
SIXTH EDITION
Introducing 
Communication Theory
ANALYSIS AND APPLICATION
Richard West
Emerson College
Lynn H. Turner
Marquette University

INTRODUCING COMMUNICATION THEORY: ANALYSIS AND APPLICATION, SIXTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2018 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous editions 
© 2014, 2010, and 2004. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by 
any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written consent of McGraw-Hill 
Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or 
broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside 
the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 QVS 21 20 19 18 17 
ISBN 978-1-259-87032-3
MHID 1-259-87032-4
Chief Product Officer, SVP Products & Markets: G. Scott Virkler
Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets: Michael Ryan
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: Betsy Whalen
Managing Director: David Patterson
Brand Manager: Jamie Laferrerra
Director, Product Development: Meghan Campbell
Marketing Manager: Meredith Leo
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Terri Schiesl
Program Manager: Jennifer Shekleton
Content Project Managers: Lisa Bruflodt, Samantha Donisi-Hamm
Buyer: Susan K. Culbertson
Designer: Jessica Serd 
Content Licensing Specialist: DeAnna Dausener
Compositor: MPS Limited
Printer: Quad/Graphics
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
West, Richard L. | Turner, Lynn H.
  Introducing communication theory : analysis and application/Richard
  West, Emerson College, Lynn H. Turner, Marquette University.
  Sixth edition. | New York, NY : McGraw-Hill Education, [2019] |
  Includes bibliographical references and indexes.
  LCCN 2016059715 | ISBN 9781259870323 (alk. paper)
  LCSH: Information theory. | Communication.
  LCC Q360 .W47 2019 | DDC 003/.54—dc23
  LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2016059715
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website  
does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education 
does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these sites.
mheducation.com/highered

iii
Brief 
Contents
Part One    Foundations    1
COMMUNICATION, THEORY, AND RESEARCH
	 1.	 Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, 
and Ethics    3
	 2.	 Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts    24
	 3.	 Thinking About Theory and Research    42
Part Two    Understanding the Dialogue    65
THE SELF AND MESSAGES
	 4.	 Symbolic Interaction Theory    68
	 5.	 Coordinated Management of Meaning    83
	 6.	 Cognitive Dissonance Theory    104
	 7.	 Expectancy Violations Theory    119
RELATIONSHIP DEVELOPMENT 
	 8.	 Uncertainty Reduction Theory    135
	 9.	 Social Exchange Theory    155
10.	
Social Penetration Theory    170
11.	
Relational Dialectics Theory    187
12.	
Communication Privacy Management Theory    204
13.	
Social Information Processing Theory    218
GROUPS, TEAMS, AND ORGANIZATIONS 
14.	
Groupthink    237
15.	
Structuration Theory    255
16.	
Organizational Culture Theory    272
17.	
Organizational Information Theory    287
THE PUBLIC 
18.	
The Rhetoric    306
19.	
Dramatism    324
20.	
The Narrative Paradigm    338
THE MEDIA 
21.	
Agenda Setting Theory    355
22.	
Spiral of Silence Theory    369
23.	
Uses and Gratifications Theory    387
24.	
Cultivation Theory    403
25.	
Cultural Studies    420
26.	
Media Ecology Theory    436
CULTURE AND DIVERSITY 
27.	
Face-Negotiation Theory    459
28.	
Communication Accommodation Theory    476

iv     Brief Contents
29.	
Muted Group Theory    494
30.	
Feminist Standpoint Theory    510
Afterward
ConnectingQuests    527
Glossary    G-1
References    R-1
Name Index    I-1
Subject Index    I-11

v
Contents
Preface    xvii
About the Authors    xxix
PART ONE	
Foundations 
001
COMMUNICATION, THEORY, AND RESEARCH     
Chapter 1	
Thinking About Communication: Definitions, 
Models, and Ethics      3
Defining Communication      5
Models of Understanding: Communication as Action, 
Interaction, and Transaction      8
Communication as Action: The Linear Model      9
Communication as Interaction: The Interactional Model      10
Communication as Transaction: The Transactional Model      12
Communication Models of the Future      13
Ethics and Communication      14
Business and Industry      15
Religion and Faith      16
Entertainment      17
Higher Education      17
Medicine      18
Politics      19
Technology      19
Some Final Thoughts      19
The Value of Understanding Communication Theory      21
Understanding Communication Theory Cultivates 
Critical Thinking Skills      21
Understanding Communication Theory Helps You 
to Recognize the Breadth and Depth of Research      21
Understanding Communication Theory Helps to Make 
Sense of Personal Life Experiences      22
Communication Theory Fosters Self-Awareness      22
Conclusion      22
Discussion Starters      23

vi     Contents
Chapter 2	
Thinking About the Field: Traditions 
and Contexts      24
Seven Traditions in the Communication Field      25
The Rhetorical Tradition      26
The Semiotic Tradition      27
The Phenomenological Tradition      27
The Cybernetic Tradition      28
The Socio-Psychological Tradition      28
The Socio-Cultural Tradition      29
The Critical Tradition      29
Putting It All Together      29
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field      30
Intrapersonal Communication      30
Interpersonal Communication      32
Small Group and Team Communication      33
Organizational Communication      34
Public/Rhetorical Communication      36
Mass/Media Communication      37
Cultural Communication      38
Collating the Contexts      40
Conclusion      41
Discussion Starters      41
Chapter 3	
Thinking About Theory and Research      42
Defining Theory: What’s in a Name?      44
Components      45
Goals      46
Approaches to Knowing: How Do You See (and Talk About) 
the World?      46
The Positivistic, or Empirical, Approach      47
The Interpretive Approach      47
The Critical Approach      47
Approaches to Knowing: What Questions 
Do You Ask About the World?      48
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go 
About Theory Building?      50
Covering Law Approach      52
Rules Approach      52
Systems Approach      53
Evaluating Theory      56
The Research Process      58
Communication Research and the 
Scientific Method      58
Communication Research and the Qualitative Approach      60
Conclusion      64
Discussion Starters      64

Contents     vii
PART TWO	
Understanding the Dialogue      65
THE SELF AND MESSAGES     
Chapter 4	
Symbolic Interaction Theory      68
History of Symbolic Interaction Theory      70
Themes and Assumptions of Symbolic Interaction Theory      71
Key Concepts      76
Mind      76
Self      77
Society      79
Integration, Critique, and Closing      79
Scope      80
Utility      80
Testability      81
Closing      81
Discussion Starters      81
Chapter 5	
Coordinated Management of Meaning      83
All the World’s a Stage      84
Assumptions of Coordinated Management of Meaning      85
The Hierarchy of Organized Meaning      88
Content      89
Speech Act      90
Episodes      90
Relationship      91
Life Scripts      91
Cultural Patterns      92
Charmed and Strange Loops      93
The Coordination of Meaning: Making Sense of the Sequence      95
Influences on the Coordination Process      96
Rules and Unwanted Repetitive Patterns      97
Integration, Critique, and Closing      100
Scope      100
Parsimony      101
Utility       101
Heurism       102
Closing      102
Discussion Starters      102
Chapter 6	
Cognitive Dissonance Theory      104
Assumptions of Cognitive Dissonance Theory      108
Concepts and Processes of Cognitive Dissonance      109
Magnitude of Dissonance      109

viii     Contents
Coping with Dissonance      110
Cognitive Dissonance and Perception      111
Minimal Justification      112
Cognitive Dissonance Theory and Persuasion      113
Integration, Critique, and Closing      115
Utility      115
Testability      117
Closing      118
Discussion Starters      118
Chapter 7	
Expectancy Violations Theory      119
Space Relations      121
Proxemic Zones      121
Territoriality      123
Assumptions of Expectancy Violations Theory      124
Arousal      127
Threat Threshold      127
Violation Valence      128
Communicator Reward Valence      129
Integration, Critique, and Closing      130
Scope      131
Utility      131
Testability      131
Heurism      131
Closing      132
Discussion Starters      132
RELATIONSHIP DEVELOPMENT     
Chapter 8	
Uncertainty Reduction Theory      135
Assumptions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory      138
Key Concepts of URT: The Axiom and Theorem      140
Axioms of Uncertainty Reduction Theory      140
Theorems of Uncertainty Reduction Theory      142
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory      143
Antecedent Conditions      143
Strategies      144
Developed Relationships      145
Social Media      147
Context      148
Integration, Critique, and Closing      150
Utility      151
Heurism      153
Closing      153
Discussion Starters      153

Contents     ix
Chapter 9	
Social Exchange Theory      155
Assumptions of Social Exchange Theory      158
Evaluating a Relationship      161
Exchange Patterns: SET in Action      163
Exchange Structures      165
Integration, Critique, and Closing      166
Scope      167
Utility      167
Testability      168
Heurism      168
Closing      169
Discussion Starters      169
Chapter 10	
Social Penetration Theory      170
Assumptions of Social Penetration Theory      172
“Tearing Up” the Relationship: The Onion Analogy      175
A Social Exchange: Relational Costs and Rewards      177
Stages of the Social Penetration Process      179
Orientation: Revealing Bit by Bit      180
Exploratory Affective Exchange: The Self Emerges      181
Affective Exchange: Commitment and Comfortability      182
Stable Exchange: Raw Honesty and Intimacy      183
Integration, Critique, and Closing      184
Scope      184
Heurism      185
Closing      186
Discussion Starters      186
Chapter 11	
Relational Dialectics Theory      187
Assumptions of Relational Dialectics Theory      190
Core Concepts of Dialectics      191
Basic Relational Dialectics      192
Autonomy and Connection      192
Openness and Protection      194
Novelty and Predictability      194
Contextual Dialectics      195
Beyond Basic Dialectics      196
Responses to Dialectics      198
Integration, Critique, and Closing      200
Parsimony      201
Utility      201
Heurism      201
Closing      202
Discussion Starters      202

x     Contents
Chapter 12	
Communication Privacy 
Management Theory      204
Evolution of Communication Privacy Management Theory      206
Assumptions of CPM      207
Key Terms and Principles of CPM      208
Principle 1: Private Information Ownership      209
Principle 2: Private Information Control      209
Principle 3: Private Information Rules       211
Principle 4: Private Information Co-ownership and Guardianship      212
Principle 5: Private Information Boundary Turbulence       214
Integration, Critique, and Closing      214
Logical Consistency      215
Utility      216
Heurism       216
Closing      216
Discussion Starters      216
Chapter 13	
Social Information Processing Theory      218
Theoretical Turbulence: The Cues Filtered Out      221
Assumptions of Social Information Processing Theory      223
Hyperpersonal Perspective: “I Like What I Read 
and I Want More”      227
Sender: Selective Self-Presentation      227
Receiver: Idealization of the Sender      228
Channel Management      229
Feedback      229
Warranting: Gaining Confidence Online      230
Integration, Critique, and Closing      231
Scope      232
Utility      232
Testability      233
Closing      234
Discussion Starters      234
GROUPS, TEAMS, AND ORGANIZATIONS     
Chapter 14	
Groupthink      237
Assumptions of Groupthink      240
What Comes Before: Antecedent Conditions of Groupthink      243
Group Cohesiveness      243
Structural Factors      244
Group Stress      245
Symptoms of Groupthink      245
Overestimation of the Group      246
Closed-Mindedness      247
Pressures Toward Uniformity      248

Contents     xi
(Group) Think About It: It’s All Around U.S.      249
Think Before You Act: Ways to Prevent 
Groupthink      249
Integration, Critique, and Closing      251
Scope      252
Testability      252
Heurism      253
Test of Time      253
Closing      253
Discussion Starters      254
Chapter 15	
Structuration Theory      255
Assumptions of Structuration Theory      259
Central Concepts of Structuration Theory      262
Agency and Reflexivity      262
Duality of Structure      263
Social Integration      267
Application of Time and Space      267
Integration, Critique, and Closing      268
Scope      269
Parsimony       269
Closing      270
Discussion Starters      270
Chapter 16	
Organizational Culture Theory      272
The Cultural Metaphor: Of Spider Webs 
and Organizations      275
Assumptions of Organizational Cultural Theory      276
Ethnographic Understanding: Laying It On Thick      279
The Communicative Performance      281
Ritual Performances      282
Passion Performances      282
Social Performances      283
Political Performances      283
Enculturation Performances      283
Integration, Critique, and Closing      284
Logical Consistency      285
Utility      285
Heurism      285
Closing      286
Discussion Starters      286
Chapter 17	
Organizational Information Theory      287
The Only Constant Is Change (in Organizations)      290
General Systems Theory      290
Darwin’s Theory of Sociocultural Evolution      291

xii     Contents
Assumptions of Organizational Information Theory      292
Key Concepts and Conceptualizing Information      294
Information Environment: The Sum Total      294
Rules: Guidelines to Analyze      295
Cycles: Act, Respond, Adjust      297
The Principles of Equivocality      298
Reducing Equivocality: Trying to Use the Information      299
Enactment: Assigning Message Importance      299
Selection: Interpreting the Inputs      300
Retention: Remember the Small Stuff      300
Integration, Critique, and Closing      301
Logical Consistency      302
Utility      303
Heurism      303
Closing      303
Discussion Starters      303
THE PUBLIC     
Chapter 18	
The Rhetoric      306
The Rhetorical Tradition      308
Assumptions of the Rhetoric      309
The Syllogism: A Three-Tiered Argument      311
Canons of Rhetoric      312
Invention      312
Arrangement      314
Style      315
Memory      316
Delivery      316
Types of Rhetoric      317
Integration, Critique, and Closing      320
Logical Consistency      320
Heurism      321
Test of Time      322
Closing      322
Discussion Starters      323
Chapter 19	
Dramatism      324
Assumptions of Dramatism      326
Dramatism as New Rhetoric      328
Identification and Substance      328
The Process of Guilt and Redemption      329
The Pentad      331
Integration, Critique, and Closing      333
Scope      333
Parsimony      334
Utility      334
Heurism      336

Contents     xiii
Closing      336
Discussion Starters      337
Chapter 20	
The Narrative Paradigm      338
Assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm      341
Key Concepts in the Narrative Approach      344
Narration      344
Narrative Rationality      345
The Logic of Good Reasons      347
Integration, Critique, and Closing      348
Scope       349
Logical Consistency      349
Utility      350
Heurism      351
Closing      351
Discussion Starters      351
THE MEDIA     
Chapter 21	
Agenda Setting Theory      355
History of Agenda Setting Research      356
Pretheoretical Conceptualizing      357
Establishing the Theory of Agenda Setting      358
Assumptions of Agenda Setting Theory      359
Two Levels of Agenda Setting      360
Three-Part Process of Agenda Setting      361
Expansions and Refinements to Agenda Setting Theory      364
Integration, Critique, and Closing      365
Scope      366
Utility      366
Heurism      367
Closing      368
Discussion Starters      368
Chapter 22	
Spiral of Silence Theory      369
The Court of Public Opinion      372
Assumptions of Spiral of Silence Theory      374
The Media’s Influence      377
The Train Test      379
The Hard Core      380
The Spiral of Silence and Social Media      382
Integration, Critique, and Closing      383
Logical Consistency      384
Heurism      385
Closing      386
Discussion Starters      386

xiv     Contents
Chapter 23	
Uses and Gratifications Theory      387
Assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Theory      389
Stages of Uses and Gratifications Research      392
Media Effects      393
Key Concepts: The Audience as Active      396
Uses and Gratifications and the Internet, Social Media, 
and Cell Phones      397
Integration, Critique, and Closing      399
Logical Consistency      400
Utility      401
Heurism      401
Closing      401
Discussion Starters      402
Chapter 24	
Cultivation Theory      403
Developing Cultivation Theory      406
Assumptions of Cultivation Theory      407
Processes and Products of Cultivation 
Theory      409
The Four-Step Process      409
Mainstreaming and Resonance      410
The Mean World Index      412
Cultivation Theory as Critical Theory      413
Integration, Critique, and Closing      416
Logical Consistency      416
Utility      417
Heurism      417
Test of Time      417
Closing      419
Discussion Starters      419
Chapter 25	
Cultural Studies      420
The Marxist Legacy: Power to the People      423
Assumptions of Cultural Studies      424
Hegemony: The Influence on the Masses      426
Counter-Hegemony: The Masses Start to Influence 
the Dominant Forces      429
Audience Decoding      431
Integration, Critique, and Closing      433
Logical Consistency      433
Utility      434
Heurism      434
Closing      435
Discussion Starters      435

Contents     xv
Chapter 26	
Media Ecology Theory      436
Assumptions of Media Ecology Theory      439
Making Media History and Making “Sense”      442
The Tribal Era      442
The Literate Era      443
The Print Era      443
The Electronic Era      443
The Medium Is the Message      444
Gauging the Temperature: Hot and Cool Media      445
The Circle Is Complete: The Tetrad      447
Enhancement      448
Obsolescence      448
Retrieval      448
Reversal      449
Carrying the McLuhan Banner: Postman and Meyrowitz      450
Integration, Critique, and Closing      452
Testability      453
Heurism      453
Closing      454
Discussion Starters      454
CULTURE AND DIVERSITY     
Chapter 27	
Face-Negotiation Theory      459
About Face      461
Face and Politeness Theory      462
Facework      463
Assumptions of Face-Negotiation Theory      464
Individualistic and Collectivistic Cultures      466
Face Management and Culture      469
Managing Conflict Across Cultures      470
Integration, Critique, and Closing      472
Logical Consistency      472
Heurism      473
Closing      474
Discussion Starters      474
Chapter 28	
Communication Accommodation Theory      476
Social Psychology and Social Identity      478
Assumptions of Communication Accommodation Theory      480
Ways to Adapt      483
Convergence: Merging Thoughts Ahead      483
Divergence: Vive la Différence      487
Overaccommodation: Miscommunicating with a Purpose      488

xvi     Contents
Integration, Critique, and Closing      490
Scope      490
Logical Consistency      491
Heurism      492
Closing      492
Discussion Starters      492
Chapter 29	
Muted Group Theory      494
Origins of Muted Group Theory      496
Makeup of Muted Groups      498
Differentiating Between Sex and Gender      499
Assumptions of Muted Group Theory      499
The Process of Silencing      503
Ridicule      504
Ritual      504
Control       505
Harassment      505
Strategies of Resistance      506
Integration, Critique, and Closing      506
Utility      507
Test of Time      508
Closing      508
Discussion Starters      508
Chapter 30	
Feminist Standpoint Theory      510
Historical Foundations of Feminist Standpoint Theory      512
The Critique of Theory and Research by Feminist Theorists      513
Assumptions of Feminist Standpoint Theory      514
Feminist Standpoint Theory and the Communication Field      518
Key Concepts of Standpoint Theory      519
Voice      519
Standpoint      519
Situated Knowledges      520
Sexual Division of Labor      521
Integration, Critique, and Closing      521
Utility      522
Closing      524
Discussion Starters      524
Afterward
ConnectingQuests      527
Glossary      G-1
References      R-1
Name Index      I-1
Subject Index      I-11

xvii
Preface
As we present the sixth edition of Introducing Communication Theory: Analysis 
and Application, we remain excited by its enormous success. The previous five 
editions demonstrate that communication theory courses are vibrant, that teachers 
of communication understand the importance of theoretical thinking, and that both 
instructors and students appreciate the consistent and organized template we employ 
throughout. This text explores the practical, engaging, and ­relevant ways in which the­
ory operates in our lives. It is written primarily for students who have little or no back­
ground in communication theory. We originally wrote the book because we thought 
that students need to know how theorizing helps us understand ourselves, as well as 
our experiences, ­relationships, media, environment, and culture. We also wrote this 
book because we believe that students should have a text that relates theory directly 
to their lives. We felt that some books insulted the student and trivialized theory while 
other books were written at a level that was far too advanced for an undergraduate. In 
this book, we take great care to achieve the following additional objectives:
∙∙Familiarize students with the principles and central ideas of important theories 
they are likely to encounter in the communication discipline.
∙∙Demystify the notion of theory by discussing it in concrete and ­unequivocal 
ways.
∙∙Provide students with an understanding of the interplay among theory, commu­
nication, and application.
∙∙Introduce students to the research process and the role of theory within this 
process.
∙∙Assist students in becoming more systematic and thoughtful critical thinkers.
The sixth edition of this book maintains its original focus of introducing com­
munication theory to students in an accessible, appealing, and consistent way. We 
believe that students understand material best when it is explained in a clear, direct 
way through a number of realistic and applicable examples. Our hope is that students 
will take away a basic knowledge of, and appreciation for, communication theory 
from reading our text. 
The theories in communication studies have roots in both communication and in 
other fields of study. This interdisciplinary orientation is reflected in the selection of 
the various theories presented in the text. We not only include the unique contribu­
tions of communication theorists, but also theories with origins in other fields of study, 
including psychology, sociology, biology, education, business, and philosophy. Com­
munication theorists have embraced the integration of ideas and principles forged by 
their colleagues across many disciplines. Yet, the application, influence, and inherent 

xviii
Preface
value of communication are all ­sustained by the theorists in this text. In other words, 
although theories cut across various academic disciplines, their relevance to communi­
cation remains paramount and we articulate this relevancy in each theory chapter. We 
do not presume to speak for the theorists; we have distilled their scholarship in a way 
that we hope represents and honors their hard work. Our overall goal is to frame their 
words and illustrate their theories with practical examples and instances so that their 
explication of communication behaviors becomes accessible for students. 
Together, we have over 60 years of experience in teaching communication ­theory. 
During this time, we have learned a great deal. Introducing Communication Theory: 
Analysis and Application utilizes and applies all that we as teachers have learned from 
our students. We continue to be indebted to both students and colleagues whose sug­
gestions and comments have greatly influenced this newest edition.
The Challenges of Teaching and Learning 
Communication Theory
The instructor in a communication theory course may face several challenges that are not 
shared by other courses. First, because many students think of theory as distant, abstract, 
and obscure, teachers must overcome these potentially negative connotations. Negative 
feelings toward the subject can be magnified in classrooms where students represent 
a variety of ages and socioeconomic, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds. Introducing 
Communication Theory addresses this challenge by offering a readable and pragmatic 
guide that integrates content with examples, capturing the essence and elegance of theory 
in a straightforward manner. In addition, the book takes an incremental approach to learn­
ing about theory, resulting in a thoughtful and appropriate learning pace.
A second challenge associated with teaching and learning communication 
theory relates to preconceived notions of research: Students may view scholarship 
as difficult or remote. This book demonstrates to students that they already possess 
many of the characteristics of researchers, such as curiosity and ambition. Students 
will be pleasantly surprised to know that they operate according to many personal 
theories every day. Once students begin to revise their misconceptions about re­
search and theory, they are in a position to understand the principles, concepts, and 
theories contained in this book.
A third challenge of teaching and learning communication theory is capturing 
the complexity of a theory in an approachable way without oversimplifying the theo­
retical process. To address this problem, instructors often present a skeletal version 
of a theory and then fill in the missing pieces with personal materials. By providing 
a variety of engaging examples and applications reflecting a wide range of classroom 
demographics, Introducing Communication Theory facilitates such an approach. 
A final challenge relates to a theory’s genesis and today’s students. Clearly, in 
this technological age, students look for and usually crave a desire to find a “tech 
angle” to communication theory. Although many theories were conceptualized de­
cades ago, in each chapter, we have provided the most recent research that represents 
a theory–technology framework. Further we have added questions in each chapter 
that are technological in nature, facilitating further student interest in the material.

Preface
xix
Major Changes in Content in the New Edition
The sixth edition has undergone significant modification, namely in the content of the 
theory chapters and in the various learning aids available. EACH chapter has been 
updated to reflect the most current thinking. In particular, the following chapters have 
undergone major changes:
Chapter 2 (Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts) includes the most 
current scholarship in each of the seven contexts of communication. 
Chapter 3 (Thinking About Theory and Research) is completely reorganized to reflect 
both the quantitative and qualitative thinking influencing theoretical development. 
Chapter 4 (Symbolic Interaction Theory) has been completely reorganized so that it 
disentangles the assumptions and themes of SI.
Chapter 8 (Uncertainty Reduction Theory) has been overhauled and provides a more 
thoughtful presentation of the various axioms and theorems related to the theory.
Chapter 12 (Communication Privacy Management Theory) has been substantively 
reorganized. In addition, new information on the criteria used to for developing 
privacy rules is discussed in detail.
Chapter 14 (Groupthink) includes new information on NASA and the Military 
Whistleblower Protection Act and their relationship to groupthink.
Chapter 15 (Structuration Theory) provides the newest thinking on various caution­
ary tales related to social integration.
Chapter 20 (The Narrative Paradigm) delineates new research and practices related 
to storytelling. 
Chapter 21 (Agenda Setting Theory) presents a reorganization and reconceptualiza­
tion of the three levels of agenda setting. 
Chapter 22 (Spiral of Silence Theory) employs the legalization of marijuana as an over­
arching template while discussing the influence and pervasiveness of public opinion.
Chapter 24 (Cultivation Theory) includes extensive additions throughout on how 
technology and “mass-mediated storytelling” influence individuals. 
Chapter 25 (Cultural Studies) uses both the Flint, Michigan water crisis and mar­
riage equality to demonstrate several of the issues and themes related to the theory.
Chapter 29 (Muted Group Theory) includes a brief history of sexual harassment as 
computer jargon’s male-centeredness to exemplify several concepts associated with 
MGT. 
Features of the Book
To accomplish our goals and address the challenges of teaching communication the­
ory, we have incorporated a structure that includes number of special features and 
learning aids into the sixth edition:
∙∙Part One, Foundations. The first three chapters of the book continue to pro­
vide students a solid foundation for studying the theories that follow. This 

xx
Preface
groundwork is essential in order to understand how theorists conceptualize and 
test their theories. Chapters 1 and 2 define communication and provide a frame­
work for examining the theories. We present several traditions and contexts in 
which theory is customarily categorized and considered. Chapter 3 provides an 
overview of the intersection of theory and research. This discussion is essential 
in a theory course and also serves as a springboard for students as they enroll in 
other courses. In addition, we present students with a template of various evalua­
tive components that we apply in each of the subsequent theory chapters.
∙∙Part Two, Theories and Theoretical Thinking. Updated coverage of all ­theories. 
Separate chapters on each of the theories provide accessible, thorough cover­
age for students and offer flexibility to instructors. Because of the feedback we 
received from the previous edition, we ­retained the original theories from the 
fifth edition This updating results in a more thoughtful, current, and applicable 
presentation of each theory. As noted earlier, in many cases, we have provided 
the most recent information of the influences of culture and/or technology upon 
a particular theory, ­resulting in some very compelling discussions and examples.
∙∙Section openers. The theory chapters in Part Two are organized into six sec­
tions. We have written section openers to introduce these groups of chapters. 
The overviews provide students with an explanation for our choices, placing 
the theories in context and allowing students to have a foundation in order to 
see the connections ­between and among theories.
∙∙Chapter-opening vignettes. Each chapter begins with an extended vignette, which 
is then integrated throughout the chapter, providing examples to illustrate the the­
oretical concepts and claims. We have been pleased that instructors and students 
point to these vignettes as important applications of sometimes complex material. 
These stories/case studies help students understand how communication theory 
plays out in the everyday lives of ordinary people. These opening stories help 
drive home the ­important points of the theory. In addition, the real-life tone of 
each vignette entices students to understand the practicality of a particular theory.
∙∙A structured approach to each theory. Every theory chapter is self-contained 
and includes a consistent format that begins with a story, followed by an intro­
duction, a summary of theoretical assumptions, a description of core concepts, 
and a critique (using the criteria established in Part One). This consistency 
provides continuity for students, ensures a balanced presentation of the theo­
ries, and helps ease the retrieval of information for future learning experiences. 
Instructors and students have found this template to be quite valuable since it 
eliminates the stream-of-consciousness frequently found in other published 
resources.
∙∙Student Voices boxes. These boxes, featured in every chapter, present both new 
and returning ­student comments on a particular concept or theoretical issue. The 
comments, extracted from journals in classes we have taught, illustrate the practi­
cality of the topic under discussion and also show how theoretical issues relate to 
students’ lives. In a sense, this feature illustrates how practical theories are and how 
much their tenets apply to our everyday lived experiences.
“Every theory chapter 
is self-contained 
and includes a 
consistent format 
that begins with a 
vignette, followed 
by an introduction, a 
summary of theoreti­
cal assumptions, a 
description of core 
concepts, and a 
critique (using the 
criteria established 
in Part One). This 
consistency pro­
vides continuity for 
students, ensures a 
balanced presenta­
tion of the theories, 
and helps ease the 
retrieval of informa­
tion for future learn­
ing experiences.”
“The first three 
chapters of the book 
continue to provide 
students a solid foun­
dation for studying 
the theories that fol­
low. This groundwork 
is ­essential in order 
to ­understand how 
­theorists conceptu­
alize and test their 
theories.”

Preface
xxi
∙∙Theory in Popular Press. Students will be introduced to further applications 
of the various theories and theoretical concepts by examining popular press 
stories. Stories and articles exemplifying various parts of a theory are provided 
from a number of different outlets, including Forbes, USA Today, the (U.K.) 
Guardian, the Chicago Tribune, the New York Times, among many others.
∙∙Visual template for theory evaluation. At the conclusion of each theory chap­
ter, a criteria for theory evaluation (presented in Chapter 3) is ­employed. In 
addition, the theory’s context, scholarly tradition (based on Robert Craig’s 
typology), and approach to knowing are articulated.
∙∙Theory at a Glance boxes. In order for students to have an immediate and 
concise understanding of a particular theory, we incorporate this ­feature at the 
beginning of each theory chapter. Students will have these brief explanations 
and short summaries before reading the chapter, thereby allowing them to have 
a general sense of what they are about to encounter. 
∙∙Afterword: ConnectingQuests. This final section of the book provides students 
with an integration of the various theories in order to see the interrelationships 
between theories. We believe that theories cut across multiple contexts. To this 
end, students are asked questions that address the intersection of theories. For 
instance, to understand “decision making” from two theoretical threads, stu­
dents are asked to compare the concept and its usage in both Groupthink and 
Structuration Theory. These questions form a foundation for future conversa­
tions about communication theory. 
∙∙Tables, figures, and cartoons. To increase conceptual organization and enhance 
the visual presentation of content, we have provided several tables and figures 
throughout the text. Further, we have provided cartoons to provide another en­
gaging reading option. Many chapters have visual aids for students to consider, 
helping them to understand the material. These visuals provide a clearer sense 
of the conceptual organization of the theories, and they support those students 
who best retain information visually.
∙∙Running glossary. Throughout each chapter, a running glossary provides stu­
dents immediate access to unfamiliar terms and their meanings.
∙∙End-of-book glossary. Students have expressed interest in having a compiled 
list of definitions at the end of the text. This glossary provides easily accessed 
definitions of all the key terms contained in the book.
In addition to the aforementioned features, several new additions exist in the new 
edition of Introducing Communication Theory: 
∙∙NEW Quantitative and Qualitative Research. In Chapter 3, we have reorga­
nized the information to make it more understandable for students. We first 
discuss quantitative research methods and then qualitative research methods. 
We also added an evaluative statement at the conclusion of each theory chapter 
which notes whether the theory has primarily been investigated using a frame­
work that is qualitative, quantitative, or both. 

xxii
Preface
∙∙NEW Theory-Into-Practice (TIP). We include this feature to provide further 
application of the information contained in the chapter. We identify a conclu­
sion or two from the theory and then provide a real-world application of the 
particular claim. This feature sustains our commitment to enhancing the prag­
matic value of a theory.
∙∙NEW Socially Significant Themes and Noteworthy Celebrities. In an effort to 
provide students with examples that are compelling and memorable, we make 
a concerted effort to illustrate points with timely topics and recognizable news­
makers. Themes such as marriage equality, social media, medical marijuana, 
whistle-blowing, internships, civility, among many others are woven through­
out the book. Important global issues, including Black Lives Matter, climate 
change, the world refugee crisis, among others are woven throughout the text. 
Cultural figures such as Dr. Oz, Samantha Bee, Maya Angelou, Jimmy Fallon, 
Dr. Phil, Martha Stewart, and others are also identified at appropriate points 
along the way. Although we never “dumb down” the theoretical material, we 
feel it’s important for students to read examples that are somewhat contempo­
rary and not dated.
∙∙NEW Tech Quest. Each chapter concludes with several Discussion Starters and 
a new question that probes how the theory relates to technology. Students will 
be asked to discuss the interface between a theory and several social media, for 
instance, including Twitter, Instagram, Facebook, LinkedIn, among others.
∙∙NEW Cartoons. Eight new cartoons have been added to the text, providing a 
humorous break from the theoretical content.
∙∙NEW Incorporation of over 200 new references. The explosion in communica­
tion research, in particular, is reflected in the incorporation of dozens of new 
studies, essays, and books that help students understand the theory or theoreti­
cal issue. We also provide students with easy access to a citation by integrating 
an APA format (the acceptable writing style of the communication field) so 
that they can see the relevancy and ­currency of a theory. When appropriate, we 
also have provided URLs for websites that have information which can be read­
ily available. 
∙∙NEW Theoretical Thought. Each theory chapter begins with a statement 
made by a theorist or theorists that highlights the essence of the chapter’s 
content. These quotations reflect further effort to honor the words of the 
theorist(s).
The 6th edition of Introducing Communications Theory: Analysis and Application is 
now available online with Connect, McGraw-Hill Education’s integrated assignment 
and assessment platform. Connect also offers SmartBook for the new edition, which 
is the first adaptive reading experience proven to improve grades and help students 

Preface
xxiii
study more effectively. All of the title’s website and ancillary content is also available 
through Connect, including: 
∙∙An Instructor’s Manual for each chapter with general guidelines for teaching 
the basic theory course, sample syllabi for quarter and semester courses, chap­
ter outlines, and classroom activities.
∙∙A full Test Bank of multiple choice questions that test students on central con­
cepts and ideas in each chapter.
∙∙Lecture Slides for instructor use in class.
Organization
Part One, Foundations, provides a conceptual base for the discrete theory chapters in 
Part Two. Chapter 1 begins by introducing the discipline and describing the process 
of communication. Chapter 2 provides the prevailing traditions and contexts that 
frame the communication field. In this chapter, we focus on Robert Craig’s guide to 
the ways in which communication theory can be considered. The chapter then turns 
to primary contexts of communication, which frame the study of communication in 
most academic settings across the country. Chapter 3 explores the intersection of the­
ory and research. In this chapter, we provide students an understanding of the nature 
of theory and the characteristics of theory. The research process is also discussed, 
as are perspectives that guide communication research. Our goal in this chapter is to 
show that research and theory are interrelated and that the two should be considered 
in tandem as students read the individual chapters. Chapter 3 also provides a list of 
evaluative criteria for judging theories as well as for guiding students toward assess­
ment of each subsequent theory chapter.
With Part One establishing a foundation, Part Two, Theories and Theoretical 
Thinking, introduces students to 27 different theories, each in a discrete, concise 
chapter. Many of these theories cut across communication contexts. For example, 
Relational Dialectics Theory can be understood and applied in an organizational 
context as well as in an interpersonal context. However, to facilitate understanding, 
we have grouped theories into six sections according to primary focus: The Self 
and Messages, Relationship Development, Groups, Teams, and Organizations, The 
Public, The Media, and Culture and Diversity. We undertake this approach to align it 
with the contexts identified in Chapter 1. 
It was challenging for us to decide which theories to include because there are 
so many from which to choose. In making our selections, we were guided by four 
broad criteria: (1) whether the theory is significant in the field, (2) whether it reflects 
the interdisciplinary nature of the field, (3) whether it is important in the context of 
current thinking in the field, and (4) whether it contributes to a balance of pioneering 
and contemporary theories in the book. In addition, we were sensitive to the need to 
include theories developed by a diverse group of scholars. We know that there are 
many theories that we were unable to include. Yet, our book provides an expansive 
and respectful array of theories that in the end, we believe provides an important in­
troduction to this challenging and worthwhile area known as communication theory. 

McGraw-Hill Connect®	 	

Learn Without Limits
Connect is a teaching and learning platform that 
is proven to deliver better results for students and 
instructors.
Connect empowers students by continually adapting 
to deliver precisely what they need, when they need 
it, and how they need it, so your class time is more 
engaging and effective.
Connect Insight®	
Connect Insight is Connect’s new one-of-a-kind 
visual analytics dashboard—now available for both 
instructors and students—that provides at-a-glance 
information regarding student performance, which 
is immediately actionable. By presenting assignment, 
assessment, and topical performance results together 
with a time metric that is easily visible for aggregate 
or individual results, Connect Insight gives the user 
the ability to take a just-in-time approach to teaching 
and learning, which was never before available. 
Connect Insight presents data that empowers 
students and helps instructors improve class 
performance in a way that is efficient and effective.
73% of instructors who use 
Connect require it; instructor 
satisfaction increases by 28% 
when Connect is required.
Students can view 
their results for any 
Connect course.
Mobile
Analytics
Connect’s new, intuitive mobile interface gives students and 
instructors flexible and convenient, anytime–anywhere access 
to all components of the Connect platform.
Using Connect improves retention 
rates by 19.8%, passing rates by 12.7%, 
and exam scores by 9.1%.
Required=Results
©Getty Images/iStockphoto 

SmartBook® 
Proven to help students improve grades and study 
more efficiently, SmartBook contains the same content 
within the print book, but actively tailors that content 
to the needs of the individual. SmartBook’s adaptive 
technology provides precise, personalized instruction on 
what the student should do next, guiding the student to 
master and remember key concepts, targeting gaps in 
knowledge and offering customized feedback, and driving 
the student toward comprehension and retention of the 
subject matter. Available on tablets, SmartBook puts 
learning at the student’s fingertips—anywhere, anytime.
Adaptive
Over 8 billion questions have been 
answered, making McGraw-Hill 
Education products more intelligent, 
reliable, and precise.
THE ADAPTIVE 
READING EXPERIENCE 
DESIGNED TO TRANSFORM 
THE WAY STUDENTS READ
More students earn A’s and 
B’s when they use McGraw-Hill 
Education Adaptive products.
www.mheducation.com

xxvi
Preface
Acknowledgments
Our book owes its existence to efforts made by others in addition to the listed au­
thors, and some people who have helped with this book may not even realize the debt 
we acknowledge here. We would like to thank all those who have helped us as we 
worked our way through this large project. First, many professors and students have 
written to us, providing important clarification and examples.
In addition, our work rests on the shoulders of the theorists whose creations 
we profile in this book. We are grateful for their creative thinking, which allows us 
to understand and begin to predict the complexities of the communication process. 
We worked hard to try to capture their insights and conclusions and convert these 
thoughts for introductory students in theory.
Further, our insights represent the discussions that we have had with our com­
munication theory students and colleagues over the years. Several parts of this book 
are based on student input at both of our institutions. Students have contributed to 
this book in both direct and indirect ways.
Textbook writers understand that no book is possible without the talents and 
commitment of both an editorial and production team. We extend our deep apprecia­
tion and admiration to those who have made our words come to life in various ways:
Jamie Laferrera, Brand Manager
Jasmine Staton, Editorial Coordinator
Lisa Bruflodt, Content Project Manager
DeAnna Dausner, Content Licensing Specialist
Finally, the development editing was handled by Erin Guendelsberger and Sow­
mya B. We thank both of them and the entire ansrsource development team.
As is customary in each book he writes, Rich would like to acknowledge his mother 
for her continual focus on what matters in life: family, fun, and spirituality. He remains 
grateful for her continued positive influence. Rich would also like to thank his partner, 
Chris, who knows precisely when to make things less intense and more relaxing.
Lynn would like to thank her family: her husband, Ted; her daughter’s fam­
ily, the Spitznagles—Sabrina, Billy, Sophie, and Will; her stepdaughter’s family, 
the Kissels—Leila, Russ, Zoe, Dylan; and her stepson’s family, the Feldshers—Ted, 
Sally, Ely, and Lucas, for invaluable lessons in communication theory and practice. 
Further, she is indebted to her brother and his family, as well as all of her extended 
family members who helped in ways great and small as this project continued over 
time. And always, Lynn is grateful for the memory of her loving parents whose stead­
fast support and encouragement of her scholarship, and all of her interests, sustain 
her in every project she undertakes. Friends and colleagues provided great support 
and have taught her many valuable lessons about scholarship and communication 
theory. She also wishes to thank Marquette University; the school offered a support­
ive climate, research assistance, and a general tenor of encouragement.
Finally, both Rich and Lynn give a special shout out to Holly Allen. Holly, a senior 
editor at Wiley, was the first to believe in us in 1994. She persuaded us to think about 
writing a textbook, the first of which was Perspectives on Family Communication 
(now in its sixth edition/McGraw-Hill). We began this writing enterprise because 

Preface
xxvii
of Holly and, to this day, she remains an inspiration as we celebrate the various suc­
cesses we’ve had in textbook writing. Thanks Holly! Always.
Finally, we thank the manuscript reviewers who gave their time and expertise to 
keep us on track in our interpretation of the ideas of others. We are grateful for their 
careful reading and insightful suggestions, which expanded and clarified our thinking in 
many ways. Our text is a much more useful product because of the comments and sug­
gestions of the following reviewers who have shaped this book over the past few editions:
Sixth Edition
Greg G. Armfield, 
New Mexico State University 
Christine Armstrong, 
Northampton Community College
Shaun Cashman, 
Pfeiffer University
J. Dean Farmer, 
Campbell University 
Javette Grace Hayes, 
California State University, Fullerton
Lisa Hebert, 
Louisiana State University
Juan Liu, 
Wayne State University
Jimmie Manning, 
Northern Illinois University
Libby McGlone, 
Columbus State Community College
Robert William Wawee, 
University of Houston Downtown
Fifth Edition
Michael Barberich,
University at Albany, SUNY
Martha J. Haun,
University of Houston
Bryan Horikami,
Salisbury University 
Anna Laura Jansma, 
University of California, Santa ­Barbara
Susan Jarboe,
San Diego State University
Kelly Jones,
Pitt Community College
Fourth Edition 
Rebecca Dumlao,
East Carolina University 
Edward T. Funkhouser,
North Carolina State University 
Scott Guest,
Bowling Green State University
Anna Laura Jansma,
University of California, Santa ­Barbara 
Anne M. Nicotera,
University of Maryland 
Mark Zeigler,
Florida State University
Third Edition
Randall S. Chase, 
Salt Lake Community College
Chrys Egan, 
Salisbury University

xxviii
Preface
Kathleen Galvin, 
Northwestern University
Reed Markham, 
Salt Lake Community College
Rita L. Rahoi-Gilchrest, 
Winona State University 
Second Edition
Sue Barnes, 
Fordham University
Jack Baseheart, 
University of Kentucky
Jamie Byrne, 
Millersville University
Thomas Feeley, 
State University of New York, ­Geneseo
Amy Hubbard, 
University of Hawaii at Manoa
Matthew McAllister, 
Virginia Tech
Janet Skupien, 
University of Pittsburgh
Jon Smith, 
Southern Utah University
Katy Wiss, 
Western Connecticut State ­University
Kevin Wright, 
University of Memphis
First Edition
John R. Baldwin, 
Illinois State University
Holly H. Bognar, 
Cleveland State University
Sheryl Bowen, 
Villanova University
Cam Brammer, 
Marshall University
Jeffrey D. Brand, 
North Dakota State University
Randy K. Dillon, 
Southwest Missouri State University
Kent Drummond, 
University of Wyoming
James Gilchrist, 
Western Michigan University
Laura Jansma, 
University of California–Santa ­Barbara
Madeline M. Keaveney, 
California State University–Chico
Joann Keyton, 
University of Kansas
Debra Mazloff, 
University of St. Thomas
Elizabeth M. Perse, 
University of Delaware
Linda M. Pledger, 
University of Arkansas
Mary Ann Renz, 
Central Michigan University
Patricia Rockwell, 
University of Southwestern Louisiana
Deborah Smith-Howell, 
University of Nebraska
Denise Solomon, 
University of Wisconsin
Tami Spry, 
St. Cloud State University
Rebecca W. Tardy, 
University of Louisville
Ralph Thompson, 
Cornell University

xxix
About the Authors
Richard West is a Professor in the Department of Communication Studies 
at Emerson College in Boston. Rich received his BA and MA from Illinois 
State University and his PhD from Ohio ­University. Rich has been teaching 
since 1984, and his teaching and ­research interests range from family diver­
sity to teacher–student communication. He began teaching communication 
theory as a graduate student and has taught the class in lecture format to 
more than 200 students. Rich is a past recipient of the Outstanding Alumni 
Award in Communication at Illinois State University and Ohio University. 
He is a member of several editorial boards in communication journals. Rich 
is also the recipient of the Eastern Communication Association’s (ECA) 
Distinguished Service Award where he also serves as a Research Fellow. 
He also served as ECA’s President in 2008. 
Lynn H. Turner is a Professor in Communication Studies at Marquette Uni­
versity in Milwaukee, Wisconsin. Lynn received her BA from the Univer­
sity of Illinois and her MA from the University of Iowa, and she received 
her PhD from Northwestern University. She has taught communication 
theory and research methods to undergraduates and graduates in the Died­
erich College of Communication at Marquette since 1985. Prior to coming 
to Marquette, Lynn taught at Iowa State University and in two high schools 
in Iowa. Her research interests include interpersonal communication, fam­
ily communication, and gendered communication. She is the recipient of 
several awards, including Marquette’s College of Communication Research 
Excellence Award, and the Book of the Year award from the Organization 
for the Study of Communication, Language, and Gender for her book with 
Patricia Sullivan, From the Margins to the Center: Contemporary Women 
and Political Communication. Lynn is a past president of the Central States 
Communication Association.
Rich and Lynn, together, are coauthors of dozens of essays and articles in 
the communication field. In addition, the two have served as guest coeditors 
of the Journal of Family Communication a few times, focusing on diversity 
and the family. In addition, they have coauthored several books, includ­
ing Gender and Communication, Perspectives on Family Communication, 
IPC, and Understanding Interpersonal Communication: Making Choices 
in Changing Times. The two have coedited the Family Communication 
Sourcebook (Sage, 2006; Winner of the Outstanding Book Award by the 

xxx
 About the Author
National Communication Association), and The Handbook of Family Communica­
tion. Further, both are the recipients of the Bernard J. Brommel Award for Outstand­
ing Scholarship and Service in Family Communication. Finally, both recognize the 
uniqueness and the honor to have served as president of the National Communication 
Association (Lynn in 2011; Rich in 2012), “the oldest and largest organization in 
the world promoting communication scholarship and education” (www.natcom.org).

1
P A R T 	One
Foundations
Communication, Theory, and Research
YOU MIGHT NOT HAVE THOUGHT ABOUT THIS, BUT 
each day the decisions we make, the (social) media we 
consume, and the relationships we experience can be 
enriched and explained by communication theory. Com­
munication theory helps us to understand other people 
and their communities, the media, and our associations 
with families, friends, roommates, coworkers, and com­
panions. Perhaps most important, communication theory 
makes it easier to understand ourselves.
We begin our discussion of communication theory 
by asking you to consider the experiences of Morgan 
and Alex. After randomly being assigned as roommates, 
the two met on “move-in day” at Scott Hall. They were both pretty nervous. They 
had checked out each other on Facebook, emailed each other, and talked on the 
phone a few times, so they knew quite a bit about each other. Once they met, they 
started talking. They went out for coffee the first few weeks of school, getting to 
know each other better. They spent a lot of time telling stories about their families 
and friends, and talking about what they look for in a partner. They both loved televi­
sion, especially the reality shows, because they loved to see how other people dealt 
with their lives in times of stress. After several weeks, Morgan and Alex became 
closer. They were going to have to balance their desire to hang out with each other 
with their need to be alone. And it was going to be give-and-take because their 
schedules were completely opposite. Eventually, the two became great friends.
To illustrate the various ways in which communication theory functions in 
the lives of Morgan and Alex, let’s identify important aspects of their story and 
see how theory provides some understanding of Morgan’s and Alex’s behaviors. 
Chapter 1
Thinking About 
­Communication: ­Definitions, 
Models, and Ethics  3
Chapter 2
Thinking About the Field: 
Traditions and Contexts  24
Chapter 3
Thinking About Theory 
and Research  42

First, these roommates supported the research of Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
(Chapter 8) through their need to reduce their uncertainty about each other. They 
also probably self-disclosed some personal information to each other, underscoring a 
central feature of Social Penetration Theory (Chapter 10). Next, they discovered that 
they both watch television and use it to see how others live their lives, highlighting 
the essence of Uses and Gratifications Theory (Chapter 23). Balancing their need 
to be together with the need to remain private encompasses Relational Dialectics 
Theory (Chapter 11). Morgan and Alex also told personal stories to each other; sto­
rytelling is at the heart of the Narrative Paradigm (Chapter 20). In sum, at least five 
communication theories could help explain the experiences of the two roommates.
The first three chapters provide an important foundation for discussing 
each communication theory that follows. These chapters give you a general in­
troduction to communication and to theory. First, to provide you some insights 
into the communication field, in Chapter 1 we present our definition of commu­
nication, the prevailing models of communication, and other important issues in­
cluding ethics and communication. Chapter 2 is dedicated to a discussion of the 
various traditions and contexts of communication, two important frameworks to 
consider as you read the remainder of the book. We prepare you directly for un­
derstanding the intersection of theory and research in Chapter 3. In this chap­
ter, we also present you the necessary templates to evaluate and understand 
each theory. The chapter provides important criteria for evaluating a theory 
and also includes a model for you to examine. We revisit these templates at the 
conclusion of each theory chapter so that you have a consistent approach from 
which to interpret the various theories.
2
 Part One  •  Foundations

3
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
and disappointment, they quickly recalled the dif­
ficulty of their son’s situation. They didn’t want to 
upset him any further. The Bollens tried to figure 
out a way to communicate to their son that al­
though they love him, they wished that he would 
get a job and leave the house. They simply wanted 
some peace, privacy, and freedom, and their son 
was getting in the way. It wasn’t a feeling either 
one of them liked, but it was their reality.
They considered a number of different ap­
proaches. In order to get the conversation going, 
they even thought about giving Eddy a few website 
links related to local apartment rentals. Recently, 
the couple’s frustration with the situation took a 
turn for the worse. Returning from one of their 
long walks, they discovered Eddy on the couch, 
hung over from a party held earlier at his friend’s 
house. When Jimmy and Angie confronted him 
about his demeanor, Eddy shouted, “Don’t start lec­
turing me now. Is it any wonder that none of your 
other kids call you? It’s because you don’t know 
when to stop! Look, I got a headache and I don’t 
want to hear it from you guys!” Jimmy snapped, 
“Get out of my house. Now!” Eddy left the home, 
slamming the front door behind him. Angie stared 
out of the window, wondering whether they would 
ever hear from their son again.
Thinking About Communication: 
Definitions, Models, and Ethics
C H A P T E R	1
 Jimmy and Angie Bol­
len have been married 
for almost 30 years, 
and they are the parents of three children who 
have been out of the house for years. But, a re­
cent layoff at the company where their son Eddy 
worked has forced the 24-year-old to return 
home until he can get another job.
At first, Eddy’s parents were glad that he was 
home. His father was proud of the fact that his 
son wasn’t embarrassed about returning home, 
and his mom was happy to have him help her with 
some of the mundane chores at home. In fact, 
Eddy showed both Jimmy and Angie how to in­
stant message their friends and also put together 
a family website. His parents were especially 
happy about having a family member who was 
“tech-savvy” hanging around the house.
But the good times surrounding Eddy’s return 
soon ended. Eddy brought his laptop to the table 
each morning, marring the Bollen’s once-serene 
breakfasts. Jimmy and Angie’s walks at night were 
complicated because their son often wanted to 
join them. At night, when they went to bed, the 
parents could hear Eddy talking on his cell phone, 
sometimes until 1:00 a.m. When Eddy’s parents 
thought about communicating their frustration 
The Bollens
I suppose all of us get accustomed to look at what we are doing in a 
certain way and after a while have a kind of “trained incapacity” for 
looking at things in any other way.
—Marie Hochmuth Nichols

4    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
T
he value of communication has been lauded by philosophers (“Be silent or say some­
thing better than silence”—Pythagoras), writers (“The difference between the right 
word and the almost right word is the difference between lightning and a lightning bug”—
Mark Twain), performing artists (“Any problem, big or small, in a family usually starts with 
bad communication”—Emma Thompson), business leaders (“Writing is great for keeping 
records and putting down details, but talk generates ideas”—T. Boone Pickens), motiva­
tional speakers (“The quality of your communication is the quality of your life”—Tony 
Robbins), and even talk show hosts (“Great communication begins with connection”—
Oprah). Perhaps one of the most lasting of all words came from a 1967 film (Cool Hand 
Luke): “What we have here is a failure to communicate”—a quotation that has subsequently 
been stated in such diverse settings as in the movie Madagascar, the song “Civil War” by 
Guns N’ Roses, and television shows NCIS and Frasier. It’s clear that nearly all cross sec­
tions of a Western society view communication as instrumental in human relationships.
In the most fundamental way, communication depends on our ability to under­
stand one another. Although our communication can be ambiguous (“I never thought 
I’d get this gift from you”), one primary and essential goal in communicating is 
understanding. Our daily activities are wrapped in ­conversations with others. Yet, as 
we see with the Bollen family, even those in close relationships can have difficulty 
expressing their thoughts.
Being able to communicate effectively is highly valued in the United States. Corpo­
rations have recognized the importance of communication. In 2016, the ­National Safety 
Management Society (nsms.us/?s=communication&submit=Search) reports that indus­
trial safety is contingent on the ability of employees and management to communicate 
clearly and to avoid jargon when possible. Indeed, the entire Safety Professions http://
www.com.edu/gcsi/ “First and foremost, risk managers must be good communicators.” 
Health care, too, is focusing more on the value of communication. Interestingly, as early 
as the late 1960s, doctor–patient communication has been a topic of concern in research 
(Korsch, Gozzi, & Francis, 1968). More ­recent literature shows that doctor–patient com­
munication is essential for the recovery of patients (Singh, 2016). Finally, in the classroom, 
researchers (e.g., Bolkon & Goodboy, 2011; Titsworth, Mazer, Goodboy, Bolkan, & 
Myers, 2015) have concluded that affirming feedback/student confirmation positively af­
fects student learning. And, with respect to social networking sites such as Facebook, 
individuals in romantic relationships report using communication (technology) as a way 
to check up on “status updates” on an individual’s wall—from commitment to fidelity 
(usatodayeducate.com/staging/index.php/campuslife/the-bytes-and-the-bees-love-can-
transcend-anything-even-facebook). Make no mistake about it: Abundant evidence un­
derscores the fact that communication is an essential, pervasive, and consequential be­
havior in our society.
As a student of communication, you are uniquely positioned to determine your 
potential for effective communication. To do so, however, you must have a basic under­
standing of the communication process and of how communication theory, in particular, 
functions in your life. We need to be able to talk ­effectively, for instance, to a number of 
very different types of people during an average day: teachers, ministers, salespeople, 
family members, friends, automobile mechanics, and health care providers.
Communication opportunities fill our lives each day. However, we need to under­
stand the whys and hows of our conversations with others. For instance, why do two 
people in a relationship feel a simultaneous need for togetherness and independence? 

	
Defining Communication     5
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
Why do some women feel ignored or devalued in conversations with men? Why does 
language often influence the thoughts of others? How do media influence people’s 
behavior? To what extent can social media affect the communication among people? 
These and many other questions are at the root of why communication theory is so 
important in our society and so critical to understand.
Defining Communication
Our first task is to create a common understanding for the term communication. 
Defining communication can be challenging. Katherine Miller (2005) underscores 
this dilemma, stating that “conceptualizations of communication have been abundant 
and have changed substantially over the years” (p. 3). Sarah Trenholm (1991) notes 
that although the study of communication has been around for centuries, it does not 
mean communication is well understood. In fact, Trenholm interestingly illustrates 
the dilemma when defining the term. She states, “Communication has become a sort 
of ‘portmanteau’ term. Like a piece of luggage, it is overstuffed with all manner of 
odd ideas and meanings. The fact that some of these do fit, resulting in a conceptual 
suitcase much too heavy for anyone to carry, is often overlooked” (p. 4).
We should note that there are many ways to interpret and define ­communication—a 
result of the complexity and richness of the communication discipline. Imagine, for 
instance, taking this course from two different professors. Each would have his or 
her way of presenting the material, and each classroom of students would likely ap­
proach communication theory in a unique manner. The result would be two exciting 
and distinctive approaches to studying the same topic.
This uniqueness holds true with defining communication. Scholars tend to see human 
phenomena from their own perspectives, something we delve into further in the next chap­
ter. In some ways, researchers establish boundaries when they try to explain phenomena 
to others. Communication scholars may approach the interpretation of communication 
differently because of differences in scholarly values. With these caveats in mind, we 
offer the following definition of communication to get us pointed in the same direction. 
Communication is a ­social process in which individuals employ symbols to establish 
and interpret meaning in their environment. We necessarily draw in elements of medi­
ated communication as well in our discussion, given the importance that communication 
technology plays in contemporary society. With that in mind, let’s define five key terms 
in our perspective: social, process, symbols, meaning, and ­environment (Figure 1.1).
First, we believe that communication is a social process. When interpreting com­
munication as social, we mean to suggest that it involves people and interactions, 
whether face-to-face or online. This necessarily includes two people, who act as send­
ers and receivers. Both play an integral role in the communication process. When 
communication is social, it involves people who come to an interaction with various 
intentions, motivations, and abilities. To suggest that communication is a process 
means that it is ongoing and unending. Communication is also dynamic, complex, and 
continually changing. With this view of communication, we emphasize the dynamics 
of making meaning. Therefore, communication has no definable beginning and end­
ing. For example, although Jimmy and Angie Bollen may tell their son that he must 
communication
a social process in 
which individuals 
employ symbols 
to establish and 
interpret meaning in 
their environment
social 
the notion that 
people and interac­
tions are part of 
the communication 
process
process 
ongoing, dynamic, 
and unending  
occurrence

6    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
leave the house, their discussions with him and about him will continue well after he 
leaves. In fact, the conversation they have with Eddy today will most likely affect their 
communication with him tomorrow. Similarly, our past communications with people 
have been stored in their minds and have affected their conversations with us.
The process nature of communication also means that much can happen from 
the beginning of a conversation to the end. People may end up at a very different 
place once a discussion begins. This is exemplified by the frequent conflicts that 
roommates, spouses, and siblings experience. Although a conversation may begin 
with absolute and inflexible language, the conflict may be resolved with compro­
mise. All of this can occur in a matter of minutes.
Individual and cultural changes affect communication. Conversations between sib­
lings, for example, have shifted from the 1950s to today. Years ago, siblings rarely dis­
cussed the impending death of a parent or the need to take care of an aging parent. Today, 
it’s not uncommon to listen to children talking about nursing home care, home health 
care, and even funeral arrangements. The 1950s was a time of postwar euphoria; couples 
were reunited after World War II and the baby boom began. Today, with an ongoing U.S. 
troop presence around the world, Americans rarely experience the euphoria they once had. 
The tensions, uncertainties, and loss of life are too compelling for many people. As you 
can see, perceptions and feelings can change and may remain in flux for quite some time.
Some of you may be thinking that because the communication process is dy­
namic and unique it is virtually impossible to study. However, C. Arthur VanLear 
(1996) argues that because the communication process is so dynamic, researchers and 
theorists can look for patterns over time. He concludes that “if we recognize a pat­
tern across a large number of cases, it permits us to ‘generalize’ to other unobserved 
cases” (p. 36). Or, as communication pioneers Paul Watzlawick, Janet Beavin, and 
Don Jackson (1967) suggest, the interconnectedness of communication events is crit­
ical and pervasive. Thus, it is possible to study the dynamic communication process.
To help you visualize this process, imagine a continuum where the points are unre­
peatable and irreversible. Frank Dance (1967) depicts the communication process by using 
a spiral or helix (Figure 1.2). He believes that communication experiences are cumulative 
Communication
Environment
Social
Process
Symbols
Meaning
Figure 1.1
Key Terms in 
Defining 
Communication

	
Defining Communication     7
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
and are influenced by the past. He notes that present experiences inevitably influence a 
person’s future, and so he emphasizes a nonlinear view of the process. Communication, 
therefore, can be considered a process that changes over time and among interactants.
A third term associated with our definition of communication is symbols. A 
symbol is an arbitrary label or representation of phenomena. Words are symbols 
for concepts and things—for example, the word love represents the idea of love; 
the word chair represents a thing we sit on. Labels may be ambiguous, may be both 
verbal and nonverbal, and may occur in face-to-face and mediated communication. 
Symbols are usually agreed on within a group but may not be understood outside of 
the group. In this way, their use is often arbitrary. For ­instance, most college students 
understand the phrase “preregistration is closed”; those outside of college may not 
understand its meaning. Further, there are both concrete symbols (the symbol rep­
resents an object) and abstract symbols (the symbol stands for a thought or idea).
Even the innocuous Twitter symbol—the hashtag has resonance in politics. 
Tamara Small (2011), for example, claims that in-depth political reporting and discussion 
is fast becoming rare in politics. Rather, the search for a condensed, 140‑character tweet 
has supplanted efforts to investigate and interrogate sometimes called “viral politics” 
(Penney, 2014). So, the hashtag symbol effectively becomes a representation of a story 
that used to be several hundred words found in newspapers and magazines.
In addition to process and symbols, meaning is central to our definition of 
communication. Meaning is what people extract from a message. In communica­
tion episodes, messages can have more than one meaning and even multiple layers 
of meaning. Without sharing some meanings, we would all have a difficult time 
speaking the same language or interpreting the same event. Judith Martin and Tom 
Nakayama (2013) point out that meaning has cultural consequences:
[W]hen President George W. Bush was about to go to war in Iraq, he ­referred 
to this war as a “crusade.” The use of this term evoked strong negative reac­
tions in the Islamic world, due to the history of the Crusades nearly 1,000 years 
ago . . . . While President Bush may not have knowingly wanted to frame the 
Iraq invasion as a religious war against Muslims, the history of the Crusades 
may make others feel that it is. (p. 70)
Clearly, not all meaning is shared, and people do not always know what others 
mean. In these situations, we must be able to explain, repeat, and clarify. For example, 
symbol
arbitrary label given 
to a phenomenon
concrete symbol
symbol represent­
ing an object
abstract symbol 
symbol representing 
an idea or thought
meaning 
what people extract 
from a message
∞
Figure 1.2
Communication 
Process as a Helix
Source: Reprinted 
by permission of 
Frank E. X. Dance.

8    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
if the Bollens want to tell Eddy to move out, they will probably need to go beyond tell­
ing him that they just need their “space.” Eddy may perceive “needing space” as simply 
staying out of the house two nights a week. Furthermore, his parents will have to figure 
out what communication “approach” is best. They might believe that being direct may 
be best to get their son out of the house. Or they might fear that such clear communica­
tion is not the most effective strategy to change Eddy’s behavior. Regardless of how 
Jimmy and Angie Bollen communicate their wishes, without sharing the same mean­
ing, the family will have a challenging time getting their messages across to one another.
The final key term in our definition of communication is environment. 
­Environment is the situation or context in which communication occurs. The 
­environment includes a number of elements, including time, place, historical period, 
relationship, and a speaker’s and listener’s cultural backgrounds. You can understand 
the influence of environments by thinking about your beliefs and values pertaining to 
socially significant topics such as marriage equality, physician-assisted suicide, and 
immigration into the United States. If you have had personal experience with any of 
these topics, it’s likely your views are affected by your perceptions.
The environment can also be mediated. By that, we mean that communication takes 
place with technological assistance. At one point or another, all of us have commu­
nicated in a mediated environment, namely through email, chat rooms, or social net­
working sites. These mediated environments influence the communication between two 
people in that people in electronic relationships are (usually) not able to observe each 
other’s eye behavior, listen to vocal characteristics, or watch body movement (Skype 
would be an exception to this, however). Clearly, the mediated environment has received 
a great deal of attention over the years as communication theory continues to develop.
environment 
situation or context 
in which communi­
cation occurs
Student Voices
Janelle
The discussion in class about environment was interesting to me. I can’t begin to 
tell you how many different types of physical environments I’m in every day. I work 
in a nonprofit, so I’m always in and out of the office. Our office is on the third floor 
of a five-story building. It’s quite small, but we have a lot of fun. Sometimes, though, 
I have to go to a corporate office where everything is new and looks very expen­
sive. A lot of the workers, though, seem up-tight! Then, I have to visit some people’s 
homes and I can say that there is so much difference in the way people have ar­
ranged their home environments. And I haven’t even begun to talk about how I use 
email and the ­different mediated environments. It’s unbelievable!
Models of Understanding: Communication as Action, 
Interaction, and Transaction
Communication theorists create models, or simplified representations of complex 
interrelationships among elements in the communication process, which allow us to 
models 
simplified represen­
tations of the com­
munication process

	
Models of Understanding: Communication as Action, Interaction, and Transaction     9
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
visually understand a sometimes complex process. Models help us weave together 
the basic elements of the communication process. Although there are many com­
munication models, we discuss the three most prominent ones here. In discussing 
these models and their underlying approaches, we wish to demonstrate the manner in 
which communication has been conceptualized over the years.
Communication as Action: The Linear Model
In 1949, Claude Shannon, a Bell Laboratories scientist and professor at the 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and Warren Weaver, a consultant on projects 
at the Sloan Foundation, described communication as a linear process. They were 
concerned with radio and telephone technology and wanted to ­develop a model that 
could explain how information passed through various channels. The result was the 
conceptualization of the linear model of communication.
This approach to human communication comprises several key elements, as 
Figure 1.3 demonstrates. A source, or transmitter of a message, sends a ­message to 
a receiver, the recipient of the message. The receiver is the person who makes sense 
out of the message. All of this communication takes place in a channel, which is the 
pathway to communication. Channels frequently correspond to the visual, tactile, 
olfactory, and auditory senses. Thus, you use the visual channel when you see your 
roommate, and you use the tactile channel when you hug your parent.
Communication also involves noise, which is anything not intended by the infor­
mational source. There are four types of noise. First, semantic noise pertains to the 
slang, jargon, or specialized language used by individuals or groups. For instance, 
linear model of  
communication 
one-way view of 
communication that 
assumes a mes­
sage is sent by a 
source to a receiver 
through a channel
source 
originator of a 
message
message 
words, sounds, 
actions, or gestures 
in an interaction
receiver 
recipient of a 
message
channel 
pathway to 
communication
noise 
distortion in 
channel not intend­
ed by the source
semantic noise 
linguistic influences 
on reception of 
message
www.CartoonStock.com

10    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
when Jennifer received a medical report from her ophthalmologist, the physician’s 
words included phrases such as “ocular neuritis,” “dilated funduscopic examina­
tion,” and “papillary conjunctival changes.” This is an example of semantic noise be­
cause outside of the medical community, these words have limited (or no) meaning. 
Physical, or external, noise ­exists outside of the receiver. Psychological noise refers 
to a communicator’s prejudices, biases, and predispositions toward another or the 
message. To ­exemplify these two types, imagine listening to participants at a political 
rally. You may experience psychological noise listening to the views of a politician 
whom you do not support, and you may also experience physical noise from the 
people nearby who may be protesting the politician’s presence. Finally, physiologi­
cal noise refers to the biological influences on the communication process. Physi­
ological noise, then, exists if you or a speaker is ill, fatigued, or hungry.
Although this view of the communication process was highly respected many 
years ago, the approach is very limited for several reasons. First, the model presumes 
that there is only one message in the communication process. Yet we all can point to 
a number of circumstances in which we send several messages at once. Second, as we 
have previously noted, communication does not have a definable beginning and end­
ing. Shannon and Weaver’s model presumes this mechanistic orientation. Furthermore, 
to suggest that communication is simply one person speaking to another oversimplifies 
the complex communication process. Listeners are not so passive, as we can all con­
firm when we are in heated arguments with others. Clearly, communication is more 
than a one-way effort and has no definable middle or end (Anderson & Ross, 2002).
Communication as Interaction: The Interactional Model
The linear model suggests that a person is only a sender or a receiver. That is a nar­
row view of the participants in the communication process. Wilbur Schramm (1954), 
therefore, proposed that we also examine the relationship between a sender and a 
receiver. He conceptualized the interactional model of communication, which em­
phasizes the two-way communication process between communicators (Figure 1.4). 
In other words, communication goes in two directions: from sender to receiver and 
physical (external) 
noise
bodily influences  
on reception of  
message
psychological noise
cognitive influences 
on reception of 
message
physiological noise
biological influences 
on reception of 
message
interactional model 
of communication 
view of communica­
tion as the sharing 
of meaning with 
feedback that links 
source and receiver 
Noise
Noise
Target/Receiver
Sender/Source
Message
Semantic
Physical
Psychological
Physiological
Semantic
Physical
Psychological
Physiological
Figure 1.3
Linear Model of 
Communication

	
Models of Understanding: Communication as Action, Interaction, and Transaction     11
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
from receiver to sender. This circular process suggests that communication is ongo-
ing. The interactional view ­illustrates that a person can perform the role of either 
sender or receiver during an interaction, but not both roles simultaneously.
One element essential to the interactional model of communication is ­feedback, 
or the response to a message. Feedback may be verbal or nonverbal, intentional or 
unintentional. Feedback helps communicators to know whether or not their message 
is being received and the extent to which meaning is achieved. In the interactional 
model, feedback takes place after a message is received, not during the message itself.
To illustrate the critical nature of feedback and the interactional model of com-
munication, consider our opening example of the Bollen family. When Eddy’s par-
ents find him on the couch drunk, they proceed to tell Eddy how they feel about 
his behavior. Their outcry prompts Eddy to argue with his parents, who in turn, tell 
him to leave their house immediately. This interactional sequence shows that there 
is an alternating nature in the communication between Eddy and his parents. They 
see his behavior and provide their feedback on it, Eddy listens to their message and 
responds, then his father sends the final message telling his son to leave. We can take 
this even further by noting the door slam as one additional feedback behavior in the 
interaction.
A final feature of the interactional model is a person’s field of experience, or 
how a person’s culture and experiences influence his or her ability to communicate 
with another. Each person brings a unique field of experience to each communica-
tion episode, and these experiences frequently influence the communication between 
people. For instance, when two people come together and begin dating, the two inevi-
tably bring their fields of experience into the relationship. One person in this couple 
may have been raised in a large family with several siblings, while the other may be 
an only child. These experiences (and others) will necessarily influence how the two 
come together and will most likely affect how they maintain their relationship.
Like the linear view, the interactional model has been criticized. The interac-
tional model suggests that one person acts as sender while the other acts as receiver 
in a communication encounter. As you have experienced, however, people communi-
cate as both senders and receivers in a single encounter. But the prevailing criticism 
feedback 
communication 
given to the source 
by the receiver to 
indicate  
understanding 
field of experience
overlap of sender’s 
and receiver’s cul-
ture, experiences, 
and heredity in  
communication
Noise
Noise
Noise
Noise
F
i
e
l
d
 
o
f 
e
x
p
e
ri
e
n
c
e
Message
Channel
Sender
Receiver
Feedback
Feedback
F
i
e
l
d
 
o
f 
e
x
p
e
ri
e
n
c
e
Figure 1.4
Interactional  
Model of 
Communication

12    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
of the interactional model pertains to the issue of feedback. The interactional view 
assumes two people speaking and listening, but not at the same time. But what occurs 
when a person sends a nonverbal message during an interaction? Smiling, frowning, 
or simply moving away from the conversation during an interaction between two 
people happens all the time. For example, in an interaction between a mother and her 
daughter, the mother may be reprimanding her child while simultaneously “reading” 
the child’s nonverbal behavior. Is the girl laughing? Is she upset? Is she even listening 
to her mother? Each of these behaviors will inevitably prompt the mother to modify 
her message. These criticisms and contradictions inspired development of a third 
model of communication.
Communication as Transaction: The Transactional Model
The transactional model of communication (Barnlund, 1970; Frymier, 2005; 
Wilmot, 1987) underscores the simultaneous sending and receiving of messages in 
a communication episode, as Figure 1.5 shows. To say that communication is trans­
actional means that the process is cooperative; the sender and the receiver are mutu­
ally responsible for the effect and the effectiveness of communication. In the linear 
model of communication, meaning is sent from one person to another. In the interac­
tional model, meaning is achieved through the feedback of a sender and a receiver. In 
the transactional model, people build shared meaning. Furthermore, what people say 
during a transaction is greatly influenced by their past experience. So, for instance, 
at a college fair, it is likely that a college student will have a great deal to say to a 
high school senior ­because of the college student’s experiences in class and around 
campus. A college senior will, no doubt, have a different view of college than, say, a 
college sophomore, due in large part to his or her past college experiences.
Transactional communication requires us to recognize the influence of one 
message on another. One message builds on the previous message; therefore, there 
transactional model 
of communication 
view of communica­
tion as the simul­
taneous sending 
and receiving of 
messages
Communicator
Message/Feedback
Shared
ﬁeld of
experience
Noise
Physiological
Psychological
Physical
Semantic
Field of experience
Communicator
Field of experience
Figure 1.5
Transactional 
Model of 
­Communication

	
Communication Models of the Future     13
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
is an interdependency between and among the components of communication. A 
change in one causes a change in others. Furthermore, the transactional model pre­
sumes that as we simultaneously send and receive messages, we attend to both 
verbal and nonverbal elements of a message. In a sense, communicators negotiate 
meaning. For instance, if a friend asks you about your family background, you may 
use some private language that your friend doesn’t understand. Your friend may 
make a face while you are presenting your message, indicating some sort of confu­
sion with what you’ve said. As a result, you will most likely back up and define 
your terms and then continue with the conversation. This example highlights the 
degree to which two people are actively involved in a communication encounter. 
The nonverbal communication is just as important as the verbal message in such a 
transactional process.
Earlier we noted that the field of experience functions in the interactional model. 
In the transactional model, the fields of experience exist, but overlap occurs. That is, 
rather than person A and person B having separate fields of experience, eventually 
the two fields merge (see Figure 1.5). This was an important ­addition to the under­
standing of the communication process because it demonstrates an active process 
of understanding. That is, for communication to take place, individuals must build 
shared meaning. For instance, in our earlier example of two people with different 
childhoods, the interactional model suggests that they would come together with an 
understanding of their backgrounds. The transactional model, however, requires each 
of them to understand and incorporate the other’s field of experience into his or her 
life. For example, it’s not enough for Julianna to know that Paul has a prior prison 
record; the transactional view holds that she must figure out a way to put his past into 
perspective. Will it affect their current relationship? How? If not, how will Julianna 
discuss it with Paul? The transactional model takes the meaning-making process one 
step further than the interactional model. It assumes reciprocity, or shared meaning.
Communication Models of the Future
As we move further into the 21st century, we have to ask the question: Are these 
models sufficient as we examine human communication? We already know that 
communication models are usually incomplete and unsuitable for all purposes 
(McQuail & Windhal, 2015). The answer is fairly complex. First, the proliferation 
of new social networking sites (SNS), for example, and their influence upon com­
munication demand that communication models integrate technological discussions. 
Second, this integration must necessarily be thoughtful, given the plethora of SNS. 
Traffic to SNS has grown exponentially over the past few years with about 75 percent 
of online adults using social networking (http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets
/social-networking-fact-sheet)—up from 7 percent in 2005. The diversity of these 
sites—from Facebook to LinkedIn to Instagram—suggests that no simple model will 
be possible. We address the notion of technology in several chapters in this book 
and the theorist’s perception of how technology affects the communication process.
We can envision a model of communication that incorporates SNS as both the sender 
and the receiver. We anticipate that scholars will embark upon understanding the transac­
tional nature of such platforms as Snapchat, where a message disappears after 10 seconds. 

14    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
Clearly, Shannon, Weaver, Schramm, and Barnlund could never have envisioned such 
technology. We’re sure that in the not-so-distant future, we will have an abundance of re­
search on the influences of these technological influences on the communication process.
You now have a basic understanding of how we define communication, and we have 
outlined the basic elements and a few communication models. Recall this interpretation 
as you read the book and examine the various theories. It is probable that you will in­
terpret communication differently from one theory to another. Remember that theorists 
set boundaries in their discussions about human behavior, and, consequently, they often 
define communication according to their own view. One of our goals in this book is to en­
able you to articulate the role that communication plays in a number of different theories.
Thus far, we have examined the communication process and unpacked the complex­
ity associated with it. We have identified the primary models of communication, trying to 
demonstrate the evolution and maturation of the communication field. We now explore 
a component that is a necessary and vital part of every communication episode: ethics.
Ethics and Communication
In the movie The Insider, which was based on a true story, the lead character’s name is Jef­
frey Wigand, a former tobacco scientist who violated a contractual agreement and exposed 
a cigarette maker’s efforts to include addictive ingredients in all cigarettes. The movie 
shows Wigand as a man of good conscience with the intention of telling the public about 
the company and its immoral undertakings. Wigand clearly believed that saving lives was 
the right and only thing to do, and he made his actions fit his beliefs: He acted on his ethics.
In this section, we examine ethics, or the perceived rightness or wrongness of action 
or behavior. Ethics is a type of moral decision making (May, 2013), and determining 
what is right or wrong is influenced by society’s rules and laws. For example, although 
some may believe Wigand’s efforts were laudable, others may note that Wigand ap­
parently knew what was going on when he signed a contract prohibiting him from 
disclosing company secrets. Furthermore, the murkiness of ethics is evidenced when 
one considers that Wigand made a lot of money before disclosing what was occurring.
The United States is built on standards of moral conduct, and these standards 
are central to a number of institutions and relationships. Because ethical standards 
tend to shift according to historical period, the environment, the conversation, and 
the people involved, ethics can be difficult to understand. Let’s briefly discuss ethical 
issues as they pertain to cultural institutions; a more comprehensive explanation of 
ethics can be found elsewhere (see MacKinnon, 2012).
To begin, George Cheney, Debashish Munshi, Steve May, and Erin Ortiz (2010) 
posit the following: “Communication, as both a discipline and an ‘interdiscipline’ or 
field, is poised to play a unique role in advancing discussions of ethics because the 
field offers an array of concepts and principles attuned to the examination of ethics” 
(p. 1). Their words resonate throughout this discussion.
Let’s start here by asking why we should understand ethics, next explain ethics as 
it relates to society, and finally, explain the intersection of ethics and communication 
theory. As you think about this information, keep in mind that ethical decision mak­
ing is culturally based. That is, what we consider to be ethical and appropriate in 
one society is not necessarily a shared value in another society. For instance, though 
ethics 
perceived rightness 
or wrongness of an 
action or behavior

	
Ethics and Communication     15
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
many in the United States can identify with the plight of the Bollen family, you 
should know that in many cultures, having a son return to his family-of-origin is 
revered and would not pose the problems that the Bollens are experiencing.
Why study ethics? The response to this question could easily be another ques­
tion: Why not study it? Ethics permeates all walks of life and cuts across gender, 
race, class, sexual identity, and spiritual/religious affiliation. In other words, we can­
not escape ethical principles in our lives. Ethics is part of virtually every decision 
we make. Moral development is part of human development, and as we grow older, 
our moral code undergoes changes well into adulthood. Ethics is what prompts a so­
ciety toward higher levels of integrity and truth. Elaine Englehardt (2001) observes 
that “we don’t get to ‘invent’ our own system of ethics” (p. 2), which means that we 
generally follow a given cultural code of morality. And, Ken Andersen (2003) argues 
that without an understanding and an expression of ethical values, society will be 
disadvantaged: “Violating the norms of ethical communication is, I believe, a major 
factor in the malaise that has led many people to withdraw from the civic culture 
whether of their profession, their associations, their political arena” (p. 14).
From a communication perspective, ethical issues surface whenever messages 
potentially influence others. Consider, for instance, the ethics associated with telling 
your professor that you couldn’t turn in a paper on time because a member of your 
family is ill, when such an illness doesn’t exist. Think about the ethics involved if you 
take an idea of a coworker and present it to your boss as if it were your own. Consider 
the ethical consequences of going out on several dates with someone and choosing 
not to disclose a past felony for assault, or of posing as someone other than yourself 
on Match.com or Tweeting events that are deceptive. Television, too, carries ethi­
cal implications. For example, can television promote racial tolerance and harmony 
and simultaneously ­present portrayals of cultural groups in stereotypic and offensive 
ways? We continue our discussion of ethics by identifying some of the institutions 
whose ethical standards have been the subject of much conversation. Business and 
industry, religion, entertainment, education, medicine, politics, and technology are 
just a few of the many fields that have been prone to ethical lapses and have been 
challenged in communicating messages of integrity (Table 1.1).
Business and Industry
Perhaps no cultural institution has been under more ethical suspicions of late than 
“corporate America.” Unethical behavior in corporations has reached proportions 
never before seen. In fact, many of these scandals prompted the Occupy Wall Street 
protest movements in 2011 and 2012, and in 2016, the rise of a (then) little known 
U.S. Senator from Vermont: Bernie Sanders.
Because a corporation is usually obsessed about its reputation (Carroll, 2015), 
companies have tried to hide costs, use creative accounting practices, commit account­
ing fraud, and a plethora of other ethical breaches. The examples are plentiful: The 
former head of the World Bank engineers a job promotion and salary increase for his long­
time companion; WorldCom declares bankruptcy after the discovery of an $11 billion 
accounting “error”; Volkswagen, the world’s biggest automaker, admits to rigging die­
sel emissions tests in the United States and Europe; Enron inflates earnings reports 
and hides billions in debt, while increasing salaries of its executives; the founder of 

16    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
Adelphia Communications and his two sons commit bank and securities fraud, lead­
ing to the company’s demise; and Boeing’s chief financial officer inappropriately 
recruits a retired government official with whom he previously negotiated contracts. Fi­
nally, the Bernie Madoff investment securities scandal included Madoff bilking nearly 
$64 billion from over 4,500 clients. Sadly, each of these situations occurred within a 
10-year ­period. The list of business scandals has been especially prominent. But with 
the advent of Corporate Ethics Statements, congressional legislation requiring public 
accountability, improved transparent accounting practices, and increased accountabil­
ity to stockholders, most businesses have begun to improve their ethical standing. Of 
course, much, much more needs to be done to eliminate lingering levels of distrust.
Religion and Faith
Both Eastern and Western civilizations have stressed ethics in their moral traditions. 
For instance, according to Taoism, no one exists in isolation, and, therefore, empathy 
and insight will lead to truth. For the Buddhist, being moral ­requires that one use 
words that elicit peace and avoid gossip, self-promotion, anger, argument, and lying. 
From a Western perspective, many ethical issues ­derive from early Greek civilization. 
Aristotle first articulated the principle of the Golden Mean. He believed that a person’s 
moral virtue stands between two vices, with the middle, or the mean, being the founda­
tion for a rational society. For instance, when the Bollens are deciding what to say to 
their son Eddy about overstaying his welcome, their Golden Mean might look like this:
EXTREME	
GOLDEN MEAN	
EXTREME
lying 	
truthful communication 	
reveal everything
The Judeo-Christian religions are centered as well on questions of ethics. In fact, 
there is an online publication devoted solely to Religion and Ethics (pbs.org/wnet
Table 1.1  Examples of Ethical Decision Making in the United States
INSTITUTION
EXAMPLES OF ETHICAL ISSUES
Business and industry
Should CEOs be given pay raises in companies that are not 
profitable?
Religion
Should the church allow priests to counsel couples who 
are about to be married? 
Entertainment
Does viewing violence in movies prompt violence in society?
Higher education
Should student fees go to political groups on campus?
Medicine
Can pharmaceutical companies be held responsible for 
sample medicines?
Politics
Should political candidates make promises to citizens?
Technology
Who should monitor websites targeting children?

	
Ethics and Communication     17
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
/religionandethics/current/headlines.html). Christianity is founded on the principle 
of good example—that is, live according to God’s laws and set an example for oth­
ers. However, some believe that such moral standards are not uniquely religious. For 
those not affiliated with organized religion, the secular values of fairness and justice 
and working toward better relationships are important as well. Affiliating with a reli­
gion may also pose some ethical difficulty if a ­person does not subscribe to a number 
of its philosophies or orientations. For ­instance, people who believe that Catholic 
priests should be able to marry will have a difficult time reconciling that value with 
Catholic law that prohibits such marriages.
Despite efforts to retain ethicality, religious institutions have had a num­
ber of ethical challenges over the years. Ministers frequenting prostitutes, pedophilic 
priests, drug abuse by church leaders, and sexual immorality among parishioners and 
pastors are just a few of the dozens of religious scandals that have caused outrage. 
Fortunately, many religious bodies are now developing clear ethical statements on 
appropriate behavior and clarifying the consequences of ethical violations.
Entertainment
The entertainment industry has also been intimately involved in dialogues about ethics 
and communication. Often, a circular argument surfaces with respect to Hollywood: 
Does Hollywood reflect society or does Hollywood shape society? Many viewpoints 
are raised in these arguments, but three seem to dominate. One belief is that Hol­
lywood has a responsibility to show the moral side of an immoral society; movies 
should help people escape a difficult reality, not relive it. A second opinion is that Hol­
lywood should create more nonviolent and nonsexual films so that all family members 
can watch a movie. Unfortunately, critics note, films like Hostel, Kill Bill, Sin City, 
The Wicker Man, Rampage tend to exacerbate violent attitudes in young people. A 
third school of thought is that Hollywood is in show business, and therefore making 
money is what moviemaking is all about. Regardless of whether you agree with any 
of these orientations, the entertainment industry will continue to reflect and influence 
changing moral climates in the United States. Some might say that Hollywood leading 
the charge in any conversation on ethics is, in itself, a question of ethics.
Higher Education
A third cultural institution that has been charged with questionable ethics is higher 
education. Colleges and universities across the United States teach introductory 
courses in ethics, and these are required courses in many schools.
Despite this interest, many schools have lost their own moral compass. For instance, 
colleges and universities face an ethical choice about reporting crime statistics on their 
campus. Despite the fact that they are required to report campus crime via the Jeanne 
Clery Act (named after a Lehigh University student who was murdered in 1986), some 
campuses fear the bad publicity. As a result, crime is “contextualized” (“Our campus is 
in a large city; there’s a lot of crime everywhere” or “Our campus is in a rural setting; 
we may have a few problems but, we’re still relatively safe”). On a logistic level, another 
ethical decision arises when schools are required to identify the enrollment patterns 
for legislative and financial support. Frequently, schools report statistical increases in 

18    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
­enrollment over a number of years when in reality the school system has simply adopted 
a new way of counting heads. And, in 2012, Emory University (preceded by McKenna 
College, Baylor University, Iona College, and many others) made front-page headlines 
when it was found that the school mani­pulated and falsified data used in the ratings used 
by publications that rank colleges (e.g., U.S. News & World Report). The institution’s 
integrity is often called into question by engaging in such practices (Ramsey & Wesley, 
2015). Clearly, although they are called ­institutions of “higher” learning, some would 
argue that many campuses have reached new “lows” in ethical decision making.
Medicine
A fourth institution concerned with ethics and communication is the medical com­
munity. Specifically, with advances in science changing the cultural landscape, bio­
ethical issues are topics of conversation around the dinner table. Physician-assisted 
suicide is one example of medicine at the center of ethical controversy. To some, the 
decision to prolong life should be a private one, made by the patient and his or her 
doctor. To others, society should have a say in such a decision.
Medical decisions can become publicly debated far from the hospital bedside. 
Late-term abortions, human cloning, drug-enhanced athletes, medicinal marijuana, 
executed prisoners organ use, and physician-assisted suicide are all topics that 
demonstrate the interrelationship among ethics, politics, and medicine. This topic 
has resonated sufficiently in our society that there is an abundance of professional 
journals, websites, and publications dedicated to the interface of ethics and medicine. 
The American Society of Law, Medicine, and Ethics is one such organization dedi­
cated to ethical decision making (www.aslme.org).
Howard Brody, in the New England Journal of Medicine, one of the most ­
oft-cited medical journals, presents new ethical discussions taking place in 
the medical community. Dr. Brody evidences that 30 percent of health care 
costs can be considered to be “waste.” That is, he contends that this waste, 
or what he determines to be “useless interventions, useless tests, and harm­
ful treatments,” is too frequent. He laments that this “non-beneficial medi­
cine” is fast becoming the norm in medicine. Brody argues that an “ethics of 
rationing care and waste avoidance” is necessary if medicine is to be able to 
respond to health-related concerns. Brody posits that physicians are not pri­
oritizing this notion of wasteful medical care and that this ignorance is con­
tributing to higher medical costs. He also acknowledges that although there 
are clearly political implications to this ethical discussion, it is incumbent 
upon physicians to undertake this topic to “protect . . . patients from harm.”
Source: Brody, H. (2012). From an ethics of rationing to an ethics of waste avoidance. New 
England Journal of Medicine, 366, 1949–1951.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Ethics and Health Care

	
Ethics and Communication     19
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
Politics
It is difficult to disentangle the topic of ethics from politics. The two are often viewed 
as incompatible. We are living in cynical times, and opinion polls consistently show 
that the public’s view of political leaders rates lower than the public’s view of pay­
ing taxes. The scandals associated with politics relate to lobbyists, campaign financ­
ing, infidelity, deception, conflicts of interest, cover-ups, bribery, conspiracy, tax 
evasion. Political scandals have been in the news since, well, the beginning of 
politics. It may seem, however, that they have grown in number over the past few 
years. Whether it’s the resignation of the CIA Director because of his extramarital 
affair, the U.S. President’s sexual harassment allegations from 20 women, or the hate­
ful Facebook postings by political candidates the list goes on and on.
The ethical problems associated with politics may never go away, despite ­efforts 
to establish ethics commissions and oversight advisory boards in state and national 
governments. Though many of us wish to be optimistic in thinking that we are cul­
tivating a new generation of political leaders who are ethical beings, there are those 
who are not as hopeful. Still, with nonprofit organizations such as Public Interest Re­
search Group (PIRG) and the Government Accountability Project—groups that ex­
pose ethical shortcomings in our government and its leaders—and with aptly named 
Government offices such as the U.S. Office of Government Ethics, there may be 
cause for increased confidence in the future.
Technology
Technology is at the center of many ethical debates today (van Manen, 2015). Armed 
with a copy of the First Amendment, proponents of free speech say the Internet, for exam­
ple, should not be censored. Free speech advocates stress that what is considered inappro­
priate can vary tremendously from one person to another, and consequently, censorship 
is arbitrary. Consider, for instance, the U.S. Supreme Court decision protecting “virtual” 
child pornography on the Internet. Noting that the Child Pornography Protection Act was 
overly broad, the justices felt that banning computer-generated images of young people 
was unjustified. In addition, social networking sites such as Facebook, with over 1 billion 
global users are prone to ethical problems. How much information is too much? Teenag­
ers letting others know where they live, blogs that divulge too much information about a 
family’s financial situation, and would-be employers looking over the shoulders of users 
are just a few of the many ethical challenges characterizing the online world.
As the United States is clearly more reliant on technology than ever before, ethical 
issues will continue to arise. Lying about one’s identity online, downloading copyrighted 
material, inviting young people into violent and hate-filled websites, and watching ex­
ecutions on the Internet are all examples of potential technological ethics dilemmas.
Some Final Thoughts
The relationship between communication and ethics is intricate and complex. Public 
discourse requires responsibility (Torcello, 2016). We presume that political leaders will 
tell the truth and that spiritual leaders will guide us by their example. Yet we know that 
not all elected officials are honest and that not all religious leaders set a spiritual standard. 
Organizations are especially prone to ethical dilemmas. For instance, whistle-blowing, 

20    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
or revealing ethically suspicious behavior in a company, can have lasting implications. 
Although some may view whistle-blowing as a courageous and morally sound act, oth­
ers may view it as a violation of trust. This difference in perception usually rests on 
whether a whistle-blower is perceived as a disgruntled employee who may have been 
passed over for a promotion or as someone who is genuinely concerned about a com­
pany’s ethical practices. Unethical practices do little to garner trust in people.
There is an ethical dimension to listening as well. As listeners (or readers) we 
have a responsibility to give a fair hearing to the ideas of others. This responsibility 
extends to such ideas as the communication theories presented in this book. Rob 
Anderson and Veronica Ross (2002) point out six important ethical strategies to con­
sider when reading communication theory:
1.	 Remain open to being persuaded by the statements of others.
2.	 Remain willing to try out new ideas that may be seen by others as mistakes, 
and invite others to experiment also.
3.	 Accept that multiple perspectives on reality are held as valid by different peo­
ple, especially in different cultural contexts.
4.	 Attempt to test any tentatively held knowledge.
5.	 Live with ambiguity, but become less tolerant of contradiction.
6.	 Evaluate knowledge claims against personal experience and the everyday con­
crete pragmatics of what works. (p. 15)
In addition to these suggestions, we add one more: If a theory is a bit difficult to un­
derstand at first, don’t gloss over it. Delve into the explanation once more to gain a 
clearer picture of the theorists’ intentions. You may feel inexperienced or unprepared 
to challenge these theories. Yet we offer the theories for review, application, and 
comment and want you to ask questions about them. Although we would like to think 
that all theorists are open and receptive to multiple ways of knowing, the reality re­
mains that theory construction is bound by culture, personality, time, circumstance, 
and the availability of resources. As students of communication theory, we all must 
be willing to ask some difficult questions and probe some confusing areas.
Student Voices
Mandy
I’ve always thought that ethics is the most important part of communicating with 
other people. I don’t care whether I’m in an office or in the classroom, I think we 
have to live using ethical standards. We need to know that lying to other people 
rarely makes sense. We need to know that if we don’t try to understand others from 
their point of view, we’re probably never going to understand what they mean. The 
media have to be ethical, too. They just can’t put out whatever they want and not be 
held accountable. I guess the bottom line is that if we try to be concerned about oth­
ers, try to understand what they are feeling, and do what we can to be honest, we 
are on our way to being ethical.

	
The Value of Understanding Communication Theory     21
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
The Value of Understanding Communication Theory
Although we’ve alluded to this throughout the chapter, we’d like to emphasize the 
importance of communication theory to all of our lives. We realize that many of you 
may not be immediately aware of the value of this topic. Therefore, we want to give 
you a glimpse into the significance of communication theory. Remember: You can 
understand all sorts of issues in life (e.g., divorce, a job interview, your self-concept) 
through communication theory. As you read and understand each chapter, you will 
likely develop your own personal understanding of the importance of communica­
tion theory. That is, you’ll likely develop your own theoretical lens of understanding 
human behavior. We encourage you to be open as you explore this exciting area.
Understanding Communication Theory Cultivates 
Critical Thinking Skills
One important value you glean from studying communication theory relates to your 
critical thinking skills. Without doubt, as you read and reflect on the theories in this 
book, you will be required to think critically about several issues. Learning how to apply 
the theory to your own life, recognizing the research potential of the theory, and under­
standing how a particular theory evolved will be among your responsibilities in this 
course. In addition, understanding communication can aid in your skill set. If only every 
Hollywood celebrity going through a divorce had read Chapter 11 (Relational Dialectics 
Theory), perhaps there would be a better understanding of relational pushes and pulls. 
The various decision-making groups of global governments might be more effective 
in-group members, read about Groupthink (Chapter 14). Even motivational speakers 
would find value in what Aristotle had to say (The Rhetoric; Chapter 18). These skills 
notwithstanding, as Tapas Ray (2012) notes, many theories and communication tradi­
tions have a Western cultural bias, so we need to be cautious in a universal application of 
the theory. These activities require that you cultivate your critical thinking skills—skills 
that will help you on the job, in relationships, and as you are introduced to media.
Understanding Communication Theory Helps You 
to Recognize the Breadth and Depth of Research
In addition to fostering critical thinking skills, being a student of communication 
theory will help you appreciate the richness of research across various fields of 
study. Regardless of what your current academic major is, the theories contained 
in this book are based on the thinking, writing, and research of ­intellectually curi­
ous men and women who have drawn on the scholarship of numerous disciplines. 
For instance, as you read about the Relational Dialectics Theory (Chapter 11), you 
will note that many of its principles originate in philosophy. Groupthink (Chapter 
14) originated in foreign policy decision making. Communication Accommodation 
Theory (Chapter 28), you will find that many of its principles originate in cultural 
anthropology. And, Face-Negotiation Theory (Chapter 27) was influenced by 
research in sociology. As you pursue a particular degree, keep in mind that much 
of what you are learning is a result of theoretical thinking and this thinking is often 
interdisciplinary in nature.

22    Chapter 1  •  Thinking About Communication: Definitions, Models, and Ethics
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
Understanding Communication Theory Helps to Make 
Sense of Personal Life Experiences
Understanding communication theory also helps you make sense of your life experi­
ences. It’s impossible to find a theory in this book that does not in some way relate 
to your life or to the lives of people around you. Communication theory aids you in 
understanding people, media, and events and helps you answer important questions. 
Have you ever been confused about why some men speak differently from some 
women? Chances are that reading Muted Group Theory (Chapter 29) will help you 
understand why that may be the case. Do the media promote a violent society? The 
theory of Cultivation Analysis (Chapter 24) will likely help you answer that ques­
tion. What role does technology play in society? Media Ecology Theory (Chapter 26) 
responds to that question. And what happens when someone stands too close while 
talking to you? Expectancy Violations Theory (Chapter 7) explores and explains this 
type of behavior. Some of you may have entered this course thinking that communi­
cation theory has limited value in your life. You will see that much of your life and 
your experiences in life will be better understood because of communication theory.
Communication Theory Fosters Self-Awareness
Thus far, we observed that learning about communication theory helps your critical 
thinking skills, informs you about the value of research across different fields of 
study, and aids you in understanding the world around you. One final reason to study 
theories of communication pertains to an area that is likely to be most important in 
your life—you. Learning about who you are, how you function in society, the influ­
ence you are able to have on others, the extent to which you are influenced by the 
media, how you behave in various circumstances, and what motivates your decisions 
are just a handful of the possible areas that are either explicitly or implicitly dis­
cussed in the theories you will be introduced to in this book. We are not suggesting 
that you should be central to whether a theory has relevance. Rather, we are stating 
that theories related ­directly to you—your thoughts, values, behaviors, and back­
ground. For instance, Social Penetration Theory (Chapter 10) will help you consider 
the value of self-disclosing in your relationships. Chapter 4 (Symbolic Interaction 
Theory) will assist you in thinking about the meaning of the various symbols sur­
rounding you. Yet these are not “self-help” communication theories; they do not 
provide easy answers to difficult questions. What you will encounter are theories that 
will help you as you try to understand yourself and your surroundings.
You are about to embark on an educational journey that is likely new to you. We hope 
you persevere in unraveling the complexity of communication theory. The journey may 
be different, challenging, and tiring at times, but it will always be applicable to your life.
Conclusion
In this chapter, we introduced you to the communication process. We presented our 
definition of communication and provided you various elements embedded in that 
process. In addition, we identified three prevailing models of communication: the 
linear model, the interactional model, and the transactional model. We discussed 

T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  C O M M U N I C A T I O N :  D E F I N I T I O N S ,  M O D E L S ,  A N D  E T H I C S
	
Discussion Starters     23
ethics and its relationship to communication theory. Finally, we provided several 
reasons why it is important for you to study communication theory.
You now have an understanding of the communication process and some sense 
of how complex it can be. As you read the many theories in this book, you will be 
able to view communication from a variety of perspectives. You will also gain valu­
able information that will help you understand human ­behavior and give you a new 
way to think about our society. We continue this examination in Chapter 2 when we 
present the traditions in communication study and important contexts in which com­
munication takes place.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  We noted that technology will likely affect future commu­
nication models. Based on your use of a social media platform, construct a 
communication model that incorporates how technology will influence face-
to-face communication.
	
1.  What led to the blowup between Eddy Bollen and his parents? Do you 
believe that Eddy and his parents were trying to handle his situation in an ethical 
way? Why or why not?
	
2.  Do you believe that all slips of the tongue, conversational faux pas, and un­
intentional nonverbal behaviors should be considered communication? Why or why 
not? What examples can you provide to justify your thoughts?
	
3.  Explain why the linear model of communication was so appealing years 
ago. Explain the appeal of the transactional model using current societal events.
	
4.  Discuss the value of looking at communication theory from a variety of dif­
ferent disciplinary angles.
	
5.  What are some recent ethical dilemmas related to communication? How 
was each dilemma resolved, if it was?
	
6.  Comment on why so many definitions of communication exist.
	
7.  Discuss how different family members might have different fields of 
experience.

T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
24
 As the 18-year-old 
daughter of a single 
parent, 
Lee 
Yamato 
knows that life can be 
difficult. She is the only child of Jenny Yamato, 
a Japanese American woman whose husband 
died from a heart attack several years ago. 
Jenny raised her daughter in Lacon, a small rural 
town in the South. It was stressful being a single 
mom, and Jenny was sometimes the target of 
overt racist jokes. As a waitress, Jenny knew 
that ­college would be the way to a better life 
for her daughter. She saved every extra penny 
and worked at the children’s library for several 
months to bring in extra income. Jenny knew 
that Lee would get financial aid in college, but 
she also wanted to be able to help her only child 
with ­college finances.
As Lee finished her senior year in high 
school, she knew that before too long she would 
be leaving to attend a public university. Unfortu­
nately, the closest college was over 200 miles 
from Lacon. Lee had mixed feelings about her 
move. She was very excited to get away from the 
small-town gossip, but she also knew that leaving 
Lacon meant that her mom would have to live by 
herself. Being alone could be devastating to her 
mom, Lee thought. Still, Lee recognized that her 
education was her first priority and that in order 
to get into veterinary school, she would have to 
stay focused. Thinking about her mom would only 
make the transition more difficult and could sour 
her first year as a college student.
Jenny, too, felt ambivalent about Lee leaving. 
When Jenny’s husband died, she didn’t think that 
she could raise a 13-year-old by herself. In fact, 
given that single moms were not looked at with 
a lot of respect, Jenny felt even more overpow­
ered. However, her own tenacity and determina­
tion had paid off, and she was extremely proud 
that her child was going away to college. Like her 
daughter, though, Jenny felt sad about Lee’s de­
parture. She felt as if her best friend was leaving 
her, and she couldn’t imagine her life without her 
daughter. She  knew that they would talk on the 
phone, but it couldn’t replace the hugs, the laugh­
ter, and the memories.
On the day that Lee was to leave, Jenny gave 
her a box with chocolate chip cookies, some pea­
nut butter cups (Lee’s favorite), a photo album 
of Lee and Jenny during their camping trip to 
­Arizona, and a shoe box. Inside the shoe box 
were old letters that Jenny and her husband 
had written to each other during their courtship. 
Jenny wanted Lee to have the letters to remind 
her that her dad’s spirit lives on in her. When Lee 
looked at the first letter, she put it down, hugged 
her mom, and cried. She then got into her car 
and slowly drove away, leaving her house and her 
only true friend behind.
Thinking About the Field: 
Traditions and Contexts
C H A P T E R	2
Jenny and Lee 
Yamato
Theory, in my understanding of theory, is a form of discourse.
—Robert T. Craig

	
Seven Traditions in the Communication Field     25
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
T
he communication discipline is vast, and its depth is reflected in the lives of people 
across the United States, people like Lee and Jenny Yamato. Their ­relationship is 
obviously a close one, marked now by a common and often emotional point in a family’s 
development: college. As the two begin to adapt to a new type of relationship character­
ized by distance, their communication will also take on new levels of importance. As 
Bethani Dobkin and Roger Pace (2006) state, “[C]ommunication has the potential to 
shape identities, relationships, environments, and cultures” (p. 6). The Yamato family 
will likely communicate with an appreciation for the full impact that communication can 
have on their lives. Let’s begin our discussion of the communication field by looking 
at seven traditions in communication. We will then examine various settings in which 
communication occurs. These two approaches guide this chapter. The first approach (the 
seven traditions) is theoretical in nature; the second framework (the seven contexts) is 
more practical in its approach. We describe each in the following pages.
Chapter 1 provided a foundation for conceptualizing what communication is and 
understanding the complexity of the communication process. In this chapter, we further 
unravel the meaning of communication by articulating two primary ways of looking at 
the field of communication.
Seven Traditions in the Communication Field
Robert Craig (Craig, 1999; Craig & Muller, 2007) outlines communication theory 
in one of the more intellectually valuable ways, assisting people in understanding 
“themselves, their society, and their culture in a communicative way” (Garcia-
Jimenez & Craig, 2010, p. 430). Craig believed that communication theory is an 
often unwieldy area of study and, to this end, ­provided categories to aid our un­
derstanding of it. Craig and Muller note that trying to make sense of communica­
tion theory is often complicated because of different intellectual styles in the field. 
A classification system for understanding communication theory, then, helps us to 
break down the challenges associated with understanding theory.
Craig terms the following framework as “traditions” to highlight the belief that 
theoretical development doesn’t just occur naturally. Indeed, theorizing in commu­
nication is a deliberative, engaging, and innovative experience that happens over 
Student Voices
Trish
To be honest, I wasn’t sure how to explain my communication major to my mom and 
dad when I went home for Thanksgiving. They had no idea why I wanted to major in 
it! After I talked to them about what communication is (and what it isn’t!), I think they 
were pretty happy that I found a major that made sense to me. I know I’m more em­
ployable by understanding communication, but I also just love knowing how broad a 
field it is. I think I convinced some of my roommates to switch their major!

26     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
time. As Craig and Muller (2007) point out, “[T]heorists invent new ideas to solve 
problems they perceive in existing ideas in a particular tradition” (p. xiii). And, 
although traditions suggest adhering to a historical preference, Craig and Muller 
are quick to point out that traditions change frequently and, like communication, 
are dynamic. Further, they caution that many theories are not easily categorized: 
“Even a theory that rebels against its tradition and rejects major parts of it can still 
belong to the tradition in significant ways” (p. xiv). So let’s examine the seven 
traditions of communication theory as advanced by Craig (1999). To honor the 
integrity of each tradition yet avoid irrelevant detail for this section of the chapter, 
we will provide you an overview of each tradition. If you’d like additional details, 
you are encouraged to consult Craig’s ­research. See Figure 2.1 for more informa­
tion the traditions.
The Rhetorical Tradition
At the heart of the rhetorical tradition is what Craig notes as the “practical art” 
(p. 73) of talk. This tradition suggests that we are interested in public address and 
public speaking and their functions in a society. Rhetorical theory is especially valued 
in many Western societies because it helps us understand the influence of speech and 
how we can cultivate our public speaking effectiveness. This tradition also includes 
the ability to reflect on different viewpoints before arriving at a personal view. It is 
the usefulness of the rhetorical tradition that remains attractive to researchers, 
theorists, and practitioners.
The rhetorical tradition necessarily involves elements pertaining to language and 
the audience. Henry Alford (2016), for instance, discusses the linguistic challenges 
for many same-sex marriages. Some couples wish to avoid the “heteronormative” 
Rhetorical
Talk as a practical art
Semiotic
Rethinking what
is natural
Phenomenological
Experiencing otherness
Cybernetic
Information-processing
Socio-Psychological
Causal linking
Socio-Cultural
From another’s view
Critical
Advocating fairness
Figure 2.1
Traditions in 
Communication 
Theory

	
Seven Traditions in the Communication Field     27
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
nature of husband and wife and instead, elect to have more unique titles, including 
“hersbands,” “wusbands,” and even “support staff.” The tradition also includes a 
discussion pertaining to audience appeals; how do audience members respond to 
emotions, for example? To what extent does the power of language move people 
to emotional and decisive action? How are we influenced or swayed by the appeals 
by mass media? What role does personal example play in having others accept our 
point of view? What effect does speaking to a large group of people have on the 
perceptions or actions of that group? Or, to what extent does the rhetorical tradition 
challenge the common belief that “telling the plain truth is something other than the 
strategic adaptation of a message to an audience”? (Craig, 2007, p. 73). Answering 
such questions is not easy and such questions are often the domain of philosophers. 
Yet, they are important if we are to consider the value and historical significance of 
looking at the communication process from a rhetorical lens.
The Semiotic Tradition
Simply put, semiotics is the study of signs. Signs are part of a social life; they stand 
for something else. Children laughing and running around is a sign of play. A ring 
on the ring finger of the left hand is a sign of a married individual. An adult crying 
in a funeral home is a sign of sadness. Most common among these signs are words 
or what we generally consider language usage. According to the semiotic tradition, 
meaning is achieved when we share a common language. As noted in Chapter 1, 
people arrive at a communication exchange with various fields of experience and 
values placed on these experiences. Pioneer linguist I. A. Richards (1936) observed 
that words are arbitrary and have no intrinsic meaning. Consequently, achieving 
commonality in meaning is more difficult than first imagined, particularly if one is 
using language that is not recognized or valued by another.
Semiotics suggests that what we think of as “natural” or “obvious” in public 
discourse needs to be considered in context. That is, our values and belief structures 
are often a result of what has been passed down from one generation to another (a 
tradition). What was considered to be a “given” years ago may simply not be that 
way today. Semiotics challenges the notion that words have appropriate meanings; 
indeed, words change as the people using those words change. Consider, for ex­
ample, the use of the words war and peace in the 1940s, the 1960s/1970s, the 1990s, 
and today. There are also likely to be multiple meanings of these two words if, for 
example, someone lost a family member in one of these wars and if another person 
protests war on a regular basis. Consider the phrase single parent. In the 1950s, it 
did not resonate deeply in society. However, as time evolved, the divorce rate soared 
and marriage was not a “default” choice; being a single mom (like Jenny Yamato) or 
single dad is now commonplace.
The Phenomenological Tradition
Let’s explore the term phenomenology, a concept derived from the field of ­philosophy. 
Phenomenology is a personal interpretation of everyday life and activities.
Craig (2007) believes that the phenomenological tradition is marked by commu­
nication that he contends is an “experience of otherness” (p. 79). What this means is 
semiotics
the study of signs
phenomenology
a personal interpre-
tation of everyday 
life and activities

28     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
that a person tries to attain authenticity by eliminating biases in a conversation. Many 
phenomenologists believe that an individual’s system of ­beliefs should not influence 
the dialogue taking place. As you’re probably figuring out, this is quite challenging, 
or, as Craig points out, is a “practical impossibility” (p. 80). Consider, for example, 
the challenge many people have communicating with other people who have differ­
ent points of view or who are from different backgrounds. Craig notes that many 
phenomenological ideas are especially applicable to issues pertaining to diversity, 
identity, class, sexuality, and religion.
The Cybernetic Tradition
Communication as information science was first introduced by Shannon and Weaver, 
two scholars associated with the linear model we discussed in ­Chapter 1. Recall that 
this model’s fundamental shortcoming pertained to the fact that human communica­
tion is not as simplistic as linearity suggests. Nonetheless, what Shannon and Weaver 
advanced was the belief that communication involves noise. Cybernetics in particu­
lar looks at problems such as noise in the communication process. But it goes further. 
Cybernetics tries to unravel the complexities of message meaning by underscoring 
the unpredictability of the feedback we receive.
By advocating a cybernetic approach, communication theorists are embracing 
an expansive view of communication. As Craig (2007) states: “[I]t is important for 
us as communicators to transcend our individual perspectives, to look at the com­
munication process from a broader, systemic viewpoint, and not to hold individuals 
responsible for systemic outcomes that no individual can control” (p. 82). In other 
words, the cybernetic tradition asks us to understand that communication is not only 
information processing, but also that individuals enter into communication settings 
with different abilities in that ­information processing. Fields of study which have 
been influenced by cybernetics include game theory, psychology, architecture, and 
artificial intelligence (Ashby, 2015).
The Socio-Psychological Tradition
Those who adhere to the socio-psychological tradition uphold a cause–effect model. That 
is, communication theory is examined from a view that holds that someone’s behavior is 
influenced by something else—something social psychologists call a “variable.” Craig 
(2007) believes that underlying this tradition is the assumption that our own communi­
cation patterns and the patterns of others vary from one person to another. It is up to the 
social psychologist to unravel the ­relationship among these patterns.
An early advocate of the socio-psychological tradition was Carl Hovland. Hov­
land, a Yale psychologist, examined attitude change and investigated the extent to 
which long- and short-term recall influences an individual’s attitudes and beliefs. In 
the 1950s—long before personal computers came into ­existence—Hovland also was 
the first to experiment with computer simulations and the learning process. His work 
and the work of other social psychologists underscored the importance of experi­
mental research and trying to understand causal links. It is this scientific evidence 
for human behavior that continues to pervade much communication theorizing from 
this tradition.

	
Seven Traditions in the Communication Field     29
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
The Socio-Cultural Tradition
The essence of the socio-cultural tradition can be summed up this way: “Our every­
day interactions with others depend heavily on preexisting, shared cultural patterns 
and social structures” (Craig, 2007, p. 84). The core of the socio-cultural tradition 
suggests that individuals are parts of larger groups who have unique rules and pat­
terns of interaction. To theorize from this tradition means to acknowledge and be­
come sensitive to the many kinds of people who occupy this planet. Theorists should 
not instinctively nor strategically “group” people without concern for individual 
identity.
Socio-cultural theorists advocate that we abandon the binary “you/me” or “us/
them” approach to understanding people. Instead, appealing to the co‑creation of 
social order/reality is a worthier goal for consideration. As people communicate, 
they produce, maintain, repair, and transform reality (Carey, 1989). Dialogue and 
interaction must be characterized by an understanding of what Craig (2007) calls 
“voice” (p. 84), an individual point of view that inevitably finds its way into everyday 
conversation.
The Critical Tradition
Individuals who are concerned with injustice, oppression, power, and linguistic domi­
nance are those who would likely identify themselves as critical theorists. Critiquing 
the social order and imposing structures or individuals on that order are at the heart 
of critical theory. Among the theorists most known for protesting social order is phi­
losopher and political economist/revolutionary Karl Marx. Marx believed that power 
in society has been hijacked by institutions that have no real concern for the working 
class. In his book The Communist Manifesto, Marx and his colleague Friedrich Engels 
(1848) contend that the history of a society is best understood by looking at the class 
struggles in that society.
Critical theorists look at language and how it creates imbalances and power 
differentials in society. Critical theorists also find that openly questioning the 
assumptions that guide a society is legitimate. In doing so, communicators expose 
the beliefs and values that guide their decision making and actions. As is suggested 
in our opening story of Jenny and Lee Yamato, Jenny felt that as a single mom, she 
could never achieve the level of respect afforded to other family types. Critical theo­
rists would attempt to unravel how a society defines freedom, equality, and reason, 
three qualities identified by Craig (2007), in order to understand Jenny’s experiences. 
Who or what are the principal forces on social order? How does one achieve the 
freedom to express one’s will? These and a host of other questions are at the core of 
the critical tradition.
Putting It All Together
This discussion provides you one way of looking at the texture of the communica­
tion field. Communication theory, as you will discover, is not created in a vacuum. 
Scholars enter into the theory-building process with particular positions, some of 
which influence the direction of the theories they construct and refine. The preceding 

30     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
traditions are rooted in communication and we will consider each as we introduce 
you to the various theories. As we alluded to earlier, theory is not always so “clean” 
and therefore, there will be a hybrid of a few traditions along the way.
With this backdrop, we now wish to explore a more practical framework from 
which to view communication theory. We turn our attention to the various contexts, 
or environments, of communication from which research and theory develop.
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field
In order to make the communication field and the communication process more un­
derstandable and manageable, we now look at the various contexts of communica­
tion. What is a context? Contexts are environments in which communication takes 
place. Contexts provide a backdrop against which researchers and theorists can ana­
lyze phenomena. Contexts also provide clarity. Our discussion of context focuses 
on situational contexts. To suggest that a context is situationally based means that 
the communication process is limited by a number of factors—namely, the number 
of people, the degree of space between interactants, the extent of feedback, and the 
available channels.
Earlier we noted that the communication field is very diverse and offers various 
research opportunities. This can be a bit cumbersome, and at times even communica­
tion scholars lament the wide array of options. Still, there seems to be some universal 
agreement on the fundamental contexts of communication. In fact, most communica­
tion departments are built around some or all of the following seven communication 
contexts: intrapersonal, interpersonal, small group, organizational, public/rhetorical, 
mass/media, and cultural (Figure 2.2). Keep in mind, however, that communication 
departments in colleges and universities across the United States divide themselves 
uniquely. Some, for instance, include mass communication in a department of com­
munication whereas others may have a separate department of mass communica­
tion. Some schools have a department of interpersonal communication and include 
every context therein. This diversity underscores that the discipline is permeable, 
that boundary lines among the contexts are not absolute.
Intrapersonal Communication
As you review theories in this book, keep in mind that a theory may focus on how 
individuals perceive their own behavior. At the root of this thinking is ­intrapersonal 
communication. Intrapersonal communication theorists frequently study the role that 
cognition plays in human behavior. Intrapersonal communication is communica­
tion with oneself. It is an internal dialogue and may take place even in the presence 
of another individual. Intrapersonal communication is what goes on inside your head 
even when you are with someone. Intrapersonal communication is usually more 
repetitive than other communication; we engage in it many times each day. This 
context is also unique from other contexts in that it includes those times when you 
imagine, perceive, daydream, and solve problems in your head. Intrapersonal com­
munication is much more than talking to oneself. It also includes the many attribu­
tions you may make about another person’s behavior. For instance, an employer may 
contexts
environments in 
which communica-
tion takes place
situational contexts
environments that 
are limited by such 
factors as the num-
ber of people pres-
ent, the feedback, 
the space between 
communicators, 
among others
intrapersonal 
communication
communication with 
oneself

	
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field     31
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
want to know why an employee arrives late to work and looks disheveled each day. 
The supervisor may believe that the worker’s tardiness and demeanor are a result of 
some domestic problems. In reality, the employee may have another job in order to 
pay for his or her child’s college tuition. We all have internal dialogues, and these 
­internalized voices can vary tremendously from one person to another.
Intrapersonal communication is distinguished from other contexts in that it al­
lows communicators to make attributions about themselves. People have the ability 
to assess themselves. From body image to work competencies, people are always 
making self-attributions. You may have thought seriously about your own strengths 
and shortcomings in a number of situations. For example, do you find that you are an 
excellent parent, but not so excellent as a statistics student? Are there times when you 
feel that you are a trusted friend, but not so trusted in your own family?
CONTEXT
INTRAPERSONAL
Communication with oneself
INTERPERSONAL
Face-to-face communication
SMALL GROUP
Communication with a group 
of people
ORGANIZATIONAL
Communication within and among
large and extended environments
PUBLIC/RHETORICAL
Communication to a large 
group of listeners (audience)
MASS/MEDIA
Communication to a very 
large audience through 
mediated forms
SOME RESEARCH AND THEORETICAL 
CONCERNS
Impression formation and decision 
making; symbols and meaning; 
observations and attributions; ego 
involvement and persuasion
Relationship maintenance strategies; 
relational intimacy; relationship control; 
interpersonal attraction
Gender and group leadership; group 
vulnerability; groups and stories; group 
decision making; task diﬃculty
Organizational hierarchy and power; 
culture and organizational life; employee 
morale; opinions and worker satisfaction
Communication apprehension; delivery 
eﬀectiveness; speech and text criticism; 
ethical speechmaking; popular culture 
analysis
Use of media; aﬃliation and television 
programming; television and values; 
media and need fulﬁllment; eﬀects of
social networking sites
Culture and rule-setting; culture and 
anxiety; hegemony; ethnocentrism
CULTURAL
Communication between and
among members of diﬀerent cultures 
Figure 2.2
Contexts of 
Communication

32     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
Although some people may believe that talking to oneself is a bit peculiar, 
Virginia Satir (1988) believes that these internal dialogues may help individu­
als bolster their self-esteem—the degree of positive orientation people have about 
themselves. Often, intrapersonal communication is difficult; it requires individuals 
to accept their accomplishments and confront their fears and anxieties. Looking in 
a mirror can be both enlightening and frightening. Of course, mirrors can also be 
distorting. Jenny Yamato, for example, may think that her world is over once her 
daughter leaves for college. The reality for the vast majority of parents, however, is 
that they survive the “loss.” As a single parent, Jenny may think that she is incapable 
of moving on without Lee. Once Lee leaves, however, Jenny may find that she is 
more empowered living alone.
The research in intrapersonal communication centers a great deal on the cogni­
tions, symbols, and intentions that individuals have. To this end, researchers in this 
area have examined attitudes toward specific behaviors and events, including dat­
ing (McEwan & Guerrero, 2012), suspicion and detection, (Kim & Levine, 2011), 
mother–daughter relationships (Arroyo & Andersen, 2016), stress (Wright, 2012), 
silence (Bisel & Arterburn, 2012), attachment (Goodboy & Bolkan, 2011), and mo­
tivation of business executives (Millhous, 2004).
Our discussion of intrapersonal communication has focused on the role of the 
self in the communication process. Recall from Chapter 1 that as individuals com­
municate with themselves, the process may be either intentional or unintentional. 
Intrapersonal communication is at the heart of a person’s communication activities. 
Without recognizing oneself, it is difficult to recognize another.
Interpersonal Communication
From its beginnings, interpersonal communication referred to face-to-face com­
munication between people. Contemporary views of interpersonal communication 
incorporate a technological lens (e.g., dating websites, etc.). ­Several theories that you 
will read about in this book have their origins in the interpersonal context. This con­
text is rich with research and theory and is perhaps the most expansive of all of the 
contexts. Investigating how relationships begin, the maintenance of relationships, 
and the dissolution of relationships characterizes much of the interpersonal context.
One reason researchers and theorists study relationships is that relationships 
are so complex and diverse. For instance, you may find yourself in dozens of 
relationship types right now, including physician–patient, teacher–student, parent–
child, supervisor–employee, and so forth. Interacting within each of these relation­
ships affords communicators a chance to maximize the number of channels (visual, 
auditory, tactile, olfactory) used during an interaction. In this context, these channels 
function simultaneously for both interactants: A child may scream for his mom, for 
instance, and as she is able to calm him with her caress, she touches the child, looks 
in his eyes, and listens to his whimpering subside.
The interpersonal context itself comprises many related subcontexts. Interper­
sonal researchers have studied the family (Koerner, 2015; Turner & West, 2015), 
friendships (Chen & Nakazawa, 2012), long-term marriages (Hughes & Dickson, 
2006), physician–patient relationships (Gordon & Street, 2016), and the organization–
public relationship (Ifert-Johnson & Acquavella, 2012). In addition, researchers are 
self-esteem
the degree of 
positive orientation 
people have about 
themselves
interpersonal 
communication
face-to-face 
communication 
between people

	
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field     33
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
interested in a host of issues and themes (e.g., risk, power, teasing, gossip, liking, 
attraction, emotions, etc.) associated with these relationships.
Researchers have also examined the link between interpersonal communica­
tion and mass media, organizations, and the classroom (Frymier & Houser, 2002) 
as well as the role that social media (Facebook) and email play in establishing and 
maintaining relationships (Lee, Choudhry, Wu, Matlin, Brennan, & Shrank, 2016). 
Finally, relationships that have not been studied enough, including gay and lesbian 
relationships, cohabiting relationships, and Facebook friendships and computer-an­
chored relationships, are being investigated at a rapid pace in the communication 
field (Bryant & Marmo, 2012; Croom, Gross, Rosen, & Rosen, 2016; Muraco & 
Fredriksen-Goldsen, 2011; Willoughby, Carroll, & Busby, 2012). As you can see, re­
searchers have framed some very diverse and exciting work within the interpersonal 
communication context, and studying relationships and what takes place within them 
has broad appeal.
Small Group and Team Communication
A third context of communication is the small group or team. Small groups are com­
posed of a number of people who work together to achieve some common purpose. 
Small group research focuses on task groups as opposed to the friendship and family 
groups found in the interpersonal context. Communication theory centering on small 
groups frequently concerns the dynamic nature of small groups, including group 
roles, boundaries, and trust.
Researchers disagree about how many people make up a small group. Some 
scholars argue that the optimal number for a small group is five to seven mem­
bers, whereas others put no limit on the maximum number of members. Nearly all 
agree, however, that there must be at least three people for a small group to exist 
(Poole, 2007; Schultz, 1996). For our purposes, then, small group communication 
is defined as communication among at least three individuals.
The number in a group is not as important as the implications of that number. 
The more people, the greater the opportunity for more personal relationships to de­
velop. This may influence whether small groups stay focused on their goals and 
whether group members are satisfied with their experiences (Shaw, 1981). A classic 
study (Kephart, 1950) revealed that as the size of the group increases, the number of 
relationships increases substantially. With a three-person group, then, the number of 
potential relationships is 6; with a seven-person group, there are 966 possible rela­
tionships! When there are too many group members, there is a tendency for cliques 
to form (Kesebir, 2012). However, large numbers of group members may result in 
additional resources not present in smaller groups.
People are influenced by the presence of others. For example, some small groups 
are very cohesive, which means having a high degree of togetherness and a common 
bond. This cohesiveness may influence whether the group functions effectively and 
efficiently. In addition, the small group context affords individuals a chance to gain 
multiple perspectives on an issue. That is, in the intrapersonal context, an individual 
views events from his or her own perspective; in the interpersonal context there are 
more perspectives. In the small group context, many more people have the potential 
to contribute to the group’s goals. In problem-solving groups, or task groups in 
small group 
communication
communication 
among at least 
three individuals
cohesiveness
the degree of 
togetherness 
between and among 
communicators

34     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
particular, many perspectives may be advantageous. This exchange of multiple per­
spectives results in synergy, and explains why small groups may be more effective 
than an individual at achieving goals.
Networking and role behavior are two important components of small group be­
havior. Networks are communication patterns through which information flows, and 
networks in small groups answer the following question: Who speaks to whom and 
in what order? The patterns of interaction in small groups may vary significantly. For 
instance, in some groups the leader may be included in all deliberations, whereas in 
other groups, members may speak to one another without the leader. The small group 
context is made up of individuals who take on various roles, or the positions of group 
members and their relationship to the group. These roles may be very diverse, includ­
ing task leader, passive observer, active listener, recorder, and so forth.
Before we close our discussion of small groups, we should point out that as with 
the interpersonal communication context, research on small groups spans a variety of 
areas. Team and small group communication scholars have studied meeting manage­
ment (Rogelberg, Rhoades-Shanock, & Scott, 2012), emotional intelligence (Tajeddin, 
Safayeni, Connelly, & Tasa, 2012), gossip in public school classrooms (Jaworski & 
Coupland, 2005), conflict (Gross, Guerrero, & Alberts, 2004), creativity (Martins & 
Shalley, 2011), and cultural diversity (Zhang & Huai, 2016). Much theory and 
research today continues to underscore the fact that groups exist to meet certain 
needs (Adams & Galanes, 2015).
Working in small groups seems to be a fact of life in society. At times, it may 
seem as if we cannot go anywhere without some sort of small group forming. From 
peer groups to task groups to support groups, the small group experience is a ubiq­
uitous one. Very few students can receive their degree without working in small 
groups. From study groups to presentations, you may feel as if you are immersed 
in small group activities. Company supervisors relish team approaches to problem 
solving. Some families have weekly or monthly family meetings, at which the group 
discusses such issues as vacations, sibling rivalry, and curfew.
The United States will continue to rely on teams and small groups, even as we 
increase our reliance on technology. In fact, this technology has found its way into 
group experiences, namely in the form of telecommuting and web conferencing. 
Still, perhaps it’s because we are students of communication or perhaps it’s because 
we understand relational development in myriad ways, we feel that person-to-person 
contact will never go out of style. Computers may crash, email may freeze up, and 
cell phones may run out of charge, but people will continue to function and commu­
nicate in small groups.
Organizational Communication
It is important to distinguish between small group communication and organizational 
communication. Organizational communication pertains to communication within 
and among large, extended environments. This communication is extremely diverse 
in that organizational communication necessarily entails interpersonal encounters 
(supervisor–subordinate conversations), public speaking opportunities (presenta­
tions by company executives), small group situations (a task group preparing a re­
port), and mediated experiences (internal memos, email, and videoconferencing). 
synergy
the intersection of 
multiple perspectives 
in a small group
networks
communication 
patterns through 
which information 
flows
roles
positions of group 
members and their 
relationship to the 
group
organizational 
communication
communication 
within and among 
large, extended 
environments

	
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field     35
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
Organizations, then, are groups of groups. Theories of organizational communica­
tion are generally concerned with the functionality of the organization, including its 
climate, rules, and ­personnel.
What distinguishes this context from others is that a clearly defined hierarchy 
exists in most organizations. Hierarchy is an organizing principle whereby things or 
persons are ranked one above the other. For an example of the hierarchy in many col­
leges and universities, see Figure 2.3. Does your school follow the same hierarchy? 
Katherine Miller (2015) points out that organizations are traditionally hierarchical in 
nature and that there are almost uniform ideas about structure, values, and division 
of labor. Organizations are unique in that much of the communication taking place 
is highly structured, and role playing is often specialized and predictable. Employees 
and employers alike are clear in their chain of command. Unlike in the interpersonal 
context, several modes of communication can substitute for face-to-face interaction, 
including email and teleconferencing.
The uniqueness of organizational communication is also represented by the re­
search and theory conceptualized in this context. Many of the present-day organiza­
tional communication theories had their origins in a series of studies conducted in 
the mid-1920s to early 1930s. These studies, known as the Hawthorne experiments, 
were significant influences on modern theory in that they inaugurated the human 
relations approach to organizations (Jung & Lee, 2015). Researchers at the Western 
Electric Hawthorne plant in suburban Chicago were interested in determining the ef­
fect of lighting levels on employee productivity. Interestingly, results of this research 
hierarchy
an organizing 
principle whereby 
things or people are 
ranked one above 
the other
Hawthorne 
experiments
a set of 
investigations that 
ushered in a human 
relations approach 
to organizations
VP—Student Aﬀairs
Nursing
Business
Applied
Sciences
Arts and
Sciences
Law
VP—Finance
VP—Academic Aﬀairs
Community
Students
Students
Board of Trustees
Vice President
Dean
Faculty
Department
Chair
Staﬀ
President
Figure 2.3
Example of 
Hierarchy in 
Higher Education

36     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
indicated that not only did the environmental conditions influence employee output, 
but so did the interpersonal relationships with other employees and supervisors. One 
conclusion arising from these studies was that organizations should be viewed as so­
cial entities; to speed up production, employers must consider workers’ attitudes and 
feelings. These studies were among the first to put a human face on the impersonal 
corporate world (Roethlisberger & Dickson, 1939).
Although the human relations approach has enjoyed a great deal of theoretical 
and research attention, today there are a number of additional organizational 
orientations, including cultural systems and scientific management. Further, organi­
zational (communication) theory and research today address various eclectic issues, 
including the Challenger disaster (Gouran, Hirokawa, & Martz, 1986), uncertainty 
on the job (Waldeck, Seibold, & Flanagin, 2004), whistle-blowing (Miceli, Near, 
Rehg, & Van Scotter, 2012), rumor (Berbary, 2012), job training (Waldron & Lavitt, 
2000), sexual harassment (McDonald & Charlesworth, 2016), and workplace bully­
ing (Akella, 2016). In addition, as with other contexts, the influence of ethnic and 
racial culture has also been examined (Jenkins & ­Dillon, 2012) within organizations.
What is important to glean from this discussion is that, like other contexts, the 
organizational context has a rich tradition. The Hawthorne studies of human behavior 
on the job have led today’s researchers and theorists to expand their perspectives of 
organizations and organizational life.
Public/Rhetorical Communication
The fifth context is known as the public communication context, or the dissemi­
nation of information from one person to a large group. This is not a new context; 
speech presentations have existed since the beginning of time and continue today. 
Tony Robbins, Deepak Chopra, Suze Orman, Bill Gates, and Bono are just a few of 
the contemporary public figures who are in high demand as public speakers.
In public speaking, speakers usually have three primary goals in mind: to inform, 
to entertain, or to persuade. This latter goal—persuasion—is at the core of rhetorical 
communication. Many of the principles of persuasion—­including audience analysis, 
speaker credibility, and verbal and nonverbal delivery of a message—are necessarily 
part of the persuasive process. As you reflect on your own public speaking experi­
ences, you may be surprised to learn that in actuality you have been following rhetori­
cal strategies rooted in early Greek and Roman days. How people have constructed 
their persuasive speeches has been the focus of study for more than 2,500 years.
Effective public speakers owe their success to early rhetorical principles, a topic 
that we discussed earlier. For our purposes here, we define rhetoric as a speaker’s 
available means of persuading his or her audience. This definition was advanced 
many years ago by Aristotle. Rhetoric has been described as an art that brings 
together speakers and audience (Hart, 1997). The study of rhetoric is expansive and 
can include the study of texts of speeches, presidential inaugural addresses, and 
rhetorical analyses of cultural themes and issues. Samples of rhetorical scholarship 
include analyses of the Spanish gay and lesbian youth on YouTube (Acevedo-Callejas, 
2015), Sarah Palin’s Facebook posts (Lawrence & Schafer, 2012), President Nixon’s 
speech on Vietnam (Drury, 2016), and abolitionist Frederick ­Douglass (Selby, 2000). 
We will discuss rhetoric in much more detail in Chapter 18.
public 
communication
the dissemination 
of information from 
one person to many 
others (audience)
rhetoric
a speaker’s avail-
able means of 
persuasion

	
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field     37
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
One area in the public/rhetorical context that has received significant scholarly 
attention is communication apprehension (CA), or the general sense of fear of 
speaking before an audience. Pioneering and valuable research undertaken by James 
McCroskey and Virginia Richmond, over the years, has been quite informative as the 
communication field tries to unpack the challenges of speech anxiety. You will recall 
that boundaries between and among the contexts are often blurred, and CA research 
is one example of that blurring. Although communication apprehension is a public 
speaking concern, CA focuses on intrapersonal issues. Furthermore, CA has been 
studied with a number of different populations, including student athletes (Stockstill & 
Roach, 2007), pharmacy undergraduates (Nayeem, Khan, & Mehta, 2015), employ­
ees (Russ, 2012), and those in romantic relationships (Theiss & Solomon, 2006), as 
well as across cultures (Hsu, 2004). In addition, researchers have advanced ways to 
reduce communication apprehension. Clearly, the public communication/ rhetorical 
context addresses the confluence of theory, research, and skills.
Mass/Media Communication
The sixth context is the mass communication or mediated context, which targets 
large audiences. First, we need to define a few terms. Mass media refers to the chan­
nels, or delivery modes, for mass messages. Mass media include newspapers, videos, 
CD-ROMs, (tablet) computers, TV, radio, and so forth. Mass communication re­
fers to communication to a large audience via one of these channels of communica­
tion. Although mass communication frequently refers to “traditional” venues (e.g., 
newspapers), we expand our discussion to ­include new media, which encompasses 
computer-related technology. This communication technology includes the Internet, 
including emailing, blogging, and texting the influence of social networking sites 
(Facebook and LinkedIn) on communication; cell phone usage; and high-definition 
(HD) television. For our purposes, we assert that mass communication pertains com­
munication to a large ­audience via multiple channels of communication. The mass 
communication context, therefore, includes both the channel and the audience.
Like each of the preceding contexts, the mass communication context is dis­
tinctive. It allows both senders and receivers to exercise control. Sources such as a 
communication 
apprehension
a generalized fear 
or anxiety regarding 
communicating in 
front of others
mass media
channels or delivery 
modes for mass 
messages
mass 
communication
communication to a 
large audience via 
various channels 
(e.g., radio, Internet, 
television, etc.)
new media
computer-related 
technology
Student Voices
Bradley
They say that people can manage communication apprehension. I have to admit I 
didn’t believe that . . . at first. Then, I had to give a speech in front of my lecture 
class (there were around 100 students in there). I was running for student senate 
and the professor asked if I wanted to say a few words. I was so nervous! My hands 
were sweaty and I ­almost fell over my own feet when I walked up to the front of the 
class. As I talked for a few seconds, though, I slowed down and saw a lot of friendly 
faces out in the audience. I was so relieved when it was all over, but I did manage 
my anxiety quite a bit.

38     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
newspaper editor or a television broadcaster make decisions about what information 
should be sent, and receivers have control over what they ­decide to read, listen to, 
watch, or review. Suppose, for instance, that you are an advertiser who has slotted an 
expensive television commercial featuring Venus and Serena Williams. You’ve paid 
the Williams sisters handsomely, and yet, to determine whether their endorsement 
has made a difference in sales, you have to wait for the numbers to come in. You have 
control over the choice of the endorsers, but the audience also simultaneously has 
control over what they watch and what they ultimately buy.
Some, like theorist Stuart Hall (see Chapter 25), suggest that mass media in­
herently serve the interests of the elite, especially big business and multinational 
corporations, who, Hall suggests, fund much of the research in mass communication. 
Many studies, however, are not underwritten by corporate sponsorship. They reflect 
the growing diversity of mass communication researchers and ­theorists. A myriad of 
topics using a mass media framework have been studied, including the portrayal of 
sex on prime-time television (Eyal & Finnerty, 2007), online dating sites (Kang & 
Hoffman, 2011), heroes in the movie The Matrix (Stroud, 2001), racist ideologies 
in Orange is the New Black (Enck & Morrissey, 2015), email (Turnage, 2007), 
grandparent personal websites (Harwood, 2000), and an analysis of The Daily Show 
and The Colbert Report (Hmielowski, Holbert, & Lee, 2011). As you can see, a wide 
array of ­research studies characterize the mass communication context.
As we write this, some of our comments may already be out of date. In fact, the 
rapidity of change may even render some of our technological references as obso­
lete! Mass communication quickly changes, and what was promised as a marvelous 
advance today is often considered outdated tomorrow (e.g., MySpace’s value has 
dropped in billions, for example, because of the introduction of other sites and even 
Facebook and Twitter numbers have dropped among the very young because of a 
fear that their posts will have repercussions later in life). Because of the pervasive­
ness and availability of mass media in our society, media theorists will have to deal 
with the impact of media on the communication process itself. Some researchers 
(e.g., Turkle, 2015) suggest that computers help (re)define the way we conceive of 
ourselves. This redefinition may have an inevitable impact on the communication 
process. Furthermore, although a large number of homes and businesses subscribe to 
new technologies, a gap will always exist between those who have the resources and 
those who do not. Consequently, future mass communication theorists may have to 
rethink the universality of their theories.
Cultural Communication
The final communication context we wish to examine is cultural communication. 
To begin, we should define what we mean by culture. There are many definitions 
of culture. For our purposes, culture can be viewed as a “community of meaning 
and a shared body of local knowledge” (Gonzalez, & Chen, 2015, p. 5). Cultural 
communication, therefore, refers to communication between and among individuals 
whose cultural backgrounds vary. These individuals do not necessarily have to be 
from different countries. In a diverse country such as the United States, we can 
experience cultural communication variation within one state, one community, and 
even one block. It is not uncommon in many parts of this society, for instance, to see 
culture
a community of 
meaning with, 
among other things, 
a shared body of 
knowledge
cultural 
communication
communication 
between and 
among individuals 
whose cultural 
backgrounds vary

	
Seven Contexts in the Communication Field     39
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
two people from different cultural backgrounds speaking to each other. Urban cen­
ters, in particular, can be exciting cultural arenas where communication takes place 
between members of different co-cultures. Co-cultures are groups of ­individuals 
who are part of the same larger culture, but who—through unity and individual iden­
tification around such attributes as race, ethnicity, sexual identity, religion, and so 
forth—create opportunities of their own. The word, co-culture, is now widely ac­
cepted in the academic community as a replacement for subculture, a term suggest­
ing that one culture has dominance over another culture.
Cultural communication is an historically important academic context, with its 
beginnings traced back only to the 1950s (Leeds-Hurwitz, 1990). However, much 
exciting work has been done since then. The growth of this area of study can be 
attributed to the growth across organizational cultures, with more U.S. companies 
doing business abroad. In addition, technological availability, population shifts, and 
genuine efforts to understand other cultures contribute to the growing interest and 
frequent conversations pertaining to this context. Some of these dialogues are still 
difficult, nearly 50 years after the signing of the Civil Rights Act. Some cultural 
events have helped jumpstart the 21st century cultural conversations (e.g., Senator 
Barack Obama becoming president), but these conversations are still fraught with 
challenges because not everyone becomes engaged with these dialogues.
The cultural context differentiates itself from other contexts in a few ways. First, 
as you may have determined, this context is the only context that specifically ad­
dresses culture. Although some contexts, such as the organizational context, com­
prise research on racial and ethnic cultures, this work is often ancillary, with culture 
being examined for its effects on the organization, for example. In the intercultural 
context, however, researchers and theorists purposely explore the interactions and 
events between and among people of different ­cultures. Second, study in the inter­
cultural communication context means that ­researchers inherently accept the fact 
that human behavior is ­culturally based. In other words, culture structures how we 
perceive and how we act.
To give you an indication of the type of research and thinking taking place in 
the cultural communication context, consider the following research titles: “Con­
necting Community Voices: Using a Latino/a Critical Race Theory Lens on an En­
vironmental Justice Advocacy” (Anguiano, Milstein, De Larkin, Chen, & Sandoval, 
2012), “Native American Culture and Communication Through Humor” (Shutiva, 
2015), “Discursive Negotiation of Family Identity: A Study of U.S. Families with 
Adopted Children from China” (Suter, 2008), “When Mississippi Chinese Talk,” 
and “Growing up Together: The Internet, Cultural Knowledge, and Thai Names” 
(Korn, 2015).
Although this research derives from a number of different cultural perspectives, 
you should be aware that much of what we know and how we relate is a result of 
a Western model of thinking—that is, many of us interpret events and behaviors 
through a European (American) lens (Asante, 1987). Gonzalez and Chen (2015) state 
that when studying culture and communication, it’s important to “invite experience” 
(p. 3) into the research arena. A great deal of intercultural communication theory and 
research embraces such an ­effort. This context is filled with opportunities to study 
areas that have not ­received a lot of attention in the past. Investigating culture and 
cultural groups holds continued promise as the United States grows more diverse.
co-cultures
groups of individu-
als who are part 
of the same larger 
culture, but who can 
be classified around 
various identities 
(e.g., race, sex, 
age, etc.)

40     Chapter 2  •  Thinking About the Field: Traditions and Contexts
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
Collating the Contexts
In discussing these seven contexts, we have provided you with a basic category sys­
tem for dividing the broad field of communication. These seven categories help us 
discuss the communication process more clearly and specifically. Yet the template is 
not perfect, and as you have probably noted in our discussion, there is often overlap 
among the categories. For instance, when people belong to an online cancer support 
group, their communication has elements of at least four contexts: intrapersonal, 
interpersonal, small group, and mass communication. Thus, we caution you against 
viewing these categories as completely exclusive and distinctive from one another.
Finally, as alluded to earlier, technology similarly pervades each of these con­
texts and consequently, communication is affected. That is, one or more contexts are 
influenced by technology. For example, online dating sites are not always researched 
with a mediated lens; it is a topic that is also both intrapersonal (e.g., the personal de­
cision to go online) as well as interpersonal (the communication between two people).
In fact, as you review these theories, you should be asking yourself whether any 
important questions can be asked about the impact of technology. And, despite the 
A web essay identifies something that scores of students of communication 
should understand but too often ignore: Facebook addiction. The article be­
gins by acknowledging the fact that social networking sites (SNS) have value 
insofar as they provide connections to others, including friends, relatives, and 
colleagues. And, of all the SNS, Facebook is arguably the location where peo­
ple have the most online activity. Yet, the essay also concludes that because 
Facebook has become such a huge hit, “people are actually suffering from 
what has been dubbed FAD, or Facebook Addiction Disorder.” This addiction 
may seem trivial or even humorous, yet, the article provides both signs of 
addiction and tips to avoid the addiction. Signs that one has FAD include: 
(1) spending copious amounts of time on the site, (2) signs of anxiety and 
stress when restricted from using the site, (3) reduction of recreational activ­
ities, (4) substituting real dates for virtual dates, (5) establishing fake friends, 
and (6) realizing a complete addiction (e.g., pets have Facebook pages, re­
quire friends to contact you via Facebook, etc.). Ways to beat FAD include: 
(1) recognize a possible addiction, (2) set time aside away from browsing 
Facebook, (3) allocate times that are dedicated to Facebook only (brief times), 
and (4) be prepared to delete Facebook if the addiction becomes too pow­
erful. Because “it is easy to get sucked in and spend hours on the site,” the 
contents of this piece resonate to users (and nonusers) all across the globe.
Source: http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/facebook-addiction-disorder-the-6-symptoms-of
-f-a-d/61408. Retrieved February 20, 2016. 
Theory in Popular Press  •  Facebook Addiction Disorder

T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E  F I E L D :  T R A D I T I O N S  A N D  C O N T E X T S
	
Discussion Starters     41
pervasiveness of technology in all of our lives, sometimes its influence is muted. As 
Nancy Baym (2012) and her colleagues suggest, legitimate reasons need to exist to 
justify the inclusion of technology and new media in research. They state that it’s 
important for researchers and theorists to ­rationalize the need to study communica­
tion technology; explaining phenomena is much more important than exploring it.
Conclusion
This chapter provided you a framework to use as you try to understand the communica­
tion field. We began by exploring the seven established traditions of communication 
theory that are inclusive of the theories you’re about to read in this book. These traditions 
include Rhetorical, Semiotic, Phenomenological, Cybernetic, Socio-Psychological, 
Socio-Cultural, and Critical. We next examined the primary contexts of communication: 
Intrapersonal, Interpersonal, Small Group, Organizational, Public/Rhetorical, Mass/
Media, and Cultural. As various theories are introduced to you, you will see that many of 
them fall neatly in these divisions. Other theories will cut across traditions and contexts.
You should now be able to discern the uniqueness of the communication discipline. 
As you read the next chapter on theory building, you will begin to link the communica­
tion process with the theoretical process. These preliminary chapters offer important 
foundations to draw on as you encounter the theories presented later in the book.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: We have cautioned against assuming that technology is 
always a relevant topic to examine as you learn about the various communi­
cation theories. First, discuss the challenges and pitfalls of placing too much 
attention on technology. Next, apply your responses to the various contexts that are 
outlined in this chapter.
	
1.  Lee and Jenny Yamato’s experiences fall across several of the contexts we 
identified in this chapter. Which of the contexts are in play in their story?
	
2.  Which of the seven traditions in the communication field most appeals to 
you? Why?
	
3.  Which context of communication most appeals to you? Why?
	
4.  If you had to add another context of communication based on your experi­
ences, what context would it be? How would you interpret the context for others? 
What examples illustrate the context?
	
5.  How would you illustrate—with a picture—the overlap between and among 
the various communication traditions?
	
6.  Explain how politics can influence each of the communication contexts.
	
7.  Suppose you were asked to differentiate between a tradition and a context. 
What would guide your thinking in your response? 

42
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
Rolanda Nash hurried 
to class after work. She 
­always seemed to be 
running late. Since she decided to divorce Anton 
and move from Sheridan, Wyoming, to Chicago 
things were confusing. After her relationship 
with Anton, she felt she would never trust an­
other man again. Meanwhile, she had to complete 
six credits to graduate and keep the new job she 
had secured in Chicago. In addition to doing her 
schoolwork, Rolanda was working 30 hours a 
week for one of her professors, Dr. Stevens. Dr. 
Stevens was testing a theory called Communica­
tion Accommodation Theory that focused on how 
and when people made their own communica­
tion sound like their conversational partner’s (a 
process of accommodation). According to the 
theory, when someone wants to get another’s ap­
proval, there is a higher chance they’ll mirror the 
other’s talk. Dr. Stevens wanted to observe com­
munication accommodation in an organizational 
setting. The professor sent Rolanda into two 
different organizations with a tape recorder to 
tape naturally occurring conversations between 
subordinates and managers.
It was very challenging for Rolanda to cap­
ture natural conversations. Although Stevens 
had obtained permission for her to record con­
versations in the organizations, some people rec­
ognized her and seemed to clam up when she 
appeared. In addition, neither of the two organi­
zations employed many African Americans and 
Rolanda felt she stuck out as she walked through 
the hallways. But she was used to that. In most of 
her university classes she was the only African 
American woman. She was hoping Chicago 
would offer more ­diversity.
If she could get enough conversations to 
satisfy Dr. Stevens, she could go home to tackle 
her  English assignment. Stevens hadn’t really 
told her  how many conversations she needed, 
but Rolanda was hoping 10 would be enough 
because that’s all she had gotten in five days of 
­taping. Dr. Stevens had mentioned last week that 
when Rolanda was finished taping, she would 
probably be sending her back to the organiza­
tions to do some follow-up interviews with the 
people she had taped. Rolanda wondered how 
that’ll work out.
Thinking About Theory and Research
Rolanda Nash
There is nothing so practical as a good theory.
—Kurt Lewin
R
olanda is involved in theorizing and researching about complex communication 
interactions both in her work and in her personal life. Although not everyone 
does research for a living, often people wonder to themselves, or ask one another, 
How can we stop arguing so much? Why are we successful in communicating some­
times and not at other times? How can we be better communicators? Will social 
media unite us or divide us? We can provide answers to these kinds of questions 
C H A P T E R	3

T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
	
Thinking About Theory and Research 
     ﻿    
43
with theory, because as Robert Craig and Heidi Muller (2007) observe, “[T]heo­
rizing is a formalized extension of everyday sense-making and problem solving” 
(p. ix). Theories allow us to see how organizations (as well as individuals) handle 
crisis and communication (Liska, Petrun, Sellnow, & Seeger, 2012). Furthermore, 
when we make observations and compare them to theory, we’re doing research. 
Theory and research are ­inextricably linked. Paul Reynolds (2015) points out that 
some researchers begin with theory (theory-then-research) whereas others begin 
with research (research-then-theory), but all researchers need to think about both 
theory and research.
In this book we are discussing theory and research as professionals use them in 
their work; yet all of us in daily life think like researchers, using implicit theories to 
help us understand those questions we mentioned previously. Fritz Heider (1958) 
referred to everyday interactors engaging in theoretical thinking as “naïve psycholo­
gists” or what we might call implicit theorists. Whenever we pose an answer to one 
of our questions (e.g., if we suggest that maybe we are really fighting over power and 
control and not what color to paint the living room), we are engaging in theoretical 
thinking.
Sometimes, an implicit theorist and a professional work in the same ways. First, 
as we have just mentioned, they are similar because both puzzle over questions en­
countered through observations and both seek answers for these questions. Both also 
set up certain criteria that define what an acceptable answer might be. For instance, 
when Ely wonders why his college roommate talks so much, he might decide on 
the following criteria for an answer: The ­answer has to apply to all communica­
tion contexts (online, face-to-face, and so forth); and the answer has to make sense 
(Ely wouldn’t accept an answer stating that his roommate comes from another planet 
where talk is more highly valued than here on earth, for instance). When Ely (and so­
cial scientists) find answers that satisfy their criteria, they generalize from them and 
may apply them to other situations that are similar. If Ely concludes that his room­
mate is insecure and talks to cover up his insecurity, he may determine that others he 
meets who talk more than he does are also insecure. We will return to the notion of 
an implicit theorist a bit later in the chapter.
In all those processes, everyday communicators follow the basic outline ad­
vanced by social science. However, there are differences between them as well. Social 
scientists systematically test theories whereas nonscientists test ­selectively. Ely 
merely makes observations of people he knows, whereas a social scientist will try to 
observe some kind of systematic sample of the population. In addition, Ely will prob­
ably easily accept evidence that agrees with his theory about the relationship between 
insecurity and talking, and tend to ignore evidence that contradicts it. Researchers 
are more rigorous in their testing and are more willing to amend theories, incorporat­
ing information arising from ­inconsistencies to create a revised formulation of the 
theory.
In this chapter, we build on what you already know as an implicit theorist and 
prepare you for reading about the theories in the text by providing the following: 
(1) a definition of theory that maps the term onto intellectual traditions and explains 
how assumptions affect the process of theorizing, (2) a list of evaluative criteria for as­
sessing a theory, and (3) a brief description of the ­research process.

44     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
Defining Theory: What’s in a Name?
Generally speaking, a theory is an abstract system of concepts with indications of 
the relationships among these concepts that help us to understand a phenomenon. 
Stephen Littlejohn and Karen Foss (2011) suggest this abstract ­system is derived 
through systematic observation. Donald Stacks and Michael Salwen (2014) suggest 
that theory “is like a map for exploring unexplored territories” (p. 4). Jonathan H. 
Turner (1986) defined theory as “a process of developing ideas that can allow us to 
explain how and why events occur” (p. 5). This definition focuses on the nature of 
theoretical thinking without specifying exactly what the outcome of this thinking 
might be. William Doherty and his colleagues (1993) have elaborated on Turner’s 
definition by stating that theories are both process and product: ­“Theorizing is the 
process of systematically formulating and organizing ideas to understand a particu­
lar phenomenon. A theory is the set of interconnected ideas that emerge from this 
process” (p. 20). In this definition, the authors do not use Turner’s word explain 
because the goals of theory can be more numerous than simply explanation, a point 
we explore later in this chapter.
In this brief discussion, you have probably noticed that different theorists ap­
proach the definition of theory somewhat differently. The search for a universally 
accepted definition of theory is a difficult, if not impossible, task. In part, the dif­
ficulty in defining theory is due to the many ways in which a ­theory can be classified 
or categorized. We’ll refine our definition here by examining the components and 
goals of theories.
As you work toward understanding theory and the various theoretical perspec­
tives in this book, understand that a “Eurocentric cultural bias” problem exists (Craig, 
2013, p. 42). We need to frame our understanding of the current discussion with the 
belief that “communication research around the world has relied on Western theories 
and methods, and the global discourse on communication theory has been exces­
sively one-sided” (Craig, p. 43). With this essential concern identified, we now turn 
our attention to defining theory via its components and various goals.
theory
an abstract system 
of concepts and 
their relationships 
that help us to 
understand a  
phenomenon
Student Voices
Martina
When we first started talking about the “implicit theorist” idea, I thought it was kind 
of weird. I was pretty sure I wasn’t a theorist, implicit or not! Then I started keeping 
track of how I was thinking like a theorist in my everyday life. It was amazing how 
many times I did make a theory and then tried to test it. It seemed like it happened a 
lot at work. When I was being considered for a promotion, I watched carefully to see 
what the “higher ups” in my office did and how they reacted to my work. I developed 
a ­“theory” that the men in positions of power needed to think of me as their daughter, 
but the women wanted me to perform as an equal. So, when I presented my work to 
the men, I was more deferential and asked them for advice. I never did that with the 
women. I decided my theory was correct when I got the promotion!

	
Defining Theory: What’s in a Name?     45
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
Components
To understand theory as a whole, we need to understand the component parts that make 
up theories. Theories are composed of several key parts, the two most important of 
which are called concepts and relationships. Concepts are words or terms that label the 
most important elements in a theory. Concepts in some of the theories we will discuss 
include cohesiveness (Groupthink), ­dissonance (Cognitive Dissonance Theory), self 
(Symbolic Interaction Theory), and scene (Dramatism). As you can see, sometimes 
theories are named using one of their key concepts, although this is not always the case.
A concept often has a specific definition that is unique to its use in a theory, 
which differs from how we would define the word in everyday conversation. For ex­
ample, the concept “cultivation” used in Cultivation Analysis (see Chapter 24) refers 
specifically to the way media, especially television, create a picture of social reality 
in the minds of media consumers. This use of the term differs from using it to mean 
hoeing your garden or developing an interest, skill, or friendship. It is always the task 
of the theorist to provide a clear definition of the concepts used in the theory.
Concepts may be nominal or real. Nominal concepts are those that are not observ­
able, such as democracy or love. Real concepts are observable, such as text messages 
or spatial distance. As we’ll discuss later in the chapter, when researchers use theory 
in their studies, they must turn all the concepts into something concrete so that they 
can be observed. It is much easier to do this for real concepts than for nominal ones.
Relationships specify the ways in which the concepts in the theory are com­
bined. For example, in Chapter 1 we presented three different models of the process 
concepts
labels for the most 
important elements 
in a theory
nominal concepts 
concepts that are 
not directly  
observable
real concepts
concepts that are 
directly observable
relationships 
the ways in which 
the concepts of a 
theory relate to one 
another
www.CartoonStock.com

46     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
of communication. In each model, the concepts are very similar. What is different is 
the relationship specified among them. In the first model, the relationship is a linear 
one where one concept relates to the second, which then relates to the next, and so 
forth. In the second model, the posited relationship is interactive, or two-way. The 
third model illustrates mutual influence (transaction), where all the concepts are seen 
as affecting one ­another simultaneously.
Goals
We can also clarify the definition of theory by understanding its purposes. In a broad 
sense, the goals of theory can include explanation, understanding, prediction, and 
social change; we are able to explain something (why Rolanda and Anton’s marriage 
ended, for example) because of the concepts and their relationships specified in a 
theory. We are able to understand something (Rolanda’s distrust of men) because 
of theoretical thinking. In addition, we are able to ­predict something (how Rolanda 
will respond to other men she meets) based on the patterns suggested by a theory. 
Finally, we are able to effect social change or empowerment (altering the institution 
of marriage so that it more completely empowers both partners, for example) through 
theoretical inquiry.
Although some theories try to reach all these goals, most feature one goal over 
the others. Rhetorical theories, some media theories, and many interpersonal theo­
ries seek primarily to provide explanation or understanding. Others (e.g., traditional 
persuasion and organizational theories) focus on prediction. Still others (e.g., some 
feminist and other critical theories) have as their central goal to change the structures 
of society. This means effecting social change, not simply improving individual lives. 
To understand the difference, think about a theory of conflict management that may 
help people understand how to engage in conflict more productively, thus enriching 
their lives. Yet, it may do nothing to change the underlying structures that promoted 
the conflict in the first place.
In the previous discussion, we suggest that theories act as lenses to help re­
searchers interpret concrete experiences and observations. Janet Yerby (1995) refers 
to theories as “the stories we have developed to explain our view of ­reality” (p. 362). 
This line of thinking prompts us to ask what motivates a scholar to choose one theory 
(or lens) over another in their work. The answer to this question comes from an 
examination of the “approaches to knowing” that scholars bring to their work before 
they begin to do research.
Approaches to Knowing: How Do You See 
(and Talk About) the World?
Scholars (e.g., Treadwell, 2016; White & Klein, 2008; Zhou & Sloan, 2015) have dis­
cussed how researchers think and talk about the world. Most of these scholars have iden­
tified three general approaches: positivistic or empirical, interpretive, and critical. We will 
discuss each of these below, but ­remember because we wish for you to have a comprehensive 
understanding of each, we’re presenting each approach in detail. Most researchers, 
however, do not subscribe to all the details we present (Stacks & Salwen, 2014).

	
Approaches to Knowing: How Do You See (and Talk About) the World?      47
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
The Positivistic, or Empirical, Approach
The positivistic, or empirical, approach assumes that objective truths can be un­
covered and that the process of inquiry that discovers these truths can be, at least in 
part, value-neutral. This tradition advocates the methods of the natural sciences, with 
the goal of constructing general laws governing human interactions. An empirical re­
searcher strives to be objective and works for control, or direction over the important 
concepts in the theory. In other words, when the researcher makes observations, he 
or she carefully structures the situation so that only one element varies. This enables 
the researcher to make relatively definitive statements about that element. As Leslie 
Baxter and Dawn Braithwaite (2008) observe, the researcher’s task in the empirical 
approach is “to deduce testable hypotheses from a theory” (p. 7). In other words, 
the positivistic approach moves along the theory-then-research model to which 
Reynolds (2015) referred. Graham Bodie and Susanne Jones (2012) illustrate this 
process because they conducted an empirical study to test which one of three differ­
ent theoretical models of supportive communication best explains their results.
The Interpretive Approach
The interpretive approach views truth as subjective and co-created by the partici­
pants, with the researcher clearly being one of the participants. There is less emphasis 
on objectivity in this approach than in the empirical approach because complete objec­
tivity is seen as impossible. However, this does not mean that ­research in this approach 
has to rely totally on what participants say with no outside judgment by the researcher. 
The interpretive researcher believes that values are relevant in the study of communica­
tion and that researchers need to be aware of their own values and to state them clearly 
for readers, because values will naturally permeate the research. These researchers are 
not concerned with control and the ability to generalize across many people as much as 
they are interested in rich descriptions about the people they study. This emphasis on 
rich description leads interpretive researchers to put a lot of focus on the voices of their 
participants and quote their comments extensively (deSousa, 2011). For interpretive re­
searchers, theory is best induced from the observations and experiences the researcher 
shares with and/or hears from the respondents. We should note that many positivistic 
scholars have acknowledged the importance of being value-free in their thinking. Yet, 
most will acknowledge that the communication researcher can influence the study in 
many (unintended) ways. This is usually referred to as post-positivism.
The Critical Approach
In the critical approach, an understanding of knowledge relates to power. ­Critical 
researchers believe that those in power shape knowledge in ways that perpetuate the 
status quo. Thus, powerful people work at keeping themselves in power, while si­
lencing minority voices questioning the distribution of power and the power holders’ 
version of truth. Feminists and Marxists, among others, work from this intellectual 
tradition. For critical researchers, it’s important to change the status quo to resolve 
power imbalances and give voice to those silenced by the power structure. Kent 
Ono (2011) observes that critical theory “often emerges out of the everyday life 
experiences of women, people of color, and members of LGBTQ communities” 
positivistic/  
empirical approach 
an approach assum-
ing the existence 
of objective reality 
and value-neutral 
research
control 
direction over the 
important concepts 
in a theory
interpretive  
approach 
an approach view-
ing truth as subjec-
tive and stressing 
the participation 
of the researcher 
in the research 
process
critical approach 
an approach stress-
ing the researcher’s 
responsibility  
to change the  
inequities in the 
status quo

48     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
(p. 9). Claudia Anguiano and her colleagues (Anguiano, Milstein, De Larkin, 
Chen, & Sandoval, 2012) provide a concrete example of Ono’s statement. They ex­
amined environmental inequity using Latino/a Critical Race Theory. They wished 
to promote Hispanic activism around environmental justice issues, and sought, with 
their research “to translate theoretical knowledge into practical strategies for better 
policymaking” (p. 137).
Some critical theorists, notably Stuart Hall (1981), whose work we feature in 
Chapter 25, have commented that power imbalances may not always be the result of 
intentional strategies on the part of the powerful. Rather, ideology, or “those images, 
concepts, and premises which provide the frameworks through which we represent, 
interpret, understand and ‘make sense’ of some aspect of social existence” (Hall, 
1981, p. 31), is often “produced and reproduced” accidentally. For example, this 
may come about when certain images of ­masculinity work to sell a product. When 
advertisers observe this success, they continue creating ads with these images. In this 
fashion, the images of ­masculinity become entrenched in society. Thus, although the 
powerful are ­interested and invested in staying in power, they may not be fully aware 
of what they do to silence minority voices. To have a visual understanding of the 
three approaches, look at Table 3.1.
Approaches to Knowing: What Questions 
Do You Ask About the World?
Each of the three approaches to knowing provides different answers to questions 
about the nature of reality (researchers call this ontology), questions about how we 
know things (known as epistemology), and questions about what is worth knowing 
(or what researchers call axiology). We’ll briefly address each of these terms and 
suggest how the three approaches to knowing treat them differently.
Ontology is the study of being and nonbeing, or in other words, the study of 
reality. The word ontology comes from the Greek language and means the science 
of being or the general principles of being. Pat Arneson (2009c) states that on­
tology is “the study of what it means to be human, which shapes the background 
understanding for theorizing about human communication” (p. 697). This definition 
focuses on the idea that ontology gives us a certain vision of the world and on what 
constitutes its important features. It is called the first philosophy because it is not 
ontology 
a branch of knowl-
edge focused on the 
nature of reality
epistemology 
a branch of 
knowledge focused 
on how we know 
things
axiology 
a branch of 
knowledge focused 
on what is worth 
knowing
Table 3.1  Three Approaches to Knowing
EMPIRICAL
INTERPRETIVE
CRITICAL
Goal
Explanation 
of world
Probe the relativism 
of world
Change 
the world
Engagement 
of researcher
Separate
Involved
Involved
Application 
of theory
To generalize about 
many like cases
To illuminate the 
individual case
To critique a specific
set of cases

	
Approaches to Knowing: What Questions Do You Ask About the World?      49
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
possible to philosophize until the nature of reality is determined. Often questions of 
ontology cluster around how much free will people have. Researchers who see the 
world from an empirical approach believe that general laws govern human interac­
tions. Thus they also believe that people don’t have a lot of free choice in what they 
do—people are predictable because they follow the laws of human behavior which, 
to a large extent, ­determine their actions. A researcher’s job is to uncover what is 
already out there in reality. This differs from researchers with an interpretive bent, 
who would allow that people do have free choice, and see a researcher’s job as to co-
create ­reality with research participants. Finally, critical researchers see both choice 
and ­constraint in the power structures they wish to change.
The questions surrounding epistemology focus on how we go about knowing; 
what counts as knowledge is intimately related to ontology. Epistemology looks at 
“nature, scope, and limits of human knowledge” (Arneson, 2009b, p. 350). How 
researchers see the world, truth, and human nature necessarily influences how 
they believe they should try to learn about these things. The approach (positivistic, 
­interpretive, or critical) Dr. Stevens took in our opening example would affect her 
way of collecting information, an epistemologic choice. For instance, if Dr. Ste­
vens researched as a positivist, she would institute many more controls than we de­
scribed in our opening case study. Furthermore, the number of observations would 
not be left to chance or to Rolanda’s schedule. Dr. Stevens would have calculated 
the number of conversations she needed to support the statistics she’d use to test 
relationships among status and communication accommodation. If Dr. Stevens op­
erated in the interpretive tradition, she would not be ­content with her own analysis 
of the conversations. She might invite the participants to read the transcripts of 
their conversations so that they could tell her whether they were trying to accom­
modate to their partners. Stevens would probably be interested in the participants’ 
explanations for why they changed (or did not change) their speech patterns as 
they conversed with superiors or subordinates in the workplace. Using a critical 
approach, Dr. Stevens might bring some of the following questions to her research: 
How is the relationship between workers of differing statuses communicatively 
­constructed? Does convergence happen unequally based on status? Are there sta­
tus differences other than occupation that impact communication accommodation? 
How can we change the prevailing power structures to improve the inequities we 
observe in the workplace?
The final set of questions focuses on the place of values in theory and research. 
The empirical position on axiology is that science must be value free. However, most 
researchers do not take this extreme position and accept that some subjectivity, in the 
form of values, informs the research process (Merrigan & Huston, 2014). Research 
and theory-building are indeed, axiological efforts in that the very topic selection and 
the approach to studying that topic are usually value-laden undertakings. The ques­
tion is not whether values should permeate theory and research but how they should.
Here we briefly present three positions on this debate that correspond to the three 
ways of knowing: avoiding values as much as possible in research (empirical), recog­
nizing how values influence the entire research process (interpretative), and advocating 
that values should be closely intertwined with scholarly work (critical). The first stance 
argues that the research process consists of many stages and that values should inform 
some of these stages, but not others. For example, the part of the research enterprise 

50     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
that focuses on theory choice must be informed by the values of the researcher. Scholars 
choose to view a research problem through the lens that they believe most accurately 
describes the world. Thus, some researchers choose theoretical frameworks that are con­
sistent with an ontology of free choice, whereas others choose frameworks that are more 
“lawlike” and deterministic. Yet, when they test these theories (the verification stage), 
they must eliminate “extra-scientific values from scientific activity” (Popper, 1976, 
p. 97). As you can see, this stance proposes a very limited role for values.
The second position argues that it is not possible to eliminate values from any 
part of theorizing and research. In fact, some values are so embedded in ­researchers’ 
culture that researchers are unconscious that they even hold them. Sandra Bem (1993), 
for instance, observes that much of the research on differences between women and 
men was influenced by biases existing at the time. Many feminist scholars argue 
that social science itself suffers from a male bias (Harding, 1987). Some scholars 
examining African American issues make the same observations about the European 
American biases that exist in much social scientific research (Dixon, 2015). Thomas 
Nakayama and Robert Krizek (1995) point out that communication researchers often 
take White for granted as the default race. Thus, the values and assumptions held 
by those with a European American perspective are never highlighted, questioned, 
or acknowledged; they simply inform a scholar’s process (Gunaratne, 2010). Yoshi­
taka Miike (2007) takes this one step further to advocate using Asiacentric (meaning 
rooted in Asian thinking) theories rather than Eurocentric ones.
The final position argues that not only are values unavoidable, but they are desir­
able in research. Earlier in this chapter we mentioned social change as one goal of 
theory. Those who embrace this goal are called critical theorists. Critical theorists 
advocate seeing theory and research as political acts that call on scholars to change 
the status quo. Thus, scholars must contribute to changing conditions rather than 
simply reporting conditions (Table 3.2).
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go 
About Theory Building?
When researchers seek to create theory, they are guided by all of the issues we’ve 
just discussed: their general approach to knowing things (empirical, ­interpretive, or 
critical) and the answers to questions about truth or reality, gathering information, 
Table 3.2  Answers Supplied by the Three Approaches to Knowing
EMPIRICAL
INTERPRETIVE
CRITICAL
Ontology
No free choice
Free choice
Choice restrained 
by power
Epistemology
Theory first. 
Control study
Research first. 
Co-create study
Critique power.
Seek change
Axiology
Reduce role 
of values
Acknowledge 
values
Celebrate
values

	
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go About Theory Building?      51
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
and values (ontology, epistemology, and axiology). In addition, they have some 
guidelines about how to create theory. We will review three traditional guidelines: 
covering law, rules, and systems. The covering law approach and the rules approach 
represent two extremes, whereas the systems approach provides an intermediate po­
sition between the extremes. Again, we caution that few scholars take the extreme 
positions sketched out here. Rather, these positions form benchmarks from which 
­researchers anchor their own stances on questions of communication. 
The covering law approach seeks to explain an event in the real world by re­
ferring to a general law. Researchers applying a covering law approach believe that 
communication behavior is governed by forces that are predictable and generaliz­
able. The rules approach, at the other end of the ontological continuum, holds that 
communication behavior is rule governed, not lawlike. The rules approach differs 
from the covering law approach in that researchers holding the rules approach admit 
the possibility that people are free to change their minds, to behave irrationally, to 
have idiosyncratic meanings for behaviors, and to change the rules. Ultimately, their 
differences focus on the concept of choice. The covering law model explains human 
choices by seeking a prior condition (usually a cause) that determines the choice 
that is made (usually an effect). From the rules model, rule following results from a 
choice made by the follower, but does not necessarily involve antecedent conditions 
or any aspect of the cause–effect logic of the covering law approach.
A third view, the systems approach, subscribes somewhat to the beliefs of the 
rules approach while also suggesting that people’s free will may be constrained by the 
system in which they operate. Further, this approach acknowledges the impossibility of 
achieving what the covering law approach requires: laws about human communication 
that are invariant and general. The systems approach proposes assumptions that are 
more easily met than those of the covering law approach (Monge, 1973). We now ex­
amine each of the three approaches in more detail and provide an overview in Table 3.3.
covering law  
approach 
a guideline for 
creating theory 
suggesting that 
theories conform to 
a general law that 
is universal and 
invariant
rules approach 
a guideline for 
creating theory that 
builds human choice 
into explanations
cause 
an antecedent 
condition that  
determines an 
effect
effect
a condition that 
inevitably follows a 
causative condition
systems approach 
a guideline for 
creating theory that 
acknowledges  
human choice and 
the constraints 
of the systems 
involved
Table 3.3  Guidelines to Communication Theory Construction
APPROACH
DESCRIPTION/EXAMPLE
Covering Law
Covering law theorists hold that there are fixed relationships 
­between two or more events or objects. Example: Whenever 
Linda speaks, Bob interrupts her; this is a lawlike statement that 
expresses a ­relationship between Linda and Bob. These 
statements are commonly referred to as if-then statements.
Rules
Rules theorists contend that much of human behavior is a 
result of free choice. People pick the social rules that govern 
their ­interactions. Example: In an interaction between 
co-workers, much of their conversation will be guided by rules 
of politeness, turn taking, and so on.
Systems
Systems theorists hold that human behavior is part of a system.
Example: Think of a family as a system of family relationships 
rather than individual members. This illuminates the complexity 
of communication patterns within the family and the family’s 
relationship to society at large.

52     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
Covering Law Approach
This term was first introduced by William Dray (1957), a historian who defined 
covering law as that “explanation is achieved, and only achieved, by subsuming what 
is to be explained under a general law” (p. 1 [emphasis in original]). Some cover­
ing law explanations refer to universal laws that state all x is y. These laws are not 
restricted by time or space. However, as new information comes to light, even laws 
have to be modified. Covering law explanations do not always have to be cause 
and effect. They may also specify relationships of coexistence. We have a causal 
relationship when we say that self-disclosures by one person cause self-disclosures 
from a relational partner. A claim of coexistence merely asserts that two things go 
together—that is, when one person self-discloses, the other does, too—but it does not 
claim that the first self-disclosure causes the second. It’s possible that social norms 
of reciprocity cause the second self-disclosure or that both disclosures are caused by 
the environment (an intimate, dimly lit bar or consuming more alcohol than usual).
Critical attributes of covering law explanations are that they provide an explicit 
statement of a boundary condition and that they allow hypotheses, testable predic­
tions of relationships, of varying levels of specificity, to be generated within this 
boundary condition. Furthermore, because the system is deductive, complete confir­
mation of theories is never possible. There will always be unexamined instances of 
the hypothesis.
The type of covering law that we have just described is considered outdated by 
most social scientists (Bostrom, 2004). Most researchers today recognize that this 
type of universal law is unrealistic. Instead, researchers might strive for “probabilistic 
laws,” or statements we can predict with a certain ­degree of probability. For example, 
as Berger (1977) asserts, “We can predict with a certain probability that if males and 
females with certain eye colors have large numbers of children, a certain proportion 
of those children will have a certain eye color. However, we are not in a position to 
predict what the eye color of a particular child will be” (p. 10).
Overall, a covering law approach instructs researchers to search for lawlike gen­
eralizations and regularities in human communication. These lawlike generalizations 
may be culturally bound or may have some other complex ­relationship with culture. 
Covering law offers a theory-generating option that aims for complete explanation 
of a phenomenon. The law, in effect, governs the relationships among phenomena. 
Rules Approach
This approach assumes that people are typically engaged in intentional, goal-­directed 
behavior and are capable of acting rather than simply being acted upon. We can 
be restricted by previous choices we have made, by the choices of others, and by 
cultural and social conditions, but we are conscious and active choice makers. 
Further, human behavior can be classified into two categories: activities that are 
stimulus–response behaviors (termed movements) and activities that are intentional 
choice responses (termed actions) (Cushman & Pearce, 1977). Rules theorists con­
tend that studying actions is most relevant to theorists.
Rules theorists look inside communities or cultures to get a sense of how people 
regulate their interaction with others (Shimanoff, 1980). Rules do not require people 
to act in a certain way; rather, rules refer to the standards or ­criteria that people use 
hypotheses 
testable predictions 
of relationships 
between concepts 
that follow the 
general predictions 
made by a theory
movements
activities based on 
stimulus response
actions
activities based on 
intentional choice 
responses

	
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go About Theory Building?      53
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
when acting in a particular setting (Cushman & Cahn, 1985). For example, when two 
people meet, they normally do not begin at an intimate level of exchange. Rather, there 
is an agreed-upon starting point, and they will delve further into intimacy if the two see 
the relationship as having a future. The process of meeting another is guided by rules, 
although these rules are rarely verbally identified by either person. Don Cushman and 
Barnett Pearce (1977) believed that if the relationship evolves, the rules guiding interac­
tions change. Rules, then, are important benchmarks for the direction of an interaction. 
Table 3.4 illustrates how rules guide initial encounters of peers in the United States.
Several researchers (Lull, 1982; Van den Bulck, Custers, & Nelissen, 2016; Wolf, 
Meyer, & White, 1982) have used a rules-based theoretical framework to study media 
and family television-viewing behaviors. James Lull (1982) identified three types of 
rules that govern family television watching. First are habitual rules, which are nonne­
gotiable and are ­usually instituted by the authority figures in the family. When Roger and 
Marie tell their children that there can be no television until all homework is checked over 
by one of them and declared finished for the night, they are establishing a habitual rule.
Parametric rules are also established by family authority figures, but they are 
more negotiable than habitual rules. For example, the Marsh family may have a rule 
that members can engage in extended talk only during commercial breaks when they 
are viewing television. Yet, if something exciting has happened to one member, they 
may negotiate to talk about it during the ­program itself. 
Finally, Lull identified tactical rules, or rules that are understood as a means 
for achieving a personal or interpersonal goal, but are unstated. For ­example, if Rob 
and Jeremy are watching television together and Rob likes ­Jeremy, he may tune in to 
Jeremy’s favorite show even though he himself would not have chosen that program. 
He follows the tactical rule of maintaining ­relational harmony with his partner.
Overall, a rules approach instructs researchers to discover the rules that govern 
particular communication contexts and construct theoretical statements around these 
rules. The rules perspective offers a theory-generating option that aims for a satisfy­
ing explanation of a specific communication situation. The ­theorist would normally 
begin with a typology of the rules that govern the situation and move from those to 
statements connecting the rules and specifying the conditions affecting the rules.
Systems Approach
Systems thinking in communication is derived from General Systems Theory (GST), 
which is both a theory of systems in general—“from thermostats to missile guidance 
habitual rules
nonnegotiable rules 
that are usually  
created by an 
authority figure
parametric rules
rules that are set by 
an authority figure 
but are subject to 
some negotiation
tactical rules
unstated rules used 
to achieve a  
personal or  
interpersonal goal
Table 3.4  Rules Governing Initial Peer Encounters
In the first fifteen minutes of an encounter:
    Politeness should be observed.
    Demographics should be exchanged.
    Partners should speak in rough 
    equivalence to each other. 
    Interruptions and talk-overs 
    should be minimal. 
In the second fifteen minutes:
    Politeness should be observed.
    Likes and dislikes can be discussed.
    One partner can speak more than 
    another, but avoid dominance.
    More interruptions can be tolerated, 
    but avoid dominance.

54     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
computers, from amoebas to families” (Whitchurch & Constantine, 1993, p. 325)—and 
a program of theory construction. Systems thinking captured the attention of communi­
cation researchers because it changed the focus from the individual to an entire family, 
a small group, or an organization. This shift reconceptualized communication for schol­
ars and helped them to think innovatively about experience and interaction in groups. 
Further, systems thinking replaced the stringent assumptions of covering law with more 
realistic ones. Systems theorists (Monge, 1973; Stroh, 2015) agreed with the rules as­
sertion that “human communication is not characterized by universal patterns” (p. 9). 
Systems thinking requires systemic, nonuniversal generalizations, does not depend on 
inductive reasoning, separates the logical from the empirical, allows alternative expla­
nations for the same phenomenon, and permits partial explanations (Monge, 1973).
Systems thinking rests on several properties, including wholeness, interdepen­
dence, hierarchy, boundaries, calibration/feedback, and equifinality. We will explain 
each of these properties briefly.
Wholeness    The most fundamental concept of the systems approach is wholeness. It 
states that a system can’t be fully comprehended by a study of its individual parts in isola­
tion from one another. To understand the system, it must be seen as a whole. Wholeness 
suggests that we learn more about a couple, for example, by analyzing their interactions 
together than we do by analyzing one partner’s motivations or statements alone.
Interdependence    Because the elements of a system are interrelated, they ­exhibit 
interdependence. This means that the behaviors of system members co‑construct 
the system, and all members are affected by shifts and changes in the system. Vir­
ginia Satir (1988) compares the family to a mobile to illustrate how this principle 
applies to families. We might expect that when elderly parents decide to sell the fam­
ily home and move to a small condo, their decisions will affect all of their children.
Hierarchy    All systems have levels, or subsystems, and all systems are embedded 
in other systems, or suprasystems. Thus, systems are a hierarchy, a complex orga­
nization. Each of the subsystems can function independently of the whole system, but 
each is an integral part of the whole. Subsystems generally shift and change over time, 
but they may potentially become extremely close and turn into alliances or coalitions 
that exclude others. For example, if one parent confides a great deal in a son whereas 
the other talks to one of their daughters, two coalitions may form in the family, mak­
ing interactions more strained and troubled. This property is mapped in Figure 3.1.
Boundaries    Implicit in the preceding discussion about hierarchy and complexity is 
the notion that systems develop boundaries around themselves and the subsystems 
they contain. Because human systems are open systems (it is not possible to com­
pletely control everything that comes into or goes out from them), these boundaries 
are relatively permeable: They have openness. Thus, although the managers of a 
General Motors plant in Ohio may wish that their employees did not know about the 
strike at a General Motors plant in Michigan, they will be unable to prevent informa­
tion and communication from passing through the boundary around their organiza­
tional system. And, it’s fair to say that technology usually influences the boundaries 
in any human system.
wholeness 
a fundamental 
property of systems 
theory stating that 
systems are more 
than the sum of 
their individual parts
interdependence
a property of  
systems theory  
stating that the  
elements of a 
system affect one 
another
subsystems 
smaller systems 
that are embedded 
in larger ones
suprasystems 
larger systems that 
hold smaller ones 
within them
hierarchy 
a property of sys-
tems theory stating 
that systems consist 
of multiple levels
boundaries 
a property of 
systems theory 
stating that systems 
construct  
structures  
specifying their 
outer limits
openness 
the acknowledgment 
that within all human 
systems the  
boundaries are 
permeable

	
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go About Theory Building?      55
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
Calibration/Feedback    All systems need stability and constancy within a defined 
range (Watzlawick, Beavin, and Jackson, 1967). Calibration, or checking the scale, 
and subsequent feedback to change or stabilize the system, allow for control of the 
range. The thermostat provides a common example illustrating this process. Home 
heating is usually set at a certain temperature, say 65 degrees. The thermostat will 
allow a temperature range around 65 before changing anything. Therefore, if the 
thermostat is set for 65 and the temperature is 65 plus or minus 3 degrees, nothing 
happens. If the temperature drops below 62 degrees, the heat goes on; if it rises above 
68 degrees, the furnace shuts off. In this way, the heating system remains stable. 
However, if conditions change in the house (e.g., the family insulates the attic), the 
thermostat may need to be recalibrated or set at a slightly lower temperature to ac­
commodate the change. After insulating, the house may feel comfortable if the tem­
perature is set at 63 degrees.
Changing the standard (moving the temperature from 65 to 63 degrees) is ac­
complished through feedback. Feedback, in systems thinking, is positive when it 
produces change (the thermostat is set differently) and negative when it maintains 
the status quo (the thermostat remains at 65). When systems change they are called 
morphogenic, and when they stay the same they are called homeostatic. 
Equifinality    Open systems are characterized by the ability to achieve the same 
goals through different means, or equifinality (von Bertalanffy, 1968). This prin­
ciple applies to human groups in two ways. First, a single group can achieve a goal 
through many different routes. For example, if a manager wants to increase pro­
ductivity, he can raise wages, threaten the workers with firing, hire a consultant, or 
do some combination of these. There are several ways the manager can reach the 
goal. Additionally, equifinality implies that different groups can achieve the same 
goal through multiple pathways. For instance, PK Computer Systems may achieve 
Bou
nda
ry 
Environment
Acme Corporation
(Suprasystem)
Board of
Directors
Management
Advertising
Department
Sales
Department
Human
Resources
Department
Research and
Development
Public
Relations
Department
Outputs to the
environment
Inputs from the
environment
Figure 3.1
Suprasystems, 
Systems, and 
Subsystems in the 
Acme Corporation
calibration 
a property of sys­
tems theory stating 
that systems peri­
odically check the 
scale of allowable 
behaviors and reset 
the system
feedback 
a subprocess of cal­
ibration; information 
allowing for change 
in the system
morphogenic 
a process that 
occurs when a 
system recalibrates 
(or changes)
homeostatic 
a term for a stable 
system that isn’t 
changing
equifinality 
a property of 
systems theory 
stating that systems 
can achieve the 
same goals through 
different means

56     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
profitability by adopting a ­casual organizational culture, whereas Western Commu­
nication Systems may achieve profitability by demanding a more formal workplace.
Overall, a systems approach instructs researchers to search for holistic expla­
nations for communication behavior. Systems thinking offers a theory-generating 
option that aims to model the phenomenon as a whole, admitting the possibility for 
change from a variety of outside influences.
Evaluating Theory
As you read the communication theories in the text, you’ll need some standards for judg­
ing their value, worth, and effectiveness. Communication theory should not be viewed as 
“good” versus “bad” (Dainton & Zelley, 2014). All theories have unique strengths and 
shortcomings, therefore, we should not dismiss or embrace any theory without under­
standing all of its various parts. The following criteria are generally accepted as useful 
measures for evaluating communication theory: scope, logical consistency, parsimony, 
utility, testability, heurism, and the test of time. We will discuss each of them briefly.
Scope    Scope refers to the breadth of communication behaviors covered by a theory. 
It is somewhat similar to the level of generality notion we discussed ­earlier. Bound­
aries are the limits of a theory’s scope. Although theories should explain enough of 
communication to be meaningful, they should also have clear boundaries specifying 
their limits. The scope of some theories may change over time. Uncertainty Reduction 
Theory (URT), for example, which we discuss in Chapter 8, originally was bounded by 
initial encounters between strangers. In some ways this suggests a rather limited scope 
for the ­theory. However, although the duration of initial encounters is short, it is true 
that people spend a great deal of time throughout their lives meeting and conversing 
with new people. Thus, the scope of the theory may seem a bit broader upon reflection. 
Logical Consistency    Simply put, theories should make sense and have an ­internal 
logical consistency so they are clear and not contradictory. The claims made by the 
theory should be consistent with the assumptions of the theory. Logical consistency 
means that the theory “hangs together” and doesn’t contradict itself, either by ad­
vancing two propositions that are in conflict with each other or by failing to operate 
within the parameters of its assumptions.
Parsimony    Parsimony refers to the simplicity of the explanation provided by the 
theory. Theories should contain only the number of concepts necessary to explain the 
phenomenon under consideration. If a theory can explain a ­person’s communication 
behavior satisfactorily by using one concept (such as expectancy violations), that is 
more useful than having to use many concepts. However, because theories of commu­
nication and social behavior are dealing with complex phenomena, they may have to be 
complex themselves. ­Parsimony requires simplicity without sacrificing completeness.
Utility    This criterion refers to the theory’s usefulness, or practical value. A good 
theory has utility when it tells us a great deal about communication and human 
behavior. It allows us to understand some element of communication that was previ­
ously unclear. It weaves together pieces of information in such a way that we are able 
scope 
a criterion for eval-
uating theories; re-
fers to the breadth 
of communication 
behaviors covered 
in the theory
logical consistency 
a criterion for 
evaluating  
theories; refers  
to the internal logic 
in the theoretical 
statements
parsimony
a criterion for 
evaluating  
theories; refers  
to the simplicity 
of the explanation 
provided by the 
theory
utility
a criterion for evalu-
ating theories; refers 
to the theory’s use-
fulness or practical 
value

	
Approaches to Knowing: How Do We Go About Theory Building?      57
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
to see a pattern that was previously unseen. To a large extent, the utility criterion asks 
the following question: “Can real-world applications be found?”
Testability    Testability refers to our ability to investigate a theory’s accuracy. One 
of the biggest issues involved in testability concerns the specificity of the theory’s 
central concepts. For example, as we discuss in Chapter 9, Social Exchange Theory 
is predicated on the concepts of costs and rewards. The theory predicts that people 
will engage in behaviors that they find rewarding and avoid behaviors that are costly. 
However, the theory defines costs and rewards in a circular fashion: Behaviors that 
people engage in repeatedly are rewarding, and those that they avoid are costly. You 
can see how difficult it is to test the central prediction of Social Exchange Theory 
given this circular definition.
Heurism    Heurism refers to the amount of research and new thinking that is stimu­
lated by the theory. Theories are judged to be good to the extent that they generate in­
sights and new research. Although not all theories produce a great deal of research, an 
effective theory prompts some research activity. For example, the theory we discuss in 
Chapter 25, Cultural Studies, came from many diverse disciplines and has stimulated 
research programs in English, ­anthropology, social psychology, and communication.
Test of Time    The final criterion, the test of time, can be used only after some time 
has passed since the theory’s creation. Is the theory still generating ­research or has 
it been discarded as outmoded? Deciding whether a theory has withstood the test of 
time is often arbitrary. For instance, if a theory was conceptualized and tested in the 
1970s, but has remained dormant in the literature for over a decade and is now being 
reintegrated into research, has this theory satisfied the test of time? Judging this 
criterion is often a subjective process. Furthermore, it is not a criterion that can be 
used to assess a new theory (see Table 3.5 for a review of each of the seven criteria 
just discussed).
These criteria have been general standards for evaluating theories for some time, 
but our changing communication environment may require us to add to or revise 
this list.
testability
a criterion for 
evaluating theories; 
refers to our ability 
to test the accuracy 
of a theory’s claims
heurism
a criterion for 
evaluating theories; 
refers to the amount 
of research and 
new thinking stimu-
lated by the theory
test of time
a criterion for 
evaluating theo-
ries; refers to the 
theory’s durability 
over time
Student Voices
Ray
Before reading this chapter, I never thought that I could evaluate theory. It just seemed 
like theory was a given. It’s interesting to think about some theories being better or 
worse than others. I guess that’s why researchers argue. It’s not exactly about the 
facts—those are probably not all that different—but it’s about whose theory is a better 
explanation of those facts. It helps to have some criteria to use in evaluating theory. 
But I bet that even with those criteria, researchers with different paradigms will 
­disagree. It’s just hard to see things the same way if one person thinks there’s absolute 
truth out there and another thinks that everyone has his or her own truth.

58     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
The Research Process
Any introduction to communication theory must necessarily include a discussion 
of research. You already know that the two processes—theory-building and re­
search generation—are unique. Yet, we need to provide you some sense of the 
research process for you to have a foundation from which to draw as we discuss 
each theory.
In the example at the beginning of the chapter, we illustrated how interrelated 
theory and research processes are, so now we’ll examine the research process. Our 
discussion will necessarily be brief here; we know many of you will take an entire 
class devoted to the study of research methods, so here we simply give you an idea of 
how important theory and research are to one another. Although we could delve into 
a variety of areas in communication research, we maintain our focus on the objective 
(quantitative) and subjective (qualitative) efforts undertaken by researchers.
Communication Research and the Scientific Method
Conceptualizing communication theory has historically been related to quantitative 
thinking. That is, many of the theories you read about have their roots in experiments 
and the qualities related to those investigations. We will briefly address several 
themes related to this research orientation. Should you wish to find out more about 
quantitative communication research, you should look at additional information 
(e.g., Wrench, Thomas-Maddox, Richmond, & McCroskey, 2015). At the beginning 
of this chapter, Dr. Stevens’s study illustrated theory-then-­research. Rolanda’s tran­
scripts are used to test what Communication Accommodation Theory predicts about 
communication behaviors in the workplace. Dr. Stevens will see if the speculations 
she made based on the theory’s logic hold true in the conversations that Rolanda 
Table 3.5  Criteria for Evaluating Communication Theories
CRITERIA
QUESTIONS TO CONSIDER
Scope
What are the boundaries of the theory’s explanation?
Logical consistency
Do the claims of the theory match its assumptions? Do the
principles of the theory contradict each other?
Parsimony
Is the theory as simple as it can be to explain the phenomenon
under consideration?
Utility
Is the theory useful or practical?
Testability
Can the theory be shown to be false?
Heurism
Has the theory been used in research extensively to stimulate 
new ways of thinking about communication?
Test of time
How long has the theory been used in communication 
research?

	
The Research Process     59
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
taped. This traditional process, known as the scientific method, follows deductive 
logic in that Stevens moved from the general (the theory) to specific instances (the 
actual conversations gathered in two workplaces). If Stevens had used inductive 
logic (moving from specific to general), she would have asked Rolanda to record 
many more conversations. Stevens would have refrained from hypothesizing, or 
guessing, about what she might find in advance of the data collection. Then she and 
Rolanda would have listened to their tapes, trying to find some type of pattern that 
best explained what they heard. Finally, Stevens would have generalized based on 
her observations.
After Stevens hypothesized about what she will find in the workplace regarding 
accommodations between workers and managers based on the theory, she then must 
operationalize all the concepts. This means she needs to specify how she will mea­
sure the concepts that are important to her study. In this process, Dr. Stevens turns 
the abstract concepts of the theory into concrete variables that can be observed and 
measured. For example, status difference is a critical notion in the theoretical frame­
work, so Stevens specifies to Rolanda how she should measure this. In this case, 
measurement will be based on job title. Rolanda has to discover the job title for each 
of the people she observes and then compare those titles to a chart Stevens has given 
her classifying job ­titles into the two categories of “supervisor” and “subordinate.” 
This seems like a fairly straightforward means to operationalize the notion of status, 
but there may be instances where it is not a perfect operationalization. For instance, 
a lower-level employee who has worked for the company for many years might hold 
more status than a middle manager who has only recently arrived and is just learning 
the corporate culture. Additionally, women managers often report some problems 
with achieving the status expected from their job title. You can see how nominal con­
cepts that are more complex and abstract, such as love and intimacy, would be even 
more difficult to operationalize than occupational status.
A next step in quantitative investigation and the traditional scientific model 
sends Rolanda into the two organizations to make observations and collect data (in 
this case, the conversations and the job titles). When Rolanda returns with the tapes, 
Dr. Stevens will have to code the conversations, again using operationalizations for 
various concepts related to the theory. Some types of data do not need extensive cod­
ing to analyze. For example, if Dr. Stevens ­operationalized status based on income 
and then provided ­respondents with a survey asking them to indicate the category for 
their salary, these data would not need the same type of coding required in the taped 
conversations. The income categories could simply be numbered consecutively. 
In contrast, the conversations have to be listened to repeatedly to determine whether 
a given comment converges with or diverges from the comment ­preceding it.
Although some researchers approach their work strictly as hypothesis testers 
and some approach it more as theory generators, in practice most weave back and 
forth between the two. Furthermore, Wallace (1983) has argued that two types of re­
search exist: pure and applied (Figure 3.2). In pure research, researchers are guided 
by knowledge-generating goals. They are interested in testing or generating theory 
for its own sake and for the sake of advancing our knowledge in an area. In applied 
research, researchers wish to solve specific problems with the knowledge they or 
other researchers have generated. Figure 3.2 illustrates the relationship between these 
two types of research goals and processes. 
scientific method 
the traditional 
method for doing 
research involving 
controlled observa-
tions and analysis 
to test the prin-
ciples of a theory
deductive logic 
moving from the 
general (the theory) 
to the specific (the 
observations)
inductive logic 
moving from the 
specific (the  
observations) to the 
general (the theory)
operationalize
making an abstract 
idea measurable 
and observable
observations
focused  
examination within 
a context of inter-
est; may be guided 
by hypotheses or 
research questions
data
the raw materials 
collected by the  
researcher to 
answer the ques-
tions posed in the 
research or to test 
a hypothesis
code
converting raw 
data to a category 
system
pure research
research to  
generate knowledge
applied research
research to solve a 
problem or create a 
policy

60     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
In our example of Dr. Stevens’s research, we see her performing pure ­research. If a 
specific organization hired Dr. Stevens to consult with them to improve employee mo­
rale, however, her research would become applied. ­Theory and practice are intertwined, 
and pure and applied research are not ­unrelated processes. In Figure 3.2, the arrows 
running between the two types of research show this interrelationship. Without each 
other, each type of research would be conducted in a vacuum (Pettey, Bracken, & Pask, 
2016). Let’s dig a little deeper into the qualitative lens in communication research. 
Communication Research and the Qualitative Approach
Similar to quantitative design, we could write a great deal related to qualitative 
communication research. In fact, an entire journal in the communication field 
is dedicated to this topic (“Qualitative Research Reports in Communication”). 
Therefore, we necessarily truncate our discussion and focus on a number of dif­
ferent methods that can be undertaken using this approach, knowing that you can 
find further information elsewhere (e.g., Silverman, 2016). Instead of delineating 
all of the numerous methods related to qualitative inquiry, we focus our attention 
on the primary characteristics of this type of research. As a result, you will be able 
to see how a particular communication theory is influenced by qualitative thinking. 
We address four different characteristics: context-situated, inductive, emergent, and 
privileged-centered.
When we say that qualitative research is context-situated, similar to what we 
noted in Chapter 2, we are saying that individuals must be studied in their naturalistic 
setting and accommodate the time, space, and location. Qualitative scholars do not 
Explanations
“Pure” phase
Tests
Observations
Causal and
deductive
arrangement of
empirical
generalizations
Causal and
deductive
extensions of
explanatory
scope
Empirical
generalizations
Desire for
control
Desire for
understanding
Sample
summarization,
parameter
estimation
Interpretation,
sampling,
instrumentation,
scaling,
measurement
Explanations
“Applied” phase
Evaluations
Outcomes
Politics
Economics
Plans
Implementations
Review,
weighting
Administration,
operation
Predictions
Figure 3.2  The Procedures of Scientific Analysis

	
The Research Process     61
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
believe that objectivity can be achieved (unlike quantitative researchers who believe 
that objectivity is possible and probable). If, for instance, Marla was interested in 
studying roommate rivalry, she would talk to the roommates and to understand their 
conflict, she will have to understand conflict as it occurs organically and not presup­
pose any measurement or template. Marla will need to understand conflict taking 
into account when it happened, why, where, and with whom. In other words, she will 
have to examine conflict contextually.
The inductive feature of qualitative research refers to what we alluded to ear­
lier. Researchers using a qualitative lens aim to collate individual observations, for 
instance, and draw some general claims about human behavior. However, in this 
process, every effort is made to honoring the voice of the participant, even while 
trying to develop some conclusions. So, let’s use Marla again. If she interviewed say 
15 roommates and found out that most of the sources of conflict were related to fi­
nances, she could draw a conclusion (“Roommate equity in paying bills”), but would 
work to report unique responses to the question on finances. She will use the data/
responses to generate ideas or claims about the participants. 
A third characteristic of qualitative research is that it is emergent. When we 
note that research is emergent we mean that as questions are posed, they must be 
responsive to the setting. Again, this is an organic process in that researchers must be 
aware of respondent reactions and manage appropriately. So, when Marla finds that 
a roommate she interviews decides to detail his experiences with his parents paying 
his college tuition, Marla will have to encourage him to be focused on the question 
about conflict, but also simultaneously recall this response diversion as she analyzes 
her results.
Embedded in many qualitative research studies is the notion that participants 
possess privilege. This privilege-centeredness means that answers can ramble and 
that any “power” differences between the researcher and the participant is dimin­
ished. You are able to see that this quality is somewhat applicable to every other 
quality, but it’s important to highlight. Is the information that is gathered authentic? 
So, as Marla listens to roommates talk about their conflicts, she shouldn’t look at 
her watch for time limits, she should avoid telling her participants to “stay focused 
on the question,” and she must take into consideration all of the dimensions of their 
responses. In doing so, she will be indulging an authenticity so often sought out in 
qualitative research. 
Student Voices
Alexandria
My uncle got back from serving in Iraq and I know very well he has PTSD. I’d like to 
do a study on those military people who are on “the front lines” and what happens to 
their relationships when they return home. My aunt and he always argue and before 
he left, they never yelled at all! I know it’d be stupid to study this using statistics, but I’d 
rather “survey his voice” to see what his experiences were and whether he feels he 
has some “issues” as a result of serving.

62     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
The preceding four characteristics are among many that are considered by quali­
tative researchers. We hope that as you review each theory, you understand that many 
are derived from the sorts of qualities we explained. 
Let's discuss a few more points relative to quantitative and qualitative research. 
In conducting quantitative research, one key difference between professional research­
ers and implicit ones rests on the definition of two terms: reliability and validity. 
­Researchers say that something has reliability when you can get the same results 
over time. For example, if Rolanda visited the organizations in two years and her 
observations there yielded the same results that they do now, her observations would 
reliability
the stability and 
predictability of an 
observation
The New York Times (online) in February 2011 asked the following question 
on the Room for Debate page: “Where are the women in Wikipedia?” The in­
troduction noted that although Wikipedia had more than 3.5 million articles 
in English, and advertises itself as open to all to edit, less than 15 percent of 
the contributors are women. Following this, eight posts attempted to answer 
the question as to why there was a gender gap on Wikipedia. The answers 
ranged depending on the theoretical perspective of the poster. For instance, 
Susan Herring noted that differing communication styles might account for 
the imbalance. She observed that “it’s a popular stereotype that men are be­
lieved to know more ‘hard facts,’ while women are better at nurturing and get­
ting along with people.” Yet, when Herring tested this stereotype she found 
that academic women posted slightly more factual messages online in discus­
sion forums than did academic men. What did differ, however, was communi­
cation styles or the way men and women posted their messages. She found 
that “men tended to assert their opinions as ‘facts,’ whereas women tended 
to phrase their informative messages as suggestions, offers, and other non-
assertive acts.” Herring concludes that Wikipedia doesn’t encourage wom­
en’s style and rather favors a more masculine, fact-asserting, style.
	
Joseph Reagle argues that women’s low participation on Wikipedia is 
based on subtle discrimination against women as seen in a culture of hack­
ers with geeky images and argumentative styles. Further, Reagle notes that 
Wikipedia’s openness allows misogyny that keeps women away. Others 
theorized that the lack of women on Wikipedia had more to do with power 
than gender, and others offered that the fight to make oneself “heard” might 
be unappealing to women. Terri Oda theorized that since women have less 
spare time than men, they might be discouraged by the time-consuming na­
ture of posting on Wikipedia.
Source: nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2011/02/02/where-are-the-women-in-wikipedia/trolls
-and-other-nuisances.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Explaining the Gender Gap 
on Wikipedia

	
The Research Process     63
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
be called reliable. You can imagine many reasons reliability is difficult to obtain. For 
instance, if there had been a big turnover in personnel at one of the organizations, 
reliability would be difficult. Professional researchers conduct statistical tests to judge 
reliability. Implicit scientists usually operate as though their observations are reliable 
without ever testing for it.
Reliability is important, but validity is even more critical to the empirical re­
search process. This is the case because observations can be reliable even if they 
are not valid, but the opposite is not true. To draw useful conclusions from research, 
observations must be both reliable and valid. Validity refers to the fact that the ob­
servation method actually captures what it is supposed to. For instance, Dr. Stevens 
is interested in communication accommodation, so she is having Rolanda listen 
to workplace conversations in hallways to find it. If people engage in extensive 
conversations where Rolanda can tape them, then probably the observations are 
able to measure the concept of interest. But, what if Rolanda tapes a lot of casual 
greetings that don’t show much of anything important to the notion of communica­
tion accommodation? Would Dr. Stevens be correct in concluding that people do 
not accommodate their communication according to status? Maybe not, if a lot 
of accommodating is going on behind closed doors where Rolanda didn’t go. In 
that case, the measurement (taped hallway conversations) was not valid because it 
didn’t capture what the researcher was interested in. Again, professional research­
ers are concerned about the validity of their observations and work diligently to 
demonstrate validity. Implicit researchers don’t think too much about validity un­
less they somehow discover that they have been basing their generalizations on a 
mistaken notion.
In qualitative research (Schwandt, Lincoln, & Guba, 2007) a different standard 
is applied to assess the value and rigor of a study. In particular, four areas are pro­
posed: credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability. The credibility 
criterion requires the research participant to assess the legitimacy of the findings. For 
instance, if members of the “Black Lives Matter” movement were interviewed for a 
study on discrimination, only the members participating in the study could provide 
credence to the research. Transferability is the extent to which a study’s results can be 
generalized to other settings or contexts. Qualitative researchers tend to avoid using 
“reliability” in their findings because they often don’t find it possible to measure the 
same thing twice with the same results. Therefore, they often contend that depend­
ability is more appropriate; researchers need to account for the dynamism of human 
behavior and that it continually changes. Finally, when research can be corroborated 
by others, it is confirmable, an effort to discover any challenges or modifications to 
the original study. Although there is some disagreement in the research community 
whether or not a different set of expectations should exist in qualitative research, 
there is value, nevertheless, in knowing that not all scholars think and act alike in 
their research.
Overall, the research process is similar for implicit and professional research­
ers, but professional researchers are more rigorous at every step of the process. Both 
draw conclusions based on their findings, and ultimately we are convinced by the 
arguments each advances about the strength of their process. When we believe that 
the results are based on good (reliable and valid) observations and careful logic, we 
accept the findings.
validity
the truth value of an 
observation

64     Chapter 3  •  Thinking About Theory and Research
T H I N K I N G  A B O U T  T H E O R Y  A N D  R E S E A R C H
We have briefly outlined a discussion of the primary ways to understand human 
behavior. Regardless whether a quantitative or qualitative approach is embraced, 
there is room for a great deal of creativity in the research process. You will encounter 
this as you read and understand the theories in this book.
Conclusion
This chapter introduced the concepts of theory and research and discussed their 
usefulness for examining communication behaviors. We have provided an initial 
definition of theory as well as explored some of the goals of theory. We dis­
cussed the frameworks for theories, or three approaches to knowing: empirical, 
interpretive, and critical. Each of these approaches answers questions about truth 
(ontology), gathering information (epistemology), and values (axiology) somewhat 
differently. Further, we discussed how theories can be created using three different 
guidelines: covering law, systems, and rules. We offered a list of criteria to help with 
evaluating different theories. We explained the research process briefly, discussing 
issues of induction (grounded theory), deduction (scientific method), and an over­
view of qualitative thinking in communication research. As we seek to understand 
communication, we turn to theory to help us organize the information that research 
provides.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Imagine a study that explores the intersection of narcis­
sism and Twitter. Describe how both a quantitative and qualitative researcher 
might go about studying this topic.
	
1.  How do you think a theory can help us understand the communication behav­
ior of subordinates and superiors in an organization? Use examples in your response.
	
2.  Provide some examples of ways you think like a theorist in your daily life.
	
3.  What is the difference between inductive and deductive logic? Give some 
examples of your everyday use of both induction and deduction.
	
4.  Do you see communication behavior as being lawlike, like a system, or rule 
governed? Explain your answer.
	
5.  How do a researcher’s beliefs about the world actually affect the ­research 
process? Be specific.
	
6.  How is a critical theory different from an empirical or humanistic ­theory? 
What do we learn about a theory by classifying it in terms of its ­approach to knowing?
	
7.  What factors do you think should go into determining whether a study should 
be qualitative or quantitative in nature?

65
Understanding the Dialogue
	
The Public    305
Chapter  18.  The Rhetoric    306
Chapter  19.  Dramatism    324
Chapter  20.  The Narrative Paradigm    338
	
The Media    353
Chapter  21.  Agenda Setting Theory    355
Chapter  22.  Spiral of Silence Theory    369
Chapter  23.  Uses and Gratifications  
Theory    387
Chapter  24.  Cultivation Theory    403
Chapter  25.  Cultural Studies    420
Chapter  26.  Media Ecology Theory    436
	
Culture and Diversity    457
Chapter  27.  Face-Negotiation Theory    459
Chapter  28.  Communication 
Accommodation Theory    476
Chapter  29.  Muted Group Theory    494
Chapter  30.  Feminist Standpoint 
Theory    510
	
The Self and Messages    67
Chapter    4.  Symbolic Interaction Theory    68
Chapter    5.  Coordinated Management  
of Meaning    83
Chapter    6.  Cognitive Dissonance Theory    104
Chapter    7.  Expectancy Violations Theory    119
	
Relationship Development    133
Chapter    8.  Uncertainty Reduction Theory    135
Chapter    9.  Social Exchange Theory    155
Chapter 10.  Social Penetration Theory    170
Chapter   11.  Relational Dialectics Theory    187
Chapter  12.  Communication Privacy 
Management Theory    204
Chapter  13.  Social Information Processing 
Theory    218
	
Groups, Teams, and Organizations    235
Chapter  14.  Groupthink    237
Chapter  15.  Structuration Theory    255
Chapter  16.  Organizational Culture  
Theory    272
Chapter  17.  Organizational Information  
Theory    287
P A R T 	Two

This page intentionally left blank

67
The Self and Messages
ACHIEVING MEANING IS CRITICAL IN OUR LIVES. We 
can’t get too far in our conversations unless we under­
stand others and can make ourselves understood. Under­
standing messages and co-creating meaning is what the 
communication process is all about. Meaning, therefore, 
requires us to assess our own thinking and also to be 
prepared to assess how others interpret our messages. 
Through our conversations with others, we gain a better 
sense of ourselves and a clearer understanding of the 
messages we are sending and receiving.
How we process meaning is the cornerstone of our first 
section of theories, which we have labeled “The Self and 
­Messages.” Four theories highlight the prominent role of in­
trapersonal communication in meaning making. First, Symbolic Interaction Theory 
explores the interplay between the self and the society in which we live. Symbolic 
Interactionists argue that people act toward other people or events on the basis 
of meaning they assign to them. Coordinated Management of Meaning is also con­
cerned with achieving meaning; however, the theory goes a bit further. It states 
that people will apply a personal set of rules to try to understand a social situation. 
Cognitive Dissonance Theory also looks at a person’s ability to manage meaning 
and the discomfort people feel when their beliefs are in conflict with each other. 
Expectancy Violations Theory looks specifically at what happens when someone 
does something different than what we’d expected. The theory suggests that we 
will judge a violation as either good or bad and act accordingly in the conversation.
The theories associated with the self and with messages deal with the ways 
people work toward gaining clarity and comprehension. Before, during, and 
after conversations with others, we process things in our own minds to deter­
mine meaning. As you read about these theories, you will encounter a number 
of important topics; namely, the influence of society on attitudes, communicator 
credibility, decision making, ­conversational rules, attraction, and liking.
Chapter 4
Symbolic Interaction 
Theory (Mead)  68
Chapter 5
Coordinated Management 
of Meaning (Pearce & 
­Cronen)  83
Chapter 6
Cognitive Dissonance 
­Theory (Festinger)  104
Chapter 7
Expectancy Violations 
­Theory (Burgoon)  119

68
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
 Roger Thomas stared in 
the mirror and straight­
ened his tie. He gave him­-
self a last glance and decided that he looked 
pretty professional. He was a little apprehensive 
about the new job, but he was excited, too. He 
had just graduated from Carlton Tech in Omaha, 
­Nebraska, with a degree in engineering, and he 
had landed a terrific job in Houston. This made 
for a lot of changes in his life. It was a bit over­
whelming. He was born and raised in central 
Nebraska, and he had never really been in a city 
bigger than Omaha until he went on his job inter­
views. Now he was living in Houston! It had all 
happened so quickly that Roger could almost feel 
his head spin.
	
Some of Roger’s concern centered on the 
fact that he was the first person in his family to 
graduate from college. As far back as he could 
recall, his family had been farmers, and although 
he knew that engineering was something he loved 
and excelled at, he felt a little confused about 
how to behave off the farm and in a completely 
new life. It also didn’t help that he was so far from 
home. Whenever he had felt stressed at Carlton, 
he had gone home to see his family, and they had 
usually made him feel better. He remembered one 
day in during his first year at Carlton when he 
felt impossibly out of place and uncomfortable. 
He really didn’t know how to act as a college stu­
dent. He went home for the weekend, and being 
in a familiar place with his family instantly gave 
him confidence. When he returned to Carlton on 
Monday, he felt much more self-assured.
	
Even though his parents had not attended 
college themselves, they respected education 
and communicated this to Roger. They expressed 
pride in him and his accomplishments. They also 
told him how his younger brothers looked up to 
him. This gave Roger confidence in himself, and 
he liked the idea that he was blazing a new trail 
for his family. Also, whenever he visited, he ap­
preciated his parents’ qualities; they were so 
calm and steady. As they went about their tasks, 
they demonstrated the peace and harmony that 
Roger wanted to find in his life’s work. After see­
ing them, he always had a renewed sense of self.
	
Now Roger decided he would have to get on 
Skype, but today he had to face his new office 
alone. Yet even thinking about his family made 
him feel a little stronger. He was smiling when 
he got to the office. He was greeted warmly by 
the office ­assistant, who showed him into the 
conference room. He waited there for the other 
new hires to join him. By 9:05 a.m. they were all 
gathered, and their boss came in to give them an 
orientation speech. While the boss was talking, 
Roger looked around at his colleagues.
	
There were 10 new employees in all, and 
they could not have been more different. Roger 
was the youngest person in the room by at least 
5 years. He was a bit alarmed when he realized 
Symbolic Interaction Theory
Based on the research of George Herbert Mead
Roger Thomas
Only selves have minds, that is, that cognition only belongs to selves, even 
in the simplest expression of awareness.
—George Herbert Mead
C H A P T E R	4

S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Symbolic Interaction Theory     69
that he must be the one with the least experi­
ence. He tried to calm himself down. He thought 
of his parents’ pride in him and how his brothers 
looked up to him. Then he remembered his favor­
ite teacher telling him that he was one of the best 
engineering students ever to go through Carlton. 
This helped Roger, and after the boss was fin­
ished speaking, he felt prepared to face the chal­
lenges of the job. During the break, he even had 
the confidence to begin talking to one of his new 
colleagues. He introduced himself and discovered 
that he didn’t have less experience than she did. 
Helen Underwood explained that she had lived in 
a small Texas farming town, where she worked 
for the government. After working for a couple 
of years, she had decided to go back to school 
and get a degree. Roger was amazed to meet 
someone else who came from a farming back­
ground. Helen told Roger she was ­really im­
pressed that he had graduated from ­Carlton. 
She knew it had a wonderful reputation, and 
its internship program was supposed to be 
the best in the country. Roger replied that 
he had been really lucky to go there and had 
loved working at his internship, where he had 
learned a great deal. Helen said she was ner­
vous about starting out at this firm, and Roger 
smiled and nodded.
	
This conversation made him feel much 
better about the challenges that were ahead 
of him. Even though Helen was in her forties, 
they had a great deal in common, and they 
were in the same situation at the firm. Roger 
thought they would be friends.
A
s Roger goes through preparations for the first day of his new job and as he speaks 
with his boss and his new colleague, he is engaging in the ­dynamic exchange of 
symbols. George Herbert Mead, who is credited with originating the Theory of Sym­
bolic Interaction, was fascinated with humans’ ability to use symbols; he proposed that 
people act based on the symbolic meanings that are communicated in a given situation. 
People use language and symbols in their everyday communication with others. Sym­
bols form the essence of Symbolic Interaction (SI) Theory, and the theory centers on the 
­relationship between symbols (or verbal and nonverbal codes) and interactions between 
people using these symbols. As Lorie Sicafuse and Monica Miller (2010) observe, gen­
erally in social encounters people do not respond to stimuli directly but, rather to sym­
bolic representations of stimuli, negotiated through interactions with others.
Ralph LaRossa and Donald C. Reitzes (1993) suggest that Symbolic Interaction 
Theory is “essentially . . . a frame of reference for understanding how humans, in con­
cert with one another, create symbolic worlds and how these worlds, in turn, shape 
human behavior” (p. 136). LaRossa and Reitzes reflect Mead’s contention about 
the interdependency between the individual and society. In fact, SI forms a bridge 
between theories focusing attention on individuals and theories attending to social 
forces. This is the case because of Mead’s belief in individuals as active, reflective 
participants in their social context. Dana Berkowitz and Linda Liska Belgrave (2010) 
concur and use SI to frame their study examining how drag queens in South Florida 
take their marginalized status and turn it into something empowering.
Mead published very little during his academic career, but after he died his students 
collaborated on a book based on his lectures. They titled the book Mind, Self, and Society 
(Mead, 1934), and it contains the foundations of Symbolic Interaction Theory. Interest­
ingly, the name Symbolic Interaction was not a creation of Mead’s. One of his students, 
Herbert Blumer, actually coined the term, but it was clearly Mead’s work that began the 
theoretical movement. Blumer published his own articles in a collection in 1969.

70     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
The ideas of SI have been very influential in communication studies because 
of Mead’s emphasis on the importance of communication and social encounters 
(e.g., Harrigan, Dieter, Leinwohl, & Marrin, 2015; Lucas & Steimel, 2009; Poe, 
2012). Communication scholars have found in SI a flexible framework allowing ap­
plication to numerous communication contexts. For instance, Pamela Poe (2012) 
explored how older people perceive health messages using SI as a framework; 
Patricia Book (1996) examined family narrative influences on a person’s ability to 
communicate about death. In addition, Daniel Flint (2006) found the theory useful 
in understanding marketing, Jan Fernback (2007) studied online social networking, 
Braden Leap (2015) discussed the interplay between the National Wildlife Refuge 
and SI, and Matthew Loveland and Delia Popescu (2011) extended the theory to an 
examination of web-based deliberations about democracy.
Several researchers observe, however, that Symbolic Interaction is a community 
of theories, rather than simply one theory. Many theorists refer to the Chicago School 
and the Iowa School as the two main branches of the theory. We can understand these 
branches and the overall contentions of SI by a brief examination of the history of the 
theory’s development. 
History of Symbolic Interaction Theory
The intellectual ancestors of Symbolic Interaction Theory were the early-
twentieth-century pragmatists, such as John Dewey and William James. The prag­
matists believed that reality is dynamic, which was not a popular idea at that time. 
In other words, they had different ontological beliefs than many other leading intel­
lectuals. The pragmatists advanced the notion of an emerging social structure and 
insisted that meanings were created in interaction. They were activists, or critical 
theorists, who saw science as a way to advance knowledge and improve society.
Two different universities, the University of Iowa and the University of Chicago, 
employed scholars who subscribed to the ideas of the pragmatists, and at both schools, 
SI was advanced. At Iowa, Manford Kuhn and his students were instrumental in affirm­
ing the original ideas of the theory and added to the theory as well. The Iowa group 
advocated some new ways of looking at the self, but their approach was viewed as ec­
centric; and not universally embraced by researchers. Thus, most of the principles and 
developments of Symbolic Interactionism stemmed from the Chicago School.
Both George Herbert Mead and his friend John Dewey were on the faculty at the 
University of Chicago. Mead had studied both philosophy and social science, and he 
lectured on the ideas that form the core of the Chicago School. As a popular teacher 
who was widely respected, Mead played a critical role in establishing the perspective 
of the Chicago School. He focused on an approach to social theory emphasizing the 
importance of communication to life and social encounters.
The two schools diverged primarily on methodology (or epistemology). Mead 
and his student at the University of Chicago, Herbert Blumer, contended that the 
study of human beings could not be conducted using the same methods as the study 
of other things. They advocated the use of case studies and ­histories and nondirective 
interviews. The Iowa School adopted a more ­quantitative approach to their stud­
ies. Kuhn believed that the concepts of SI could be operationalized, quantified, and 

	
Themes and Assumptions of Symbolic Interaction Theory     71
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
tested. To this end, Kuhn developed a technique called the Twenty-Statements Self-
Attitudes questionnaire. A research respondent taking the 20-statements test is asked 
to fill in 20 blank spaces in answer to the question, Who am I? Some of Kuhn’s col­
leagues at Iowa became disenchanted with this view of the self and broke away to 
form the “new” Iowa School. Carl Couch was one of the leaders of this new school. 
Couch and his associates began studying interaction behavior through videotapes of 
conversations, rather than simply examining the 20-statements test, although they 
still subscribed to a quantitative approach. Couch’s innovative research studies “led 
many to differentiate the Iowa School as ‘old’ and ‘new,’ representing Kuhn’s and 
Couch’s respective influence during those eras” (Carter & Fuller, 2015, p. 4).
Mead’s theory was rooted in a practical view of behavior (Fink, 2015). And, to 
be sure, in addition to the main schools of thought described above, several varia­
tions exist. In addition to these main schools of Symbolic Interaction, there are many 
variations. Many other theories that emphasize slightly different aspects of human 
interaction owe some debt to the central concepts of SI. Despite this variety, Mead’s 
central concepts remain relatively constant in most interpretations of SI. Conse­
quently, we will examine the basic assumptions and the key concepts that Mead 
outlined and Blumer later elaborated.
Theory at a Glance  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
People are motivated to act based on the meanings they assign to people, 
things, and events. These meanings are created in the language that peo­
ple use both in communicating with others (interpersonal context) and in 
self-talk (intrapersonal context), or their own private thought. Language al­
lows people to develop a sense of self and to interact with others in the 
community.
Themes and Assumptions of Symbolic Interaction Theory
Symbolic Interaction Theory is based on ideas about the self and its relationship to 
society. Because this statement can be interpreted very broadly, we wish to spend 
some time detailing the themes of the theory and, in the process, ­reveal the assump­
tions framing the theory.
Three assumptions frame Symbolic Interactionism (Carter & Fuller, 2015; 
LaRossa & Rietzes, 1993): 
∙∙
Individuals construct meaning via the communication process. 
∙∙
Self-concept is a motivation for behavior. 
∙∙
A unique relationship exists between the individual and society.
Each of these assumptions supports a number of different conclusions of SI. We 
discuss each assumption and the themes related to each.

72     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
First, Symbolic Interaction Theory holds that individuals construct meaning through 
the communication process because meaning is not intrinsic to a thing or idea. It takes 
people to make meaning. In fact, the goal of interaction is to create shared meaning. 
This is the case because without shared meaning communication is extremely dif­
ficult, if not impossible. Imagine ­trying to talk to a friend if you had to explain your 
own idiosyncratic meaning for every word you used, and your friend had to do the 
same. Of course, sometimes we assume that we and our conversational partner agree 
on a meaning only to discover that we are mistaken (Mom: “I said get ready as fast 
as you can.” Joe: “One hour was as fast as I could get ready.” Mom: “But I meant for 
you to be ready in 15 minutes.” Joe: “You didn’t say that!”), but, frequently, we can 
count on people having common meanings in a conversation.
Three conclusions can be derived from this assumption (Blumer, 1969; LaRossa & 
Reitzes, 1993). They include:
∙∙
Humans act toward others on the basis of the meanings those others have for them.
∙∙
Meaning is created in interaction between people.
∙∙
Meaning is modified through an interpretive process.
Humans Act Toward Others on the Basis of the Meanings Those Others Have for 
Them  This assumption explains behavior as a loop between stimuli and the re­
sponses people exhibit to those stimuli. Symbolic Interaction theorists such as Herbert 
Blumer were concerned with the meaning behind behavior. They looked for mean­
ing by examining psychological and sociological explanations for behavior. Thus, 
as researchers study the behaviors of Roger Thomas (from our beginning scenario), 
they see him making meanings that are congruent with the social forces that shape 
him. For instance, Roger assigns meaning to his new work experience by applying 
commonly agreed-upon interpretations to the things he sees. When he sees the age 
of his coworkers, he believes that they have more experience than he does because 
in the United States, we often equate age with experience. Furthermore, SI research­
ers are ­interested in the meaning that Roger attaches to his encounter with Helen 
(e.g., he is cheered up and believes they will become friends).
Meaning Is Created in Interaction Between People  Mead stresses the ­intersubjective 
basis of meaning. Meaning can exist, according to Mead, only when people share 
common interpretations of the symbols they exchange in interaction. Blumer (1969) 
explains that there are three ways of accounting for the origin of meaning. One ap­
proach regards meaning as being intrinsic to the thing. Blumer states, “Thus, a chair 
is clearly a chair in itself . . . the meaning emanates, so to speak, from the thing and as 
such there is no process involved in its formation; all that is necessary is to recognize 
the meaning that is there in the thing” (pp. 3–4).
A second approach to the origin of meaning sees it as “brought to the thing 
by the person for whom the thing has meaning” (Blumer, 1969, p. 4). This posi­
tion supports the popular notion that meanings are in people, not in things. In this 
perspective, meaning is explained by isolating the psychological elements within an 
individual that produce a meaning.
Mead’s theory takes a third approach to meaning, one that is congruent with 
many communication researchers, seeing it as occurring between people. Meanings 

	
Themes and Assumptions of Symbolic Interaction Theory     73
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
are “social products” or “creations that are formed in and through the defining activi­
ties of people as they interact” (Blumer, 1969, p. 5). Therefore, if Roger and Helen 
did not share a common language and did not agree on denotations and connotations 
of the symbols they exchanged, no meaning would result from their conversation. 
Furthermore, the meanings created by Helen and Roger are unique to them and their 
relationship. A study of how ­police officers symbolically construct the meaning of 
their jobs (Innes, 2002) ­illustrates this assumption by showing how the police talk 
about murders to the public and among themselves. 
Meaning Is Modified Through an Interpretive Process  Blumer notes that this in­
terpretive process has two steps. First, communicators point out the things that have 
meaning. Blumer argues that this part of the process is ­different from a psychological 
approach and consists of people engaging in communication with themselves. Thus, 
as Roger gets ready for work in the morning, he communicates with himself about the 
areas that are meaningful to him. The second step involves communicators selecting, 
checking, and transforming the meanings in the context in which they find themselves. 
When Roger talks with Helen, he listens for her remarks that are relevant to the areas 
he has decided are meaningful. Further, in his interpretation process, Roger depends on 
the shared social meanings that are culturally accepted. Thus, Roger and Helen are able 
to converse relatively easily because they both come from similar co-cultures.
The second assumption focuses on the importance of the self-concept, or the 
relatively stable set of perceptions that people hold of themselves. Self-concept is a 
motivation for human behavior. When Roger (or any social actor) asks the question 
“Who am I?”, the answer relates to self-concept. The characteristics Roger acknowl­
edges about his physical features, roles, talents, emotional states, values, social skills 
and limits, intellect, and so forth make up his self-concept. This notion is critical 
to Symbolic Interactionism. Furthermore, Symbolic Interaction is interested in the 
ways in which people develop self-concepts. The theory pictures individuals with 
active selves, grounded in social interactions with others (Figure 4.1). This theme 
suggests two conclusions, according to LaRossa and ­Reitzes (1993):
∙∙
Individuals develop self-concepts through interaction with others.
∙∙
Self-concepts provide an important motive for behavior.
Figure 4.1
How the 
Self-Concept 
Develops
You
Friends
Family
Teachers
Lovers
Strangers
Acquaintances
self-concept 
a relatively stable 
set of perceptions 
people hold about 
themselves

74     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Individuals Develop Self-Concepts Through Interactions with Others  This con­
clusion suggests that it is only through contact with others that we develop a sense 
of self. People are not born with self-concepts; they learn them through interactions. 
According to SI, infants have no sense of an individuated self. During the first year 
of life, children begin to differentiate themselves from their surroundings. This is the 
earliest development of the self-concept. Mead’s theory contends that this process 
continues through the child’s acquisition of language and the ability to respond to 
others and internalize the feedback he or she receives. Roger has a sense of self 
because of his contacts with his parents and his teachers and his colleagues. Their 
interactions with him tell him who he is. Granberg (2011) notes that, in the context of 
identity change following weight loss, it was not enough to successfully lose weight 
and sustain that over time. The identity change was not effected until interactions 
with others validated the new identity. 
Self-Concepts Provide an Important Motive for Behavior  The notion that beliefs, 
values, feelings, and assessments about the self affect behavior is a central tenet of the 
theory. Symbolic Interactionists contend that a unique relationship exists between the 
individual and society. Mead argues that because human beings possess a self, they 
are provided with a mechanism for self-interaction. This mechanism is used to guide 
behavior and conduct. It is also important to note that Mead sees the self as a process, 
not as a structure. Having a self forces people to construct their actions and responses, 
rather than simply expressing them. So, for instance, if you feel great about your 
abilities in your communication theory course, then it is likely that you will do well in 
the course. In fact, it is likely that you will feel confident in all of your courses. This 
process is often called the self-fulfilling prophecy, or the self-expectations that cause 
self-fulfilling 
prophecy
a prediction about 
yourself causing 
you to behave in 
such a way that it 
comes true

	
Themes and Assumptions of Symbolic Interaction Theory     75
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
a person to behave in such a way that the expectations are realized. When Roger re­
members his professor’s praise of his engineering abilities, he is ­setting himself up to 
make a self-fulfilling prophecy about his performance at his new job.
The final assumption pertains to the relationship between individual freedoms 
and social constraint. Symbolic Interactionists contend that a unique relationship 
exists between the individual and society. Mead and Blumer took a middle position 
on this issue. They tried to account for both order and change in social processes. 
Symbolic Interaction Theory as a comprehensive sociological theory recognizes 
that both social structural and personal factors influence behavior (Andersen & 
Taylor, 2016). Individuals are influenced in their thoughts and actions by social 
forces and processes, shared meanings and symbols, and by individual agency and 
self-motives (Mead, 1934). Donald Reitzes and his colleagues (2010) noted that 
because of this middle position, acknowledging the importance of both the individ­
ual and society, SI allowed them to examine how people quit smoking by providing 
an integrated framework of social factors and individual factors contributing to the 
“smoker identity.”
Conclusions related to this assumption include the following: 
∙∙
People and groups are influenced by cultural and social processes.
∙∙
Social structure is worked out through social interaction.
People and Groups Are Influenced by Cultural and Social Processes  This as­
sumption recognizes that social norms constrain individual behavior. For instance, 
when Roger gets ready for his first day at his new job, he selects a navy suit, a white 
oxford shirt, and a burgundy and blue striped tie. His preferred mode of dress would 
be jeans and a flannel shirt, but he chooses clothing that he feels will be socially ap­
propriate in the job context. Furthermore, culture strongly influences the behaviors 
and attitudes that we value in our self-concepts. In the United States, people who see 
themselves as assertive are likely to be proud of this attribute and reflect favorably 
on their self-concept. This is the case because the United States is an individualistic 
culture that values assertiveness and individuality. In some Asian cultures, coopera­
tion and community are highly valued, and the collective is more important than the 
individual. Thus, an Asian who sees herself as assertive might feel ashamed of such 
a self-concept.
For example, Mary Roffers (2002) notes that a college assignment to design a 
personal website was very difficult for a Hmong student in her class. The student 
explained that talking about oneself is not approved of in his culture and putting 
information about himself on the website felt inappropriate. In contrast, Jenny Davis 
(2010) found that people in the United States enjoyed creating a personal website for 
the control it gave them in negotiating their self-presentation. 
Social Structure Is Worked Out Through Social Interaction  This assumption 
mediates the position taken by the previous assumption. SI challenges the view that 
social structure is unchanging and acknowledges that individuals can modify so­
cial situations. For example, many U.S. workplaces have instituted “casual Fridays,” 
when the employees wear casual clothing rather than the typical, socially prescribed 
office wear. In this way, the participants in the ­interaction modify the structure and 

76     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Key Concepts
Previously we stated that the book outlining Mead’s thinking was titled Mind, Self, 
and Society. The title of the book reflects the three key elements of Symbolic Inter­
action. We describe each element here, noting how other important issues relate to 
these basic three. It will become clear that the three concepts overlap to some extent.
Mind
Mead defines mind as the ability to use symbols that have common social meanings, 
and Mead believes that humans must develop minds through interaction with oth­
ers. Infants cannot really interact with others until they learn language, or a shared 
system of verbal and nonverbal symbols organized in patterns to express thoughts 
and feelings. Language depends on what Mead calls significant symbols, or those 
symbols that evoke basically the same meaning for many people. Let’s use the infant 
as an example to illustrate the concept of significant symbols. When parents coo and 
talk to their baby, the infant may respond, but she does not really understand the 
meanings of the words her parents use. As she learns language, the infant exchanges 
shared or significant symbols and can anticipate the responses of others to the sym­
bols she uses.
By using language and interacting with others, we develop what Mead calls 
mind, and this enables us to create an interior setting for the society that we see op­
erating outside us. Thus, mind can be viewed as the way people internalize society. 
Yet mind does not just depend on society. Mead suggests that there is a reciprocal 
relationship: Mind reflects and creates the social world. As people learn language, 
Student Voices
Francisco
I liked the example about casual Fridays in the workplace. When I went to work at 
my current job there were a lot of rules I found difficult to follow. At first, it seemed 
like I was going to be constrained by the structure I found on the job. But, then I 
started to talk to people and we were able to make a couple of changes that makes 
working there a lot better for me. So, I think that assumption of SI is true. People have 
some constraints on them because of social rules, but people also have free will 
and can change some of the rules. If I hadn’t been able to change things, I probably 
would have quit—which would have been my choice, too.
mind 
the ability to use 
symbols with 
common social 
meanings
language 
a shared system 
of verbal and 
nonverbal symbols
significant symbols 
symbols whose 
meaning is generally 
agreed upon by 
many people
are not completely constrained by it. In other words, SI theorists believe that humans 
are choice makers. In our opening scenario, Roger chooses to introduce himself to 
Helen; he is not bound to do so by forces outside his control. In making choices, 
Roger exerts his individuality and demonstrates that he is not completely constrained 
by culture or situation.

	
Key Concepts     77
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
they learn the social norms and cultural values that constrain them. But they also 
learn ways to shape and change that social world through interaction. When children 
learn to talk, they may learn to say “please” and “thank you” as cultural indicators 
of politeness. Yet they may also create unique, personal ways of expressing polite­
ness, like saying “mayberry” and “yes you,” that become accepted phrases within a 
specific relationship.
Closely related to the concept of mind is the notion of thought, which Mead 
conceives of as an inner conversation. While Roger, in our opening story, pre­
pares for his new job, he reviews all the experiences that brought him to that time 
and place. He thinks about his family’s example and support, he remembers a 
favorite teacher, and he tells himself that he will be successful at this challenge. 
Through this intrapersonal conversation, Roger sorts out the meaning of his new 
situation. Mead holds that without social stimulation and interaction with oth­
ers, people would not be capable of holding inner conversations or sustaining 
thought.
According to Mead, one of the most critical activities that people accomplish 
through thought is role taking, or the ability to symbolically place oneself in an 
imagined self of another person. This process is also called “perspective taking” 
because it requires that one suspend one’s own perspective on an ­experience and in­
stead view it from the imagined perspective of another. For example, if Helen thought 
about Roger after their meeting and reflected on how he must have felt to be newer and 
younger than most of the other employees, then she would be role taking. Whenever 
we try to imagine how another person might view something or when we try to behave 
as we think another would, we are role taking. Mead suggests that role taking is a sym­
bolic act that can help clarify our own sense of self, even as it allows us to develop the 
capacity for empathy with others.
Self
Mead defines self as the ability to reflect on ourselves from the perspective of others. 
From this you can see that Mead does not believe that self comes from introspection 
or from simply thinking on one’s own. For Mead, the self develops from a particular 
kind of role taking—that is, imagining how we look to another person. Borrowing 
a concept originated by the sociologist Charles Cooley in 1912, Mead refers to this 
as the looking-glass self, or our ability to see ourselves in the reflection of another’s 
gaze. Cooley (1972) believes that three principles of development are associated with 
the looking-glass self: (1) we imagine how we appear to others, (2) we imagine their 
judgment of us, and (3) we feel hurt or pride based on these self-feelings. We learn 
about ourselves from the ways others treat us, view us, and label us. For example, 
when Rachel participated in the Great Bike Ride Across Iowa, she rode a three-speed 
bike 523 miles, from one end of the state to the other. The ride took one week, and 
after about three days, she felt she could not pedal a minute longer. But just as she 
was about to give up, a man biked up beside her and said, “You are amazing, going on 
this bike ride on a three-speed bike. You are just great. Keep it up.” As he pedaled off, 
she straightened up and thought to herself, “Well, I guess I am amazing. I can finish 
this ride!” The label the man gave her actually changed her feelings of exhaustion and 
made her see her accomplishments and herself differently and more positively.
thought 
an inner 
conversation
role taking 
the ability to 
put oneself in 
another’s place
self 
imagining how we 
look to another 
person
looking-glass self 
our ability to see 
ourselves as an­
other sees us

78     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Other researchers (e.g., Gilovich & Keltner, 2015; Ishida, 2016; Zhao, 2016) refer 
to the looking-glass self as reflected appraisals, or people’s perceptions of how others 
see them. Joanne Kaufman and Cathryn Johnson (2004) used the concept of reflected 
appraisals to examine how gay men and lesbians develop and manage their identities. 
They argue that SI is a much better framework for understanding identity construction 
than the stage models often ­applied to gay and lesbian identity development. Kaufman 
and Johnson found that gay men and lesbians who experienced positive reflected ap­
praisals (in regard to same-sex identity) had an easier time developing their identity 
than did those people who experienced negative reflected appraisals.
Mead’s notion of the looking-glass self implies the power that labels have on 
self-concept and behavior. This power represents a second type of self-fulfilling 
prophecy. Earlier in the chapter we spoke of self-fulfilling prophecies as being self-
expectations that affect behaviors. For example, Roger tells himself repeatedly that 
he will succeed at his job and then engages in behaviors that are congruent with his 
expectations of success. In turn, these behaviors will likely ensure that he will suc­
ceed. By the same token, negative self-talk can create situations where predictions 
of failure come true. The second type of self-fulfilling prophecy produced by labels 
is called the Pygmalion effect, and it refers to the expectations of others governing 
one’s actions.
The name comes from the myth of Pygmalion, on which a play of the same name 
and the musical My Fair Lady were based. The main character, Eliza, states that the 
difference between an upper-class lady and a poor flower girl is not in her behavior, 
but in how others treat her. This phenomenon was tested in a classic study by Rob­
ert Rosenthal and Lenore Jacobson (1968). In their study, Rosenthal and Jacobson 
told elementary-school teachers that 20 percent of their students were gifted. But 
the names of these “gifted” students were simply drawn at random. Eight months 
later these students showed significantly greater gains in IQ compared to the rest of 
the children in the class. Rosenthal and Jacobson concluded that this was the result 
of teachers’ expectations (and behaviors based on these expectations) toward the 
“gifted” children.
As Mead theorizes about self, he observes that through language people have 
the ability to be both subject and object to themselves. As subject, we act, and as 
object, we observe ourselves acting. Mead calls the subject, or acting self, the I and 
Pygmalion effect 
living up to or 
down to another’s 
expectations of us
I
the spontaneous, 
impulsive, creative 
self
Theory-Into-Practice
Symbolic Interaction Theory
Theoretical Claim: Individuals develop self-concepts through their interactions with 
others.
Practical Implication: Because Brianna has received ongoing supportive messages 
about her abilities in class, on the lacrosse field, and in the church choir, she evalu­
ates herself as able to meet nearly any challenge presented to her.
T*I*P

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     79
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
the object, or observing self, the Me. The I is spontaneous, impulsive, and creative, 
whereas the Me is more reflective and socially aware. The I might want to go out 
and party all night, whereas the Me might exercise caution and acknowledge the 
homework assignment that should be done instead of partying. Mead sees the self as 
a process that integrates the I and the Me.
Society
Mead argues that interaction takes place within a dynamic social structure that we 
call culture or society. Mead defines society as the web of social relationships that 
humans create. Individuals engage in society through behaviors that they choose 
actively and voluntarily. Society thus features an interlocking set of behaviors that 
individuals continually adjust. Society exists prior to the individual, but is also cre­
ated and shaped by the individual, acting in concert with others (Bern-Klug, 2009; 
Forte, 2004). 
Society, then, is made up of individuals, and Mead talks about two specific parts 
of society that affect the mind and the self. Mead’s notion of particular others refers 
to the individuals in society who are significant to us. These people are usually fam­
ily members, friends, work colleagues, and supervisors. We look to particular others 
to get a sense of social acceptability and a sense of self. When Roger thinks of his 
parents’ opinion of him, he is deriving a sense of self from particular others. The 
identity of the particular others and the context influence our sense of social accept­
ability and our sense of self. Often the expectations of some particular others conflict 
with those of others. For example, if Roger’s family wants him to work hard and be 
successful, whereas his friends want him to party and ignore work, he is likely to 
experience conflict.
The generalized other refers to the viewpoint of a social group or the culture 
as a whole. It is given to us by society, and “the attitude of the generalized other is 
the attitude of the whole community” (Mead, 1934, p. 154). The generalized other 
provides information about roles, rules, and attitudes shared by the community. The 
generalized other also gives us a sense of how other people react to us and of gen­
eral social expectations. This sense is influential in ­developing a social conscience. 
The generalized other may help mediate conflicts generated by conflicting groups of 
particular others. So if your friends want you to party and your family wants you to 
study, your knowledge of the importance of a college degree in your culture may lead 
you to decide in favor of your parents’ position.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Symbolic Interaction Theory has been a powerful theoretical framework for ­over 
80 years. The theory is derived from mostly qualitative work, although more recent 
applications have been quantitative in nature. The theory provides striking insights 
about human communication ­behavior in a wide variety of contexts. Without doubt, 
SI is well developed, beginning with the role of the self and progressing to an ex­
amination of the self in society. Yet the theory is not without its critics. As you 
Me
the reflective, 
socially aware self
society
the web of social 
relationships 
humans create and 
respond to
particular others
individuals who are 
significant to us
generalized other
the attitude of the 
whole community

80     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Scope
Some critics (e.g., van Krieken, Habibis, Smith, Hutchins, Martin, & Maton, 2014) 
complain that Symbolic Interaction Theory is too broad to be useful. This criticism 
centers on the evaluation criterion of scope. The theory covers too much ground, 
these critics assert, to fully explain specific meaning-making processes and com­
munication behaviors. It is helpful to have a theory that explains a wide variety of 
human behavior, but when a theory purports to explain everything, it will be vague 
and difficult to apply. This is the criticism leveled against the theory: It tries to do 
too much, and its scope needs to be refined. In response to this criticism, proponents 
explain that Symbolic Interaction is not one unified theory; rather, it is a framework 
that can support many specific theories.
Utility
The second area of criticism concerns the theory’s utility. Symbolic Interaction 
Theory has been faulted as not as useful as it could be for two reasons (Charmaz, 
2014). First, it focuses too much on the individual, and second, it ignores some 
important concepts that are needed to make the explanation complete. In the first 
case, critics observe that the theory’s focus on the individual’s power to create 
reality ignores the extent to which people live in a world not of their own mak­
ing. Symbolic Interaction theorists regard a situation as real if the actors define 
it as real. But Erving Goffman (1974) comments that this notion, although true, 
­ignores physical reality. For instance, if Roger and his parents agreed that he was 
an excellent engineer and that he was doing a wonderful job at his new firm, that 
would be reality for them. Yet it would not acknowledge the fact that Roger’s boss 
perceived his skills as inadequate and fired him. Others counter by citing that the 
theory treads a middle ground between freedom of choice and external constraint 
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  
Organizational |  Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  
Critical
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
think about Mead’s theory, consider three areas of evaluation: scope, utility, and 
testability.

	
Discussion Starters     81
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
(Sicafuse & Miller, 2010). They recognize the validity of constraint, but they also 
emphasize the importance of shared meanings.
Related to this is the suggestion that the theory ignores important concepts 
such as emotions and self-esteem. Critics observe that it does not explain the 
emotional dimension of human interaction. Further, critics note that Symbolic 
Interaction discusses how we develop a self-concept, but it does not have much 
to say about how we evaluate ourselves. These deficiencies render the theory 
less useful than it should be in explaining the self. With reference to the lack of 
attention to the emotional ­aspects of human life, theorists respond that ­although 
Mead does not emphasize these aspects, the theory itself can accommodate emo­
tions. In fact, some researchers have applied the theory to emotions with success. 
For instance, James Forte, Anne Barrett, and Mary Campbell (1996) used a Sym­
bolic Interaction perspective to examine grief. Their study ­examined the utility 
of a Social Interaction perspective in assessing and intervening in a bereavement 
group. The authors found that Symbolic Interaction was a useful model. Regarding 
self-esteem, Symbolic Interactionists agree that it is not a focus of the theory. But 
they point out that this is not a flaw in the theory; it is simply beyond the bounds 
of what Mead chose to investigate.
Testability
With regard to testability, critics comment that the theory’s broad scope renders its 
concepts vague. When so many core concepts are nominal (not directly observable), 
it is difficult to test the theory. Again, the response to this critique argues that Mead’s 
theory is a general framework, not a single theory. In more specific theories derived 
from SI, such as Role Theory, for example, the concepts are more clearly defined and 
are capable of falsification, satisfying the criterion of testability.
Closing
Symbolic Interaction has critics, but still remains an enduring theory. It supports re­
search in multiple contexts, and it is constantly being refined and extended. Further, 
it is one of the leading conceptual tools for interpreting social interactions, and its 
core constructs provide the foundation for many other theories that we discuss in this 
book. Thus, because Symbolic Interaction Theory has stimulated much conceptual 
thinking, it has accomplished a great deal of what theories aim to do.
Discussion Starters
tech quest: SI asserts that we learn about ourselves through interactions 
with others. And, specifically, Cooley’s concept of the looking-glass self 
notes that we see ourselves reflected in the gaze of others. How does it 
(or does it) affect the theory if the “gaze” is computer mediated? Can we learn 
about ourselves in the same way as the theory asserts if our interactions with 
others are conducted over social media sites such as Facebook, for instance? 

82     Chapter 4  •  Symbolic Interaction Theory
S Y M B O L I C  I N T E R A C T I O N  T H E O R Y
How would (or would) the theory have to change to accommodate these types 
of interactions?
	
1.  Discuss Roger Thomas’s initial reactions to his new job in Houston. How 
do they specifically relate to his sense of self?
	
2.  Do you believe Mead’s argument that one cannot have a self without social 
interaction? Would a person raised in relative isolation, for example, have little to 
no sense of self? Explain your answer.
	
3.  Has there been a time in your life when your sense of self changed dramati­
cally? If so, what contributed to the change? Did it have anything to do with others 
in your life?
	
4.  Do you agree with the emphasis that Mead places on language as a shared 
symbol system? Is it possible to interact with someone who speaks a completely 
different language? Explain your position.
	
5.  One of the criticisms of Symbolic Interaction Theory is that it puts too 
much emphasis on individual action and not enough emphasis on the constraints on 
individuals put upon them by society and their social position. What do you think 
about this criticism?
	
6.  Explain the difference between the concepts self-fulfilling prophecy and 
Pygmalion effect. How are they similar? How are they different?
	
7.  Do you agree that Mead’s theory is too broad in scope to really be consid­
ered a theory? Explain your answer.

83
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
Coordinated Management of Meaning
Based on the research of W. Barnett Pearce and Vernon Cronen
C H A P T E R	5
About four years ago, 
Jessie Taylor decided 
that she could not stay 
in her abusive marriage 
and left her husband, taking her two children—
Megan, 13, and Melissa, 9—with her. They cur­
rently live in a small apartment, and Jessie knows 
that the place is too cramped for the three of 
them. Yet, with her upcoming marriage to Ben 
Murphy, Jessie realizes that her living situation 
will change very soon. Her work hours as a new 
law clerk, however, are quite long; at times, she 
must be in the office for 12-hour days. As a re­
sult, Jessie’s children frequently require adult 
supervision in the early evening. Although Jessie 
would rather be at home with her children, 
she realizes that she cannot count on her ex-­
husband’s child support payments, and she must 
keep her job. She hopes that her approaching 
marriage to Ben will help ease the financial and 
familial challenges.
	
Ben Murphy’s wife died a little over a year 
ago. He parents his 4-year-old son, Patrick, but 
gets a great deal of help from both his mother 
and his two sisters. He feels badly about leav­
ing Patrick but is grateful that his family is there, 
because his job as a state trooper is frequently 
unpredictable. He never really knows when he 
is going to be called out for an emergency or 
when he will be asked to work overtime. Lately, 
however, his sisters have made some comments, 
and Ben worries that the baby-sitting may be 
turning into a burden for them and his mom. Ben 
is hoping that his marriage to Jessie will ease his 
reliance upon his mother and sisters.
	
One evening, as Ben and Jessie are discuss­
ing final wedding plans, the two begin to talk 
about their future family. Ben is very excited 
about raising three children and looks forward to 
his son, Patrick, having new siblings. Jessie, how­
ever, is nervous about the logistics of bringing 
new people into her children’s lives. Megan and 
Melissa are not pleased about their upcoming 
“blended” family. They have already had disagree­
ments with Ben about a number of issues, includ­
ing computer use and after-school activities.
	
As Ben and Jessie sit in front of the fire­
place, they openly talk about the challenges, 
obstacles, and frustrations that they know they 
will experience in just a few months. Ben ad­
mits, “First, I need to tell you that I love you and 
that should be the most important thing right 
now. And I really think that the kids will come 
around in time—probably after we’ve been to­
gether for a while. A lot of families in our situa­
tion start out like this. There’s a lot of chaos and 
then things begin to settle down. Hey, we’re not 
all that unusual.”
The Taylor-
Murphys
I am prepared to argue that the quality of our personal lives and of our 
social worlds is directly related to the quality of communication in which 
we engage.
—Barnett Pearce

84     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
M
any people take their conversations for granted. When individuals speak to one 
another, they often fall into predictable patterns of talk and rely on prescribed 
social norms. To understand what takes place during a conversation, Barnett Pearce 
and Vernon Cronen developed Coordinated Management of Meaning (CMM). For 
Pearce and Cronen, people communicate on the basis of rules. Although we will 
address this later in the chapter, rules help us not only in our communication with oth­
ers but also in our interpretation of what others are communicating to us. CMM helps 
explain how individuals co-create the meaning in a conversation. Jessie Taylor and 
Ben Murphy, for instance, are beginning to forge rules and patterns that will govern 
their new family’s interaction.
	
For our purposes, Coordinated Management of Meaning generally refers to 
how individuals establish rules for creating and interpreting meaning and how those 
rules are enmeshed in a conversation where meaning is constantly being coordi­
nated. Human communication, therefore, is guided by rules. Cronen, Pearce, and 
Harris’s (1982) summary of CMM is informative here: “CMM theory describes 
human actors as attempting to achieve coordination by managing the ways messages 
take on meaning” (p. 68). And it is important to note that Pearce (2007) succinctly 
underscores the transactional nature of communication we identified in Chapter 1 
by noting: “CMM invites you to ask, of the passing moment, ‘What are we making 
together?’” (p. xi). Clearly, the theory requires an understanding of the co-creation 
of “social worlds” that Pearce believes exist. ­Finally, Pearce (2012) notes, “CMM 
does things to us; it changes in constructive ways the way we think and relate to 
others” (p. 17). As we ­discuss this theory, we will underscore a number of issues 
associated with it.
All the World’s a Stage
To describe life experiences, Pearce and Cronen (1980) use the metaphor “undirected 
theater” (p. 120). They believe that in life, as in theater, a number of actors are fol­
lowing some sort of dramatic action and other actors are producing “a cacophonous 
bedlam with isolated points of coherence” (p. 121). Pearce (1989) describes this 
metaphor in eloquent detail:
Imagine a very special kind of theater. There is no audience: everyone is “on 
stage” and is a participant. There are many props, but they are not neatly or­
ganized: In some portions of the stage are jumbles of costumes and furniture; 
in others, properties have been arranged as a set for a contemporary office; in 
yet another, they depict a medieval castle. . . . Actors move about the stage, 
encountering sets, would-be directors, and other actors who might provide a 
supporting cast for a production of some play. (p. 48)
The theorists believe that in this theatrical world, there is no one grand director, but 
rather a number of self-appointed directors who manage to keep the chaos in check.
	
Jessie agrees. “Yeah, I know we’re not the 
first family arranged this way. And I know things 
will work out. But when? And how are we all 
going to keep from screaming at each other while 
we work it all out? Adjusting can take some time.” 
Her words are greeted by a warm hug from Ben.

	
Assumptions of Coordinated Management of Meaning     85
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
	
Conversational flow is essentially a theater production. Interactants direct their 
own dramas, and, at times, the plots thicken without any script. For many people, 
how they produce meaning is equivalent to their effectiveness as communicators. To 
continue the metaphor, when actors enter a conversation, they rely on their past act­
ing experiences to achieve meaning. How they perceive the play is their reality, but 
the roles they play in the production are not known until the production begins. To 
this end, the actors are constantly coordinating their scripts with one another.
	
The theatrical metaphor was later reconsidered by Pearce (2007). He noted that it 
was somewhat incomplete as he considered the ebb and flow of conversations and the 
unpredictability of dialogue. As you might imagine, conversations are frequently cha­
otic. Pearce and Cronen indicate that the actors who are able to read another’s script will 
attain conversational coherence. Those who do not will need to coordinate their mean­
ing. Of course, even agreeing upon what conversational script to follow can be difficult. 
­Jessie and Ben, for example, may agree that achieving family harmony is essential, but 
may not agree on how to achieve that harmony. As Pearce (1989) observes, people may 
battle it out with respect to what script they will enact and then continue to argue about it.
	
This notion of a creative theatrical production was in stark contrast to the perspec­
tive held by other researchers when CMM was conceptualized. Early discussions of 
CMM centered on the need to break away from the empirical tradition that charac­
terized much theory building at that time. To shape their theory, Pearce and Cronen 
looked to a number of different disciplines, including philosophy (Wittgenstein), psy­
chology (James), and education (Dewey). Further, at the heart of CMM, according to 
Catherine Creede, Beth Fisher-Yoshida, and Placida Gallegos (2012), is the following 
question: What are we making together? Before delving into the theory’s central fea­
tures, we first consider three assumptions of the Coordinated Management of Meaning.
Theory at a Glance  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
In conversations and through the messages we send and receive, people 
co-create meaning. As we create our social worlds, we employ various rules 
to construct and coordinate meaning. That is, rules guide communication 
between people. CMM focuses on the relationship between an individual and 
his or her society. Through a hierarchical structure, people come to organize 
meaning of literally hundreds of messages received throughout the day.
Assumptions of Coordinated Management of Meaning
CMM focuses on the self and its relationship to others; it examines how an ­individual 
assigns meaning to a message. The theory is especially important ­because it focuses 
on the relationship between an individual and his or her ­society (Philipsen, 1995). 
Referring back to the theater metaphor, consider the fact that all actors must be able 
to improvise—using their personal repertoire of acting experiences—as well as ref­
erence the scripts that they bring into the drama.

86     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
	
Human beings, therefore, are capable of creating and interpreting meaning. In 
addition to this, there are a few assumptions as well:
∙∙
Human beings live in communication.
∙∙
Human beings co-create a social reality.
∙∙
Information transactions depend on personal and interpersonal meaning.
	
The first assumption of CMM points to the centrality of communication. That 
is, human beings live in communication. Communication is, as noted in Chapter 1, a 
dynamic process that is more than talk; communication, according to CMM, is also 
a way of creating and doing things (Pearce, 2007). Pearce (1989) claims that “com­
munication is, and always has been, far more central to whatever it means to be a 
human being than had ever been supposed” (p. 3). Further underscoring the interplay 
between communication and CMM, Paige Marrs (2012) advances that communica­
tion is the “substance of human community” and that CMM is an essential part of 
the discourses embedded in these communities. Finally, in CMM, Christine Oliver 
(2014) contends that communication can be identified as a “performative phenom­
enon” (p. 273).
	
We live in communication. In adopting this claim, Pearce rejects traditional 
models of the communication process such as the linear model to which we ­referred 
in Chapter 1. Rather, CMM theorists propose a counterintuitive ­orientation: They 
believe that social situations are created by interactions. ­Because individuals cre­
ate their conversational reality, each interaction has the potential to be unique. This 
perspective requires CMM adherents to cast aside their preexisting views of what 
it means to be a communicator. Further, CMM theorists call for a reexamination 
of how individuals view communication because “Western intellectual history has 
tended to use communication as if it were an odorless, colorless, tasteless vehicle of 
thought and expression” (Pearce, 1989, p. 17). Pearce and Cronen contend that com­
munication must be reconfigured and contextualized in order to begin to understand 
human ­behavior. When researchers begin this journey of redefinition, they start in­
vestigating the consequences of communication, not the behaviors or variables that 
accompany the communication process (Cronen, 1995a).
	
To illustrate this assumption, consider our opening story. Although Jessie and 
Ben believe that they have covered most of the details associated with merging their 
families, many more issues will appear as the families come together. Family mem­
bers will create new realities for themselves, and these realities will be based on com­
munication. Conversations will frequently be determined by what the family knows 
as well as what the family does not know. That is, parents and children will work 
through unexpected as well as expected joys and sorrows. Like many families in 
their situation, they may stumble upon areas they never considered. The two families 
will be working from different sets of conversation rules and therefore may arrive at 
very different conclusions as they discuss important issues.
	
A second assumption of CMM is that human beings co-create a social reality. 
Although we implied this assumption earlier, it merits delineation. The belief 
that people in conversations co-construct their social reality is called ­social 
constructionism. Pearce (2007) is clear in his social construction advocacy. He ob­
serves: “Rather than ‘What did you mean by that?’ the relevant questions are ‘What 
social 
constructionism
belief that people 
co‑construct their 
social reality in 
conversations

	
Assumptions of Coordinated Management of Meaning     87
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
are we making together?’ ‘How are we making it?’ and ‘How can we make better 
social worlds?’” (pp. 30–31). These social worlds require an understanding of social 
reality, which refers to a person’s beliefs about how meaning and action fit within 
his or her interpersonal encounters. When two people engage in a conversation, they 
each come with a host of past conversational experiences from previous social re­
alities. Current conversations, however, elicit new realities because two people are 
arriving at the conversation from different vantage points. In this way, two people 
co-create a new social reality. 
	
Sometimes, these communication experiences are smooth; at other times they 
are cumbersome. As we alluded to earlier and as Gerry Philipsen (1995) concludes, 
“Many interactions are more messy than clean and more awkward than elegant” 
(p. 19). Our opening example of Jessie and Ben illustrates this ­assumption. Although 
Jessie and Ben have been dating for some time and are preparing for their wedding, 
CMM theorists believe that they will continue to co-create a new social reality. For 
instance, the two will have to manage the issue of Jessie’s daughters’ reluctance to 
support the marriage. As Jessie and Ben discuss the matter in front of the fireplace, 
regardless of how they have previously discussed it, they create a new social reality. 
Perhaps some new ­issues will emerge—child support, Jessie’s job, the age of the 
children, Jessie’s ex-spouse, and so forth—or perhaps Jessie, Ben, or both will adopt 
new perspectives on their future family makeup. In any event, the social reality that 
the two experience will be a shared reality.
social reality
a person’s beliefs 
about how meaning 
and action fit within 
an interpersonal 
interaction
Student Voices
Alejandro
The idea that we “live” in communication was really a simple thing for me to under­
stand. I look around me. I listen. I talk. I think about the patterns that I’m establishing 
with ­others and that others are establishing with still other people. I think about 
how I construct my communication realities. And, then, I begin to see part of what 
CMM is. We are “communication-centric,” even as I think about where I came from 
(Mexico). I think that communication is very real, regardless of where you’re born 
or raised. And, I like the fact that CMM puts communication at the center of all the 
relationships we have.
The third assumption guiding CMM relates to the manner in which people con­
trol conversations. Specifically, Pearce (2012) concluded that “communication is 
about meaning” (p. 4) and that meanings are constantly changing from interaction to 
interaction. 
	
Transactions depend on personal and interpersonal meaning, as distinguished 
many years ago by Donald Cushman and Gordon Whiting (1972). Personal meaning 
is defined as the meaning achieved when a person interacts with another and brings 
into the interaction his or her unique experiences. Cushman and Whiting suggest 
that personal meaning is derived from the ­experiences people have with one another, 
and yet “it is improbable that two individuals will interpret the same experience in a 
personal meaning
the meaning 
achieved when 
a person brings 
his or her unique 
experiences to an 
interaction

88     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
similar manner . . . and equally improbable that they would select the same symbolic 
patterns to represent the experience” (p. 220). Personal meaning helps people in dis­
covery; that is, it not only allows us to discover information about ourselves, but also 
aids in our discovery about other people.
When two people agree on each other’s interpretation, they are said to achieve 
interpersonal meaning. Cushman and Whiting (1972) argue that interpersonal 
meaning can be understood within a variety of contexts, including families, small 
groups, and organizations. They note that interpersonal meaning is co-constructed by 
the participants. Achieving interpersonal meaning may take some time because re­
lationships are complex and deal with multiple communication issues. A family, for 
example, may be challenged with financial problems one day, child-raising concerns 
the next, and elderly care the next. Each of these scenarios may require family mem­
bers to engage in unique communication pertaining to that particular family episode.
Personal and interpersonal meanings are achieved in conversations, frequently 
without much thought. Perceptive individuals recognize that they cannot engage in 
specialized personal meaning without explaining themselves to others. Cushman and 
Whiting tell us that interpersonal meaning must often be negotiated so that rules 
of meanings move from “in-house usage” to “standardized usage.” Sharing mean­
ing for particular symbols, however, is complicated by the fact that the meaning of 
many symbols is left unstated. For instance, consider a physician specializing in 
HIV/AIDS who discusses recent drug therapies with a group of college students. As 
the physician discusses HIV/AIDS, she must talk in laypersons’ terms so that audi­
ence members will understand. However, despite honest efforts at avoiding jargon, 
it may be nearly impossible to avoid it completely. That is, as much as the physician 
tries, time may not permit her to fully explain the meaning of all specialized terms.
These three assumptions form a backdrop for discussing CMM. As these as­
sumptions indicate, the theory rests primarily on the concepts of communication, 
social reality, and meaning. In addition, we can better understand the theory by ex­
amining a number of other issues in ­detail. Among these issues is the manner in 
which meaning is categorized.
The Hierarchy of Organized Meaning
You already have learned that the essence of communication is meaning and that “we 
live our lives filled with meanings, and one of our life challenges is to manage those 
meanings” (Pearce, 2012, p. 4). Therefore, according to CMM theorists, human be­
ings organize meanings in a hierarchical manner. This is one of the core features of 
CMM, so we will discuss this at length. First we ­examine the meaning behind this 
claim, and then we look at the framework ­associated with the assumption. We have 
highlighted the hierarchy in Figure 5.1.
Suggesting that people organize meaning implies that they are able to determine 
how much weight to give to a particular message. It is true that people are constantly 
being bombarded with stimuli and that they must be able to ­organize the stimuli for 
communication to occur. This thinking is relevant to CMM. Imagine, for instance, 
Ian arriving at his new job on Monday morning. Throughout the day he will be 
exposed to a number of messages. From understanding company policy on medical 
interpersonal 
meaning 
the result when 
two people agree 
on each other’s 
interpretations of 
an interaction

	
The Hierarchy of Organized Meaning     89
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
leaves to overtime pay to computer safety, Ian must manage countless messages. As 
he returns home at the end of the day, he must organize the messages. In some way, 
he must try to coherently frame literally hundreds of messages from his day.
The process of organizing for Ian is similar to what many people experience 
when they speak to others. When people come together, they must try to handle not 
only the messages that are sent to them from others, but also the messages that they 
send to others. This helps people understand the full meaning of the messages. Let’s 
consider how Pearce and Cronen (1980) illustrate the management of meaning.
CMM theorists propose six levels of meaning: content, speech acts, episodes, 
relationship, life scripts, and cultural patterns. As you read about the levels, keep in 
mind that higher levels help us to interpret lower-level meanings. That is, each type 
is embedded in the other. In addition, Pearce and Cronen prefer to use this hierarchy 
as a model rather than as a true ordering system. They believe that no true ordering 
is appropriate because people differ in their interpretation of meaning at various 
levels. Further, Illene Wassermann (2012), invoking the hierarchy of meaning, states 
that communication occurs at more than one level at a time and that the meaning 
that is created by ­individuals are embedded in each level of the hierarchy. CMM 
theorists, then, propose a hierarchy to help us understand the sequencing of meaning 
in different people.
Content
The content level specifies the first step of converting raw sensory data into some 
meaning. For instance, during your break at work, you may convert the symbols 
being observed or sent into some sort of meaning by their content. You may group 
information you hear about the boss in one category, information about the work­
place environment in a second category, and information about the pay scale in a 
third category. For Ben Murphy in our chapter’s opening, the words “I love you” 
convey information about Ben’s reaction to Jessie, but the content of his words 
Cultural Patterns
Life Scripts (Sense of Self)
Relationship (Contract)
Episodes
Speech Act
Content
Figure 5.1
Hierarchy of 
Meaning
content
the conversion 
of raw data into 
meaning

90     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
requires this additional level of meaning. Imagine the content level as a message 
without a context (Pearce, Cronen, & Conklin, 1979).
Speech Act
In discussing the second level of meaning, Pearce (2007) describes speech acts as 
a “class of very familiar things, such as promises, threats, insults, speculations, 
guesses, and compliments” (p. 105). These are actions we perform by speaking. 
Speech acts communicate the intention of the speaker and indicate how a particular 
communication should be taken. Using our earlier example of Ben Murphy, when 
Ben states, “I love you,” to Jessie, the phrase communicates more than an assertion. 
The phrase carries an affectional tone because of the speech act (Austin, 1975).
Furthermore, Pearce (1994) notes that “speech acts are not things; they are 
configurations in the logic of meaning and action of conversations, and these con­
figurations are co-constructed” (p. 119). Therefore, we should be aware that two 
people co-create the meaning of the speech act, a belief we talked about in our ear­
lier assumption of CMM. Frequently, the speech act is defined both by the sender 
and by the response to what others have said or done. As Pearce concludes, “You 
cannot be a ‘victim’ unless there is a ‘victimizer’” (p. 119). In addition, the re­
lational history must be taken into consideration when interpreting a speech act. 
It is difficult to figure out what a message means unless we have a sense of the 
dynamics between the participants. And it’s important to point out that speech acts 
don’t always involve speech; Pearce acknowledges the importance of nonverbal 
communication, too.
Episodes
To interpret speech acts, Pearce and Cronen (1980) discuss episodes, or communica­
tion routines that have definable beginnings, middles, and endings. In a sense, episodes 
describe contexts in which people act. Irene Stein (2012) states that episodes can be 
small, such as discernible parts of a conversation, or large, such as the entire discussion 
between people. At this level, we begin to see the influence of context on meaning. 
Episodes vary tremendously—from picking up a hitchhiker to talking to your doctor 
about a diagnosis to having an affair with a coworker to fighting with your colleague 
over the direction of a project. Pearce (2007) states that episodes are sequences of 
speech acts that are “linked together as a story” (p. 132). Individuals in a communication 
exchange may differ in how they punctuate an episode. Punctuation pertains to the 
process of identifying when an episode begins or ends. Episodes show how interactions 
are organized into a meaningful pattern. Pearce and Conklin (1979) clearly note that 
“coherent conversation requires some degree of coordinated punctuation” (p. 78). Dif­
ferent punctuation, however, may elicit different impressions of the episode, thereby 
creating “inside” and “outside” perspectives of the same episode. For example, Ben 
Murphy and Jessie Taylor may have punctuated differently their previous discussions 
about their future together. Ben may believe that dealing with the children will be better 
left until after their wedding, whereas Jessie may believe that the issue should be dealt 
with beforehand. Their subsequent episodes, therefore, will be partly determined by the 
way they handle their punctuation differences. Pearce (2005) believes that episodes are 
speech act
action we perform 
by speaking (e.g.,  
questioning, 
complimenting, or 
threatening)
punctuation
process of identifying 
when an episode 
begins or ends
episodes
communication 
routines that have 
recognized 
beginnings, middles, 
and endings

	
The Hierarchy of Organized Meaning     91
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
fairly imprecise because the actors in social situations find themselves in episodes that 
vary tremendously. He notes that episodes are also culturally based in that people bring 
to their interactions cultural expectations for how episodes should be executed. Finally, 
episodes can be highly structured within a social unit (e.g., family) that contains rituals, 
roles, or prescribed behavior.
Relationship
The fourth level of meaning is the relationship, whereby two people recognize their 
potential and limitations as relational partners.
Pearce (2007) expands our traditional understanding of relationship. In addition 
to partnerships between and among friends, spouses, and family members, he also 
believes that relationships can include “larger, less personal relationships such as 
corporations, cities, religions, and tennis clubs” (p. 200). He asserts that, in a sense, 
we’re all “related” because of genes, language, and the planet’s forces on each of us. 
These all coalesce to connect us, willingly or unwillingly.
	
Relationships are like contracts, which set guidelines and often prescribe behavior. 
In addition, relationships suggest a future. Few people take the time to outline rela­
tional issues unless they are concerned about their future together. 
 The relationship level suggests relational boundaries in that parameters are es­
tablished for attitudes and behavior—for instance, how partners should speak to each 
other or what topics are considered taboo in their relationship. Pearce and Cronen 
(1980) note that boundaries distinguish between “we” and “they,” or those people 
who are included in the contract and those who are not. The theorists use the term 
enmeshment to describe the extent to which people identify themselves as part of 
the relational system. Pearce (2012) further contends that enmeshment is the extent 
to which individuals get “caught up” in their patterns of communication. He asserts 
that people are enmeshed in a variety of different social systems, each comprised of 
various logics and meanings.
A relationship may prove invaluable as two people discuss issues that are espe­
cially challenging. For instance, there will certainly be some difficult discussions once 
the Murphy-Taylor family resides together. Knowing the relational boundaries and the 
expectations the family members hold for themselves as well as for one another will 
be important as they become a stepfamily. Although upcoming events will be trying 
for this family, they will be managed more effectively with an understanding of the 
contract.
Life Scripts
Clusters of past and present episodes are defined as life scripts. Think of life 
scripts as autobiographies that communicate with your sense of self. You are who 
you are because of the life scripts in which you have engaged. And how you view 
yourself over your lifetime affects how you communicate with others. Imagine 
the differences between Ben Murphy’s and Jessie Taylor’s life scripts. Their past 
episodic experiences will be very informative as they try to deal with their future 
plans together. Ben comes from a very supportive and loving family, so he may 
expect conversations with Jessie to be characterized by these nurturing episodes. 
relationship
agreement and 
understanding 
between two people
enmeshment
the extent to which 
partners identify 
themselves as part 
of a system
life scripts
clusters of past or 
present episodes 
that create a system 
of manageable  
meanings with 
others

92     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
In fact, it is likely that his experiences as a single father and his perceptions of 
parenthood are less troubled because of past episodes co-created with his bio­
logical family. Jessie, however, did not have an affirming relationship with her 
ex-husband. Consequently, her past debilitating episodes influence how she now 
communicates with Ben. Moreover, in her interactions with Ben, she may expect 
something very different from what Ben expects from her. We should point out, 
though, that life scripts include those episodes that two people construct together. 
So, once Ben and Jessie begin to co-create their social world, they will simultane­
ously co-create a life script.
Cultural Patterns
When discussing cultural patterns, Pearce and Cronen (1980) contend that ­people 
identify with particular groups in particular cultures. Also, each of us behaves 
according to the actual values of our society. These values pertain to sex, race, class, 
and spiritual spirituality, among others. Cultural patterns, or archetypes, can be 
described as “very broad images of world order and [a person’s] relationship to 
that order” (Cronen & Pearce, 1981, p. 21). That is, an individual’s relationship 
to the larger culture is relevant when interpreting meaning. Speech acts, episode 
relationships, and life scripts are all understood within the cultural level. This is 
even more paramount when two people from two ­different cultures try to under­
stand the meaning of each other’s words. For ­instance, Myron Lustig and Jolene 
Koester (2015) point out that the U.S. culture puts a premium on individualism, 
or the notion that the interests of an indi­vidual are put before the interests of 
the group. Individualism focuses on independence and initiative. Other cultures 
(such as Colombia, Peru, and Taiwan) ­emphasize collectivism, or the notion that 
cultural patterns
images of the world 
and a person’s 
relationship to it
individualism
prioritizing personal 
needs or values 
over the needs or 
values of a group 
(I-identity)
collectivism
a cultural value that 
prioritizes group 
needs or values 
over the needs 
or values of an 
individual  
(we-identity)

	
Charmed and Strange Loops     93
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
the interests of the group are put ­before the ­interests of the individual. Diffi­
culty may arise when two people ­representing two different orientations interpret 
meaning from their particular vantage point. Culture, therefore, requires shared 
meanings and values.
The levels of meaning espoused by Pearce and Cronen are critical to consider 
when conversing with another. However, keep in mind that the theorists contend that 
their purpose is to model the way people process information, not to establish a true 
ordering. Also, remember that individuals vary in their past and present interactions. 
Therefore, some people will have highly complex hierarchies and others will have 
simplified hierarchies. In addition, some people are able to interpret complex mean­
ing, while others are not as proficient. Fisher-Yoshida (2012) succinctly summarizes 
the utility of the hierarchy by stating the model “reflects that communication occurs 
at more than one level at the same time, and the meaning we make is embedded in 
the contexts that went before and the contexts that follow” (p. 228). The hierarchy of 
meaning is an important framework in helping us understand how meaning is coor­
dinated and managed. 
Charmed and Strange Loops
The hierarchy of meaning presented earlier suggests that some lower levels can 
reflect back and affect the meaning of higher levels. Pearce and Cronen (1980) have 
termed this process of reflexivity a loop. Because the hierarchy cannot go on forever, 
the theorists propose that some levels reflect back. This supports their view that com­
munication is an ongoing, dynamic, and ever-changing process, a topic we discussed 
in Chapter 1.
When loops are consistent throughout the hierarchy, Pearce and Cronen identify 
them as a charmed loop. Charmed loops occur when one part of the hierarchy 
confirms or supports another level. Furthermore, the rules of meaning are consistent 
and agreed upon throughout the loop. Figure 5.2 illustrates a charmed loop. Note 
that there is consistency, or confirmation, in the loop. To illustrate, consider the 
following example. You hired a painter to repaint the first floor of your home. You 
agreed to pay the painter by the hour, and when you receive the bill you are shocked 
at the price. You confront the painter, stating that you observed a lot of “wasted” 
hours and that you are not going to pay the entire bill. The painter is prepared to 
challenge your judgment.
This encounter between painter and client exemplifies a charmed loop. In this 
case, the episode, or event, is the disagreement you both have over the costs of paint­
ing your home. Because your life script is your sense of self, your life script in this 
encounter is consistent with your passion to stand up for what you believe. In this 
example, the cultural pattern suggests that the two of you—painter and client—enter 
the conflict with two different views of the situation. The painter wants to get paid for 
a service and the client wants to feel satisfied with the service. In this brief example, 
the loop is charmed in that there is consistency among the levels (episode, life script, 
cultural pattern) in the hierarchy. In other words, the encounter makes sense in that 
your willingness to challenge the bill is consistent with who you are. And the way 
loop
the reflexiveness 
of levels in the 
hierarchy of 
meaning
charmed loop
rules of meaning 
are consistent 
throughout the loop

94     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
you communicate with the painter is consistent with the cultural expectations of this 
type of relationship (i.e., you expect efficiency). The rules of meaning in this interac­
tion are confirmed throughout the loop.
At times, however, some episodes are inconsistent with levels higher up in the 
hierarchy. Pearce and Cronen have called this a strange loop. Strange loops usually 
align with intrapersonal communication in that individuals engage in a sort of in­
ternal dialogue about their self-destructive behaviors. In a basic sense, Creede et al. 
(2012) contend that strange loops refer to some sort of a “stuck experience” that 
people have when they cycle through patterns that are, well, rather oppositional. We 
illustrate strange loops in Figure 5.3.
To exemplify strange loops, the theorists offer the case of an alcoholic whose 
bouts with sobriety are followed by bouts of drinking. We present this strange loop 
in Figure 5.4. In this strange loop, confusion sets in. The life script of an alcoholic, 
for instance, suggests that drinking is out of control, so the alcoholic refuses to drink. 
But once the drinking stops, an alcoholic may feel a sense of control, so drinking be­
gins again. In this example, the life script is the person’s alcoholism, which manages 
meaning (or drinking) in particular episodes. The episodes are part of the alcoholic’s 
life script. It’s apparent, then, that the strange loop will continue to repeat itself. We 
call this a vicious cycle. 
With this background, we now turn our attention to the issue of coordination and 
examine its meaning in CMM.
strange loop 
rules of meaning 
change within the 
loop
Charmed Loop
Figure 5.2
Strange Loop
Figure 5.3
Life Script/Self A
“I am an alcoholic.”
≠
≠
Cultural Pattern: It is important for people to control their behavior.
Episode A
“I cannot control my drinking.”
Life Script/Self B
“I am not an alcoholic.”
Episode B
“I can control my drinking.”
Figure 5.4
Example of a 
Strange Loop

	
The Coordination of Meaning: Making Sense of the Sequence     95
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
The Coordination of Meaning: Making Sense of the Sequence
In his discussion of coordination, Pearce believes that coordination is best ­understood 
by watching people interact on a daily basis. Underscoring the first assumption of 
CMM, Pearce (2007) concludes that “‘coordination’ is probably not the first word that 
leaps to your mind when someone says ‘communication.’ Perhaps it should be” (p. 83).
Because people enter conversations with a variety of abilities and competencies, 
achieving coordination can be difficult at times. Coordination with others is challeng­
ing, in part because others try to coordinate their actions with ours. ­Coordination 
exists when two people try to make sense out of the sequencing of messages in their 
conversation. According to Pearce (2012), meaning is not achieved in isolation, but 
rather in coordination with other people. Three outcomes are possible when two peo­
ple converse: They achieve coordination, they do not achieve coordination, or they 
achieve some degree of coordination (Philipsen, 1995). Gerry Philipsen reminds us 
that social reality is not perfectly coordinated, so the most likely outcome is partially 
achieved coordination.
Let’s look at some examples of perfect coordination, no coordination, and partial 
coordination by borrowing the experiences of Jessie Taylor and Ben Murphy. They 
are discussing an upcoming camping trip:
Ben:  We need to be straightforward with the girls now. I don’t see any problem 
with sleeping in the same tent and letting the kids sleep in their tent. Patrick can 
sleep with us if he gets upset.
Jessie:  I think you’re right. He should have fun with the girls.
Ben:  Also, they love him, which makes it easier for all of us.
Jessie:  The weekend should be a great bonding time for the families.
The two have coordinated their meanings of what to do with their children on 
the first family trip. Although each is entering the conversation with different experi­
ences, Ben and Jessie have created a completed episode of meaning. Perfect coordi­
nation is attained.
However, things are not usually this smooth when discussing such complex is­
sues. For instance:
Ben:  We need to be straightforward with the girls now. I don’t see any problem 
with sleeping in the same tent and letting the kids sleep in their tent. Patrick can 
sleep with us if he gets upset.
Jessie:  My girls won’t like that. I’m hoping you’re not saying that our feelings are 
more important than our kids’ feelings?
Ben:  I didn’t say that. . . .
Jessie:  Why would you even think that? Our first trip together shouldn’t be spent 
trying to explain why Mom and Dad want their privacy.
Ben:  All I was trying to do was to let the kids know that their Mom and Dad need 
to have their own space.
Jessie:  And that they need to deal with their own problems?! Look, I may be over­
reacting here, but . . . .
Ben:  I’m sorry that I ever brought up the issue.
coordination
trying to make 
sense of message 
sequencing

96     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
As you can see, this episode is quite different from the previous one. In fact, it ap­
pears that Ben and Jessie have different interpretations of what the other is saying, 
which prevents coordination from being achieved.
The following dialogue represents partial coordination of meaning:
Ben:  We need to be straightforward with the girls now. I don’t see any problem 
with sleeping in the same tent and letting the kids sleep in their tent. Patrick can 
sleep with us if he gets upset.
Jessie:  It’s more complicated than that. This is the first time that we’re all going to 
be together for a weekend.
Ben:  Honey, if we don’t try this right away, it’ll be more difficult when we all 
move in together.
Jessie:  But the kids are still trying to get this situation all figured out. Separating 
things out this way may be more of a pain than we thought.
Ben:  How about if we bought a larger tent and let the kids sleep on one side and 
we’ll be on the other?
Jessie:  That should work.
This partially coordinated dialogue closes the episode between the two parents. Both 
appear to be satisfied with the compromised sleeping arrangements.
Influences on the Coordination Process
Coordination is influenced by several issues, including a sense of morality and the 
availability of resources. Our social worlds are essentially moral places that pre­
scribe ways we should act and the resources we should draw upon to live our lives 
with dignity and honor. Pearce (2014) claims that “we only know the social world 
from ‘inside’” (p. 9). In this section, we examine both morality and resources.
First, coordination requires that individuals be concerned with a higher moral 
order (Pearce, 1989). Many CMM theorists, like Pearce, explain morality as honor, 
dignity, and character. Moral order involves ethics, and this order is essentially an 
opportunity for individuals to assert an ethical stance in a conversation. CMM theo­
rists contend that ethics is an inherent part of the conversational flow.
Each person brings various moral orders into a conversation to create and com­
plete an episode. Pearce contends that people simultaneously perform various roles, 
such as sister, mother, lover, student, employee, friend, and citizen. He believes that 
each of these roles carries various rights and responsibilities that ­differ from one person 
to another. Difficulty arises, however, if inconsistent moral obligations exist in conver­
sations. For instance, in some cultures, men are identified as the sole decision makers 
and chief protectors of their family. This may conflict with women’s obligations and 
may affect the coordination process in their conversations. These value differences may 
play themselves out throughout a relationship.
In addition to morality, coordination can be influenced by the resources available 
to an individual. When CMM theorists discuss resources, they refer to “the stories, 
images, symbols, and institutions that persons use to make their world meaningful” 
(Pearce, 1989, p. 23). Resources also include perceptions, memories, and concepts 
that help people achieve coherence in their social ­realities.
resources
stories, symbols, 
and images that 
people use to make 
sense of their world

	
Rules and Unwanted Repetitive Patterns     97
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
When resources in a conversation vary from one person to another, coordination 
may be challenged. To better understand this notion, consider the ­experiences of Loran 
and Wil. As a 19-year employee of a local textile manufacturer, Loran is respected by 
the seven employees he supervises. Although he does not have a college degree, he rel­
ishes his seniority in a company that almost shut down a few years ago. Wil, however, 
has a college degree and an MBA. Because the company is interested in energizing its 
employees with fresh perspectives on management, it is hiring college graduates with 
management savvy. As a result, Wil became a new supervisor in Loran’s department. 
These changes were marked by heated discussions and a great deal of disagreement be­
tween Loran and Wil. Loran’s resources—his historical understanding of the factory, his 
relationships with his employees, the stories shared with others, the perceptions he has 
of the company’s goals, and so forth—seem to be secondary to Wil’s resources. Wil’s 
resources are limited, because he has little understanding of the company’s history, but 
he does bring his college education to his job, a credential shared by few at the factory. 
Because an incompatibility between resources exists, Loran and Wil may have difficulty 
coordinating their meaning. Two important, but incompatible, sets of resources exist 
between Loran and Wil, and each may threaten conversation coordination.
Coordinating conversations is critical to communication. At times, coordinating 
with others is simple, but at other times it is quite challenging. People bring different 
resources into conversations, prompting individuals to respond to others based on their 
own management of meaning. In addition to resources, coordination relies on the rules 
that conversationalists follow. We now explore rules and their relationship to CMM.
Rules and Unwanted Repetitive Patterns
One way that individuals manage and coordinate meaning is through the use of rules. 
Earlier in the chapter we mentioned that CMM follows a rules perspective, meaning 
that people’s dialogues include templates for how to behave. For CMM theorists, 
rules provide people opportunities to choose between ­alternatives. Once rules are 
established in a dialogue, interactants will have a sufficiently common symbolic 
framework for communication (Cushman & Whiting, 1972). CMM theorists argue 
that rule usage in a conversation is more than an ability to use a rule. Interactants 
must understand the social reality and then incorporate rules as they decide how to 
act in a given situation.
Rules are necessarily linked to time, place, relationship, self-concept, episode, 
culture, and other elements in a context (Murray, 2012). As you ­understand the no­
tion of rules and their placement in CMM, keep in mind that rules are always depen­
dent on context and that context is a multifaceted environment. 
Two types of rules exist in CMM: constitutive and regulative. Constitutive rules 
refer to how behavior should be interpreted within a given context. In other words, 
constitutive rules tell us what types of behavior mean. We are able to understand 
another person’s intention because of the constitutive rules in place. For example, 
saying “I love you” has different implications when you speak to a roommate, a lover, 
a family member, or even a coworker. In each of these relationships, we adopt a rule 
that suggests that the relationship type (contract) and the episode will determine how 
the statement should be received.
constitutive rules
rules that organize 
behavior and help 
us to ­understand 
how meaning should 
be interpreted

98     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
A second type of rule assisting coordination is the regulative rule. Constitutive 
rules assist people in their interpretation of meaning, but they do not provide people 
with guidelines for behavior. That is the function of regulative rules. Regulative 
rules refer to some sequence of action that an individual undertakes, and they com­
municate what happens next in a conversation. There are, for instance, regulative 
rules for meeting a new coworker. You generally introduce yourself, welcome your 
colleague to the workplace, and indicate that you’re available to answer appropriate 
questions.
To understand the interfacing of constitutive and regulative rules, consider the 
following situation. A couple married 20 years is having a crisis. The wife has 
discovered her husband’s extramarital affair and must now decide what constitu­
tive and regulative rules to follow. She decides on a venting session because the 
constitutive rule tells her that such an affair is wrong in their marriage. In turn, her 
husband must determine how to interpret the venting (constitutive rule) and must 
construct some sequence of response (regulative rule). As the two engage in their 
discussion (and co-create their social reality), they will ultimately discover each 
other’s rules systems. Although they have been married for two decades, this situ­
ation has not surfaced before, and consequently they may not know what the pos­
sibilities are in terms of constitutive and regulative rules. As this discovery takes 
place, it is likely that the coordination of the conversation will be jeopardized. That 
is, each person may enact different episodes along the way. They may not always 
agree on the rules enacted, but at least they are able to make sense out of their con­
versational experiences.
If the couple continue to have sustained conflict, they may engage in what 
Cronen, Pearce, and Linda Snavely (1979) identify as unwanted repetitive patterns 
(URPs). Unwanted repetitive patterns are sequential and recurring interpersonal 
conflictual episodes that are considered unwanted by the individuals in the conflict. 
regulative rules
guidelines for 
people’s behavior
unwanted repetitive 
patterns (URPs)
recurring, undesir‑
able conflicts in a 
relationship

	
Rules and Unwanted Repetitive Patterns     99
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
The individuals in a conflictual pattern feel powerless to cease the conflict (Murray, 
2012). Pearce and his associates studied hostile workplace ­relationships and noted 
that although privately each worker communicated a genuine desire to be amicable 
and efficient, publicly their discussions were hostile and ego bruising. This verbal 
sparring seemed to be ripe for explanation using CMM. The researchers explained 
that URPs arise because two people with particular rules systems follow a structure 
that obligates them to perform specific behaviors, regardless of their consequences. 
It may seem peculiar that people believe they are obligated to act a certain way. Yet as 
we alluded to earlier, Pearce (1989) states that “persons find themselves in URPs . . . 
in which they report, with all sincerity, that ‘I had no choice; I had to act this way’” 
(p. 39). Consider the notion of unwanted repetitive patterns this way:  “Our com­
munication has fallen into a pattern of responses that is not benefiting us” (Coleman, 
Deutsch, & Marcus, 2014, p. 215).
Why do two people continue to engage in URPs? First, they may see no other 
option. That is, the couple may not possess the skill to remove themselves from the 
conflict. Second, the couple may be comfortable with the recurring conflict. They 
Theory in Popular Press  •  Family Conflict as an Unwanted 
Repetitive Pattern
In her blog, Elizabeth Scott contends that when families get together (over 
the holidays, for instance), usually everyone wants to get along. Yet, the real­
ity is that family conflict continues to be revved up, despite our knowledge 
of the person or the source of conflict. Scott poses the following question: 
How often do we decide to be around family members, knowing very well 
that many of these interactions will turn out to be conflictual? Scott provoca­
tively also asks: “Have you ever wished you had a remote control for humans, 
complete with pause, rewind and mute buttons?” Interviewing an expert who 
specializes in “using conversation to master confrontation,” Scott concludes 
that many of our conflicts are recurring and repeated with people whom we 
know so well. And, despite our best efforts to the contrary, we try to “win” 
an argument as much as possible. We fall into these patterns because they 
are so familiar and because we often don’t even know we’ve fallen victim to 
these unwanted repetitive patterns. Scott reports that conflict specialists 
recognize the importance of using “choice points,” or points in a conversation 
where the tone can be elevated or the topic reframed. These “choice times,” 
Scott acknowledges, are difficult, but help us to avoid reacting irrationally. It 
also helps the other person to rethink whether or not the conflictual episode 
is important enough to argue.
Source: Scott, E. (2010). Family conflict resolution solutions, stress.about.com/od/familystress
/a/Family-Conflict-Resolution-Solutions.htm.

100     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
know each other and know how the other generally communicates in conflictual situ­
ations. Third, a couple may unwittingly fall into this ­pattern, almost instinctively and 
by default. Finally, a couple may simply be too exhausted to work toward conflict 
resolution.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
The Coordinated Management of Meaning is one of the few theories to place com­
munication explicitly as a cornerstone in its foundation. It has both quantitative and 
qualitative roots. Because communication is central to the theory, many scholars have 
employed the theory in their writings. Among the criteria for evaluating a theory, 
four seem especially relevant for discussion: scope, parsimony, utility, and heurism.
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability | Heurism  |  Test of Time
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Critique
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic |  Critical
      (early research)                   (recent research)
Scope
It is unclear whether CMM is too broad in scope. Some communication scholars 
(e.g., Brenders, 1987) suggest that the theory is too abstract and that imprecise defini­
tions exist. Further, Brenders believes that some of the ideas espoused by Pearce and 
Cronen lack parameters and beg clarification. The introduction of personal language 
systems, argues Brenders, is problematic and “leaves ­unexplained the social nature of 
meaning” (p. 342). Finally, M. Scott Poole (1983), in his review of CMM, notes that 
the theory may be problematic in that it is difficult to “paint with broad strokes and at 
the same time give difficult areas the attention they deserve” (p. 224).
Yet CMM theorists contend that such criticisms do not take into account the 
evolution of the theory and its refinement over the years (Barge & Pearce, 2004). 
Pearce (1995) candidly admits that during “the first phase of the CMM project, [our 
writings] were confused because we could not say what we were doing in the lan­
guage of social science” (pp. 109–110). Therefore, critics should interpret the theory 
within the spirit of change; even theorists change as they clarify the goals of their 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     101
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
theory. Furthermore, Cronen (1995b) admits some early problems with the concep­
tualization of CMM by indicating that the way he and Pearce discussed the creation 
of meaning was originally confusing and “wrong-headed.” Pearce, Cronen, and other 
CMM theorists believe that those who levy indictments regarding the scope of the 
theory should understand the time period in which the theory was developed.
Parsimony
The scope may be broad, but do not think that the theory has not undergone tests 
of parsimony. At first glance, one may conclude that the theory is too cumbersome 
because it “is better understood as a worldview and open-ended set of concepts and 
model” (Barge & Pearce, 2004, p. 25). However, illustrating difficult concepts with 
a visual and succinct way of looking at conversations (vis-à-vis the hierarchy of 
meaning), for instance, has resulted in making CMM a model that is efficient and 
available to theoretical consumers. The ­theorists posit that “there is no reason why 
any research method could not be used in CMM research” (p. 25). One could argue, 
then, that Pearce and Cronen’s illustration of the hierarchy of meaning is a visual and 
succinct way of looking at conversations. Therefore, even cumbersome and complex 
conversations can be analyzed and understood.
Student Voices
Jeremy
If I analyzed a recent conversation with my supervisor, I’d say that a lot of CMM 
concepts apply. First, in the hierarchy of meaning, I’m French Canadian and he’s 
Japanese American. Our conversations are definitely affected by cultural patterns. 
Second, my life script or view of myself as a good worker is pretty solid. I can’t 
imagine I would ever be called in for slacking on the job. I also think that on the 
relationship level, he and I are pretty clear. I know that as my supervisor he doesn’t 
appreciate joking around, and as his employee I don’t enjoy “off-color” discussions. 
I guess this hierarchy can be applied to almost any conversation.
Utility 
The application of this theory to individuals and their conversations is quite ap­
parent. The practicality of looking at how people achieve meaning, their ­potential 
recurring conflicts, and the influence of the self on the communication process is 
admirable. CMM is one of the few communication theories that has been identified 
by both theorists and CMM scholars as a “practical theory” (Creede et al., 2012). In 
fact, Pearce was always concerned with the utility of his theory since its inception 
(Pearce, 2012). As well, he is direct in ­calling CMM a practical theory and notes 
that the one question guiding CMM is “How can we make better social worlds?” 
(Pearce, 2007, p. 45). Finally, Pearce observes that the theory has evolved along 
three stages: interpretive, critical, and practical” [emphasis added] (p. 52). Clearly, 
there is a pragmatic legacy with CMM.

102     Chapter 5  •  Coordinated Management of Meaning
C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
Heurism 
CMM is a very heuristic theory, spanning a number of different content areas, in­
cluding examining international adoption (Leinaweaver, 2012), spirituality (Pearce, 
2012), student–professor relationships (Murray, 2014), refugee communities such 
as the Congolese (Hughes & Bisimwa, 2015), electronic chat rooms (Moore & 
Mattson-Lauters, 2009), and mentoring relationships (Parke, 2011). Furthermore, 
­researchers have incorporated the theory and its tenets to understand health care 
(Forsythe, 2012), high school hazing (DeWitt & DeWitt, 2012), the ­Presbyterian 
Church (Hutcheson, 2012), volunteer work (Creede, 2012), and families who have 
been tortured or persecuted across cultures (Montgomery, 2004).
Closing
Thanks in large part to CMM, we have a deeper understanding of how individuals 
co-create meaning in conversations. In fact, Ronald Arnett (2014) contends 
that Pearce provided a “communicative roadmap for navigating an era” (p. 6) 
in communication research. Further, the thinking and research of Pearce have 
been collated and are archived at Fitchburg State University where a certificate in 
CMM is available. CMM is, as Allan Holmgren (2004) says, like a Swiss Army 
knife, useful in many situations. The theory has aided us in understanding the 
importance of rules in social situations. CMM, and Pearce in particular, is cred­
ited for moving the theory into areas that have allowed for a “porous boundary” 
between his scholarship and his work toward social change (Lannamann, 2014, 
p. 257). It is clear that few can deny that CMM positioned communication at the 
core of human experience and remains a theory that has anchored communication 
as central to discourse. 
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Since CMM relies so heavily on the ability of people to co­
ordinate their communication in order for meaning to be achieved, how might 
meaning be “interrupted” if, while communicating in person, someone began 
texting another person? Explain the anticipated effects and your response.
	
1.  What types of coordination will our chapter opener’s Taylor-Murphy family 
experience as they begin a life together? Try to identify stages that the family may 
experience and specific episodes of coordination.
	
2.  How might coordination be influenced by differing cultural backgrounds of 
communicators?
	
3.  Discuss enmeshment and its relationship to conversations in your ­family. 
Be sure to define the term and apply it to your family relationships.
	
4.  Chess and poker are games requiring coordination. Discuss some of life’s 
“games” and how they require coordination. Be creative and give specific examples.

C O O R D I N A T E D  M A N A G E M E N T  O F  M E A N I N G
	
Discussion Starters     103
	
5.  What types of meaning breakdowns have you experienced in your conver­
sations with others? Be specific and identify the context, the situation, and the con­
versation topic.
	
6.  Identify and explain a strange loop that exists in popular culture or in your 
interpersonal relationships.
	
7.  Discuss specific ways in which any component of CMM has practical value 
to you as a college student. Identify the part of the theory that has ­relevancy to you 
and reasons for its applicability.

104
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Cognitive Dissonance Theory
Based on the research of Leon Festinger
Ali Torres shuffled the 
papers on her desk and 
looked out the office win­
dow. She was really bored with this job. When 
she  initially signed on to work with the Puerto 
Rican Alliance in Gary, Indiana, she was so 
­excited. The job seemed to be a dream come true. 
First, it offered her a chance to give back to her 
community—both the city of Gary and the Puerto 
Rican community within the city. She had grown up 
in Gary, Indiana, and knew firsthand how difficult 
it was to get ahead for people of color, ­especially 
Latinos. Latinos were a minority among minorities 
in this city, and it was tough to make much prog­
ress. Despite that, Ali had gotten a lot from grow­
ing up in Gary. When she was in high school, a 
friendly guidance counselor had offered her a 
helping hand and suggested that Ali consider col­
lege. Without Ms. Martinez’s support, she never 
would have thought about college, much less ac­
tually graduated. But, Ali had finished college and 
now she felt strongly about giving something back. 
So the job had seemed perfect; it would be a way 
for her to give back to the community and at the 
same time use her major in public relations.
	
Yet, in the six months Ali had worked in the 
­Alliance office, her sole responsibilities had cen­
tered on typing and running errands. She felt like 
a gofer, with no chance to do anything she con­
sidered important. Actually, she was beginning 
to question whether the Alliance itself was doing 
anything worthwhile. Sometimes she thought the 
whole operation was just a front so politicians 
could say something was being done to help the 
Latino population in the city.
	
Her coworkers didn’t seem to mind that they 
didn’t do much all day, so Ali wasn’t getting much 
support from them. But it was her boss’s attitude 
that bothered Ali the most. He was a respected 
leader in the Latino community; she remembered 
him from when she was growing up. When she 
found out she would be working for him, she had 
been delighted. But as far as Ali could tell, he 
hardly ever worked at all. He was rarely in the of­
fice, and when he did come in, he took long lunch 
hours and many breaks. He spoke to Ali very in­
frequently and never gave her assignments.
	
Ali was feeling extremely frustrated. She 
was on her own to develop projects or, more 
likely, simply to put in eight hours doing a lot 
of nothing. Ali had decided that she would quit 
this job and start looking for something where 
she could feel more useful, but she was having a 
hard time giving up on her dream of contributing 
to her community. She had begun this job with 
such high hopes. She had ­expected to work to 
persuade funding agencies to sponsor programs 
to strengthen opportunities for the Latino com­
munity. Ironically, now she found that the only 
person she was persuading was herself, as she 
C H A P T E R	6
Ali Torres
I prefer to rely on my memory. I have lived with that memory a long time, 
I am used to it, and if I have rearranged or distorted anything, surely that 
was done for my own benefit.
—Leon Festinger

C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
	
Cognitive Dissonance Theory     105
S
uppose you are Ali Torres’s friend and are interested in knowing how she feels 
about her job. You notice that she seems a little depressed when she talks about 
work, and lately she hasn’t brought up the subject at all. Her ­silence about her work 
is especially obvious to you compared with how enthusiastically she spoke about the 
position when she first started at the Alliance. You could ask Ali directly how she 
feels, but you wonder how honest she will be with you. You know Ali doesn’t want 
you to worry about her. You also know that Ali cares a great deal about the ideals 
of the Alliance and that she might not want to tell you if she is disappointed. Your 
problem in this situation is inferring Ali’s attitudes.
The problem you would face as Ali’s friend is a common one because people’s 
attitudes cannot be directly observed; yet attitudes are believed to be ­excellent predic­
tors of people’s behaviors (Knobloch-Westerwick & Meng, 2009; O’Neill & Arendt, 
2008). As Susan Fiske and Shelley Taylor (1984) observe, “[A]ttitudes have always 
been accorded star status in social explanations of human behavior by lay people 
and professionals alike” (p. 341). Because of their importance, many theories try to 
explain attitude formation, change, and the interlocking relationship among cogni­
tions, attitudes, affect, and behavioral tendencies. Many psychologists (e.g., Rydell, 
Hugenberg, & McConnell, 2006) assert that the most influential approaches to at­
titudes come from ­cognitive consistency theories.
Consistency theories in general posit that the mind operates as an intermedi­
ary between stimulus and response. These theories assert that when people ­receive 
information (a stimulus), their mind organizes it into a pattern with other previously 
encountered stimuli. If the new stimulus does not fit the pattern, or is inconsistent, 
then people feel discomfort. For example, Ali Torres feels this type of distress as she 
reflects on the discrepancy between her desire to ­respect her boss and her observa­
tions of his seeming indifference to the job. In these cases, consistency theorists note 
that there is a lack of balance among varying cognitions, or ways of knowing, beliefs, 
judgments, and so forth.
Leon Festinger called this feeling of imbalance cognitive dissonance; the feel­
ing people have when they “find themselves doing things that don’t fit with what they 
know, or having opinions that do not fit with other opinions they hold” (1957, p. 4). 
This concept forms the core of Festinger’s Cognitive Dissonance Theory (CDT), 
a theory that argues that dissonance is an uncomfortable feeling that motivates people 
to take steps to reduce it (Figure 6.1). As Roger Brown (1965) notes, the basics 
of the theory follow rather simple principles: “A state of cognitive dissonance is said 
to be a state of psychological discomfort or tension which motivates efforts to achieve 
consonance. Dissonance is the name for a disequilibrium and consonance the name 
for an equilibrium” (p. 584). To some (e.g., Chang, Solomon, & Westerfield, 2016), 
dissonance is especially “acute when one of the beliefs in question relates to the 
individual’s self-concept” (p. 268). Further, Brown points out that the theory allows 
cognitions
ways of knowing, 
beliefs, judgments, 
and thoughts
cognitive 
dissonance
feeling of 
discomfort resulting 
from inconsistent 
attitudes, thoughts, 
and behaviors
wrestled with the decision of whether to keep 
working or give up on this job. Ali spoke to some 
of her friends, who encouraged her to do what 
she thought was right and quit the Alliance if 
she wanted to. That made her feel better, but 
she couldn’t completely shake her memories of 
the auspicious beginning of the job and all her 
high hopes.

106     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
for two elements to have three different relationships with each other: These relation­
ships are called consonant, dissonant, or irrelevant.
A consonant relationship exists between two elements when they are in equi­
librium with one another. If you believe, for instance, that health and fitness are 
important goals and you work out three to five times a week, then your beliefs about 
health and your own behaviors would have a consonant ­relationship with one another. 
Ali would have a consonant relationship if she believed that the Alliance was really 
making a difference in the Latino community and that her work was meaningful. A 
dissonant relationship means that ­elements are in disequilibrium with one another. 
An example of a dissonant ­relationship would be if a practicing Catholic we’ll call 
Rita believes in a woman’s right to choose abortion. In this case, Rita’s religious be­
liefs are in conflict with her beliefs about abortion. In our opening story, Ali Torres 
is experiencing a dissonant relationship.
An irrelevant relationship exists when the elements imply nothing about one 
another. This type of relationship is illustrated by believing that the speed limit should 
be raised to 65 miles per hour on all freeways, and believing that women should have 
equal rights in the workplace. Although the two beliefs may indicate a general view 
endorsing individual freedoms, they basically have no relationship to each other. 
When beliefs are in a consonant or irrelevant ­relationship, there is no psychological 
discomfort. However, if beliefs are ­dissonant, discomfort results.
The importance of cognitive dissonance for communication researchers rests 
on Festinger’s assertion that the discomfort caused by dissonance motivates 
change. As we see in our chapter-opening vignette, Ali Torres is feeling frustrated 
and uncomfortable in her job. Her initial belief about the opportunities for her to 
help others through this job and her prior high regard for her boss are inconsistent 
with her present situation. This is the point at which persuasion can occur. The 
theory suggests that to be persuasive, strategies should focus on the inconsisten­
cies while providing new behaviors that allow for consistency or balance. Thus, 
feelings of 
dissonance
Inconsistent
attitudes,
thoughts, and
behaviors
reduced by
unpleasant
arousal
a change that
removes
inconsistency
result in
results in
Figure 6.1
The Process 
of Cognitive 
Dissonance
dissonant 
relationship 
two elements in 
disequilibrium with 
each other
irrelevant 
relationship 
two elements that 
have no meaning­
ful relation to each 
other
consonant 
relationship
two elements in 
equilibrium with 
each another

C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
	
Cognitive Dissonance Theory     107
CDT offers communication researchers some explanation for persuasion, as well 
as providing guidelines for creating persuasive messages. Further, cognitive dis­
sonance focuses on communication behavior as people seek to persuade others 
and as people strive to reduce their dissonant cognitions. For example, when Ali 
went to her friends to discuss her decision, she was seeking help in reducing 
dissonance. Her conversations with friends and her efforts at self-persuasion are 
examples of communication being used in the dissonance reduction process (We 
address the interplay between Cognitive Dissonance Theory and persuasion a bit 
later in the chapter.)
Daniel Tomasulo writes in his blog, “Ask the Therapist,” that he is experienc­
ing cognitive dissonance as a result of learning that Lance Armstrong will no 
longer fight allegations of doping violations during his cycling career. Further, 
as a result, the U.S. Anti-Doping Agency voted to ban Armstrong from compet­
ing for life and strip him of his record seven Tour de France titles. Tomasulo 
notes that he considered Armstrong a true hero and now he has to readjust 
his thinking about the cyclist. Armstrong is, in Tomasulo’s view now, both a 
hero for what he has done for raising cancer awareness and a fraud for 
seemingly admitting that his victories were fueled by performing-enhancing 
drugs. Tomasulo states that: “In my opinion, Lance Armstrong is a survivor and 
a liar. He is an incredibly strong man, and an incredibly weak man. Armstrong 
is a source of inspiration, and a source of disgrace and embarrassment. He 
is both a hero and a villain. In short, he has become the modern-day example 
of cognitive dissonance.” As CDT suggests, Tomasulo observes that he has to 
reconcile his dissonant beliefs about Armstrong or suffer anxiety.
Source: Tomasulo, D. Lance Armstrong: Cognitive dissonance as a hero’s journey ends, 
psychcentral.com/blog/archives/2012/08/25/lance-armstrong-cognitive-dissonance-as-a
-heros-journey-ends/.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Defining Dissonance
Theory At a Glance  •  Cognitive Dissonance
The experience of dissonance—incompatible beliefs and actions or two in­
compatible beliefs—is unpleasant, and people are highly motivated to avoid 
it. In their efforts to avoid feelings of dissonance, people will ignore views 
that oppose their own, change their beliefs to match their actions (or vice 
versa), and/or seek reassurances after making a difficult decision.

108     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Cognitive Dissonance Theory
As we have indicated, Cognitive Dissonance Theory provides an explanation for 
how beliefs and behavior change attitudes. Its focus is on the effects of ­inconsistency 
among cognitions. Our introductory material suggested a number of assumptions 
that frame CDT. Four assumptions basic to the theory include:
∙∙
Human beings desire consistency in their beliefs, attitudes, and behaviors.
∙∙
Dissonance is created by psychological inconsistencies.
∙∙
Dissonance is an aversive state that drives people to actions with ­measurable 
effects.
∙∙
Dissonance motivates efforts to achieve consonance and efforts toward 
­dissonance reduction.
The first assumption portrays a model of human nature that is concerned with 
stability and consistency. When we discuss Uncertainty Reduction Theory in Chap­
ter 8, you will see a similar conceptualization of human nature. Cognitive Disso­
nance Theory suggests that people do not enjoy inconsistencies in their thoughts and 
beliefs. Instead, they seek consistency. This is why Ali feels uncomfortable in her job 
and unhappy with her thoughts about quitting the job. She is seeking consistency, yet 
her perceptions of her job provide her with inconsistency. Janet Meyer (2011) found 
that a frequent reason that people regretted messages they had sent to others had to 
do with dissonance.
The second assumption speaks to the kind of consistency that is important to 
people. The theory is not concerned with a strict logical consistency. Rather, it refers 
to the fact that cognitions must be psychologically inconsistent (as opposed to logi­
cally inconsistent) with one another to arouse cognitive dissonance. For example, if 
Ali Torres holds the cognition that “I want to contribute to my community,” it is not 
logically inconsistent to also believe that the Alliance is not contributing much to 
the community. The two beliefs are not logically contradictory. Yet it is psychologi­
cally inconsistent for Ali to continue working for the Alliance when she believes it 
is doing little to help Latinos in Gary, Indiana. That is, Ali will feel psychologically 
inconsistent by continuing to do nothing when she wishes to be of help. Ali also feels 
stress related to her thoughts of quitting and her lingering hopes for what she might 
have accomplished in this job.
The third assumption of the theory suggests that when people experience psycho­
logical inconsistencies, the dissonance that is created is aversive. Thus, people do not 
enjoy being in a state of dissonance; it is an uncomfortable state. Festinger asserted 
that dissonance is a drive state possessing arousal properties. Since Festinger’s initial 
conceptualization of the theory, a significant amount of research has supported this 
assumption (e.g., Foster & Misra, 2013; Rydell, McConnell, & Mackie, 2008). One 
study (Elkin & Leippe, 1986) found that physiological arousal was also related to 
dissonance. Therefore, Cognitive Dissonance Theory would assume that Ali would 
feel physically uncomfortable as a result of the psychological dissonance that she is 
experiencing.
Finally, the theory assumes that the arousal generated by dissonance will 
motivate people to avoid situations that create inconsistencies and strive toward 

	
Concepts and Processes of Cognitive Dissonance     109
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
situations that restore consistency. Thus, the picture of human nature that frames 
the theory consists of seeking psychological consistency as a result of the arousal 
caused by the aversive state of inconsistent cognitions (Figure 6.2).
Concepts and Processes of Cognitive Dissonance
As the theory developed over the years, certain concepts were refined and other 
concepts were added. For example, the following scenario illustrates a situation 
where dissonance would arise: If Juan believes that relationships should be com­
pletely harmonious (a cognition) and yet he argues a great deal with his partner (a 
conflicting behavior), the theory predicts that Juan will become tense and suffer 
discomfort. When dissonance theorists seek to predict how much discomfort or 
dissonance Juan will suffer, they invoke many concepts, which we will discuss 
further.
Magnitude of Dissonance
The first concept is magnitude of dissonance, which refers to the quantitative 
amount of dissonance a person experiences. Magnitude of dissonance will de­
termine actions people may take and cognitions they may espouse to reduce the 
dissonance. The theory differentiates between situations producing more disso­
nance and those producing less dissonance. A peculiar relationship sometimes 
exists with respect to dissonance and beneficial events. For instance, in one 
study, when people thought they were candidates for an “unpleasant medical 
screening,” even though the screening had medical value, they reported less 
favorable perceptions about the screening than those who were deemed ineligible 
(Ent & Gerend, 2015).
Three factors influence the magnitude of dissonance a person will feel (Zim­
bardo, Ebbesen, & Maslach, 1977). First, the degree of importance, or how sig­
nificant the issue is, affects the degree of dissonance felt. If, for example, Juan 
has many friendships and activities outside his relationship and his partner is not 
critically important to him, the theory predicts that his magnitude of dissonance 
will be small. But if Juan finds much of his identity and social interaction in his 
Attitude
I like to volunteer my time for the good of others.
Behavior
I tutor at the Literacy Center twice a month.
It is important to give back to the community.
I have been blessed with good fortune.
People who have good fortune should share it with others.
The only way the community will prosper is if we all do our share.
Beliefs
Figure 6.2
Consistency in 
Beliefs, Attitudes, 
and Behaviors
magnitude of 
dissonance
the quantitative 
amount of discom­
fort felt
importance
a factor in deter­
mining magnitude of 
dissonance; refers 
to how significant 
the issue is

110     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
relationship with his partner, then the magnitude of dissonance should be greater. 
The same could be said for Ali Torres. If she does a great deal of volunteer work 
in the community and her job is not the main source of her identity, then the mag­
nitude of her dissonance is not as great as if her job is critically important to her.
Second, the amount of dissonance is affected by the dissonance ratio, or the 
amount of dissonant cognitions relative to the amount of consonant cognitions. 
Given Juan’s propensity to argue with his partner, he probably has many cogni­
tions that are relevant to that behavior. Some of these cognitions are consistent 
with his behavior; for example, “It is good to get feelings out in the open.” “It is 
positive to feel you can really be yourself with your partner.” “Sometimes arguing 
allows you both to see problems in a creative way.” ­Several of his cognitions are 
dissonant with conflict behavior, however. For ­example, consider: “If we really 
loved each other, we wouldn’t argue so much.” “We spend so much time fighting, 
we never have any fun.” “Our fights are so repetitive, we never solve anything.” 
“My parents never argued with each other; we must not be very sensitive to each 
other.” “I didn’t picture my relationship like this.” Because Juan has more dis­
sonant cognitions than consonant ones, the ratio is negative. Thus, Juan is likely 
to feel that there is inconsistency, and the discomfort of dissonance will result. 
If the ratio were more balanced or weighted toward the positive, Juan would feel 
less dissonance.
Finally, the magnitude of dissonance is affected by the rationale that an ­individual 
summons to justify the inconsistency. The rationale refers to the reasoning employed 
to explain why an inconsistency exists. The more reasons one has to account for the 
discrepancy, the less dissonance one will feel. For ­instance, if Juan and his partner 
have just moved, changed or lost a job, ­purchased a home, or experienced any other 
stressor, Juan may be able to ­justify the conflicts as being a result of the stress he is 
feeling and thus probably a temporary situation. In this case, it is likely that the dis­
sonance he feels will be much less than if he is unable to come up with any rationale 
explaining his behaviors (Matz & Wood, 2005).
Coping with Dissonance
Although Cognitive Dissonance Theory explains that dissonance can be reduced 
through both behavioral and attitudinal changes, most of the research has focused on 
the latter. Many ways to increase consistency are cognitively based, and the theory 
suggests several methods Juan may use to reduce his ­dissonance. First, Juan could 
add or subtract cognitions to change the ratio of consonant to dissonant cognitions. 
In Juan’s case, this might mean adding the fact that his friends Albert and Don fight 
a lot but seem to be happy, and subtracting the idea that he didn’t picture his rela­
tionship as full of conflict. ­Alternatively, Juan might try to reduce the importance 
of the dissonant cognitions. He might think about the fact that children do not know 
much about their parents’ relationship, so the fact that he did not think his parents 
fought a lot might not weigh too heavily in the equation. Finally, Juan could seek out 
information that advocates conflict in relationships and stresses the benefits of open 
communication between partners. He might discredit the information that suggests 
conflict is not good for a relationship by believing that it comes from an unrealistic, 
overly optimistic point of view. In sum, we can cope with dissonance by (1) adding 
rationale
a factor in deter­
mining magnitude of 
dissonance; refers 
to the reasoning 
employed to explain 
the inconsistency
dissonance ratio
a factor in deter­
mining magnitude 
of dissonance; the 
amount of conso­
nant cognitions 
relative to the 
dissonant ones

	
Concepts and Processes of Cognitive Dissonance     111
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
to our consonant beliefs, (2) reducing the importance of our dissonant beliefs, or 
(3) changing our beliefs to seemingly eliminate the dissonance in some way. With 
reference to the third option, Katie Dunleavy and Matthew Martin (2010) found that 
students expressed that nagging an ­instructor to obtain a better grade was more ac­
ceptable behavior than their ­instructors did. The researchers speculated that students 
might have reduced their dissonance about performing a negative behavior (nagging) 
by transforming their beliefs about the behavior’s negative impact. Teachers, on the 
other hand, did not perform the behavior, so they had no need to change their beliefs.
Cognitive Dissonance and Perception
As Juan engages in any of these strategies to change his cognitions and reduce his 
feelings of dissonance, perceptual processes come into play. Specifically, Cognitive 
Dissonance Theory relates to the processes of selective exposure, ­selective atten­
tion, selective interpretation, and selective retention because the theory predicts that 
people will avoid information that increases dissonance. These perceptual processes 
are basic to this avoidance.
Selective exposure, or seeking consistent information not already present, helps 
to reduce dissonance. CDT predicts that people will avoid information that increases 
dissonance and seek out information that is consistent with their attitudes and behav­
ior. In the example of the conflictual relationship, Juan might seek friends who also 
fight a great deal yet seem to be happy in their ­relationships.
Selective attention refers to looking at consistent information once it is there. 
People attend to information in their environment that conforms to their attitudes and 
beliefs while ignoring information that is inconsistent. Thus, Ali Torres might read 
favorable articles about the Alliance in the newspaper while overlooking articles that 
suggest contrary views.
Selective interpretation involves interpreting ambiguous information so that 
it becomes consistent. Utilizing selective interpretation, most people interpret close 
friends’ attitudes as more congruent with their own than is actually true (Berscheid & 
Walster, 1978). People use selective interpretation to avoid potential dissonance.
Finally, selective retention refers to remembering and learning consistent in­
formation with much greater ability than we do inconsistent information. Cognitive 
Dissonance Theory predicts that if a couple were arguing about whether to spend 
a vacation camping or on a cruise, the partner who wished to camp would not re­
member the details of the cruise package and the one desiring the cruise would not 
remember much about the camping plans. If Juan heard a lecture once about how 
important conflict can be in close relationships, he may well remember that in his 
current situation of frequent fighting with his partner. Similarly, Ali might focus on 
stories she heard in the past about good works that the Alliance has done.
Attitudes seem to organize memory in this selective retention process ­(Lingle & 
Ostrom, 1981). When thinking about someone as your teacher, you will remember her 
ability to lecture, her command of the subject, her ability to get a discussion started, and 
her accessibility to help you with assignments. If, on the other hand, you were thinking 
about the same person as an actor, you would recall her ability to project a character 
and to gain your interest. Once you have formed an attitude about someone as a teacher 
rather than an actor, that influences your recall about that person.
selective exposure
a method for 
reducing dissonance 
by seeking informa­
tion that is conso­
nant with current 
beliefs and actions
selective attention
a method for 
reducing dissonance 
by paying attention 
to information that 
is consonant with 
current beliefs and 
actions
selective 
interpretation
a method for 
reducing dissonance 
by interpreting 
ambiguous infor­
mation so that it 
becomes consistent 
with current beliefs 
and actions
selective retention
a method for 
reducing dissonance 
by remembering 
information that 
is consonant with 
current beliefs and 
actions

112     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Let’s sum up the preceding sections this way: When people are confronted with 
cognitive inconsistency, they usually wish to achieve cognitive dissonance. And as 
Sohn and Lariscy (2015) note, people selectively pay attention to information that is 
consistent with previously held beliefs. Communicators also “weigh unequal values 
on different pieces of information” (p. 239). When this mental equilibrium exists, a 
confirmatory bias has taken place.
Minimal Justification
One of the interesting and counterintuitive assertions that Festinger advances in this 
theory has to do with what he calls minimal justification. Minimal justification refers 
to offering only the minimum incentive required to get someone to change. The ex­
periment that Festinger and his colleague James Carlsmith performed that established 
the principle of minimal justification is the now-famous $1/$20 study. Festinger and 
Carlsmith (1959) recruited male students at Stanford University and assigned them 
to do a boring, repetitive task consisting of sorting spools into lots of 12 and giving 
square pegs a quarter turn to the right. At the end of an hour of this monotonous as­
signment, the experimenter asked the research participants to do him a favor. The 
researcher explained another person was needed to continue doing this task, and of­
fered to pay the participants to recruit a woman in the waiting room by telling her how 
enjoyable the task was. This woman was actually a research assistant also, and she 
was helping the researchers examine how the men tried to persuade her. Some of the 
men were offered $1 to recruit the woman, whereas others were offered $20 for the 
same behavior. (Remember, this was 1959, and both these sums were worth a great 
deal more than they are now.) Festinger and Carlsmith found that the men engaged 
in this study differed in their attitudes at the end. Those who received $20 for recruit­
ing the woman said that they really thought the task was boring, whereas those who 
received only $1 stated that they really believed the task was enjoyable.
From these results came the notion of minimal justification. Festinger and Carl­
smith argued that doing something a person does not believe in for a minimal reward 
sets up more dissonance than doing that same thing for a larger ­reward. If people 
engage in deception for a lot of money, they will acknowledge that they did it for the 
money. If they engage in deception for only $1, they do not have a ready explanation 
that will make their attitudes and behaviors form a consonant relationship. To reduce 
their dissonance, they have to make some type of change to bring consistency to their 
cognitions. Therefore, they may change their opinion of the task to make sense of 
why they told the woman in the waiting room that it was fun. Now they believe they 
told her it was fun because, in fact, it was enjoyable. 
Minimal justification focuses more on changing attitudes than changing behavior 
because the concept acknowledges that behavior could be changed by offering some­
one a lot of money to do something. But, imagine that your school wants to persuade 
the students to want to engage in more volunteer ­activities as well as to actually engage 
in the activities. If the goal is to believe that social activism is a value, the school might 
offer students a T-shirt for volunteering rather than an A in a class for participating in 
service learning, for example. Students receiving a T-shirt probably wouldn’t say they 
volunteered for 10 hours a week all semester just to get the shirt, while students could 
say their volunteer activities were simply a result of wanting an A grade. 
confirmatory bias
the tendency 
to confirm a 
preconception or 
interpretation of 
phenomena
minimal justification
offering the least 
amount of incentive 
necessary to obtain 
compliance

	
Cognitive Dissonance Theory and Persuasion     113
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Cognitive Dissonance Theory and Persuasion
Much of the research following from Festinger’s work focuses on persuasion, es­
pecially with regard to decision making. A large amount of research concentrates 
on cognitive dissonance as a post-decision phenomenon. Several studies examine 
buyer’s remorse, which refers to the dissonance people often feel after deciding 
on a large purchase. One study examining buyer’s remorse focused on automobile 
purchases (Donnelly & Ivancevich, 1970). In their study, they located people who 
were waiting for delivery of cars they had signed ­contracts to buy. These people were 
divided into two groups. One group was contacted twice to reassure them about the 
wisdom of their purchase. Another group was not contacted between the contract 
signing and the delivery of the car. About twice as many in the group that was not 
contacted canceled the order for the car. This finding supported the theory that disso­
nance may be activated after making a large purchase. Further, the study showed that 
providing people with information about the wisdom of their ­decision can reduce 
the dissonance. This finding speaks to the importance of the decision and to manipu­
lating the dissonance ratio, factors we discussed earlier in the chapter.
buyer’s remorse
post-decision 
dissonance related 
to a purchase
Another study (Knox & Inkster, 1968) investigated this regret period after a 
decision in a different context. This study had experimenters approach people either 
shortly before or shortly after they had placed a $2 bet at a Canadian racetrack. The 
bettors were asked how confident they felt about their horse’s chances. Their findings 
indicated that people were more confident that their horse would win after they had 
placed the bet than they were before they placed the bet. They interpreted these find­
ings as consistent with CDT because they reasoned that after the bet has been placed, 
people feel dissonance. The  decision to choose one particular horse is dissonant 
with the belief that the horse has flaws that could prevent it from winning the race. 
A simple coping mechanism for reducing this dissonance is to increase the beliefs 
about the attractiveness of the horse that you bet on, or the chosen alternative. Thus, 
the  theory would predict, and Knox and Inkster found, bettors expressing more con­
fidence after making their decision than before. As Robert Wicklund and Jack W. 
Brehm (1976) point out, when a decision is irrevocable, as in a bet placed, people 
have to work quickly to reduce the inevitable dissonance that results.
Student Voices
Nancy
I certainly have experienced buyer’s remorse. And I think I probably handled it in the 
way Cognitive Dissonance Theory predicts. When my husband and I bought our first 
house, I was a nervous wreck, and the only way I calmed myself down was to think 
about how bad our other choices were and to spend time talking with Neil about 
how great this house was. We kind of talked ourselves into believing we made a 
fabulous choice.

114     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Another study (Brownstein, Read, & Simon, 2004) looked at cognitive disso­
nance at the racetrack. Participants were given information about horses and then 
were asked to rate each horse’s chance of winning the race. The respondents rated the 
horses three times before placing their bets and one time afterward. Consistent with 
Cognitive Dissonance Theory’s predictions, the researchers found that the ratings of 
the chosen horse increased after the choice had been made.
Vani Simmons, Monica Webb, and Thomas Brandon (2004) studied whether cog­
nitive dissonance principles could help college students stop smoking. They tested 
an experimental learning intervention based on the theory. One hundred forty-four 
college students who smoked were asked to create ­educational videos about the risks 
of smoking or about quitting smoking. They found that intentions to quit smoking 
were increased by making the videos as CDT would predict.
Festinger and two colleagues examined post-decision dissonance in a pioneering 
case study (Festinger, Riecken, & Schachter, 1956). Festinger and his colleagues joined 
a doomsday cult based in Chicago in the 1950s. The group was led by a middle-aged 
man and woman. The woman, whom the researchers named Mrs. Keech, began to 
receive messages from spiritual beings who seemed to be predicting a great disaster, 
a flood that would end the world. Then the spiritual beings transmitted information to 
Mrs. Keech that the members of the cult would be saved before the flood. The group was 
instructed that spacemen would arrive and transport the believers to safety on another 
planet. The believers began to make preparations for the end of their world and their 
departure to another world. The appointed time for departure was midnight, and the 
group gathered in Mrs. Keech’s living room to await the spaceship that would take 
them to safety. As the moments slipped by, it became apparent that no one was coming 
to rescue the believers, and, in fact, they did not need to be rescued because the world 
was not under water. At first, the cult seemed on the verge of disintegration as a result 
of the extreme dissonance everyone was feeling. Yet the group was so committed to 
their beliefs that they found ways to reconcile the dissonance.
The group reconciled their dissonance in two specific ways. First, Mrs. Keech 
claimed a new message came from the spiritual beings telling the group that their 
faith had caused God to save the world from destruction. Thus, the group used selec­
tive interpretation and allowed new information through selective attention. Second, 
Mrs. Keech said she had received an additional message telling the group to publi­
cize the situation. The group became energized again, reduced their dissonance, and 
confirmed themselves in their decision to be members of the group. 
Some researchers have observed the relationship of dissonance and ­communication 
strategies in situations other than decision making. Patrice Buzzanell and Lynn Turner 
(2003) examined family communication in families where the major wage earner had 
lost his or her job within the past 18 months. Buzzanell and Turner interviewed family 
members to assess the communication issues created by the job loss.
Buzzanell and Turner found that job loss did create feelings of dissonance in 
most family members, and the researchers argued that family members reduced their 
dissonance about job loss by using three interesting strategies. First, families adopted 
a tone of normalcy, telling the interviewers that nothing had really changed after 
the job loss. Second, families deliberately foregrounded positive themes and back­
grounded negative ones. ­Finally, families maintained gendered identity construction, 
working to ­assure the man who had lost his job that he was still the man of the family. 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     115
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
In all of these strategies, family members worked to reduce the dissonance created 
by job loss.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Although researchers have been using and revising Festinger’s theory since 1957, 
the theory’s genesis is clearly quantitative and most of the work undertaken today 
remains true to this experimental approach. And, while some writers contend that the 
theory is a great theoretical achievement in social psychology (Barrett, 2017), most 
of the criticisms relate to the theory’s utility and usefulness.
Utility
One concern of CDT relates to critics’ complaints that the theory may not possess 
utility because other theoretical frameworks can explain the attitude change found in 
the $1/$20 experiment better than cognitive dissonance.
Irving Janis and Robert Gilmore (1965) argue that when people participate in an 
inconsistency, such as arguing a position they do not believe in, they become motivated 
to think up all the arguments in favor of the position while suppressing all the argu­
ments against it. Janis and Gilmore call this process ­biased scanning. This biased scan­
ning process should increase the chances of accepting the new position—for example, 
changing one’s position from evaluating the spool-sorting task as dull to the position 
that it really was an ­interesting task.	
Janis and Gilmore (1965) note that when a person is overcompensated for engag­
ing in biased scanning, suspicion and guilt are aroused. Thus, they are able to explain 
why the large incentive of $20 does not cause the students in Festinger and Carlsmith’s 
(1959) experiment to have an increased attitude change.
Other researchers (Cooper & Fazio, 1984) argue that the original theory of cog­
nitive dissonance contains a great deal of “conceptual fuzziness.” Some ­researchers 
note that the concept of dissonance is confounded by self-concept or impression 
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  | 
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Critique
Evaluation
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time

116     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
management. Impression management refers to the activities people engage in to look 
good to themselves and others. For example, Elliot Aronson (1969) argues that people 
wish to appear reasonable to themselves and suggests that in Festinger and Carlsmith’s 
(1959) experiment, if “dissonance exists, it is because the individual’s behavior is 
inconsistent with his self-concept” (p. 27). Aronson asserts that the Stanford students’ 
dissonance resulted from seeing themselves as upright and truthful men contrasted 
with their behavior of ­deceiving someone else because they were being paid to do so.
In the study we discussed earlier by Patrice Buzzanell and Lynn Turner (2003) 
concerning family communication and job loss, we could conceive of the strategies 
the families adopted as employing impression management rather than reducing dis­
sonance. When fathers reported that nothing had changed in their family despite the job 
loss, they may have been rationalizing to continue to seem reasonable to themselves, 
just as Aronson suggests.
In the preceding critiques, researchers disagree about what cognitive state is at 
work: dissonance, biased scanning, or impression management. Daryl Bem (1967) ar­
gues that the central concept of importance is not any type of cognition but, rather, is 
behavioral. Bem states that rather than dissonance in cognitions operating to change 
people, self-perception is at work. Self-perception simply means that people make con­
clusions about their own attitudes the same way others do—by observing their behav­
ior. Bem’s alternative explanation allows more simplicity in the theory as well.
In Bem’s conceptualization, it is not necessary to speculate about the ­degree of cog­
nitive dissonance that a person feels. People only need to observe what they are doing to 
calculate what their attitudes must be. For instance, if I am not working out regularly, but 
I believe fitness and health are important goals, I must not really believe working out is 
so important to good health. In our chapter-opening story about Ali Torres, Bem would 
argue that the longer Ali works at the Alliance, the more likely she is to come to believe 
that she is doing something worthwhile. Bem’s argument suggests that if Ali’s friend asks 
her if she likes her job, she might reply, “I guess I do. I am still there.”
Claude Steele’s work (Steele, 1988, 2012; Steele, Spencer, & Lynch, 1993) also 
offers a behavioral explanation for dissonance effects: self-affirmation. However, un­
like Bem, Steele and his colleagues argue that dissonance is the result of ­behaving in 
a manner that threatens one’s sense of moral integrity. You can see how this expla­
nation might work quite well in Ali Torres’s situation. Her discomfort might not be 
because she holds two contradictory beliefs but because she doesn’t respect herself 
for staying in a job where she is not accomplishing anything of significance.
Other scholars believe that Cognitive Dissonance Theory is basically useful and 
explanatory but needs some refinements. For example, Wicklund and Brehm (1976) 
argue that CDT is not clear enough about the conditions under which dissonance leads 
to change in attitudes. They believe that choice is the missing concept in the theory. 
Wicklund and Brehm posit that when people believe they have a choice about the dis­
sonant relationship, they will be motivated to change that relationship. If people think 
they are powerless, then they will not be bothered by the dissonance, and they probably 
will not change. ­Regarding our beginning scenario about Ali Torres, Wicklund and 
Brehm would argue that we could predict whether she will leave her job based on how 
much choice she believes she has in the matter. If, for instance, she is tied to Gary, Indi­
ana, because of family responsibilities or if she believes she would have trouble locating 
a new job in the city, she may not be motivated to act on her dissonant cognitions. On 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     117
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
the other hand, if nothing really ties her to Gary, or there are plenty of other job oppor­
tunities, she will be motivated to change based on those same cognitions.
Another refinement is suggested by the work of Joel Cooper and Jeff Stone (2000). 
Cooper and Stone point out that in the more than 1,000 studies using CDT, only rarely has 
the group membership of the person experiencing dissonance been considered. Cooper 
and Stone believe that group membership plays an important role in how people experi­
ence and reduce dissonance. For example, they found that social identity derived from 
religious and political groups had an impact on how people responded to dissonance. 
Somewhat related to Cooper and Stone’s notion is work that examines “spiritual disso­
nance” and examines people who volunteer for religious groups (McGuire, 2010).
Other critics note that CDT is not as useful as it should be because it does not 
provide a full explanation for how and when people will attempt to reduce disso­
nance. First, there is what has been called the “multiple mode” problem. This prob­
lem exists because, given a dissonance-producing situation, there are multiple ways 
to reduce the dissonance. As we discussed earlier in the chapter, there are several 
ways to bring about more consonance (such as changing your mind or engaging in se­
lective exposure, attention, interpretation, or retention). The weakness in the theory 
is that it doesn’t allow precise predictions.
This prediction problem is also apparent in the fact that the theory does not speak 
to the issue of individual differences. People vary in their tolerance for dissonance, 
and the theory fails to specify how this factors in to its ­explanation.
Testability
Another weakness that scholars point out relates specifically to our criterion of testability. 
As you recall, testability refers to the theory’s likelihood of ever being proven false. The­
ories that have a seeming escape clause against being falsified are not as strong as those 
that do not. Researchers have pointed out that because Cognitive Dissonance Theory 
asserts that dissonance will motivate people to act, when people do not act, proponents 
of the theory can say that the dissonance must not have been strong enough, rather than 
concluding that the theory is wrong. In this way it is difficult to disprove the theory.
Student Voices
Amelia
This theory makes so much sense, and I can apply it to my own struggle to quit smok­
ing. I know smoking isn’t good for me, and I have tried to quit. Everyone tells me I 
should; and I know it’s true. It makes me feel like an idiot that I continue to do some­
thing that’s harmful to my health. But it’s so hard to quit. I have noticed that I use some 
of the ways to reduce dissonance that the theory talks about. Like I’ve said that every­
one has to die of something, so I’ve tried to reduce the importance of the dissonance. 
And I’ve also mentioned that I smoke low tar cigarettes, and I don’t smoke as much 
as some of my friends—trying to add to the consonant beliefs. The only technique I 
haven’t actually used is to quit, which would remove the dissonance completely!

118     Chapter 6  •  Cognitive Dissonance Theory
C O G N I T I V E  D I S S O N A N C E  T H E O R Y
Although Cognitive Dissonance Theory has its shortcomings, it does offer us 
insight into the relationship among attitudes, cognitions, affect, and behaviors, and it 
does suggest routes to attitude change and persuasion. ­Social cognition researchers 
as well as communication scholars continue to use many of the ideas from CDT. As 
Steven Littlejohn and Karen Foss (2017) observe, ­Festinger’s theory is not only the 
most important consistency theory, it is one of the most significant theories in social 
psychology. CDT has been the framework for over a thousand research studies (Per­
loff, 1993), most of which have supported the theory. Additionally, numerous cri­
tiques and interpretations have refined and revised the theory. And some researchers 
(e.g., Harmon-Jones, 2009; Hoelzl, Pollai, & Kastner, 2011) believe that continuing 
to refine the theory by examining cognitions more specifically and combining it with 
other theoretical models will yield rich theoretical ­insights.
Closing
Cognitive Dissonance Theory has contributed greatly to our understanding of 
cognitions and their relationship to behaviors. The concept of dissonance remains 
a powerful one in the research literature, informing studies in psychology, cognitive 
psychology, communication, and other related fields.
Discussion Starters
tech quest: Describe how CDT might explain what happens when people 
meet online and then feel differently about one another after meeting face to 
face. 
	
1.  Explain the relationship of selective attention, exposure, interpretation, and 
retention to cognitive dissonance. Provide examples where appropriate. How do 
you think Ali Torres might use these processes, given her situation?
	
2.  Give an example of two attitudes you hold that have an irrelevant 
­relationship to each other. Cite two consonant attitudes you hold. Do you have any 
attitudes that are dissonant with each other? If so, have you done anything about 
them? Explain how your actions fit with the theory.
	
3.  What do you think about the problem of CDT’s testability suggested in this 
chapter? Could the theory be revised to make it testable?
	
4.  Suppose you want some friends to change their drinking and driving behav­
iors. How could you apply the theory in persuading your friends?
	
5.  Do you agree with the minimal justification notion? Provide an ­example in 
which minimal justification seemed to work to persuade someone.
	
6.  How do you think group membership affects dissonance and what role do 
you believe it plays in dissonance reduction?
	
7.  Besides persuasion, what other communication applications would you sug­
gest for CDT?

119
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
As she prepared for her 
interview with Ingraham 
Polling, Margie Russo felt 
confident that she would be able to handle any 
questions posed to her. As a 44-year-old mother 
of three young children, she felt that her life ex­
periences alone would help her respond to any of 
the more difficult questions. She was a Girl Scout 
leader, served as treasurer of the Parent Teacher 
Organization at the middle school, and worked 
part time as an executive assistant. She knew 
these experiences would be invaluable as she an­
swered questions in her interview.
	
Despite her confidence, Margie suddenly 
felt anxious about her interview with Alyssa 
Mueller, the polling company’s human resources 
repre­sentative. When told by the office assis­
tant that ­Ms. Mueller was ready to see her, Mar­
gie ­approached Alyssa’s office, knocked on her 
door, and went into the room. When she was still 
more than 10 feet away from the big desk, Alyssa 
looked up and asked, “Are you Ms. Russo?” Mar­
gie ­responded, “I am.” Alyssa replied, “Well, c’mon 
over here and sit down and let’s chat a bit.”
	
As Margie approached her interviewer, an un­
easy feeling fell over her, a nervousness that she 
had never experienced before and had certainly 
not expected. Alyssa could sense Margie’s anxiety 
and asked if she could get her some coffee or tea. 
“No, thank you,” said Margie. “Well, why don’t you sit 
down?” asked Alyssa.
	
Margie really wanted this job. She had been 
preparing for the interview with her husband, who 
asked her a number of different kinds of ques­
tions the night before. She didn’t want to lose her 
chance at getting this job.
	
As the two sat and discussed the job and its 
responsibilities, Margie’s mind began to wander. 
Why was she so nervous? She had been around 
people, and she knew that she had expertise for 
the job. Yet Margie was very nervous, and she 
had butterflies in her stomach.
	
Alyssa focused on the duties Margie would 
be responsible for and to whom she would re­
port. As she spoke, Alyssa walked around her 
office a bit, at times leaning on the side of her 
desk in front of Margie’s chair. Alyssa had a 
number of different questions remaining but 
wanted Margie to speak. She asked her whether 
she had seen a good movie recently. “Oh, sorry, 
Alyssa,” Margie replied. “I just don’t have time 
for movies.”
	
“I guess I should have figured that out,” 
said Alyssa. “You really are a busy person. I’m 
very ­impressed by how you seem to manage so 
many things at one time. Your children are very 
lucky. How does your family do when you’re so 
busy?”
Margie Russo
Expectancy Violations Theory
Based on the research of Judee Burgoon
One of the things that always intrigued me in communication was looking 
at things that are counter-intuitive; things that challenge the basic tru­
isms that everybody holds and that we should all buy into.
—Judee Burgoon
C H A P T E R	7

120     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
A
n important part of any discussion of communication is the role of nonverbal com­
munication. What we do in a conversation (or how we say something) can be more 
important than what we actually say (Knapp, Hall, & Horgan, 2014). To understand 
nonverbal communication and its effects on messages in a conversation, Judee Burgoon 
developed Expectancy Violations Theory 1978; 2015 Since that time, Burgoon and a 
number of her associates have studied various messages and the influence of nonver­
bal communication on message production. Burgoon (1994) discusses the intersection 
of nonverbal communication and message production when she states that “nonverbal 
cues are an inherent and essential part of message creation (production) and interpreta­
tion (processing)” (p. 239). The theory was originally called the Nonverbal Expectancy 
Violations Theory, but Burgoon later dropped the word nonverbal because the theory 
now examines issues beyond the domain of nonverbal communication, something that 
we will explore a bit later in the chapter. Nonetheless, from its early beginnings in the 
late 1970s, Expectancy Violations Theory (EVT) has been a leading theory in identi­
fying the influence of nonverbal communication on behavior and is a theory that ad­
dresses how people respond to unexpected communication (Guerrero, 2008).
Our chapter-opening story of Margie Russo and Alyssa Mueller represents the 
nature of the theory. Margie entered the conversation with her interviewer with a 
sense of trepidation, and once their brief interaction was under way, she began to feel 
uneasy about the manner in which the space between them changed. Alyssa moved 
closer to Margie during the interview, causing Margie to feel uncomfortable. How­
ever, once the conversation centered on Margie’s children, she did not view Alyssa or 
her closeness as a threat to her confidence.
Expectancy Violations Theory suggests that people hold expectations about the 
nonverbal behavior of others. Burgoon contends that unexpected changes in conver­
sational distance between communicators are arousing and frequently ambiguous. 
Interpreting the meaning behind an expectancy violation depends on how favorably 
the “violator” is perceived. Returning to our opening scenario, in many interviews, the 
interviewer is not expected to lean on a desk in front of the job candidate. When this 
occurred, Margie became uncomfortable. It was only after Alyssa began to talk about 
the movies that Margie began to feel more at ease. In other words, she started to view 
Alyssa in a more favorable light.
In our discussion thus far, we have been using examples from nonverbal com­
munication, primarily distance. Burgoon’s (1978) early writing on EVT integrated 
specific instances of nonverbal communication; namely, personal space and people’s 
expectations of conversational distance. When the theory was first conceptualized, 
space was a core concept of the theory. Although the theory has expanded beyond 
	
“Oh, they’re fine, thanks. I do get some free 
time, but I try to spend as much time as I can 
with my children.” Margie was feeling more re­
laxed as she began to talk about how busy she 
was helping her two daughters sell Girl Scout 
cookies. She then talked about her ability to jug­
gle several things at once.
	
Alyssa responded, “That’s great! Let’s talk 
some more about how you handle deadlines.”
	
It was apparent that as the two talked Margie 
became more comfortable speaking to Alyssa. 
Eventually, she dismissed her nervousness and felt 
that she was well on her way to becoming ­employed 
with Ingraham Polling.

	
Space Relations     121
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
personal space, it is important to provide you an understanding of Burgoon’s origi­
nal thinking ­before you can understand the ­expansion of the theory. Further, because 
­spatial violations constitute a primary feature of the theory, it is important to under­
stand the various spatial ­distances before we delve further.
Space Relations
The study of a person’s use of space is called proxemics. Proxemics includes the 
way people use space in their conversations as well as perceptions of another’s use of 
space. Many people take spatial relations between communicators for granted, yet, 
as we (West & Turner, 2017) conclude, people’s use of space can seriously affect 
their ability to achieve desired goals. Spatial use can influence meaning and mes­
sage, and people’s spaces have intrigued researchers for some time. Burgoon began 
her original work on EVT by studying interpretations of space violations.
proxemics
study of a person’s 
use of space
personal space
individual’s variable 
use of space and 
distance
Burgoon (1978) starts from the premise that humans have two competing needs: af­
filiation and personal space. Personal space, according to Burgoon, can be defined as 
“an invisible, variable volume of space surrounding an individual which defines that in­
dividual’s preferred distance from others” (p. 130). Burgoon and other Expectancy Viola­
tions writers believe that people simultaneously ­desire to stay in close proximity to others, 
but also desire some distance. This is a perplexing but realistic dilemma for most of us. 
Few people can exist in isolation, and yet people prefer their privacy at times.
Proxemic Zones
Burgoon’s Expectancy Violations Theory has been informed by the pioneering and 
classic work of anthropologist Edward Hall (1992, 1996). After studying North 
Americans (in the Northeast), Hall claimed that four proxemic zones exist—­intimate, 
personal, social, and public—and each zone is used for different reasons. Hall includes 
Theory-Into-Practice
Expectancy Violations Theory
Theoretical Claim: Understanding various proxemic differences helps us to manage 
our expectations of another’s behavior.
Practical Implication: Jessie and Carla are roommates but each was born and raised in 
a different country (Jessie was born in Venezuela and Carla was born in Canada). Liv­
ing in a small dorm room, the two found out early on that they would have a hard time 
finding private “space.” Yet, when each goes out, the two have different experiences 
and expectations. Jessie generally doesn’t mind when people stand close to her to talk; 
Carla does. Even when talking to her family, Carla wants to keep a distance that she 
maintains with friends or classmates. Jessie has no expectation of distance, except 
for those whom she first meets and especially guys she may be interested in dating.
T*I*P

122     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
ranges of spatial distance and the behaviors that are appropriate for each zone. We 
have highlighted the proxemic zones in Figure 7.1.
Intimate Distance  This zone includes behaviors that exist in a range encompassing 
0–18 inches. Hall (1966) notes that this includes behaviors that range from touch (for 
instance, making love) to being able to observe a person’s facial characteristics. Whis­
pers, for instance, carried out in this intimate distance range have the ability to become 
extremely powerful. Hall finds it interesting that when U.S. citizens find themselves in 
intimate surroundings but are not with intimate partners, they often attempt to create a 
nonintimate experience. Consider what happens in an elevator. People usually fix their 
eyes on the ceiling, the buttons, or the door as the elevator passes floor after floor. Peo­
ple keep their hands at their side or grasp some object. Hall finds it amusing that many 
people expend so much energy extracting themselves from intimate distances. Margie 
Russo in our opening story seems to be troubled by the intimate distance created by 
Alyssa. If she wasn’t in an interview, she’d likely remove herself from the situation. 
It’s important to point out that some invasions of personal space may be construed as 
sexual harassment, regardless of the intent. For this reason, we need to remain sensitive 
to the various perceptions of intimate distance.
Personal Distance    This zone includes those behaviors that exist in an area ranging 
from 18 inches to 4 feet. According to Hall (1966), personal distance encompasses 
being as close as holding another’s hand to keeping someone at arm’s length. You may 
find that most, if not all, of the intimate relationships you have are within the closest 
point of the personal distance zone. Personal distance is likely to be used for your family 
and friends. The farthest point—4 feet—is usually reserved for less personal relation­
ships, such as sales clerks. Hall indicates that in the personal distance zone, the voice is 
usually moderate, body heat is detectable, and breath and body odor may be perceptible.
Social Distance    With a proxemic range spanning 4–12 feet, the social ­distance cate­
gory characterizes many conversations in U.S. culture, for instance, between and among 
coworkers. Hall (1966) contends that the closer social distance is usually reserved for 
those in a casual social setting, for example, a cocktail party. Although the distance 
seems a bit far, Hall reminds us that we are able to perceive skin and hair texture in the 
close phase of this category. The far phase is associated with individuals who have to 
speak louder than those in the close phase. In addition, the far phase can be considered 
to be more formal than the close phase. The far phase of social distance allows people 
Intimate space
0–18 in.
Self
18 in.–4 ft
4–12 ft
12 ft +
Personal space
Social space
Public space
Figure 7.1
Proxemic Zones
intimate distance
very close spatial 
zone spanning 
0–18 inches, usually 
reserved for those 
whom we share 
personal feelings 
personal distance 
spatial zone of 
18 inches to 4 feet, 
reserved for family 
and friends
social distance 
spatial zone of 
4–12 feet, reserved 
for more formal 
relationships such 
as those with 
coworkers

	
Space Relations     123
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
to carry on simultaneous tasks. For instance, receptionists are able to carry on with their 
work while they converse with approaching strangers. It is possible, therefore, to moni­
tor another person while completing a task.
Public Distance    The range encompassing 12 feet and beyond is considered to be 
public distance. The close phase of public distance is reserved for fairly formal 
discussions, for instance, in-class discussions between teachers and students. Public 
figures usually are at the far phase (around 25 feet or more). As you may have deter­
mined, it is difficult to read facial reactions at this point, unless media enhancements 
(for instance, large-screen projection) are used in the presentation. Whereas the close 
phase characterizes teachers in a classroom, the far phase includes teachers in a lec­
ture hall. Also, actors use public distance in their performances. Consequently, their 
actions and words are exaggerated. Teachers and actors, however, are just two of the 
many types of people who use public distance in their lives.
Territoriality
Before we close our discussion of personal space, we explore an additional ­feature: 
territoriality, or a person’s ownership of an area or object. Frequently, we lay claim 
to various spatial areas that we want to protect or defend. People decide that they want 
to erect fences, put on nameplates, or designate spaces as their own (e.g., Marissa’s 
room, Mom’s car, etc.). Three types of territories exist: primary, secondary, and public 
(Altman, 1975; Lyman, 1990). Primary territories signal an individual’s exclusive 
domain. For instance, one’s own workshop or computer are primary territories. In fact, 
many people put their names on their primary territories to further signify ownership. 
Secondary ­territories signal some sort of personal connection to an area or object. 
­Secondary territories are not exclusive to an individual, but the individual feels some 
sort of association to the territory. For ­instance, many graduate students feel that a cam­
pus library is their secondary ­territory; they don’t own the building, but they frequently 
occupy a space in the building. Public territories ­involve no personal affiliations and 
include those areas that are open to all ­people—for example, beaches, parks, movie 
theaters, and public transportation areas.
Territoriality is frequently accompanied by prevention and reaction (Knapp et al., 
2014). That is, people may either try to prevent you from entering their territory or 
will respond once the territory is invaded. Some gangs use territorial markers in 
a neighborhood to prevent other gangs from invading their turf. Knapp et al. note 
that if prevention does not work in defending one’s territory, a person may react in 
some way, including getting both physically and cognitively aroused. In sum, humans 
typically stake out their territory in four primary ways: markers (marking our spot), 
labels (identification symbols), offensive displays (demonstrating aggressive looks 
and behaviors), and tenure (being there first and staying the longest) (Knapp, 1978).
Our elaborated discussion of space has relevance to Expectancy Violations The­
ory not only because the theory is rooted in proxemics, but also because it has direct 
application to the distances previously discussed. EVT assumes that people will react 
to space violations. To this end, our expectations for behavior will vary from one 
distance to another. That is, people have a sense of where they want others to place 
themselves in a conversation. For instance, consider Margie and Alyssa from our 
territoriality 
person’s ownership 
of an area or object
primary territories 
signal a person’s 
exclusive domain 
over an area or 
object
secondary 
territories 
locations that signal 
a person’s affiliation 
with an area or 
object
public territories 
locations that signal 
open spaces for 
everyone, including 
beaches and parks
public distance 
spatial zone of 
12 feet and beyond, 
reserved for very 
formal discussions 
such as between 
professor and 
students in class

124     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
opening story. Just as Margie has expectations for Alyssa’s behavior in an interview, 
Alyssa, too, expects Margie to behave in a predictable way. Alyssa expects Margie 
to maintain a comfortable distance as well. She does not expect Margie to come into 
the office, put her briefcase on the desk, and pull a chair up next to Alyssa. Accord­
ing to EVT, if Margie’s behavior is unexpected and Alyssa evaluates her behavior 
negatively, Alyssa may become more concerned with the expectancy violation than 
with Margie’s credentials. The proxemic zones proposed by Hall, then, are important 
frameworks to consider when interpreting another’s behavior.
Thus far, we have introduced you to how personal space is associated with Expec­
tancy Violations Theory. The theory has evolved over the years, with Burgoon and other 
EVT proponents clarifying their original findings and concepts. Although we provide her 
pioneering theory in detail in this chapter, we also integrate updates and revisions of the 
theory where appropriate. To ­further explore the theory, we will first provide the basic as­
sumptions of the theory and then examine a number of issues associated with the theory.
Expectancy Violations Theory is concerned primarily with the structure of non­
verbal messages. It asserts that when communicative norms are violated, the 
violation may be perceived either favorably or unfavorably, depending on the 
perception the receiver has of the violator. Violating another’s expectations is 
a strategy that may be used rather than conforming to another’s expectations.
Theory At a Glance  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
expectancies 
thoughts and behav­
iors anticipated in 
conversations
Assumptions of Expectancy Violations Theory
Expectancy Violations Theory is rooted in how messages are presented to ­others and 
the kinds of behaviors others undertake during a conversation. According to Burgoon 
(2015), the theory “arose out of an effort to resolve conflicting views of proxemics in 
human interactions” (p. 1). In addition, three assumptions guide the theory:
∙∙
Expectancies drive human interaction.
∙∙
Expectancies for human behavior are learned.
∙∙
People make predictions about nonverbal behavior.
The first assumption states that people carry expectancies in their interactions with 
others. In other words, expectancies drive human interaction. ­Expec­tancies can be de­
fined as the cognitions and behaviors anticipated and prescribed in a conversation with 
another person. Expectancies, therefore, necessarily include individuals’ nonverbal and 
verbal behavior. In her early writings of EVT, Burgoon (1978) notes that people do not 
view others’ behaviors as random; rather, they have various expectations of how others 
should think and behave. Reviewing the research by Burgoon and her associates, Tim 
Levine and his colleagues (2000) suggest that expectancies are a result of social norms, 
stereotypes, hearsay, and the idiosyncrasies of communicators. Consider, for instance, 
our story of Margie Russo and Alyssa Mueller. If you were the interviewer, what sort of 

	
Assumptions of Expectancy Violations Theory     125
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
expectations would you have for the nonverbal and verbal behavior of the ­interviewee? 
Many people conducting the interview would certainly expect a specific level of confi­
dence, manifested by a warm handshake, a give-and-take conversational flow, and ac­
tive listening skills. Interviewees would also be expected to keep a reasonable distance 
from the interviewer during the interview process. Many people in the United States do 
not want people whom they do not know to stand either too close or too far away from 
them. Whether it is in an ­interview situation or even a discussion between two people 
who have a prior ­relationship, Burgoon and other EVT writers (e.g., Kalman & Rafaeli, 
2012) argue that people enter interactions with a number of expectations about how 
a message should be delivered and how the messenger should deliver it. See Figure 7.2 
for factors that influence a person’s expectations.
Judee Burgoon and Jerold Hale (1988) contend that two types of expectations 
exist: pre-interactional and interactional. Pre-interactional expectations include the 
types of interactional knowledge and skills the communicator possesses before he 
or she enters a conversation. People do not always understand what it takes to enter 
and maintain a conversation. Some conversationalists may be very argumentative, 
for example, and others may be extremely passive. Most people do not expect such 
extreme behavior in their dialogues with others. Interactional expectations pertain 
to an individual’s ability to carry out the interaction itself. Most people expect others 
to maintain appropriate conversational distance. In addition, in communicating with 
others, listening behaviors such as prolonged eye contact are frequently expected. 
These and a host of other behaviors are important to consider when examining the 
role of expectations before and during an interaction.
Of course, depending on the cultural background of communicators, these be­
haviors can vary tremendously from one person to another. In addition, whether our 
expectations are met will usually be influenced by the culture in which we live and by 
whether we have internalized cultural patterns for conversation expectations.
This leads us to our second assumption of EVT—that people learn their ex­
pectations from both the culture at large and the individuals in that culture. For in­
stance, the U.S. culture teaches that a professor–student relationship is underscored 
by professional respect. Although not explicitly stated in most college classrooms, 
professors have more social status than students, and therefore certain expectations 
exist in their relationships with their students. For instance, we expect teachers to be 
knowledgeable about subject matter, to present it to students in a clear manner, and 
to be available if students are concerned or confused about a topic. We also expect 
professors to recognize, acknowledge, and affirm students in the classroom who offer 
their thoughts (Finn & Schrodt, 2012). The teacher–student relationship is just one 
Expectancies
Individual communicator factors (gender,
personality, age, appearance, reputation)
Relational factors (prior relational history,
status diﬀerences, levels of attraction
and liking)
Context factors (formality/informality, 
social/task functions, environment 
restrictions, cultural norms)
Figure 7.2
Influences on 
Expectancies
pre-interactional 
expectations 
the knowledge or 
skills a communica­
tor brings to an 
interaction
interactional 
expectations 
an individual’s abil­
ity to carry out the 
interaction

126     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
The third assumption pertains to the predictions people make about nonverbal 
communication. Later in this chapter we note that EVT theorists have applied the no­
tion of expectancies to verbal behavior. Nonetheless, the original statement of EVT re­
lated specifically to nonverbal behavior. To this end, it’s important to point out a belief 
inherent in the theory: People make predictions about another’s nonverbal behavior.
In later writings of EVT, Judee Burgoon and Joseph Walther (1990) expanded the 
original understanding of EVT via personal space to other areas of nonverbal commu­
nication, including touch and posture. They suggest that the attractiveness of another 
influences the evaluation of expectancies. In conversations, people do not simply at­
tend to what another is saying. As you will learn in this chapter, nonverbal behavior 
affects the conversation, and this behavior prompts others to make predictions.
Let’s use an example to explain this assumption a bit further. Suppose someone 
whom you feel is attractive starts to make direct eye contact with you at a grocery store. 
At first, you may feel a bit odd with the prolonged stare. But because you are attracted 
to the person, that initial awkwardness may fade into comfort. Then you may begin 
to surmise that the person is interested in you because you see a decrease in physical 
distance between the two of you. This example illustrates the fact that you were making 
example of a co-culture teaching its citizens that expectations exist in a particular re­
lationship. Most discussions between teachers and students, therefore, are laden with 
cultural expectations of how the two should relate to each other. A number of societal 
institutions (the family, the media, business and industry, and so forth) are central 
in prescribing what cultural patterns to follow. These at-large cultural prescriptions 
ultimately may be followed by individuals in conversation with each other.
Individuals within a culture are also influential in communicating expectations. 
Burgoon and Hale (1988) remark that differences based on our prior knowledge of 
others, our relational history with them, and our observations are important to con­
sider. For instance, Alyssa Mueller’s past experiences with prospective employees in­
fluence how she perceives an interaction and her expectations of job candidates in an 
interview (relational history). In addition, expectations result from our observations. 
In one family, for instance, standing very close to one another is a family norm, and yet 
this norm is not shared in other families. Interesting scenarios occur in conversations 
between individuals with different norms; expectations for conversational distance 
vary and may influence perceptions of the interaction or have other consequences.
Student Voices
Eddie
It seems like there are big differences in how we allow violations to occur. 
As a gay guy, I’ve made comments to girls who have a great shape and have 
even played with their hair to tell them that it’s incredibly styled. In a lot of 
those situations, I hear the same thing: “If you were a straight guy, you would 
never be touching me.” I guess it makes a difference whether or not there is 
perception of inappropriateness.

	
Threat Threshold     127
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
predictions (e.g., the person is attracted to you) based on his or her nonverbal behavior 
(e.g., eye contact and personal space). Before you begin to believe your own projec­
tion of attractiveness, however, keep in mind that your reaction may be either mis­
guided or simply wrong. Despite your level of confidence, nonverbal communication 
is frequently ambiguous and is open to multiple interpretations (Knapp et al., 2014). 
We now turn our attention to additional concepts and features of EVT: arousal, threat 
threshold, violation valence, and communicator reward valence.
Arousal
Burgoon originally felt that deviations from expectations have consequences. These 
deviations, or violations, have what is called “arousal value” (Burgoon, 1978, p. 133). 
By this she means that when a person’s expectations are violated, the person’s interest 
or attention is aroused, and he or she uses a particular mechanism to cope with the vio­
lation. When arousal occurs, one’s interest or ­attention to the deviation increases and 
one pays less attention to the message and more attention to the source of the arousal 
(Bachman & Guerrero, 2006; LaPoire & Burgoon, 1996). Burgoon and Hale (1988) 
later termed this “mental alertness” or an “orienting response,” in which attention is 
diverted toward the source of the deviation.
A person may be both cognitively and physically aroused. Cognitive arousal is an 
alertness or an orientation to a violation. When we are cognitively aroused, our intuitive 
senses become heightened. Physical arousal includes those behaviors that a commu­
nicator employs during an interaction—such as moving out of uncomfortable speaking 
distances, adjusting one’s stance during an interaction, and so forth. Most EVT studies 
have investigated cognitive arousal (via self-report inventories), yet little research has 
examined physiological arousal. One interesting study that examined physical arousal 
in conversation was undertaken by Beth LaPoire and Judee Burgoon (1996). Specifi­
cally, they asked college students to engage in a practice medical interview. During 
the interaction, the researchers studied heart rate, skin temperature, and pulse volume 
changes every 5 seconds while they assessed expectancy violations. Only heart rate 
and pulse volume demonstrated any statistical significance. Results indicated that after 
subjects registered cognitive arousal to a violation, they first experienced heart rate 
decreases and pulse volume increases. This was followed by pulse volume decreases. 
In sum, people notice when others are not adhering to interaction expectations. Arousal 
remains a complicated but important part of EVT. As you can see, arousal is more than 
simply recognizing when someone commits a violation.
Threat Threshold
Once arousal exists, threats may occur. A second key concept associated with EVT is 
threat threshold, which Burgoon (1978) defines as the “distance at which an inter­
actant experiences physical and physiological discomfort by the presence of another” 
(p. 130). In a sense, the threat threshold is a tolerance for distance violation. Burgoon 
maintains that “when distance is equated with threat, closer distances are perceived 
as more threatening and farther distances as less threatening” (p. 134). In this sense, 
distance is interpreted as a statement of threat from a communicator. People may either 
arousal 
increased interest 
or attention when 
deviations from 
expectations occur
threat threshold 
tolerance for 
distance violations
cognitive arousal 
mental awareness 
of deviations from 
expectations
physical arousal 
bodily changes as a 
result of deviations 
from expectations

128     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
reward or punish a threat. Burgoon arrives at this conclusion by consulting the research 
on liking and attraction. This research suggests that closer distances are reserved for 
people we like or to whom we are attracted. Some people don’t mind when others stand 
close to them; their threat threshold, therefore, is high. Others become very uncomfort­
able around those who stand too close; for them, the threat threshold is low. So, for 
instance, if you are attracted to a person you see each morning at Starbucks, your threat 
threshold will likely be high as he or she talks to you and comes closer to you as your 
conversation progresses. During this same interaction, however, you may discover that 
this is not the sort of person you want to hang out with, and you may find your threat 
threshold getting smaller. Burgoon notes that the size of the threshold is based on how 
we view the initiator of the threat, which we discussed earlier as the communication 
reward valence. Once a violation occurs, however, we again interpret the violation. 
Although Burgoon later decided that the threat threshold is not necessarily associated 
with the other communicator, the concept remains important to consider as you try to 
understand the violation–communication reward valence interplay in EVT.
Violation Valence
Throughout this chapter, we have emphasized that when people speak to others, they 
have expectations. Many of these expectations are based on social norms of the other 
person. When expectations are violated, however, many people evaluate the violation 
on a valence. Violation valence refers to the positive or negative assessment of an 
unexpected behavior. Violation valence ­focuses on the deviation of an expectation.
Violation valence requires making sense of a violation through interpretation 
and evaluation (Burgoon & Hale, 1988). Quite simply, communicators try to inter­
pret the meaning of a violation and decide whether they like it. If, for instance, a 
professor is speaking very close to you, you may interpret the ­behavior as an ex­
pression of superiority or intimidation. Consequently, the ­violation valence would 
be negative. Or you may view the violation as something positive; you might think 
the professor is demonstrating a sense of ­connection. Your violation valence, then, 
would be positive. Most of the ­research in the area of violations suggests that viola­
tions are likely to have a negative impact on close relationships (e.g., Cohen, 2007).
To better understand the violation valence, consider two situations between co­
workers Noland and Rick. Standing in the break room, Noland begins to talk about 
his phone call to his wife this morning. As he discusses his conversation about where 
they decided to go for vacation, Noland begins to close this distance between him 
and Rick. Rick feels very uncomfortable with the distance in that his expectations 
for spatial distance between coworkers is violated. In other words, Rick is negatively 
aroused by Noland’s distance behavior. A different situation, however, might prompt 
a different reaction. Imagine that Noland corners Rick to tell him that he heard that 
the company was laying off 20 percent of its workers within two months. Because 
Rick was recently hired by the company, he might be positively aroused and allow 
Noland to violate his personal space. Most likely, he will positively evaluate Noland 
and allow the violation to take place.
It may be perplexing to think that violations can be viewed positively. Yet there 
are many such examples. For instance, in a job interview, the candidate who is able 
violation valence 
perceived negative 
or positive assess­
ment of an unex­
pected behavior

	
Communicator Reward Valence     129
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
to convince the interviewer that he or she is the most qualified is usually the person 
who gets the job. Most job interviews are very structured and have an agreed-on 
informal process. Most job candidates follow the interview script and do not violate 
anyone’s expectations. At times, though, candidates do not follow the script; they 
violate expectations. Although some interviewers may think these candidates are too 
independent, others (say, in the dot.com industry) may see them as creative, bold, 
and original. These may be the qualities that ultimately get the person the job. Thus, 
the violation was not expected in an interview, yet resulted in a favorable impression.
Communicator Reward Valence
What happens when our expectations are not met in a conversation with another? 
Burgoon believes that when people depart, or deviate, from expectations, how that 
deviation is received depends on the reward potential of others. Let’s explain this a 
bit further. Burgoon, along with Deborah Coker and Ray Coker (1986), notes that not 
all violations of expected behavior necessarily yield negative perceptions. Specifi­
cally, the researchers offer the following: “In cases where behaviors are ambiguous 
or have multiple interpretations, acts committed by a high-reward communicator 
may be assigned positive meanings, and the same acts committed by a low-reward 
communicator may be assigned negative meanings” (p. 498). Communicators can 
offer each other a number of rewards, including smiles, head nods, physical attrac­
tiveness, attitude similarity, socioeconomic status, credibility, and competence. In 
our opening story, Alyssa Mueller’s demeanor in asking about Margie’s children 
was apparently viewed as reward behavior because Margie’s nervousness immedi­
ately subsided. Burgoon thinks people have the potential to either reward or punish 
in conversations and maintains that people bring both positive and negative charac­
teristics to an interaction. She terms this communicator reward valence.
Burgoon holds that the concept of reward includes a number of characteristics 
that allow a person to be viewed favorably or unfavorably. Burgoon (2015) has stated 
that “highly regarded communicators, such as those with high status, reputed ex­
pertise, purchasing power, physical attractiveness, similarity to partner, or who give 
positive feedback, have more favorable meanings ascribed to their nonverbal behav­
ior than those with lower reward valence regardless of actions” (p. 8). According to 
Expectancy Violations Theory, interpretations of violations depend on the commu­
nicator and his or her value. So, for instance, Margie Russo may not view Alyssa’s 
close proximity as a positive deviation from expected behavior in an interview. Yet 
Alyssa’s behavior was more positively received because of other characteristics; 
namely, her courteous manner and interest in Margie’s children.
Let’s apply this idea to eye behavior in a number of different contexts. A pro­
longed stare from a person on public transportation is probably not going to be re­
ceived favorably, but it may be received favorably from one’s romantic partner. If a 
keynote speaker at a dinner banquet looked above the listeners’ heads, many people 
would be bewildered by this lack of eye contact. But when strangers pass on the street, 
lack of eye contact is expected. Or, think about your response to receiving a constant 
stare from your supervisor or a coworker. Finally, cultural differences influence per­
ceptions of eye contact. A wife who avoids eye contact while telling her husband that 
communicator 
reward valence 
the sum of the posi­
tive and negative 
characteristics of 
a person and the 
­potential for him 
or her to carry 
out rewards or 
­punishments

130     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
she loves him may elicit a different evaluation than if she had direct eye contact, but 
this interpretation varies across cultural groups. Some (e.g., Irish Americans) would 
expect another to look directly at them when saying something very personal, such 
as “I love you.” Others (e.g., Japanese Americans), however, do not place such value 
on eye contact. In each of these contexts, violations of expected eye behavior may be 
interpreted differently according to how we receive the ­communicator.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Expectancy Violations Theory is one of the few theories specifically focusing on what 
people expect—and their reactions to others—in conversations. Unequivocally, the 
research has followed a quantitative approach since its inception in the 1970s. The 
assumptions and core concepts clearly demonstrate the importance of nonverbal mes­
sages and information processing. EVT also enhances our understanding of how ex­
pectations influence conversational distance. The theory uncovers what takes place in 
the minds of communicators and how communicators monitor nonverbal (and verbal) 
behavior during their conversations. Among the criteria for evaluating a theory, four 
seem especially relevant for discussion: scope, utility, testability, and heurism. 
Integration
Student Voices
Star
Talking about space differences got me thinking about how people use it. I remem­
ber a time where a vendor at a ballpark got pretty close to me as I bought some 
popcorn. As I gave him the money, I could tell he was standing way too close to me. 
As a matter of fact, he was what I would call (using Hall’s category) “intimate” in his 
space. Really, though, I didn’t mind it all that much. He was cute, I was single, and we 
were both kind of bored, I think!
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility | Testability  |
Heurism  |  Test of Time
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     131
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
Scope
At first glance, the scope of this theory may appear to be too broad; nonverbal com­
munication is an expansive area. Yet Burgoon’s theory has parameters in that she origi­
nally conceptualized one category of nonverbal communication as she articulated her 
theory: personal space. She has investigated and ­expanded her research to include other 
nonverbal behaviors such as eye gaze, yet her original work was clear in scope.
Utility
The practicality of EVT is apparent. Burgoon’s theory presents advice on how to elicit 
favorable impressions and discusses the implications of space violations, a topic that 
affects countless conversations. In particular, researchers who employ EVT in their work 
have investigated topics that make a difference in the lives of people, whether related 
to relationship challenges (Wright & Roloff, 2015) or cell phone usage (Miller-Ott & 
Kelly, 2015). This sort of research suggests that it has fulfilled the criterion of utility.
Testability
Some scholars (e.g., Sparks & Greene, 1992) have criticized the clarity of concepts 
in Burgoon’s theory, suggesting that testability may be problematic. Sparks and 
Greene comment that self-perceptions of arousal are not valid measures. They spe­
cifically note that Burgoon and her associates failed to establish valid indices of ob­
servers’ ratings and believe “we should not accept the claim about the validity of any 
nonverbal index until that validity has been demonstrated” (p. 468). This intellectual 
debate may appear trivial to you, yet recall that arousal is a key component of EVT. 
LaPoire and Burgoon (1992) responded to this criticism by first claiming that Sparks 
and Greene did not fairly reflect the objectives of Burgoon’s research. Additionally, 
LaPoire and Burgoon (1996) contend that because arousal is such a complicated and 
layered concept, their approach to defining arousal remains valid.
Even Burgoon (2015) suggests that the testability of the theory merits attention. 
In particular she states that EVT lacks testing across large, demographic groups and 
in non-Western cultures. Although she believes there are consistencies and applica­
tions across various groups, much more investigation is needed. Generally speaking, 
EVT is a testable theory. In Chapter 3, we noted that testability requires that theorists 
be specific in their concepts. In fact, Burgoon (1978) is one of a few theorists who 
clearly defines her terms; as she refined her theory, she also clarified past ambigui­
ties. In doing so, she presents a foundation from which future researchers might con­
tinue to draw and replicate her claims.
Heurism
The scholarship related to Expectancies Violation Theory has proliferated over the decades 
since EVT’s inception. The theory has been incorporated in a myriad of studies that span 
a number of diverse topic areas. For instance, EVT has been incorporated into an array 
of interesting and important areas, including political humor (Walther-Martin, 2015), 
obesity (Schyns, Roefs, Mulkens, & Jansen, 2016), and victim impact statements 
(Lens, van Doorn, Pemberton, Lahlah, & Bogaerts, 2016). The theory has also been in­
corporated into studies related to clothing and teacher credibility (Sidelinger & Bolen, 

132     Chapter 7  •  Expectancy Violations Theory
E X P E C T A N C Y  V I O L A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
2016), human–computer interactions (Burgoon, Bonito, Lowry, Humphreys, Moody, 
Gaskin, & Giboney, 2015), forgiveness in dating relationships (Guerrero & Bachman, 
2011), media figures/celebrities (Cohen, 2010), and marital interactions (Schoebi, 
Perrez, & Bradbury, 2012). An interesting and compelling study by Rory McGloin and 
Kristine Nowak (2011) ­examined the employment of avatars to determine the extent to 
which consumers were predisposed to purchasing particular products. The researchers 
successfully ­argued that an individual has certain impressions of an avatar’s credibility 
and consequences exist when those expectations are violated. 
Closing
Expectancy Violations Theory is an important theory because it offers a way to link be­
havior and cognitions. It is one of the few communication theories that offers us a better 
understanding of our need for both other people and personal space. For that, Burgoon’s 
work continues to be critical and groundbreaking in the communication discipline.
Discussion Starters
tech quest: Arousal is a key component of Expectancy Violations Theory. 
Explore how blogs might be discussed when examining the multifaceted 
nature of arousal. That is, can blogs be “arousing” in technological 
relationships? Explain why or why not. 
	
1.  In addition to distance behaviors, what other nonverbal behaviors are 
present in interview situations like the one between Margie and Alyssa?
	
2.  Explain how EVT might inform research and thinking on touch ­behavior. 
For instance, does the theory help us to understand the difference between 
appropriate and inappropriate touch? Explain with examples.
	
3.  Provide some nonverbal expectations that you have learned from your 
culture. Discuss what similarities and differences exist.
	
4.  How do you suppose arousal manifests itself in conversations between 
supervisors and employees? Identify a few arousal mechanisms.
	
5.  Suppose you want to study expectancy violation in school. How might you 
begin to investigate violations? Be as specific as possible, and identify some meth­
ods for studying expectations.
	
6.  Employing at least two examples, differentiate between communicator 
reward valence and violation valence.
	
7.  Discuss the application of any component of EVT to a job interview. 

133
Relationship Development
AUTHORS OF SELF-HELP BOOKS MAKE MILLIONS OF 
DOLLARS promoting ways to begin, develop, and maintain 
our interpersonal relationships. However, the sad reality is 
that there are no “four-easy steps” or one specific formula 
associated with relationship success. As we all can testify, 
our various relationships with friends, family, partners, co­
workers, spiritual leaders, and others are filled with dynam­
ics that defy simple description and are not fully explained 
in self-help books. This becomes especially important as we 
think about the fact that most of these books, sought out by 
millions of people, pretty much ignore theory and don’t have 
a solid research base to back up their claims.
This is precisely why the theories in this section, called 
­“Relationship Development,” are important to consider. They 
represent scholarship examining all types of interpersonal re­
lationships and the numerous patterns and processes involved 
in relationship development. In sum, these theories address how 
and why relationships begin, develop, and are maintained.
	
Six theories are discussed in this section. Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
suggests that when strangers meet, their focus is on reducing levels of un­
certainty about each other and about their relationship, and that relationships 
develop as a function of ­decreased uncertainty. Social Exchange Theory ex­
plains that people maintain a relationship based on their sense of the costs 
and benefits of being in it. Social Penetration Theory examines how a person’s 
decision to reveal personal information to another influences the direction of 
their relationship. As relationships progress, the participants are likely to expe­
rience conflicting impulses (“I want to be close, but I want my ­independence,” 
for example). How people deal with these tensions is the essence of ­Relational 
Dialectics Theory. Communication Privacy Management Theory states that 
Chapter 8
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
(Berger & Calabrese)  135
Chapter 9
Social Exchange Theory 
(Thibaut & Kelley)  155
Chapter 10
Social Penetration Theory 
(Altman & Taylor)  170
Chapter 11
Relational Dialectics Theory 
(Baxter & Montgomery)  187
Chapter 12
Communication Privacy 
Management Theory 
(Petronio)  204
Chapter 13
Social Information Processing 
Theory (Walther)  218

people in relationships constantly manage boundaries between the thoughts 
and ­feelings they are willing to share and those they are not. Finally, Social 
Information Processing Theory deals with how people initiate and develop rela­
tionships through computer-mediated communication. The theory explains how 
relationships progress relying on verbal and temporal cues.
	
Relational life is interesting, challenging, complex, entertaining, and ex­
hausting. The theories we present help unravel the reasons we continue to 
be part of other ­people’s lives and why they stay with us. When you encounter 
these theories, you will also become familiar with a number of engaging topics. 
You will read about uncertainty, rewards, depth and breadth, tensions, privacy, 
and motivation. In each theory, the emphasis is on how communication moder­
ates these topics. As you read the next six chapters, pay attention to the differ­
ent ways each theory conceptualizes and ­explains relational life and the central 
role communication plays in our interpersonal relationships.
134
 Relationship Development

135
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
 Edie Banks and Mal­
colm Rogers are in the 
same philosophy class 
at Urban University but, 
until today, they really had not spoken together, 
although they had seen each other in the class 
every Monday, Wednesday, and Friday for the 
past three months. Malcolm had noticed Edie and 
found her attractive, but he wondered why she 
never spoke up in class. Edie thought Malcolm 
had made some good comments in the class dis­
cussions, and he was cute! Today, as Edie was 
leaving the classroom, she noticed Malcolm star­
ing at her from the corner of the room where he 
sat with his friends. Although Edie had thought 
about getting to know Malcolm, she felt a little 
uncomfortable about having him stare so hard at 
her, and she hurried to get out of the classroom 
and away from his gaze.
Unfortunately, her friend Maggie stopped 
her at the doorway with a question about the as­
signment for next week, and so Edie and Malcolm 
reached the hallway at the same time. There was 
an awkward pause as they smiled uncertainly at 
each other. Malcolm cleared his throat and said, 
“Hi. That was a pretty interesting lecture in class 
today, wasn’t it?” Edie shrugged, smiled back, 
and replied, “I’m not sure I get what’s going on 
in there. I’m majoring in engineering, and this is 
just an elective for me. Sometimes I think I should 
have taken bowling instead.” Malcolm smiled and 
said, “I’m a communication studies major myself, 
but this class relates to a lot of what we’ve talked 
about in some of my comm classes, so it’s OK for 
me. But I guess I’d have the same reaction you’re 
having if I got stuck in an engineering class! I 
probably couldn’t engineer my way out of a paper 
bag.” The two laughed for a minute. There was an 
awkward silence and finally Edie said, “Gotta run. 
Catch you later,” and hurried off down the hall.
Malcolm walked to his next class wonder­
ing if they would talk again, if Edie was putting 
him down, if she thought he had been rude about 
her major, if she liked him, if he liked her, or if he 
cared. Edie, for her part, was kicking herself for 
sounding like an idiot the first time she’d talked to 
Malcolm. “Why in the world would I say I should 
have taken bowling?” she asked herself. “Malcolm 
probably thinks I’m totally stupid!” But then she 
wondered why he’d been staring so intently at 
her before. It was a little creepy—maybe it didn’t 
matter whether he thought she was dumb, she 
might not want to get to know him after all. Edie 
sighed to herself. It was confusing.
Uncertainty Reduction Theory
Based on the research of Charles Berger and Richard Calabrese
Edie Banks and 
Malcolm Rogers
C H A P T E R	8
URT talks about the struggle, in a sense, that people have in their 
everyday lives in adapting to an ever-changing world.
—Charles Berger

136     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
S
ometimes called Initial Interaction Theory, Uncertainty Reduction Theory (URT) 
was originated by Charles Berger and Richard Calabrese in 1975. It continues to be 
an important theory today, because, as Leanne Knobloch (2008) stated, “[E]veryday life 
is infused with uncertainty” (p. 133). Berger (2016a) is similarly clear: “Attempting to 
reduce uncertainty is a pervasive and vital activity across a wide range of human endeav­
ors” (p. 1). Berger and ­Calabrese’s goal in constructing this theory was to explain how 
communication is used to reduce uncertainties between strangers engaging in their first 
conversation together. Berger and Calabrese believe that when strangers first meet, they 
are primarily concerned with increasing predictability in an effort to make sense out of 
their communication experience. Berger (2011) commented on the theory saying that:
[T]he main supposition underlying the theory is that when strangers meet, they 
are faced with myriad uncertainties about each other’s attitudes, beliefs values 
and potential actions. In the service of predicting and, in some cases explain­
ing, each other’s beliefs and actions so that communicative choices can be 
made, individuals seek to reduce their ­uncertainties by acquiring information 
about each other. (p. 215)
As we discussed in Chapter 3, people act as implicit researchers and in URT, 
Berger and Calabrese posited that, as implicit researchers, we are ­motivated both to 
predict and to explain what goes on in initial encounters. Prediction can be defined as 
the ability to forecast the behavioral options likely to be chosen from a range of possible 
options available to oneself or to a relational partner. Explanation refers to attempts to 
interpret the meaning of past actions in a ­relationship. These two concepts—prediction 
and explanation—make up the two primary subprocesses of uncertainty reduction.
Our opening example of Malcolm and Edie illustrates Berger and ­Calabrese’s 
basic contentions about meeting someone for the first time. ­Because Malcolm does 
not know Edie, he is not sure how to interpret her comments to him. Nor is he certain 
about what will happen the next time they see each other. There are so many pos­
sible explanations for what was said that Malcolm’s uncertainty level is high. This is 
consistent with the ideas of theorists Claude E. Shannon and Warren Weaver (1949), 
who note in their information theory that uncertainty exists whenever the number 
of possible alternatives in a given situation is high and the likelihood of their oc­
currence is relatively equal. ­Conversely, they say, uncertainty is decreased when the 
alternatives are limited in number and/or there is an alternative that is usually chosen. 
Berger and ­Calabrese used Shannon and Weaver’s work as a foundation for URT.
For example, when Teresa walks into her Spanish I classroom on the first day of 
class and the person sitting nearest the door smiles at her, Teresa has a few alternative 
explanations for this behavior. The person could be friendly, trying to get to know her, 
squinting in the sunlight, or mistaken in thinking she knows Teresa. Because a college 
classroom is often governed by a norm of friendliness and because the alternative ex­
planations are few in number, Teresa will probably decide the smile was one of friendly 
welcoming, reducing her ­uncertainty fairly easily. But if Teresa walked into a job inter­
view and found another candidate in the waiting room with her who glanced her way and 
smiled, the alternative explanations would be more numerous. They would contain all of 
the above possibilities and others, including that the person is ­sizing her up as competi­
tion, the person thinks she’s weak competition, the ­person is trying to get her to let her 
guard down, and so forth. These increased alternatives will increase uncertainty, causing 
Teresa to attempt to reduce it. Berger and Calabrese theorize that communication is the 
prediction
the ability to  
forecast one’s own 
and others’  
behavioral choices
explanation
the ability to  
interpret the  
meaning of  
behavioral choices

U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
     ﻿    
137
vehicle by which ­people reduce their uncertainty about one another. In turn, reduced 
uncertainty creates conditions ripe for the development of interpersonal relationships.
After Berger and Calabrese (1975) originated their theory, it was later slightly elabo­
rated (Berger, 1979; Berger & Bradac, 1982). The current version of the theory suggests 
that there are two types of uncertainty in initial encounters: cognitive and behavioral. 
Our cognitions refer to the beliefs and attitudes that we and others hold. Cognitive 
uncertainty, therefore, refers to the degree of uncertainty associated with those beliefs 
and attitudes. When Malcolm wonders whether Edie was ridiculing his major 
and whether he really cares, he experiences cognitive uncertainty. Behavioral 
uncertainty, on the other hand, pertains to “the extent to which behavior is predictable 
in a given situation” (Berger & Bradac, 1982, p. 7). Because we have cultural rituals for 
small talk, Edie and Malcolm probably have an idea of how to behave during their short 
conversation. If one of them had violated the ritual by either engaging in ­inappropriate 
self-disclosure (revealing private information about oneself to another) or totally ignoring 
the other, their behavioral uncertainty would have increased. People may be cognitively 
uncertain, behaviorally uncertain, or both before, during, or following an interaction.
Furthermore, Berger and Calabrese (1975) argued that uncertainty reduction 
has both proactive and retroactive processes. Proactive uncertainty reduction comes 
into play when a person thinks about communication options ­before actually engag­
ing with another person. When Edie attempted to avoid Malcolm at the classroom 
door, she was trying to deal with her uncertainty proactively. If Malcolm preplanned 
what he might say to Edie, he would also be using proactive processes. Retroactive 
uncertainty reduction consists of ­attempts to explain behavior after the encounter 
itself. Thus, Malcolm’s questions to himself about what Edie did and said and his 
own reactions are part of the retroactive process. The same is true of Edie’s interior 
monologue after her encounter with Malcolm.
In addition, Berger and Calabrese (1975) and Berger (2015) theorized that un­
certainty is related to other concepts rooted in communication and relational devel­
opment: verbal output, nonverbal warmth (such as pleasant vocal tone and leaning 
forward), information seeking (asking questions), self-disclosure, reciprocity of dis­
closure, similarity, and liking. Each of these concepts is related to uncertainty. URT 
posits a dynamic movement of interpersonal relationships in their initial stages. This 
cognitive  
uncertainty
degree of  
uncertainty related 
to cognitions
behavioral  
uncertainty
degree of  
uncertainty related 
to behaviors
self-disclosure
personal messages 
about the self  
disclosed to  
another
Theory At a Glance  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
When strangers meet, their primary focus is on reducing their level of un­
certainty in the situation because uncertainty is uncomfortable. People can 
be uncertain on two different levels: behavioral and cognitive. They may be 
unsure of how to behave (or how the other person will behave), and they may 
also be unsure of what they think of the other person and what the other 
person thinks of them. High levels of uncertainty are related to a variety of 
verbal and nonverbal behaviors.

138     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
theory has been described as an example of original theorizing in the field of com­
munication (Miller, 1981) because it employs concepts (such as ­information seeking, 
self-disclosure) that are specifically relevant to studying communication behavior. 
URT attempts to place communication as the cornerstone of human behavior, and to 
this end a number of assumptions about human ­behavior and communication under­
lie the theory.
Assumptions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory
As we have mentioned in previous chapters, theories are frequently grounded in as­
sumptions that reflect the worldview of the theorists. Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
is no exception. The following assumptions frame this theory:
∙∙
People experience uncertainty in interpersonal settings and it generates cogni­
tive stress.
∙∙
When strangers meet, their primary concern is to reduce their uncertainty and 
increase predictability.
∙∙
Interpersonal communication is a developmental process that occurs through 
stages, and it is the primary means of uncertainty reduction.
∙∙
The quantity and nature of information that people share change 
through time.
∙∙
It is possible to predict people’s behavior in a lawlike fashion.
We will briefly address each assumption. First, in a number of interpersonal set­
tings, people feel uncertainty. Because differing expectations exist for interpersonal 
occasions, it is reasonable to conclude that people are uncertain or even nervous 
about meeting others. Consider the case of Malcolm and Edie, for instance. Although 
there are a great many cues in the environment that can help Malcolm and Edie make 
sense out of their interaction, there are complicating factors as well. For example, 
Malcolm may have noticed Edie hurrying to leave the room. There may be several 
alternative explanations for this behavior, including another class that is a distance 
away, a general predisposition toward hurrying, having to go to the bathroom, feeling 
faint and wanting fresh air, wanting to avoid meeting Malcolm at the door, and so 
forth. Given all these alternatives, it is likely that Malcolm (or anyone in his situa­
tion) feels uncertain about how to interpret Edie’s behavior. Further, this assumption 
asserts that uncertainty is an aversive state. As Berger and Calabrese (1975) state, 
“When persons are unable to make sense out of their environment, they usually be­
come anxious” (p. 106). The theory assumes that it takes a great deal of emotional 
and psychological energy to remain uncertain, and people would prefer not to experi­
ence that. 
The next assumption underlying URT advances the proposition that when strangers 
meet, two concerns are important: reducing uncertainty and increasing predictability. 
Denise Haunani Solomon (2015) underscores this by stating: “Initial interactions 
are fraught with unknowns about the partner’s personal traits and attitudes, how the 
partner will behave and respond to messages, how people should conduct them­
selves, and what direction the interaction might go (p. 1). Uncertainty Reduction 

	
Assumptions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory     139
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Theory suggests that information seeking is a primary method to reduce uncer­
tainty and attain some sort of predictability. Information ­seeking usually takes the 
form of asking questions in order to gain some ­predictability. Think about the last 
time you had an initial encounter with someone in an interpersonal setting. More 
than likely a great deal of time in this interaction was ­occupied with questions and 
answers (e.g., Where are you from? What is your major? Do you live on campus?, 
etc.) This process can be quite engaging, and many people do this unconsciously. 
Jessica Deyo and her colleagues (2011) found that in speed-dating contexts, par­
ticipants’ behaviors adhered to this ­assumption albeit in a speeded-up fashion. The 
first minute of the speed date was filled with questions and answers focused on 
demographic information.
The third assumption of URT suggests that interpersonal communication is a 
process involving developmental stages and it is the primary means people have 
for reducing uncertainty. According to Berger and Calabrese (1975), generally 
speaking, most people begin interaction in an entry phase, defined as the be­
ginning stage of a communication encounter between strangers. The entry phase 
is guided by implicit and explicit rules and norms, such as responding in kind 
when someone says, “Hi! How are you doing?” Individuals then enter the sec­
ond stage, called the personal phase, or the stage where the interactants start to 
communicate more spontaneously and to reveal more idiosyncratic ­information. 
The personal phase can occur during an initial encounter, but it is more likely 
to begin after repeated interactions. The third stage, the exit phase, refers to the 
stage during which individuals make decisions about whether they wish to con­
tinue interacting with this partner in the future. Although all people do not enter a 
phase in the same manner or stay in a phase for a similar amount of time, Berger 
and Calabrese believe that this universal framework exists that explains how in­
terpersonal communication shapes and reflects the development of interpersonal 
relationships.
The fourth assumption underscores the nature of time. It also focuses on the 
fact that interpersonal communication is developmental. Uncertainty ­reduction 
theorists believe that initial interactions are key elements in the ­developmental 
process. To illustrate this assumption, consider the experiences of Rita, who spent 
a few anxious minutes by herself before entering the YWCA to attend her first 
meeting of Parents, Family, and Friends of Lesbians and Gays (PFLAG). She 
immediately felt more comfortable when Dan, another newcomer, came over to 
introduce himself and welcome her to the group. As the two exchanged informa­
tion about their anxieties and uncertainties, they both felt more confident. As they 
talked, Rita and Dan reduced their uncertainties about what the other members 
of the support group would be like. Charles Berger and Kathy Kellerman (1994) 
believe that Rita and Dan are goal directed and therefore will employ a number 
of communication strategies to acquire ­social information. Reducing uncertainty 
is key for both Rita and Dan. A bit later in the chapter, we will discuss some of 
these strategies.
The final assumption indicates that people’s behavior can be predicted in a law­
like fashion. Recall from Chapter 3 that theorists have some guidelines to help them 
in the job of theory construction. One of the guidelines we reviewed was covering 
law, which assumes that human behavior is regulated by generalizable principles that 
entry phase
the beginning stage  
of an interaction 
between strangers
personal phase
the stage in a 
relationship when 
people begin to 
communicate more 
spontaneously and 
personally
exit phase
the stage in a 
relationship when 
people decide 
whether to continue 
or leave

140     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
function in a lawlike manner. Although there may be some exceptions, in general 
people behave in accordance with these laws. The goal of a covering law theory is 
to lay out the laws that will explain how we communicate. As you might imagine, 
covering law theories have a difficult task. Although some aspects of the natural 
world may operate under laws, the social world is much more variable. That is why 
covering laws in the social ­science are called “lawlike.” A pattern is outlined, but 
the deterministic notion implied with natural laws is relaxed a bit. Still, even to ap­
proach the goal of lawlike statements is daunting. Thus, theories like URT begin with 
what may seem like commonsense observations in order to establish regularities that 
govern people’s behaviors. Covering law theories are constructed to move from state­
ments that are presumed to be true (or axioms) to statements that are ­derived from 
these truisms (or theorems).
Key Concepts of URT: The Axiom and Theorem
Embedded in Uncertainty Reduction Theory—unlike any other communication 
theory—are a number of different tenets or conclusions. Each has been identified as 
an area for research exploration by Berger (2015) and Calabrese (1975). We explore 
each of these below.
Axioms of Uncertainty Reduction Theory
Uncertainty Reduction Theory is an axiomatic theory. This means that Berger and 
Calabrese began with a collection of axioms, or truisms drawn from past research 
and common sense. These axioms, or what some researchers might call propositions, 
require no further proof than the statement itself. Berger and Calabrese extrapolated 
this axiomatic thinking from earlier researchers (Blalock, 1969), who concluded that 
causal relationships should be stated in the form of an axiom. Axioms are the heart 
of the theory. They have to be ­accepted as valid because they are the building blocks 
for everything else in the theory. Each axiom presents a relationship between uncer­
tainty (the central theoretical concept) and one other concept. URT originally posited 
seven ­axioms. To understand each, we refer back to our chapter-opening example of 
Edie and Malcolm.
Axiom 1: As the amount of verbal communication between strangers in­
creases, the level of uncertainty for each interactant in the relationship de­
creases. As uncertainty is further reduced, the amount of verbal communica­
tion increases. (The verbal communication axiom.)
Regarding Malcolm and Edie’s situation with reference to this axiom, the theory 
maintains that if they talk more to each other, they will become more certain about 
each other. Furthermore, as they get to know each other better, they will talk more 
with each other.
Axiom 2: As nonverbal affiliative expressiveness increases, uncertainty levels 
decrease in an initial interaction situation. In addition, decreases in uncertainty 
axioms
truisms drawn from 
past research and 
common sense

	
Key Concepts of URT: The Axiom and Theorem     141
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
level will cause increases in nonverbal affiliative expressiveness. (The nonver­
bal expressiveness axiom.)
If Edie and Malcolm express themselves to each other in a warm nonverbal 
fashion, they will grow more certain of each other, and as they do this, they will 
increase their nonverbal affiliation with each other: They may be more ­facially 
animated, or they may engage in more prolonged eye contact. The two might even 
touch each other in a friendly fashion as they begin to feel more comfortable with 
each other. 
Axiom 3: High levels of uncertainty cause increases in information-­seeking 
behavior. As uncertainty levels decline, information-seeking ­behavior 
­decreases. (The information-seeking axiom.)
This axiom, which we will discuss later, is one of the more provocative propo­
sitions associated with URT. It suggests that Edie will ask questions and otherwise 
engage in information seeking as long as she feels uncertain about Malcolm. The 
more certain she feels, the less information seeking she will do. The same would 
apply to Malcolm.
Axiom 4: High levels of uncertainty in a relationship cause decreases in the 
intimacy level of communication content. Low levels of uncertainty produce 
high levels of intimacy.
Because uncertainty is relatively high between Edie and Malcolm, they ­engage in 
small talk with no real self-disclosures. The intimacy of their ­com­munication content 
is low, and their uncertainty level remains high. The fourth axiom asserts that if they 
continue to reduce the uncertainty in their relationship, then their communication will 
consist of higher levels of intimacy.
Axiom 5: High levels of uncertainty produce high rates of reciprocity. Low 
levels of uncertainty produce low levels of reciprocity.
According to URT, as long as Edie and Malcolm remain uncertain about each 
other, they will tend to mirror each other’s behavior. For example, after Edie shares 
that she is lost in the class and that she is an engineering major, Malcolm reveals 
his major to her and admits that he would probably have troubles in engineering 
classes. Immediate reciprocation of that sort (I tell you where I am from and you 
tell me where you are from) is a hallmark of initial encounters. The more people 
talk to each other and develop their relationship, the more they trust that reciprocity 
will be made at some point. If I don’t tell you something that mirrors your com­
munication today, I will probably do so the next time we talk or the time after that. 
With this in mind, strict reciprocity is replaced by an overall sense of reciprocity 
in our relationship.
Axiom 6: Similarities between people reduce uncertainty, whereas 
­dissimilarities increase uncertainty.
Because Edie and Malcolm are both college students at Urban University, 
they may have similarities that reduce some of their uncertainties about each other 

142     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
immediately. Yet they are different sexes and have different majors—­dissimilarities 
that may contribute to their uncertainty level.
Axiom 7: Increases in uncertainty level produce decreases in liking; ­decreases 
in uncertainty produce increases in liking. 
As Edie and Malcolm reduce their uncertainties, they typically will increase 
their liking for each other. If they continue to feel highly uncertain about each other, 
they probably will not like each other very much. This axiom has received some 
indirect empirical support. In a study examining the relationship between commu­
nication satisfaction and uncertainty reduction, James Neuliep and Erica Grohskopf 
(2000) found that participants playing interviewers in an organizational role play 
were more likely to feel positively toward the participants playing the job seekers 
(and more likely to hire them) when their uncertainty was low. The seven axioms and 
their relationships are summarized in Table 8.1.
Theorems of Uncertainty Reduction Theory
Berger and Calabrese combined all seven axioms in every possible pairwise com­
bination to derive 21 theorems (Table 8.2). Theorems are theoretical statements 
that are derived from axioms. Theorems also suggest a relationship between two 
concepts. For instance, if the amount of verbal communication is negatively re­
lated to uncertainty (Axiom 1) and uncertainty is negatively related to intimacy 
levels of communication (Axiom 4), then verbal communication and intimacy lev­
els are positively related (Theorem 3, see Table 8.2). You can generate the other 
20 theorems by combining the ­axioms using the deductive formula above. You 
need to use the rule of multiplication for multiplying positives and negatives. For 
example, if two variables have a positive relationship with a third, they are expected 
to have a positive relationship with each other. If one variable has a positive rela­
tionship with a third, whereas the other has a negative relationship with the third, 
they should have a negative relationship with each other. Finally, if two variables 
theorems
theoretical  
statements derived 
from axioms,  
positing a  
relationship  
between  
two concepts
Table 8.1  Axioms of Uncertainty Reduction Theory
AXIOM
MAIN CONCEPT
RELATIONSHIP 
QUALITY
RELATED CONCEPT
1.
↑  Uncertainty
Negative
↓  Verbal Communication
2.
↑  Uncertainty
Negative
↓  Nonverbal Affiliative 
Expressiveness
3.
↑  Uncertainty
Positive
↑  Information Seeking 
4.
↑  Uncertainty
Negative
↓  Intimacy Level 
of Communication
5.
↑  Uncertainty
Positive
↑  Reciprocity
6.
↓  Uncertainty
Negative
↑  Similarity
7.
↑  Uncertainty
Negative
↓  Liking

	
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory     143
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
each have a negative relationship with a third, they should have a positive relation­
ship with each other. This process allows URT to be a comprehensive theory.
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory
Many researchers have tested URT and based their studies on the tenets of the theory. 
Furthermore, Berger and several colleagues continue to refine and expand the theory, 
taking into ­account research findings. URT has been expanded and modified in a few 
areas. These areas include antecedent conditions, strategies, ­developed relationships, 
social media, and context.
Antecedent Conditions
Berger (1979) has suggested that three antecedent (prior) conditions exist when seek­
ing uncertainty reduction. The first condition occurs when the other person has the 
Table 8.2  Theorems of Uncertainty Reduction Theory Deduced from Axioms
AXIOM         MAIN CONCEPT
RELATIONSHIP 
QUALITY
RELATED CONCEPT
  1.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Positive
↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
  2.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Negative
↓  Information Seeking
  3.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Positive
↑  Intimacy Level of Communication
  4.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Negative
↓  Reciprocity
  5.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Positive
↑  Similarity
  6.            ↑  Verbal Communication
Positive
↑  Liking
  7.            ↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
Negative
↓  Information Seeking
  8.            ↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
Positive
↑  Intimacy Level of Communication
  9.            ↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
Negative
↓  Reciprocity
10.            ↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
Positive
↑  Similarity
1 1.            ↑  Nonverbal Affiliative Expressiveness
Positive
↑  Liking
12.            ↑  Information Seeking
Negative
↓  Intimacy Level of Communication
13.            ↑  Information Seeking
Positive
↑  Reciprocity
14.            ↑  Information Seeking
Negative
↓  Similarity
15.            ↑  Information Seeking
Negative
↓  Liking
16.            ↑  Intimacy Level
Negative
↓  Reciprocity
17.            ↑  Intimacy Level
Positive
↑  Similarity
18.            ↑  Intimacy Level
Positive
↑  Liking
19.            ↑  Reciprocity
Negative
↓  Similarity
20.            ↑  Reciprocity
Negative
↓  Liking
21.            ↑  Similarity
Positive
↑  Liking

144     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
potential to reward or punish. If Edie is a very popular, charismatic figure on cam­
pus, her attention may be seen as a reward by Malcolm. Likewise, Malcolm might 
experience a rejection by her as punishing. If ­Malcolm finds out that a friend thought 
Edie was boring and unattractive or if he discovers she has a bad reputation on cam­
pus, he will not see her attention as rewarding or her rejection as punishing. Thus, 
according to Berger, Malcolm will be more motivated to reduce his uncertainty the 
more attractive Edie ­appears to him.
A second antecedent condition exists when the other person behaves ­contrary to 
expectations. In the case of Edie and Malcolm, social norms might suggest that star­
ing is impolite. When Edie perceives Malcolm staring intently at her for an extended 
period of time, her expectations of his behavior are violated, and Berger predicts that 
her desire to reduce her uncertainty increases.
The third and final condition exists when a person expects future interactions 
with another. Malcolm knows that he will continue to see Edie in class for the rest 
of the semester. Yet, because he has discovered that she is an engineering major, he 
may feel that he can avoid her in the future. In the first case, Berger would expect 
Malcolm’s desire to increase predictability to be high—he knows he’ll be seeing 
Edie often; in the second case, Malcolm’s desire level is lower because Edie has a 
different major, and they can avoid each other after this class ends.
Strategies
A third area of expansion pertains to strategies. Berger (2015) suggests that 
people—in attempting to reduce uncertainty—use tactics from three categories of 
strategies: passive, active, and interactive. At the core of each is the goal of “de­
sired information” (p. 2) from those with whom we are communicating. First, there 
are passive strategies, whereby an individual assumes the role of unobtrusive ob­
server of another. Active strategies exist when an observer engages in some type 
of effort other than direct contact to find out about another person. For instance, a 
person might ask a third party for information about the other. Finally, interactive 
strategies occur when the observer and the other person engage in direct contact 
or face-to-face ­interaction—that is, conversation that may include self-disclosures, 
direct questioning, and other information-seeking tactics. Although these strategies 
are critical to reducing uncertainty, Berger believes that certain behaviors, such as 
passive strategies
reducing uncertain-
ties by unobtrusive 
observation
active strategies
reducing uncertain-
ties by means other 
than direct contact
interactive  
strategies
reducing uncertain-
ties by engaging in 
conversation
Student Voices
Max
When I read about the strategies to reduce uncertainty, it made sense. When I first 
moved here to go to school I am sure I used all of these strategies. I spent a lot of 
time at the Union, kind of just watching what everyone was doing, and I remember 
asking someone I knew a little bit from high school to tell me more about someone 
else I’d just seen in passing, but who looked really nice. And, finally, of course, I got 
up the nerve to actually talk to her and we went through a lot of small talk before 
things got going.

	
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory     145
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
asking inappropriately sensitive questions, may increase rather than decrease uncer­
tainty, and people may need additional reduction strategies. Kami Kosenko (2011) 
found support for all these strategies in a study examining transgender adults’ com­
munication about safer sex. In this study all of these strategies were illustrated in the 
participants’ responses.
To briefly illustrate these strategies, consider Malcolm and Edie. The time they 
spend in class covertly observing each other falls into the passive category. When 
Malcolm observes how Edie reacts to jokes the professor tells in lecture, he is uti­
lizing a particular passive strategy called reactivity searching, or observing Edie 
doing something. A different passive strategy, called disinhibition searching, would 
require Malcolm to observe Edie in more informal settings outside the classroom to 
see how she behaves when her inhibitions are down. If either one of them engages 
friends to find out information about the other, he or she will be using an active 
strategy. When they speak after class, they use an interactive strategy to find out 
about each other and to reduce their uncertainties.
Tara Emmers and Dan Canary (1996) argue that in established relationships an 
additional strategy is employed. They call this strategy “uncertainty acceptance,” 
and it includes responses such as simply trusting your partner. Emmers and Canary 
suggest that accepting or trusting your partner even when you are not completely 
certain about what is happening is a viable strategy for coping with uncertainty in 
developed relationships.
Developed Relationships
When Berger and Calabrese (1975) conceived their theory, they were inter­
ested in describing initial encounters between strangers. They stated a clear 
and ­narrow boundary around their theoretical insights. In the intervening years, 
however, the theory has been expanded to include developed relationships, as 
the acceptance strategy discussed previously indicates. Berger (1982, 1987) 
has updated his theory since its inception. First, he comments that uncertain­
ties are ongoing in relationships, and thus the process of uncertainty reduction 
is ­relevant in developed relationships as well as in initial interactions. This 
­con­clusion broadens earlier claims by Berger and Calabrese that specifically 
limited URT to initial encounters.
The inclusion of the three antecedent conditions discussed previously ­(potential 
for reward or punishment, deviation from expectations, and anticipation of future in­
teractions) points us toward an examination of uncertainty in developed relationships. 
Specifically, we will expect rewards from, be surprised by, and anticipate future inter­
actions with those with whom we have ongoing relationships.
Uncertainty in developed relationships may be different than it is in initial en­
counters. It may function dialectically within relationships; that is, there may be a 
tension between reducing and increasing uncertainty in developed ­relationships. 
Berger and Calabrese (1975) observe, “While uncertainty reduction may be reward­
ing up to a point, the ability to completely predict another’s behavior might lead 
to boredom. Boredom in an interpersonal relationship might well be a cost rather 
than a reward” (p. 101). Gerald R. Miller and Mark Steinberg (1975) mention a 
similar belief, noting that people have a greater desire for uncertainty when they feel 
reactivity searching
a passive strategy 
involving watching  
a person doing 
something
disinhibition 
searching
a passive strategy 
involving watching  
a person’s natural 
or uninhibited 
behavior in an  
informal  
environment

146     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
secure than they do when they feel insecure. This suggests that as people begin to 
feel certain about their relationships and their partners, the excitement of uncertainty 
becomes desirable. Neuliep and Grohskopf (2000) agree, stating that the linear re­
lationship between uncertainty and other communication variables may not hold in 
stages beyond initial interaction.
Let’s examine this contradiction between certainty and uncertainty a bit further 
with an example. In our chapter-opening vignette, Malcolm and Edie met for the first 
time after class. If their subsequent conversations evolve into a relationship, then 
their ­relationship will involve a level of predictability—that is, both will be able to 
predict certain things about the other because of the time they spend together. Yet 
this predictability (certainty) may get tedious after a time, and they may feel their 
relationship is in a rut. At this point, the need for uncertainty, or novelty, will become 
high, and the couple might try to build some variety into their routine to satisfy this 
need. Yet Leanne Knobloch and her colleagues (2007) observe that uncertainty is 
undesirable in marriage because it leads the partners to be more negative in evaluat­
ing conversations with each other.
Uncertainty and uncertainty reduction processes operate in dating relation­
ships in somewhat the same ways that Berger and Calabrese theorize they do in 
initial interactions. One study (Mongeau, Jacobsen, & Donnerstein, 2007) found 
that reducing uncertainty was cited as a primary goal in dating. Research conducted 
by Sally Planalp and her colleagues (Planalp, 1987; Planalp & ­Honeycutt, 1985; 
Planalp, Rutherford, & Honeycutt, 1988) discovered that dating couples found that 
at times their uncertainty increased. When this ­happened, the individuals were 
motivated to reduce it through their communication behaviors. In a study of 46 
married couples, Lynn Turner (1990) reached similar conclusions. Therefore, ac­
cording to these researchers, we must not ­assume that once relationships begin, 
uncertainty disappears.
Another example of how Uncertainty Reduction Theory has been extended 
into developed relationships is found in the research of Malcolm Parks and Mara 
Adelman (1983). Parks and Adelman studied the social networks (friends and 
family members) of an individual and indicate that these third-party networks 
can be quite important information sources about a romantic partner. They note 
that network “members may comment on the partner’s past actions and behav­
ioral tendencies. They may supply ready-made explanations for the partner’s be­
havior or serve as sounding boards for the individual’s own explanations” (p. 57). 
They conclude that the more partners communicate with their social networks, 
the less uncertainty they will experience. Furthermore, the researchers found that 
the less uncertainty people feel, the less likely they will be to dissolve a relation­
ship with another.
Based on this expansion into established relationships, Berger and Gudykunst 
(1991) posited the eighth axiom and seven resulting new theorems, which we dis­
cussed previously. As we mentioned, the new axiom asserted that romantic partners 
who interact with their partner’s social network experience less uncertainty about 
their partner than do those who do not have this interaction. The more interaction 
with the social network, the less uncertainty there will be.
Some researchers who were interested in how URT applied to established 
relationships suggested that people in this stage experienced a different type of 

	
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory     147
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
uncertainty than did those in initial encounters. This uncertainty was labeled 
relational uncertainty and defined as lack of certainty about the future and the sta­
tus of the relationship. Berger (1987) discussed this new uncertainty type and noted 
that it mars relational stability. Additional research (e.g., Ficara & Mongeau, 2000; 
Knobloch & Solomon, 2003) established that relational uncertainty is distinct from 
the individual uncertainty that Berger and Calabrese originally theorized about. 
Relational uncertainty is found to be different from individual uncertainty because 
it exists at a higher level of abstraction (Knobloch & Solomon, 2003). Relational 
uncertainty was found to be useful in predicting several other behaviors within 
relationships, such as how participants will handle face threats (Knobloch, Satterlee, & 
DiDomenico, 2010) and communicative responses to betrayal (Levine, Kim, & 
Ferrara, 2010).
Marianne Dainton and Brooks Aylor (2001) examined how relational ­uncertainty 
operated in three different types of relationships: long-distance ­relationships with 
no face-to-face interaction, long-distance relationships with some face-to-face 
interaction, and geographically close relationships. The researchers were interested to 
see how relational uncertainty, jealousy, maintenance, and trust interacted in these 
three types of relationships. This is an ­important investigation because, as they 
note, 25–40 percent of romantic ­relationships between college students are long 
distance.
They found overall, as URT would predict, that the more uncertainty existed 
in a relationship the more jealousy, the less trust, and the fewer maintenance be­
haviors also existed. Dainton and Aylor also found support for trust as “a potent 
means for reducing relational uncertainty” (p. 183). The researchers also found 
that face-to-face contact is critical to reducing relational uncertainty. The people 
in long-distance relationships with no face-to-face ­interaction suffered from sig­
nificantly more relational uncertainty. However, those who were geographically 
close did not differ significantly from those in long-distance relationships with 
some face-to-face interaction, which is not ­exactly what URT would predict. The 
researchers conclude that this is a fruitful line for further research into the utility 
and heurism of URT.
Social Media
Another area where URT has expanded is in social media. For instance, Artemio 
Ramirez, Jr. and Joseph Walther (2009) and others (e.g., Flanagin, 2007; Tidwell & 
Walther, 2002) have noted that URT can be applied to ­computer-mediated communi­
cation. Some research (e.g., May & Tenzek, 2011) indicates that information seeking 
on the Internet is similar to how URT describes it in a pre-online environment—
involving the passive, active, and ­interactive strategies that we’ve discussed pre­
viously. Cynthia Palmieri, Kristen Prestano, Rosalie Gandley, Emily Overton, and 
Qin Zhang (2012) found that self-disclosures on Facebook decreased uncertainty, 
in line with URT’s predictions. And, in another study using URT principles, Jayeon 
Lee (2015) examined the role that social media plays in perceptions of journalists. 
Lee discovered that the social media activities of journalists affected audience view­
points. In particular, Lee concluded that journalists who self-disclosed items re­
lated to their personal life were viewed positively. However, when these journalists 
relational  
uncertainty
a lack of certainty 
about the future 
and status of a 
relationship

148     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
provided feedback to commenters, they were deemed as less professional than those 
who did not provide feedback.
Ramirez and Walther (2009), however, observe that there are some significant 
differences in information seeking online versus face to face. According to these 
researchers, online information seeking allows communicators to “employ several 
approaches to information acquisition sequentially or simultaneously in order to 
reduce uncertainty” (p. 73). Further, the online environment means that informa­
tion-seeking sources may begin to pile up without a person’s consent and outside of 
their control. Googling (or using other online search engines to obtain information 
about a specific person) someone provides a great deal of information about them 
that they may not even be aware is in the public domain. Finally, Artemio Ramirez 
and his colleagues (Ramirez, Walther, Burgoon, & Sunnafrank, 2002) have noted 
that Googling forms a special case of active information-seeking strategy they call 
extractive strategy.
Other researchers (e.g., Gibbs, Ellison, & Lai, 2011) have observed that in the 
online dating arena, uncertainty reduction is a salient concern. Further they note 
that online disclosures (unlike those offline) do not need to occur in the symmet­
ric fashion that Berger and Calabrese (1975) described (first I tell you where I am 
from and then you reciprocate by telling me where you grew up). Instead, online 
information-seeking behaviors may occur prior to hearing a person’s disclosures, 
as well as simultaneously or after disclosures are made. For instance, Andrea can 
Google Mark at any time during a possible online connection and use extrac­
tive strategies. Further, Gibbs and her colleagues suggest that this asymmetric 
information exchange is important to online daters because the risk of deception 
online is so large that it contributes to concerns about personal safety. However, 
Gibbs and colleagues found that online daters use a great deal of interactive strat­
egies such as direct questioning online which confirmed URT’s claims as well as 
earlier research (Antheunis, Valkenburg, & Peter, 2010). But one-third of Gibbs’s 
562 respondents reported triangulating information (comparing what a person 
said to information about them on websites or in public records), supporting the 
notion that the online environment adds different information-seeking strategies.
Context
Thinking back to our discussion in Chapter 2, URT has been extensively studied in 
one additional context: culture. Research shows that uncertainty varies across cul­
tures. Let’s illustrate this cultural application.
The expansion and adaptation of URT to culture is credited to William 
Gudykunst (1993, 2005). Thus far, our examples clearly relate to the interper­
sonal context. Gudykunst (1995) extended Berger and Calabrese’s formulation 
of URT into a new theory that deals specifically with culture, which he identi­
fied as Anxiety-Uncertainty Management (AUM). According to James Neuliep 
(2015), uncertainty is a cognitive state while anxiety pertains to an affective 
(emotional) state. This AUM expansive suggests that “many people, regardless 
of culture, experience anxiety when communicating, or when they anticipate 
communicating, with persons from different cultures or ethnic groups, espe­
cially during initial encounters” (Neuliep, p. 7). Neuliep (2012) also contends 
extractive strategy
an active  
information-seeking 
strategy involving 
online searches to 
obtain information 
about a specific 
person.

	
Expansions of Uncertainty Reduction Theory     149
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
that uncertainty is an aversive state—a claim also identified as a basic assump­
tion of the URT.
Gudykunst and Tsukasa Nishida (1986a) discovered differences in low- and 
high-context cultures. According to Edward T. Hall (1977), low-context cultures 
are those in which meaning is found in the explicit code or message. Examples 
of low-context cultures are the United States, Germany, and ­Switzerland. In these 
cultures, plain, direct speaking is valued. Listeners are supposed to be able to understand 
meaning based merely on the words a speaker uses. In high-context cultures, non­
verbal messages play a more significant role, and most of the meaning of a message 
is internalized by listeners or resides in the context. Japan, Korea, and China are ex­
amples of high-context cultures. These cultures value indirectness in speech because 
listeners are expected to ignore much of the explicit code in favor of understood 
meanings cued by nonverbals and context.
With respect to research on low- and high-context cultures, Gudykunst and 
Nishida (1986b) found that frequency of communication predicts uncertainty reduc­
tion in low-context cultures, but not in high-context cultures. The researchers also 
discovered that people use direct communication (asking questions) to reduce their 
uncertainty in individualistic cultures. In collectivistic cultures, more indirect com­
munication is used with individuals who are not identified as members of the cultural 
in-group. Based on this research, then, people from different cultures engage in dif­
ferent kinds of communication to reduce their uncertainty.
Gudykunst and Mitchell Hammer (1987) undertook an additional study examin­
ing URT and culture. Instead of studying cultures outside the United States, how­
ever, they focused their research on African Americans. Interestingly, they found 
that URT did not apply to their African American respondents. Specifically, African 
Americans were not more confident in their impressions of others after asking them 
questions, and they were not attracted to people about whom they could make pre­
dictions. Consequently, uncertainty reduction may not be applicable in all cultural 
communities.
A concept similar to uncertainty reduction is uncertainty avoidance, which 
is an attempt to shun or avoid ambiguous situations (Hofstede, 1991; Smith, 
2015). In other words, uncertainty avoidance refers to a person’s tolerance for 
uncertainty. Geert Hofstede believes that the perspective of people in high-
uncertainty avoidance cultures is “What is different is dangerous,” whereas people 
in low‑uncertainty avoidance cultures subscribe to “What is different is curious” 
(1991, p. 119). Gudykunst and Yuko Matsumoto (1996) point out that a ­number 
of cultures differ in their uncertainty avoidance (Figure 8.1), and understanding 
that these differences exist can help us understand communication behaviors in 
other countries.
Although not as developed as Anxiety-Uncertainty Management, researchers 
have begun to cast the principles of URT into other contexts beyond the inter­
personal. One such example is Michael Boyle and his colleagues’ (2004) work 
examining people’s information-seeking behaviors in the United States after the 
terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001. Boyle and his coresearchers argue that 
“although uncertainty reduction theory has primarily been used in interpersonal 
communication research [its] basic logic can be applied to mass communica­
tion research” (p. 157). In addition, some work has set uncertainty reduction 
low-context  
cultures
cultures, as in the 
United States, 
where most of the 
meaning is in the 
code or message
high-context  
cultures
cultures, like Japan, 
where the meaning 
of a message is in 
the context or  
internalized in 
listeners
uncertainty  
avoidance
an attempt to  
avoid ambiguous 
situations

150     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
principles in the context of the workplace (Hargie, Tourish, & Wilson, 2002; 
Morrison, 2002).
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Uncertainty Reduction Theory has attracted scholars from a variety of disciplines. The 
beginnings of our relationships are usually unpredictable and URT helps us understand 
those challenges. Further, Berger (2016b) posits that “uncertainty is ‘big business’” (p. x) 
in that governmental and non-governmental organizations lose billions of dollars be­
cause “managers abhor uncertainty” (p. x). Finally, the theory has enjoyed a quanti­
tative tradition, providing an empirical lens on an often overlooked communication 
behavior (uncertainty).
Over a decade after the publication of the original theory, Berger (1987) ­admitted 
that Uncertainty Reduction Theory “contains some propositions of dubious ­validity” 
(p. 40). Other writers concur. Although URT has stimulated a great deal of discus­
sion and research, it also has been criticized. As you think about how useful URT is, 
keep the following criteria in mind: utility and heurism.
India
France
Korea
China
England
Denmark
Sweden
United States
Canada
Jamaica
Argentina
Belgium
Chile
Egypt
Japan
Mexico
Peru
Spain
Greece
Countries With
High Uncertainty Avoidance
Argentina
Belgium
Chile
Egypt
France
Greece
Japan
Korea
Mexico
Peru
Spain
Countries With
Low Uncertainty Avoidance
Canada
Denmark
England
China (Hong Kong)
India
Jamaica
Sweden
United States
Figure 8.1  Countries and Uncertainty Avoidance

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     151
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Utility
Some researchers believe that the major assumptions of the theory are flawed. 
Michael Sunnafrank (1986) argues that reducing uncertainty about the self and 
another in an initial encounter is not an individual’s primary concern. ­Instead, Sun­
nafrank argues, “a more primary goal is the maximization of relational outcomes” 
(p. 9). Sunnafrank calls for a reformulation of URT that takes into account the 
importance of predicted outcomes during initial interactions. This has come to be 
known as predicted outcome value (POV). Drawing on our chapter’s opening, Sun­
nafrank would contend that Malcolm will be more concerned with maximizing 
rewards in a potential relationship with Edie than in figuring out what she might 
do and why she is doing it. Actually, ­Sunnafrank suggests that URT might kick in 
after Malcolm decides what the predicted outcomes of talking with Edie will be. 
Jina Yoo’s (2009) findings ­offered some empirical support for POV’s claims as 
opposed to URT’s.
Berger’s (1986) response to Sunnafrank is that outcomes cannot be predicted 
without knowledge and reduced uncertainty about oneself, one’s partner, and 
one’s relationship. It is Berger’s contention that uncertainty reduction is inde­
pendent of as well as necessary to predicted outcome values. In fact, he believes 
that if one remains highly uncertain, there really are no predicted outcome values. 
Furthermore, Berger responds to Sunnafrank’s critique by noting that the act of 
predicting an outcome serves as a means to reduce uncertainty. Thus, Berger con­
cludes that Sunnafrank has simply expanded the scope of URT rather than offering 
an alternative to it.
A second problem with URT’s utility has to do with its validity. Recall that even 
Berger (1987) has admitted some validity problems, yet he is not willing to give up 
on the theory. Some of his more skeptical colleagues, however, assert that given the 
tight logical structure of an axiomatic theory, if one building block is wrong, then 
much of the resulting theory is suspect. Kathy Kellermann and Rodney Reynolds 
(1990) point to Axiom 3, which suggests that high uncertainty causes high levels of 
information-seeking behavior, as problematic.
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural

152     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
Their study of over a thousand students failed to find support for the third axiom. 
Instead, they found that “wanting knowledge rather than lacking knowledge is what 
promotes information-seeking in initial encounters with others” (p. 71 [emphasis 
added]). Kellermann and Reynolds point out that many times we may be uncertain 
about another, but because we have no interest in the other, we are not motivated to 
reduce our uncertainties by information-seeking behaviors. People engage in com­
munication, therefore, not to ­reduce uncertainty, but because they care about the 
other, are interested in the other, or both. In a different vein, Dale Brashers (2001) 
also questions the validity of Axiom 3. He notes with reference to post–September 11 
anxieties that sometimes more information results in a greater sense of uncertainty. 
­Interestingly, however, Dell McKinney and William Donaghy (1993) found some 
empirical support for Axiom 3, so the debate on this issue undoubtedly will continue 
concerning URT’s usefulness.
Piercarlo Valdesolo writes in Scientific American online that predicted out­
come values and uncertainty reduction might work in concert to predict 
whether relationships move from initial encounters to a greater level of de­
velopment. Valdesolo reflects back to a dilemma he had when he began a 
romantic relationship just before Valentine’s Day. He recounts that he had a 
hard time trying to figure out how to celebrate the holiday with a relatively 
new romantic partner: Should he play hard to get or wear his heart on his 
sleeve? Valdesolo notes that he might have gotten some help from a recent 
study that showed women Facebook profiles of men who had supposedly 
viewed their Facebook profile. The women were divided into groups: One 
group was told that these men liked them the most of any profiles they’d 
viewed; one group was told the men found them to be average; and the 
third group was told the men either liked them the most or they thought 
they were average. The women responded most positively to the men they 
weren’t sure about, not the ones they thought liked them the most. Valdesolo 
comments that being uncertain only works if “your target actually likes you. 
Indeed, the more people tend to think about the possibility of uncertain nega­
tive outcomes (what is the biopsy going to show?) the worse they come to 
feel about that outcome.” So, uncertainty is aversive when the POV is nega­
tive, but not so much when the POV is positive. Valdesolo comments that he 
wishes he knew that when he first started his relationship, but he did marry 
her anyway!
Source: Valdesolo, P. A scientific dating insight: Create uncertainty—The aphrodisiac effect of 
not knowing how much they like you, scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=a-scientific-dating
-insig&page=2
Theory in Popular Press  •  Uncertainty or POV?

U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     153
Closing
Uncertainty Reduction Theory has made a very important contribution to the field 
of communication, even as it has generated a few theoretical disputes. Although this 
theory may be somewhat linear in nature (recall our discussion on communication 
models in Chapter 1), it has provoked a great deal of commentary and research, and it 
places communication in a central position. It marked a beginning when communica­
tion researchers began focusing on their own discipline for theoretical explanations 
rather than borrowing ­theories from other disciplines.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: How does communicating via social media sites impact 
the utility of URT? For instance, does knowing a lot about a stranger before 
actually meeting him or her face to face (by reading the person’s Facebook 
page, for instance, or by following him or her on Twitter) mean that the axioms and 
Student Voices
Steve
I enjoyed the section of the chapter that talked about expanding the theory into 
developed relationships. I have been working for the same boss for four years, yet 
many times I feel a sense of uncertainty with her like the theory talks about. You’d 
think I’d know what to expect from Tara after working for her for several years, but 
she still keeps surprising me. Last week, she completely changed her attitude, and I 
wasn’t quite sure how to take it. For several weeks she’s been telling me that we had 
to finish a project much more quickly than the time we usually take with our work. So 
I have been killing myself to get it done. Then last week she said we could slow down, 
and she didn’t explain herself at all. I immediately used active strategies and started 
asking a couple of other people in the office to see if I could figure out what she was 
thinking. So, overall, I think the theory should be expanded to developed relation­
ships, and it should also apply to ­relationships in the workplace. We have a ton of 
uncertainty at my job!
Heurism
Reflecting on our criteria for theory evaluation, this theory is highly heuristic. 
For instance, URT has been integrated into research examining small groups 
(Booth-Butterfield, Booth-Butterfield, & Koester, 1988) as well as ­research in 
doctor–patient communication (Perrault & Silk, 2015) and computer-mediated 
communication (Lundy & Drouin, 2016). It is clear from our earlier discussions 
that URT has been expanded into many contexts, making it highly heuristic.

154     Chapter 8  •  Uncertainty Reduction Theory
U N C E R T A I N T Y  R E D U C T I O N  T H E O R Y
theorems of URT no longer hold true? Or do social media only provide different 
channels for collecting information about people, further supporting the claims of 
URT?
	
1.  Why is examining initial interactions like that of Edie and Malcolm an 
important undertaking for communication theorists? Provide at least one example 
to support your view.
	
2.  Uncertainty reduction is the process of using communication to increase our 
ability to explain and predict others’ behaviors. Do you think that predicting and 
explaining others’ behaviors are really important concerns when people interact 
with one another?
	
3.  Are there times when asking questions in initial encounters with others only 
results in more uncertainty? Give examples. Has reducing your uncertainty about 
someone ever led to you liking the person less? Describe how this occurs.
	
4.  Do you agree with Berger and Calabrese’s assumption about the develop­
mental process of interpersonal relationships? Give examples that support or con­
test the notion that relationships use communication to pass through entry, 
personal, and exit phases.
	
5.  What additional factors or events exist—other than those presented in this 
chapter—when two people meet for the first time? Be sure to be specific and 
provide appropriate examples.
	
6.  If you could talk with Berger or Calabrese, what would you say to ­either of 
them about the utility of their theory in your life? Apply the theory to any aspect or 
relationship type in your life today in answering this question.
	
7.  How useful is URT when it comes to examining communication across 
cultures? What do you think of the extensions that have been made to URT to 
make it apply to intercultural communication?

155
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
Meredith Daniels and 
LaTasha Evans have been 
best friends since they 
served as hall monitors 
together in the fourth 
grade. After elementary school they moved on 
together to Collins High School. There they suf­
fered through homework, dating dilemmas, and 
other typical high school concerns. In addition, 
they coped with racial issues because Meredith 
is European American and LaTasha is African 
American. In their hometown of Biloxi, Missis­
sippi, the heritage of racism formed a barrier 
to their friendship. Although Biloxi is now fairly 
progressive, Meredith’s grandfather was very un­
comfortable about her friendship with LaTasha. 
Also, LaTasha’s Uncle Benjamin had partici­
pated in Freedom Marches in the 1960s and had 
formed some unfavorable opinions about Whites. 
For a short time, her uncle had been a member 
of a Black separatist organization. He had some 
difficulty with LaTasha and Meredith’s friendship, 
too. Both of the young women had worked hard 
to maintain their relationship despite their family 
members’ objections.
When LaTasha and Meredith were together, 
they often wondered why race was such a big 
deal. They seemed like sisters to each other, 
closer than many sisters they knew. They had 
the exact same sense of humor, and they could 
always cheer each other up with a goofy look or 
some silly joke about their past. They enjoyed the 
same movies ­(horror/thrillers) and the same sub­
jects in school ­(English and French) and had simi­
lar taste in clothes (boho-glam) and boyfriends 
(intellectual guys).
But at home they often had to defend their 
friendship to their families. Meredith’s parents 
said that they did not object to the friendship, but 
were unhappy when Meredith socialized with Afri­
can American boys and went to parties where she 
might be one of only two or three White girls in at­
tendance. LaTasha’s parents also had no problem 
with Meredith; they liked her and understood the 
friendship. But they drew the line when it came to 
dating White boys. LaTasha’s parents were very 
proud of their African American heritage, and 
they told all their children how important it was 
to maintain their traditions and way of life. For 
them this meant that the family must stay African 
American: no dating or marriage with someone 
of another race. LaTasha’s cousin had married a 
Japanese woman, and the whole family was hav­
ing a great deal of difficulty accepting the couple.
Now that LaTasha and Meredith were enter­
ing their senior year at high school, things had be­
come even more difficult. LaTasha’s parents were 
adamant that she attend a historically Black col­
lege after graduation. Meredith’s family wanted 
her to go to a small college in southern California 
Social Exchange Theory
Based on the research of John Thibaut and Harold Kelley
C H A P T E R	9
Meredith 
Daniels and 
LaTasha Evans
The adjustment one individual makes affects the adjustments the others 
must make, which in turn require readjustment.
—John Thibault and Harold Kelley

156     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
A 
Social Exchange theorist examining Meredith and LaTasha’s relationship would 
predict that it might be heading for some trouble because the relationship cur­
rently seems to be costing the two more than it is rewarding them. ­Social Exchange 
Theory (SET) is based on the notion that people think about their relationships in 
economic terms. Michael Roloff (2015) put it this way: “Human survival is based 
on the ability to acquire needed resources [and] communication is a tool by which 
individuals can negotiate an exchange as well as provide resources” (p. 1). People 
tally up the costs of being in a ­relationship and compare them to the rewards that are 
offered by being in that relationship. Costs are the elements of relational life that 
have negative value to a person, such as the time and effort one has to put into main­
taining a relationship or the negatives one has to put up with in their partner (such 
as the amount of time he or she likes to spend with online games). In our chapter-
opening scenario, the stress and tension that LaTasha and Meredith feel about the 
issue of college are now costs to their relationship. Their relationship ­always had the 
cost of generating conflict in their respective families. Rewards are the elements of 
a relationship that have positive value. In Meredith and LaTasha’s case, the fun they 
have together, the loyalty they show for each other, and the sense of understanding 
they share are all rewards.
George Homans is generally credited with bringing the notion of an exchange 
perspective to human behavior. Homans examined the idea of exchange in small 
groups and it was later explored in interpersonal relationships (Trevino & Tilly, 
2016). Although some of what we present in this chapter can be applied to group 
behavior, the essence of what we delve into relates to how individuals think about 
and cultivate their relationships with others.
Social Exchange theorists argue that people assess their relationships in terms of 
costs and rewards (Roloff, 2009; Stafford, 2008). All relationships ­require some time 
and effort on the part of their participants. When friends spend time with each other, 
which they must do to maintain the relationship, they are unable to do other things 
with that time, so in that sense the time spent is a cost. Friends may need attention at 
inopportune times, and then the cost is magnified. For instance, if you had to finish a 
term paper and your best friend just broke up with her boyfriend and needed to talk to 
you, you can see how the friendship would cost you something in terms of time. Yet re­
lationships provide us with rewards, or positives, too. Families, friends, and loved ones 
generally give us a sense of acceptance, support, and companionship. Some friends 
costs
elements of 
relational life with 
negative value
rewards
elements of 
relational life with 
positive value
because both her parents had graduated from 
this school, and they had many relatives living 
near the college. Both LaTasha and Meredith, 
however, wanted to go to college together or at 
least be somewhat near each other. In addition, 
they ­resented how much time and energy all the 
discussions about college seemed to take up. It 
was almost ruining their senior year!
When they were together, they could usu­
ally forget about all the hassle and just have fun 
as usual, but the pressure was taking a toll on 
their friendship. Although they tried not to think 
about it, they both were concerned about the 
future. It was hard not to be able to tell each 
other everything as they always had in the past, 
but Meredith and LaTasha found that talking to 
each other about college was stressful, so they 
mainly avoided the subject. Privately, each won­
dered what was going to happen and how she 
would get along next year without her best friend.

S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
	
Social Exchange Theory 
     ﻿    
157
open doors for us or provide us with status just by being with us. Friends and families 
keep us from feeling lonely and isolated. Some friends teach us helpful lessons.
The Social Exchange perspective argues that people calculate the overall worth 
of a particular relationship by subtracting its costs from the rewards it provides 
(Monge & Contractor, 2003):
Worth = Rewards − Costs
Positive relationships are those whose worth is a positive number; that is, the rewards 
are greater than the costs. Relationships where the worth is a negative number (the 
costs exceed the rewards) tend to be negative for the participants. Social Exchange 
Theory goes even further, predicting that the worth of a relationship influences its 
outcome, or whether people will continue with a relationship or terminate it. Positive 
relationships are expected to endure, whereas negative relationships will probably 
terminate.
Although, as we will explore in this chapter, the situation is more complicated 
than this simple equation, it does give the essence of what exchange theorists argue. 
John Thibaut and Harold Kelley (1959) say, for example, that “every individual vol­
untarily enters and stays in any relationship only as long as it is adequately satis­
factory in terms of his [sic] rewards and costs” (p. 37). As Ronald Sabatelli and 
Constance Shehan (1993) note, the Social Exchange approach views relationships 
through the metaphor of the marketplace, where each person acts out of a self-
oriented goal of profit taking. However, Laura Stafford (2008) qualifies that 
economic exchanges and social exchanges have some differences: Social exchanges 
involve a connection with another person; social exchanges involve trust, not legal 
obligations; social exchanges are more flexible; and social exchanges rarely involve 
explicit bargaining. As we shall see later in the chapter, some researchers are not 
sure if the claims of Social ­Exchange work only in the marketplace or do describe 
interpersonal ­exchanges as well.
We have been talking in general about exchange theories and the perspective 
of Social Exchange; this is because (1) Social Exchange provides an overarching 
view of human beings that might be taken up by other specific theories like ­Social 
Penetration Theory that we discuss in the next chapter, and (2) there are several 
different theories of Social Exchange. Michael Roloff (1981, 2015) discusses five 
specific theories. Roloff observes that these theories are tied together by a central 
argument that “the guiding force of interpersonal relationships is the advancement 
of both parties’ self-interest” (p. 14). Furthermore, Roloff notes that these theories 
do not assume that self-interest is a negative thing; rather, when self-interest is rec­
ognized, it will actually enhance a relationship. Yet Roloff also argues that there are 
significant differences among these five theories—some of which derive from the 
fact that they were developed by researchers in different disciplines (e.g., psychol­
ogy, social psychology, and sociology). It is beyond our purposes here to differentiate 
among all the theories of Social Exchange. We will concentrate on explicating what 
may be the most popular theory, John Thibaut and Harold Kelley’s (1959) Theory 
of Interdependence. Although Thibaut and ­Kelley called their theory the Theory of 
Interdependence, it is often referred to as Social Exchange Theory because it fits into 
the exchange framework (Roloff, 2015).
outcome
whether people 
continue in a 
relationship or 
terminate it

158     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Social Exchange Theory
All Social Exchange theories are built upon several assumptions about human nature 
and the nature of relationships. Some of these assumptions should be clear to you after 
our introductory comments. Because Social Exchange Theory is based on a metaphor 
of economic exchange, many of these assumptions flow from the notion that people 
view life as a marketplace. In addition, Thibaut and Kelley base their theory on two 
conceptualizations: one that ­focuses on the nature of individuals and one that describes 
the relationships ­between two people. They look to drive reduction, an internal moti­
vator, to understand individuals and to gaming principles to understand relationships 
between people. Thus, the assumptions they make also fall into these two ­categories.
The assumptions that Social Exchange Theory makes about human nature in­
clude the following:
∙∙
Humans seek rewards and avoid punishments.
∙∙
Humans are rational beings.
∙∙
The standards that humans use to evaluate costs and rewards vary over time 
and from person to person.
The assumptions Social Exchange Theory makes about the nature of ­relationships 
include the following:
∙∙
Relationships are interdependent.
∙∙
Relational life is a process.
We will look at each of these assumptions in turn.
The notion that humans seek rewards and avoid punishment is consistent with 
the conceptualization of drive reduction (Roloff, 1981). This ­approach assumes that 
people’s behaviors are motivated by some internal drive mechanism. When people 
feel this drive, they are motivated to reduce it, and the process of doing so is a plea­
surable one. If George feels thirsty, he is driven to reduce that feeling by getting a 
drink. This whole process is rewarding and, thus, “To be rewarded means that a per­
son had undergone drive reduction or need fulfillment” (Roloff, 1981, p. 45). This 
assumption helps Social Exchange theorists understand why LaTasha and Meredith 
enjoy each other’s company: They feel a need for understanding and companionship, 
and this need (or drive) is fulfilled (or reduced) by spending time together.
Theory At a Glance  •  Social Exchange Theory
Social Exchange Theory posits that the major force in interpersonal rela­
tionships is the satisfaction of both people’s self-interest. Self-interest is 
not considered necessarily bad and can be used to enhance relationships. 
Interpersonal exchanges are thought to be analogous to economic ex­
changes where people are satisfied when they receive a fair return for their 
expenditures.

	
Assumptions of Social Exchange Theory     159
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
The second assumption—that humans are rational—is critical to Social 
Exchange Theory. The theory rests on the notion that within the limits of the infor­
mation that is available to them, people will calculate the costs and ­rewards of a given 
situation and guide their behaviors accordingly. This also includes the possibility 
that, faced with no rewarding choice, people will choose the least costly alternative. 
In the case of LaTasha and Meredith, it is costly to continue their friendship in the 
face of all the stress and family objections they are experiencing. Yet both young 
women may believe that it is less costly than ending their friendship and denying 
themselves the support and affection that they have shared for the past nine years.
James White, David Klein, and Todd Martin (2014) point out that assuming 
rationality is not the same as saying that people engage in rationalization. By assum­
ing that people are rational beings, Social Exchange Theory asserts that people use 
­rational thinking to make choices. But when we rationalize, we “attempt to provide 
an apparently rational justification for [our] behavior after the ­behavior occurred” 
(p. 37). Thus, rationalizing provides a fabricated attempt to make a choice look ratio­
nal after the fact. This distinction becomes important when we discuss some of the 
criticisms of Social Exchange Theory at the end of this chapter.
The third assumption—that the standards people use to evaluate costs and 
rewards vary over time and from person to person—suggests that the theory must 
take diversity into consideration. No one standard can be applied to everyone to 
determine what is a cost and what is a reward. Thus, LaTasha may grow to see the 
relationship as more costly than Meredith does (or vice versa) as their standards 
change over time. However, Social Exchange Theory is a lawlike theory, as we de­
scribed in Chapter 3, because SET claims that although individuals may differ in 
their definition of rewards, the first assumption is still true for all people: We are 
motivated to maximize our profits and rewards while minimizing our losses and costs 
(Pascale & Primavera, 2016).
As we mentioned earlier in this chapter, Thibaut and Kelley take those three 
assumptions about human nature from drive reduction principles. In their approach 
to relationships, they developed a set of principles that they call Game Theory. The 
classic game they developed that illustrates their first assumption about relationships 
is called the Prisoner’s Dilemma (Figure 9.1). This game supposes that two prisoners 
are being questioned about a crime they deny committing. They have been separated 
(Jones)
(Jones)
(Jones)
Deny
Deny
Confess
Confess
1
2
3
4
(Smith)
(Smith)
(Smith)
(Smith)
(Smith)
Figure 9.1
The Prisoner’s 
Dilemma

160     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
for the questioning, and they are given two choices: They can confess to the crime, 
or they can persist in their ­denials. The situation is further complicated by the fact 
that the outcome for them is not completely in their own hands, individually. Instead, 
each prisoner’s outcome is a result of the combination of their two responses. The 
configuration of their possible choices is called a 2 × 2 matrix because there are two 
of them and they each have two choices: confess or deny.
Student Voices
Veronica
I first met my now fiancé on Match.com. We had quite a discussion about whether 
we wanted to get married or continue to live together. The costs of getting 
married were, in my eyes, pretty limited because we’d have some tax benefits. 
In her eyes, there were several risks like whether or not we were both prepared 
to say “till death do us part” or whether or not we are ready to be monogamous. 
We both thought about this a lot to ourselves and in the end, felt that the benefits 
of being married outweighed the costs of cohabiting.
If we call one of the prisoners Jones and the other Smith, we can see their choices 
and outcomes:
1.	 Jones confesses and Smith confesses = they both receive a life sentence.
2.	 Jones confesses and Smith denies = Jones goes free and Smith is jailed for life.
3.	 Jones denies and Smith confesses = Smith goes free and Jones is jailed for life.
4.	 Jones denies and Smith denies = they both serve a short jail term.
It is clear that the outcomes for Smith and Jones are interdependent. The outcome in 
each case depends on the relationship between Smith’s and Jones’s ­answers, not on 
one answer alone. This concept is so central to Thibaut and Kelley that they named 
their theory the Theory of Interdependence rather than Social Exchange or Game 
Theory. They did so because they wished to avoid the notion of win–lose in Game 
Theory, and they wished to stress that social exchange is a function of interdepen­
dence. Even though they used the ­Prisoner’s Dilemma as a starting point, Thibaut 
and Kelley were interested in social ­relationships, which is why we can apply these 
concepts to relationships like LaTasha and Meredith’s.
When we think of LaTasha and Meredith’s situation, we can see that if Meredith 
decides to cut back on her friendship with LaTasha, LaTasha will ­inevitably be af­
fected. Her own decisions about the costs and rewards of the relationship are contingent 
on Meredith’s decision. Thus, whenever anyone member of a relationship acts, both 
the other and the relationship as a whole are influenced. In a study of family members 
who care for elderly relatives (Raschick & Ingersoll-Dayton, 2004), the authors found 
there was interdependency in the care-giving and care-receiving relationship.
The second assumption that Thibaut and Kelley make is that relational life 
is a process. In stating this, the researchers are acknowledging the importance of 
time and change in relational life. Specifically, time affects exchanges because past 

	
Evaluating a Relationship     161
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
experiences guide judgments about rewards and costs, and these judgments im­
pact subsequent exchanges. For example, if Kathy dislikes school and has a very 
low opinion of teachers and then takes a class that exceeds her expectations, and 
she finds that she really likes this particular teacher, their relationship and Kathy’s 
expectations about future relationships with teachers will be shaped by the process. 
Further, the notion of process allows us to see that relationships constantly change 
and evolve.
Given these assumptions about humans and relationships, we are ready to exam­
ine two of the major parts of the theory: evaluation of a relationship and exchange 
patterns.
Evaluating a Relationship
As we mentioned previously, SET is more complex than the simple equa­
tion of worth that we initially presented. Social exchange includes “both a 
notion of a relationship, and some notion of a shared obligation in which both par­
ties ­perceive responsibilities to each other” (Lavelle, Rupp, & Brockner, 2007, 
p. 845). When people calculate the worth of their relationships and make decisions 
about staying in them, a few other considerations surface. One of the most interesting 
parts of Thibaut and Kelley’s theory is their explanation of how people evaluate their 
relationships with reference to whether they will stay in them or leave them. Thibaut 
and Kelley claim that this evaluation rests on two types of comparisons: comparison 
level and comparison level for alternatives. The comparison level (CL) is a standard 
representing what people feel they should receive in the way of rewards and costs 
from a particular relationship. Thus, Meredith has a subjective feeling about what 
she should give and what she should get, in return, from a friendship. Her CL has 
been shaped by all her past friendships, by family members’ advice, and by popular 
culture such as TV and film representations of friendships that give her an idea of 
what is expected from this relationship.
Comparison levels vary among individuals because they are subjective. 
­Individuals base their CL, in large part, on past experiences with a specific type 
of relationship. Because individuals have very different past experiences with simi­
lar types of relationships, they develop different comparison levels. For ­example, if 
Suzanne has had many friendships that required her to do a great deal of listening 
and empathizing, her CL will include this. If Andrew has not experienced friends 
requiring this listening behavior from him, he will not expect to encounter this cost 
in friendship. Because we often interact with people from our own culture, we share 
many relational expectations due to messages we have received from popular culture 
(Rawlins, 1992). Thus, we overlap somewhat in our expectations for relationships, 
and our CLs may not be totally different from one another’s.
Thibaut and Kelley argue that our satisfaction with a current relationship 
derives from comparing the rewards and costs it involves to our CL. If our current 
relationship meets or exceeds our CL, the theory predicts we will be satisfied with the 
relationship. Yet people sometimes leave satisfactory relationships and stay in ones 
that are not so satisfying. Thibaut and Kelley explain this seeming inconsistency with 
their second standard of comparison, the ­comparison level for alternatives (CLalt). 
comparison level 
(CL)
a standard for what 
a person thinks he 
or she should get in 
a relationship
comparison level 
for alternatives 
(CLalt)
how people evalu-
ate a relationship 
based on what their 
alternatives to the 
relationship are

162     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
This refers to “the lowest level of ­relational rewards a person is willing to accept 
given available rewards from alternative relationships or being alone” (Roloff, 
1981, p. 48). In other words, the CLalt provides the threshold for evaluating a 
relationship compared to the ­realistic alternatives to that relationship (Dillow, 
Malachowski, Brann, & Weber, 2011). For example, Michael Kramer (2005) stud­
ied community ­theater participation. He notes that people who live in towns where 
there is only one community theater are likely to stay with fewer rewards than 
those who have other options in their town. He observes that this emphasizes the 
­importance of CLalt.
CLalt provides a measure of stability rather than satisfaction—that is, the CLalt 
suggests how likely it is that Meredith would leave her relationship with LaTasha, 
even though it is a satisfying one, for something she thinks would be better. If we 
further examine LaTasha and Meredith’s relationship using CL and CLalt, we might 
speculate that Meredith finds her friendship with LaTasha very satisfying in gen­
eral. She might give it an eight out of a 10-point ranking where one is horrible and 
10 is perfect. The eight would be Meredith’s outcome score for her relationship 
with LaTasha. If Meredith’s expectations of friendship, or her CL, is only a six, 
then Meredith should be satisfied with her friendship with LaTasha. Furthermore, 
if Meredith thinks that by being alone now as she ­decides about college she would 
rate herself at a three, and she has few other friends that could even come close 
to her relationship with LaTasha, then her CLalt will be low. Her 8 outcome with 
LaTasha will exceed it, and Social Exchange Theory predicts that Meredith will 
want to remain friends with LaTasha.
If we calculate these numbers based on the format specified in Table 9.1, 
Meredith’s outcome, eight, is greater than her CL (6), and her CL is greater than 
her CLalt, which is three. Thus, her pattern fits the first example in the table and the 
theory predicts that the state of her relationship is satisfying and stable.
This kind of calculation—although perhaps a little unrealistic in turning a re­
lationship into a single number—suggests why some people remain in relationships 
that are abusive. If people see no alternative and fear being alone more than being 
in the relationship, Social Exchange Theory predicts they will stay. Some have 
written about women in abusive relationships, using this ­theoretical reasoning to 
explain why women stay with violent men (Walker, 1984). Other researchers 
Table 9.1  How Outcome, CL, and CLalt Affect the State of a Relationship
RELATIVE VALUE OF OUTCOME, CL, CLALT
STATE OF THE RELATIONSHIP
Outcome > CL > Clalt
Satisfying and stable
Outcome > CLalt > CL
Satisfying and stable
CLalt > CL > Outcome
Unsatisfying and unstable
CLalt > Outcome > CL
Satisfying and unstable
CL > CLalt > Outcome
Unsatisfying and unstable
CL > Outcome > Clalt
Unsatisfying and stable
> means greater than; < means less than
Source: Adapted from Roloff, 1981, p. 48. Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc.

	
Exchange Patterns: SET in Action     163
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
(Cox & Kramer, 1995) note that managers in organizations use these calculations to 
help them make decisions about dismissing employees. And Bishop, Scott, Goldsby, 
and Cropanzano (2005) investigate how employees use social exchange in forming 
commitments to their jobs. Table 9.1 summarizes six possible combinations among 
the outcome, the CL, and the CLalt and the resulting state of the relationship pre­
dicted by the ­theory.
Exchange Patterns: SET in Action
In addition to studying how people calculate their relational outcomes, Thibaut and 
Kelley were interested in how people adjust their behaviors in interaction with their 
relational partners. Thibaut and Kelley suggest that when people interact, they are 
goal directed. This is congruent with their assumption that human beings are ra­
tional. People, according to Thibaut and Kelley, engage in behavioral sequences, 
or a series of actions designed to achieve their goal. These sequences are the heart 
of what Thibaut and Kelley conceptualize as social exchange. As Thibaut and 
Kelley note, when people engage in these behavioral sequences they are dependent 
to some extent on their relational partner. For instance, if one person wishes to play 
gin rummy, cooperation from a partner is required. This interdependence brings 
up the concept of power—the dependence a person has on another for outcomes. 
If Meredith depends more on LaTasha for rewards than vice versa, then LaTasha has 
greater power than Meredith in their relationship. Some researchers (Darr, 2016) ob­
serve that certain exchanges, such as gift giving, bestow status and power on the giver. 
Other researchers (Trussell & Lavrakas, 2004) suggest there is probably an optimal 
amount a giver can give before status and power might begin to decline.
There are two types of power in SET: fate control and behavior control. 
Fate control is the ability to affect a partner’s outcomes. For example, if Meredith 
withholds her friendship from LaTasha, she affects LaTasha’s outcome. If LaTasha 
cannot replace Meredith as a friend, Meredith’s behavior gives her fate control over 
LaTasha. This presumes that Meredith does not care about the relationship. If she 
does, then withholding her friendship is a punishment for her as well, which gives 
LaTasha a certain amount of fate control in the relationship, too.
Behavior control is the power to cause another’s behavior to change by changing 
one’s own behavior. If Meredith calls LaTasha on the phone, it is likely that LaTasha 
will stop whatever else she is doing and talk to Meredith. If LaTasha is with Meredith 
and falls silent, Meredith will probably change her behavior in response. She might 
stop talking too, or she might question LaTasha to find out if something is wrong.
Thibaut and Kelley state that people develop patterns of exchange to cope with 
power differentials and to deal with the costs associated with exercising power. These 
patterns describe behavioral rules or norms that indicate how people trade resources in 
an attempt to maximize rewards and minimize costs. Thibaut and Kelley describe three 
different matrices in social exchange to ­illustrate the patterns people develop. These 
matrices include the given matrix, the effective matrix, and the dispositional matrix.
The given matrix represents the behavioral choices and outcomes that are 
determined by a combination of external factors (the environment) and internal 
factors (the specific skills each interactant possesses). When two people engage in 
behavioral  
sequences
a series of actions 
designed to achieve 
a goal
power
the degree of de-
pendence a person 
has on another for 
outcomes
fate control
the ability to affect 
a partner’s  
outcomes
behavior control
the power to 
change another’s 
behavior
given matrix 
the constraints on 
your choices due 
to the environment 
and/or your own 
skill levels

164     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
an exchange, the environment may make some options more difficult than others. 
LaTasha’s and Meredith’s families, for instance, are part of the environment that is 
making their friendship more difficult. A scarcity of money would be another aspect 
of the given matrix that would make some alternatives less likely for some relation­
ships. Furthermore, the given matrix depends on the skills people bring to the social 
exchange. If people lack skills for ­ballroom dancing, for example, it is unlikely that 
they will spend time dancing together. To a certain degree, the given matrix repre­
sents “the hand you are dealt.”
People may be restricted by the given matrix, but they are not trapped by it. They 
can transform it into the effective matrix, “which represents an expansion of alterna­
tive behaviors and/or outcomes which ultimately determines the behavioral choices in 
social exchange” (Roloff, 1981, p. 51). If a man does not know how to tango, he can 
take lessons in this dance and learn it, transforming the given matrix into the effective 
matrix. If Meredith and LaTasha think their families are bothering their friendship 
too much, they can engage in conflict with them until they change their families’ 
minds. Or they can stop talking about each other at home and keep their friendship 
secret so that they can avoid their families’ negative sanctions.
The final matrix, the dispositional matrix, represents the way two people believe 
that rewards ought to be exchanged between them. If Meredith and LaTasha think that 
friends ought to stick together no matter how much outside interference they receive 
from family members, that will affect their dispositional matrix. Some people view 
exchanges as competition, and this belief will be reflected in their dispositional matrix.
Thibaut and Kelley assert that if we know the kinds of dispositions a person 
has (the dispositional matrix) and the nature of the situation in which he or she is 
operating (the given matrix), then we will know how to predict the transformations 
the person will make (the effective matrix) to impact the social exchange. Thus, if 
we understand that LaTasha expects great loyalty from her friends, and from herself 
as a friend, and we know that her family’s opposition to her friendship to Meredith 
is not too strong, we might predict that LaTasha will defend Meredith to her fam­
ily and attempt to change their beliefs. If her family has a stronger opposition, we 
might predict that LaTasha will simply ­remain friends with Meredith without trying 
to change her family’s beliefs. The dispositional matrix guides the transformations 
people make to their given ­matrix; these transformations lead to the effective matrix, 
which determines the social exchange.
In their theory, Thibaut and Kelley do not explicitly deal with communication 
behaviors, such as self-disclosure, a topic we discuss in Chapter 10 in conjunction 
with Social Penetration Theory. Yet some of their discussion about the three matrices 
implies that self-disclosure does play an important role in ­social exchange. As Roloff 
(1981) observes,
Self-disclosure would seem to imply the communication of two things:
(1) the dispositions one has, and (2) the transformations (strategy) one is going 
to employ in this exchange. Since dispositions affect a person’s strategy, we 
might assume that knowledge of dispositions might well allow us to predict 
the transformations. (p. 77)
This self-disclosure, like all disclosures about the self, contains risks. It could provide 
the relational partner with information that could be used against the discloser. If people 
effective matrix 
the transformations 
you are able to 
make to your given 
matrix, by learning  
a new skill, for 
example
dispositional matrix 
the beliefs you have 
about relationships

	
Exchange Structures     165
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
know how another transforms the given matrix, they have an edge in social exchanges. 
For example, if LaTasha knows that Meredith tries to resolve problems in a cooperative 
fashion, she can use Meredith’s ­cooperative nature against her to get what she wants 
in an exchange. An understanding of how the matrices affect communication behavior 
is one reason communication researchers are interested in Social Exchange Theory.
Exchange Structures
Exchanges may take several forms within these matrices. These include direct exchange, 
generalized exchange, and productive exchange (Figure 9.2). In a ­direct exchange, 
reciprocation is confined to the two actors. For instance, when Brad washes his 
father’s car and then his dad lets him use the car on ­Saturday night, the exchange is di­
rect. One social actor provides value to ­another and the other reciprocates. In a longtime 
friendship like Meredith and LaTasha’s, they consistently participate in direct ex­
changes. It isn’t necessary to reciprocate immediately, but when LaTasha does a favor for 
Meredith, she knows that Meredith will eventually respond in kind.
A generalized exchange involves indirect reciprocity. One person gives to an­
other and the recipient responds, but not to the first person. Generalized ­exchanges 
occur, for example, when someone moves away from the neighborhood and friends 
and neighbors help pack up the moving van. Because the person has moved away, he 
or she won’t help any of those neighbors move when they are ready to relocate. The 
favor is reciprocated by helping someone else, in the new neighborhood. Generalized 
exchanges involve the community or ­social network rather than simply two specific 
people as in the examples we have discussed with LaTasha and Meredith.
Finally, exchanges may be productive, meaning that both actors have to con­
tribute for either one of them to benefit. In a direct or generalized exchange, one 
person is the beneficiary of another’s provision of value. One receives a ­reward and 
the other incurs a cost. In a productive exchange, both people incur benefits and 
costs simultaneously. If LaTasha and Meredith do a project together for their senior 
English class, they engage in productive ­exchange. Both of them have to do the work, 
and they both share equally in the grade they ­receive.
direct exchange 
an exchange where 
two people  
reciprocate costs 
and rewards
generalized  
exchange
an exchange where 
reciprocation 
involves the social 
network and isn’t 
confined to two 
individuals
Direct exchange
A
B
C
Generalized exchange
A
B
AB
Productive exchange
A
B
Figure 9.2
Exchange 
Structures
productive 
exchange
an exchange where 
both partners incur 
costs and benefits 
simultaneously

166     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Social Exchange Theory has generated a great deal of research and has been called “one of 
the major theoretical perspectives in the field of social psychology” (Cook & Rice, 2003, 
p. 53). SET is grounded in quantitative research, making it an empirically driven frame­
work from which to examine interpersonal relationships. As you reflect on SET, the crite­
ria of scope, utility, testability, and heurism are important to address.
SET explains relationships between people through the metaphor of juggling the 
relational costs and rewards. Recently, National Public Radio’s Nina Gregory 
wrote in All Tech Considered that our relationships with people, as mediated 
through various social media sites, may also have a cost and reward calculus. 
Gregory interviewed a few tech experts at the TED conference in Long Beach, 
California, about their opinions concerning online privacy. David Kobia, direc­
tor of technology at Ushahidi, framed his answer in Social Exchange terms. He 
noted that it isn’t just social media use that invades privacy, but also cell phones 
and a range of other tech devices. Kobia noted, “It’s as if you are emanating ‘data 
exhaust.’ If you could see this, it would appear like a data halo around you. Even 
with Google, the number of signals they collect about you even if you sign off . . . 
it’s a losing battle. If you’re going to use technology, an iPad, a smartphone, this 
is the price you pay.” Chris Anderson, the editor-in-chief of Wired Magazine, 
noted that privacy is complicated and, as with Social Exchange, people have to 
decide what they want to give up and what they wish to gain.
Source: Gregory, N. New ways to think about online privacy, npr.org/blogs/alltechconsidered
/2012/02/29/147669008/new-ways-to-think-about-online-privacy.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Costs and Rewards of Social Media
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal | Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     167
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
Scope
When examining SET on the basis of scope, some critics comment that it fails to 
explain the importance of group solidarity in its emphasis on individual need fulfill­
ment (England, 1989). This critique combines some of the issues raised previously 
and argues that “the exchange framework can be viewed as valuing the separative self 
to the extent that rationality and self-interest are emphasized” (Sabatelli & Shehan, 
1993, p. 397). By prioritizing this value, the connected self is overlooked and un­
dervalued. In some ways, this objection has ontological considerations as well, but 
it also suggests that the scope of the theory is too narrow. SET only considers the 
individual as a unique entity without focusing on the individual as a member of a 
group. Because of this, SET cannot account for relationships in cultures that priori­
tize connection over individuality, for example.
Student Voices
Brittany
Thinking about Social Exchange Theory helped me understand my friend Lindsay’s 
relationship with her boyfriend, Stan. I never could get what she saw in him at all 
until I read about CLalt. Then a light bulb went on. Even though I think Lindsay is 
great, she has very low self-esteem, and Stan is her first real boyfriend. She’s never 
said so, but I bet she thinks that if she leaves Stan she won’t be able to get another 
boyfriend. We go to a rather conservative school, and Lindsay is a liberal person. 
Stan is less conservative than most of the other guys we know, so I am guessing 
that Lindsay thinks there aren’t a lot of other guys around for her—because of both 
her low self-esteem and her political views. Now that I understand it a little better, I 
might try talking to Lindsay. She could do a lot better than Stan, and I hope she will 
see that.
Utility
The criterion of utility suggests that if the theory doesn’t present an accurate picture 
of people, it will be faulted as not useful. The real question is: Are humans really 
that calculating (Zafirovski, 2005)? SET has been criticized for the conceptualization 
of human beings it advances. In the theory, humans are seen as rational calculators, 
coming up with numerical equations to represent their relational life. Many people 
object to this understanding of humans, asking whether people really rationally cal­
culate the costs and rewards to be realized when in a relationship. Social Exchange 
assumes a great deal of cognitive awareness and activity, which several researchers 
have questioned (Berger & Roloff, 1980). Researchers have not come to a definitive 
answer about how much people calculate their relational life, but this calculation 
probably ebbs and flows according to many factors. First, some contexts may make 
people more self-aware than others. As LaTasha and Meredith receive more pres­
sure to decide about college, they may think about their relationship more than they 
did when they were younger. Second, some individual differences might affect how 

168     Chapter 9  •  Social Exchange Theory
S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
people process information. Some people are simply more self-aware than others 
(Snyder, 1979). As researchers continue to work with this theory, they must account 
for these and other factors relative to this calculation.
In addition, critics wonder if people are really as self-interested as Social Ex­
change Theory assumes. Steve Duck (1994) argues that applying a marketplace men­
tality to the understanding of relational life vastly misrepresents what goes on in 
relationships. He suggests that it is wrong to think about personal relationships in 
the same way that we think about business transactions, like buying a house or a car. 
This suggestion relates to the approaches to knowing one brings to the theory, as we 
discussed in Chapter 3. For some people, the analogy of the marketplace is appropri­
ate, but for others it is not and may be highly offensive.
Testability
A common criticism of Social Exchange Theory is that it’s not testable. As we dis­
cussed in Chapter 3, one important attribute of a theory is that it is testable and capa­
ble of being proven false. The difficulty with SET is that its central concepts—costs 
and rewards—are not clearly defined. As Sabatelli and Shehan (1993) note,
It becomes impossible to make an operational distinction between what people 
value, what they perceive as rewarding, and how they behave. Rewards, val­
ues, and actions appear to be defined in terms of each other (Turner, 1978). 
Thus, it is impossible to find an instance when a person does not act in ways 
so as to obtain rewards. (p. 396)
When the theory argues that people do what they can to maximize rewards and 
then also argues that what people do is rewarding behavior, it is difficult to dis­
entangle the two concepts. This issue relates to the difference between rational­
ization and rationality that we discussed earlier in the chapter. As long as Social 
Exchange Theory operates with these types of circular definitions, it will be un­
testable and, thus, unsatisfactory. However, Roloff (1981) observes that some 
work has been done to create lists of rewards in advance of simply observing what 
people do and labeling that as rewarding because people are doing it. Edna Foa 
and Uriel Foa (1974) began this work of clearly defining rewards. Roloff further 
argues that despite this problem, there has been a great deal of empirical work 
using Social ­Exchange ­theories.
Heurism
People who support SET point out that it has been heuristic. Studies in many diverse 
areas, from corporations (Muthusamy & White, 2005) to foster care (Timmer, Sedlar, & 
Urquiza, 2004) have been framed using the tenets of Social Exchange. Researchers 
have also examined communication in romantic relationships (Frisby, Sidelinger, & 
Booth-Butterfield, 2016), theater groups (Kramer, 2005), and micro-blogging (Liu, 
Min, Zhai, & Smyth, 2016) using SET. In addition, some researchers (e.g., DeHart, 
2012) have suggested that Social Exchange Theories might offer a useful framework 
for examining coaching people to ­exhibit positive communication. Furthermore, the 
emphasis that Thibaut and Kelley placed on interdependence is congruent with many 

S O C I A L  E X C H A N G E  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     169
researchers’ notions of interpersonal relationships. As a theory that examines human 
relationships, Social Exchange Theory has resonated with a number of scholars.
Closing
Despite being around for decades, Social Exchange Theory continues to find rel­
evance in an ever-changing complex society. The theory emphasizes the needs for 
people to assess the benefits and risks of their relationship and ultimately calculate 
the value of the relationship. Given the unpredictability of relational life, we’re likely 
to see this theory incorporated into research for years to come.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: In this chapter we suggested that a cost in many relation­
ships is the time spent nurturing them. Do you think that the multitasking 
behaviors that many people have now adopted, whereby they can conduct a 
face-to-face conversation at the same time they are texting or using another 
electronic device, will change that particular cost for people?
	
1.  Discuss Meredith and LaTasha’s given matrix, transformational matrix, and 
dispositional matrix.
	
2.  Explain the problem with Social Exchange Theory regarding testability. 
Is there anything that Social Exchange theorists could do to make the ­theory more 
testable? Use examples in your response.
	
3.  Choose a current relationship of yours and perform a cost-benefit analysis 
on it. Assess whether the relationship meets, fails to meet, or exceeds your com­
parison level.
	
4.  How does Social Exchange Theory explain the unselfish things that people 
do that do not seem calculated to gain rewards for themselves?
	
5.  Have you ever stayed in a relationship because you thought you did not 
have any other alternatives? Explain.
	
6.  How realistic do you think gaming principles like those used to ­develop the 
Prisoner’s Dilemma are? Give examples that support or contest the use of a 2 × 2 
matrix to model human choices.
	
7.  Do you believe that SET is too culture specific and can’t account for com­
munication in cultures that aren’t individualistic?

170
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
 
About three years ago, 
Jason 
LaSalle’s 
wife, 
­Miranda, died in a car ac­
cident, leaving Jason a single parent of 8-year-
old twins. Since his wife’s death, he has struggled 
both financially and emotionally. He has worried 
about making his rent and van payments and 
about meeting his children’s needs. For the past 
three years, Jason has worked odd jobs around 
the neighborhood to supplement his modest in­
come as custodian for a local cinema complex. In 
addition, Jason has been lonely. He is shy around 
others, especially women. Miranda was the only 
woman he really felt comfortable with, and he 
misses her a great deal.
	
Jason’s sister, Kayla, is always trying to get 
Jason out of the house. One night, she hired a 
baby-sitter and picked him up to go out. This eve­
ning was especially important to Kayla because 
she had also invited her friend Elise Porter, who 
was recently ­divorced. Kayla thought that Elise 
might be a good match for her brother. She was 
hoping that Elise’s easygoing nature and her great 
sense of humor would appeal to Jason. Through­
out the evening, Jason and Elise talked about a 
variety of things, ­including their experiences as 
single parents, her ­divorce, and the two children 
they were each raising. Much of their night was 
spent dancing or talking to each other. The eve­
ning ended with Jason and Elise promising to get 
together again soon.
	
As Jason drove home to his apartment he 
couldn’t help, but think about Miranda. He was 
lonely. It had been three years since he had shared 
any intimacy with an adult. When he arrived home, 
his sadness increased as he caught sight of a fam­
ily picture taken at Disney World shortly before 
Miranda’s death. He wasn’t sure if it was a good 
time to pursue an intimate relationship, and yet he 
wanted a chance to see what kind of person Elise 
was. He knew that future dates would inevitably 
require him to talk about Miranda, and he felt that 
such conversations would be very difficult. He 
would have to open up emotionally to Elise, and 
the thought of being placed in such a vulnerable 
position seemed challenging.
	
After he paid the babysitter and closed the 
door behind her, he walked into the twins’ room 
and gave each a kiss on the forehead. Sitting 
drinking his tea in the living room, Jason felt that 
he was embarking upon something new, exciting, 
and a bit frightening.
Social Penetration Theory
Based on the research of Irwin Altman and Dalmas Taylor
Jason LaSalle
C H A P T E R	10
W
hen we say we’re close to someone, we often act as though others understand 
precisely what we mean. That is not always the case, however. Saying that you 
are close or intimate with someone may not be universally ­understood.
Communication and disclosure intimacy appear to be the sine qua non of 
developing satisfying interpersonal relationships.
—Irwin Altman and Dalmas A. Taylor

S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Social Penetration Theory     171
To understand the relational closeness between two people, Irwin Altman 
and Dalmas Taylor (1973) conceptualized Social Penetration Theory (SPT). The 
two conducted extensive study in the area of social bonding among various 
types of couples. Their theory illustrates a pattern of relationship development, 
an evolution that they identified as social penetration. Social penetration refers 
to a process of relationship bonding whereby individuals move from superfi­
cial communication to more intimate communication. According to Altman and 
Taylor, intimacy involves more than physical intimacy; other dimensions of inti­
macy include intellectual and emotional, and the extent to which a couple shares 
activities (West & Turner, 2017). The social penetration process, therefore, nec­
essarily includes verbal behaviors (the words we use), nonverbal behaviors (our 
body posture, the extent to which we smile, etc.), and environmentally oriented 
behaviors (the space between communicators, the physical objects present in the 
environment, etc.).
Altman and Taylor (1973) believe that people’s relationships vary tremen­
dously in their social penetration. From husband–wife to supervisor–employee 
to golf partners to physician–patient, the theorists conclude that relationships 
“­involve different levels of intimacy of exchange or degree of social penetration” 
(p. 3). The authors note that relationships follow some particular trajectory, or 
pathway, to closeness. Furthermore, they contend that relationships are somewhat 
organized and predictable in their development. Because relationships are critical 
and “lie at the heart of our humanness” (Rogers & Escudero, 2004, p. 3), Social 
Penetration theorists attempt to unravel the simultaneous nature of relational com­
plexity and predictability. And, although many individuals may have established 
online relationships, Altman and Taylor did not conceptualize this development 
in their writing.
The opening story of Jason LaSalle and his arranged date illustrates a central 
feature of Social Penetration Theory (SPT). The only way for Jason and Elise to 
understand each other is for them to engage in personal conversations; such discus­
sion requires each sharing personal bits of information. As the two become closer, 
they will move from a nonintimate relationship to an intimate one. In addition, each 
person’s personality will influence the direction of the relationship. So Jason and 
Elise’s relationship will be influenced by Jason’s shyness and Elise’s easygoing 
manner. The future of Jason’s relationship with Elise is based on a multiplicity of 
factors—factors that we will explore throughout this chapter.
Early discussions of SPT began during the 1960s and 1970s, an era when 
opening up and talking candidly was highly valued as an important relational 
strategy. Through the years, however, communication researchers and practitio­
ners acknowledged that cultures can vary tremendously in their endorsement of 
openness as a relational skill, and scholars such as Barry Farber and his col­
leagues (2012) question the initial enthusiasm for too much relational openness in 
general. Therefore, as you read this chapter, keep in mind that we are discussing a 
theory that is rooted in a generation for which speaking freely and without bound­
ary was a highly valued characteristic. Nevertheless, much of the theory remains 
relevant today as we live in a society where openness is still a valued personal 
characteristic. Simply look at daytime television talk shows hosted by Dr. Oz or 
Dr. Phil for evidence of this.
social penetration
process of bonding  
that moves a 
relationship from 
superficial to more 
intimate
trajectory
pathway to closeness

172     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
To begin, we outline several assumptions of Social Penetration Theory. We then 
identify the catalyst for the theory and provide a detailed example of the stages of the 
penetration process. 
Assumptions of Social Penetration Theory
Social Penetration Theory (called a “stage theory” by Mongeau & Henningsen, 
2008), has enjoyed widespread acceptance by a number of scholars in the commu­
nication discipline. Part of the reason for the theory’s appeal is its straightforward 
approach to relationship development. Although we alluded to some assumptions 
earlier, we will explore the following assumptions that guide SPT:
∙∙
Relationships progress from nonintimate to intimate.
∙∙
Relational development is generally systematic and predictable.
∙∙
Relational development includes depenetration and dissolution.
∙∙
Self-disclosure is at the core of relationship development.
First, relational communication between people begins at a rather superfi­
cial level and moves along a continuum to a more intimate level. On their date 
arranged by Kayla, Jason and Elise no doubt talked about trivial issues related 
to being single parents. They probably shared how difficult it is to have enough 
time in the day to do everything, but they probably did not express how desper­
ate they feel at 3:00 a.m. when they awake from a nightmare, for example. These 
initial conversations at first may appear unimportant, but as Jason discovers, such 
conversations allow an individual to size up the other and provide the opportunity 
for the early stages of relational development. There is little doubt that Jason feels 
awkward, but this awkwardness can pass. With time, relationships have the op­
portunity to become intimate.
Not all relationships fall into the extremes of nonintimate or intimate. In fact, 
many of our relationships are somewhere in between these two poles. Often, we may 
want only a moderately close relationship. For instance, we may want a relationship 
with a coworker to remain sufficiently distant so that we do not know what goes on in 
her house each night or how much money she has in the bank. Yet we need to know 
Theory At a Glance  •  Social Penetration Theory
Interpersonal relationships evolve in some gradual and predictable fashion. 
Social Penetration theorists believe that self-disclosure is the primary way 
that superficial relationships progress to intimate relationships. Although 
self-disclosure can lead to more intimate relationships, it can also leave one 
or more persons vulnerable.

	
Assumptions of Social Penetration Theory     173
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
enough personal information to have a sense of whether she can complete her part 
of a team project.
The second assumption of Social Penetration Theory pertains to predictability. 
Specifically, Social Penetration theorists argue that relationships progress fairly 
systematically and predictably. Some people may have difficulty with this claim. 
After all, relationships—like the communication process—are dynamic and ever 
changing, but even dynamic relationships follow some ­acceptable standard and 
pattern of development.
To better understand this assumption, again consider Jason LaSalle. Without 
knowing all the specifics of his situation, we could figure out that if he pursues a 
relationship with Elise, he will have to work through his emotions about Miranda. 
In addition, he must inevitably reconcile how their families might merge if the 
relationship progresses into more intimacy. We could probably predict that the 
relationship will move slowly at first while both Jason and Elise work out their 
feelings and emotions.
These projections are grounded in the second assumption of the theory: Rela­
tionships generally move in an organized and predictable manner. ­Although we may 
not know precisely the direction of a relationship or be able to predict its exact future, 
social penetration processes are rather organized and predictable. We can be fairly 
sure, for instance, that Jason and Elise will not introduce each other to important 
people in their families before they date a few more times. We would also expect 
that neither would declare his or her love for the other before they exchanged more 
intimate information. Of course, a number of other events and variables (time, per­
sonality, and so forth) affect the way relationships progress and what we can predict 
along the way. As Altman and Taylor (1973) conclude, “People seem to possess very 
sensitive tuning mechanisms which enable them to program carefully their interper­
sonal relationships” (p. 8).
The third assumption of SPT pertains to the notion that relational development 
includes depenetration and dissolution. At first, this may sound a bit peculiar. Thus 
far, we have explored the coming together of a relationship. Yet relationships do fall 
apart, or depenetrate, and this depenetration can lead to relationship dissolution. 
Elise, for example, may be unprepared for Jason’s past and may wish to depenetrate 
and ultimately dissolve the relationship.
Addressing depenetration and dissolution, Altman and Taylor liken the process 
to a film shown in reverse. Just as communication allows a relationship to move 
forward toward intimacy, communication could move a relationship back toward 
non-intimacy. If the communication is conflictual, for example, and this conflict 
continues to be destructive and unresolved, the relationship may take a step back and 
become less close. And Social Penetration theorists think that depenetration—like 
the penetration process—is often systematic.
If a relationship depenetrates, it does not mean that it will automatically dissolve 
or terminate. At times, relationships experience transgressions, or the violation of 
relational rules, practices, and expectations. These transgressions may seem unwork­
able and, at times, they are. In fact, Sean Horan (2012) points out that transgressions 
can be quite influential in relational life. In Chapter 5, we discussed unwanted repeti­
tive patterns of conflict in couples. We noted that recurring conflicts characterize a 
depenetrate
slow deterioration 
of relationship
transgression 
a violation of 
relational rules, 
practices, and 
expectations

174     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
number of different relationship types and that couples generally learn to live with 
these conflicts. You may ­believe conflict or relational transgressions will inevitably 
lead to dissolution, but depenetration does not necessarily mean that the relationship 
is doomed.
The final assumption contends that self-disclosure is at the core of relationship 
development. Self-disclosure can be generally defined as the purposeful process of 
revealing information about yourself to others. Usually, the ­information that makes 
up self-disclosure is of a significant nature. For instance, revealing that you like to 
play the piano may not be all that important; revealing a more personal piece of 
information, such as that you are a practicing Catholic or that you use marijuana for 
medicinal reasons may significantly influence the evolution of a relationship.
According to Altman and Taylor (1973), nonintimate relationships progress to 
intimate relationships because of self-disclosure. This process ­allows people to get 
to know each other in a relationship. Self-disclosure helps shape the present and 
future relationship between two people, and “making [the] self accessible to an­
other person is intrinsically gratifying” (p. 50). Elise will understand the challenges 
that lie ahead for her in a relationship with Jason by hearing Jason reveal his feel­
ings about his wife’s death and his desire to begin dating again. In turn, because 
social penetration requires a “gradual overlapping and exploration of their mutual 
selves by parties to a relationship” (p. 15), Elise, too, would have to self-disclose 
her thoughts and feelings. 
self-disclosure
purposeful process  
of revealing 
­information about 
yourself to others
T*I*P
Theory-Into-Practice
Social Penetration Theory
Theoretical Claim: Reciprocity with similar levels of “risk” typically leads to increased 
intimacy between people.
Practical Implication: Lana told her roommate, Rachel, that she did not have 
enough financial aid to stay in school. Rachel, in turn, disclosed that if her father 
had not taken out a loan on their condo, she would have to quit school (too). ­Rachel’s 
reciprocity brings the two even closer together because it serves to validate Lana’s 
experience.
Finally, we should note that self-disclosure can be strategic or nonstrategic. That 
is, in some relationships, we tend to plan out what we will say to another person. In 
other situations, our self-disclosure may be spontaneous. Spontaneous self-disclo­
sure is widespread in our society. In fact, researchers have used the phrase “stranger-
on-the-train (or plane or bus) phenomenon” to refer to those times when people 
reveal information to complete strangers in public places. To be precise, stranger-on-
the-train refers to those moments of “sharing with an anonymous seat-mate intimate 
details [of which] not even our closest friends are aware” (Bareket-Bojmel & Shahar, 
2011, pp. 732–733). Think about how many times you have been seated next to a 
stranger on a trip, only to have that person disclose personal information throughout 
the journey. Interpersonal communication researchers continue to investigate why 
people engage in this activity.
stranger-on-the-
train
the event that occurs  
when strangers 
reveal personal 
­information to others 
in public places

	
“Tearing Up” the Relationship: The Onion Analogy     175
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
“Tearing Up” the Relationship: The Onion Analogy
Previously we discussed the importance of revealing information about oneself of 
which others are unaware. In their discussion of SPT, Altman and Taylor incorporate 
an onionskin structure (Figure 10.1). They believe that a person like Jason LaSalle 
can be compared to an onion, with the layers (concentric circles) of the onion repre­
senting various aspects of a person’s personality. The outer layer is an individual’s 
public image, or that which is available to the naked eye. This is the “publicly ob­
servable self” [where] “private information that is stored at deeper layers must be 
discovered” (Fox, 2015, p. 6). Jason’s public image is an African American male in 
his mid-40s who is slightly balding. Elise Porter is also an African American, but is 
significantly taller than Jason and has very short hair. A layer of the public image 
is removed, however, when Jason discloses to his date his frustrations with being a 
single father.
As the evening evolves for the two of them, Jason and Elise no doubt begin 
to reveal additional layers of their personalities. For instance, Elise may reveal 
that she, too, experiences single-parent anxieties. This reciprocity, or the process 
whereby one person’s openness leads to the other’s openness, is a primary com­
ponent in SPT. In fact, researchers have shown consistently that when one person 
divulges personal information, the other person is likely to reciprocate similar lev­
els of sensitive information (Acquisti, John, & Loewenstein, 2012). Reciprocity 
has been shown to be significant in both established and new relationships, such 
as Jason and Elise’s. Further, in terms of online ­relationships, people are more in­
clined to self-disclose to others online (e.g., Facebook) than face to face (Palmieri, 
Prestano, Gandley, Overton, & Zhang, 2012). And, in an interesting study compar­
ing U.S. American and Ghanaian University students (Lin & Sackey, 2015), those 
in the Ghana were more favorable toward disclosing via Facebook. The Ghanaian 
public image 
outer layer of a 
person; what is 
available to others
reciprocity 
the return of 
­openness from one 
person to another
1
4
2
3
Death
Marriage/
partnership
Education
Dating
Levels of
intimacy
Figure 10.1
The Social 
­Penetration Process 
of Jason LaSalle

176     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
students were also more likely to chat and send disclosive messages on Facebook 
than their U.S. counterparts.
Before leaving the discussion of self-disclosure, we should point out that 
penetration can be viewed along two dimensions: breadth and depth. Breadth 
refers to the number of various topics discussed in the relationship; breadth time 
pertains to the amount of time that relational partners spend communicating with 
each other about these various topics. Depth refers to the degree of intimacy 
that guides topic discussions. In the initial stages, relationships can be classified 
as having narrow breadth and shallow depth. For Jason LaSalle, it is feasible 
that his first date with Elise was characterized this way. Most likely, the two 
did not ­discuss many topics, and what they did discuss probably lacked intimate 
overtones. As relationships move toward intimacy, we can expect a wider range 
of topics to be discussed (more breadth), with several of those topics marked 
by depth.
A few conclusions are important with respect to the breadth and depth of 
self-disclosure. First, shifts or changes in central layers (of the onion) have more 
of an impact than those in outer, or peripheral, layers. Because an individual’s 
public image, or outer layer, represents those things that others can see, or what 
we can term the superficial, we expect that if there are changes in the outer layer, 
the consequence is minimal. For example, if Elise changed her hairstyle, her rela­
tionship with Jason would be less affected than if she changed her opinion about 
premarital sex.
Second, the greater the depth, the more opportunity for a person to feel vul­
nerable. Imagine that Jason reveals some inadequacy about himself to Elise—for 
instance, the fact that he was on welfare for two years after his wife’s death. When 
he reveals this personal information to Elise, she can respond in several different 
ways. She can simply say, “Wow,” and not venture further into the discussion. Or she 
can reply, “That must have been very hard for you,” communicating compassion. A 
third possible response is “I don’t see anything wrong with that. Millions of people 
need some help at some point in their lives.” The latter response demonstrates even 
more compassion and an effort to diffuse the possible anxiety that Jason is feeling. 
How Elise responds influences how vulnerable Jason feels. As you can see, the first 
response may elicit a high degree of vulnerability, whereas the third response may 
invoke ­little vulnerability.
As you reflect on the topic of self-disclosure, keep in mind that an individual 
should be judicious in using self-disclosure. Although self-disclosure generally 
moves a relationship toward more closeness, if people disclose too much during the 
early stages of a relationship, they may actually end the relationship. Some partners 
may be ill equipped and underprepared to know another so intimately. Also note 
that trust is an inherent part of the disclosure and ­reciprocity processes. In fact, it is 
very difficult to disentangle the relationship between trust and self-disclosure as the 
two are inextricably linked (Such, ­Espinoza, Garcia-Fornes, & Sierra, 2012). If we 
desire reciprocity in ­disclosure, we must try to gain the trust of the other person and, 
similarly, feel trustful of the other person. One goal in self-disclosure, then, is to be 
thoughtful and appropriate. We have included other guidelines for self-disclosure 
in Table 10.1.
breadth
the number of 
­topics discussed in 
a relationship
breadth time
amount of time spent 
by relational partners 
discussing various 
topics
depth 
degree of intimacy 
guiding topic dis-
cussion

	
A Social Exchange: Relational Costs and Rewards     177
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
A Social Exchange: Relational Costs and Rewards
Social Penetration Theory is grounded in several principles from many theories 
­related to relationship development. Principle among these are Social Exchange 
Theory (Thibaut & Kelley, 1959). As we discussed in Chapter 9, this theory suggests 
that social exchanges “entail services that create unspecified obligations in the future 
and therefore exert a pervasive influence on social relations” (Blau, 1964, p. 140). 
Altman and Taylor based some of their work on social ­exchange processes; that is, 
an exchange of resources between individuals in a relationship. Specifically, rewards 
and costs relate to Social Exchange Theory.
Taylor and Altman (1987) argue that relationships can be conceptualized in 
terms of rewards and costs. You may recall these terms in Chapter 9. Nonetheless, 
let’s restate their meanings. Rewards are those relational events or behaviors that 
stimulate satisfaction, pleasure, and contentment in a relational partner, whereas 
costs are those relational events or behaviors that stimulate negative feelings. Quite 
simply, if a relationship provides more rewards than costs, then individuals are 
more likely to stay in that relationship. However, if an individual believes that 
there are more costs to being in a relationship, then relationship dissolution is 
probable. For instance, Jason LaSalle will most likely regulate the closeness of his 
relationship with Elise by assessing a reward–cost ratio, which is defined as the 
balance between positive and negative relationship experiences. If Jason believes 
reward-cost ratio
balance between 
positive and nega-
tive relationship 
experiences
Table 10.1  Guidelines for Self-Disclosure
ASK YOURSELF
SUGGESTION
Is the other person important 
to you?
Reveal significant pieces of information about 
yourself to those people with whom you have 
­developed a ­personal relationship.
Is the risk of disclosing 
­reasonable?
Try not to reveal significant information about 
yourself if there is great risk associated with it. 
Assess the risk potential of your disclosure.
Are the amount and type of 
­disclosure appropriate?
Discern whether you are revealing too much or too 
little information. Examine the timing of the disclosure.
Is the disclosure relevant to 
the situation at hand?
Constant disclosure is not typically useful in a 
­relationship. Don’t share everything.
Is the disclosure reciprocated?
Unequal self-disclosure creates an imbalanced 
relationship. Wait for reciprocity.
Will the effect be constructive?
If not employed carefully, disclosure can be 
used in destructive ways. Use care in disclosing 
­information that may be perceived as damaging.
Are cultural misunderstandings 
possible?
Maintain cultural sensitivity as people disclose to 
you and you disclose to others.

178     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
he is deriving more pleasure (nurturance, supportive teasing, and so forth) than 
pain (frustration, insecurity, and so forth) from being in his relationship with Elise, 
then it is likely that he is fairly satisfied at the moment. His own expectations and 
experiences must also be taken into account in the reward–cost ratio. As Taylor and 
Altman point out, “[R]ewards and costs are consistently associated with mutual 
satisfaction of personal and social needs” (1987, p. 264).
To understand this a bit better, consider the following two conclusions observed 
by Taylor and Altman: (1) Rewards and costs have a greater impact early on in the 
relationship than later in the relationship, and (2) relationships with a reservoir of 
positive reward/cost experiences are better equipped to handle conflict effectively. 
We will examine each of these briefly.
The first conclusion suggests that there are relatively few interpersonal experiences in 
the early stages, resulting in individuals focusing more on a single reward or a single cost. 
So, for instance, it is probable that Jason will be impressed with Elise if she is willing to 
give Jason space during the early stages of their relationship; for Jason, rushing into a rela­
tionship may be a bit overwhelming, and Elise’s patience may be viewed as an important 
relational reward. Elise, however, may view Jason’s early ambivalence as an indicator of 
things to come. She may, therefore, decide that his uncertainty is simply too much of a cost 
to endure and want to dissolve the relationship sooner than Jason does.
With respect to the second conclusion regarding costs and rewards, Taylor and 
Altman note that some relationships are better able to manage conflict than others. 
As relational partners move on in a relationship, they may experience a number of 
disagreements. Over the years, couples become accustomed to managing conflict in 
various ways, creating a unique relational culture that allows them to work through 
future issues. There may be more trust in handling a conflict in established relation­
ships. In addition, the relationship is not likely to be threatened by a single conflict 
because of the couple’s stockpile of experiences in dealing with conflict.
www.CartoonStock.com

	
Stages of the Social Penetration Process     179
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
In sum, then, relationships often depend on both parties assessing the rewards 
and costs. If partners feel that there are more rewards than costs, chances are that 
the relationship will survive. If more costs are perceived than rewards, the rela-
tionship may depenetrate or dissolve. However, keep in mind that both partners 
may not see an issue similarly; a cost by one person may be viewed as a reward 
by the other.
The Social Exchange perspective relies on both parties in a relationship to 
calculate the extent to which individuals view the relationship as negative (cost) or 
positive (reward). According to Social Exchange thinking, as relationships come 
together, partners ultimately assess the possibilities within a relationship as well 
as the perceived or real alternatives to a relationship (Carpenter & Greene, 2015). 
These evaluations are critical as communicators decide whether the process of so-
cial penetration is desirable. In the following section, we identify the stages of the 
social penetration process.
Stages of the Social Penetration Process
The decision about whether a potential relationship appears satisfying is not 
immediate. As we mentioned earlier, Social Penetration Theory is viewed as a 
“stage” theory (Carpenter & Greene, 2015). Furthermore, relationship develop-
ment occurs in a rather systematic manner, and decisions about whether people 
want to remain in a relationship are not usually made quickly. Not all relation-
ships go through this process, and those that do are not always romantic rela-
tionships. To demonstrate how each stage functions in relationships that are not 
romantic, we provide a scenario for you to think about. We then talk about each 
stage and refer back to the example. Figure 10.2 outlines the four stages of the 
social penetration process.
Consider the relationship between Carmen and Brennan, two 21-year-olds 
who both decided to live off-campus for their junior year. The two did not know 
each other before meeting in their Psych course, but both found that they wanted 
to live away from campus and both wanted to pledge one of the sororities. The two 
come from different parts of the country: Carmen is from Los Angeles, and Bren-
nan was raised in rural Pennsylvania. They also differ in family makeup in that 
Carmen is one of four siblings and Brennan is an only child. Finally, Carmen is 
the first in her family to attend college while Brennan is a third-generation college 
student. They have only met each other in class and are now about to have their 
first breakfast ­together.
Orientation
Revealing bits of
ourselves to others
Exploratory Aﬀective
Exchange
Emergence of an
individual’s personality
Aﬀective Exchange
Spontaneous
communication;
use of personal idioms
Stable Exchange
Eﬃcient communication;
establishment of a
personal system of
communication
Figure 10.2  Stages of Social Penetration

180     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Orientation: Revealing Bit by Bit
The earliest stage of interaction, called the orientation stage, occurs at the public 
level; only bits of ourselves are revealed to others. During this stage, comments are 
usually on the cliché level and reflect superficial aspects of individuals. People usu­
ally act in socially desirable ways and are cautious of disturbing any societal expecta­
tions. Individuals smile pleasantly and react politely in the orientation stage. Conflict 
is usually avoided at this stage (Carpenter & Greene, 2015).
Taylor and Altman (1987) note that people tend not to evaluate or criticize dur­
ing the orientation stage. This behavior would be perceived as inappropriate by the 
other and might jeopardize future interactions. If evaluation does occur, the theorists 
believe that it will be couched in soft overtones. In addition, both parties actively 
avoid any conflict so that they have further opportunity to size up each other.
The orientation stage can be understood by examining the dialogue between 
Carmen and Brennan during their breakfast:
Carmen:  I have to admit that I am a bit weirded out about all of this. I mean I 
know you from class, but I am anxious. I do feel ok, though, and think this will 
work out. 
Brennan:  I agree. [awkward silence]
Carmen:  But, look: We both love lacrosse, and maybe we’ll both make the team. 
We both want to rush, and I hope . . . [Brennan interrupts]
Brennan:  I love to study near . . . Sorry. You go ahead.
Carmen:  No, you go.
Brennan:  I was going to say that I hope that we have some chances to get away 
and maybe even head up to my family’s lake house. I love to study near the 
water and if it’s warm, I definitely love to swim. I haven’t had time this past 
summer, though, because I was working too much at the Local Buzz.
Carmen:  Believe it or not, I don’t know how to swim! I tried to learn, but I just 
don’t seem to be coordinated.
Brennan:  Hey! I’m a good swimmer. I’ll teach you when we get some time. 
Carmen:  Ha. If I eat any more of this stuff, I’ll definitely know how to float!
orientation stage 
stage of social 
penetration that 
includes revealing  
small parts of 
­ourselves
Student Voices
Kendall
The romantic relationship I have been in went through some pretty predictable 
stages. We actually had a third party introduce the two of us to each other. After 
that, we dated for a few months—disclosing a lot of private information along the 
way. I mean, I’ve never told anyone in my life the kinds of things I told her. She 
obviously knows me better than anyone after two years. We’re now trying to figure 
out our “final commitment” (marriage), but we both want to wait till we graduate 
before that happens. I’m broke!

	
Stages of the Social Penetration Process     181
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
As you can see, both women speak in a rather superficial and very formalized con­
versation, and neither one is really judging the other. In fact, Brennan has an oppor­
tunity to tell Carmen how strange it is that she doesn’t know how to swim, but she 
chooses to stay supportive.
Exploratory Affective Exchange: The Self Emerges
In the orientation stage, interactants are cautious about revealing too much about 
themselves to each other. The exploratory affective exchange stage, however, is an 
expansion of the public areas of the self and occurs when aspects of an individual’s 
personality begin to emerge. Both people begin to ­“explore” each other and small pieces 
of their private life becomes more public. The theorists note that this stage is compa­
rable to the relationships we have with casual acquaintances and friendly neighbors. 
Like other stages, this stage includes both verbal and nonverbal behaviors. People might 
begin to use some catch phrases that are idiosyncratic to the relationship. There is a 
small amount of spontaneity in communication because individuals feel more relaxed 
with each other, and they are not as cautious about blurting out something that they may 
later regret. Also, more touch behavior and more affect displays (such as facial expres­
sions) may become part of the communication repertoire with the other person. Taylor 
and Altman tell us that many relationships don’t proceed beyond this stage.
To gain a clearer picture of the exploratory affective exchange stage, think again 
about Carmen and Brennan. This time, however, consider that the two have been 
roommates for about eight weeks now, and each is getting a better idea about the 
personality of the other. Both are now pledging Delta Sigma and are sitting in their 
apartment talking about their pledging experience.
Brennan:  Okay, Carmen. I don’t know why we’re doing this. 
Carmen:  I know. At times, I think it’s weird that we’re doing all this just to have 
this “sisterhood” experience. But, we both know that the group does a lot of 
good and I mean the girls are just very cool and not stuck on themselves. I grew 
up in a family where helping each other out was important. I think this sort of 
thing is why I like the girls. 
Brennan:  I know, but I’m not having any fun! I am so tired, too, and I . . . .
Carmen:  Please, Brennan, will you just chill?! We both agreed to do this and if 
you want to back out now, do it. But, sometimes you’re such a downer.
Brennan:  I’m not whining. Just because I say I’m having second thoughts 
on pledging doesn’t mean I’m a whiner. I’m just not sure if this is working 
­toward conformity or . . . .
Carmen:  Whatever. I know that I wanted to pledge because I wanted a group of 
friends who I could trust and who would be there if I needed help. I wish you 
would just relax about things.
Clearly, Brennan and Carmen are starting to feel more comfortable around each other. 
In fact, Brennan’s “chill” and “whatever” language reflects the sort of catchphrases 
to which Taylor and Altman refer. Furthermore, Carmen is slowly revealing more 
personal information about her family and her perceptions of Brennan as a whiner. 
Brennan, in turn, openly questions the value of the pledge process. Their exploratory 
affective exchange is generally one characterized by candor, engagement, and ease.
exploratory affective  
exchange stage 
stage of social 
­penetration that 
results in the 
­emergence of  
our personality  
to others

182     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Affective Exchange: Commitment and Comfortability
This stage is characterized by close friendships and intimate partners. The ­affective 
exchange stage includes those interactions that are more “freewheeling and casual” 
(Taylor & Altman, 1987, p. 259) in that communication is frequently spontaneous 
and individuals make quick decisions, often with little regard for the relationship as 
a whole. This stage represents further commitment to the other individual; the inter­
actants are comfortable with each other.
The stage includes those nuances of a relationship that make it unique; a smile may 
substitute for the words “I understand,” or a penetrating gaze may translate into “We’ll 
talk about this later.” We might also find individuals using personal idioms (Hopper, 
Knapp, & Scott, 1981), which are private ways of expressing a relationship’s intimacy 
through words, phrases, or behaviors. ­Idiomatic expressions—such as “honey” or 
“bubbles”—carry unique meaning for two people in a relationship. David Atkins and 
his research team (2012) contend that personal idioms act as a couple’s private commu­
nication system. These idioms are different from the catchphrases we discussed in the 
exploratory affective exchange in that idioms usually characterize more established re­
lationships, whereas catchphrases may develop at any point in an initial interaction. We 
should add that this stage, like the exploratory affective exchange stage, may also in­
clude criticisms. As the theorists contend, these criticisms, hostilities, and disapprovals 
may exist “without any thought of threat to the relationship as a whole” (Altman & 
Taylor, 1973, p. 139). Consequently, barriers to closeness may be broken down, but 
many people still protect themselves from becoming too vulnerable.
Returning to our example, Carmen and Brennan have been together for a little 
more than 10 weeks. They have had ample opportunity to understand a number of 
idiosyncrasies about each other; living with someone usually does that to people. 
Their conversation centers around a date that Brennan had on Saturday night:
Brennan:  I simply refuse to believe that I even spent one hour with him! I mean 
I have dated a lot of guys, but this one was one of the weirdest.
Carmen:  I’ve seen some of your dates, Bren. Ah, remember “Jack and the 
Beanstalk!” Hello?
Brennan:  Hmm. I know. Hey, at least he didn’t take his cat on a date!
Carmen:  I knew you would say that. But, listen, that guy was so nice . . . you 
never see guys act like gentlemen these days!
Brennan:  Yeah, and it’s a wonder why his four cats didn’t claw you while you 
guys were together!
Carmen: I know the kind of guy you like, Brennan. And, yes, we’re very different 
from each other on guys. I just keep things to myself a lot and won’t wear my 
heart on my sleeve like you do! I’m much more discreet shall we say?
Brennan: There’s a reason why I call you “Carmen Chameleon!”
Carmen:  Funny girl.
As you can sense, there is noticeable comfort in the relationship right now. ­Altman 
and Taylor would argue that although it appears that the two know each other so 
well, they are willing to expose their relational values, their perceptions of the 
other’s dating experiences, among other things. There is a slight tension embed­
ded in their conversation, but nothing that seems to prompt the other to terminate 
affective exchange 
stage 
stage of social 
penetration that is  
spontaneous and 
quite comfortable 
for relational 
partners
personal idioms
private, intimate 
expressions stated 
in a relationship

	
Stages of the Social Penetration Process     183
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
the conversation. Their interpersonal “barriers” appear to be down and both are 
comfortable sharing very personal comments about each other. And, to be sure, 
affective exchanges may include both positive and negative exchanges.
Stable Exchange: Raw Honesty and Intimacy
The fourth and final stage, stable exchange, pertains to an open expression of 
thoughts, feelings, and behaviors that results in a high degree of spontaneity and re­
lational uniqueness. During this stage, partners are highly intimate and synchronized; 
that is, behaviors between the two sometimes recur, and partners are able to assess 
and predict the behavior of the other fairly accurately. At times, the partners may tease 
each other about topics or people. This teasing, however, is done in a friendly manner.
Social Penetration theorists believe that there are relatively few misinterpreta­
tions in communication meaning at this stage. The reason for this is ­simple: Both 
partners have had numerous opportunities to clarify any previous ambiguities and 
have begun to establish their own personal system of communication. As a result, 
communication, according to Altman and Taylor, is efficient. At this stage, two inde­
pendent people begin to emerge as “one” insofar as they have begun to peel away the 
levels that they have used to protect themselves (recall our onion analogy). 
We return to our example of Carmen and Brennan. It is now final exam week, 
and obviously the two are very tense. Yet they both realize that this week must be free 
of conflict, and both also realize that after this week, they will not see each other for 
a month because of the break. The stable exchange stage is very apparent when we 
listen to their conversation:
Carmen:  So, okay, this week we have to be careful not to blow up at each other. I 
have three finals and a paper due. 
Brennan:  Tell me about it. Did I ever tell you that if I don’t get at least a B average, 
my parents told me that I’m on “probation,” and they won’t help with my tuition.
Carmen:  Seriously? I wish I even had help with my tuition; even my fees for 
pledging almost put me over. Next term, I’m going to have to pick up another 
part-time job.
Brennan:  I’m lucky, I know. 
Carmen:  Yep. Not everyone has mommy and daddy to help them.
Brennan: Hey, I’m not going to apologize because my parents work hard. 
Carmen: I’m not asking you to apologize. I never told you this, either, but if I 
don’t get one of the Delta scholarships, this year may be my last here.
Brennan: That’s crazy. Don’t even say that. 
Carmen: I’m gonna keep studying. I can’t think about anything, but right now.
The stable exchange stage includes individuals who are willing to expose inti­
mate parts of themselves. Clearly, both Carmen and Brennan care about each other 
and manifest various levels of vulnerability. Although our earlier example suggested 
a conflicted relationship, there is now what Altman and ­Taylor (1973) call dyadic 
uniqueness, or distinctive relationship qualities such as humor and sarcasm.
As we mentioned earlier, this multistage approach to intimacy can get convo­
luted with periodic spurts and slowdowns along the way. In addition, the stages 
stable exchange 
stage 
stage of social 
penetration that 
results in complete 
openness and spon-
taneity for relational 
partners
dyadic uniqueness 
distinctive relation-
ship qualities

184     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
are not a complete picture of the intimacy process. There are a number of other 
influences, including a person’s background and values and even the environment 
in which the relationship exists. The social penetration process is a give-and-take 
experience whereby both partners continue to work on balancing their individual 
needs with the needs of the relationship.
Finally, similar to most of the theories you will read about in this book, Altman 
and Taylor could never have envisioned the Internet when conceptualizing this theory. 
As you review it, consider the technological influences inherent in the stages (we ad­
dress the interplay between relationship development and online communication in 
Chapter 11). For instance, as we all know, some relationships grow online and this on­
line disclosure can influence the path of the relationship. Twitter idioms and hashtags 
for instance, affect the conversations taking place between people (Mayty, Gupta, 
Goyall, & Mukherjee, 2015). In fact, using Twitter, in particular, as a conversational 
platform, has been the subject of research over the past several years (e.g., Rudra, 
Chakraborty, Sethi, & Das, 2015). Consider how the stages might be influenced if 
technology was introduced into the penetration process.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Social Penetration Theory has been appealing since its inception over 40 years ago. 
Altman and Taylor have proposed an intriguing model by which to view relational 
development. The theory’s empirically derived conclusions have drawn the attention 
of researchers over the years. The theory had its beginnings during a time of open­
ness in society. As you think about the theory and its value, consider the following 
criteria: scope and heurism.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical Intrapersonal
Communication 
Context
Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  Public/
Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  Testability  | 
Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Scope
The scope of SPT is of concern. In fact, the scope of the theory “makes it difficult to 
adequately test it as a whole” (Mongeau & Henningsen, 2008, p. 370). Some scholars 
contend, for instance, that self-disclosure—one of the key themes of the theory—may 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     185
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
be too narrowly interpreted. For instance, Rachel Freeth (2012) ­believes that self-
disclosure depends on a number of factors (e.g., timing, relationship intimacy, etc.), 
not simply the need to reveal to people over time. Further, self-disclosure is a fairly 
complex process, sometimes catching people off guard (Winzenburg, 2012).
Further, Mark Knapp, Anita Vangelisti, and John Coughlin (2013) reject the no­
tion that relationship development is as linear as is suggested in SPT. They believe 
relationships are embedded in other relationships, and in turn, these relationships 
affect the communication between partners. Therefore, other people may influence 
the direction of a relationship. In addition, the linearity of the theory suggests that the 
reversal of relational engagement (recall that Altman and ­Taylor likened relationship 
disengagement to a film shown in reverse) is relational disengagement. Leslie Baxter 
and Erin Sahlstein (2000) assert that the concept of information openness and closed­
ness cannot be understood in isolation; there is much more going on in a relationship 
than simple self-disclosure.
To be fair, Altman later revisited the social penetration processes and amended 
his original thinking with Taylor. Altman explained that being open and disclosive 
should be viewed in conjunction with being private and withdrawn (Altman, Vinsel, & 
Brown, 1981; Taylor & Altman, 1987). In a sense, Altman proposes what Baxter and 
Montgomery articulate in their theory on ­Relational Dialectics Theory (Chapter 11). 
C. Arthur VanLear (1991) underscored this thinking by concluding that there are two 
competing cycles of openness and closedness in both friendships and romantic relation­
ships. Jason LaSalle and Elise Porter from our opening story will surely experience this 
push and pull of self-disclosure as their relationship progresses. It is likely that as both 
of them share pieces of information, each will also remain private about other issues.
Heurism
There can be no doubt that Social Penetration Theory and the concept of self-
disclosure has yielded literally thousands of studies. Therefore, SPT is highly heu­
ristic. Researchers have studied and written about the effects of self-­disclosure, 
for example, on various types of relationships and across a variety of populations. 
Families (Turner & West, 2017), physicians (Trahan & Goodrich, 2015), alco­
holics (Greenberg & Smith, 2015), and teachers (McKenna-Buchanan, Munz, & 
Rudnick, 2015) have all been investigated. Furthermore, the effects of culture on the 
Student Voices
Sam
We talked about reciprocity in relationships. My own relationship with my boyfriend 
has a lot of reciprocity. He and I are constantly revealing parts of ourselves to each 
other, and we also talk about our emotional reactions to the other’s self-disclosure. 
It’s weird to be romantically involved with someone who’s willing to return the 
same kind of intimacy I give. In the past, my relationships have been anything, but 
reciprocal. Now, I think I’ve found someone who can let me know his reactions to 
what I say and how I feel.

186     Chapter 10  •  Social Penetration Theory
S O C I A L  P E N E T R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
penetration process (e.g., Chen, 2006) have also been investigated. Scholars in the 
area of relationship development and its ancillary areas, including relational control 
(Rogers & Escudero, 2004) and relational maintenance (Dindia, 2003) owe much of 
their thinking to the scholarship examining social penetration. Finally, HIV status 
(Catona, Greene, Magsamen-Conrad, & Carpenter, 2016), blogging (Tang & Wang, 
2012), and Internet dating (Gibbs, Ellison, & Lai, 2011) and their relationship to self-
disclosure have also been studied.
Closing
Despite some criticism, Social Penetration Theory remains an integral theory per­
taining to relationship development and has generated scholarly interest. In partic­
ular, the theory has resonated with interpersonal communication scholars and those 
interested in looking at how relational intimacy evolves. Relationship development 
can be exhausting, invigorating, and challenging at times, and SPT helps people 
understand those challenges.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Most Social Penetration theorists and researchers have 
emphasized face-to-face relationships. Yet, we know that this is a limited 
view of interpersonal relationships, in general, and self-disclosure, in 
particular. Therefore, discuss how the notion of reciprocity, in particular, is 
influenced by technology. How does the process vary from face to face to online?
	
1.  If their relationship develops further, what do you think Jason and Elise will 
talk about as the two get to know each other better? Will there be any risk involved 
as they disclose to each other? Explain with examples.
	
2.  When self-disclosing to another person, several things can go wrong. Explain 
the consequences of poorly planned or inappropriate self-disclosure. Provide examples 
along the way.
	
3.  What similar patterns cut across escalating relationships? Discuss marital 
relationships, relationships between friends, and parent–child relationships as indi­
viduals move toward intimacy.
	
4.  Some critics have charged that Social Penetration Theory focuses too much 
on self-disclosure. Others, however, contend that self-disclosure forms the basis of 
most intimate relationships. What do you think? Is there a compromise between the 
two views?
	
5.  If you outlined the stages of a past romantic relationship of yours, would it 
follow the sequencing that Altman and Taylor suggest? What similarities are there 
to the social penetration process? What differences are there? Provide examples.
	
6.  Apply SPT principles to workplace relationships you have encountered.
	
7.  Other than an onion, what additional analogies can you think of that would 
apply to SPT?

187
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
Eleanor Robertson and 
Jeff Meadows worked 
together to clean up the 
mess left from the din­
ner party they had just 
given for their friend Mary Beth’s 35th birthday. 
They both agreed that the party had been a great 
success and that everyone had had a wonder­
ful time. They were ­having fun talking about their 
friends—who was breaking up and who was get­
ting together.
	
Eleanor smiled as she thought about how 
much she and Jeff had learned about each other 
and their relationship in the two years they had 
lived together. Eleanor used to get upset when 
Jeff wanted to be with friends and not spend all 
his time with her alone. Now she thought she 
understood Jeff’s desire to have others in their 
lives. She also found that the more she was able 
to let go of her possessive feelings and behav­
iors, the more Jeff wanted to be close.
	
Jeff came over and hugged Eleanor. He 
said, “Honey, that was a great party. The food 
was ­perfect—I’m glad we decided to do Italian. 
Thanks for all your help to make everything go 
so well. Mary Beth really appreciated it, I know. 
And since she and I have been friends forever, it 
really means a lot to me.”
	
Eleanor pulled away and laughed at Jeff. “I 
didn’t do too much, sweetheart,” she said to Jeff. 
“You were the one who was busy in the kitchen. 
But I am glad Mary Beth had fun. I really like her 
a lot, too.”
	
Jeff and Eleanor finished cleaning up and 
started talking about what they would do tomor­
row. They decided they would take a picnic to 
Golden Gate Park and then maybe go to a movie—
they agreed they’d decide on the movie after the 
picnic depending on how they felt. It sounded 
like a fun Sunday—they had a plan, but they 
could change their minds and skip the movie if 
picnicking in the park was too inviting.
	
Eleanor was very happy and thought about 
telling  Jeff how much she loved and needed him, 
but she decided to keep quiet about the depth of 
her feelings for now. Jeff probably knew how she 
felt, and she was a little afraid of revealing all her 
feelings to him right now. It had been a perfect day, 
and she didn’t want to spoil it by saying something 
that might make Jeff withdraw a little. She wasn’t 
sure she wanted to be so vulnerable to Jeff at this 
point in their relationship, even though when they 
first started going out together, she had told him 
she loved him repeatedly. Now she found herself 
being a bit more guarded and self-protective even 
though she loved him more now than she did then.
Relational Dialectics Theory
Based on the research of Leslie Baxter and Barbara Montgomery
C H A P T E R  11
Eleanor 
Robertson and 
Jeff Meadows
From the perspective of relational dialectics . . . a month from now, a 
year from now, five years from now, we will be somewhere else with 
these ideas.
—Leslie Baxter

188     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
W
hen researchers examine the story of Eleanor and Jeff, they might speculate 
that their relationship is moving through stages. Researchers who work within 
the framework of Social Penetration Theory (see Chapter 10), for example, would 
point to the fact that Jeff and Eleanor have worked through some of their earlier is­
sues and now interact with each other at a deeper level of intimacy than they once 
did. These researchers might point to the fact that the relationship between Eleanor 
and Jeff is more coordinated and less conflictual than it once was as an indication 
that they have moved to a more intimate stage of relational development. Yet, other 
researchers would look at Jeff and Eleanor and see their story as best explained by a 
different theoretical position, called Relational Dialectics Theory.
	
Relational Dialectics Theory (RDT) maintains that relational life is ­characterized 
by ongoing tensions between contradictory impulses (Baxter & Norwood, 2016). 
Although that may sound confusing and messy, ­researchers who espouse the 
dialectical position believe it accurately depicts the way that life is for people. People 
are not always able to resolve the ­contradictory elements of their beliefs, and they 
can hold inconsistent beliefs about relationships. For example, the adage “absence 
makes the heart grow fonder” seems to coexist easily with its opposite, “out of sight, 
out of mind.”
	
Leslie Baxter and Barbara Montgomery (1996) formulated the most com­
plete statement of the theory in their book ­Relating: Dialogues and Dialectics, 
although both of them had been writing about dialectical thinking for several years 
prior to that book’s publication. Baxter and Montgomery’s work was directly 
influenced by Mikhail Bakhtin, a Russian philosopher who developed a theory 
of personal dialogue. Social life for Bakhtin was an open dialogue among many 
voices, and its essence was the “simultaneous differentiation from yet fusion with 
another” (Baxter, 2004, p. 1). According to Bakhtin, the individual self is only 
possible when it is in context with another. Bakhtin notes that human experience 
is constituted through communication with others. And, as Baxter (2011) states, 
the concept of a relationship for Bakhtin is only possible by maintaining two 
distinct voices.
	
From Bakhtin’s thinking, Baxter and Montgomery (1996) shaped the ­notion 
of the dialectical vision. We can best explain this vision of human ­behavior by 
contrasting it to two other common approaches: the monologic and dualistic ap­
proaches. The monologic approach pictures contradictions as either/or relation­
ships. For instance, monologic thinking would lead to the ­belief that Jeff and 
Eleanor’s relationship was either close or distant. In other words, the two parts 
of a contradiction are mutually exclusive in monologic thinking, and as you move 
toward one extreme, you retreat from the other. See Figure 11.1 for a visual repre­
sentation of this notion.
	
In contrast, the dualistic approach sees the two parts of a contradiction as 
two separate entities, somewhat unrelated to each other. In our example of Eleanor 
and Jeff, dualistic thinkers might choose to evaluate them separately, rating how 
close each one feels compared to the other. Furthermore, dualism allows for the 
idea that relationships may be evaluated differently on these scales at different 
times (Figure 11.1).
	
Alternatively, thinkers with a dialectic approach maintain that multiple points 
of view play off one another in every contradiction. Although a contradiction involves 
monologic approach 
an approach framing 
contradiction as 
either/or
dualistic approach
an approach framing 
contradiction as two 
separate entities
dialectic approach 
an approach framing 
contradiction as 
both/and

R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Relational Dialectics Theory     189
Monologic
Dualistic
Dialectic
A
B
A
B
B3
B2
B1
B4
B5
A1
A2
A3
A4
A5
Figure 11.1  Monologic, Dualistic, and Dialectic Approaches to Relational Contradictions
Theory At a Glance  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
Relational Dialectics Theory pictures relational life as constant process 
and motion. People in relationships continue to feel the push and pull of 
conflicting desires throughout the life of the relationship. Basically, people 
wish to have both/and, not either/or, when talking about opposing goals. For 
instance, people in relationships want to be both connected and autonomous, 
open and self-protective, and to have both predictability and spontaneity in 
their interactions. As people communicate in relationships, they attempt to 
reconcile these conflicting desires, but they never eliminate their need for 
both parts of the opposition.
two opposing poles, the resulting situation expands beyond these two poles. As Bax­
ter and Montgomery (1996) observed, “[d]ialectical thinking is not directed toward a 
search for the ‘happy mediums’ of compromise and balance, but instead focuses on 
the messier, less logical, and more ­inconsistent unfolding practices of the moment” 
(p. 46). A simple way of putting it is that dialectic thinking substitutes both/and for 
either/or, recognizing that people want multiple (and often contradictory) goals in 
their relational lives. Thus, in RDT, there are often more than two different elements 
involved in a relational situation (Baxter & Scharp, 2015).
	
As Eleanor and Jeff interact, many voices contribute to their sense of their re­
lationship: their memories of their past conflicts about Jeff’s friends, their current 
sense of confidence in their relationship, their concerns about their future, their 
friendships with others, and so forth. Dialectic theory holds that it is not accurate 
to say that only one or two positions exist in relational contradictions. Leslie Baxter 
and Dawn Braithewaite (2008) give the example of a college student saying, “Well, 
I’m kinda like, seeing him, but we’re not, ya know, serious” (p. 349) to illustrate a 
struggle in meaning with voices of both closeness and distance competing with each 
other.
	
We now turn our attention to the assumptions underlying RDT.

190     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Relational Dialectics Theory
RDT is grounded in four main assumptions that reflect its contentions about rela­
tional life:
∙∙
Relationships are not linear.
∙∙
Relational life is characterized by change.
∙∙
Contradiction is the fundamental fact of relational life.
∙∙
Communication is central to organizing and negotiating relational 
­contradictions.
	
The most significant assumption that grounds this theory is the notion that 
relationships do not progress in a linear fashion. Rather, relationships consist 
of oscillation between contradictory desires. In fact, Baxter and Montgomery 
(1996) suggest that we should rethink our language and our metaphors about 
relationships. They note that the phrase relational development connotes some 
linear movement or forward progress, when, in fact, relationships do not steadily 
move in one direction. 
The second assumption of RDT promotes the notion of process or change, 
although not necessarily framing this change as linear progress. Baxter and 
Montgomery observe that “relationship process or change . . . refers to quantitative 
and qualitative movement through time in the underlying contractions around which 
a relationship is organized” (1996, p. 52). Thus, Jeff and Eleanor are different now 
than they were a year ago. But that difference is not a linear move toward intimacy 
as much as it is a difference in the way they express their togetherness and their 
independence.
	
The contradictions or tensions between ­opposites never go away and never cease 
to provide tension, the third assumption of RDT. People manage these tensions and 
oppositions in different ways, but they are present continuously in relational life. 
The push and pull represented by dialectic tensions construct relational life, and one 
of our main communication tasks is managing these tensions. This approach differs 
from other types of relational theories in that it considers homeostasis to be un­
natural: Change and transformation are the hallmarks of relational interaction in this 
perspective (Carr & Wang, 2012; Semlak & Pearson, 2011).
	
The final assumption of RDT pertains to communication. Specifically, this 
theory gives a central position to communication. As Baxter and Montgomery 
(1996) observe, “From the perspective of relational dialectics, social actors give 
life through their communicative practices to the contradictions that organize their 
relationships. The social reality of contradictions is produced and reproduced by 
the communicative action of social actors” (p. 59). It is through communication 
practices that people achieve dialectical unity, or the way in which people are able 
to make contradictions feel complete and satisfactory (Harrigan & Braithwaite, 
2010). 
	
When Jeff praises Eleanor for the party, for example, he is expressing ­affection 
and negotiating closeness. When Eleanor keeps silent instead of saying, “I love you,” 
to Jeff, she is protecting herself and keeping a bit of distance between them. As 
Eleanor and Jeff plan their picnic for the next day, they are discussing how much 
dialectical unity 
the way people 
use communication 
to make sense of 
contradictions in 
their relationships.

	
Core Concepts of Dialectics     191
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
predictability and how much novelty they wish to have. Planning initially provides 
predictability, but the couple’s stated willingness to be flexible in their plan allows 
for spontaneity as well. Thus, Jeff and Eleanor’s communication practices organize 
the three basic dialectics we will discuss later in the chapter: autonomy and connec­
tion, openness and protection, and novelty and predictability.
Core Concepts of Dialectics
The following elements are basic to the dialectical perspective: totality, contra­
diction, motion, and praxis (Rawlins, 2009). Totality suggests that people in 
a relationship are interdependent. This means that when something happens to 
one member of a relationship, the other member(s) will be affected as well. For 
example, if Jeff gets a promotion at work that entails more travel than his former 
position, Eleanor will have to deal with his absences. She may compensate by 
making more friends outside their relationship, and this will affect Jeff some­
what when he is home. He will have to meet new friends and share Eleanor’s 
time, for example.
	
In addition, totality means that the social and cultural context affects the pro­
cess; communicating in relationships “involves the constant interconnection and 
reciprocal influence of multiple individual, interpersonal, and social factors” 
(Rawlins, 1992, p. 7). For instance, Eleanor and Jeff’s relationship is affected by 
their social circle, by their location in San Francisco, and by the historical moment 
in which they live.
	
Contradiction refers to oppositions—two elements that contradict each other. 
As such, contradiction is the central feature of the dialectic approach. Dialectics are 
the result of oppositions. When Eleanor desires to tell Jeff that she loves him but 
also wishes to withhold that information to protect herself, she is experiencing con­
tradiction. Motion refers to the processual nature of relationships and their change 
over time. When Eleanor reflects on how different her relationship with Jeff is now 
compared to what they had two years ago, she is experiencing motion. Think back to 
one of your own relationships. Compare how you relate now to how you did when 
you first met. No doubt you will see motion at work also.
totality 
acknowledges the 
interdependence 
of people in a 
relationship
contradiction
the central feature 
of the dialectic 
approach; refers to 
oppositions
motion
the processual 
nature of 
relationships
Student Voices
Helena
I am constantly being pushed and pulled by contradictions in my relationship with 
my sister. She’s my best friend and my worst enemy. I’d do anything for her and she 
feels the same, but I can’t think of anyone who can make me madder or more upset 
than she can. Plus, because we’re twins, the notion of autonomy and connection is 
really up there for me. It’s a pain when people say we’re so alike or when they can’t 
tell us apart, but there is a cool part to having a twin and being so bonded. Dialec­
tics theory was made for me and my sister, Lisa.

192     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Finally, praxis means that humans are choice makers. Although we do not have 
completely free choice in all instances and are restricted by our previous choices, by 
the choices of others, and by cultural and social conditions, we are still conscious and 
active choice makers. For example, Eleanor chooses to be with Jeff, and this choice 
restricts other choices she might make. She must get along with Jeff’s parents and 
siblings when they get together for the holidays. She might not ever have chosen to 
be with these people on her own, but because she is in love with Jeff, she must spend 
time with them. On a more basic level, Jeff and Eleanor did not choose the time in 
which they live, but the culture shapes some of their choices. If they lived in the 
1950s, for instance, they would be less likely to be unmarried and living together. 
Praxis also refers to the practical choices people make when confronted with dialec­
tic tensions (Sahlstein, Maguire, & Timmerman, 2009).
Basic Relational Dialectics
Many different specific dialectics have been discussed with reference to relational 
life. As we mentioned previously, perhaps the three most relevant to interpersonal re­
lationships are the dialectics of autonomy and connection, openness and protection, 
and novelty and predictability (Baxter, 1990). Other researchers have also found that 
these dialectics are common to relational life. For example, in one study (Erbert, 2000) 
marital couples were interviewed to determine how they perceived relational dialectics 
with reference to conflicts. Autonomy and contradiction and openness and closedness 
were perceived as the most important contradictions, and the predictability and novelty 
dialectic was deemed important for some specific conflict types.
Autonomy and Connection
The dialectic between autonomy and connection refers to our simultaneous desires 
to be independent of our significant others and to find intimacy with them. As our 
story of Eleanor and Jeff illustrates, relational life involves the conflicting desires 
to be both close to and separate from relational partners. Jeff appreciates Eleanor’s 
efforts on the dinner party, which makes him feel close to her. Yet the reason for 
the party in some sense celebrates his separateness from Eleanor. The fact that Jeff 
has a long-standing friendship with Mary Beth illustrates his autonomy. Seeing both 
autonomy and closeness as constants in relational life is a hallmark of RDT, which 
makes it unique from many other theories of communication in relationships.
	
For example, as Baxter and Montgomery (1996) observe, other theories like 
Social Penetration Theory (Chapter 10) and Uncertainty Reduction Theory (Chapter 8) 
advance a rather static view of closeness; partners move toward closeness or away 
from it. From this vantage point, Eleanor and Jeff may be seen as growing closer and 
closer as they share more experiences and affection. Dialectic theory holds that con­
tradictions are inherent in all relationships and that the dynamic interplay between 
autonomy and closeness is important to understanding a relationship. So Jeff and 
Eleanor are seen by RDT as moving between closeness and distance throughout their 
relationship. They are not understood as moving toward or moving away from either 
of these two competing needs. 
praxis
refers to the choice-
making capacity of 
humans
autonomy and 
connection 
an important 
relational tension 
that shows our 
conflicting desires 
to be close and to 
be separate

	
Basic Relational Dialectics     193
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Communication researchers are interested in dialectic thinking because of the 
communication implications of the theory. Baxter and Montgomery (1996) discuss 
how couples’ private communication codes illustrate the presence of both connec­
tion and autonomy in relationships. For instance, nicknames celebrate something 
inherently individual in that they are usually highlighting an individual trait (such 
as Shorty, Chief, or Sweetness). Yet they also indicate a relational closeness in that 
distant friends do not invoke pet names for one another. In the simple practice of 
calling someone by a nickname, we are coding individuation and closeness.
Theory in Popular Press  •  The Dance Between Closeness 
and Distance
In their blog about family life, family therapists Don MacMannus and Debra 
MacMannus discuss how intimacy is affected by people’s varying needs for 
closeness and distance. The call it the “ongoing dance of intimacy” and ob­
serve that a close relationship consists of continual movements “away” and 
“toward.” MacMannus and MacMannus caution, in line with the thinking of 
RDT, that closeness and distance are neither good nor bad, and intimate 
relationships need both. As they put it, people need time together and time 
apart to keep the relational bonds from feeling too tight or too loose. 
Source: MacMannus, D., & MacMannus, D. M. How’s your family really doing? howsyourfamily
.com/how-to-balance-closeness-and-distance-in-relationship/.

194     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
Openness and Protection
A second critical tension in relational life has to do with openness and protection. 
The openness and protection dialectic focuses on our conflicting desires first to be 
open and vulnerable, revealing personal information to our relational partners, and 
second to be strategic and protective in our communication. As Eleanor mulls over 
how much to tell Jeff about her feelings, she is wrestling with the tension between 
disclosure and silence, or the openness and protection dialectic.
	
The dialectic position features both with respect to candor and concealment. 
For instance, Leslie Baxter and Erin Sahlstein (2000) mention how gossiping can 
honor both openness and privacy as gossipers simultaneously disclose about others 
while keeping silent about themselves. Paige Toller and Dawn Braithwaite (2009) 
found that parents who had suffered the loss of a child used strategies that alternated 
between openness and concealment with their spouses. In one strategy, however, 
they seemed to combine the two poles by using an open nonverbal approach while 
keeping silent verbally about their feelings. Angela Hoppe-Nagao and Stella Ting-
Toomey (2002) found six ways that married couples manage the tension between 
openness and closedness: (1) topic selection, (2) time alternation, (3) withdrawal, 
(4) probing, (5) antisocial strategies, and (6) deception.
	
Topic selection involved making some topics taboo, or off limits for discussion, 
thereby guarding privacy while assuring openness on all other topics. Time alterna­
tion meant blocking out specific times to talk about sensitive ­topics. Withdrawal and 
probing were either leaving the conversation or asking for more information from 
the partner. Yelling, crying, or pouting were examples of antisocial communication. 
Deception involved small distortions of the truth or omissions to keep some things 
private and to avoid conflict in the ­relationship. 
openness and 
protection
an important 
relational tension 
that shows our 
conflicting desires 
to tell our secrets 
and to keep them 
hidden
Student Voices
Kellye
It’s easy to see how dialectics are in my family. I have a mother who has severe 
arthritis and she needs help around the house. My dad can’t do it alone and he 
wants to have someone come in to help out. She has this need to be independent, 
but also knows that there is no way that she and my dad can do it alone—a need 
to be dependent. It’s one dialectic we are experiencing right now.
Novelty and Predictability
The dialectic between novelty and predictability refers to the conflict between 
the comfort of stability and the excitement of change. The dialectic position sees 
the interplay of certainty and uncertainty in relationships. Jeff and Eleanor’s plan­
ning behavior illustrates this interplay. When they make a plan together, they are 
accomplishing at least two things with reference to predictability about them­
selves and their relationship. First, their plan defines them as in a relationship, 
novelty and 
predictability
an important 
relational tension 
that shows our 
conflicting desires 
to have both 
stability and change

	
Basic Relational Dialectics     195
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
because planning is a relational activity. It also establishes a routine so they know 
what they will be doing in the short-term future. Yet they leave the plan a bit open 
ended to allow for creativity and novelty. With their plan for Sunday, Eleanor 
and Jeff have dealt simultaneously with their contradictory needs for routine and 
spontaneity.
Contextual Dialectics
What we have just discussed are interactional dialectics in that they are located 
within the relationship itself—they are part of the partners’ interaction with each 
other (Rawlins, 1992). Researchers have also discussed other dialectics that affect 
relational life. William Rawlins calls these contextual dialectics, which means that 
they derive from the place of the relationship in the culture.
	
Contextual dialectics are formed from the tension between the public definitions 
of a given relationship—friendship, for example—and the private interactions within 
a specific friendship. Rawlins discusses two contextual ­dialectics—between the pub­
lic and the private and between the real and the ideal. Although perhaps a little less 
important to us than interactional dialectics, these two do affect interpersonal com­
munication in relationships. The public and private dialectic refers to the tension 
between the two domains: a private relationship and public life. Rawlins discusses 
the fact that in the public realm friendship occupies a rather marginal position. Lillian 
Rubin (1998) makes the same observation, noting that public expectations favor 
kin relationships over friendships even when individuals may value their friends 
more highly than their kin. Rawlins notes that friendship suffers in comparison to 
other relationships because there is no institution to sanction it. Eleanor and Jeff’s 
cohabiting relationship may have the same marginal status because, unlike marriage, 
it is not legally sanctioned.
	
Rawlins (1992) argues that tension arises in a close friendship between this mar­
ginal public status and the friendship’s deep private character. Rawlins states that 
this dialectic results in friendships (and by implication, other unsanctioned relation­
ships) acting with what he calls double agency. By this he means that these relation­
ships fulfill both public and private functions. ­Rawlins observes that sometimes the 
public functions constrain the private ones. For instance, people who form friend­
ships in the workplace may encounter negative feedback from their significant others 
who see the friendships as a threat to their relationship. When Jeff and Eleanor first 
became serious, Eleanor felt threatened by Jeff’s female friends. The public aspects 
of friendships and love relationships provide tension.
	
The dichotomy of the public and the private is obvious when we think about 
political figures. Politicians live a public life but have private lives as well. Dialec­
tical thinking shows us that private, relational life is intertwined with public life. 
Although the two spheres can be separated to an extent, in many meaningful ways 
Dialectic Theory shows us that they are interwoven. Certainly, we have seen this to 
be the case when politicians’ private misdeeds have become public as in the cases of 
John Edwards and Arnold Schwarzenegger, among others.
	
This public and private dialectic interacts with the dialectic of the real and the 
ideal. The tension of the real and ideal dialectic is featured when we think of old 
family sitcoms (1950s/1960s), such as Leave It to Beaver: We receive an idealized 
interactional 
dialectics
tensions resulting 
from and 
constructed by 
communication
contextual 
dialectics
tensions resulting 
from the place of 
the relationship 
within the culture
public and private 
dialectic
a contextual dialectic 
resulting from a 
private relationship 
and public life
real and ideal 
dialectic 
a contextual 
dialectic resulting 
from the difference 
between idealized 
relationships and 
lived relationships

196     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
message of what family life is like in televised families and then when we look at 
the families we live in, we have to contend with the troublesome realities of family 
life. The tension between these two images forms this ­dialectic. If Eleanor reads a 
lot of romance novels emphasizing complete openness between ­romantic partners, 
she may feel a tension between that vision and her lived experience with Jeff, which 
involves some sharing but not complete openness.
	
In addition, this dialectic contrasts all the expectations one has of a relationship 
with its lived realities. Generally, expectations about relationships are lofty and ideal­
ized. Friendships are seen as sites of affection, loyalty, and trust. Families are pictured 
as havens in a troubled world. Loved ones are believed to provide unconditional affec­
tion and support. Yet we know that interpersonal relationships are not always pleasant 
and can have a dark side that contrasts starkly with these ideals. Dialectic Theory 
attempts to explain how people live with and manage this contradiction.
	
Finally, cultural and contextual factors influence these two dialectics. In cultures 
where friends are elevated to the status of family (e.g., some Middle Eastern cultures), 
the tension will be experienced quite differently than in Rawlins’s description, if it is felt 
at all. In addition, social mores and expectations vary over time, and the dialectics are 
influenced by these changes. For ­example, Ernest Burgess and Harvey Locke (1953) 
distinguished between an institutional and a companionate marriage. Prior to the 1950s, 
marriage was expected to be an economic institution, critical to the survival of the human 
race. More recently in the United States, marriage has been viewed as a love ­relationship 
where one’s partner functions as one’s best friend. The tensions ­between the ideal and the 
real may shift depending on the contours of the socially prescribed ideal. The institutional 
marriage didn’t raise the expectations for the relationship nearly as much as the current 
ideal. See Table 11.1 for a summary of the basic relational dialectics.
Beyond Basic Dialectics
The basic dialectic tensions we have just reviewed characterize many interpersonal 
relationships, but a growing body of research is uncovering additional tensions and 
questioning whether autonomy–connection, openness–protection, and novelty–
predictability permeate relationships in all contexts (Braithwaite & ­Baxter, 1995). 
	
In two studies examining RDT in an online environment, ­Kristen Norwood and 
Leslie Baxter (2011) found a different set of four dialectics that animated online 
Table 11.1  Interactional and Contextual Dialectics
TRADITIONAL INTERACTIONAL DIALECTICS	
CONTEXTUAL DIALECTICS
Autonomy-Connection:  desiring a separate identity 	
Public-Private:  contrasting the public and private
    and wanting a bond between partners	
    aspects of a relationship
Openness-Protection:  wanting to tell personal 	
The Real-The Ideal:  comparing a lived relationship to 
    information while seeking privacy	
    a fantasy of that relationship
Novelty-Predictability:  wanting change while 
    desiring stability	

	
Beyond Basic Dialectics     197
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
letters people wrote seeking birth mothers willing to allow them to adopt their babies. 
Other researchers (Pederson, 2014) discovered that online narratives of forgive­
ness present three competing discourses: outward practice versus inward process, 
liberation for self versus liberation for others, and long process versus epiphany.
	
In studies about friendship, Marnel Goins (2011) found the tensions characterizing 
talk among Black women friends were completely different than the basic dialectics 
and included: consumerism versus savings, using “good” or “bad” English, satisfaction 
versus dissatisfaction with their appearance and ­acceptance or rejection of race-based 
“otherness.” Rawlins (1992) found no evidence of the novelty–predictability dialectic 
in his study. Instead, he found a dialectic focusing on the tensions between judgment 
and acceptance. This ­dialectic emerges in the tension between judging a friend’s 
behaviors and simply accepting them. In studying friendships in the workplace, Ted 
Zorn (1995) found the three main dialectics, but he also found some additional tensions 
that were specific to the workplace context.
	
Julie Apker, Kathleen Propp, and Wendy Zabava Ford (2005) note that the work­
place is a relatively unexplored context for applying RDT. When they studied nurses 
working in health care team interactions, they found several ­dialectics related to 
how the nurses negotiated their status and identity. They called these role dialectics 
because they spoke to the tensions nurses experienced relative to being both equal to 
and subordinate to the physicians on the health care team.
	
In examining people’s participation in a community theater group, Michael 
Kramer (2004) advanced 11 dialectic tensions ranging from commitment to 
group and commitment to other life activities to tolerance and judgment (of the 
other members). Michaela Meyer (2003) examined the relationship between two 
characters in the television show Dawson’s Creek and found the dialectic of 
connection–autonomy as well as a new dialectic, informing–constituting identity 
formation. It is possible that relational context makes a difference in the dialectics; 
these new dialectics were discovered in online communications, friendships, the 
workplace, a community group, and a televised friendship. Perhaps it is also the case 
that ethnicity also made a difference in the types of dialectics researchers found. 
	
Yet, other researchers (Baxter, Braithwaite, Golish, & Olson, 2002; Bryant, 
2003; Toller, 2005) examined issues of illness and death in the context of the 
family and also uncovered additional dialectics. They found that the dialectic of 
presence–absence was an important consideration for families dealing with Al­
zheimer’s patients (Baxter et al., 2002), for those experiencing the death of a par­
ent and becoming part of a stepfamily (Bryant, 2003), or for parents losing a child 
(Toller, 2005). Tamara Golish and Kimberly Powell (2003) advanced a further dia­
lectical tension, that of joy–grief. They noted that parents experiencing a premature 
birth experienced the contradictory emotions of joy and grief and needed to find 
communication strategies for managing this contradiction. A study in stepfamilies’ 
communication (Baxter, Braithwaite, Bryant, & Wagner, 2004) found the dialec­
tic of one parent versus two parents in authority to be important to children. The 
children experience a tension between wanting their biological parent to have all 
the authority and wanting their stepparent to share authority with their biological 
parent. Also in the context of stepfamilies, other researchers (Braithwaite, Toller, 
Daas, Durham, & Jones, 2008) found children voicing the dialectic of control and 
restraint. See Table 11.2 for a listing of some of these new dialectics.

198     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
Responses to Dialectics
Although the dialectic tensions are ongoing, people do make efforts to manage 
them. Some research (Jameson, 2004) examines politeness as a general method for 
managing dialectic tensions. Baxter (1988) identifies four specific strategies for this 
purpose: cyclic alternation, segmentation, selection, and integration (Table 11.3). 
Table 11.2  New Dialectics
INTERACTIONAL DIALECTIC	
CONTEXT WHERE FOUND
Judgment–Acceptance	
Friendship
Subordinate–Equal	
Workplace
Group–Individual	
Community group
Ordered activities–Emergent activities	
Community group
Inclusion–Exclusion	
Community group
Acceptable behavior–Unacceptable behavior	
Community group
Presence–Absence	
Families/Stepfamilies
Joy–Grief	
Families
Informing–Constituting identity	
Televised friendship
One parent–Two parent authority	
Stepfamilies
Control–Restraint	
Stepfamilies
Table 11.3  Responses to Dialectic Tensions
RESPONSE	
DESCRIPTION
Cyclic alternation	
Choosing different poles for different times. Being close when 
young and more distant with age, for example.
Segmentation	
Choosing different poles for different contexts. Being close at 
home and more distant at work, for example.
Selection	
Choosing one pole and acting as though the other does not 
exist. Being an extremely close family, for example.
Integration	
Synthesizing the oppositions in dialectic tensions; composed of 
three substrategies.
Neutralizing	
A substrategy of integration; involves choosing a compromise 
­between the oppositions. Being moderately close, for example.
Disqualifying	
A substrategy of integration; involves exempting certain issues 
from the general pattern. Deciding to be open on all topics 
except sex, for example.
Reframing	
A substrategy of integration; involves transforming the opposi­
tions so they no longer appear to oppose one another. Deciding 
that closeness can only be achieved if there’s a little distance 
too, for example.

	
Responses to Dialectics     199
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
Cyclic alternation occurs when people choose one of the opposites to feature at par­
ticular times, alternating with the other. For instance, when sisters are very young, 
they may be inseparable, highlighting the closeness pole of the dialectic. As adoles­
cents, they may favor autonomy in their relationship, seeking separate identities. As 
adults, when they are perhaps living in the same town, they may favor closeness again.
	
Segmentation involves isolating separate arenas for emphasizing each of the op­
posites. For example, a husband and wife who work together in a family business might 
stress predictability in their working relationship and novelty for times they are at home. 
The third strategy, selection, refers to making a choice between the opposites. A couple 
who choose to be close at all times, ignoring their needs for autonomy, use selection.
	
Finally, integration involves some kind of synthesis of the opposites.­
Integration can take three forms: neutralizing, disqualifying, or reframing the 
polarities. Neutralizing involves compromising between the polarities. People who 
choose this strategy try to find a happy medium between the opposites. Jeff and 
Eleanor may decide they cannot really be as open as Eleanor would like, yet they 
cannot be as closed as Jeff might want either. Thus, they forge a moderately open re­
lationship. Disqualifying neutralizes the dialectics by ­exempting certain issues from 
the general pattern. A family might be very open in their communication in general 
yet have a few taboo topics that are not discussed at all, such as sex and finances. 
Reframing refers to transforming the ­dialectic in some way so that it no longer 
seems to contain an opposition. Julia Wood and her colleagues (1994) discuss how 
couples reframe by defining connection as including differences. Thus, the dialectic 
between autonomy and connection is redrawn as a unity rather than as an opposition. 
If Eleanor and Jeff begin to see their closeness as a function of their ability to also be 
separate from each other, they are reframing, or redefining, what it means to be close.
	
Baxter and Montgomery (1996) review these and other techniques for dealing 
with dialectical tensions. They argue that any techniques that people use share three 
characteristics: They are improvisational, they are affected by time, and they are 
possibly complicated by unintended consequences. Let’s look at these three charac­
teristics in turn.
	
Improvisational, according to Baxter and Montgomery, means that whatever 
people do to deal with a particular tension of relational life, they do not alter the on­
going nature of the tension. For example, Jeff and Eleanor have come to a moderately 
open relationship to neutralize the dialectical tension, but they have not changed the 
fact that openness and protectiveness continue to be an issue in their relationship.
	
The aspect of time refers to the notion that, when dealing with dialectics, com­
munication choices made by relational partners are affected by the past, enacted in 
the present, and filled with anticipation for the future. When Jeff praises Eleanor for 
the party they gave for Mary Beth, he does so knowing that they have argued about 
his friends in the past and hoping that these arguments will not continue in the future. 
In speaking about applying the dialectical ­approach to friendship, Rawlins (1992) 
comments that “configurations of contradictions compose and organize friendships 
throughout an ongoing process of change across the life course” (p. 8). He further 
observes that the way friends coordinate and manage their tensions over time is a key 
factor in ­dialectical analysis. The conclusion he draws is that “dialectical inquiries 
are ­intrinsically historical investigations” (p. 8), concerned with developmental pro­
cesses over time.
cyclic alternation 
a coping response to 
dialectical tensions; 
refers to changes 
over time
segmentation 
a coping response to 
dialectical tensions; 
refers to changes 
due to context
selection 
a coping response to 
dialectical tensions; 
refers to prioritizing 
oppositions
integration 
a coping response 
to dialectical 
tensions; refers 
to synthesizing 
the opposition; 
composed of three 
substrategies
neutralizing 
a substrategy of 
integration; refers 
to compromising 
between the 
oppositions
disqualifying 
a substrategy of 
integration; refers to 
exempting certain 
issues from the 
general pattern
reframing 
a substrategy of 
integration; refers 
to transforming the 
oppositions

200     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Finally, Baxter and Montgomery point out that relational partners may enact a 
strategy for coping with a tension, yet it may not work out as they intended. For 
example, the husband and wife who work together and employ segmentation as we 
described earlier may feel they are coping with the novelty and predictability tension. 
But they may become dissatisfied because they spend a lot of time at work and so do 
not get enough novelty in their relationship.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Dialectical process thinking adds a great deal to our explanatory framework for 
relational life. First, we can think specifically about issues around which ­relational 
partners construct meaning. Second, we can remove a static frame and put our emphasis 
on the interplay between change and stability. We do not have to choose between ob­
serving patterns and observing unpredictability ­because we recognize the presence of 
both within relationships. Likewise, ­dialectical thinking directs people to observe the 
interactions within a relationship, among its individual members, as well as outside 
a relationship, as its members interact with the larger social and cultural systems in 
which they are embedded. This approach helps us focus on power issues and multicul­
tural ­diversity.
	
In general, scholars have been excited about the promise generated by Re­
lational Dialectics Theory, and the responses to it have been generally positive. 
With respect to its methodological approach, Baxter and Norwood (2016) state 
the following: “Although the 1996 version of RDT was ecumenically receptive to 
both quantitative and qualitative methods, the 2011 version of the theory favors the 
latter.” Baxter and Scharp (2015) also posit that the theory has now been effectively 
discussed in critical research. Therefore, all three ways of knowing are relevant to 
RDT. As you think about RDT, parsimony, utility, and heurism are three evaluative 
criteria to consider.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical | Semiotic | Phenomenological | Cybernetic | 
Socio-Psychological | Socio-Cultural | Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal | Interpersonal | Small Group | Organizational | 
Public/Rhetorical | Mass/Media | Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical | Interpretive/Hermeneutic | Critical
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability | Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     201
Parsimony
With respect to parsimony, some researchers question whether the dialectics of 
autonomy and connection, openness and protection, and novelty and predictability 
are the only dialectics in all relationships. In some ways, the original conception of 
RDT may have been too parsimonious in only listing three basic dialectics. For in­
stance, many of the studies we have cited have generated additional dialectics. Yet, 
the proliferating list of dialectic tensions that we’ve mentioned raises the opposite 
concern about how well the theory does on the criterion of parsimony. Endless lists 
of new dialectic tensions make the theory problematic. However, it’s possible that 
some of these newer tensions may enable RDT to explain relational life in a more 
complete manner, eschewing the need for a parsimonious model. 
Utility
Perhaps the most positive appeal of the theory is that it seems to explain the push and 
pull people experience in relationships much better than some of the other, more linear, 
theories of relational life. Most people experience their relationships in ebb-and-
flow patterns, whether the issue is intimacy, self-disclosure, or something else. That 
is, relationships do not simply become more or less of something in a linear, straight-
line pattern. Instead, they often seem to be both/and as we live through them. Dia­
lectics offers a compelling explanation for this both/and feeling, making the theory 
fulfill the criterion of utility.
Heurism
Leslie Baxter (2006) observed, the most important criterion for a theory like 
RDT is heurism because the theory’s goal is to shed light on the “complex and 
indeterminate process of meaning-making” (p. 130). As such, we might not judge 
it so stringently on the criterion of parsimony before looking into how well it has 
stimulated research. It seems to have been successful in this regard. Researchers 
have examined how RDT might be explained in a number of different areas 
and contexts, including parent–child relationships (Scharp & Thomas, 2016), 
romantic relationships (Faulkner & Ruby, 2015), Alcoholics Anonymous mem­
bers (Thatcher, 2011), cohabiting couples (Moore, Kienzle, & Flood Grady, 
2015), adult students (O’Boyle, 2014), nonvoluntary family relationships (Carr & 
Wang, 2012), among others. The sustained use of RDT as a theoretical framework 
across so many different interpersonal contexts speaks well to its performance 
as a heuristic theory.
Closing
Baxter and Montgomery (1996) observe that dialectics is not a traditional theory in 
that it offers no axioms or propositional arguments. Instead, it describes example, what 
coping strategies people might use to deal with the major dialectic tensions in their 

202     Chapter 11  •  Relational Dialectics Theory
R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
relationships. This lack of predictive ability may be the result of the relative youth 
of dialectics as a theoretical frame for relational life, but more likely, it results from 
differing goals: An empirical or positivistic theory seeks prediction and final state­
ments about communication phenomena; dialectics is a more interpretative theory 
and it operates from an open-ended, ongoing viewpoint. Baxter and Montgomery end 
their 1996 book with a personal dialogue between themselves about the experience 
of writing about a theory that encourages conversation rather than provides axiomatic 
conclusions. They agree that in some ways it is difficult to shake the cultural need for 
consistency and closure.
	
Many researchers agree that the dialectic approach is an exciting way to conceive 
of communication in relational life. Although quite a bit of research has been under­
taken using RDT, expect to see more refinements of this theory and more studies 
testing its premises. Leslie Baxter (2011) underscores this sentiment by noting that 
“growing a theory is a process akin to raising a child” (p. 1). In that vein, RDT is a 
theory that continues on a journey of exploration and investigation.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Suppose a new dialectic (online–offline) was being studied 
in communication research. How do you think that tension would be played 
out in a relationship, and what would it entail? Could people use current dia­
lectic strategies (cyclic alternation, segmentation, etc.) to deal with it or would they 
have to develop new strategies in your opinion? 
	
1.  Can you think of other dialectic tensions that will pervade the ­relational life 
of Eleanor and Jeff besides those discussed in the chapter?
	
2.  Do you think relationships are better explained through stage theories or 
dialectics? Why? Provide examples.
Student Voices
Martin
I can believe that dialectics is a useful theory because it definitely opened my eyes 
about my relationship with my brother. The push–pull idea says it all. When we 
were younger, we couldn’t stand each other. But I did notice that if he went away 
for a while or I just didn’t see him, I’d start to miss him. When he got back, I went 
back to hating him again. Now that we’re older, I wouldn’t say we hate each other, 
but we still react negatively if one gets too close. Yet we can’t get too far apart 
either, or that’s bad. If we haven’t talked in a couple of days, one of us will surely 
call the other just to check in. I always thought we had an odd relationship. It helps 
to see that we’re struggling with what everyone else does in relationships with 
others—wanting connection and ­independence at the same time.

R E L A T I O N A L  D I A L E C T I C S  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     203
	
3.  How do you think communication is used to deal with conflicting ­desires 
within a relationship? How does RDT help us understand communication behaviors?
	
4.  A few of the articles cited in the chapter have to do with RDT applied in 
ethnicities other than White, European American. How do you think culture and 
ethnicity impact the theory? Is it universal across cultures? Or do you see its claims 
as culture specific?
	
5.  Provide an example of a dialectical tension that was managed through cy­
clic alternation.
	
6.  Provide an example of how you could use segmentation to resolve a dialec­
tical tension.
	
7.  Provide an example of how you could use reframing to resolve a ­dialectical 
tension.

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Lisa Sanders knew it would 
be hard making it through the 
workday without being side­
tracked by someone. She rushed around the 
office, keeping her eyes down, trying to avoid 
getting sucked into a conversation with anyone. 
She enjoyed her work and loved her coworkers, 
but the downside was that somebody always 
wanted to chat, and she simply had no time to 
waste today. She had already used too much pre­
cious work time going through her email. She had 
deleted about 65 pieces of junk, which was re­
ally getting to be a problem. The worst was that 
somehow she was on a porn list, and she kept 
getting solicitations for all sorts of nasty things. 
She just hoped that the office didn’t have some 
type of surveillance to observe all those mes­
sages. It made her feel vaguely uneasy.
She went into the break room for a cup of 
­coffee. That was a mistake. Yolanda and Michael 
were there, and they wanted to ask her opinion 
about a change the front office was making in how 
they did the billing. One thing led to another, and 
soon the three were talking about Yolanda’s con­
cerns about going on maternity leave next month. 
Lisa found herself enjoying the conversation even 
though she knew she had to get back to work.
After work, she went to Central U. to take 
a night class so that someday she could finish 
her B.A. She was hopeful that she’d finish within 
the year, and she had her eye on a management 
position that she expected would be vacant by 
then. During the break, she visited with her friend 
Doug Banda, who was also finishing up his de­
gree. She confided in Doug that she didn’t think 
she was doing very well balancing work, school, 
and her personal life. It was a continual chal­
lenge, and today it was getting the better of her. 
She almost surprised herself with how emotional 
she got while talking to Doug. Doug was a good 
friend; he just listened and offered a friendly hug 
of support. She felt better after talking with him.
Finally, class was over and Lisa went home 
and listened to her voice mail. Lisa’s mother had 
called with the usual gossip about the family. 
Most of the message had to do with Lisa’s sister-
in-law, Margo. Lisa’s mom didn’t get along very 
well with Margo, and she often called Lisa to let 
off steam about something her daughter-in-law 
had done (or hadn’t done). Today it was the fact 
that Ed’s wife was taking the kids on a vacation 
and Lisa’s mom wouldn’t get to see them for two 
weeks. While she was listening, her roommate, 
Amanda Torelli, came home.
Lisa liked Amanda and she certainly couldn’t 
afford the apartment without a roommate, but 
sometimes it felt like she didn’t have a moment to 
herself. Amanda had an overpowering personality, 
Communication Privacy 
Management Theory
Based on the research of Sandra Petronio
C H A P T E R	12
Lisa Sanders
To tell or not to tell is a condition that we frequently face, yet the question 
is complicated.
—Sandra Petronio
204

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
	
Communication Privacy Management Theory 
     ﻿    
205
A
s Lisa encounters the various people in her life—coworkers, classmates, fam­
ily members, roommates, and so forth—she engages in a complex ­negotiation 
between privacy and disclosure. This chapter presents the theory of Communica­
tion Privacy Management (CPM), which helps us sort through and explain the com­
plexities of this process. Sandra Petronio (2002) states that CPM is a practical theory 
designed to explain the “everyday” issues described in Lisa’s activities. As many 
researchers have observed, the question of whether to tell someone something we are 
thinking is a complicated one, yet it’s one we face frequently in our daily lives (e.g., 
Venetis et al., 2012). As Petronio (2016) notes, CPM is a “road map” that helps to 
explain “how people make judgments about managing their private information with 
other people” (p. 1).
Examining Lisa’s day, we can see at least five instances when Lisa is ­occupied 
with questions of disclosure: (1) She worries about keeping those ­unwanted porno­
graphic emails a secret from people at work, (2) she engages in conversation with 
coworkers without telling them that she’s feeling harried, (3) she confides in a friend 
about feeling unbalanced in her work and personal life, (4) she listens to her mother’s 
voice mail–recorded complaints, and (5) she hears her roommate’s disclosures with­
out telling her what she really thinks about her boyfriend.
All of these examples illustrate CPM’s contention that deciding what to reveal 
and what to keep confidential is not a straightforward decision but rather a continual 
balancing act. Both disclosure and privacy have potential risks and rewards for Lisa 
in all of the situations she encounters.
Lisa also has to think about the risks and rewards her decisions may create for those 
with whom she interacts. How would Amanda feel if Lisa told her that she thought her 
boyfriend was a loser? The act of revealing or withholding personal information has 
effects on relationships as well as on individuals. What happens to the relationship be­
tween Lisa and Doug as she confides in him about her feelings? All these concerns, rela­
tional and individual, create the complicated process of balance that Petronio addresses 
with Communication Privacy Management Theory. As Petronio (2002) observes:
We try to weigh the demands of the situation with our needs and those of oth­
ers around us. Privacy has importance for us because it lets us feel separate 
from others. It gives us a sense that we are the rightful owners of information 
about us. There are risks that include making private ­disclosures to the wrong 
people, disclosing at a bad time, telling too much about ourselves, or compro­
mising others. On the other hand, disclosure can give enormous benefits. . . . 
[We may] increase social control, validate our perspectives, and become more 
intimate with our relational partners when we disclose. . . . The balance of pri­
vacy and disclosure has meaning because it is vital to the way we manage our 
relationships. (pp. 1–2)
and she filled the apartment to the extent that 
Lisa often felt crowded. Amanda always had 
something to say, and tonight was no exception. 
Amanda wanted to tell Lisa all about her most 
recent fight with her boyfriend, Joel. Amanda 
and Joel were always fighting, and Lisa privately 
thought Amanda should dump the guy. But then 
she realized that Amanda liked playing the drama 
queen role, so she stopped telling Amanda any of 
her true reactions. Lisa grabbed a glass of wine 
and some crackers as she settled on the couch to 
listen to Amanda’s latest tale of woe.

206     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Thus, there was a need for a theory like CPM that attempts to do what few other 
theories have done: Explain the process that people use to manage the ­relationship 
between concealing and revealing private information.
Communication Privacy Management Theory is unlike most of the other theories 
presented in this text because it is relatively recent. For example, our discussion in 
Chapter 18 on Aristotle’s Rhetoric centers on a theoretical approach to public address 
and persuasion that goes back thousands of years. Of course, not all of the theories in 
this text have the history of Aristotle’s Rhetoric, but most have been in use for longer 
than CPM. This recency is notable for two reasons. First, it is exciting because it indi­
cates the currency of thought in the communication discipline. It indicates that fresh, 
new thinking continues to illuminate questions of communication behavior. Having 
new theories illustrates the vibrancy of communication as a field. In case you were 
tempted to dismiss theory as something from musty tomes written by dead Greeks, 
Petronio’s CPM Theory shows that theorizing is alive and well in our own century.
Second, and related to the excitement generated by its recency, is the fact that 
CPM grows specifically from a focus on communication. This also shows the matur­
ing and growth of the field of communication. Some of the other theories in this 
text, you will remember, originated in other disciplines. Communication researchers 
found them useful for some reason and borrowed them for their own work. For ex­
ample, Symbolic Interaction Theory (Chapter 4), comes from sociology. Cognitive 
Dissonance Theory (Chapter 6) originated in psychology. Communication research­
ers have found these and other theories useful for framing their studies examining 
communication behaviors. However, it may be even more helpful to have theo­
ries that place communication concepts centrally in the explanation process. CPM 
Theory does just that: allowing researchers to be more focused in their examinations 
of the communication process and specific communication practices.
Evolution of Communication Privacy Management Theory
Although the formal theory is relatively recent, the ideas that form the theory show 
a historical evolution. Over 30 years ago, Petronio and her colleagues published 
some studies outlining principles that would eventually become part of CPM (e.g., 
Petronio & Martin, 1986; Petronio, Martin, & Littlefield, 1984). In these studies, the 
researchers were interested in how people decided on the rules guiding their disclo­
sure behavior. They noted that men and women have different criteria for judging 
when to be open and when to stay silent. These criteria lead to differing rules for men 
and women on the subject of disclosure. The notion of gender differences and the 
concept of disclosure as rule governed are now parts of CPM Theory.
In 1991, Petronio published her first attempt to codify all the principles of the 
theory. Her work then differed from her later (Petronio, 2002) conceptualization in 
two ways. First, the theory had more limited boundaries in 1991. At that time, Petronio 
referred to it as a microtheory because its boundaries were confined to privacy man­
agement within a marital dyad. Now, as we explain in this chapter, the theory is less 
restricted and attempts to explain privacy and disclosure in many more contexts than 
marriage. Petronio now refers to CPM as a macrotheory because its boundaries in­
clude a large variety of interpersonal relationships, including groups and organizations.
microtheory  
a theory with limited 
boundaries
macrotheory 
a theory with exten-
sive boundaries

	
Assumptions of CPM     207
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
The second change in the theory was a name change. In 1991, Petronio called 
the theory Communication Boundary Management. When she published the fuller 
statement of the theory (Petronio, 2002), she renamed it ­Communication Privacy Man­
agement Theory. Petronio explained the new name as better “reflecting the focus on 
private disclosures. Though the theory uses a boundary metaphor to explain the man­
agement process, the name change underscores that the main thrust of the theory is on 
private disclosures” (2002, p. 2). Petronio (2004, 2010, 2016) expects (and hopes) that 
the ­theory will continue to grow and evolve as it is applied to practical questions of 
disclosure in relationships. Her 2004 article was subtitled “Please Stand By” ­indicating 
that the theory continues to evolve and her ideas keep sharpening as empirical data 
allow her and others to see and correct any weaknesses in CPM’s explanatory power.
Assumptions of CPM
Communication Privacy Management Theory is rooted in assumptions about how 
individuals think and communicate as well as assumptions about the nature of human 
beings. CPM adheres to aspects of both rules and systems approaches that we dis­
cussed in Chapter 3, and it makes three assumptions about human nature congruent 
with rules and systems:
∙∙
Humans are choice makers.
∙∙
Humans are rule makers and rule followers.
∙∙
Humans’ choices and rules are based on a consideration of others as well as 
the self.
With respect to the first assumption, Petronio believes that CPM theory helps people 
better understand the choices they make and how these choices assist them in their rela­
tionships with others. Think, for instance, about how you decide to tell a colleague about 
a poor job performance review you received. Your decision whether or not to reveal 
this personal information may have (lasting) relational consequences. As Petronio and 
Reierson (2009) state, you have the “right to control” (p. 366) the information and if you 
decide to reveal it to your colleague, it becomes “co-owned” (p. 366) by your colleague.
The second and third assumption can be grouped together since both relate to rules. 
CPM theorists acknowledge that rules play an instrumental part in our relational lives 
Theory At a Glance  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory
Disclosure in relationships requires managing private and public boundar­
ies. These boundaries are between those feelings that one wants to reveal 
and those one wants to keep private. Disclosure in relationship development 
is more than revealing private information to another, however. Negotiation 
and coordination of boundaries is required. Decisions regarding disclosure 
require close monitoring.

208     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
(refer back to Chapter 3 for a more detailed discussion of this topic). Rules tell us what 
to reveal and what to withhold from others based on a “mental calculus.” This calculus 
is grounded in a number of different areas, including culture, gender, and context. A bit 
later in the chapter we explore the relationship of rules to CPM. For now, however, keep 
in mind that “since people assume the right to retain jurisdiction over their private infor­
mation” (Petronio, 2015, p. 3), they will necessarily invoke rules to maintain that right. 
CPM Theory is a dialectic theory because it focuses on the ­tensions inherent in 
being open to others while also maintaining privacy. Petronio (2016) comments on the 
intersection between her theory and RDT: “Grounding CPM theory within a dialectical 
framework allows more insights into privacy management by capturing the underlying 
logic and management of private information people actually use in their daily lives” 
(p. 2). That is, the principles of change and contradiction function prominently in our 
lives and our needs for autonomy and sociability influence our privacy decisions.
These assumptions, taken together, represent a perception of active human beings 
and a picture of humans as engaged in relational life to the extent that self and other 
are intertwined (Table 12.1). The notion of being intertwined is important to CPM. 
Not only are the self and the other in an engaged relationship, but disclosure is also 
intertwined with the concept of privacy. As Petronio has argued, privacy is only un­
derstood in a dialectical tension with disclosure. If we disclose everything, we won’t 
have a concept of privacy. Conversely, if all information is private, the idea of disclo­
sure won’t make sense. It’s only by pairing them that each concept can be defined.
Key Terms and Principles of CPM
As we have noted, CPM is concerned with explaining people’s negotiation pro­
cesses around disclosing private information. Our first task, then, is defining private 
information. Petronio (2000) commented that people define private information as 
information about things that matter deeply to them. The process of communicating 
private information in relationships with others becomes ­private disclosures.
The emphasis away from self-disclosure marks a distinction between CPM’s 
definition of disclosure and that of traditional research on openness (e.g., Jourard, 
1971) and as identified in other theories such as Social Penetration Theory, for ex­
ample (Chapter 10). CPM views the definition differently in three ways. First, private 
disclosure puts more emphasis on the personal content of the disclosure than does 
traditional self-disclosure literature. In doing this, CPM gives more credence to the 
substance of disclosures, or what is considered private. In addition, CPM examines 
how people disclose through a rule-based system. In so doing, CPM focuses on rule 
structures created for sharing and withholding private disclosures. Finally, CPM does 
private information
information about 
things that matter 
deeply to a person
private disclosures 
the process of com-
municating private 
information to 
another
Table 12.1  Assumptions of CPM
CPM THEORY
ALL DIALECTIC THEORIES
Human choice
Human-made rules
Social concerns
Relational life characterized by change
Contradiction as the fundamental fact of relational life

	
Key Terms and Principles of CPM     209
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
not consider that disclosures are only about the self. Disclosures form a communi­
cative process. As Petronio (2002) observes, “[T]o fully understand the depth and 
breadth of a disclosure, CPM does not restrict the process to only the self, but extends 
it to embrace multiple levels of disclosure including self and group (p. 3). She is clear 
in noting that “disclosure, as a concept, is defined as more dynamic than consigning 
it to only the self. CPM also recognizes that people can give permission to access 
their private information without disclosing” (Petronio, 2016, p. 5).
Communication Privacy Management Theory accomplishes this by proposing 
five, interrelated, principles: private information ownership, private information 
control, private information rules, private information co-ownership and guardian­
ship, and private information boundary turbulence. We will explain each of these 
basic principles of the theory in turn. (See Table 12.2.) 
Principle 1: Private Information Ownership
The first principle asserts that people believe they “own” information about them­
selves, and they can manage it however they want. As Sandra Petronio (2010) notes 
this belief in ownership is a perception, and as such, may not always be factual. 
Petronio points to research such as work she has done with Jeff Child and Judy 
Pearson (Child, Pearson, & Petronio, 2009), which focused on student bloggers that 
illustrates this discrepancy. While people claim they have privacy, or complete own­
ership of their private information, that claim is often contradicted online.
Principle 2: Private Information Control
The second principle of CPM builds on the first. The logic of these two principles is as 
follows: Because I “own” the private information about me, I can choose how I want to 
control that information. Thus, Lisa from our chapter-opening story makes the decision to 
keep her feelings about her roommate’s ­romantic life private; she believes she owns this 
information and she has the power to decide when to share or withhold it. Petronio (2010) 
notes that the level of control may range from high to moderate to low. For example, 
Table 12.2  Principles of CPM
Principle 1:     Ownership
People believe they own the information about 
­themselves.
Principle 2:    Control
People develop boundaries to control their personal 
information.
Principle 3:    Rules
People share and withhold information based on a 
system of rules.
Principle 4:    Co-ownership 
Others become co-owners of people’s private informa­
tion based on rules about linkage, permeability, and 
ownership.
Principle 5:    Turbulence
When the rules are not followed and mistakes are 
made, turbulence results.   

210     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
if something is a secret that very few people are allowed to hear, the control is high. If 
Robyn decides to tell only her husband about a diagnosis of breast cancer and withhold 
the information from the rest of her family and friends, she is keeping high control over 
the information. If she decides to tell a few more people, her control becomes moderate, 
and as more people are allowed access to the information, Robyn’s control is low.
This principle introduces the concept of private boundaries. CPM relies on the 
boundary metaphor to make the point that there is a line between being public and being 
private. On one side of the boundary, people keep private information to themselves; 
on the other side, people reveal some private information to others in social relationship 
with them. Some research indicates that deciding to disclose private information can 
be a healthful choice (Joseph & Afifi, 2010); however, it is the discloser’s choice. The 
boundaries around personal information are within people’s control to set and change.
Boundaries may be set differently related to a variety of factors, however, some 
of which are not completely within a person’s control. For instance, age may have an 
influence on how boundaries are established. Children in the United States maintain 
relatively small privacy boundaries. The boundaries increase as children grow into ado­
lescence and adulthood and cultivate a more developed sense of privacy. As people 
enter old age, their boundaries begin to shrink. In addition, gender and culture may play 
private boundaries 
the demarcation 
between private 
information and 
public information
In an entry for Motherlode, the parenting blog, Jillian Keenan discusses how 
lucky it was that there was no blogging when she was a rebellious teenager, 
so her mother wasn’t able to write publically about the things she did. When 
Keenan was 15, and having a heated argument with her mother, she pulled 
out a knife and said to her mother, “This is how much pain I’m in. What do I 
have to do to make you understand that?” She goes on to say that she then 
“dipped the tip of the knife into my skin and cut a very shallow gash on the 
back of my arm.” Now, as an adult, she looks back at that melodramatic action 
and other mistakes she made growing up and reflects on how she was able 
to own that information about herself. She isn’t so sure that is true of teens 
today. Keenan acknowledges that parents might need an outlet for their own 
frustrations and concerns about their children, but she concludes that
it is one thing to broadcast your own pain. It is quite another to broadcast 
your child’s. In this Internet age, children deserve to struggle into adulthood 
with some degree of privacy. If my mother had publicized that moment 
when I cut my arm, it could have devastated my future in incalculable ways.
Given the Internet’s ubiquity it may become difficult to own your own information.
Source: Keenan, J. (2012). Thanks, Mom, for not telling the world I pulled a knife on you, 
parenting.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/12/27/thanks-mom-for-not-telling-the-world-i-pulled-
a-knife-on-you/?emc=eta1.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Do Teens Own Their Personal 
Information Online?

	
Key Terms and Principles of CPM     211
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
a role in how boundaries are drawn. One study (Cho, Rivera-Sánchez, & Lim, 2009) 
showed that age, gender, and nationality influenced people’s conceptions of ­privacy 
online. Older females from individualistic cultures were the most concerned about 
online privacy and did the most to establish privacy boundaries online.
Principle 3: Private Information Rules 
Principle Three relates to the first two. This principle asserts that people make de­
cisions about controlling the private information they own based on rules. Petronio 
(2013) believes that people are the “sole owners” (p. 9) of the information they possess. 
Privacy rules are foundational to CPM, so we’ll discuss them at some length. First, 
privacy rules have two main features: development and attributes. Rule development 
is guided by people’s decision criteria for revealing or concealing private information. 
CPM Theory (Petronio, 2013; 2015) states that two criteria are used for developing 
privacy rules. Two types of criteria are used to determine whether or not to allow 
another person access to information: core and catalyst. Petronio (2015) defines core 
criteria as those that are “more resilient and often function in the background” (p. 3) 
and catalyst criteria as opportunities when “privacy rules have to be responsive to 
needed change” (p. 3). Let’s briefly look at each.
With respect to core criteria, CPM theorists assert that decisions to reveal or conceal 
can be dependent on issues such as culture. Think about how culture (e.g., gender, cultural 
community, sexual identity, etc.) guides an individual’s expectations for privacy. Thus we 
might understand Amanda’s desire to be transparent to Lisa in our chapter opening by 
noting that she is Italian American, a culture that generally values openness of expression.
rule development
one of the features 
of privacy rule 
characteristics; 
describes how rules 
come to be decided
Figure 12.1
Boundaries and 
the Life Span
Boundaries of 
Privacy: Dialectics of 
Disclosure by Sandra 
Petronio, the State 
University of New 
York Press, © 2002 
State University of 
New York. All Rights 
Reserved.
Adolescent’s
privacy
boundary
Child’s
privacy
boundary
Elderly person’s
privacy
boundary
Adult’s privacy boundary
core criteria
one criterion used 
to that influences 
the type of privacy 
rules people might 
use to regulate 
private information; 
provide guidance 
for privacy manage­
ment
catalyst criteria
one criterion used 
to determine wheth­
er to allow another 
person access to in­
formation; account 
for reasons privacy 
rules change

212     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Catalyst criteria relate to the reasons why privacy rules may shift or otherwise 
necessitate change. Petronio (2015) explains that sometimes a person may incor­
rectly assess the consequence of a privacy rule. She provides the example of divorc­
ing parents. Suppose that the couple decides to reveal information about the divorce 
to their children, knowing that research is clear that the information may cause stress 
for the family. The couple—once the two discover that their disclosure is harmful—
will likely reconsider any future disclosures. Petronio notes that the motivation to 
disclose, the risk of the disclosure, the context of the situation, and the relationships 
involved can all prompt the privacy rule changes that will occur.
The decision criteria help explain the process of rule development, which is 
one element of privacy rules. The second aspect of privacy rules concerns privacy 
rule attributes, which refer to the ways people acquire rules and the properties of 
the rules. Generally, the theory suggests that people learn rules through socialization 
processes or by negotiation with others to create new rules.
For example, Lisa was socialized in her company through informal networks 
that taught her it was important to spend time nurturing relationships with her co­
workers. The organization often invoked the metaphor of a family, hosted many so­
cial events for the workers, and tried in several other ways to impress on employees 
that close relationships were an important part of the organizational culture. When 
learned rules are inadequate or need modifying, then people collaborate to forge new 
rules. For instance, if the company determined that its workers were disclosing to 
one another to the detriment of productivity, they might work to renegotiate the rules. 
Principle 4: Private Information Co-ownership and Guardianship
The fourth principle refers to how private information is shared and becomes co-owned. 
When private information is shared, the boundary around it is called a collective boundary, 
and the information is not only about the self; it belongs to the relationship. When private 
information remains with an individual and is not disclosed, the boundary is called a 
personal boundary (Figure 12.2). When Lisa and her mother talk about Lisa’s brother’s 
wife, that information belongs to them as a dyad, and neither one of them reveals it to 
Margo or Lisa’s brother, creating a collective boundary. When Lisa privately holds her 
opinion of Joel, Amanda’s boyfriend, that information has a personal boundary.
An important element of this principle is boundary coordination, which refers 
to how we manage information that is co-owned. For example, when Lisa and her 
mother talk about Margo, Lisa’s sister-in-law, it is clear that the information is to be 
kept from Margo and Lisa’s brother. Boundary coordination is the process through 
which that decision is made and through which Lisa and her mother become co-
owners of private information.
Petronio (2010) notes that co-ownership is regulated through boundary link­
age, boundary ownership rights, and boundary permeability. Boundary linkage 
refers to the connections that form boundary alliances between people. For example, 
when Lisa tells private information to Doug, they are linked in a privacy boundary. 
Physicians form linkages with their patients because the medical profession stresses 
patient confidentiality. If you overhear a piece of private information that wasn’t in­
tended for you, you are technically linked; however, the linkage is weak because you 
know you weren’t the intended recipient of the information.
privacy rule  
attributes 
one of the features 
of privacy rules; 
they refer to the 
ways people  
acquire rules and 
the properties  
of the rules 
collective boundary
a boundary around 
private information 
that includes more 
than one person
personal boundary 
a boundary around 
private information 
that includes just 
one person
boundary  
coordination 
one of the processes 
in the privacy rule 
management system; 
describes how we 
manage private 
information that is  
co-owned
boundary linkage
the connections 
forming boundary 
alliances between 
people

	
Key Terms and Principles of CPM     213
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Boundary ownership refers to rights and privileges accruing to co-owners of 
private information. For boundary ownership to be exercised accurately, the rules 
need to be clear. For instance, if your friend tells you private information, are you al­
lowed to share it with someone else (Mikucki-Enyart, 2011)? If your friend has told 
you explicitly not to tell anyone her secret, then the boundary is clear and unambigu­
ous. However, if she just told you the secret without specifying whether you could 
tell anyone else, you might feel unsure about your co-ownership. You could suspect 
you aren’t supposed to tell, but without instructions you feel uncertain.
Yet boundaries are dynamic and may be redrawn over time. For example, when 
Rachel Norton was 18, her brother had an accident with the family car. Together, 
she and her brother had the car repaired and paid for the repairs without telling their 
parents. Now that they are both adults, they have told their parents about the incident. 
Thus, the boundary broadened to include the whole family. It may also be the case 
that co-owners do not agree about boundary issues. Amanda, from our opening story, 
might think that her tales about Joel, her boyfriend, link Lisa into a boundary that 
Lisa, herself, would rather not be included in.
boundary ownership 
rights and privileges 
accruing to  
co-owners of  
private information
Person A
(Personally private information)
Personal boundary
Collective boundary
(Collective private information)
Person B
(Personally private information)
Figure 12.2
Boundary Types
Boundaries of 
Privacy: Dialectics of 
Disclosure by Sandra 
Petronio, the State 
University of New 
York Press, © 2002 
State University of 
New York. All Rights 
Reserved.

214     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Finally, boundary coordination is accomplished through boundary permeability, 
which refers to how much information is able to pass through the boundary. When 
access to private information is closed, boundaries are said to be thick boundaries; 
when access is open, people have thin boundaries in place. 
Principle 5: Private Information Boundary Turbulence 
The fifth principle refers to what happens when the privacy rules break down or 
people make mistakes in enacting them. Boundary turbulence exists when the 
rules of boundary coordination are unclear or when people’s expectations for pri­
vacy management come into conflict with one another. Boundary regulation is not 
always a smooth operating system, and the people involved can experience clashes 
that Petronio labels turbulence. For example, if Lisa refused to listen to Amanda’s 
problems one evening, they might come into conflict. If you discovered that a 
friend told another about some private information you had shared and meant for 
that friend to keep private, boundary turbulence would ensue. CPM Theory asserts 
that when individuals experience boundary turbulence, they will try to make ad­
justments so that they can reduce the turbulence and achieve coordination.
Boundary turbulence can occur for a number of different reasons. In some cases, 
the turbulence results from what Petronio (2010) calls “fuzzy boundaries” by which 
she means that the boundaries are ambiguous. One partner could claim that he or she 
didn’t know he or she wasn’t supposed to reveal information, for instance. Or, the 
partners could define the information differently. A romantic partner might think one 
is entitled to know all about the partner’s past while the other person may believe that 
the past is private and doesn’t need to be revealed. In any event, turbulence will ensue 
when “expectations for privacy management are unfulfilled” (Petronio, 2010, p. 182).
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Communication Privacy Management Theory has enjoyed significant attention from 
scholars in communication as well as from those in other disciplines. The theory 
appears to resonate because its boundaries and boundary rules guide all sorts of be­
haviors in all types of relationships. Moreover, researchers have studied the theory 
boundary  
permeability
the extent to which 
information is able 
to pass through a 
boundary
thick boundaries
closed boundaries 
allowing little or no 
information to pass 
through
thin boundaries 
open boundaries 
allowing all informa-
tion to pass through
boundary  
turbulence
conflicts about 
boundary expecta-
tions and  
regulation
Student Voices
Aleah
I know I like to keep a lot of information private. Topic avoidance is really how I get 
along with my father. We don’t agree on much of anything and if he knew all my 
personal beliefs he would be arguing with me all the time. It works pretty well to 
keep those boundaries in place and my dad and I can talk about the weather, sports, 
and our dog—we get along just great that way.

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     215
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Student Voices
Cleo
One of the biggest issues that this theory made me think about was the health care 
system. I feel that there is a lot of boundary turbulence going on in that. Also, the 
whole idea of my ownership of my private information is a big issue with health 
care. I mean, are they really keeping it private? Also, the theory kind of helps explain 
why I don’t like it when the school calls to tell me something on the phone about my 
son’s health. The phone seems like the wrong way for me to hear that Nathan had 
a seizure. I know they have to use the phone, but I remember how lonely and imper­
sonal it felt when the school called with that news. It was the first we knew that 
Nathan had a problem. Now that he’s been diagnosed, I keep in contact with the 
school all the time. I have gotten to know the nursing staff at his school, and it 
doesn’t feel so bad to talk to them now.
Logical Consistency
One criticism of the theory that Petronio (2002) has discussed relates to its logical con­
sistency. Some critics have observed that CPM uses the term dialectic inaccurately, 
claiming to be dialectic in nature when it’s really based on dualistic thinking. The basis 
for the criticism stems from Baxter and Montgomery’s (1996) distinctions among mo­
nologic, dualistic, and dialectic approaches (see Chapter 11). Using these distinctions, 
Baxter and Montgomery have argued that CPM takes a dualistic approach, treating 
privacy and disclosure as independent of one another and able to coexist in tandem.
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical | Interpretive/Hermeneutic | Critical
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic | 
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal | Interpersonal | Small Group | Organizational | 
Public/Rhetorical | Mass/Media | Cultural
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
and its various assumptions and concepts using both a quantitative and qualitative 
lens. As you think about the merits of CPM, three criteria for theory evaluation are 
relevant: logical consistency, utility, and heurism.

216     Chapter 12  •  Communication Privacy Management Theory 
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
Petronio (2002) responds to this criticism by noting that perhaps the ­accusation 
of dualistic thinking comes from the use of the terms balance and equilibrium in the 
early versions of CPM Theory. Petronio argues that CPM is not focused on balance 
in the psychological sense. She states: “Instead, [CPM] argues for coordination with 
others that does not advocate an optimum balance between disclosure and privacy. 
As an alternative, the theory claims there are shifting forces with a range of privacy 
and disclosure that people handle by making judgments about the degrees of privacy 
and publicness they wish to experience in any given interaction” (pp. 12–13 [em­
phasis in original]). Thus, Petronio argues that it is legitimate to call CPM Theory 
dialectical in nature.
Utility
Communication Privacy Management Theory has much promise of utility. It ­offers 
an explanation for the delicate process of coordination disclosing and ­concealing 
that people perform continually in their relationships with others. Furthermore, CPM 
may provide insights as that process of coordination becomes even more complex. 
CPM is needed to explain those daily intrusions into our lives due to technological 
advances. As technology moves more and more of what we have considered private 
information into the public realm, we will need to understand the rule-based manage­
ment system underlying this trend. As Petronio (2015) aptly notes, “potential appli­
cations of communication privacy management continue to grow” (p. 7).
Heurism 
Communication Privacy Management Theory demonstrates heurism because it has 
been utilized as a framework in a variety of situations, including romantic relation­
ships (e.g., Nichols, 2012), military families (Owlett, Richards, Wilson, DeFreese, & 
Roberts, 2015), academic advising (e.g., Thompson, Petronio, & Braithwaite, 2012), 
and health care (e.g., Romo, 2012; Petronio & Sargent, 2011).
One promising and exciting area where CPM has been investigated is with blog­
ging and Facebook. Jeff Child (e.g., Child & Petronio, 2011; Child & Starcher, 2016; 
Child & Westermann, 2013; Child, Petronio, Agyeman-Budu, & Westermann, 2011) 
has been in the forefront of scholars who have explored notions of privacy and how 
it relates to online experiences. His research remains critical for those who are in­
terested in the interface of social media platforms and CPM. The heuristic nature of 
the theory and its evaluation on the other criteria all argue for CPM’s success as a 
theoretical framework for communication questions.
Closing
As we continue to understand the decision to reveal private information to others, 
Communication Privacy Management Theory will be an important and valuable ref­
erence. Our conversations and relationships with others are complex. To this end, 

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  P R I V A C Y  M A N A G E M E N T  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     217
CPM provides us a useful framework as we seek to unravel the many and varied 
communication practices we undertake in our lives.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Can CPM Theory explain disclosures and privacy attempts 
encountered in online interactions? Do you think the concept of privacy and 
private disclosures is changed in online environments? Is it still a relevant 
concept when it seems as though we are willingly giving up our privacy in so 
many ways online? Explain your answer.
	
1.  Apply CPM Theory to Lisa Sanders’s case. How might it help Lisa to 
understand her situation?
	
2.  Within the past 10 years there has been an increase in the number of studies 
using CPM, which seems to indicate it is standing the test of time. Do you agree 
that CPM will stand the test of time? Why or why not?
	
3.  What approach to theory building does Petronio take in CPM Theory (laws, 
rules, systems, or some combination)? Explain your answer.
	
4.  What topics of interest can you use CPM Theory to investigate?
	
5.  Do you agree with Petronio’s defense of CPM against the critique that it 
uses the concept of dialectics but really takes a dualistic approach to privacy man­
agement? Explain your reasoning.
	
6.  Explain the concept of control with reference to communication boundar­
ies. What contexts can you think of where control might be an issue? Explain your 
choices.
	
7.  Provide an example of how boundary turbulence affects communication 
privacy management processes.

S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Corrina Abrams was 
bored. She was study-
ing for her midterm in 
business statistics and needed a break. She felt 
as though she would freak out if she continued 
to try any more practice problems. As she got 
up to get a drink, she thought about going on-
line to check any email from the ­“betogether.
com” website. The site—a dating ­location—was 
popular among college students and was often 
the topic of conversation whenever ­Corrina and 
her friends got together. That evening, as Cor-
rina checked her email, she noticed one from 
another college student who wrote with the sub-
ject line “Salut. Je m’ennuie.” Corrina Googled 
the French salutation (“Hello, I’m bored”) and 
­immediately responded to him. She was happy to 
read the email (written in English) from Marcus, 
a Canadian who, like Corrina, was also a college 
student. She figured a five-minute break chat-
ting with a guy who was also in college would be 
pretty cool.
As she sat and chatted with her Canadian 
email companion, she soon realized that she 
was discussing some pretty personal informa-
tion with him. She told him about helping her 
roommate deal with a recent assault, how she 
was the first kid in her family to go to college, 
and how she remained close friends with both 
of her parents after their divorce. Marcus, in 
turn, revealed that he was in a technical col-
lege because his parents couldn’t help him with 
tuition and that he was paying for school by 
doing some amateur modeling. For some rea-
son, she liked where the conversation with 
Marcus was going. He seemed very different 
from any other person and he never judged her 
nor did he pry inappropriately.
Over the course of a month, Corrina and 
­Marcus continued to email, instant message, 
and text each other. They were amazed how 
much they had in common. They both loved 
country music and had dozens of country 
music CDs. They both loved reading Wired 
magazine. The two also talked about each oth-
er’s family and about the differences between 
online relationships and those that began in 
a bar or coffee shop. And, although ­Corrina 
was excited to talk, she didn’t really want to tell 
Marcus about her low grades in college and 
the fact that she was on academic probation. It 
was too important for her to focus on the posi-
tive, especially since she liked the fact that she 
felt he was similar to her in a lot of ways. After 
several days of e-chats, Corrina thought that 
Marcus was simply too good to be true. And 
Marcus seemed to be quite enamored with her. 
He figured that because she was a business 
major, Corrina was smart and would graduate 
with a job in hand. The credentials of his new 
online interest impressed him. It was clear that 
the two had shared quite a bit of information 
Social Information Processing Theory
Based on the research of Joseph Walther
C H A P T E R	13
Corrina Abrams
There are times when less interpersonal or socioemotional communica-
tion is beneficial.
—Joseph Walther
218

S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
	
Social Information Processing Theory 
     ﻿    
219
T
he development and maintenance of our relationships have, as you have read 
elsewhere in this book, fascinated researchers for decades. In fact, it’s fair to say 
that one of the most researched areas in the communication field is the evolution of 
human relationships. The theories in this section of the book, in fact, underscore the 
complexity and excitement of theories related to ­relation­ships. Yet, very few theories 
have infused and focused on one development of the 21st century that remains pivotal 
to millions of relationships around the globe: the Internet.
When looking at how relationships developed years ago and how relationships 
develop today, we need to examine the role of technology. Decades ago, it was 
customary—even required—that relationships undergo a predictable trajectory. Al­
though some variation existed, the relational journey went something like this: We 
meet someone in person, we “date” that person socially, we introduce that person to 
our friends and family, and we marry that person (see Chapter 10 on Social Penetra­
tion Theory for more information on predictable relational development). To some of 
you, this approach may still make sense to you. Yet to others of you, this may sound 
like a scene out of a 1950s movie! After all, you might ask, what about dating sites 
and other technologies that are influencing relationships?
The development of online relationships is at the heart of a theory known as 
Social Information Processing (SIP). The theory, introduced by Joseph Walther 
(1992, 1993, 2008, 2015) long before other scholars envisioned the ­enormous influ­
ence of the Internet, rests upon the interplay among technology, relationships, and 
self-presentations. For Walther and other SIP advocates, the possibility of develop­
ing and cultivating online relationships is not only probable, it occurs with high de­
grees of success and relationship satisfaction.
To imagine what SIP suggests, we almost have to suspend our traditional in­
terpretation of what it means to have a “relationship.” As you have read in other 
chapters that focused on relationship development, many interpersonal commu­
nication theorists prior to Walther argued that relational life is one that is shaped 
and sustained by face-to-face (FtF) communication. Walther tweaked this fun­
damental perspective and determined that the nonverbal cues to which we are 
over the week. And, they hadn’t even met face 
to face! Yet.
Eventually, the two “Facebooked” each 
other, and soon, a few in their Friendship circles 
began to merge. They posted pictures of them­
selves (“He ­really is cute,” she admitted; “Wow, 
she could be in a magazine,” he thought). These 
were only pictures, but the two developed a 
virtual world that reflected their personalities. 
The social linkage that started on a whim now 
turned into a full-blown technological relation­
ship of six weeks.
Still, Corrina couldn’t stop wondering whether 
all of this was simply a fantasy or whether it could 
develop into something bigger. She knew there 
was a difference between talking online and see­
ing someone in person—she and Marcus talked 
and laughed a lot about that. And she realized 
she had never even seen anything other than 
Marcus’s face on her computer screen!
After a while, Corrina was seriously thinking 
of meeting her newfound acquaintance. But, then 
again, she thought, maybe just continuing the 
online relationship would fulfill her needs right 
now—she just wasn’t sure. She kept wondering 
whether it was too good to be true. Had she re­
ally found a soul mate nearly 400 miles away in 
another country? She still couldn’t believe that all 
of this happened simply because she went online 
during a night of studying!

220     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
accustomed in our FtF relationships, although important, were not ­essential to having 
an interpersonal relationship. He acknowledges that while both individuals in either 
FtF or online relationships have the same needs for uncertainty reduction and affin­
ity (see Chapter 8 on Uncertainty Reduction Theory), online interactants “adapt their 
linguistic and textual behaviors” to how others communicate with them (Walther & 
Anderson, 1994, p. 65). That means that unlike FtF relationship development, online 
relationship development, according to Social Information Processing Theory, states 
that relational participants will engage each other personally through both the words 
they use and also the frequency of those words.
So, it is not only what Corrina and Marcus reveal about each other that ­allows 
their relationship to develop and mature, but also the number of times that they com­
municate with each other. A difference exists, for instance, if ­Corrina emails Marcus 
once a week instead of once a day. And, after six weeks, Walther and others would 
suggest that this relationship has all the workings of an intimate experience. 
Social Information Processing Theory has, at its core, impression management 
(D’Angelo & Van Der Heide, 2016; Walther, 2015). For our purposes, we define 
impression management as either a strategic or unconscious effort to influence an­
other’s perception. Much of the earlier ­research on impression management focused on 
FtF communication and the nuances with meeting someone. A person’s self-image was 
viewed as important in relational development. Later applications of impression man­
agement were undertaken once online communication began (Ellison, Heino, & Gibbs, 
2006). Ellison and her colleagues, for example, found that various self-presentational 
­behaviors exist in online dating environments. They report on three selves: the actual 
self (attributes of an individual), the ideal self (attributes an individual ideally pos­
sesses), and the ought self (attributes an individual should possess). These selves are 
manifested and are of particular importance in online conversations and relationships, 
allowing an individual to manage his or her online persona or identity.
Identity management is directly associated with the social information process 
(Rosenberg & Egbert, 2011). As online participants, we necessarily forego our reli­
ance upon nonverbal cues in our dialogues. Therefore, the ­linguistic cues we send 
impression  
management 
the strategic or 
unconscious effort 
to influence
actual self
the attributes a 
person possesses
ideal self 
the attributes a 
person ideally  
possesses
ought self 
the attributes a  
person should  
possess
Theory At a Glance  •  Social Information Processing Theory
Individuals have the ability to establish online relationships and these relation­
ships are equal to or greater than the intimacy achieved in face-to-face (FtF) 
relation­ships. Even without nonverbal cues, through various technologies 
(e.g., email, texting, etc.), online relationships have the potential to be signifi­
cant in people’s lives. Individuals use the computer-mediated communication 
environment (CMC) to get to know each other and use this information to 
form impressions of each other. Because messages travel via one primary 
channel, it takes longer for relationships to achieve the same level as those 
that are FtF. In some cases, online relationships may be viewed as more 
important than FtF relationships.

	
Theoretical Turbulence: The Cues Filtered Out     221
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
to others will be undertaken with a concern for self-presentation. Walther (2011) 
contends that we “accrue impressions” of ­others in our online relationships. He 
further states that “communicators are ­moti­vated to develop interpersonal impres­
sions” (p. 458). Therefore, we can see that impressions are central to SIP and that 
the theory relies heavily on how individuals are interpreting (the words of) each 
other online.
Theoretical Turbulence: The Cues Filtered Out
Many of the communication theories (e.g., Social Penetration Theory) we address 
in this book are rooted in other theoretical perspectives from various fields of 
study. Yet unlike some theories (e.g., Communication Accommodation Theory), 
SIP was conceptualized, in part, by addressing the shortcomings of other theo­
ries that addressed communication mediums. These theories are termed cues 
filtered-out theories ­(Culnan & Markus, 1987; Walther & Parks, 2007), mean­
ing that because of a devoid of nonverbal cues, online relational development 
has little integrity. Walther’s research critiqued past methodological and con­
ceptual problems with theoretical thinking. He subsequently worked toward 
establishing an interpersonal communication theory that more accurately re­
flected the intersection among communication, online environments, the self, and 
cues filtered-out 
theories 
theories that  
address the lack of 
nonverbal cues as 
being detrimental to 
online relationship 
development
www.CartoonStock.com

222     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
relationships. Let’s briefly discuss two of those theoretical perspectives that in­
fluenced Walther’s theory: Social Presence Theory and Media Richness Theory. 
We provide a snapshot of each theoretical lens below. 
Social Presence Theory (Short, Williams, & Christie, 1976) relates to the 
extent that individuals are aware of each other via various communication media, 
that is, the awareness of individuals during an interaction—their characteristics, 
qualities, physicalities, and so forth. According to the theory, some mediums have 
a higher degree of social presence (e.g., video) and others possess lower ­degrees 
of social presence (e.g., audio and text-based). High-degree mediums are viewed 
as opportunistic for relational growth and lower-degree mediums are perceived as 
being more impersonal and unemotional in nature. Social ­presence is a “subjective 
quality,” meaning that individuals may not agree on whether or not there is a high 
or low degree of engagement in an interaction. With respect to online environ­
ments, social presence manifests in the manner in which messages are sent and 
received by others in the mediated environment. To a large extent, according to the 
theory, a high degree of social presence ­results in a warmer (and more satisfying) 
interpersonal experience.
Media Richness Theory (Daft & Lengel, 1986) also functions in the evolu­
tion of Social Information Processing Theory. The theory, first explored in the 
­organizational context, suggests that while communicating online, the medium is too 
narrow to allow for relationship development. To this end, individuals ­experience 
uncertainty and equivocality in their communication with others. In the theory, “rich­
ness” is evaluated in several ways, including the medium’s capacity for immediate 
feedback, the number of cues and channels used, and the extent to which a message is 
personalized (Gu, Higa, & Moodie, 2011). Similar to Social Presence Theory, schol­
ars studying Media Richness posit that mediums interpreted as “rich media” help to 
support both verbal and nonverbal cues. According to the theory, “richest” media are 
FtF communications, which prompt ­individuals to communicate faster; rich media 
are used for more complex conversations and tasks. The “leanest” media are tele­
phones, memos, and letters, which frequently prompt others to avoid communicating 
in more complex ways.
Walther (2011) believes that while both theories have important theoretical no­
tions, the online world is much more complex than what is inferred by Social Pres­
ence and Media Richness. For example, text-based communication between online 
participants—despite the absence of nonverbal cues—has relational value. To this 
end, both Social Presence Theory and Media Richness Theory suffer from a limited 
understanding of relational life online. Walther argues that if interactants commu­
nicate enough times and with sufficient breadth and depth, nonverbal communica­
tion does not remain paramount in relationship development. His premise is that 
email, for instance, may prove to be quite valuable to others as it can be sent rapidly 
with highly personalized words. Consider Corrina from our opening example. She 
clearly established a foundation with Marcus via email. Other platforms eventually 
provided more information, but the two relied upon a “lean” medium. In addition, 
Facebook, despite its showing of a lot of people with a lot of information about 
one’s self, likely provides both college students “rich” personal displays, intimate 
pictures, and other symbols. 
Social Presence 
Theory 
a theory that posits 
the extent to which 
people are aware 
of each other via 
various  
communication 
media
Media Richness 
Theory
a theory that ad-
vances the notion 
that communication 
can be classified  
according to  
message complexity

	
Assumptions of Social Information Processing Theory     223
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Social Information Processing Theory
By now, we hope that you are getting an idea that online relationships have the po­
tential to be expressive, intimate, and in many cases, long term. Social Information 
Processing researchers like Joseph Walther are intrigued by how identities are man­
aged online and how relationships are able to move from one of superficiality to 
one of intimacy. To further delineate SIP, we offer the following three assumptions 
related to the model:
∙∙
Computer-Mediated Communication provides unique opportunities to connect 
with people.
∙∙
Online communicators are motivated to form (favorable) impressions of them­
selves to others.
∙∙
Online interpersonal relationships require extended time and more accumu­
lated messages to develop equivalent levels of intimacy seen in FtF interper­
sonal relationships. 
Our first assumption rests on the premise that computer-mediated communication 
is a unique opportunity to build interpersonal relationships with others. First, although 
we alluded to it earlier, let’s define CMC. Those studying the nexus between human 
communication and technology embrace computer-mediated communication, 
which is a process in which people perceive, interpret, and exchange information via 
large networked telecommunications systems. These CMC systems are vast, almost 
always text based, and include, among others, Instant Messaging and email. CMC 
has been identified as “an organic setting” (Tong & Walther, 2013, p. 3) and it can 
be both synchronous and asynchronous. Synchronous communication occurs when 
both sender and receiver are online simultaneously. Asynchronous communication 
exists when time constraints influence the sending and receiving of various messages 
and responses. Asynchronous messages exist at various times and do not require the 
concurrent presence of a sender.
The relationship between CMC and relational development is underscored by 
Walther (2011): “[C]omputer-mediated communication (CMC) systems, in a variety 
of forms, have become integral to the initiation, development, and maintenance of 
interpersonal relationships” (p. 443). Consider the various systems to which Social 
Information Processing scholars subscribe: email, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, tex­
ting, blogging, videoconferencing, and others. Now, consider whether or not you 
have had an interpersonal relationship via any of these formats. Chances are that 
many or most of you will say that you’ve built a relationship via these technological 
venues. You will likely agree with Walther and others who claim that CMC systems 
provide for relational growth.
Yet some of you may not fully embrace, for instance, this notion of relationship 
development over the Internet. You may subscribe to the belief that for interpersonal 
communication and an interpersonal relationship to exist, face-to-face communica­
tion must inevitably occur (consider our definition of “interpersonal communica­
tion” in Chapter 2). Perhaps you think that although CMC is a legitimate way to 
cultivate an understanding of another, to establish a relationship requires the parties 
computer-mediated 
communication 
(CMC) 
process in which 
people perceive, 
interpret, and  
exchange informa-
tion via large  
networked  
telecommunications 
systems
synchronous  
communication 
a process that 
occurs when both 
sender and receiver 
are online  
simultaneously
asynchronous  
communication 
a process that 
occurs when both 
sender and receiver 
are online at  
different times,  
owing to time  
constraints

224     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
to actually meet. Perhaps you feel that despite an ongoing interaction, Corrina and 
Marcus from our chapter-opening story will never develop a “relationship.”
Much of Joseph Walther’s research (e.g., DeAndrea & Walther, 2011a; 
Walther, 2011) undercuts this latter perception. He first argues that people will 
communicate personal information online and in many cases, people will disclose 
more online than they will in person. In fact, research shows that people will re­
ciprocate high levels of intimate information while online (Kalbfleisch, 2016), 
a topic we revisit later in the chapter. Further, a study by Walther and Jeong-
woo Jang (2012) demonstrates that even participatory websites (e.g., YouTube, 
TripAdvisor.com, etc.) and their online interactants can “both facilitate and com­
plicate social influence” (p. 2), providing additional evidence that CMC ­remains 
opportunistic for online discussions, reactions, and relationships. Think of this 
claim in this way: As you visit a website, many times you are there for social sup­
port, information, or simply to talk, read, and/or listen. ­Relational life is similar. 
Many times, “visitors” enter our lives and we end up keeping them around for quite 
some time. In essence, they become part of our relational fabric. So, consider the 
serendipity related to Corrina and Marcus. She was not anticipating meeting any­
one. Yet CMC provided her the chance to chat with someone and based upon the 
levels of disclosure and the mutual ­exchange of personal information, the two are 
on their way to an interpersonal ­relationship.
CMC is clearly different than face-to-face communication, but it offers an un­
paralleled opportunity to meet someone whom you would never meet FtF. Moreover, 
just as in FtF encounters, relationships established via CMC systems, too, prompt 
emotions and feelings we find in all relationships, including social support, jealousy, 
and happiness (Green-Hamann, Eichhorn, & Sherblom, 2011; Utz & Beukeboom, 
2011). Finally, since CMC systems are available around the globe, the uniqueness 
of being able to cultivate online relationships with someone who is, say, 5,000 miles 
away cannot be ignored. 
A second assumption of Social Information Processing Theory was alluded 
to earlier in the chapter. Online participants are motivated to present themselves in 
strategic ways. Impression management is essential in online relationships (Walther, 
1994) and participants undertake efforts to ensure particular impressions. Individuals 
like Corrina Abrams, for example, obviously wish to avoid presenting her various 
Student Voices
Delia
I’m sure I’m the only one who disagrees with some parts of this theory. I’m sure it has 
been researched a lot and I know there’s a lot of validity to it. But, I’m having a hard 
time understanding how we can have more online intimacy than in person. I think if 
we start believing this stuff, then we will never know that being with someone—face-
to-face—is more important than being online. I know that this contradicts the theory, 
but I don’t ever want people to think that we can get really close online and think 
that’s the same as getting close in person. Just doesn’t make sense to me.

	
Assumptions of Social Information Processing Theory     225
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
“selves” to others in negative ways (recall that Corrina did not want to reveal her poor 
academic status in college).
Researchers have found that social networking sites (SNS) like Facebook are 
filled with people who wish to provide a number of different self-presentations to 
others (Bryant, Marmo, & Ramirez, 2011). Since the more Facebook friends one 
has, the more attractive the individual is viewed to be (Walther, Van Der Heide, Kim, 
Westerman, & Tong, 2008), managing one’s online impressions is of importance to 
many users. In terms of romantic relationships, if someone is either single or part­
nered, a number of options are available to communicators that would communicate 
their relational image to others: (1) display relationship status (e.g., single, married, 
divorced, etc.); (2) utilize a picture that displays a partner; (3) provide dialogue about 
the user’s partner; (4) dialogue in chat rooms aimed at a person’s relational goals 
(e.g., marriage, and/or cohabitation, etc.) (Utz & Beukeboom, 2011; Winter, Hafer­
kamp, Stock, & Kramer, 2011).
How others present and manage themselves online remains important on vari­
ous SNS and on numerous CMC system platforms. Because numerous sites include 
others monitoring a number of different verbal and nonverbal displays, people delib­
erately use different behaviors to project a particular online identity (Bullingham & 
Vasconcelas, 2013). For some, openness is a primary goal; for others, impression 
management is undertaken in more covert ways. Clearly, if others’ opinions make a 
difference in relational goals, then a person will invest some time on managing and 
influencing those opinions (Toma & Hancock, 2011). 
A third assumption of Social Information Processing Theory states that 
different rates of information exchange and information accrual affect relationship 
development. To understand this assumption, let’s reflect upon Corrina Abrams and 
her online relational experiences with Marcus. She relies on several back-and-forth 
messages with Marcus and also undertook this technological exchange over the 
course of several weeks. In fact, she begins to really wonder about whether or not 
Marcus is her “soul mate,” an intuition that many people in FtF relationships also 
consider after numerous interactions.
This third assumption reflects Walther’s contention that online relationships 
have the same capacity to become intimate as those that are established face to face. 
Recall our earlier discussion of “cues filtered-out” theories, which, as you will re­
member, render nonverbal cues as nearly absent in CMC platforms and systems. 
Despite this, a great deal of research has reported that given sufficient time and an 
accrual of messages, intimacy can be, and usually is, achieved. 
Chronemic cues, or those cues related to how people perceive, use, or respond 
to time, and the accrual of messages are two notions that are interrelated. Walther 
(2008) states that “when sufficient time elapses so that ample communicative ex­
changes are made, personal and relational information accrues and CMC is no less 
effective than face-to-face interaction at developing impressions and managing in­
terpersonal relations” (p. 393). Walther and other Social ­Information Processing 
researchers believe that nonverbal cues we see in FtF ­encounters (e.g., smiling, 
touching, etc.) are important. Yet online relationships that rely upon text-based or 
email-based communication—despite the absence of nonverbal cues (except chro­
nemic cues)—can be highly intimate. He posits that “language and writing are held 
to be highly interchangeable with nonverbal cues” (p. 393).
chronemic cues 
cues related to how 
people perceive, 
use, or respond to 
time

226     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Years ago, as we noted previously, relational life (and many interpersonal com­
munication theories) placed a high premium on the value of nonverbal communica­
tion. And, today, we continue to do so, as evidenced by the proliferation of research 
in nonverbal communication (e.g., Matsumoto, Frank, & Hwang, 2013). Yet Walther 
is suggesting that when we discuss online relationships, we need to suspend the 
notion that nonverbal cues are mandatory in order for a relationship to exist. His 
research supports the claim that if messages are delivered over a period of time and 
these “verbal messages” are adapted and transferred into nonverbal codes, an online 
relationship can become quite intimate (Walther, 2012). 
These claims may be counterintuitive to you and prior to Walther’s theory, in­
terpersonal researchers relied extensively on the value of nonverbal communication 
in relationship development. And, we agree that nonverbal behaviors are critical to 
interpersonal relationships. However, Social Information Processing Theory is sug­
gesting that although the messages are verbal, communicators “adapt” to the restric­
tions of online medium, look for cues in the messages from others, and modify their 
language to the extent that the words compensate for the lack of nonverbal cues 
(Walther, DeAndrea, & Tong, 2010). In addition, Walther contends that although 
there is no precise comparison, it does generally take (at least) four times longer to 
exchange as much information via CMC as it does to do so face to face (even when 
communicating in “real time”). Further, these messages “build up” over time and 
provide online participants sufficient information from which to begin and develop 
interpersonal relationships. All of the aforementioned allows for a relationship that 
is of high intimate value. 
With these fundamental assumptions of Social Information Processing Theory 
identified, we now turn our attention to a few central features and concepts related 
to the theory. As you reflect on this theory and read the following, keep in mind that 
the theory had its beginnings in the early 1990s. To some researchers at the time, 
Walther’s theory was considered to be both provocative and pioneering because he 
was the first communication theorist to discover that online relationships can be just 
as valuable and satisfying as those established FtF. Let’s dig further into the theory 
by discussing two areas of the theory that have gained quite a bit of attention. First, 
we discuss the hyperpersonal perspective and next we address a principle that Wal­
ther has termed warranting.
Student Voices 
Joey
I love how Walther says that we focus too much on the nonverbal when we meet 
up with someone. Myself: I went to a dating website and he and I spent time texting, 
talking on the phone, and emailing a lot before we even met. We did Skype a few 
times and that was the point where we both liked the “authentic” face of the other 
person. I know years ago, people didn’t have the benefit of talking without seeing 
the other person. No, it may help to show that physical-ness should not take priority 
over the words someone is saying.

	
Hyperpersonal Perspective: “I Like What I Read and I Want More”     227
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Hyperpersonal Perspective: 
“I Like What I Read and I Want More”
As Walther conceptualized and clarified Social Information Processing ­Theory, 
he was struck by how vivid and poignant the online communication was between 
interactants. He conducted research that showed, among other things, that com­
munication between online participants was viewed as more powerful than those 
undertaken face to face. Walther (1996, 2011) argues that the impressions we cultivate 
via CMC systems and those relationships we develop and maintain “exceed the 
desirability and intimacy that occur in parallel off-line interactions” (2011, p. 460). 
Individuals online can take their time thinking about responses and can choose to do 
it in a synchronous manner (e.g., Instant Messaging) or without the online partner 
around (asynchronous). Senders and receivers have the opportunity to “think before 
they speak.” All of this, Walther advances, tends to lead to friendlier online relational 
environments. He terms this the hyperpersonal perspective (Walther has also called 
this the hyperpersonal effect (Walther, 1996) and hyperpersonal model (2011)).
Walther’s approach to understanding CMC relationships was a result of con­
sulting and researching theories from a variety of fields, a belief we discussed pre­
viously. After investigating Social Information Processing Theory and its various 
trajectories, Walther (1996) discovered that despite the prevailing views of some 
regarding the limitation of online relationships, individuals actually took advantage 
of CMC and strategically positioned themselves to others in very favorable ways, in 
ways that a FtF context cannot. Walther believes that online participant/users “ex­
ploit” the technological aspects of the medium to manage their impressions and to 
help their relationships. Consequently, those relationships we establish online are 
often more intimate than those we establish FtF.
The hyperpersonal perspective takes all of this into consideration and much 
more. This perspective entails a number of different areas related to CMC and inter­
personal relationships, including message tone, message complexity, personal lan­
guage, editing behaviors, composing time, among others (Walther, 2007). In other 
words, online communicators can be selective in how they present themselves and 
how they respond to another individual and an inordinary depth of intimacy can take 
place within online relationships.
The hyperpersonal perspective is more than saying that an online relation­
ship is intimate. Walther, in a number of different scholarly venues, articulated its 
complexity and for our purposes here, we elucidate the four components he studied: 
(1) senders, (2) receivers, (3) channel, and (4) feedback. These four, you may re­
call, constitute many of the models of communication we explained in Chapter 1. 
For now, though, let’s discuss each so that you can better understand this intriguing 
extension of Social Information Processing Theory.
Sender: Selective Self-Presentation
According to Walther (1996; Walther & Tong, 2015), senders have the ability to pres­
ent themselves in highly strategic and highly positive ways. This self-presentation is 
controlled and it serves as a foundation for how CMC users get to know one another. 
The fundamental underpinning of this component of the hyperpersonal perspective 
hyperpersonal 
perspective
an extension of  
Social Information 
Processing Theory 
that suggests 
people are able to 
develop more  
intimate  
relationships than 
those that are FtF

228     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
is affinity seeking. That is, senders provide information online that prompts affinity 
in others. Walther (1996), for instance, playfully states that when we send online 
messages to another, we don’t need to hold in our waist and we can nod, smile, 
or feign interest without others knowing. Senders, then, may provide personal dis­
closures that represent an “idealized self.” They may do more than self-disclose. 
Walther states that a sender’s word choices and expressions of affinity (“You sound 
so cool”) as well as the extent to which a sender agrees with a receiver are all part of 
a hyperpersonal experience. 
Think of our earlier story of Corrina Abrams. It is clear that to impress Marcus, 
she is presenting herself in very positive ways. Think of the different feelings she 
engenders: She told Marcus that she helped her roommate after an assault (“compas­
sion”), how she is the first child in her family to attend college (“tenacity”), and that 
she is good friends with both of her parents following their divorce (“nonjudgmen­
tal”). As a sender, Corrina is communicating to Marcus an image that is overwhelm­
ingly positive. She is transmitting preferable cues (Walther, 1992) to Marcus and is 
certainly managing her online image in a way that casts her as an other-centered and 
thoughtful person. Her social currency is apparently accelerated because she chose 
to emphasize more flattering examples about herself. In other words, she used CMC 
to edit her disclosive messages, making her more desirable in Marcus’s eyes. In the 
end, she is engaging in preferential actions to elicit preferential reactions.
Receiver: Idealization of the Sender
At the core of this component in the hyperpersonal perspective is attribution. 
Attributions are those evaluations and judgments we make based on the actions or 
behaviors of others. It’s a concept that is perceptual in nature; we perceive others 
and come up with some conclusions based upon what we perceive. Walther (2011) 
believes that receivers tend to “fill in the blanks” on perceptions that are either in­
complete or missing altogether; we make attributions of another’s behavior (e.g., the 
sender). Think of his claim this way: We already know that a sender is providing 
favorable information to a receiver online. Now, consider the fact that because a re­
ceiver is not privy to all the “typical” cues we find in FtF conversations, the receiver 
tends to attribute and, according to the theory, the receiver may “overattribute.” A 
receiver, for instance, is likely to think that a sender has more similarities than differ­
ences. A receiver may tend to compare the sender to someone else he or she knows, 
employing some sort of “perceptual personality” framework (“You sound like my 
cousin Barry. He’s my favorite relative”). Finally, a receiver may experience an 
overreliance on the minimal cues available online and forget that the relationship he 
or she has with a sender is based on words—the misspellings, typographical errors, 
use of punctuation, and so forth (Lea & Spears, 1992; Walther, 1996). 
In terms of Corrina and Marcus, as a receiver, Marcus overattributed ­Corrina’s 
credentials. He perceived her major in business as indicative of her intellectual prowess. 
We know that impression is incorrect. Further, he assumed she would have a job before 
graduation, a debatable point again, given that Corrina was struggling academically and 
may even be on academic probation. This is not to suggest that the two will not or do not 
have an authentic relationship. Rather, the two are engaging in hyperpersonal behaviors 
that may render the relationship less profound than the two of them perceive it to be.
attributions  
evaluations and 
judgments we make 
based on the  
actions or  
behaviors of others

	
Hyperpersonal Perspective: “I Like What I Read and I Want More”     229
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Channel Management
Earlier in the chapter, we talked about synchronous and asynchronous ­com­munication. 
You may recall that when both sender and receiver are online ­simultaneously, we 
have synchronous experiences. When either the sender or receiver sends a message 
without the presence of the other, we have ­asynchronous experiences.
CMC does not require both sender and receiver to be online at the same time. 
In fact, the asynchronous nature of CMC allows online participants to reflect upon, 
edit, and review their comments before hitting the “Send” button. Think about the 
times, for instance, where you were speaking with someone face to face in the ear­
lier stages of meeting. While exchanging information with one another, you don’t 
have a lot of time to think about what you say and at times, your anxiety may even 
prompt you to blurt out something inappropriate.
Now consider the previous example as one undertaken online. Upon meeting some­
one, you have the opportunity to think about texts or emails before sending them. Further, 
prior to sending messages, you can rewrite them for clarity, sense, and relevancy. With 
some CMC systems, you can even “retract” emails before they reach the receiver. Online 
asynchronous experiences allow for “optimal and desirable” communication. Senders 
and receivers pay little ­attention to the physical cues, as we learned earlier, and so the 
energies and “cognitive resources” (Walther, 2011, p. 461) are placed into ensuring that 
the messages are of high quality. Walther contends that the more relational the ­affection 
or more desirable the other communicator is, the more editing in message composition. 
Feedback
The fourth component embedded in a hyperpersonal perspective is feedback. You may 
remember from Chapter 1 that feedback is essentially those words or behaviors that are 
communicated to us in an interaction. Feedback’s relationship to CMC and the hyper­
personal approach is a bit more complicated. In this case, Walther interprets feedback as 
behavioral confirmation, which is a “reciprocal influence that partners exert” (Walther, 
1996, p. 27). In communication theory, we refer to this as self-fulfilling prophecy, a 
term we introduced in our discussion of Symbolic Interactionism (Chapter 4). This 
prophecy essentially is a tendency for an individual’s expectation of a target person to 
evoke a response from that person which, in turn, reaffirms the original prediction. So, if 
Corrina believes that based on his emails and text, Marcus is a trusting person, she will 
treat him as such and he, in return, will be trusting, reaffirming her original supposition.
Walther’s (2011) hyperpersonal perspective acknowledges a feedback system 
this way: “When a receiver gets a selectively self-presented message and idealizes 
its source, that individual may respond in a way that reciprocates and reinforces the 
partially modified personae, reproducing, enhancing, and potentially exaggerating 
them” (p. 463). Because cues in an online environment are limited, the feedback that 
does occur is often exaggerated or magnified. A sender and receiver have “height­
ened expectations and idealized impressions” (Ramirez & Wang, 2008, p. 34). 
The four components—sender, receiver, channel, and feedback—suggest that the 
hyperpersonal perspective is a process—that is, it’s ongoing and ­dynamic. As you 
consider Walther’s theoretical extension, keep in mind that online communication is 
a complex process. Walther (2008) concludes that SIP is a “process” theory because 
feedback
the behavioral  
confirmation  
behaviors of  
senders and  
receivers

230     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
both information and interpersonal meaning is ­accumulated over time, providing on­
line partners an opportunity to establish a relationship. The dynamics of being online, 
with individuals with whom we’re establishing relationships, are often unpredictable. 
For instance, Stephanie Tom Tong and Walther (2012) discovered that perceptual 
disconfirmation can exist. And, recall that time is of importance here (Ramirez & 
Wang, 2008). That is, a hyperpersonal experience is not one that occurs immediately 
for everyone. Corrina and Marcus, for example, communicate over several weeks 
and their hyperpersonal relationship may be quite different from, say, another couple, 
which may require additional time for intimacy to be achieved. We now turn our focus 
to a second feature of SIP that has attracted some scholarly attention: warranting.
Warranting: Gaining Confidence Online
As we discussed the self-presentation of online participants, you may have consid­
ered the fact that individuals may simply present themselves in less than truthful 
ways. In fact, it is possible for people to assert online identities and believe that 
others will simply subscribe to everything that is written or posted. What happens if 
the partners decide to initiate a FtF meeting? Will the self-presentations be deemed 
truthful? Will the impressions be accurate?
To ameliorate distorted and deceptive online presentations, Joseph Walther and 
his colleague Malcolm Parks (2002) articulated the need for “warranting” behavior 
by communicators. In the online universe, warranting is defined as “the perceived 
legitimacy and validity of information about another person that one may receive 
or observe online” (Walther, 2011, p. 466). Walther argues that online relationship 
development—like those that are FtF—can fall prey to misleading or manipulative 
overtures. To this end, in order for CMC users to feel more confident about online 
assertions, a warranting “value of ­information” will frequently take place that allows 
for more truthfulness and accuracy in presentations. Many online partners ensure 
that warranting exists in order to reduce uncertainty, to engender more confidence 
about the veracity of comments and self-presentations, and ultimately, to grow their 
relationship. Warranting usually takes the form of a sender connecting the receiver 
with the sender’s off-line network. Further, warranting varies in terms of accept­
ability and integrity. Personal webpages, for instance, will have less warranting value 
than, say, one that has been officiated by a third party. Or, a photo included by a CMC 
user will have less warranting value than a photo found in an official media outlet.
Walther and his research team (2009) assert that efforts at corroborating 
information and visual cues will enhance the online relationship efficacy between 
people. In a study that included mock-up Facebook postings, the researchers found 
that self-proclaimed physical attractiveness by a Facebook user was found to be more 
believable when others confirmed the claim. What this suggests is that “one’s own 
claims of attractiveness on Facebook are suspect” (p. 248), but when others can cor­
roborate those claims, this self-presentation contains more credibility. 
A central point of Social Information Processing Theory pertains to the self-
presentation of information. This online impression management is opportunistic for 
dishonesty. According to Walther, CMC users will frequently try to ensure the accuracy 
of their profiles, photos, images, and words they convey. Individuals like Corrina and 
warranting 
the perceived  
legitimacy and  
validity of  
information about 
another person that 
one may receive or 
observe online

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     231
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Theory-Into-Practice
Social Information Processing Theory
Theoretical Claim: Warranting allows an individual to validate the legitimacy of a 
person’s identity via online/social media.
Practical Implication: Desiree and Jazz just met online a few weeks ago. She told 
her new boyfriend that she is a homebody and doesn’t like to go out a lot. But, Jazz 
“saw” an entirely different Desiree as he looked at her past pictures boozing it up 
on her Instagram account. Thus, Jazz’s perception of Desiree’s credibility is now 
vastly different than when they first started chatting.
T*I*P
Marcus may one day meet if they continue to have a satisfying online relationship. Right 
now, neither may be skeptical, but if they each continue to reveal more information about 
one another, both may want verification of that information. And, it’s likely that both 
will desire to know what the other looks like—in person. So, If both Corrina and Marcus 
now take steps to provide information that has high warranting value, it’s probable that 
this technological relational experience will one day become a real-world experience.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Throughout this book, we have attempted to give you theories that are both rooted in 
other fields of study and theories that have their infancy in the communication discipline. 
Social Information Processing Theory is an attempt to bridge the two. While Walther 
clearly identified other theoretical frameworks in the conceptualization of SIP, his the­
ory, nonetheless, centers on communication and human relationships. Further, the theory 
clearly has evolved from quantitative investigation, making it positivistic in nature. With 
his infusion of CMC, the theory is a unique and important development in communica­
tion theory. To evaluate the theory, we examine three areas: scope, utility, and testability.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |   
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational | 
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

232     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Scope
Any theory dealing with computer-mediated communication will inevitably be criti­
cized for its expansiveness and lack of nuance. Yet although Walther’s ­theory ad­
dresses relationship development, his theoretical thinking over the years has silenced 
many critics who argue that it suffers from a lack of refinement. Walther spent sev­
eral years ensuring that the “cumbersome” area known as CMC does not result in 
research that is too broad. Some original research (e.g., Tidwell & Walther, 1995) 
began by examining CMC relationships over time. And, it became clear that since that 
time, Walther’s theory has evolved to scholarly levels that reflect more specificity 
(e.g., warranting perspective) and that address different types of online communi­
cators. Therefore, the theory does not suffer from too much breadth. Rather, SIP 
has moved from a generalized thinking of online relationships to more specific 
discussions, including those that relate to chronemics, such as physical attraction, 
among other areas that have captured much research attention over the years.
Student Voices
Mira
Finally, finally! Someone in the communication field researches what I experience all 
the time. I know I’m a nontraditional age student in this class, but that has given me 
more experiences than the others. One of those experiences relates to online self-
disclosure. This theory is very useful for me to think about. SIP says that people like 
me disclose more online than in person. I agree. And, sometimes it led to way too 
much ­intimacy way too quickly. I hope that as the theory progresses, we will see 
­research talk about moving too fast and what happens to the online relationship. 
But, for now, I’m just glad I read about a theory that makes a difference in my life!
Utility
As SIP was discussed above, we’re confident that many of you were shaking your heads 
in agreement with what Walther argues. In other words, the usefulness of the theory 
became apparent to you. Perhaps Walther (2011) best summarizes the usefulness of 
his theory: “Newer theories have also arisen, some barely tested, the ultimate utility of 
which remains to be seen” (p. 444). Further, given that texting occupies the most com­
mon cell phone activity and on average, over six billion text messages are sent each 
day in the United States (https://teckst.com/19-text-messaging-stats-that-will-blow
-your-mind), Walther and his colleagues (Walther, Van Der Heide, Ramirez, Burgoon, & 
Pena, 2015) believe that SIP’s utility will continue. So, perhaps the relative newness 
of the SIP theory (recall that many theories we’re studying in this book have been 
around for years) provides pause to some of you as you consider its practicality. Yet 
when considering the various themes, issues, and concepts related to Walther’s theory 
(e.g., affinity, nonverbal cues, impression management, etc.), few would argue with 
the usefulness and pragmatic value of studying these areas within online environments.

S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     233
Testability
One area of SIP that has received some criticism relates to its testability. Interest­
ingly, Walther has been a self-reflective critic of his own theory. First, he acknowl­
edged that SIP did not fully clarify the role of the issue of time in CMC relationships 
(Walther, 2011), an issue we discussed earlier in the chapter. 
Later writing by Walther (2015), however, suggested that time in CMC, messages 
take longer to process than those conveyed face-to-face. In particular, he believes that 
understanding online relational messages requires an individual to gather enough in­
formation so that he or she can draw conclusions about the person. There may be even 
more of a need to consider time when different online users are using different online 
platforms. Thus, while the original incarnation of the theory did not sufficiently in­
vestigate time, the current SIP thinking shows that time does, indeed, influence CMC.
Second, in discussing the hyperpersonal perspective, Walther admits that not all 
of the theoretical components of his hyperpersonal approach have been researched 
sufficiently. He and his research colleagues (2011) relate that “despite its impor­
tance, feedback has received the least direct attention in research on the hyperper­
sonal model of CMC” (p. 5). Thus, although feedback has been studied since this 
claim, in the development of the hyperpersonal model, a major portion of the model 
had received intermittent attention.
In addition, some writers have looked at the receiver’s behavior in the hyperper­
sonal perspective. Specifically, Jiang, Bazarova, and Hancock (2011) assert that the 
receiver’s perceptions help contribute to online intimacy. Yet the researchers conclude 
that the “receiver component has never been isolated from the sender’s effect” (p. 61). 
In other words, although the hyperpersonal approach states that the sender and re­
ceiver are both unique and interrelated, researchers have not tested whether there is a 
particular receiver behavior that leads to greater online intimacy. Although Jiang and 
her colleagues found that online intimacy is a result of a sender’s self-disclosure as 
well as a receiver’s perceptions of the disclosure, they were among the first to provide 
this causal link. Walther (2015) later notes that researchers have established that self-
disclosure is more frequent in CMC encounters than face-to-face encounters because 
CMC users “must employ ‘interactive’ strategies’ [including] asking personal ques­
tions in order to prompt a partner’s self-disclosure” (p. 9). In other words, the more 
information that is actively solicited will result in more self-disclosure taking place. 
Such a conclusion provides for a testable area related to the hyperpersonal perspective. 
Third, in examining the warranting hypothesis, Walther, Brandon Van Der Heide, 
Lauren Hamel, and Hillary Shulman (2009) accept the fact that high warranting value 
may exist on those matters that have strong social desirability. For instance, physi­
cal attractiveness is a highly desirable trait in the United States, making it socially 
desirable. So, as Walther accepts, online communicators would seek corroboration 
for those qualities that society deems important (or desirable). Whether or not other 
less socially desirable qualities are prone to warranting overtures is not fully explained. 
Testing these traits, then, may require alternative processes.
Social Information Processing Theory arrived in the communication discipline 
at the time that the rest of the research world was starting to examine the ­Internet for 
its possible influence on interpersonal communication and human relationships. As 
we alluded to earlier, Joseph Walther is somewhat of a scholarly prophet, forecasting 
the importance of looking at online relationships in the early 1990s.

234     Chapter 13  •  Social Information Processing Theory
S O C I A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  P R O C E S S I N G  T H E O R Y
Closing
We’re sure that as you reviewed Walther’s comparisons between CMC and FtF relation­
ships, many of you were wondering whether or not we will continue to be engaged in 
CMC with little chance of face-to-face meetings. This will likely never be the case. Yet 
we cannot ignore the fact that Walther’s theory ­remains a pivotal framework to consider 
as we envision future relationship ­development in an uncertainty technological time.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Social media is frequently the sort of text-based communi­
cation that SIP theorists discuss. Yet there are various types of social media. 
Differentiate between and among at least three types and how relationship 
development might differ in each.
	
1.  Corrina and Marcus have begun to establish their relationship online after 
just a few conversations. Do you believe that their experiences reflect what others 
experience when going online in the same manner as Corrina? Do any demographic 
issues (e.g., age, biological sex, cultural background) make a difference in online 
relationship development?
	
2.  Think of other situations in which a “cues filtered-out” approach ­exists. Use 
examples in your response.
	
3.  Compare and contrast the coming together of a relationship online and one 
that is FtF.
	
4.  Envision that you are a social media expert who is embarking upon an on­
line relationship with someone who is not tech-savvy. Discuss the similarities and 
differences in this online relationship development.
	
5.  React, with examples, to the concerns and cautions expressed by Delia (in the 
Student Voices box). Do you believe her views are appropriate? Why or why not?
	
6.  Walther’s followers are beginning to examine what happens when online 
communicators meet for the first time. What experiences have you had (or have 
you heard about) related to meeting in this manner? 
	
7.  Provide an example for each component of the hyperpersonal perspective 
and determine whether or not the approach merits modification. 

235
Groups, Teams, and Organizations
THE UNITED STATES IS A SOCIETY THAT RELIES ON 
groups, teams, and organizations in order to function. Small 
group, team, and organizational communication have a rich 
history a rich tradition in communication studies. A number 
of important theoretical developments have occurred in the 
field, all of which have lasting importance for individuals in 
the United States and around the world. One reason we 
have seen such attention in this area is that most of us 
will work for a company or ­corporation at some point in 
our lives. In addition, global, ­political, social, and ­economic 
changes have prompted groups and organizations to look at 
their missions and purposes across the globe. 
Companies and organizations continue to undergo 
significant changes in the 21st century. These changes are a result of corporate 
scandals, the need to work together in more culturally diverse work environ-
ments, the increased accountability needed in business and industry, and the 
fact that very few jobs these days can be accomplished at work without the help 
of others. 
	
The four theories we present in this section consider the influence that 
changing times have on groups and organizations. Each theory looks at the role 
of a group member or employee in various ways as well as the influence that 
individuals and their ­behaviors have on a particular organization. For instance, 
Groupthink views group members as capable of being so connected that they 
fail to question the group’s goals or tasks. Structuration Theory sees individuals 
and teams as being both constrained and encouraged by the structure of  
an organization. Organizational Culture Theory is aimed at understanding how 
people, processes, and products function in organizational life. Finally, how em-
ployees try to reduce ambiguity in their corporate life is the primary emphasis 
of Organizational Information Theory.
Chapter 14
Groupthink (Janis)  237
Chapter 15
Structuration Theory 
(Giddens, Poole, Seibold, & 
McPhee)  255
Chapter 16
Organizational Culture Theory 
(Geertz, Pacanowsky, & 
O’Donnell-Trujillo)  272
Chapter 17
Organizational Information 
Theory (Weick)  287

	
These theories view groups and organizational members as being both 
active and passive. Group and organizational life is precisely like that. At times 
we are ­consumed with getting the task accomplished and may be unaware of 
our eagerness to get things done. We actively work toward clarity and toward 
becoming part of a company. At other times, though, we may simply allow oth­
ers to engage. The ­theories in this section help us understand a number of 
interesting and valuable areas, including decision making, social influence, rules, 
corporate climate, and ­employee relationships. 
236
Groups, Teams, and Organizations

237
G R O U P T H I N K
As they sat in the sem­
inar room at Melton Pub­
lishing, the seven men 
and 
women 
privately 
wonde­red when they 
would discover their next superstar author. Last 
week the board heard the bad news: Their profits 
were down significantly, and they needed a best 
seller to counter some of the company’s financial 
loss. The company worked hard on establishing an 
e-book unit, but it has struggled against the mega-
presses. Elizabeth Hansen, the board’s director, 
suggested that the group review at least two books 
they thought could reverse the company’s losses. 
From early reviews of one of the books—Red 
Warnings, a science-fiction novel—Hansen be­
lieved that here was an opportunity to turn around 
the downward spiral and give the small press a 
promising future. She knew that employee and 
board morale was down and felt that something 
had to be done quickly.
	
As director for the past few years, Elizabeth 
knew that, in a way, her own credibility was 
on the line. She was chairing a board of liter­
ary people who, for the most part, had no life 
experience sitting on for-profit boards. And, 
she knew that the similarity among the mem­
bers would likely result in them agreeing to a 
quick and reasonable solution to the company’s 
financial circumstances. Although no clear so­
lution was obvious at this difficult time for the 
company, Elizabeth was sure something had to 
be done.
	
Instead of Skyping, the group gathered to­
gether to talk about finances. Elizabeth opened 
the discussion with an upbeat message: “We’ll 
beat this downward spiral,” she said. She re­
minded the group that the 14-year-old company 
had a history of surviving rough times. “This is 
just another bump in the road,” she reported.
	
The discussion soon turned to the book Red 
Warnings, which had been reviewed favorably 
in a national book magazine. Since the review’s 
publication, orders for the book had skyrocketed. 
­Elizabeth thought that the best way to generate 
more money for the small company, thereby re­
sulting in more publicity, was to market Red Warn­
ings aggressively: through the media, on college 
campuses, at science-fiction conventions across 
the country, and, hopefully, with a national book 
club selection. The book could bring in hundreds 
of thousands of dollars in profits, but Elizabeth 
knew that this would require tireless marketing. 
Melton Publishing is small, she thought, but not 
too small to promote a best seller. Social media 
will help, she believed to “spread the message.”
	
Randy Miles, another board member, dis­
agreed with Elizabeth’s plans. He thought that 
there was simply too much risk in concentrating 
so much time and money on one book. Randy’s 
way to improve the financial situation of the com­
pany could be summed up in one word: cutbacks. 
Groupthink
Based on the research of Irving Janis
Melton Publishing 
Board of 
Directors
Groups, like individuals, have shortcomings. Groups can bring out the 
worst as well as the best.
—Irving Janis
C H A P T E R 	14

238     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
P
articipating in groups is a fact of life. Whether people are at school, work, a 
volunteer agency, a spirituality meeting, or other venue, they frequently spend 
significant working hours in groups. As Cass Sunstein and Reid Hastie (2015) state, 
“since the beginning of human history, people have made decisions in groups” (p. 3).
 To understand the nature of decision making in small groups, Irving Janis, in his 
book Victims of Groupthink (1972), explains what takes place in groups where group 
members are highly agreeable with one another. The original work in Groupthink 
focused on ­foreign-policy decision making, although the theory has subsequently 
been ­applied to myriad other areas. Janis contends that when group members share 
a common fate, there is great pressure toward conformity. He labels this pressure 
Groupthink, a term cleverly patterned after vocabulary found in George Orwell’s 
1984 (e.g., doublethink). We should point out that the word Groupthink was coined 
in 1952 by business author and editor William Whyte in Fortune magazine. About 
two decades later, Janis provided the communication context of this term and group 
experience.
	
Groupthink is defined as a way of deliberating that group members use when 
their desire for unanimity overrides their motivation to assess all available plans of 
action. Janis contends group members frequently engage in a style of deliberating 
After looking over the company’s financial re­
cords of the past few years, he had discovered 
that far too many people had been hired, result­
ing in overspending on salary, benefits, and book 
production. He knew that cutting back was not 
a popular strategy but reasoned that this wasn’t 
the time for worrying about being popular.
	
Their meeting dragged on from an anticipated 
two hours to approaching five hours. Elizabeth 
and Randy continued to explain and defend their 
viewpoints. At times there was heated arguing; the 
two would frequently raise their voices to make 
their points. During their arguments, the remain­
ing board members would try to be agreeable. 
They knew they weren’t all that knowledgeable 
about how to turn a company around, and, for the 
most part, they sat silently while the two leaders 
squared off against each other.
	
Finally, as the afternoon sun began to set, 
Tina, a writer from the Boston area, said, “Look, 
we’ve all been very patient while the two of you 
­decide what’s best for this company. And maybe 
we’ve learned for the future that we need to get 
more financial expertise on this board. But, for 
now, I have to speak. We need to make a deci­
sion. A hard decision. Whether a decision can 
even be made today is iffy. I recommend that we 
postpone any more talk until our next meeting so 
that we can all think about our options.”
	
Randy interrupted, “Look, Tina, I appreciate your 
honesty, but this is not about whether we should 
build another bathroom! This is the ­company’s fu­
ture. I recommend that we hash this out now.”
	
Elizabeth agreed, as did the other board mem­
bers. It occurred to Tina that their “lunch meeting” 
was turning into a “working dinner.” As evening 
came, it was clear that Elizabeth and Randy were 
getting tired. “Listen, Randy, we’re running low on 
energy and time. I think we should just get the two 
motions out and have the board vote.” The other 
members agreed; it was obvious that they were 
all tired.
	
Randy reminded the group that they shouldn’t 
rush their decision, but Tina reminded him that 
he was the one who hadn’t wanted to postpone 
a ­decision. Although Randy tried to attack Tina’s 
tone, the other group members began clamoring 
for a vote. Each member openly expressed sup­
port for Elizabeth’s aggressive marketing plan. 
Because the group was small and he could sense 
the overwhelming support for Elizabeth, Randy 
decided to  give in. He left the meeting feeling 
that he had been silenced by the group at the end 
of their ­discussion.
groupthink
a way of group 
deliberation that 
minimizes conflict 
and emphasizes the 
need for unanimity

G R O U P T H I N K
	
Groupthink     239
in which consensus seeking (need for everyone to agree) outweighs good sense. 
You may have participated in groups where the desire to achieve a goal or task was 
more important than developing reasonable solutions to problems. Janis believes 
that when highly similar and agreeable groups fail to consider fully any dissenting 
opinions, when they suppress conflict just so they get along, or when the group mem­
bers do not consider all solutions, they are prone to groupthink. He argues that when 
groups are “in” groupthink, they immediately engage in a mentality to “preserve 
group harmony” (Janis, 1989, p. 60). To this end, making peace is more important 
than making clear and appropriate decisions.
	
Our example of the board of directors at Melton Publishing exemplifies the 
groupthink phenomenon. The board members are a group of people who apparently 
get along. The members are essentially connected by their literary backgrounds, 
making them more predisposed to groupthink. The group is under a deadline to come 
up with a thoughtful and financially prudent decision about the financial future of the 
company, especially during an era of e-book dominance. As the chapter unfolds, we 
will tell you more about how this group becomes susceptible to groupthink.
	
Before we identify the assumptions guiding the theory, we first need to point out 
that Janis looked at “decisions of historical decisions made by elite groups” (Fisher, 
2012, p. 70). In Janis’s earlier writings, his focus on foreign policy resulted in looking 
at “the inner circle” of those in charge, namely the U.S. President. Using principles 
from small group research, Janis (1982) ­explains why several foreign-policy decisions 
are flawed. 
	
In the development of Groupthink, Janis analyzed five matters of signifi­
cant national importance: (1) the preparedness policies of the U.S. Navy at Pearl 
Harbor in 1941, (2) the decision to pursue the North Korean Army onto its own 
territory by President Eisenhower, (3) the decision by President Kennedy to in­
vade Cuba at the Bay of Pigs shortly after Fidel Castro established a Communist 
government, (4) the decision to continue the Vietnam War by President Johnson, 
and (5) the Watergate cover-up by President Nixon. Janis argues that each of these 
policy decisions was made by both the president and his team of advisors and 
that, because each group was under some degree of stress, they made hasty and 
what amounted to inaccurate ­decisions. He interviewed a number of people who 
were part of these teams and concluded that each of these policy fiascoes occurred 
because of groupthink. It was discovered that in each of these cases, the presiden­
tial advisors did not thoroughly test information before making their decisions. 
Theory At a Glance  •  Groupthink
Highly cohesive groups frequently fail to consider alternatives to their course 
of action. When group members think similarly and do not entertain con­
trary views, they are also unlikely to share unpopular or dissimilar ideas with 
others. Groupthink suggests that these groups make premature decisions, 
some of which have lasting and tragic consequences.

240     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
In other words, there was mutual agreement to avoid critical conversations and 
conflict (Carlson, 2016). According to Janis, the group members failed to consider 
forewarnings, and their biases and desire for harmony overshadowed critical assess­
ments of their own decisions.
	
Usually, the decision-making process underscoring Groupthink is historical. 
Randy Hirokawa, Dennis Gouran, and Amy Martz (1988), for instance, came to the 
conclusion that faulty decision making characterized the disaster of the space shut­
tle Challenger. Furthermore, John Schwartz and Matthew Wald (2003) comment 
that Groupthink principles were at work when the Columbia, another shuttle, broke 
up. A “quick analysis” by aviation giant Boeing and their engineers showed that 
“smart people working collectively can be dumber than the sum of their brains” 
(p. 4). [We will address the application of Groupthink principles in more depth 
later in the chapter.] In sum, then, groupthink is often present because those in 
positions of authority or decision-making power surround themselves with those 
who are willing to “go along to get along.” Dan Sanker (2012) puts it this way: 
“[Groupthink] is a phenomenon that is responsible for otherwise intelligent and 
knowledgeable people making disastrous decisions” (p. 85). And, while most of 
the research related to groupthink has, indeed, focused on major policy-oriented 
decisions, you will later understand that the theory’s concepts have been applied to 
other types of decisions.
Assumptions of Groupthink
At its core, Groupthink is a theory associated with small group communication. 
In Chapter 2 we noted that small groups are a part of virtually every segment of 
U.S. society. Janis focuses his work on problem-solving groups and task-oriented 
groups, whose main purpose is to make decisions and give policy recommenda­
tions. Decision making is a necessary part of these small groups. Other activities of 
small groups include information sharing, socializing, relating to people and groups 
external to the group, educating new members, defining roles, and telling stories 
(Galanes & Adams, 2013; Rothwell, 2016). With that in mind, let’s ­examine three 
critical assumptions that guide the theory:
∙∙
Conditions in groups promote high cohesiveness.
∙∙
Group problem solving is primarily a unified process.
∙∙
Groups and group decision making are frequently complex.
	
The first assumption of Groupthink pertains to a characteristic of group life: 
cohesiveness. Conditions exist in groups that promote high cohesiveness. Ernest 
Bormann (1996) observes that group members frequently have a common sentiment 
or emotional investment, and, as a result, they tend to maintain a group identity. This 
collective thinking usually guarantees that a group will be agreeable and perhaps 
highly cohesive.
	
What is cohesiveness? You probably have heard of groups sticking ­together 
or having a high esprit de corps. This phrase essentially means that the group is 
cohesive. Cohesiveness is defined as the extent to which group members are will­
ing to work together. It is a group’s sense of togetherness. ­Cohesion arises from a 
problem-solving 
groups
sets of individuals 
whose main task is 
to make decisions 
and provide policy 
recommendations
task-oriented 
groups
sets of individuals 
whose main goal 
is to work toward 
completing jobs 
assigned to them
cohesiveness
a cultural value that 
places emphasis on 
the group over the 
individual

	
Assumptions of Groupthink     241
G R O U P T H I N K
group’s attitudes, values, and patterns of behavior; those members who are highly 
attracted to other members’ attitudes, values, and behaviors are more likely to be 
called cohesive.
	
Cohesion is the glue that keeps a group intact. You may have been a member of 
a cohesive group, although it can be difficult to measure cohesiveness. For instance, 
is a group cohesive if all members attend all meetings? If all members communicate 
at each meeting? If everyone seems amiable and supportive? If group members usu­
ally use the word we instead of the word I? All of these? You know if you have been 
in a cohesive group, but you may not be able to tell others precisely why the group is 
cohesive.
	
Our second assumption examines the process of problem solving in small 
groups: It is usually a unified undertaking. By this, we mean that people are not 
predisposed to disrupting decision making in small groups. Members essentially 
strive to get along. Dennis Gouran (1998) notes that groups are susceptible to 
affiliative constraints, which means that group members hold their input rather 
than risk rejection. According to Gouran, when group members do participate, fear­
ing rejection, they are likely “to attach greater importance to preservation of the 
group than to the issues under consideration” (p. 100). Group members, then, seem 
more inclined to follow the leader when decision-making time ­arrives. Taking these 
comments into consideration, the board of directors at Melton may simply be a 
group who recognizes the urgency ­associated with their financial dilemma. Listen­
ing to two board members, ­Elizabeth and Randy, therefore, is much easier than 
listening to seven. The two become leaders, and the group members allow them to 
set the agenda for ­discussion.
	
The third assumption underscores the nature of most problem-solving and 
task-oriented groups to which people belong: They are usually complex. In dis­
cussing this assumption, let’s first look at the complexity of small groups and 
then at the decisions emerging from these groups. First, small group ­members 
must continue to understand the many alternatives available to them and be able 
to distinguish among these alternatives. In addition, members must not only un­
derstand the task at hand but also the people who provide input into the task. 
This contention was supported many decades ago and continues today. For in­
stance, social psychologist Robert Zajonc (1965) studied what many people have 
figured out for themselves: The mere presence of others has an effect on us. He 
affiliative 
constraints
when members 
withhold their input 
rather than face 
rejection from the 
group
Student Voices
Alyssa
This theory is one of my favorites! I work in a non-profit company that deals 
with minority groups and I have to say that I see way too much consensus in our 
meetings. I think it’s because we all know that we’re volunteers and we don’t 
have a lot of time nor do we want to make our colleagues (our friends, really) 
mad. I think this pressure to “get along” is what makes Groupthink so much 
more probable.

242     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
offered a very simple principle regarding groups: When others are around us, 
we become innately aroused, which helps or hinders the ­performance of tasks. 
Nickolas Cottrell and his research team (Cottrell, Wack, Sekerak, & Rittle, 1968) 
later clarified the findings of Zajonc and argued that what leads people to task ac­
complishment is knowing that an individual will be evaluated by other individu­
als. Cottrell and his colleagues believe that group members may be apprehensive 
or anxious about the consequences that other group members bring to the group. 
In our opening, for instance, the board members are eager to listen to others with 
ideas because they do not offer ideas themselves. If any of the five nonspeakers 
were to openly challenge the ideas of either Elizabeth or Randy, they would be 
asked for their own ideas. Accordingly, they simply yield the floor to those who 
have a specific plan.
	
Marvin Shaw (1981) and the team of Isa Engleberg and Dianna Wynn (2013) 
discuss additional issues pertaining to groups. They note that a wide range of influ­
ences exist in a small group—age of group members, competitive nature of group 
members, size of the group, intelligence of group members, gender composition of 
the group, and leadership styles that emerge in the group. Further, the cultural back­
grounds of individual group members may influence group processes. For instance, 
because many cultures do not place a premium on overt and expressive communica­
tion, some group members may refrain from debate or dialogue, to the surprise of 
other group members. This may influence the perceptions of both participative and 
nonparticipative group members.
	
If group dynamics are both complex and challenging, why are people so fre­
quently assigned to group work? Clearly, the answer rests in the maxim “Two heads 
are better than one.” Katherine Adams and Gloria Galanes (2013) effectively argue 
this point by acknowledging that groups are better at problem solving than individu­
als alone because of their availability to more information. Further, the two scholars 
note that once a group or team participates in a decision, a higher level of com­
mitment toward the group exists. Groups and group decisions, therefore, may be 
difficult and challenging, but through group work, people are able to achieve their 
goals more expeditiously and efficiently.
	
The relationship of this assumption to Groupthink should not escape you. Two 
issues merit attention. First, groups whose members are similar to one ­another are 
groups that are more conducive to groupthink (Myers & Anderson, 2008). We term 
this group similarity homogeneity. So, as we mentioned earlier, the board of directors 
at Melton is homogeneous in its backgrounds—they are all part of literary inner circles. 
This similarity is one characteristic that can ­foster groupthink.
	
Second, group decisions that are not thoughtfully considered by every­
one may facilitate groupthink. Quality of effort and the quality of thinking are 
­essential in group decision making. For example, in our chapter-opening story, 
Elizabeth and Randy clearly offer opinions on what they think is the best course 
of action for the company. Their charisma, their ability to communicate their 
vision, and their willingness to openly share their ideas with the group may be 
intoxicating to a board that is under pressure to resolve a financial dilemma. 
It’s important to note that the two group leaders have clear ideas about how to 
proceed next, failing to identify alternative and additional ways of looking at 
the problem.
homogeneity
group similarity

	
What Comes Before: Antecedent Conditions of Groupthink     243
G R O U P T H I N K
What Comes Before: Antecedent Conditions of Groupthink
Janis believes that three conditions promote groupthink: (1) high cohesiveness of the 
decision-making group, (2) specific structural characteristics of the environment in 
which the group functions, and (3) stressful internal and external characteristics of 
the situation.
Group Cohesiveness
We have already discussed cohesiveness and its effects in relation to the three as­
sumptions that guide Groupthink. Cohesiveness is also an antecedent condition. You 
may be wondering how cohesiveness can lead to groupthink. One reason this may 
be perplexing is that cohesion differs from one group to ­another, and different levels 
of cohesion produce different results. In some groups, cohesion can lead to positive 
feelings about the group experience and the other group members. Highly cohe­
sive groups also may be more enthusiastic about their tasks and feel empowered to 
take on additional tasks. In sum, greater satisfaction is associated with increasing 
cohesiveness.
	
Despite the apparent advantages, highly cohesive groups may also bring about 
a troubling occurrence: groupthink. Janis (1982) argues that highly ­cohesive groups 
exert great pressure on their members to conform to group standards. Janis believes 
that as groups reach high degrees of cohesiveness, this euphoria tends to stifle other 
opinions and alternatives. Group members may be unwilling to express any reserva­
tions about solutions. And members even censor their own comments without being 
provoked. High-risk decisions, therefore, may be made without thinking about con­
sequences. The risks ­involved in decisions pertaining to war, for instance, are high. 
A decision to ­increase military troop presence in another country entail high risks for 
the ­soldiers, for the refugees who may flee the country, and for those who remain. 
However, the risks associated with the decision pertaining to where a homecoming 
committee should hold its meetings are minimal in comparison to the bombing deci­
sion. You can see that risk varies across settings, and assessing risk is critical to the 
groupthink phenomenon.
	
Although people may feel confident that they will recognize groupthink when 
they see it, often they don’t. Too much cohesion may be seen as a virtue, not a 
shortcoming. Imagine sitting around a conference table where everyone is smiling, 
affirming one another, and wanting to wrap things up (consider our opening story of 
Melton Publishing). Would you be willing to stop the head nodding and slaps on the 
back and ask, “But is this the best way to approach this?” To paraphrase the words 
from a famous fairy tale, who wants to tell the emperor that he has no clothes? 
Cohesiveness, therefore, frequently leads to conformity, and conformity is a primary 
route to groupthink.
	
Before moving on, let’s make sure we’re clear. We are not suggesting that co­
hesion automatically leads to groupthink. To be sure, cohesiveness is a necessary 
ingredient if groups or teams are to arrive at thoughtful, inclusive, and informed 
decisions. Still, when the effectiveness or consequences of a group’s decision 
remains secondary to a group’s cohesion, Janis contends that the group is prone 
to groupthink.

244     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
Structural Factors
Janis notes that specific structural characteristics, or faults, promote groupthink. They 
include (1) insulation of the group, (2) lack of impartial leadership, (3) lack of clear 
procedures for decisions, and (4) homogeneity of group members’ backgrounds. 
Group insulation refers to a group’s ability to be unaffected by the outside world 
and its happenings. Further, it is very easy for insulation to occur if group members 
do not solicit the opinions or views of those external to the group. In fact, they may 
be discussing issues that have relevance in the outside world, and yet the members 
are insulated from its influence. People outside the group who could help with the 
decision may even be present in the organization but not asked to participate. 
	
A lack of impartial leadership means that group members are led by people 
who have a personal interest in the outcome. An example of this point can be found 
in Janis’s appraisal of President Kennedy’s Bay of Pigs episode. When the president 
presided over the meetings on the Cuban invasion, Janis observes the following:
[At] each meeting, instead of opening up the agenda to permit a full ­airing of 
the opposing considerations, he allowed the CIA representatives to dominate 
the entire discussion. The president permitted them to refute immediately each 
tentative doubt that one of the others might express, instead of asking whether 
anyone else had the same doubt or wanted to pursue the implications of the 
new worrisome issue that had been raised. (1982, p. 42)
The deference of group members to their leader can be observed in the words of 
Arthur Schlesinger Jr., a member of Kennedy’s policy group: “I can only ­explain my 
failure to do more than raise a few timid questions by reporting that one’s impulse 
to blow the whistle on this nonsense was simply undone by the circumstances of the 
discussion” (cited in Janis, 1982, p. 39). It is apparent that Kennedy considered other 
opinions to be detrimental to his plan, and ­alternative leadership was suppressed. We 
could probably sum up this perception with one word: hubris.
	
A final structural fault that can lead to groupthink is a lack of decision-making 
procedures and similarity of group members. First, some groups have few, if any, 
procedures for decision making; failing to have previously established norms for 
evaluation of problems can foster groupthink. Dennis Gouran and Randy Hirokawa 
(1996) suggest that even if groups recognize that a problem exists, they still must 
figure out the cause and extent of the problem. Groups, therefore, may be influenced 
by dominant voices and go along with those who choose to speak up. Other groups 
may simply follow what they have observed and experienced in previous groups. In 
fact, when independent analyses of the Columbia space shuttle disaster were under­
taken after the craft’s breakup, John Schwartz (2005) reports that NASA management 
was ­influential in decisions to launch on the fateful day in 2003. Schwartz quotes a 
former shuttle commander at the Johnson Space Center in Houston: “Managers ‘ask 
for dissenting opinion because they know they are supposed to ask for them,’ but the 
managers ‘are either defending their own position or arguing against the dissenting 
opinion’ without seriously trying to understand it” (p. A17). In other words, group 
members may try to challenge management, but their words are either muted or 
dismissed. Perhaps one significant change in this area comes from NASA itself. In 
particular, in 2015, NASA asserted that managers should be participants in “open 
communication” [which] “should be the standard that is embraced by the highest 
group insulation
a group’s ability to 
remain unaffected 
by outside 
influences
lack of impartial 
leadership
groups led by 
individuals who 
put their personal 
agendas first
lack of decision-
making procedures
failure to provide 
norms for solving 
group issues

	
Symptoms of Groupthink     245
G R O U P T H I N K
management to the line supervisor” (http://ntrs.nasa.gov/archive/nasa/casi.ntrs.nasa
.gov/20150016571.pdf).
	
A second structural fault is the homogeneity of members’ backgrounds. Janis 
(1982) notes that “lack of disparity in social background and ideology among the mem­
bers of a cohesive group makes it easier for them to concur on whatever proposals are 
put forth by the leader” (p. 250). We alluded to this fault earlier in the chapter. Without 
diversity of background and experience, it may be difficult to debate critical issues.
Group Stress
The final antecedent condition of groupthink pertains to the stress on the group—that 
is, stress on the group may evoke groupthink. Stress occurs when group members 
are influenced by issues, resources, or events both within and external to the group. 
When stress is high, group members may not see any reasonable solution and there­
fore, rally around their leader. When decision makers are under great stress imposed 
by forces outside the group, faulty decision making happens. Stress, as explained in 
this theory, is a comprehensive concept in that it includes both internal and external 
stress. For instance, in a work environment, if there are deadlines of an assignment 
and you’re unable to meet those deadlines, there is internal stress in that your super­
visor established a time frame and you were unable to accommodate. However, there 
might also be external stress in that the reason you were unable to meet the deadline 
is because you have other obligations that you saw as more important (e.g., attending 
to a sick parent, etc.).
	
As you can see, groups frequently insulate themselves from outside criticism, form 
what ostensibly are close bonds, seek consensus, and ultimately develop groupthink. 
To get a clearer picture of what Groupthink looks like, Janis (1982) identifies eight 
symptoms that can be assigned to three categories. We turn to these symptoms next.
Symptoms of Groupthink
Preexisting conditions lead groups to concurrence seeking. Concurrence seeking oc­
curs when groups try to reach consensus in their final decision. Consider the inter­
pretation of consensus seeking from Andrea Hollingshead and her ­colleagues (2005): 
“Groupthink teams place such a high priority on supporting each other emotionally 
internal and 
external stress
pressure exerted 
on the group by 
issues and events 
both inside and 
outside of the group
concurrence 
seeking
efforts to search 
out group 
consensus
Student Voices
MaryJane
During my internship I worked at a major newspaper in Washington, D.C. The 
paper had a political bias for sure and I saw it play out all the time. I’d be sitting 
in on meetings where no one would disagree with the editorial page editor and a 
lot of the time, I saw people around the table “silence” anyone who would. Janis 
could do an entire case study by examining this company!

246     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
that they choose not to challenge one another” (p. 30). When concurrence seeking 
goes too far, Janis contends, it produces symptoms of groupthink. Janis (1982) ob­
serves three categories of symptoms of Groupthink: overestimation of the group, 
closed-mindedness, and pressures toward uniformity. 
	
To illustrate these symptoms and to give a sense of how Janis conceptu­
alized Groupthink, we examine a policy decision that because of the ongo­
ing post-­traumatic stress that military veterans frequently experience, continues 
to resonate today: the Vietnam War. During the height of the war, polls showed that 
most people felt that the objectives for going to ­Vietnam were ambiguous and ill-
founded. War protestors were prominent in the 1960s and early 1970s, arguing that 
the country had no clear reason (i.e., ­policy) for entering the war. The controversy 
associated with Vietnam parallels the controversies that surrounded U.S. involvement 
in Iraq and Afghanistan. 
	
We present Janis’s (1982) interpretation of what took place when President 
Lyndon Johnson’s foreign-policy advisors examined decisions about bombing North 
Vietnam. Janis’s comments are based on extensive discussions with ­individuals who 
were presidential advisors, and many of their comments are contained in the follow­
ing analysis. 
Overestimation of the Group
An overestimation of the group includes those behaviors that suggest the group 
believes it is more than it is. Two specific symptoms exist in this category (Katopol, 
2016): ­illusion of invulnerability and a belief in the inherent morality of the 
group.	
Illusion of Invulnerability    The illusion of invulnerability can be defined as a 
group’s belief that they are special enough to overcome any obstacles or ­setbacks. 
The group believes it is invincible. With respect to the Vietnam War, Janis explains 
that President Johnson’s foreign-policy group wanted to avoid peace negotiations 
because they did not want to be viewed as having little bargaining power. The group, 
overestimation 
of the group
erroneous belief 
that the group is 
more than it is
illusion of 
invulnerability
belief that the group 
is special enough to 
overcome obstacles
Theory-Into-Practice
Groupthink
Theoretical Claim: The groupthink symptom, illusion of unanimity, is frequently uncon­
sciously undertaken by those who are shy, inexperienced, or reticent to speak up.
Practical Implication: As the majority of the school board determined that 
eliminating the theater program was necessary because of state budget cuts 
to education, Melanie sat quietly, listening to everyone speak about the need to 
save money/reduce costs. When a straw vote was conducted, she agreed to the 
program cut because she was just recently elected to the board and had little 
understanding of how the budget process worked.
T*I*P

	
Symptoms of Groupthink     247
G R O U P T H I N K
therefore, was willing to take a risk and believed that selecting bombing targets in 
North Vietnam was a wise course of action. The group members based their decision 
to bomb on four issues: the military advantage, the risk to American aircraft, the 
potential to widen the conflict to other countries, and civilian casualties. Janis asks 
whether the group members shared the illusion that they were invulnerable when 
they confined their ­attacks to bombing targets.
Belief in the Inherent Morality of the Group    When group members have a ­belief 
in the inherent morality of the group, they are said to adopt the position that “we 
are a good and wise group” (Janis, 1982, p. 256). Because the group perceives itself 
to be good, they believe that their decision making must, therefore, be good. By em­
bracing this belief, group members purge themselves of any shame or guilt, although 
they ignore any ethical or moral implications of their decision. Janis found it inter­
esting that Johnson and his advisors were not concerned with bombing villages in 
North Vietnam; for them, the moral consequences did not outweigh the perception 
that the United States might be weak or fearful. In fact, the foreign-policy council 
continued to encourage bombing of Hanoi (North Vietnam) even though peace ini­
tiatives were concurrently under way in Poland. A sense of moral certitude prevailed 
because the president and his advisors believed that North Vietnam would not 
­negotiate a surrender. 
Closed-Mindedness
When a group is closed-minded, it ignores outside influences on the group. The two 
symptoms discussed by Janis in this category are stereotypes of out-groups and col­
lective rationalization. 
Out-Group Stereotypes    Groups in crisis frequently engage in out-group 
stereotypes, which are stereotyped perceptions of rivals or enemies. These stereotypes 
underscore the fact that any adversaries are either too weak or too stupid to counter 
offensive tactics. For Johnson’s advisors, enemy meant Communist. It was this ste­
reotype that kept the advisors from seeing the enemy as people. Janis (1982) reasons 
that because the North Vietnamese were ­considered to be ­Communist enemies, this 
embodiment of evil justified the ­“destruction of countless human lives and the burning 
of villages” (p. 111).
Collective Rationalization    The fourth symptom of Groupthink, collective 
­rationalization, refers to the situation in which group members ignore warnings that 
might prompt them to reconsider their thoughts and actions before they reach a final 
decision. In most circumstances, this symptom can also be ­interpreted to be a ratio­
nalization of “bad news.” President Johnson and his staff were given a number of 
forewarnings—from intelligence agencies, among others—about the implications of 
bombing North Vietnam. Some in the intelligence community believed that bombing 
sites such as oil facilities would do nothing to erode Communist operations. None­
theless, Johnson’s group maintained its unified position on escalating the bombing. 
Janis (1982) observed that the men in Johnson’s inner circle were very convinced of 
belief in the 
inherent morality 
of the group
assumption that 
the group members 
are thoughtful and 
good; therefore, the 
decisions they make 
will be good
closed-mindedness
a group’s 
willingness to 
ignore differences 
in people and 
warnings about 
poor group 
decisions
out-group 
stereotypes
stereotyped 
perceptions of 
group enemies 
or competitors
collective 
rationalization
situation in which 
group members 
ignore warnings 
about their 
decisions

248     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
the importance of the Vietnam War to the United States. Therefore, revisiting any 
strategies to exit the war was out of the question.
Pressures Toward Uniformity
The pressure toward uniformity can be enormous for some groups. Janis believed 
that some groups who go along to get along may be setting themselves up for group­
think. The four symptoms in this category are self-censorship, an illusion of unanim­
ity, the presence of self-appointed mindguards, and direct pressure on dissenters.
Self-Censorship    Earlier we discussed self-censorship. Self-censorship refers to 
group members’ tendency to minimize their doubts and counterarguments. They 
begin to second-guess their own ideas. For those in President Johnson’s foreign-
policy group, self-censorship was exhibited when group members dehu­manized the 
war experience. These advisors would not allow themselves to think of the innocent 
people being killed because such thinking would only personalize the war. Janis 
argues that silencing one’s own opposing views and using in-group rhetoric further 
bolster the decisions of the group.
Illusion of Unanimity    The sixth symptom of Groupthink is an illusion of 
­unanimity, which suggests that silence is consent. Although some advisors in 
Johnson’s inner circle felt differently about the Vietnam intervention, they were 
silent. This silence prompted others around the table to believe that there was con­
sensus in planning and execution.
Self-Appointed Mindguards    Groups in crisis may include self-appointed 
mindguards—group members who shield the group from adverse information. 
Mindguards believe that they act in the group’s best interest. Walt Rostow, White 
House assistant, effectively played the role of mindguard in Johnson’s group. Janis 
relates the following: “Rostow cleverly screened the inflow of ­information and 
used his power to keep dissident experts away from the White House. This had the 
intended effect of preventing the President and some of his advisers from becoming 
fully aware of the extent of disaffection with the war and the grounds for it” (1982, 
p. 119). Ironically, within the group, keeping the peace at the White House was more 
important than maintaining it in ­Vietnam.
Pressures on Dissenters    The final symptom involves pressuring any group mem­
ber who expresses opinions, viewpoints, or commitments that are contrary to the 
majority opinion. Janis calls this pressures on dissenters. In his ­interviews with 
those within President Johnson’s inner circle, Janis discovered that the group mem­
bers formed a gentlemen’s club, where mutual respect and congenial talk pervaded. 
Janis also later realized that these men often turned to one another for support, and 
they were loyal to one another. Is it any wonder, then, that group members believed 
that everyone agreed to the course of ­action? This attitude would prevail, of course, 
considering that those who openly disagreed frequently resigned or were replaced 
(Janis, 1982). Robert ­McNamara, Secretary of Defense under President Johnson, 
was a dissenter who believed that bombing North Vietnam was the wrong way to get 
pressure toward 
uniformity
occurs when group 
members go along 
to get along
self-censorship
group members 
minimize personal 
doubts and counter­
arguments
illusion of unanimity
belief that silence 
equals agreement
pressures on 
dissenters
direct influence on 
group members 
who provide 
thoughts contrary 
to the group’s
self-appointed 
mindguards
individuals who 
protect the group 
from adverse 
information

	
Think Before You Act: Ways to Prevent Groupthink     249
G R O U P T H I N K
the enemy to the negotiation table. However, he was under much pressure to avoid 
disagreeing with members of the gentlemen’s club.
(Group) Think About It: It’s All Around U.S.
Thomas Jefferson once said that “difference of opinion leads to inquiry, and ­inquiry 
to truth.” His words are still relevant, especially in foreign policy. Yet, considering 
that Janis studied national-policy decisions, his research may leave you with the im­
pression that groupthink cannot “hit home.” As we’ve tried to illustrate in this chap­
ter, however, groupthink is everywhere. In addition to the large-scale decisions we 
identified earlier, Groupthink decision making has been evidenced in a number of 
domestic and global examples, including Watergate (1972), the Columbia (2003) 
and Challenger (1986) tragedies, the Gulf War (1991), Hurricane Katrina (2005), 
the cover-up of child sexual abuse at Penn State University (2012), and ISIS (2015).
	
On a smaller scale, and as we alluded to previously, groupthink occurs all around 
us in “less-critical” small groups. Decisions such as whether you will attend college, 
for instance, may have been prone to groupthink. If your parents went to college, your 
grandparents were college graduates, and you read literature stating that a college 
graduate will make twice as much money in a lifetime as a high school graduate, your 
decision to attend college may have been made without completely examining any 
alternatives (e.g., school-loan debt, academic preparedness, etc.). Presumably, your 
group (family) is a cohesive group. Your family rationalized your attendance, and 
most likely, you ­didn’t raise any objections. In other words, your small group was 
susceptible to groupthink.
	
This is but one example of the many episodes of groupthink in our daily lives. 
We may find conditions for groupthink with staff behind the deli counter at the gro­
cery store; on a construction site with architects, contractors, and skilled ­laborers; or 
even at an investment club meeting where a group of people make ­decisions about 
what stocks to invest in during difficult economic times.
Think Before You Act: Ways to Prevent Groupthink
It bears repeating: Our discussion of Groupthink and the issues that accompany 
this theory may have given you the impression that all cohesive groups will be 
prone to groupthink. This is not true. Janis (1982) notes that cohesiveness is a 
necessary but not sufficient condition of Groupthink. Nonetheless, frequently, 
when groups find themselves in highly cohesive situations and when decision 
makers are under great stress, Groupthink may materialize. 
	
How can group members learn to avoid groupthink, or at least work ­toward more 
healthy interactions? Janis (1989; Herek, Janis, & Huth, 1987) suggests that groups 
engage in vigilant decision making, which involves (1) looking at the range of objec­
tives group members wish to achieve, (2) developing and ­reviewing action plans and 
alternatives, (3) exploring the consequences of each alternative, (4) analyzing previ­
ously rejected action plans when new information emerges, and (5) having a contin­
gency plan for failed suggestions. Janis ­offers additional recommendations, but critics 

250     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
such as Paul ‘t Hart (1998) ­question whether Janis’s recommendations inadvertently 
erode collegiality and foster group factionalism.
	
To avoid oversimplifying the groupthink problem, ‘t Hart (1990) has pro­
posed four general recommendations for groups who may be prone to Groupthink: 
(1) Require oversight and control, (2) embrace whistle-blowing in the group, (3) allow 
for objection, and (4) balance consensus and majority rule. We will look at each rec­
ommendation (Table 14.1).
	
First, ‘t Hart believes that one way to enhance group decision making is 
to impose some external oversight and control. He argues that groups need to 
hold key decision makers accountable for their actions; this should be done ­before 
groups begin their deliberations about issues. Accountability may take the form of 
a committee that serves to enforce control (vis à vis rules, governance procedures, 
decorum, etc.). ‘t Hart theorizes that such committees prompt group members 
to challenge collective rationalizations and inaccurate perceptions. Reflecting on 
our example of President Johnson and his foreign-policy group, ‘t Hart proposes 
that the inner circle of advisors was insulated from external oversight. As well, 
there were inadequate intragroup measures to improve the group’s decisions on 
North Vietnam.
	
In addition to accountability, ‘t Hart proposes that whistle-blowing be 
­embraced in a group’s culture. That is, group members “should be encouraged to 
voice concerns rather than to voluntarily suppress them, to question assumptions 
rather than to accept them at face value, and to continue to disagree and debate 
Table 14.1  Preventing Groupthink
RECOMMENDATION	
ACTION
Require Oversight and Control	
Establish a parliamentary committee: 
Develop resources to proactively monitor 
ongoing policy ventures; ­establish incentives 
to intervene; link personal fate to fate of 
group members.
Embrace Whistle-Blowing	
Voice doubts: Avoid suppressing concerns 
about group processes; continue to dis­
agree and debate when no satisfactory 
answers are given; question assumptions.
Allow for Objection	
Protect conscientious objectors: Provide 
for group ­members’ exits; do not play down 
the moral implications of a course of action; 
acknowledge private concerns about ethical 
issues in the group.
Balance Consensus and Majority Rule	
Alter rules governing choice: Relieve 
pressure on groups in minority positions; 
dissuade the development of subgroups; 
introduce a multiple advocacy approach to 
decisions.
Source: Adapted from ‘t Hart, 1990.
whistle-blowing
process in which 
individuals report 
unethical or illegal 
behaviors or 
practices to others

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     251
G R O U P T H I N K
when no satisfactory answers to their concerns are given by the rest of the group” 
(p. 385). Anna Mulrine (2008) writes that the 2003 Iraq invasion brought about 
great chaos in the planning and execution of decision making by the Army. To 
that end, the Army has developed a “cadre of devil’s advocates” (p. 30) who 
are charged with “questioning prevailing assumptions to avoid getting sucked 
into that Groupthink” (p. 30) which can happen in stressful times. Ultimately, 
the Military Whistleblower Protection Act was amended to expand the rights 
of whistle-blowers protecting disclosures in legal cases and closing loopholes. 
President Obama eventually signed this overhaul of the Act and it became 
law in 2013 (http://www.in.ng.mil/Portals/0/PageContents/SoldierResources/IG
/WHISTLEBLOWER_PROTECTION_ACT.pdf). Embracing whistle-blowing in 
this way results in looking at a decision from alternate points of view. Further, 
scholars such as ‘t Hart and Wim Vandekerckhove (2012) advocate that groups 
protect these sorts of whistle-blowers because groups usually need dissenting 
voices when decisions have lasting and significant consequences.
	
A third suggestion by ‘t Hart is that groups allow conscientious objectors, 
or group members who refuse to participate in the decision-making process 
because it would violate their conscience. He reasons that groupthink causes 
groups to downplay the moral implications of their decisions, and if conscien­
tious objectors know that they can exit a conversation based on moral or ethical 
grounds, then they may be more likely to speak up. Thus, these objectors may be 
able to raise doubts about the decision or even to protest it. President Johnson’s 
decision to continue bombing Vietnam, therefore, may have been different if 
conscientious objectors had been allowed to introduce the moral implications of 
killing innocent people.
	
Finally, ‘t Hart advocates that groups not require consensus but work in­
stead toward a majority of support. Because consensus demands that every group 
member agree on a decision, group members often feel pressured to consent 
(illusion of unanimity). ‘t Hart believes that groups should strive toward consen­
sus but be prepared for majority support. If groups adopt this orientation, ‘t Hart 
believes, they will function more like teams. Janis (1982) discusses the fact that 
several members of President Johnson’s inner circle of advisors (McNamara, 
Rusk, Bundy) wanted to temporarily halt the Hanoi bombings; we can only 
speculate how the passion for consensus affected both the United States and the 
Vietnamese people.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Groupthink is a theory dedicated to understanding the decision-making process in 
small groups. The theory has been tested and expanded using experimental methods, 
making it aligned with a quantitative approach. Janis believes that groups frequently 
make decisions with profound consequences, and although he focused his efforts on 
foreign-policy groups, as we learned previously, the application of Groupthink ter­
minology resonates in many other decision-making groups. Among the criteria for 
evaluating a theory, four are especially relevant for discussion: scope, testability, 
heurism, and test of time.
conscientious 
objectors 
group members 
who refuse 
to participate 
because it would 
violate personal 
conscience

252     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
Scope
Despite the fact that many Groupthink principles can be applied to several types 
of groups, Janis was clear in his original conceptualization in applying Groupthink 
solely to decision-making groups in crisis periods; he does not readily apply his 
thinking to every group type. Although the theory has been applied to groups as 
diverse as presidential advisors and ice hockey teams, the focus has been in those 
groups that are decision-making groups. Therefore, the scope of the theory could be 
defined as narrow.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Student Voices
Andre
I know it’s not a foreign-policy group, but my small group in my business class 
had all the elements of Groupthink. We knew we only had a month to put to­
gether a PowerPoint presentation, and we were all working and taking classes 
at the same time. At times, when we had our meetings, it was like everyone 
agreed just to move to the next point. We were under pressure and didn’t re­
ally understand the information we were researching, but we refused to slow 
down. We had the illusion of unanimity that Janis talked about. I know the world 
didn’t stop when we gave our presentation, but I did know that the C we got as a 
grade made me think we rushed things through too much and didn’t think about 
the consequences.
Testability
Group scholars have pointed to some validity problems with the theory, calling into 
question its testability. For instance, Jeanne Longley and Dean Pruitt (1980) criticize 

G R O U P T H I N K
	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     253
the validity of the theory. They argue that half of the symptoms of Groupthink are 
not associated with concurrence seeking—a key feature of the theory. They charge 
that “a theory should be a logical progression of ideas, not a grab-bag of phenom­
ena that were correlated with each other in a sample of six cases” (p. 80). Further, 
James Rose (2011), in an exhaustive literature ­review on Groupthink, found that 
with respect to testing the entire “model” of Groupthink, problems abound. Because 
many of Janis’s variables are not well-defined, the theory is prone to lapses in validity 
and reliability. 
Heurism
The theory of Groupthink is a heuristic undertaking; The theory and many of its ele­
ments have been employed in a number of studies and have enjoyed the ­attention of 
many communication and social psychology scholars. In addition to foreign-policy 
decisions, writers have studied Groupthink and applied its concepts and tenets to 
the economic and social crises in Europe (Mitchell, 2015), student killings at Kent 
State (Hensley & Lewis, 2010), the sexual abuse cover-up at Penn State Univer­
sity (Cohen & DeBenedet, 2012), Hurricane Katrina (Garnett & Kouzmin, 2009), 
“cohesive teamwork” interventions in health care (Kaba, Wishart, Fraser, Coderre, & 
McLaughlin, 2016), and even to the Major League Umpires Association strike 
(Koerber & Neck, 2003). The theory has also ­generated a number of assumptions about 
group behavior, and Groupthink ­remains an important part of the literature on group 
decision making. 
Test of Time
The theory of Groupthink has withstood the test of time. Scholars continue to inves­
tigate many of features of the theory and the theory has gained both academic and 
popular attention (http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2012/01/30/groupthink). 
On the 30th anniversary of Groupthink, Schwartz and Wald (2003) called Janis a “pi­
oneer in the study of social dynamics” (p. 4).Finally, given that government-policy 
decisions will ­always exist and given that many governmental leaders surround 
themselves with individuals who are typically conflict-avoidant, future instances of 
Groupthink remain rather high.
Closing
Groupthink may be more intuitively appealing than empirically driven. The theory, 
however, continues to receive attention in research as well as in the popular press. 
In fact, Janis’s thinking on Groupthink has been quite influential in several fields of 
study, including communication, cognitive and social psychology, anthropology, 
and political science. Few would debate the failure of the foreign-policy fiascoes 
outlined by Janis: massive violence and casualties, loss of confidence in govern­
mental decisions, and policymaking gone wrong. For these reasons alone, Janis is 
credited with helping us identify and examine one type of group decision-making 
problem.

254     Chapter 14  •  Groupthink
G R O U P T H I N K
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Online critics have noted that “social media has a Group­
think problem in that dissenting opinions are silenced.” Do you agree or 
disagree with this claim? Provide some examples to support your views.
	
1.  What advice would you give the Melton Publishing board of directors be­
fore they meet to discuss their financial situation? Frame your advice with Group­
think concepts in mind.
	
2.  Janis and ‘t Hart have proposed a number of ways to prevent Groupthink. 
Provide at least two additional ways to avoid Groupthink.
	
3.  Have you ever been in a small group with too much cohesiveness? If so, did 
Groupthink develop? If so, how did you know? If not, what prevented Groupthink 
from occurring?
	
4.  In his book, Groupthink, Janis asks if a little knowledge of Groupthink is a 
dangerous thing. Why do you think Janis asks this question, and what are the con­
sequences of knowing about Groupthink? Incorporate ­examples into your response.
	
5.  How widespread is Groupthink? Do you believe society is aware of the 
problem? 
	
6.  Apply principles of Groupthink to recent domestic and foreign-policy deci­
sions made by the United States.
	
7.  Discuss the delicate balance between sufficient group cohesion and 
­exceedingly high amounts of group cohesion. Illustrate your response with exam­
ples from your own group experiences.

255
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Bayside 
City 
Tire 
Company (BCT) is a 
multinational company 
with many employees. 
One of the ­employees, 
Tim Nash, is a new production ­division manager. 
Jeremy has been a production floor supervisor 
for 25 years. He has been assigned the task of 
showing Tim, his new boss, around for a ­couple 
of weeks.
	
On the first day, Jeremy takes Tim around 
the production floor to introduce him to the work­
ers on his division. When approached, all of the 
workers call Tim by his last name: “Good morning, 
Mr. Nash.” “It’s great having you onboard,” Tim 
responds to the workers by saying, “Mr. Nash is 
my father. Please, call me Tim.”
	
As Tim and Jeremy walk away, Tim asks, 
“Why is everyone so formal?”
	
Jeremy responds, “That’s company policy. 
We believe that addressing one another in this 
way ­establishes a sense of respect for our super­
visors at Bayside City Tire.”
	
Tim is having none of that: “This is my divi­
sion, and I would really prefer if we do things my 
way.”
	
Jeremy pauses, “Well, sure, this is your 
division, but this is the way they have been 
taught to communicate with one another. After 
all, think of how confused they will be if they 
are allowed to address you by your first name, 
and other managers expect to be addressed as 
‘Mr.’ or ‘Ms.’”
	
“Hmm. I’m not liking this, but I guess I don’t 
want to disrupt what’s already established here. 
Ok, let’s go with it. I guess I’ll have to get used 
to the workers calling me “MISTER Nash” until 
I can get this straightened out. Besides, I don’t 
want them to think that I am going against com­
pany rules or that I want to change things,” Tim 
answers reluctantly.
	
Later that day, Tim talks to Angela Griffith, 
the human relations coordinator for BCT, about 
changing the policy to allow employees and staff 
to address one another less formally. Angela lis­
tens to Tim’s ideas and tries to tell him that in the 
grand scheme of the BCT, the issue is not that 
critical. Tim disagrees, arguing that interpersonal 
relationships are crucial to productivity. After 
some discussion, Angela agrees to call a meeting 
of the production ­division managers to discuss the 
potential change.	
	
At the meeting, the six production divi­
sion managers all voice their opinions about the 
change in policy. Janette, a 15-year veteran with 
BCT, points out, “Personally, I like having the work­
ers address me more formally. It’s tough enough 
being a woman of color in this type of work en­
vironment, and I think this encourages respect in 
the workplace.”
Structuration Theory
Based on the research of Anthony Giddens, M. Scott Poole, 
David R. Seibold, and Robert D. McPhee
Tim Nash and 
Bayside City 
Tire Company
Democracy hence implies not just the right to free and equal self-
development, but also the constitutional limitation of power.
—Anthony Giddens
C H A P T E R	15

256     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
J
ust as a contractor uses a blueprint as a guide in building a structure, members 
of an organization use rules to state expectations of behavior and communication 
within the organization. As we learned in Chapter 8 (Uncertainty Reduction Theory), 
many people are uncomfortable with uncertainty.
Consider the need for structure in your own life. Usually, students want to 
know the structure or rules so they will understand what is expected of them in 
class. If a professor were simply to announce, “This term we’ll have a couple of 
tests, a few quizzes, and you’ll need to do a project,” students would likely be 
uncomfortable with such limited information. They would want more specific in­
structions, or rules, regarding page-length requirements of any papers, due dates, 
expectations for exams, and so on. Thus, the school and the instructor provide 
students with a course syllabus, a blueprint of the rules for the class, in which the 
structure is created and maintained. However, we can also change the structure of 
an institution by adapting rules or creating new ones. Feedback from student evalu­
ations, for instance, may guide a professor to alter the ­syllabus or the exam criteria 
in the future.
Sociologist Anthony Giddens believes that social institutions are produced, 
reproduced, and transformed through the use of rules. David Seibold and Karen 
Kroman Myers (2006) contend that social institutions are “organized around 
members’ interactional processes and practices: disseminating information, al­
locating resources, accomplishing tasks, making choices, managing disagree­
ments, and the like” (p. 143). The structure of these institutions is the focus of 
Structuration Theory.
Recall from our discussion in Chapter 3 that rules indicate and prescribe how 
things are to be done; they suggest a course of action in a setting. In Structuration 
Theory, rules in a social institution go beyond telling employees what they can and 
cannot do. In interactions among people, the rules guiding these conversations allow 
	
Darnell, who joined BCT only three years 
ago after graduating with his MBA, counters 
by stating that he thinks the workers don’t feel 
comfortable coming to him to discuss problems 
because of the formality and rules that are in 
place at BCT. “I think Tim’s onto something 
here,” ­Darnell says. “We might be able to estab­
lish a friendlier work environment if we were 
less formal in how we ­address one another. Be­
sides, what’s wrong with telling our colleagues 
that we’re not above you?”
	
Wayne, who is a third-generation employee 
of BCT, argues, “You don’t mess around with tra­
dition. This is the way it’s always been, and it’s 
worked just fine for the past 30 years.”
	
Angela listens to all their opinions, but 
the man­agers are split 50–50 on the policy 
change issue. She says, “Please, let’s try to 
arrive at some sort of closure on this. Let’s 
take a vote and see what you all think we 
should do.” After voting numerous times, it 
is obvious that the issue will not be ­resolved. 
“Okay,” says Angela, “I guess we’ll keep the 
rule in place as it is for right now since you 
can’t agree on this.” As she thought about 
this issue more, Angela couldn’t believe that 
something as simple as calling someone by a 
first name could elicit this much energy. Yet, 
she also knew that these sorts of rules, while 
seemingly unimportant, can affect the morale 
and productivity, and therefore, needed to be 
clarified for everyone.

S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Structuration Theory 
     ﻿    
257
employees to maintain or alter an organization. An instance in which this would apply 
would involve a company’s talking about poor customer service to make changes in 
the customer service policy. The rules ­governing these conversations might pertain, 
for instance, to hierarchy (e.g., the extent to which an employee can share a candid 
opinion with superiors). We ­return to a more detailed examination of rules later in 
the chapter.
In the chapter-opening example, the employees involved in the managers’ meet­
ing could potentially influence the structure of the organization by decisions made 
during their debate. If they had voted to change the rule of formally addressing one 
another, the entire organizational structure may have had to be altered. Communica­
tion is what allows for an organization to change.
Giddens (1979, 1993) views social structures as a double-edged sword. The 
structures and the rules that we create restrict our behavior. However, these same 
rules also enable us to understand and interact with others. We need rules to guide 
our decisions about how we are expected to behave. These rules may be ­either explic­
itly stated (such as grievance procedures that are outlined in an ­employee manual) or 
implicitly learned (such as respecting one another by providing each member of the 
group an opportunity to voice his or her opinion).
Groups and organizations are coordinated around various social ­interactions—
for example, socializing new members through new employee receptions, arriving 
at decisions during conference calls, conducting meetings in person or via video­
conference, or teaching new skills in employee-training sessions. Giddens (1984, 
2003) points out that the key to making sense of the communication that occurs 
in these groups and organizations is to examine the structures that serve as their 
foundation. He makes a distinction between the concepts of system (as we discussed 
in Chapter 3) and structure. The term ­system, in this sense, refers to the group or 
organization itself and the behaviors and practices that the group engages in to 
pursue its goals. Organizations may engage in many behaviors/practices, includ­
ing new employee assimilation processes and performance appraisals (Seibold & 
Myers, 2006). The term structure refers to the rules and resources members use 
to create and sustain the system, as well as to guide individual behaviors related to 
such behaviors/practices.
In the opening scenario, both the BCT organization and the group meeting of the 
division managers can be viewed as a system. Their goal is to discuss the problem 
of using formal names to address one another, as well as to conduct the daily opera­
tions of the organization. To assist them in accomplishing their goals in an efficient 
manner, both of these systems have a formal set of rules that includes guidelines for 
how employees are expected to address one another at BCT as well as guidelines for 
allowing everyone to voice their opinion during the group meeting. These represent 
the structures of the group and ­organization. Tim Nash is frustrated by the structure 
that restricts his employees from communicating with him informally. The rules for 
interactions ­between supervisors and subordinates contradict what he has learned about 
building relationships and enhancing employee productivity. Angela employs rules for 
conducting open discussions about issues before any decisions about changes are made. 
Thus, BCT is created and guided by structures—rules that explain how to demonstrate 
respect for one another.
system 
a group or  
organization and 
the behaviors that 
the group engages 
in to pursue its 
goals
structure 
the rules and 
resources used to 
sustain a group or 
organization

258     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Although Giddens first drew attention to organizational structures, commu­
nication scholars were instrumental in ushering in an application of structuration 
principles to other contexts. For example, Marshall Scott Poole (1990) and his 
colleagues David Seibold and Robert McPhee (McPhee, 2015; McPhee, Poole, & 
Iverson, 2013; Poole & DeSanctis, 1990; Poole & McPhee, 2005; Poole, Seibold, & 
McPhee, 1986; 1996; Seibold & Myers, 2007) have studied the application of struc­
turation principles to the communication field. Their theoretical approach has been 
called Adaptive Structuration Theory to explain how task groups use and strategically 
adapt ­information technology, rules, and resources to accomplish organizational/
group goals (Poole & McPhee, 2005). We will address this adaptive nature 
throughout the chapter, yet, we will continue to emphasize the original thinking 
of Giddens and discuss Structuration Theory as a perspective with appeal to many 
areas in the study of communication. As Dennis Mumby (2011) suggests, there is 
an embedded ­relationship between communication and structuration principles. 
He notes that communication not only reflects organizational reality, but also “cre­
ates and maintains the meanings that guide organized life and ­motivate particular 
­actions” (p. 194).
To begin, it’s important to define structuration. In a general sense, structura­
tion allows people to understand their patterns of behavior—the structures of 
their social system. Specifically, structuration is described as “the process by 
which systems are produced and reproduced through members’ use of rules and 
resources” (Poole, Seibold, & McPhee, 1996, p. 117). For structuration theorists, 
organizational structures are produced and replicated by people who interact on a 
daily basis, trying to accomplish personal and company goals (Modaff, Butler, & 
DeWine, 2017).
Structuration allows people to understand their patterns of behavior—the struc­
tures of their social system. With respect to small groups, Poole and colleagues con­
clude that the key to understanding groups is through an analysis of the structures 
that underlie them. Rules and resources for communicating and arriving at decisions 
are typically learned from the organization itself and from members’ past experi­
ences and personal rules. These same rules and resources are reaffirmed as a result 
of their application or use; the group may decide to keep them in their existing format 
or alter them to meet the changing needs of the group.
In arriving at a decision on whether BCT should change its rule about having 
employees address one another formally, Angela enacts a rule of decision making 
that requires the group to discuss member viewpoints before making changes. BCT 
may also have a rule for company meetings in which the majority vote decides the 
action that should be taken. If Angela fails to call a meeting of the managers to 
solicit their opinions, many of them might be displeased. Or, if Angela doesn’t give 
everyone the opportunity to state an opinion on the rule while the rest of the group 
observes an unspoken rule to respect others’ opinions (i.e., challenge ideas but do not 
attack people), some of the group’s members will be dissatisfied with the outcome 
of the meeting. Janette, for one, depends on the rule to maintain her credibility and 
authority when interacting with her male employees. The fact that Angela follows the 
rule of calling a meeting to discuss the issue reaffirms the belief that this is a good 
guideline to follow in making decisions in the organization. However, some of the 
group’s members may not be pleased with the decision to keep the rule in its current 
structuration 
the production, 
reproduction, and 
transformation of 
social environments 
through rules and 
resources in  
relationships

	
Assumptions of Structuration Theory     259
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
form, and they may invoke a new rule among their own teams in which they permit 
subordinates to address them in a less formal manner. Thus, the rule will be altered 
from its original state.
Structuration provides a useful foundation for examining the impact that 
rules and resources have on group decisions and organizational communication. 
Structures produce a system and they also represent the outcomes of a system (recall 
our discussion of the Systems perspective in Chapter 3). In addition, it helps describe 
how these rules are altered or confirmed through interactions. Finally, structuration 
is communicative: “Talk is action. If structure is truly produced through interaction, 
then communication is more than just a precursor to action; it is action” (Modaff 
et al., 2017, p. 121).
Assumptions of Structuration Theory
Structuration Theory is rather complex because it deals with people, resources, behav­
ior, tasks, norms, and organizational life (Wiggins & Bowers, 2014). Therefore, to as­
sist in unraveling this complexity, we first consider some of the basic assumptions that 
guide the theory:
∙∙
Groups and organizations are produced and reproduced through actions and 
behaviors.
∙∙
Communication rules serve as both the medium for, and an outcome of, 
interactions.
∙∙
Power structures are present in organizations and guide the decision-making 
process.
Underscoring the first assumption, Giddens proposes that every action or behav­
ior results in the production of something new—a fresh act. Each of the actions or 
behaviors in which a group or organization engages is influenced and affected by the 
past. This history serves as a reference for understanding what rules and resources 
are required to operate within the system. Consider, for instance, when a group leader 
decides to conduct a vote using an anonymous ballot. If past voting using the ballot 
has proven to be effective for group members, history is influencing the rules for 
operation within that system.
fresh act 
something new 
developed from 
action or behavior
Theory At a Glance  •  Structuration Theory
Organizations create structures, which can be interpreted as an organiza­
tion’s rules and resources. These structures, in turn, create social systems 
in an organization. Organizations achieve a life of their own because of the 
way their members use their structures. Power structures guide the deci­
sion making that takes place in these organizations.

260     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
It is important to remember that every time we communicate with someone, 
we are establishing a new beginning by (1) creating a new rule or expectation, 
(2) altering an existing rule, or (3) reaffirming rules that have been used in the past. 
In establishing these new beginnings, we still rely on past rules and expectations to 
guide our behaviors. Thus, we never escape our history—it continually influences 
our decisions for behavior in groups and organizations. It also influences changes 
that may take place in the system.
All of our communicative actions exist in relationship to the past. Angela may 
have learned in past group meetings that members are not supportive of others’ 
thoughts and opinions. She may have decided simply to state the problem and have 
group members vote on a potential solution without first soliciting the advice and 
opinions of group members. In this instance, historical rules would have been used 
as a reference for altering the group’s rules in future ­interactions.
Recall the interaction between Tim and Jeremy. According to Structuration 
Theory, each interaction that takes place between Tim and Jeremy is new and 
creates something unique in the structure of their future interactions. At the same 
time, Jeremy and Tim each bring to the interaction a set of rules (based on their 
history) and expectations that will guide and shape their communication with each 
other. In other words, as we observed in Chapter 1, their fields of ­experience 
become critical in their communication with one another. Jeremy addresses Tim 
by his last name, Mr. Nash, the first time they meet. Tim responds by saying, 
“Please, call me Tim.” Tim creates something new in the social structure by 
establishing a precedent (a new norm) of asking his subordinate to call him by his 
first name. This precedent is influenced by the past expectations that each man 
brings to the interaction. In other words, the experiences that Tim and Jeremy 
bring to the interaction affect their expectations for the structure that will guide 
their future communication. Tim believes that an open and ­relaxed communica­
tion style works, whereas Jeremy operates under a very ­different set of rules for 
interaction—formal address works best. In this case, ­Jeremy’s rules for conversing 
serve the dual function of guiding his current ­behavior and setting expectations 
for future behavior.
The second assumption of Structuration Theory is the notion that rules 
­simultaneously provide a guideline for individual behavior as well as serve as 
possible constraints on individual behavior. The structure of a group includes 
a network of rules and resources that are used by its members in making de­
cisions about what communication behaviors are expected. Katherine Miller 
(2008) writes about organizational rules: “Rules act as recipes for social life, in 
that they are generalizable procedures about how to get things done” (p. 215). 
Some rules take precedence over others, and history influences the action that 
is enacted. That is, if a rule worked well in the past, it’s likely to be retained; if 
not, it’s likely to be modified or abandoned. Moreover, rules “make certain kinds 
of conduct possible, while precluding others” (Nicolini, 2013, p. 47). The chal­
lenge lies in determining which rule will be the most efficient or productive in 
achieving the goals of the group or organization. We return to a discussion of 
rules later in the chapter. 
Let’s take a moment to examine this issue a little more closely. Giddens (1979) 
asserts that a rule can only be truly understood “in the context of the historical 

	
Assumptions of Structuration Theory     261
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
development” as a whole (p. 65). So, Structuration Theory assumes that to under­
stand the rules of a social system, individuals need to know some of the background 
resources that led to the rule. Perhaps if Tim from our chapter-opening scenario 
were to investigate the origins of the rule for addressing superiors, he would have 
a better understanding of why this rule is currently enforced. There may have been 
a past incident when employees showed a blatant disregard for their supervisors by 
substituting nicknames for the informal first names that they were permitted to use 
in addressing their superiors. For example, Tim may discover that Wayne was called 
“Wayne the Pain” by his employees years earlier when the rule was not in ­existence. 
The company subsequently developed more formal rules to help Wayne enhance 
his credibility and gain the respect of his employees. However, if after conducting 
his research, Tim does not discover a satisfactory reason for the structure or rules 
that are in place, he may try to alter this particular rule. Not only may his refusal to 
attend meetings demonstrate a personal rule, but it may also be an attempt to exert 
his power in the group.
The third assumption guiding Structuration Theory posits that power is an 
influential force in arriving at decisions in organizations. In this theory, power is 
perceived as the ability to achieve results—it enables us to accomplish our goals. 
Giddens believes that power is a two-way street; any time two people are engaged in 
communication with each other, both sources have a certain level of power that they 
bring to the interaction. Even subordinates have some power over superiors. We all 
have power, but some have more than others. It is important to consider the role that 
rules play in this discussion of power. Based on the history of an organization, typi­
cally rules have been established to grant some members a particular form of power 
over other members. In BCT, a rule of the group is that Angela has the power to call 
a meeting of the members.	
Tim wants his employees to call him “Tim” and not “Mr. Nash,” but the 
structure—in this case a company norm—does not allow production floor workers 
to communicate informally. However, Tim’s personal communication rule is that his 
workers should call him by his first name. His rule is based on his training, which 
taught him that in this situation it would be better for worker morale (and productiv­
ity) if subordinates were permitted to call him “Tim.” Tim’s decision to tell Jeremy 
to support keeping things the way they are for the time being is based not solely on 
one rule, but also on Tim’s power as a supervisor in this organization. In convincing 
Angela to call a meeting of division managers to discuss the feasibility of adopting 
this rule at BCT, Tim is once again able to exert a sense of power that is granted to 
him as a member of the group and as a division manager. However, we see that all 
of the division managers bring power in one form or another to the group decision-
making process. Darnell brings the power associated with his knowledge of 
managerial techniques as a result of his MBA. Wayne’s extensive background and 
knowledge of the organization’s history afford him a different type of power to bring 
to the discussion. Angela contributes the power associated with her position as 
human resources coordinator at BCT.
To summarize, when it comes to decision making, no one power structure in the 
web of organizational rules is more important than the other. Giddens views power as 
a two-way street, and the fact that an actor is even invited to participate in discussions 
and decision making indicates that he or she has a certain amount of power over others.
power 
imposition of 
personal will on 
others

262     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Central Concepts of Structuration Theory
Like other communication theories, Structuration Theory is composed of a number 
of component parts. And, Beth Bonniwell Haslett (2015) asserts that these concepts 
“have profound implications for organizing and communicating” (p. 6). Let’s look at 
the various elements that are central to understanding the complexity of rules and the 
influence they have on communication within systems. The concepts we will discuss 
include agency and reflexivity, duality of structure, and social integration.
Agency and Reflexivity
Structuration Theory is based on the notion that human activity is the source that cre-
ates and recreates the social environment in which we exist. Two key terms related to 
this perspective are agency and agent. Agency is defined as the specific behaviors or 
activities that humans engage in, guided by the rules and contexts in which interactions 
take place. Agency is normally undertaken by individuals, groups, or organizations 
themselves (Haslett, 2015). Agent refers to the person who engages in these behav-
iors. For example, students serve as the agents who engage in the agency of attending 
classes at a college or university. The context of the classroom provides a template of 
rules that the agents (students) are expected to follow. If the context of the class is a 
large lecture setting, the rules might dictate that the particular agency (behaviors) to 
be performed in asking a question be formal in nature (e.g., raising one’s hand to ask 
a question).
M. Scott Poole, David Seibold, and Robert McPhee (1986, 1996) apply the no-
tion of agency to their examination of small groups by proposing that a group’s mem-
bers are aware of and knowledgeable about the events and activities that take place 
around them. This awareness guides their decision to ­engage in particular behaviors 
(agency). According to Structuration theorists, organizations (and groups) engage 
in a process known as reflexivity. Reflexivity refers to the actors’ ability to moni-
tor their actions and behaviors. In essence, members of an organization are able to 
look into the future and make changes in the organization’s structure if it appears as 
if things are not going to work according to plan. An important element in agency 
and reflexivity is the ability of an individual to articulate the reasons for his or her 
choices of behavior. When an instructor asks a student why she didn’t ask the ques-
tion during class time, the student may respond that the number of questions being 
asked was too overwhelming for her to receive personal attention at that time. Thus, 
the agent has a level of consciousness about his or her behavior and can explain why 
a particular behavior was chosen over another.
In employing agency and reflexivity, organizations reflect on the structures and 
systems that are in place, and members have the ability to explain the reasons for the 
behaviors as well as the ability to identify their goals. This awareness occurs on two 
levels. Discursive consciousness refers to the ability of a person to state his or her 
thoughts in a language that can be shared with other members of the organization. Put 
another way, this consciousness pertains to knowledge that can be expressed through 
words to others. Practical consciousness refers to those actions or feelings that 
cannot be put into words. Modaff and colleagues (2017) state that “some activities 
and/or feelings are easily explained by individuals (discursive consciousness), while 
agency 
behaviors or  
activities used in 
social environments
agent 
a person engaging  
in behaviors or 
activities in social 
environments
reflexivity 
a person’s ability to 
monitor his or her 
actions or  
behaviors
discursive  
consciousness 
a person’s ability to 
articulate personal 
goals or behaviors
practical  
consciousness
a person’s  
inability to  
articulate personal 
goals or behaviors

	
Central Concepts of Structuration Theory     263
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
other experiences, behaviors, and feelings are not as easily put into words (practical 
consciousness)” (p. 118).
To understand these terms, let’s look at our opening scenario. Tim may be able to 
explain the reasons he proposed the change in BCT’s rule for ­supervisor–subordinate 
communication. He engages in reflexivity by describing his past ­supervisory 
experiences and the success that he had in relating to his former ­employees. Thus, he 
is using a level of discursive consciousness. What Tim may not be able to articulate 
is the practical consciousness, or the internal feelings, that he experiences in a formal 
work environment. Tim might find it difficult to explain the warm, familial feelings 
that emerge when his employees address him by first name. He also might not real-
ize the fact that when they ­address him as “Mr. Nash,” he feels as though they are 
addressing his father or grandfather—maybe he does not perceive himself as being 
old enough to be addressed as “Mr.” The agency, Tim’s decision to address the issue, is 
based on his ability to reflect on previous experience.
Reflexivity also enables Tim to make a prediction about how these behaviors 
will impact employer–employee relationships in the future. Tim’s ability to articulate 
his reasons for his attitudes and actions provides others with an understanding of 
why he pursues these goals. Both personal and organizational rules are influencing 
the decision of how employees should address supervisors in the organization. The 
task Tim faces is in deciding whether to maintain the organizational rule or alter it to 
accommodate his personal rules.
Duality of Structure
Rules and resources fulfill dual functions in organizations. According to the prin-
ciple of duality of structure, members of an organization depend on rules and 
resources to guide their decisions about the behaviors or actions that they will  
employ in their communication. When an individual chooses to either ­follow a rule 
or alter the rule, then the way that the rule is followed in future interactions changes. 
Following a rule makes it “valid.” Sarah Tracy (2013) contends that duality of  
structure can be interpreted as follows: “Structure is created from the top down and 
from the bottom up” (p. 61).
To better understand this relationship, let’s explore the distinction between rules 
and resources. In Structuration Theory, rather than viewing rules as strictly guide-
lines for why something must be done, it is more useful to view them as an instruc-
tion manual for how a goal may be accomplished. As was stated earlier in this chap-
ter, and as referred to in Chapter 3, these rules may be explicitly stated or implicitly 
learned. At BCT, Tim realizes that it would not be effective simply to change the 
communication expectations for his team without first consulting the other managers 
in the organization. He employs a personal rule that states that he should respect his 
colleagues and their reasons for organizational protocol. He accomplishes that goal 
by implementing this rule; he requests a meeting with the human resources coordi-
nator. Next, a group meeting is called to give all division managers the opportunity 
to express their opinions. The group’s rule of giving every member equal voice in 
arriving at decisions is employed. Finally, a vote is taken to decide the preferred 
action of the majority of the group’s members. Tim could initially decide simply 
to invoke his own rules and disregard the rules of the organization, but he decides to 
duality of structure
rules and resources 
used to guide  
organizational  
decisions about  
behaviors or  
actions
rules 
general routines 
that the  
organization or 
group follows in  
accomplishing goals

264     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
discuss the issue with his colleagues and supervisors to arrive at a decision. A vital 
element in understanding why some rules are enforced over others lies in understand­
ing the power that certain agents have in the decision-making process.
Resources refer to the power that individuals bring to the group or organiza­
tion. Power in this regard can be both tangible (office, supplies, etc.) and intangible 
(decision-making style). Power is influential because it leads an individual to take 
action or initiate change.
An organization can employ two types of resources: allocative and authoritative. 
Allocative resources refer to the material assistance generated by an organization to 
help the group in accomplishing its goal. Suppose a group of college students wants 
to have access to a facility where they can work out during their breaks between 
classes or during their “off” time. Some of the group’s members decide to write a 
proposal to college administrators and provide them with a list of activities that they 
are willing to undertake to raise some of the money if matching funds are secured. 
Thus, a plan for providing allocative, or material, resources has been established.
Authoritative resources pertain to the interpersonal characteristics that are 
employed during communication interactions. Recall from Chapter 2 that interper­
sonal communication pertains to the dynamic between two people. In Structuration 
Theory, interpersonal communication is viewed as the ability to influence others. Put 
another way, authoritative resources allow a person to ­execute power in an organiza­
tion. Every person possesses a degree of power and influence on the operations of an 
organization (Modaff et al., 2017).
One key point about power in this theory is how agents can employ power to 
get what they want in a social system (Poole & McPhee, 2005). To understand better 
what we mean by power, consider one model of social power (French & Raven, 1959; 
Raven, 1993) that has had lasting appeal. These bases of power can be thought of as 
the various authoritative resources employed in organizations. As Giddens suggests 
(1984), when individuals are oppressed, they still have resources (such as power) avail­
able to overcome the status quo. Each power type is explained next and in Table 15.1.
Reward Power    Reward power is based on a person’s perception that another has 
the ability to provide positive reinforcements. These rewards may come in the form of 
resources 
attributes or  
material goods 
that can be used to 
exert power in an  
organization
allocative resources 
material assistance 
used to help groups 
accomplish their 
goals
authoritative  
resources
interpersonal  
assistance used to 
help groups  
accomplish their 
goals
reward power 
perception that 
another person has 
the ability to provide 
positive outcomes
Table 15.1  Power Type as a Resource in an Organization
TYPE OF POWER
DEFINITION
Reward
Chris has the ability to provide something of value to Pat.
Coercive
Chris can deliver punishment to Pat.
Referent
Chris achieves agreement or compliance because Pat 
respects Chris and desires to be like Chris.
Legitimate
Chris exerts control over Pat because of Chris’s title or 
position.
Expert
Chris possesses special knowledge or expertise that Pat 
needs.

	
Central Concepts of Structuration Theory     265
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
praise, material rewards, or simply removal of negative aspects of the system. Tim’s 
employees may decide to accommodate his request to address him by his first name be­
cause they perceive him as having power to promote them or give them raises. If this is 
the case, reward power is a resource that is affecting communication in the organization.
Coercive Power    If Tim’s employees fear that they will be demoted or fired as 
a result of failing to comply with his wishes to establish relationships on a first-
name basis, coercive power may be influencing decisions and communication. 
Coercive power is based on the expectation that an individual has the ability to exact 
punishment. A person may comply with another’s request simply to avoid negative 
consequences such as losing credibility in front of one’s coworkers or getting a rotten 
work schedule.
Forbes magazine, one of the country’s premier sources for business news, 
asks one of the most provocative of all business questions: Do women fear 
power? This essay, underscoring the notion of power, a key Structuration 
principle, discusses cultural notions of power and organizational life. Writer 
Caroline Turner is rather direct in her essay’s thesis: “Could it be that women 
lack the ambition and appetite for power that are required to reach the 
top?” Turner acknowledges that the theme of women and power has ignited 
a “firestorm” and provides statistics that indicate that as one moves up the 
corporate ladder, one sees less evidence of women in leadership and pow­
erful roles (e.g., approximately 4 percent of women are CEOs in the Fortune 
500). Turner notes that there are different cultural interpretations of power 
and that masculine and feminine ways of manifesting power exist at many 
organizations. She believes that the masculine way of power and success 
is really about winning and competition. The feminine definition of power 
is about shared cooperation and less of a focus on hierarchy. Turner ac­
cepts the fact that her perceptions are rather general and that variations 
exist. Yet, while each has its advantages, Turner admits that effective and 
successful businesses manage to integrate both masculine and feminine ori­
entations of power. She concludes by stating that an organizational culture 
that facilitates “gender diversity in leadership” is more apt to be a welcom­
ing environment for both women and men. Further, she believes that the 
perception that women do not aspire to be in positions of power is a myth. 
Rather, Turner contends that many women are “turned off” by masculine 
scripts of power and companies that embrace an egalitarian framework of 
power will end up cultivating better male and female leaders.
Source: C. Turner, Do women fear power and success? forbes.com/sites/womensmedia
/2012/08/27/do-women-fear-power-and-success.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Women, Power, and Organizations
coercive power 
perception that 
another person has 
the ability to punish 
you

266     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Referent Power    Perhaps Tim’s employees choose to address him by his first name 
primarily because he is a friendly, likable person who demonstrates a genuine inter­
est in his workers. Then, the resource guiding communication ­decisions is due to 
referent power, or the ability of an individual to engage compliance based on the 
fact that personal relationships have been established between the two interactants.
Legitimate Power    Recall Tim’s comment to Jeremy: “This is my division, and I 
would really prefer if we do things my way.” The influence a person exerts on the 
basis of his or her position or title is called legitimate power. If division managers 
decide to retain the current communication rules simply because they respect Wayne 
and his tenure with the company, legitimate power is a ­resource guiding their deci­
sion. This type of power is associated with one’s right to exert influence.
Expert Power    Expert power refers to one’s ability to exert influence over ­others 
based on the knowledge or expertise that one possesses. In the opening scenario, 
we learned that Darnell holds an MBA and has extensive knowledge about effec­
tive managerial communication strategies in the workplace. If the division managers 
decide to base their decision to adopt a less-formal environment in the workplace on 
Darnell’s knowledge, his expert power serves as a ­resource in the decision.
If we were to view power as a resource, as defined in Structuration Theory, dual­
ity of structure could be applied to explain how power was used in generating action 
in the group as well as in determining if power was altered or changed as a result of 
the action that was taken. For example, many students have assigned expert power 
to a teacher based on their previous experiences in classes with knowledgeable in­
structors. However, if an instructor were to enter a classroom and employ profanity 
or only provide examples based on supermarket tabloids, those same students might 
alter their personal rule that all teachers possess expert power; they might decide to 
employ a rule in the future that requires them to be tentative in their decision to as­
sign power to an instructor. This is an example of duality of structure.
referent power 
perception that 
another person 
has the ability to 
achieve compliance 
because of  
established  
personal  
relationships
legitimate power 
perception that 
another person has 
the ability to exert 
influence because 
of title or position
expert power 
perception that 
another person has 
the ability to exert 
influence because 
of special  
knowledge or 
expertise
Student Voices
Gretchen
I want to write about how power dominates the organization. I worked for a com­
pany where no one other than the supervisor had a college degree. He loved that he 
was the only college graduate, and put the rest of the employees down. He’d do it 
in a pretty subtle way by saying things like, “I know you all haven’t gone to college to 
know the ­latest. . . .” The irony about what he’d say was that his college degree did 
not really ­qualify him to oversee us (you didn’t have to have a college degree to work 
on painting luminous decorations on alarm clocks!), but he had what we learned was 
reward power: He made out the schedule. If you needed to have a day off because 
you ­couldn’t get a baby-sitter or if you wanted a day off to go watch the Red Sox, 
he was in a (powerful) position to allow (or not allow) that. The guy certainly tried to 
wield his power at times and it really destroyed the morale in our work unit.

	
Application of Time and Space     267
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Social Integration
In addition to agency and reflexivity and a duality of structure, an additional key con­
cept functions prominently in Structuration Theory. Social integration refers to the 
reciprocity of communication behaviors among persons in interactions. This is an 
ongoing process whereby members of an organization ­become acquainted with one 
another and form expectations based on previous impressions or information that is 
learned. If members are interacting with one another for the first time, their knowledge 
of one another will be quite limited, and the process of social integration will be much 
more extensive. However, as members become acquainted with one another, the social 
integration process relies heavily on structures that are recalled from past interactions.
We already know that each interactant brings his or her own background, ex­
periences, and expectations to a communication event. However, as a member of an 
organization, an individual brings knowledge to the situation that is subject to change 
based on the influence of both internal and external sources. As we gain a sense 
of how we and others fit into the group, we begin to communicate and act in ways 
that indicate the roles we expect each member to fulfill. Expectations for patterns 
of behavior are established, but these expectations could ­potentially change as the 
members of the group interact and evolve.
It’s important to note that organizational scholars have found that social in­
tegration may be limited. That is, it may be nearly impossible to avoid the fact 
that people lose self-sufficiency and control (in organizations and in life). These 
are termed “dividuals,” meaning that their individuality has been compromised. As 
Nicolas Bencherki and James Snack (2016) observe: “people are not whole, coher­
ent entities that fit in a single organization, in the same way as the Matryoshka dolls 
nest within each other. Rather, they each constitute societies that hold together the 
many ‘pre-individual’ elements that constitute them” (p. 284). Thus, although social 
integration is a profound communication process in Structuration Theory, it can be 
limited insofar as people may lose their full identity as an organizational member.
Recall the meeting of the division managers. Because Tim is the newest member 
of the group, the other division managers may be uncertain about what type of power 
to attribute to him as he presents his ideas. The same applies to Tim’s interactions with 
his subordinates. As Tim and the others engage in subsequent interactions, his view of 
himself and others’ views of Tim will evolve.
Application of Time and Space
We now examine the role of time and space in organizations. Structuration theorists 
believe that all social interaction in an organization is composed of temporal (time) and 
spatial (space) dimensions. This time–space distanciation is an important feature of the 
theory. The actual communication or interaction that takes place in the organization 
can be examined as existing in real time and as taking place in real locations (space).
We hear a message as it occurs in a context. For instance, think about a con­
versation that your supervisor has with you about company layoffs while the two 
of you are walking to your cars at the end of the workday. The supervisor’s deci­
sion to talk about this topic, in this place (parking lot), and at this particular time 
would be of interest to Structuration theorists. However, researchers would likely 
social integration 
reciprocity of  
communication 
behaviors in  
interaction

268     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
need to look more deeply to determine the factors that motivated your boss to com­
municate this message to you. Furthermore, does your boss make reference to past 
experiences with company layoffs? Does she look ahead to potential consequences 
if such a layoff were to happen? And, ­especially relevant to many communication 
researchers, if a layoff were to be announced, how would it be communicated to 
employees? A mass email? Public posting? How would the conversation, as Poole 
and McPhee (2005) express it, “bind” (p. 180) space and time in the discussion of 
company layoffs?
Essentially, space is viewed as a contextual element that has meaning for the var­
ious members of a group or organization. The elements of time and space are factors 
that enable us to engage in communication. One’s view of his or her tenure in a group 
spans both time and space and influences the decisions that are made. For example, 
in our opening scenario, it is not likely that a single event or a single location has 
solely influenced Tim’s action to request a change in the company’s policy. Rather, 
it is a series of experiences and references that are the result of his own managerial 
history—and perhaps even his own experience as an employee in an organization—
that have influenced his choice of action.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Organizations remain central to our lives. It is estimated that company employees 
spend almost 90 percent of their time in group or team meetings. In fact, 54 percent 
of employees spend up to 30 percent of their day in team ­settings and as much as 
50 percent of their time working in a team setting ­(kenblanchard.com/img/pub/pdf_
critical_role_teams.pdf). Structuration Theory provides an important framework for 
understanding these communication opportunities. The theory has been historically 
linked to empiricism, making it aligned with quantitative methods. Still, some orga­
nizational scholars have used case studies, resulting in research that employs qualita­
tive methods as well. Among the criteria relevant to evaluating theory, we identify 
two for our discussion: scope and parsimony.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical | Semiotic | Phenomenological | Cybernetic | 
Socio-Psychological | Socio-Cultural | Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal | Interpersonal | Small Group | Organizational | 
Public/Rhetorical | Mass/Media | Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical | Interpretive/Hermeneutic | Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope | Logical Consistency | Parsimony | Utility | Testability | 
Heurism | Test of Time
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     269
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Scope
Structuration Theory can be applied to numerous social settings involving teams 
and small groups (McPhee, et al., 2013; Poole, 2013) and scores of communica­
tion interactions. As noted previously, the areas of communication that have applied 
the theory with the most theoretical success are organizational communication and 
group/team communication. Our focus has been on the organizational environment, 
namely, how the structures created in organizations influence communication and 
decisions.
Still, some concerns related to the theory’s breadth exists. At first glance, you 
may view the theory as too expansive, resulting in too broad a scope. With a discus­
sion of rules, resources, power, and discourse, it would seem that the theory is trying 
to do too much at one time. Indeed, in his review of the theory, Rob Stones (2005) as­
serts that Giddens’s theory should be “clearer, tighter, and more systematic than Gid­
dens has been about Structuration theory’s distinctive and defining characteristics” 
(p. 1). Other writers (Miles, 2014) describe the theory as “a very ambitious effort” 
(p. 324) that tries to collapse various schools of thought into one theory. 
Parsimony 
Recall that this criterion responds to the following question: Is the theory easy to 
understand or cumbersome? Many organizational communication and management 
theorists have argued the theory is laden with terminology that is challenging to un­
derstand. For example, Wafa Kort and Jamel Gharbi (2013) state that “there is a con­
sensus toward the difficulty that the readers encounter when they try to understand 
Structuration theory” (p. 95). Stephen Banks and Patricia Riley (1993) agree. They 
point out that Structuration Theory is difficult to understand: “Structuration lacks cer­
tain characteristics that communication researchers and other social science scientists 
often find appealing: It is not quickly read, immediately intuitive, or parsimonious” 
(p. 178). Banks and Riley present many concepts as they examine the intricate pro­
cess of how organizations and groups structure their communication and arrive at 
­decisions. Their ­advice to those who are ­researching this theory in an attempt to 
Student Voices
Marissa
When I first heard the word structuration and found out it applied to companies, it 
made sense. As we talked about in class, we need rules to help us with our interac­
tions and relationships at work. These rules are the structures I have experienced 
at work. When I was working retail, I remember that we had very few face-to-face 
meetings. Most of the time we had “electronic meetings” with Listservs and chat 
rooms. This was pretty strange at first, but as we all got used to the rules pertaining 
to these meetings (no emoticons, no “technological interruptions”), we got the hang 
of it pretty quickly. Eventually this became the way the different department heads 
had their meetings with employees, and this became the “rule” we lived by.

270     Chapter 15  •  Structuration Theory
S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
understand organizations and groups is to “begin at the beginning” (p. 181). This 
requires insight and understanding of the historical rules brought into an organization 
by each member—and this is an extremely difficult task to accomplish. Furthermore, 
Banks and Riley suggest that scholars resist the temptation to apply preestablished 
categories in explaining how organizations (and groups) are developed and how they 
experience change. Perhaps Daniel Broger’s (2011) comments summarize the notion 
of the theory’s potential ambiguity. He notes that the theory “requires considerable 
time and effort on the part of scholars not familiar with social theory in general and 
structuration theory in particular to come to grips with ­Giddens’s comprehensive 
theory” (p. 3). 
Closing
Structuration theorists Giddens, Poole, Seibold, and McPhee provide communica­
tion scholars a theory that considers the interplay between and among people and 
their resources in organizations (and small groups). The ­theory has drawn its crit­
ics, and Giddens has not helped his own theoretical reputation since he failed to 
address many of the criticisms and failed to provide clarifications on the criticisms 
levied against him and his theory (Broger, 2011). Nonetheless, complexity and def­
erence is not tantamount to theoretical rejection. Structuration Theory, therefore, 
will continue to resonate to those ­interested in the rules, principles, and processes 
in organizational life.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Structuration Theory suggests that organizational agents 
can utilize power in various ways. With the advent of social media, however, 
power seems to be much more diffused than when this theory was conceptu­
alized. Indicate whether or not you agree with this and why. 
	
1.  Recall a time when you were involved in a group similar to the ­Bayside 
City Tire Company—a time when a decision had to be made. What were some of 
the rules that influenced the process of decision making? Were the rules changed as 
a result of the decision that was reached or the process that was followed in arriving 
at that decision? If so, how?
	
2.  One of the assumptions of this theory is that power structures are present in 
groups and guide the decision-making process by providing us with information on 
how to best accomplish our goals. Discuss the potential positive and negative im­
plications of power as an element of structuration.
	
3.  Giddens proposes that structure (rules and resources) should not be viewed 
as a barrier to interaction, but as a necessary part of the creation of the interaction. 
Do you agree or disagree with this position? Defend your answer.
	
4.  Identify elements of other communication theories that are evident in the 
Structuration approach to groups, teams, and organizations.

S T R U C T U R A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     271
	
5.  Structuration Theory proposes that structures themselves should be viewed 
as being nontemporal and nonspatial. Discuss the significance of this idea. Provide 
an example from your own experience of the influence of time and space in a group 
or organization.
	
6.  How would you explain your family using any of the principles of Struc­
turation Theory?
	
7.  Structuration theorists state that the theory has the potential to provide real-
world applications. Discuss your reaction to this claim.

272
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
As an employee of 
Grace’s Jewelers, Amelia 
Callahan knew that her 
job was unlike those of her friends. The com­
pany employed about 180 people throughout its 
20 stores in the southeastern United States and 
targeted primarily teenage girls who frequented 
malls. Its founder, Grace Talmage, made it a point 
to visit employees like Amelia each month, helping 
them to feel good about working in such a small 
company.
	
Amelia’s relationship with Grace had always 
been quite cordial. Why wouldn’t it be? She 
received excellent commission rates and a rea­
sonable health care package (including dental 
and ­vision care) and got along superbly with 
her supervisor. In addition, Amelia and the other 
employees were able to wear casual clothing 
to work, which made them the envy of other 
workers in the mall. All of this may explain why 
Amelia had worked for the company for almost 
nine years and why she had no plans to leave—
until now.
	
After 24 years in the business, Grace 
decided it was time to sell the business and retire. 
Because of the profits that Grace has shown 
over the years, Jewelry Plus, a large retail jewelry 
store, decided to bid for the small chain. Although 
Grace did not want to sell to such a retail giant, 
their bid was simply too good to pass up. In the 
end, she decided to sell her business, much to the 
disappointment of her employees. Amelia was 
especially concerned after hearing gossip about 
the larger company’s treatment of its employees 
and its way of handling day-to-day operations. 
She privately wondered how much would change 
once Grace sold the stores. She needed the job, 
though, and decided to stay on.
	
Amelia’s instincts were right. Once the com­
pany’s transition was completed, she had to un­
dergo a “new employee” orientation, which meant 
standing in front of all of the new employees and 
informally talking about why she had applied to 
the company. Among the new company policies 
were new dress codes and a new policy for store 
­exchanges. Amelia could no longer wear casual 
clothing; instead, she had to wear a company uni­
form and black shoes with low heels.
	
With respect to store exchanges, company 
policy changed from “complete satisfaction or 
100 per­cent money-back guarantee” to “product 
must be returned within 10 days with register 
receipt.” ­Although Amelia thought that this new 
policy would turn many customers away, the 
success of Jewelry Plus was proof enough that 
it had worked in the past.
	
Finally, with the new company, her health 
benefits no longer included dental or vision 
Organizational Culture Theory
Based on the research of Clifford Geertz, Michael Pacanowsky, 
and Nick O’Donnell-Trujillo
Amelia Callahan
We believe that the particular potential of the organizational culture met­
aphor lies in its ability to liberate our thinking about both organizations 
and communication.
—Michael Pacanowsky and Nick O’Donnell-Trujillo
C H A P T E R	16

O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
	
Organizational Culture Theory     273
O
nce you graduate from college, it’s likely that many of you will work for an 
organization. Organizational life is characterized as much by change as it is by 
anything else. Change is frequently marked by such feelings as excitement, anxiety, 
uncertainty, frustration, and disbelief. These emotions are especially acute during 
stressful times, for example, during a recession and during company layoffs.
	
Go to any bookstore on campus or at the mall and you’re sure to see a number 
of books on organizational life. This pop culture approach to the world of corporate 
America is everywhere. Some authors tell us that there are Ten Easy Ways to Get a 
Raise or that there are Eight Safe Steps to Being Promoted. Other authors have made 
millions touting the importance of Communicating with Difficult People and Working 
to Live and Living to Work. Most of these books center on what people can do to 
make their lives easier in the workplace. The problem, however, is that organizational 
life is very complex. Further, few “easy ways” to anything exist in organizations and 
clearly, one difficult person one day may turn into a pleasant person the next day.
	
To understand organizational life beyond pop culture—including an ­organization’s 
values, stories, goals, practices (including technological), and philosophies—Michael 
Pacanowsky and Nick O’Donnell-Trujillo (1982, 1983, 1990) conceptualized Organiza­
tional Culture Theory (OCT). Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo believe that organiza­
tions can best be understood using a cultural lens, an idea originally proposed by anthro­
pologist Clifford Geertz. They indicate that researchers are limited in their understanding 
of organizations when they follow the scientific method, a process we outline in Chapter 
3. ­According to Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo, the scientific method is constrained 
by its task of measuring, rather than discovering. Pacanowsky and ­O’Donnell-Trujillo 
(1982) argue that Organizational Culture Theory invites all researchers “to observe, 
coverage. This lack of coverage was grist for the 
gossip mill. The story that Amelia heard during her 
orientation was that an employee actually lost two 
back teeth because she couldn’t afford the dental 
bills! With all the changes in store policies, dress 
codes, and company philosophies, Amelia and a 
number of her coworkers felt overwhelmed. In 
fact, many of Amelia’s coworkers, with whom she 
had worked over the past nine years, quit their 
jobs. As a single parent, however, Amelia felt that 
she couldn’t ­resign just yet.
	
On top of all that, her new boss was a disas­
ter! Amelia and her coworkers nicknamed him 
“The Shadow” because he stood right behind them 
as they waited on and rang up their customers. 
Having her supervisor watch everything she did 
was annoying and seemed pointless to Amelia, 
especially considering the fact that most of her 
customers were teenagers, who were fickle in 
their purchasing behaviors.
	
Despite these concerns, Amelia went to the 
company’s first picnic. She didn’t really want to, 
but she thought that she should give the company 
a chance. As she and her old and new coworkers 
drank ice tea and ate hot dogs, they seemed to 
bond. Former employees of Grace’s Jewelers 
told the workers of the retail giant about the way 
things used to be. They seemed to be genuinely 
interested in hearing about people like Gabby, 
the 70-year-old retiree who wouldn’t stop talking 
to customers. There was a great deal of laughing 
about the old times.
	
The day ended quite differently from the 
way Amelia had envisioned it. She made a few 
friends, reminisced about the past, and felt a bit 
more comfortable with her future. Although she 
knew that her boss would be difficult to deal with, 
Amelia decided that she would try to make the 
most out of her job. At the very least, she thought, 
she had some people in whom to confide.

274     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
record, and make sense of the communicative behavior of organizational members” 
(p. 129). They embrace the “totality or lived experience within organizations” 
(Pacanowsky, 1989, p. 250). The theorists paint a broad stroke in their understanding of 
organizations by stating that “culture is not something an organization has; a culture is 
something an organization is” (Pacanowsky & O’Donnell-Trujillo, 1982, p. 146).
	
Culture is communicatively constructed by organizational practices, and culture 
is distinct to each organization. For the theorists, understanding individual organiza­
tions is more important than generalizing from a set of behaviors or values across 
organizations. Further, it is important to accept the notion that organizational culture 
“is created over a period of time,” although culture is rather resilient and long-lasting 
(inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe.org/2012/thats-how-we-do-things-around-here). These 
thoughts form the backdrop of the theory.
	
Think about the types of organizations to which you now belong. They may vary 
in scope and size and may contain a number of practices that are unique to the orga­
nization. For instance, one organization that we all have in common is an academic 
one—a college or university. You’ve heard and perhaps shared stories about certain 
professors and classes to take or to avoid. There are various rites of passage in college, 
such as new-student orientation, fraternity or sorority rush, and eating cafeteria food! 
Practices such as advising and internships also characterize institutions of higher 
education. Years ago, students visited professors to get information and clarification 
on different subjects; today, much of that is done via email.
	
It is clear that the essence of organizational life is found in its culture. In this 
sense of the word, culture does not refer to the variety of races, ethnicities, and back­
grounds of individuals, a perspective we discussed in Chapter 2. Rather, according to 
www.CartoonStock.com

	
The Cultural Metaphor: Of Spider Webs and Organizations     275
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
organizational culture theorists, culture is a way of living in an organization. Orga­
nizational culture includes the emotional and psychological climate or atmosphere. 
This may involve employee morale, attitudes, and levels of productivity, competi­
tion, autonomy, and cooperation (Moon, Quigley, & Marr, 2012). Organizational 
culture also includes all the symbols (actions, routines, conversations, etc.) and the 
meanings that people attach to these symbols. Cultural meaning and understand­
ing are achieved through the interactions employees and management have with 
one another. Joann Keyton (2005) states the following about organizational culture: 
“Although difficult to describe, as an employee we know what it’s like in our organi­
zation” (p. 1). We begin our discussion of OCT by first interpreting culture and then 
presenting three assumptions of the theory.
The Cultural Metaphor: Of Spider Webs and Organizations
The origin of the word culture is interesting. Culture originally referred to preparing 
the ground for tending crops and animals. It was interpreted as fostering growth. When 
we contextualize “culture” within an organization, we need to understand that there is 
more than “what meets the eye.” In other words, organizational culture includes what 
is visible. Yet, organizational culture also includes what we cannot “see,” including, as 
we alluded to earlier, convictions, priorities, among others (Bremer, 2012).
	
Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo (1982) believe that organizational ­culture 
“indicates what constitutes the legitimate realm of inquiry” (p. 122). In other words, 
organizational culture is the essence of organizational life. As we mentioned earlier, 
they apply anthropological principles to construct their ­theory. Specifically, they 
adopt the Symbolic-Interpretive approach articulated by Clifford Geertz (1973) in 
their theoretical model. Geertz remarks that people are animals “suspended in webs 
of significance” (p. 5). He adds that ­people spin webs themselves. Pacanowsky and 
O’Donnell-Trujillo (1982) comment on Geertz’s metaphor:
The web not only exists, it is spun. It is spun when people go about the busi­
ness of construing their world as sensible—that is, when they communicate. 
When they talk, write a play, sing, dance, fake an illness, they are communi­
cating, and they are constructing their culture. The web is the residue of the 
communication process. (p. 147)
A primary goal of researchers, then, should be to think about all possible weblike 
configurations (features) in organizations.
organizational 
culture 
the essence of 
organizational life
People are like spiders who are suspended in webs that they created at 
work. An organization’s culture is composed of shared symbols, each of 
which has a unique meaning. Organizational stories, rituals, values, and rites 
of passage are examples of the culture of an organization.
Theory At a Glance  •  Organizational Culture Theory

276     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
	
Geertz invokes the image of a spider web deliberately. He believes that culture 
is like the webs spun by a spider. That is, webs are intricate designs, and each web is 
different from all others. Furthermore, webs “represent strength, life, and cohesion, 
but they are also things that need constant maintenance . . . .” (Modaff, Butler, & 
DeWine, 2011, p. 95). For Geertz, cultures are like this as well. Basing his conclu­
sions on various cultures around the world, Geertz argues that cultures are all differ­
ent and that their uniqueness should be celebrated. To understand a culture, Geertz 
believes that researchers should begin to focus on the meaning shared within it. We 
examine more of Geertz’s beliefs later.
	
Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo (1983) apply these basic principles to or­
ganizations. Employees and managers alike spin their webs. People are critical in 
the organization, and therefore, it is important to study their behaviors in conjunc­
tion with the overall organization. Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo claim that 
members of organizations engage in a number of communication behaviors that 
contribute to the culture of the company. They may do this through a number of 
ways, including gossiping, joking, backstabbing, or becoming romantically involved 
with others. Further, with 88 percent of companies using some form of social media 
(http://www.adweek.com/socialtimes/social-media-companies/502447), we need to 
accept that some of this communication will take place via technology.
	
The organizational culture at Jewelry Plus will be inevitably revealed in a number 
of ways. You will recall that Amelia learned of the new owner through gossip and that 
the company picnic was a way for her to learn more about the new company culture. 
No doubt she will experience an organizational culture with her new job that is very 
different from what she experienced with Grace’s Jewelers. The company has changed, 
the faces are new, and the rules reflect new ownership. Amelia also contributes to the 
spinning of the organizational web by both responding to company stories and passing 
them on to others. In sum, the web of organizational culture has been spun. This broad 
perspective underscores why Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo argue that organiza­
tional culture “is not just another piece of the puzzle; it is the puzzle” (p. 146).
Assumptions of Organizational Cultural Theory
The study of organizations and workplace settings began earnest in the late 1960s, 
especially because of a 1967 NASA conference on organizational communication 
(Rocci & de Saussure, 2016). Since the NASA gathering, organizational culture 
scholars have tried to understand the various challenges, goals, behaviors, and people 
in the workplace. Three assumptions guide Organizational Culture Theory. As you 
work through these assumptions, keep in mind the diversity and complexity of orga­
nizational life. Also, understand that these assumptions emphasize the process view of 
­organizations that Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo advocate:
∙∙
Organizational members create and maintain a shared sense of organizational 
reality, resulting in a better understanding of the values of an ­organization.
∙∙
The use and interpretation of symbols are critical to an organization’s culture.
∙∙
Cultures vary across organizations, and the interpretations of actions within 
these cultures are diverse.

	
Assumptions of Organizational Cultural Theory     277
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
	
The first assumption pertains to the importance of people in organizational life. 
Specifically, individuals share in creating and maintaining their ­reality. These indi­
viduals include employees, supervisors, and employers. At the core of this assumption 
are an organization’s values. Values are the standards and principles within a culture 
that have intrinsic worth to a culture. ­Values inform organizational members about 
what is important. Pacanowsky (1989) notes that values derive from “moral knowl­
edge” (p. 254) and that people display their moral knowledge through narratives or 
stories. The stories that Amelia hears and shares, for example, will result in her under­
standing the organization’s ­values.
	
People share in the process of discovering an organization’s values. Being a 
member of an organization requires active participation in that organization. The 
meanings of particular symbols—for instance, why a company continues to interview 
prospective employees when massive layoffs are under way—are communicated by 
both employees and management. The symbolic meaning of hiring new people when 
others are being fired will not escape savvy workers; why dedicate money to new 
personnel when others are losing their jobs? Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo 
(1982) believe that employees contribute to the shaping of organizational culture. 
Their behaviors are instrumental in creating and ultimately maintaining organiza­
tional reality.
	
The reality (and culture) of an organization are also determined in part by the 
symbols, the second assumption of the theory. Earlier we noted that Pacanowsky and 
O’Donnell-Trujillo adopted the Symbolic-Interpretive perspective of Geertz. This 
perspective underscores the use of symbols in organizations, and, as we mentioned 
in Chapter 1, symbols are representations for meaning. Organizational members cre­
ate, use, and interpret symbols every day. These symbols, therefore, are important to 
the company’s culture. Mary Jo Hatch (2006) extends the notion of symbols in her 
discussion of the categories of symbolic meaning (Table 16.1).
	
Symbols include the verbal and nonverbal communication in an organization. 
Frequently, these symbols communicate an organization’s values. Symbols may 
Table 16.1  Symbols of an Organizational Culture
GENERAL CATEGORY	
SPECIFIC TYPES/EXAMPLES
Physical Symbols	
Art/design/logo
	
buildings/decor
	
dress/appearance
	
material objects
Behavioral Symbols	
Ceremonies/rituals
	
traditions/customs
	
rewards/punishments
Verbal Symbols	
Anecdotes/jokes
	
jargon/names/nicknames
	
explanations
	
stories/myths/history
	
metaphors

278     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
take the form of slogans that carry meaning. For example, several companies—past 
and present—have slogans that symbolize their values, including State Farm Insur­
ance (“Like a good neighbor, State Farm is there”), the New York Times (“All the 
News That’s Fit to Print”), and Disneyland (“The Happiest Place on Earth”). The 
extent to which these symbols are effective relies not only on the media, but also on 
how the company’s employees enact them. For example, Disneyland’s belief that it 
is the happiest place on earth would be quite odd if its employees didn’t smile or if 
they were rude. In fact, the corporate culture of Disney ensures that they retain the 
most loyal, ­engaged, and customer-centered employees (Lipp, 2013). 
	
For evidence of verbal symbols in an organization, consider this story. A super­
visor named Derrick communicates a great deal about values in casual conversation 
with his employees. Derrick frequently tells long stories about how he handled a 
particular issue at a previous workplace. He often launches into ­detailed accounts of 
how, for instance, he managed to get his employees a bonus at the end of the year. 
His stories inevitably begin with a short vignette about his upbringing in Arkansas 
and end with a moral. At first, employees were unsure how to handle this type of 
communication. As time went on, however, they soon realized that Derrick was try­
ing to demonstrate a connection with his employees and to indicate that although 
problems may seem insurmountable, he knows ways to handle them. Through many 
of his stories, he communicates that he cares about the issues of the company and 
the workers; he also communicates a new view of what he thinks the organizational 
culture should be.
	
Our third assumption of OCT pertains to the variety of organizational cultures. 
Simply put, organizational cultures vary tremendously. The perceptions of the ac­
tions and activities within these cultures are just as diverse as the cultures them­
selves. Consider what it is like for Amelia as she moves from Grace’s Jewelers to 
Jewelry Plus. We have already provided a number of examples that underscore the 
various cultural issues within each company. Her perceptions, however, and her par­
ticipation in the culture may differ from those of others. Some people might appreci­
ate a cultural change after working so many years for the same small company.
	
As an employee in a small jewelry store, Amelia knew that a store’s problems 
could readily be resolved and that any suggestions for changes were welcomed and 
enacted. The culture was such that employees were empowered to make quick deci­
sions, often without supervisor approval. Exceptions to the store return policy, for 
instance, were handled by all employees. The store’s founder felt that employees 
were in the best position to deal with difficult problems needing quick resolutions. In 
addition, employee rewards for customer service were routine, and conflict media­
tion and anger management programs were available for both employees and man­
agement. These organizational practices communicate the importance of a shared 
sense of organizational reality among employees. ­Employees at Grace’s Jewelers 
got together regularly for F.A.C.—Friday Afternoon Club—at a local restaurant. 
These activities communicated the esprit de corps in the company. The employees 
of Grace’s were members of an ­organizational ­culture who “constitute and reveal 
their culture to themselves and to others” (Pacanowsky & O’Donnell-Trujillo, 1982, 
p. 131).
	
The organizational culture of Jewelry Plus is very different from that of Grace’s, 
and Amelia’s experiences with Jewelry Plus are very different from hers with Grace’s 

	
Ethnographic Understanding: Laying It On Thick     279
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
Jewelers. The corporate giant has no exception to its policy on store returns, and any 
suggestions for store improvement must be placed in the employee suggestion box 
or emailed to the national headquarters. A sense of community is not encouraged 
at Jewelry Plus because tasks clearly promote autonomy. There are some efforts 
to ensure that employees have time ­together—through breaks, lunch, or holiday 
gatherings—but these opportunities are too limited to foster collegiality. In addition, 
email is closely monitored by supervisors. Clearly, without collegiality, stories, rituals, 
and rites of passage are restricted. It should be obvious that significant differences 
exist in the ­organizational cultures of Grace’s and Jewelry Plus.
	
We have presented three assumptions of Organizational Culture Theory. Each is 
grounded in the belief that when researchers study organizational ­cultures, they will 
uncover a complex and intricate web. Pacanowsky and ­O’Donnell-Trujillo believe 
that the Symbolic-Interpretive perspective provides a realistic picture of the culture 
of a company. To gain a better sense of how they went about studying organizations, 
we turn our attention to the primary methodology employed in their work and the 
work of their predecessor, ­Clifford Geertz: ethnography.
Ethnographic Understanding: Laying It On Thick
Communication and performance studies scholar Dwight Conquergood (1992, 1994) 
studied one of the most intriguing of all research topics in communication: gang com­
munication. In an effort to understand gang communication, Conquergood moved 
into a run-down building in Chicago known at the time as “Big Red.” He lived in 
the building for nearly two years, observing and participating in virtually all parts of 
life occupied by gang members. Through observing, participating, and taking notes, 
Conquergood’s research offered a view of gang communication virtually ignored in 
the media. He uncovered many private rituals and symbols, and his work enabled the 
gang population to have a “voice” never written about in the communication disci­
pline. His efforts in ­revealing gang-related stories to others is part of ethnography, the 
underlying methodology of Organizational Culture Theory.
	
You will recall that Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo based much of their 
work on Geertz’s. Because Geertz’s work was ethnographic in nature, let’s briefly 
discuss the ethnographic orientation of Geertz and explain its relationship to the 
theory.
	
Geertz (1973) argues that to understand a culture one must see it from the 
members’ points of view. In order to do this, Geertz believes researchers should 
become ethnographers. Ethnography is a qualitative methodology that uncovers 
and interprets artifacts, stories, rituals, and practices to reveal meaning in a cul­
ture (Pachirat, 2013). Ethnographers frequently refer to their study as ­naturalistic 
research in that they believe that the manner in which they study cultures is 
much more natural than, say, that of quantitative researchers. In this spirit, 
Geertz remarked that ethnography is not an experimental science but rather a 
methodology that uncovers meaning. Discovering meaning, then, is paramount to 
ethnographers. Geertz, and later Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo, primarily 
subscribe to direct observation, interviews, and participant observation in finding 
meaning in culture.

280     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
	
As an ethnographer, Geertz spent many years studying various cultures. His 
writings have addressed a number of diverse subjects, from Zen Buddhism to island 
life in Indonesia. During his stay in some of these places, he relied heavily on field 
notes and kept a field journal, recording his feelings and ideas about his interactions 
with members of a specific culture. In his writings, Geertz (1973) concludes that 
ethnography is a kind of thick description, or an explanation of the intricate layers 
of meaning underlying a culture. Ethnographers, therefore, strive to understand the 
thick description of a culture and “to ferret out the unapparent import of things” 
(p. 26). Interestingly, Geertz ­believes that any cultural analysis is incomplete be­
cause the deeper one goes, the more complex the culture becomes. Therefore, it is not 
possible to be ­completely certain of a culture and its norms or values.
	
Geertz (1983) points out that this qualitative methodology is not equivalent to 
walking a mile in the shoes of those studied. This thinking only perpetuates “the myth 
of the chameleon fieldworker, perfectly self-tuned to his [her] exotic surroundings, 
a walking miracle of empathy, tact, patience, and cosmopolitanism” (p. 56). Geertz 
suggests that a balance must be struck between naturally observing and recording 
behavior and integrating a researcher’s values into the process. He states that “the 
trick is to figure out what the devil they think they are up to” (p. 58). This, as you 
might imagine, can be quite difficult for ethnographers.
	
Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo were drawn to Geertz’s ethnographic expe­
riences and his articulation of the importance of observation, analysis, and interpreta­
tion. Their own research experiences with different co-cultures proved invaluable. 
For instance, Pacanowsky (1983) observed police in the Salt Lake [Utah] valley, and 
Trujillo (1983) studied a new- and used-car dealership. The diversity of their experi­
ences in these smaller cultures in the United States prompted them to acknowledge 
that cultural performances, or what we call storytelling, are instrumental in commu­
nicating about an organization’s culture. We return to the topic of performance a bit 
later in this chapter.
	
Organizational Culture Theory is rooted in ethnography, and organizational cul­
ture should be understood with ethnographic principles in mind. In fact, ethnographer 
Bruce Lunsford (2015) found the theory and its origins to be “amazing, illuminating, 
excellent, and useful” (pp. 2, 3). Let’s explore ethnography by using our example of 
Amelia Callahan. If ethnographers were interested in studying the culture of her new 
field journal 
personal log 
to record 
feelings about 
communicating with 
people in a different 
culture from one’s 
own
thick description
explanation of the 
layers of meaning in 
a culture
Student Voices
Jackson
When we talked about ethnography, I knew I’d do my ethnographic study on where 
I work. It’s a fast-food place, but there is so much politics in who gets what 
schedule, where we are assigned to work, and whether or not we get overtime. 
It’s a place where the manager has the final say. Although she pretends to think it’s 
an “inclusive” place where employees have input, it’s anything but that. It’s a top-
down restaurant where punishments are great and rewards are few.

	
The Communicative Performance     281
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
job at Jewelry Plus, they might begin by examining several areas: For instance, what 
sort of new corporate rules are in place? What do new employees like Amelia think 
about them? What types of strategies are used to ease the transition for employees like 
Amelia? Are there any corporate philosophies or ideologies? Are there morale prob­
lems? How are they resolved? Has the company responded to employee complaints? If 
so, how? If not, why not? These and a host of other questions would begin the ethno­
graphic process of understanding the organizational culture of Jewelry Plus.
	
We could never fully capture the excitement of ethnography in this limited space. 
Yet we hope that you have grounding in the basic processes associated with ethnog­
raphy and an understanding of why Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo embrace 
such a methodology in their work on organizational culture. We now wish to expand 
on the topic of performance, which is a key component in OCT.
The Communicative Performance
Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo (1982) contend that organizational ­members act 
out certain communication performances, which result in a unique organizational cul­
ture. Performance is a metaphor that suggests a symbolic process of ­understanding 
human behavior in an organization. Organizational performances frequently mimic 
the theater, in that both supervisor and employees choose to take on various roles, 
or parts, in their organization. To some ­extent, the workplace can be viewed as stage 
and each “actor” enacts different scripted and ­unscripted dialogues. Let’s explore 
their system of performances. 
	
The theorists outline five cultural performances: ritual, passion, social, ­political, 
and enculturation. In Table 16.2, we identify these performances. As we discuss 
each, we will provide various examples from different contexts to communicate 
the diversity embedded in each performance. Although the category system is not 
performance 
metaphor suggesting 
that organizational 
life is like a theatrical 
presentation
Table 16.2  Cultural Performances in Organizations
Ritual Performances	
Personal rituals—checking voicemail and email; task 
­rituals—­issuing tickets, collecting fees; social rituals— 
happy-hour ­gatherings; organizational rituals—department 
meetings, ­company picnics
Passion Performances	
Storytelling, metaphors, and exaggerated speech—“this 
is the most unappreciative company,” “follow the chain of 
command or it’ll get wrapped around your neck”
Social Performances	
Acts of civility and politeness; extensions of etiquette—­
customer thank-yous, water cooler chat, supporting 
­another’s “face”
Political Performances	
Exercising control, power, and influence—“barking” 
bosses, ­intimidation rituals, use of informants, bargaining
Enculturation Performances	
Acquired competencies over organizational career—­
learning/teaching roles, orientations, interviews

282     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
necessarily exclusive, you will get an idea about the extent to which organizations 
vary in terms of how human behavior can be understood. Further, recall back to our 
discussion of organizational symbols. As you read about performance, keep in mind 
this is one way that an organization and its people interpret their environment.
Ritual Performances
Communication performances that occur on a regular and recurring basis are termed 
ritual performances. Rituals include four types: personal, task, social, and orga­
nizational. Personal rituals include things that you routinely do each day at the 
workplace. For instance, many organizational members regularly check their voice 
mail or email when they get to work each day. Task rituals are routinized behaviors 
associated with a person’s job. Task rituals get the job done. For instance, task rituals 
of employees of the Department of Motor ­Vehicles include issuing eye and written 
examinations, taking pictures of prospective drivers, administering driving tests, ver­
ifying car insurance, and the stories that employees share with one another collecting 
fees. Social rituals are the verbal and nonverbal routines that normally take into con­
sideration the interactions with others. For instance, some organizational members 
get ­together for a happy hour in bars on Fridays, celebrating the week’s end.
	
With respect to your own social rituals, consider the social routines you experience 
in your classes. Many of you arrive early to catch up with your classmates on what has 
happened since the last time you spoke and continue the social ritual either during a class 
break or after class. Social rituals may also include nonverbal behaviors in an organization, 
including casual Fridays and  employee-of-the-month awards. Finally, organizational 
rituals include ­frequently occurring company events such as division meetings, faculty 
meetings, and even company picnics like the one Amelia Callahan attended.
Passion Performances
The organizational stories that members enthusiastically relate to others are termed 
passion performances. Many times, people in organizations become fervent in their 
storytelling. Consider, for instance, the experience of Adam, who works at a national 
passion 
performances 
organizational 
stories that 
employees share 
with one another
ritual performances
regular and recurring 
presentations in the 
workplace
personal rituals 
routines done at the 
workplace each day
task rituals
routines associated 
with a particular job 
in the workplace
social rituals 
routines that involve 
relationships 
with others in the 
workplace
organizational 
rituals 
routines that 
pertain to the 
organization overall
Theory-Into-Practice
Organizational Culture Theory
Theoretical Claim: Culture is an intangible and crucial component of all organizations. 
Practical Claim: As the HR guru of BGone, a start-up focusing on European travel, 
Hinto knows that the company’s mission is related to (a) how employees are treated 
and their opportunities (e.g., monthly social events, child care, stock options, etc.) and 
(b) community commitments (e.g., mentoring, etc.). Taken together, these efforts com­
prise the organizational culture that Hinto must communicate to all employees.
T*I*P

	
The Communicative Performance     283
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
retail store. Adam and his coworkers hear and retell stories about their department 
supervisor. The story goes that the boss walks the perimeter of their department every 
30 minutes to get an expanded view of the workers and customers. If the supervisor sees 
something that he thinks is peculiar, he calls the employee into the back room, reviews 
a videotape of the event, and asks the employee what he or she will do to improve any 
future problems. Adam relates that all of his coworkers passionately tell this story over 
and over to both new and seasoned employees. In fact, even after six years, Adam’s 
passion for sharing the story is the same as when he told it for the first time.
Social Performances
Whereas passionate performances, like Adam’s, appear to have little regard for the 
butt of the story, social performances are the common extensions of civility, polite­
ness, and courtesy used to encourage cooperation among organizational members. 
The adage that “a little goes a long way” relates directly to this performance. Whether 
with a smile or a “good morning” greeting, establishing some sense of collegiality is 
frequently part of an organization’s culture. 
	
Performing these “niceties” may be viewed as either trivial and yet, it is often 
difficult to be polite. When the mood is tense, it is both trying and somewhat insincere 
to smile or to wish another a “good morning.” Most organizations wish to maintain a 
professional decorum, even in difficult times, and these social performances help to 
accomplish this.
Political Performances
When organizational cultures communicate political performances, they are exer­
cising power or control. Acquiring and maintaining power and control is a hallmark 
of U.S. corporate life. In fact, some might argue that power and control pervade 
organizational life. Nonetheless, because by their nature most organizations are 
hierarchical, there must be someone with the power to accomplish things and with 
enough control to maintain the bottom line.
	
As organizational members engage in political performances, they essentially 
communicate a desire to influence others. That is not necessarily a bad thing. Let’s 
consider an extended example here. Consider the experiences of a group of nurses, 
for instance, at Spring Valley Hospital. For years, the nurses were quiet regarding 
their second-class status relative to the hospital’s physicians. Recently, however, 
the nurses decided to speak out about their treatment. They talked to physicians, 
other medical staff, and patients. In this instance, they were exercising more control 
over their jobs. Their cultural political performances centered on being recognized 
for their competency as medical ­professionals and for their commitment to the mis­
sion of the hospital. Their goal was to be legitimized in the hospital by the physi­
cians, their coworkers, and the patients. Their performances, no doubt, were critical in 
establishing a modified organizational culture.
Enculturation Performances
The fifth type of performance identified by Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-­Trujillo 
is termed enculturation performance. Enculturation performances refer to how 
social performances
organizational 
behaviors intended 
to demonstrate 
cooperation and 
politeness with 
others
political 
performances 
organizational 
behaviors that 
demonstrate power 
or control
enculturation 
performances 
organizational 
behaviors that 
assist employees 
in discovering 
what it means to 
be a member of an 
organization

284     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
members obtain the knowledge and skills in order to become contributing members 
of the organization. These performances may be bold or subtle, and they dem­
onstrate a member’s competency within an organization. In the chapter-opening 
scenario, for example, a number of performances will be enacted to ­enculturate 
Amelia into her new position. She will watch and listen to her ­colleagues “perform” 
their thoughts and feelings on a number of ­issues: work hours, employee discounts, 
and the company newsletter, among others. In sum, Amelia will begin to know the 
organization’s culture.
	
As we mentioned previously, these performances may overlap. It is possible, 
therefore, to have social performances considered ritual performances. Think about, 
for instance, greeting one coworker with “Good morning” or fetching coffee for 
another each day. In this example, the acts of politeness are considered to be a 
personal (and even task) ritual. Therefore, the performance may be both a social and 
a ritual performance.
	
Furthermore, performances may arise from a conscious decision to act out 
thoughts and feelings about an issue, as in our example of the nurses at Spring Valley 
Hospital. Or the performances may be more intuitive, as in our example of Amelia 
Callahan. It is clear that Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo believe that communi­
cative performances are critical to an organization’s culture and are important sym­
bols of communication.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Organizational Culture Theory, as articulated by Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-
Trujillo, remains an important influence on organizational communication theory 
and research. The majority of research conducted using OCT has been qualitative in 
nature since the theorists contend that honoring the organizational “voice” is essen­
tial to understanding the organization. To evaluate the effectiveness of the theory, we 
discuss three criteria: logical consistency, utility, and heurism.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration 
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time 
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     285
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
Logical Consistency
The logical consistency of the model should not go unnoticed. Recall that logi­
cal consistency refers to the notion that theories should follow a logical arrangement 
and remain consistent. From the outset, Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo tried to 
remain true to their belief that the organization’s culture is rich and diverse; they felt that 
listening to the communicative performances of organizational members was where we 
must begin in understanding “corporate culture.” This is the basis from which much of 
the theory gained momentum.
	
Still, some believe consistency is lacking. Eric Eisenberg, H. L. Goodall, and 
Angela Tretheway (2014), for instance, observe that Organizational Culture Theory 
relies heavily on shared meaning among organizational members. They comment 
that stories, for example, are not shared similarly across employees because 
different organizational stories are told by different organizational narrators. That is, 
although the theory posits that stories are told and retold and contribute to the culture 
of an organization, the stories may not have shared meaning.
Student Voices
Nola
I remember working for a company that had the worst corporate culture you could 
imagine. I worked for a telemarketer, and even during our breaks we felt very 
uncomfortable. We never dared talk about other employees, share stories of our 
families, or even try to give ideas to the company. Without doubt, there was a lot of 
tension in the workplace. One time, my sister had to stop at work to get my car keys. 
Even she couldn’t believe it. She said that no one should be forced to work in that 
environment. If I didn’t need the money, I would have quit after one day on the job!
Utility
The theory is useful because the information is applicable to nearly every employee 
in an organization. The approach is useful because much of the information from the 
theory (e.g., symbols, stories, rituals) has direct relationship to how employees work 
and their identification with their work environment (Schein, 2016). Because the 
theorists’ work is based on real organizations with real ­employees, the researchers 
have made the theory more useful and practical.
Heurism
The appeal of Organizational Culture Theory has been far and wide, resulting in 
a heuristic theory. Researchers have focused several of the theory’s fundamental 
themes in research examining engineering initiatives (Templin, 2012), college 
campus facilities (Harris & Cullen, 2008), and nursing homes (Johnston & Womack, 
2015). Organizational culture has framed research examining Muslim employees 
(Alkhazraji, 1997), law enforcement officers (Frewin & Tuffin, 1998), student 

286     Chapter 16  •  Organizational Culture Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  C U L T U R E  T H E O R Y
discipline (van der Westhuizen, Oosthuizen, & Wolhuter, 2008), and nurses (Gaudine 
& Thorne, 2012). It has influenced scholars to consider organizational culture in 
how they teach their classes (Messersmith, Keyton, & Bisel, 2009). And, the notion 
of trust in an organization has been investigated across multiple cultures, including 
Russia and Poland (Morreale & Shockley-Zalabak, 2014).
Closing
Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo were among the first communication scholars 
to examine organizational life by looking at both employees and their behaviors. 
Looking at organizational culture in this way will enable researchers to appreciate 
the importance of connecting with the people and their performances at work. The 
theory will continue to be an important one to understand as organizational life be­
comes more layered and more complex.
Discussion Starters
tech quest: Organizational Culture Theory suggests that the culture of an 
organization (norms, attitudes, values, beliefs, community issues, etc.) com­
municates a great deal about that organization. How might a Wiki assist in 
defining and communicating the culture of an organization?
	
1.  How can employees like Amelia Callahan ease into a new and different 
organizational culture? What advice would you give her as she begins her new job 
with Jewelry Plus?
	
2.  Consider some of the organizations to which you belong. Identify the cul­
tural performances that you have either observed or shared. How could you use 
these performances in your work?
	
3.  Geertz has compared culture to a spider web. What other metaphors can 
you think of that could represent organizational cultures?
	
4.  Explain how organizational culture can vary within a large organization. 
Use examples in your response.
	
5.  Imagine that you’re an ethnographer who has been assigned to study your 
school’s culture. How might you go about studying it? What sort of cultural arti­
facts or rituals would you find?
	
6.  Based on your job experiences, explain the frequency of the various cultural 
performances identified by Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-Trujillo.
	
7.  How would you apply principles of OCT to your family?

287
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
 As she read about 
the increasing corpo­
rate scandals, Domi­
nique Martin knew that 
it would be just a matter of time. Her instincts 
became real when the Vice President of Compli­
ance and Standards at BankNG emailed her to 
come speak to him about the new federal regula­
tions on oversight and financial disclosure. Domi­
nique was an expert on banking compliance and 
she was the go-to person at BankNG whenever 
new regulations emerged. With the recent bill 
signed into law, Dominique’s instructions were 
clear: “Get it done,” her vice ­president told her.
Dominique Martin could feel the stress build 
as the months progressed and as she considered 
all the avenues related to the “FedReg” project. 
Her expertise was sought at every moment as 
­various BankNG units involved in regulation con­
tacted her for assistance. In fact, she became 
even busier as media coverage caused many in 
the media to question the ability of companies to 
­accommodate the new law, causing even more 
pressure for ­Dominique. The task was not an easy 
one because the law ­involved new procedures 
for auditing, corporate governance, internal op­
erations, and financial disclosure. Special-project 
teams dealing with the challenge of bringing their 
bank and its systems up to date were immediately 
established.
As she approached the door of the confer­
ence room, Dominique thought about how happy 
and relieved she would be once the conversion 
was over. Should BankNG’s standards be enacted 
­efficiently and effectively, Dominique wondered 
whether or not she would be promoted at the 
bank. But, for now, she had to deal with BankNG’s 
compliance and she needed a team that was re­
sponsive, ­competent, and immediate. The vice 
president ­appointed her project manager, and 
today she would meet for the first time with mem­
bers of various teams via Skype. Several employ­
ees from the Boston, Dallas, Denver, and Seattle 
offices would take part. The project goal involved 
the conversion of all BankNG information systems 
so that they would be compatible for the required 
changes. The FedReg project team consisted of 
­almost 80 people who would be ­responsible for 
various aspects of the conversion. Dominique 
was used to managing a team of 12 employees 
who were all located in the same city, so dealing 
with nearly seven times as many colleagues was 
a very new challenge.
As Dominique began the meeting, she asked 
each team leader in the various cities to intro­
duce their team members and their assigned 
duties. As they went around to the various loca­
tions, Dominique became overwhelmed. Although 
a compliance checklist was available, BankNG 
was simply too large and too complex for a 
Organizational Information Theory
Based on the research of Karl Weick
Dominique 
Martin
Sensemaking is tested to the extreme when people encounter an event 
whose occurrence is so implausible that they hesitate to report it for 
fear that they will not be believed.
—Karl Weick
C H A P T E R	17

288     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
T
he task of managing vast amounts of information is a typical challenge for many 
organizations. As our options for new communication channels increase, the 
number of messages that we send and receive, as well as the speed at which we send 
them, increases as well. Not only are organizations faced with the task of decoding 
the messages that are received, but they are also challenged with determining which 
people need to receive the information to help achieve the organization’s goals. New 
media are enabling companies to accomplish their goals in ways never before seen. 
Videoconferencing, teleconferencing, wikis, and webinars allow people like Domi­
nique to provide teams with the opportunity to share and react to great amounts of 
information ­simultaneously. Each of the teams was given the opportunity to decide 
what ­information was essential to its tasks or to request additional information that 
would be needed in the future. Clearly, the introduction of new technologies is re­
shaping existing organizational functions and structures (Lovejoy & ­Saxton, 2012).
Sometimes the information an organization receives is ambiguous. In the case 
of the FedReg project, each team depended on the others to provide information 
so that it could complete its portion of the project. Teams needed the information 
to be presented in a way they could understand. The “Customer/Shareholder Ser­
vices” team may have little knowledge of computer jargon, so they depend on the 
simple checklist to be effective. There were so 
many different areas to manage in this project: 
conducting proper homework on the law and its 
various components, coordinating information 
with the federal regulatory agencies, providing 
updates to and obtaining feedback from the bank 
board members and shareholders, establishing 
an audit committee, keeping the other divisions 
within the bank informed of changes that were 
being made, and how those changes would 
affect their departments . . . and that was only 
the beginning! Each of the teams needed to be 
kept informed about the others’ progress in order 
to meet their deadlines.
As the meeting progressed, Dominique real­
ized that the success of this project would de­
pend on ­effective communication with all the 
various teams in the different states. They devel­
oped a communication strategy to help keep the 
teams in the different offices across the coun­
try informed of the events associated with the 
project. Although the home ­office was located 
in Boston, the regional offices needed to be 
made aware of the plans and protocols so that 
everyone was on board. The plan included hiring 
an internal communication coordinator to man­
age all the messages that would be sent about 
compliance. Next, they decided that a company 
wiki would be ­established so that all project 
members could ­communicate about the infor­
mation needed to complete the project. Also, an 
electronic newsletter would be distributed peri­
odically to update all members of BankNG about 
the progress that was being made. Finally, they 
decided that they would use computer software 
to record the goals, ­resources, deadlines, and 
accomplishments associated with the project. 
In the end, despite the ­pressures and stressors, 
Dominique’s leadership prevailed and compli­
ance was achieved at BankNG with little resis­
tance and few problems. 
Although several years have passed, Domi­
nique continues to wonder whether she facili­
tated the regulatory project effectively. She knew 
that she was a good team leader, but even today, 
she thinks about whether her thoughts, actions, 
and activities were the most appropriate at the 
time. She felt confident that everyone had a voice 
in the matter and that their conversations helped 
move FedReg along. Still, she couldn’t rid herself 
of a nagging doubt about whether she managed 
the events to the best of her ability.

O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Organizational Information Theory 
     ﻿    
289
technicians to clarify the information and present it to them in a way that they could 
then communicate to their customers and shareholders. Without this exchange and 
management of information—particularly given the federal directive—BankNG’s 
regulation accommodation would probably fail.
Some writers of organizational communication have used the metaphor of a 
“living system” to describe organizations (Triolo, 2012). Just as living systems en­
gage in a process of activities to maintain their functioning and existence, an orga­
nization must have a procedure for dealing with all the information it needs to send 
and receive to accomplish its goals. Much like systems, organizations are made up 
of people and teams that are interrelated. Each depends on the other to accomplish 
their goals.
Consider the process that colleges and universities go through to recruit new 
students. The publications office conducts research to find out what criteria matter 
to potential students. Are graduation rates and job placement something high school 
students are looking for in deciding where to pursue their education? Is the diversity 
of the student body an important factor in making a decision? Does student finan­
cial aid remain paramount? Will the recent rating by The Princeton Review have an 
impact on student decisions? Or, are students attracted to a campus that has superior 
computer facilities? After collecting these data, the publications office will use this 
information to develop publicity materials that appeal to potential students. Recruit­
ment fairs may be held in major cities to provide parents and students with the op­
portunity to ask admissions counselors about the school. While this process is taking 
place, the school collects feedback and monitors the reactions of potential students 
and their parents in order to make changes in their current recruitment strategies. The 
admissions office reduces uncertainty about what qualities are attractive to students 
while at the same time assisting students in making their decision by providing infor­
mation about the school.
Karl Weick developed an approach to describe the process by which organiza­
tions (like a college or university) collect, manage, and use the information that they 
receive. Rather than focusing his attention on the structure of the ­organization in 
terms of the roles and rules that guide its members, Weick ­emphasizes the process 
of organizing. In doing so, the primary focus is on the exchange of information that 
takes place within the organization and how members take steps to understand this 
material. Weick (1995) believes that ­“organizations talk to themselves” (p. 281). To 
this end, organizational members are instrumental in the creation and maintenance 
of message meaning. 
Weick sees the organization as a system taking in confusing or ambiguous 
information from its environment and making sense out of it. Therefore, or­
ganizations will evolve as they try to make sense out of themselves and their 
environment. Rather than focusing on Dominique’s role as project manager or 
on the specific communication rules for sending messages between and among 
superiors and subordinates, Weick’s Organizational Information Theory (OIT) 
directs our attention to the steps that are necessary to manage and use the in­
formation for the BankNG project. As it becomes more difficult to interpret the 
information that is received, an organization needs to solicit input from others 
(often multiple sources) to make sense of the information and to provide a re­
sponse to the appropriate people or departments.

290     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
The Only Constant Is Change (in Organizations)
Weick’s theory focuses on the process that organizations undergo in their attempt to 
make sense out of all the information that bombards them on a daily basis. Often the 
process results in changes in the organization and its members. In fact, Weick states 
that “organizations and their environments change so rapidly that it is unrealistic to 
show what they are like now, because that’s not the way they’re going to be later” 
(1969, p. 1). According to this approach, it would be unrealistic to try to depict what 
colleges or universities and their surrounding environment look like today because 
it is likely that they will change. The major fields of study chosen by students may 
change as organizations’ needs for employees change. Consider, for instance, the 
early 1990s. To assist them in making changes in their computer systems, many 
companies were seeking graduates in the fields of computer technology and manage­
ment information systems. Today, however, as a result of the dot-com crash during 
the 2011 recession, many of these same individuals are either underemployed or 
employed in an area outside their major field of study. As you can see, organizational 
demands are often influenced by cultural demands. 
The focus of Organizational Information Theory is on the communication of 
information that is vital in determining the success of an organization. It is quite rare 
that one person or one department in an organization has all the information neces­
sary to complete a project. This knowledge typically comes from a variety of sources. 
However, the task of information processing is not completed simply by attaining 
information; the difficult part is in deciphering and distributing the information that 
is gained. To understand this process better, we will discuss how two major per­
spectives influenced OIT: General ­Systems Theory and the Theory of Sociocultural 
Evolution.
General Systems Theory
To explain the influence of information from an organization’s external envi­
ronments and to understand the influence that an organization has on its external 
environments, Weick applied General Systems Theory in the development of 
his approach to studying how organizations manage information. As we dis­
cussed in Chapter 3, Ludwig von Bertalanffy is most frequently associated with 
Theory At a Glance  •  Organizational Information Theory
The main activity of organizations is the process of making sense of equivo­
cal and ambiguous information. Organizational members accomplish this 
sensemaking process through enactment, selection, and retention of infor­
mation. Organizations are successful to the extent that they are able to 
reduce equivocality through these means.

	
The Only Constant Is Change (in Organizations)     291
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
the systems approach. von Bertalanffy believed that patterns and wholes exist 
across different types of phenomena. To this end, he proposed that when there is 
a disruption in one part of a system, it affects the entire system. In sum, systems 
theorists argue that there are complex patterns of interaction among the parts 
of a system, and understanding these interactions will help us understand the 
entire system.
Systems thinking is especially useful in understanding the interrelationships 
that exist among various organizational units. Organizations are usually made up 
of different departments, teams, or groups. Although these units may focus on in­
dependent tasks, the goals of the organization as a whole typically require sharing 
and integrating the information that each of the teams has to arrive at a solution or 
conclusion. Organizations depend on combined information so that they can make 
any necessary adjustments in order to reach their goal. They may need additional in­
formation, they may need to send information to other ­departments or people within 
the organization, or they may need outside ­consultants to make sense of the informa­
tion. If one team fails to address the ­information needed to fulfill its obligation in the 
completion of the project, achieving the final goal will probably be delayed for the 
entire organization.
In the chapter-opening scenario, we learned that Dominique needed to consult 
with different teams from different states. Each state’s team had a particular respon­
sibility in order to complete the FedReg project. Yet, the interrelationships among 
the teams cannot be ignored. That is, each has a dependency on the other; one needs 
the other for information and cannot act without it. If such information were not re­
ceived, enacting BankNG’s changes would be delayed.
An important component of General Systems Theory, and one that is ­essential 
to making sense of information in an organization, is feedback, or the information 
received by an organization and its members. It’s important to ­remember that this 
information can be either positive or negative. The organization and its members 
can then choose to use the information to maintain the current state of the organi­
zation or can decide to initiate some changes in ­accordance with the goals that the 
system is trying to accomplish. It is through feedback that units are able to deter­
mine if the information that is being transmitted is clear and sufficient to achieve 
the desired goals.
The decision of the organization to request or provide feedback reflects a selec­
tive choice made by the group in an effort to accomplish its goals. If an organization 
hopes to survive and accomplish its goals, it will continue to engage in cycles of 
feedback to obtain necessary information and reduce its uncertainty about the best 
way to accomplish its goals. This process reflects a ­Darwinian approach to how or­
ganizations manage information, as we discuss next.
Darwin’s Theory of Sociocultural Evolution
A second perspective that has been used to describe the process by which organi­
zations collect and make sense out of information is the theory of sociocultural 
evolution. You may have heard of the “survival of the fittest,” which is an apt 
phrase to describe the theory. The eventual goal of any organization is survival, 
and, like humans, it works to discover the best strategies for getting by. Although 
theory of  
sociocultural  
evolution 
Darwin’s belief that 
only the fittest can 
survive challenging 
surroundings

292     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
this approach is used to describe the social interactions that take place in an 
organization with regard to making sense out of information, its origins are in the 
field of biology. 
The theory of evolution was originally developed to describe the adapta­
tion processes that living organisms undergo in order to thrive in a challenging 
ecological environment. Charles Darwin (1948) explained these adaptations in 
terms of mutations that allow organisms to cope with their various surroundings. 
Some organisms could not adapt and died, whereas others made changes and 
prospered. Taking the example of Dominique Martin and the FedReg challenge, 
corporations that took steps to accommodate the law quickly have a greater 
chance to prosper and thrive. Those who did not make the attempt to adapt to the 
changing legal landscape will likely be faced with severe consequences including 
financial penalties.
Campbell (1965) extends this theory to explain the processes by which 
organizations and their members adapt to their social surroundings. The socio­
cultural theory of evolution examines the changes people make in their social 
behaviors and expectations to adapt to changes in their social surround­ings. 
Many times, these changes involve team-member efforts to be creative (Sawyer, 
2012). 
Consider the scenario at the beginning of this chapter. Suppose that ­Dominique 
had a team of representatives from BankNG’s offices in Japan ­involved in this proj­
ect. If she wanted to make a quick decision on how to ­address the FedReg changes 
in the Japanese offices, her first tendency would likely be to employ a communi­
cation style that U.S. employees would perceive as efficient. However, she would 
soon realize that the Japanese approach to business is quite different from that prac­
ticed in the United States. Instead of quickly presenting the facts and determining 
financial processes, Japanese bank employees prefer an approach that emphasizes 
the development of rapport. Only after the relationship has been developed would 
the issue of signing an agreement be presented. Dominique must engage in the 
process of sociocultural evolution to adapt to the norms and expectations of her 
overseas team.
Weick adapts sociocultural evolution to explain the process that organizations 
undergo in adjusting to various information pressures. These pressures may be the 
result of information overload or ambiguity. Although the evolutionary approach is 
useful in describing the adaptations that are necessary to process information, Gen­
eral Systems Theory is also an essential piece in this puzzle because it highlights 
the interrelatedness among organizational teams, departments, and employees in the 
processing of information. We now continue our discussion of OIT and identify its 
­underlying assumptions.
Assumptions of Organizational Information Theory
Organizational Information Theory is one way of explaining how organiza­
tions make sense out of information that is confusing or ambiguous. It focuses 
on the process of organizing members of an organization to manage information 

	
Assumptions of Organizational Information Theory     293
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
rather than on the structure of the organization itself. A number of assumptions 
underlie this theory:
∙∙
Human organizations exist in an information environment.
∙∙
The information an organization receives differs in terms of equivocality.
∙∙
Human organizations engage in information processing to reduce equivocality 
of information.
The first assumption states that organizations depend on information in order 
to function effectively and accomplish their goals. Weick (1979) views the concept 
of information environment as distinct from the physical surroundings in which an 
organization is housed. He proposes that these information environments are created 
by the members of the organization. They establish goals that require them to obtain 
information from both internal and external sources. However, these inputs differ in 
terms of their level of understandability.
Consider the university admissions office example. A school can use numerous 
channels to gain information about student needs: It may develop a website to answer 
prospective students’ questions and to solicit student feedback; it may conduct surveys 
at high school academic fairs to gain more information about student desires; it may 
host focus group interviews with current students to discover needs and concerns; or it 
may ask alumni to provide ­examples from their educational experiences to attract future 
students. Once it has received messages from all of these external sources, the univer­
sity must decide how to communicate messages internally to establish and accomplish 
its goals for current and future students. The possibilities for information are endless, 
and the university must decide how to manage all the available potential messages.
The second assumption proposed by Weick focuses on the ambiguity that exists 
in information: Messages differ in terms of their understandability. An organization 
needs to determine which of its members are most knowledgeable or experienced in 
dealing with particular information that is obtained. A plan to make sense of the infor­
mation needs to be established. In fact, Karl Weick (2015) argues that when things are 
ambiguous, people will do their best to work with it. That is, he believes that at times, 
employees have no choice but to deal with ambiguous messages. The key is to simply 
accept it and try to make sense of it, an idea we explore a bit later in the chapter.
At BankNG, each member of each team must be able to interpret and understand 
the messages accurately. Given the federal law requirements, however, and the com­
plexities related to the law, many messages are not always clear because individuals 
often assume understanding and often communicate in ways that are less than clear. 
Further, each office has had little experience working with such a massive undertak­
ing. Messages in BankNG, then, according to Weick’s theory, may be frequently 
equivocal. Equivocality refers to the extent to which messages are complicated, un­
certain, and unpredictable. Equivocal messages are often sent in organizations. Be­
cause these messages are not clearly understood, people need to develop a framework 
or plan for reducing their ­ambiguity about the message. 
You may be tempted to think that equivocality is ineffectual in an organization. 
Yet, as Eric Eisenberg (2007) reminds us, equivocality is not necessarily problem­
atic. He states that rather than viewing equivocality as difficult, “Weick turned this 
equivocality 
the extent to which 
organizational  
messages are  
uncertain,  
ambiguous,  
and/or unpredictable

294     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
idea on its head, arguing instead that equivocality is the ­engine that motivates people 
to organize” (p. 274). Eisenberg further clarifies that equivocality may “make coordi­
nated action possible” (p. 274). When individuals in an organization reduce equivo­
cality, they engage in a process that tries to make sense out of excessive information 
received by the organization. We delve further into equivocation a few more times 
later in the chapter.
In an attempt to reduce the ambiguity of information, the third assumption of 
the theory proposes that organizations engage in joint activity to make information 
that is received more understandable. Weick (1979) sees the process of reducing 
equivocality as a joint activity among members of an organization. It is not the sole 
responsibility of one person to reduce equivocality. Rather, this is a process that may 
involve several members of the organization. Consider the BankNG example. Each 
department needs to use information from other units, but they also need to provide 
information to these same units to accomplish the tasks necessary to meet the orga­
nization’s federal compliance. This illustrates the extent to which departments in an 
organization may depend on one another to reduce their ambiguity. An ongoing cycle 
of communicating feedback takes place in which there is a mutual give-and-take of 
information.
Key Concepts and Conceptualizing Information
Weick’s theory of Organizational Information contains a number of key concepts 
that are critical to an understanding of the theory. They include information environ­
ment, rules, and cycles. We now explore each in detail.
Information Environment: The Sum Total
Information environment is an integral part of Weick’s theory. Information envi­
ronment is a core concept in understanding how organizations are formed as well 
as how they process information. Every day, we are faced with literally thousands 
of stimuli that we could potentially process and interpret. However, it is unrealistic 
to think that an organization or its members could possibly process all the informa­
tion that is available. Thus, we are faced with the tasks of selecting information that 
is meaningful or important and focusing our senses on processing those cues. The 
availability of all stimuli is considered to be the information environment. Organi­
zations are composed and are sustained because of information that is vital to their 
formation and continues to be essential to their existence. For example, the FedReg 
project team was formed because new federal laws required publicly held companies 
to revamp their financial protocols. If the bank is to survive during a competitive era, 
it must comply or else face dire consequences on the horizon. So, the information 
environment not only comprises internal communications between and among dif­
ferent units and offices, but there are external stimuli (e.g., governmental mandates) 
that also must be considered.
Essentially, organizations have two primary tasks to perform in order to suc­
cessfully manage these multiple sources of information: (1) They must ­interpret the 
external information that exists in their information environment, and (2) they must 
information  
environment 
the availability of all 
stimuli in an  
organization

	
Key Concepts and Conceptualizing Information     295
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
coordinate that information to make it meaningful for the members of the organiza­
tion and its goals. These interpretation processes require the organization to reduce 
the equivocality of the information to make it meaningful.
Rules: Guidelines to Analyze
Weick (1979) proposes two communication strategies that are essential if the or­
ganization hopes to reduce message equivocality. The first strategy requires that 
organizations determine the rules for reducing the level of equivocality of the mes­
sage inputs as well as for choosing the appropriate response to the information 
received. In a sense, then, organizations self-govern with respect to getting things 
accomplished. In Organizational Information Theory, rules refer to the guidelines 
that an organization has established for analyzing the equivocality of a message as 
well as for guiding responses to information. For example, if any of the FedReg 
team leaders experience ambiguity over the information that is provided to them 
from the computer technicians, they are instructed to contact the technician team 
leader for clarification. If they were to contact ­Dominique first, an additional step 
would be added to the process of reducing equivocality because she would have to 
contact the technicians and then report back to the team leaders. Recall the example 
of the university ­admissions office, which conducted research in order to design 
materials that appeal to students. As a result, when it receives information from 
students inquiring about the university, the rule that it applies in dealing with the 
information environment is to respond to that message by sending out their infor­
mational brochure. Both organizations have rules for determining the equivocality 
of the information and for identifying the appropriate way in which they should 
respond to the messages.
Weick provides examples of rules that might cause an organization to choose 
one cycle of information or feedback over another for reducing the equivocality of 
messages. These rules include duration, personnel, success, and effort. Examples 
of duration and personnel rules guiding communication can be seen in our chapter-
opening story. Duration refers to a choice made by an organization to engage in 
rules 
guidelines in  
organizations as 
they review  
responses to  
equivocal  
information
duration
organizational 
rule stating that 
decisions regarding 
equivocality should 
be made in the least 
amount of time
Student Voices
Nicolas
The class discussion on equivocality was one that I understood. I work for a com­
pany where the boss is also the owner. Normally, it’s okay, but at times there is a lot 
of confusion around decisions. Sometimes, she announces a major decision (usually 
in our weekly Friday employee pep talks) and after she’s done, we still don’t know 
what she meant. One day she was talking about across-the-board raises and in the 
next breath she told us that the company was trailing projections. As we learned, 
we are guided by the personnel rule, but you’d think she, as the owner, would have a 
lot less equivocality!

296     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
communication that can be completed in the least amount of time. For example, 
BankNG has rules that state who should be contacted to clarify technical informa­
tion. These rules prevent people from asking those who are not knowledgeable about 
the topic. In establishing these rules, BankNG increases its efficiency by having em­
ployees go directly to the person who can provide the necessary information, thus 
eliminating delays that might result from having to channel questions through sev­
eral different people. In doing so, BankNG is also guided by the rule of personnel. 
This rule states that people who are the most knowledgeable should emerge as key 
resources to reduce equivocality. Computer technicians, not human resources per­
sonnel, are consulted to reduce equivocality of technical information associated 
with the project.
When an organization chooses to employ a plan of communication that has been 
proven effective in the past at reducing equivocality of information, success is the 
influential rule that is being applied. A university knows that many of its potential 
students’ questions and concerns can be answered via a well-researched brochure. It 
has proved to be a successful recruiting tool in the past, as the enrollment figures of 
the school have increased by 4 percent per year over the past five years. Thus, the 
university knows that this is a successful way of reducing information ambiguity for 
students.
personnel 
organizational rule 
stating the most 
knowledgeable 
workers should 
resolve equivocality
success 
organizational rule 
stating that a suc-
cessful plan of the 
past will be used 
to reduce current 
equivocality
Part of what allows an organization to reduce organizational equivocality is 
the notion of self-governance. Dov Seidman, the founder and CEO of LRN, a 
company dedicated to advocating principled and ethical practices in culture, 
took the notion of self-governance seriously by first ripping up the company’s 
organizational chart. His perspective was clear: “We would all ‘report’ to 
our company mission.” Seidman decided to get 20 teams from around the 
globe to imagine the notion of self-governance. Self-governance, in this re­
gard, meant abandoning top-down decision making and rather, making power 
and authority “highly collaborative.” The rules in this sort of organization are 
not firm but instead take into consideration employee values and the types 
of relationships existing in the company. Seidman states that decisions are 
undertaken by elected employee councils that handle things like recruiting, 
performance management, and conflict resolution. Other self-governing be­
haviors, including an unlimited vacation policy, spending money without hier­
archical approval, and publishing Seidman’s performance review (conducted 
by any employee who wanted to review him), are part of the new “rules” of 
self-governance. Seidman concludes that self-governing has been “enlighten­
ing, frustrating, nerve-racking, authentic, and urgent.” 
Source: Letting the mission govern a company, (2012, June 24). New York Times, p. 7.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Self-Governing Organizations 
and Organizational Rules

	
Key Concepts and Conceptualizing Information     297
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Effort is also a rule that influences the choice to use a brochure to promote 
the university. This rule guides organizations in choosing an information strategy 
that requires the least amount of effort to reduce equivocality. Rather than fielding 
numerous phone calls from potential students asking the same questions about the 
school, the university’s decision to print a brochure that answers frequently asked 
questions is the most efficient means of communicating all the university has to offer. 
The decision made by many companies to implement automated telephone customer 
service is another example of how organizations reduce equivocality of information. 
Rather than requiring a customer to explain the reason for the call multiple times as 
the customer is connected to various employees, the customer chooses a number that 
best matches the problem or concern. This directs the customer to the appropriate 
department.
Cycles: Act, Respond, Adjust
If the information that is received is highly equivocal, the organization may engage 
in a series of communication behaviors in an attempt to decrease the level of ambi­
guity. Weick labels these systems of behavior cycles. The more equivocal the mes­
sage, the more cycles needed to reduce equivocation (Herrmann, 2007). The cycle 
of communication behaviors used to reduce equivocality includes three stages: act, 
response, and adjustment. An act refers to the communication statements and behav­
iors used to indicate one’s determination to ­reduce ambiguity. For example, as a team 
leader, Dominique may say to a member of the auditor independence team, “The 
financial disclosure research team wants your group’s input on the ethics related to 
the stock transactions of the company officers.” In deciding to solicit information and 
subsequently reduce any ambiguity, Dominique is employing the rule of personnel.
A second step in the communication cycle is response. Response is defined 
as a reaction to the act. That is, a response that seeks clarification in the equivocal 
message is provided as a result of the act. The auditor team leader might reply, “It 
is essential that all possible avenues examining conflict of interest and officer stock 
transactions be explored. This is absolutely of primary importance.”
As a result of the response, the organization formulates a response in return as a 
result of any adjustment that has been made to the information that was originally 
received. If the response to the act has reduced the equivocality of the message, an 
adjustment is made to indicate that the information is now understood. If the informa­
tion is still equivocal, the adjustment might come in the form of additional questions 
designed to clarify the information further. In other words, if Dominique is still uncer­
tain, she will likely continue to ask questions, thereby reducing message equivocality.
Feedback is an essential step in the process of making sense of the information 
that is received. Weick uses the term double-interact loops to describe the cycles of 
act, response, and adjustment in information exchanges. Double-interact loops refer 
to multiple communication cycles that are used to assist the organization’s members 
in reducing the equivocality of information. Employees may have working lunches, 
informal chats in the employee break room, ­interviews, conference calls, among other 
undertakings to continue to reduce information equivocality. Imagine the double in­
teract as you imagine shoveling snow. The goal is to get the snow removed so that 
no accidents occur. Double interacts in companies are necessary to “clean up” the 
effort 
organizational 
rule stating that 
decisions regarding 
equivocality should 
be made with the 
least amount of 
work
cycles 
series of commu-
nication behaviors 
that serve to reduce 
equivocality
act 
communication  
behaviors indicating 
a person’s ambiguity  
in receiving a  
message
response 
reaction to  
equivocality
adjustment 
organizational 
responses to 
equivocality
double-interact 
loops
cycles of an  
organization (e.g.,  
interviews,  
meetings) to reduce 
equivocality

298     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
ambiguities and uncertainties. Failure to do so will not only prohibit goals from being 
attained, but also can have consequences. Because these cycles require members in 
the organization to communicate with one another to reduce the level of ambiguity, 
Weick suggests that the relationships among individuals in the organization are more 
important to the process of organizing than the talent or knowledge that any one 
individual brings to the team. Hence, the General Systems Theory ­philosophy—“the 
whole is greater than the sum of its parts”—is apparent.
The Principles Related to Equivocality
By now, we’re sure that you are able to see that one central feature of Organizational 
Information Theory is equivocality. Indeed, it is a critical theme woven throughout the 
theory, even as the theory has been revisited and refined by scholars (Weick, 2011). In 
this section, we discuss equivocality by looking at three guiding principles of equivo­
cality and also at ways to reduce this communication process in organizational life.
Organizations use several principles when dealing with equivocality. An 
­organization must analyze the relationship among the equivocality of information, 
the rules the organization has for removing the equivocality, and the ­cycles of com­
munication that should be used. When analyzing the relationship among these three 
variables, a few conclusions are possible. If a message is highly equivocal, chances 
are that the organization has few rules for dealing with the ambiguity. As a result, 
the organization has to employ a greater number of ­cycles of communication to re­
duce the level of equivocality of the information. The organization will examine the 
degree of equivocality of the information (inputs) it receives and determine if it has 
sufficient rules that will be of assistance in guiding the cycle of communication that 
should be employed to ­reduce the ambiguity.
To exemplify, a technical question is highly equivocal to those who are not 
trained in the field of expertise. Thus, the organization may not have a set of rules to 
guide communication responses and may rely solely on one rule (i.e., personnel) to 
guide the cycles of communication. If inputs are easily understood by many members 
of the organization (e.g., a customer may ask, “Is BankNG doing anything to prepare 
for federal regulations?”), more rules (i.e., success, effort, duration) can be employed 
in reducing the equivocality. The more equivocal the message, the fewer rules that 
are available to guide cycles of communication; the less equivocal the message, the 
more rules that are available to assist the organization in reducing equivocality, thus 
reducing the number of cycles that are needed to interpret the information.
A second principle proposed by Weick (1979) deals with the association between 
the number of rules that are needed and the number of cycles that can be used to reduce 
the equivocality. If the organization has only a few rules available to assist it in reducing 
equivocality, a greater number of cycles will be needed to filter out the ambiguity. In our 
chapter-opening example, a majority of the members in the organization view technical 
information related to federal regulation as highly equivocal. The only rule that many of 
them have for dealing with this equivocality is to communicate with a person (personnel) 
who is knowledgeable in the appropriate area (e.g., external auditing, financial disclo­
sure, etc.). Thus, more cycles of information exchange will be employed between the 
technician and the organization’s employees to reduce the ambiguity of the information. 

	
Reducing Equivocality: Trying to Use the Information     299
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
The third principle proposed by Weick relates to a direct relationship between 
the number of cycles used and the amount of equivocality that remains. The more 
cycles that are used to obtain additional information and make adjustments, the more 
equivocality is removed. Weick proposes that if a larger number of cycles is used, it is 
more likely that equivocality can be decreased than if only a few cycles are employed.
Although BankNG has increased the potential for equivocality of information 
by providing its employees with multiple resources for obtaining information about 
the project’s status (videoconferences, telephone conferences, wikis), it has also pro­
vided its employees with a larger number of potential cycles that can be employed to 
reduce this equivocality. Employees can engage in online dialogues in an attempt to 
answer their questions and concerns about the FedReg project. They can download 
database files that track the progress of the project and inquire if other teams will be 
meeting various deadlines that are crucial to their success in the project’s comple­
tion. And they have the benefit of having an internal communication team to manage 
all the messages they receive from various sources. Thus, there is the potential for a 
greater number of cycles that can be used to reduce the equivocality of ­information.
Reducing Equivocality: Trying to Use the Information
Reducing equivocality is both necessary and complex. According to Weick (1995) 
and W. Timothy Coombs (2015), organizations evolve through stages in an attempt to 
integrate the rules and cycles so the information can be easily understood and is mean­
ingful. The process of equivocality reduction is essentially an interpersonal process 
and occurs through the following three stages: enactment, selection, and retention.
Enactment: Assigning Message Importance
Enactment refers to how information will be received and interpreted by the or­
ganization. Andrew Herrmann (2007) states, “Enactment starts with the bracketing 
or framing of a message in the environment by an individual” (p. 18). During this 
stage, the organization must analyze the inputs it receives to determine the amount 
of equivocality that is present and to assign meaning to the information. Existing 
rules are reviewed in making decisions about how the organization will deal with the 
ambiguity. If the organization determines that it does not have a sufficient number 
of rules for reducing the equivocality, various cycles of communication must be 
analyzed to determine their effectiveness in assisting the organization in understand­
ing the information. Weick believes that this action stage is vital to the success of an 
­organization. If a university made no effort to interpret information from ­potential 
students, it would not be able to address their concerns and desires in choosing a 
college to attend effectively. Eric Eisenberg and H. L. Goodall (2013) observe that 
enactment may be Weick’s most “revolutionary” concept (p. 109).
Weick believes that one affiliate of enactment is sensemaking, or the attempt to 
create understanding in situations that are complex and uncertain. For Weick (1995), 
sensemaking includes “the placement of items into frameworks, comprehending, re­
dressing surprise, constructing meaning, interacting in pursuit of mutual understand­
ing, and patterning” (p. 6). Sensemaking “starts with chaos” (Weick, Sutcliffe, & 
enactment 
interpretation of 
the information 
received by the 
organization
sensemaking 
creating awareness 
and understanding 
in situations that 
are complex or 
uncertain

300     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Obstfeld, 2009) and covers many forms of com­munication, including routines, ar­
guments, symbols, commitments, and other ­actions and behaviors (Salem, 2007). 
Weick (2012) also believes that sensemaking involves storytelling. Although Weick 
finds sensemaking activities in all three stages (enactment, selection, retention), en­
actment is most often identified with sensemaking.
Weick (2012) contends that decisions and sensemaking are related but are not 
synonymous. In fact, Weick quotes a firefighter/crew chief as he “shifts” from deci­
sions to sensemaking:
If I make a decision it is a possession, I take pride in it, I tend to defend it 
and not to listen to those who question it. If I make sense, then this is more 
dynamic and I listen and I can change it. A decision is something you polish. 
Sensemaking is a direction for the next period. (cited in Weick, 2012, p. 22)
Interestingly, some researchers believe that a prospective sensemaking happens 
at times. In their study of surgical teams, Ragnar Rossness, Tor Evjemo, Torgeir 
Haavik, and Irene Waero (2015) contend that when surgical teams considered plausible 
projections of issues that might occur during the surgery and how these situations 
might be handled, the surgery was viewed as safer and more efficient. Therefore, 
some sort of decisions take place but these decisions are considered in light of the 
consequences and implications of the decision.
Selection: Interpreting the Inputs
Once the organization has employed various rules and cycles to interpret its infor­
mation environment, it must analyze what it knows and choose the best method for 
obtaining additional information to further reduce equivocality. This stage is referred 
to as selection. In this stage of organizing, the group is ­required to make a decision 
about the rules and cycles that will be used. If the information is still ambiguous, the 
organization has to look into the resources that it has available and determine if it has 
any additional rules that could help in reducing the ambiguity.
For instance, imagine Kelvin is overwhelmed with a task that was assigned to him 
by his boss. As he considers all the inputs required of him, Kelvin becomes visibly agi­
tated and anxious. He has one week to report back to his supervisor, and he is entering 
a time period at work during which he is constantly interrupted by colleagues seeking 
his assistance. His perception of being inundated has resulted in his dealing with a proj­
ect that has a high degree of equivocality. As he oversees the project, he has to attend 
several meetings, which, interestingly, result in additional information and additional 
ambiguity. If Kelvin is to ­reduce his feeling of being overwhelmed, he will have to 
develop a plan to obtain information and disseminate it appropriately in order to finish 
the task. Reviewing organizational rules regarding communication channels may assist 
Kelvin as he manages the inputs. In this case, his selection process will be instrumental 
in his reduction of equivocality. As an organizational member, his ­expertise will also 
be quite important in the equivocality decline (Weick & ­Sutcliffe, 2015).
Retention: Remembering the Small Stuff
Once the organization has reviewed its ability to deal with ambiguity, it analyzes the 
effectiveness of the rules and cycles of communication and engages in retention. In the 
selection 
choosing the best 
method for obtaining 
information

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     301
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
retention stage, the organization stores information for later use. This stage requires 
organizations to look at what to deal with and what to ignore or leave alone. If a particu­
lar rule or cycle was beneficial in assisting the organization in reducing the equivocality 
of information, it’s likely that it will be used to guide the organization in future deci­
sions of a similar nature. Suppose that Dominique found the videoconferences to result 
in even more confusion among the team members because they were bombarded with 
more information than was either desired or required to complete various tasks in the 
project. She will remember this and likely refrain from using the technology as a means 
of sharing project information in the future. Instead, she may choose to use online 
discussions to allow team members to choose the information ­essential to their portion 
of the task and skip over information that is of little relevance to them. If strategies for 
dealing with equivocality are deemed to be useful, they will be retained for future use.
So, through enactment, selection, and retention, organizations can begin the 
process of reducing and eliminating their ambiguity. These three processes are not 
always going to occur at once; indeed, one may take much longer than the other. As 
we noted earlier, these stages are primarily interpersonal in nature and dealing with 
human relationships—like organizational decisions—can be unpredictable.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Karl Weick’s Organizational Information Theory has been identified as a powerful 
theoretical framework for explaining how organizations make sense of the informa­
tion they receive for their existence. The theory draws from other theoretical per­
spectives that explain the processes that organizations undergo to ­receive input from 
others. Further, the theory has been investigated using the experimental method, 
making it an empirically driven process. Weick emphasizes the importance of human 
interaction in information processing, thus, centralizing communication as a key 
focus of the “theoretical latticework” (Herrmann, 2007, p. 18) associated with OIT.
retention 
collective memory 
allowing people to 
accomplish goals
Student Voices
Kathryn
During high school, I worked as a deli clerk at a convenience store. I hated the job but 
needed the money to save for college. I do remember a time when equivocality was 
­present at the workplace. The manager had a habit of coming into work and 
surprising employees without any notice. We couldn’t stand it, and we looked at his 
actions as equivocal. The employees described the work environment as equivocal 
because there were different views of the manager’s behavior. One of us thought she 
(the manager) was keeping us on our toes. Another thought she came into work 
without notice ­because she didn’t trust us to be by ourselves. Personally I thought she 
would pop into work without telling anyone because she wanted to show her power. 
I never did find out why she surprised us with her “visits,” but I’m long gone now.

302     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Logical Consistency
Recall that theories must make sense and make clear the concepts under ­discussion. 
Weick’s theory seems to fail the test of logical consistency. One ­prevailing criticism 
pertains to the belief that people are guided by rules in an organization. Yet organi­
zational scholars note that “we puzzle and mull over, fret and stew over, and gener­
ally select, manipulate, and transform meaning to come up with an interpretation 
of a situation” (Papa & Daniels, 2014, p. 114). In other words, some organizational 
members may have little interest in the communication rules in place at work. Indi­
viduals are not always so conscious or precise in their selection procedures, and their 
actions may have more to do with their intuition than with organizational rules. As 
employees become more immersed in the organizational milieu, they may be guided 
more by instinct if that instinct is accurate, ethical, and thoughtful. 
An additional criticism underscoring the problems of logical consistency is that 
Organizational Information Theory views organizations as static units in society 
(Taylor & Van Every, 2000). These researchers challenge Weick’s view by noting 
that “at no point are inherent contradictions in organizational structure and process 
even remotely evoked” (p. 275) in his research. Organizations have ongoing tensions, 
and these need to be identified and examined in light of Weick’s claims. Furthermore, 
given the dynamic changes in organizations due to corporate mergers, downsizing, 
offshore outsourcing of employee work, and the evolution of technology, static or 
frozen assessments of organizations are shortsighted.
With his model of organizational organizing, Karl Weick has provided commu­
nication scholars an understanding of how decisions are made and the key processes 
pertaining to those decisions. As individuals encounter an organization, they need 
to understand the communication processes taking place. As OIT continues to be 
refined, centralizing communication will be instrumental. As Eric Eisenberg (2007) 
states, “Weick’s most valuable contributions have been his insistence on the central­
ity of language and communication in the construction of organizational reality, and 
his sustained focus on communication as a site for improving our understanding of 
cognition, culture, and social interaction (p. 284).
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical 
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     303
Utility
The theory’s utility is underscored by its focus on the communication process. Orga­
nizational Information Theory focuses on the process of communication rather than 
on the role of communicators themselves. This is of great benefit in understanding 
how members of an organization engage in collaborative efforts with both internal 
and external environments to understand the information they receive. Rather than 
attempt to understand the people in an organization—and their unpredictability—
Weick decides to unravel the complexities of information processing, which makes 
this a rather useful theoretical undertaking. 
Heurism
OIT is heuristic and has prompted considerable scholarly discussion. The theory has 
inspired thinking in research on a variety of topics, including environmental flood­
ing (Ulmer, Sellnow, & Seeger, 2007), nomadic work (Bean & Eisenberg, 2006), 
surgical procedures (Rosness et al., 2015), organizational humor (Heiss & Carmack, 
2012), leadership in high schools (Carraway & Young, 2015), and cohesion in the 
U.S. Army (Van Epps, 2008). The theory has also been applied to such diverse popu­
lations as zoo volunteers (Kramer & Danielson, 2016) and Ghanaians living with 
HIV/AIDS (Latzoo, 2015). Charles Bantz (1989) observes that in terms of Weick’s 
influence on research overall, “[I]t is not surprising that a variety of scholars picked 
up the organizing concept directly from Weick or integrated it into their ongoing 
research” (p. 233). Weick clearly was influential in the work of organizational com­
munication scholars.
Closing
Karl Weick has centralized the notion of organizational ambiguity and his theory 
resonates today. Organizational Information Theory continues to ­attract theorists 
and practitioners interested in the intersection of organizations, messages, and peo­
ple. It has been called “the sensemaking model” (Abu-Shaqra & Luppicini, 2016, 
p. 62) and has prompted researchers from across a number of disciplines to study 
the vagaries of organizational life. To that end, the theory will continue to resonate 
in cultures where corporations have to deal with uncertain and challenging ebbs 
and flows.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Examine various forms of social media and rank-order 
their level of equivocality as they relate to organizational decision making. 
From Twitter to Facebook, develop some of the challenges of each as they 
relate to equivocality.
	
1. Based on your understanding of the concepts of Organizational Information 
Theory, what additional avenues could Dominique engage in to ­facilitate a solution 

304     Chapter 17  •  Organizational Information Theory
O R G A N I Z A T I O N A L  I N F O R M A T I O N  T H E O R Y
to the FedReg project in BankNG? Respond using at least two concepts discussed 
in the chapter.
	
2. Recall an organization in which you are or were a member. Can you remem­
ber an incident when you or the organization received ambiguous ­information? If 
so, what rules did you or the organization use in dealing with this equivocality?
	
3. Weick describes the process of enactment, selection, and retention to under­
stand how organizations deal with information inputs. Provide an ­example of how 
your school has employed these strategies in making sense of information on your 
campus.
	
4. Discuss the importance of the principle of requisite variety in dealing with 
ambiguity. Do you think that highly equivocal information requires more complex 
communication processes in order to make sense of the input? Defend your answer.
	
5. Does your college or university solicit feedback from students regarding its 
promotion of the organization? Discuss the methods that your school uses.
	
6. Discuss how organizational rules function in OIT.
	
7. Apply equivocality to an organization with which you are familiar.

305
The Public
WHEN WE LISTEN TO A SPEECH, WATCH A PLAY, 
­participate in a conversation, or consume media, we are 
members of an audience. We are the public. As audience 
members, we act out the transactional nature of commu­
nication discussed in Chapter 1. We simultaneously serve 
as both sender and receiver of messages. Both verbal 
and nonverbal com­munication, therefore, are important in 
audience-­centered messages.
	
The public is at the core of the three theories we selected for this section 
of the book. As one of the classic works of the Western world, the Rhetoric is 
an attempt to show speakers that to be persuasive with their audiences, they 
should follow some ­suggestions. This advice includes looking at the speech, 
considering the speaker, and ­analyzing the audience. Dramatism pertains to 
the important role that the public plays in persuasion. Dramatists believe that 
unless the audience identifies with the speaker, persuasion is not possible. The 
Narrative Paradigm proposes to look at the audience as participants in a sto­
rytelling experience. Narrative theorists ­contend that a person’s ­stories are 
effective when they appeal to a listener’s values. 
	
The public in communication theory refers to how we—as listeners, con­
sumers, and audiences—play a role in deciding the extent to which others will 
affect us. Reading about the theories in this section will introduce you to several 
noteworthy topics related to the audience, including audience analysis, speech 
effectiveness, speaker ­integrity, credibility, and character.
Chapter 18
The Rhetoric (Aristotle)  306
Chapter 19
Dramatism (Burke)  324
Chapter 20
The Narrative Paradigm 
(Fisher)  338

306
T H E  R H E T O R I C
 
 Camille Ramirez knew 
that she would have to 
take a public speaking 
course for her major. Although she had been 
active in high school—serving as treasurer for 
the student council and playing on the lacrosse 
team—she had never done any public speaking. 
Now that she was in her second semester, she 
wanted to get the required course out of the way, 
so she had enrolled in Public Speaking 101.
The class seemed to be going quite well. 
She felt fairly confident about her speaking 
abilities; she had received two As and one B on 
her speeches so far. The final speech, however, 
would be her most challenging. It was a persua­
sive speech, and she decided that she would 
speak on the dangers of drinking and driving. The 
topic was a personal one for Camille because 
she would talk about her Uncle Jake, a wonderful 
man who had died last year in an accident with a 
drunk driver. As she prepared for the speech, she 
thought that she would blend both emotion and 
logic into her presentation. Camille also thought 
that she would have to identify both sides of the 
drinking issue—the desire to let loose and the 
need to be responsible.
On the day of her speech, Camille took sev­
eral deep breaths before the class started; it was 
a strategy that had worked before her previous 
speeches. As she approached the lectern, she 
could feel the butterflies well up in her stom­
ach. She reminded herself about the topic and 
its personal meaning. So, as planned, she began 
with a short story about her favorite time with 
Uncle Jake—the time they went to Philadelphia 
to see the Liberty Bell. Camille then talked about 
the night—two weeks after her trip—that her 
uncle died; he was driving home from his daugh­
ter’s soccer game, and a drunk driver slammed 
his car from behind, forcing Jake to the embank­
ment. His car then slid into a pond where he 
drowned.
The room was silent as Camille finished the 
story. She proceeded to identify why she was 
speaking on the topic. She told the group that 
considering their classroom was filled with peo­
ple under the age of 25, it was important that 
they understand how fragile life is. Her words 
resonated with the group. For the next five min­
utes, Camille mentioned her Uncle Jake several 
times as she repeated the importance of not 
drinking and getting behind the wheel of a car.
Camille felt relieved as she finished her 
speech. She thought that she had done a de­
cent job with her assignment, and she also felt 
that it helped her to be able to talk about her 
uncle again. After class, severval of Camille’s 
classmates came up and congratulated her. 
Many of them posted words of sympathy on 
her Facebook page. They told her that it took 
a lot of guts to talk about such a personal sub­
ject in front of so many people. A few of them 
also commented that they felt her topic was 
perfect for the audience; in fact, one of her 
The Rhetoric
Based on the writings of Aristotle
Camille Ramirez
C H A P T E R	18
Character may almost be called the most effective means of persuasion.
—Aristotle

T H E  R H E T O R I C
	
The Rhetoric      307
classmates said that he wanted Camille to give 
the same speech to his fraternity brothers. As 
Camille walked to her dorm, she couldn’t help 
but think that she had made a difference and 
that the speech was both a personal and a pro­
fessional success.
C
ontemporary life provides us scores of opportunities to speak in front of 
others. Politicians, spiritual leaders, physicians, custodial supervisors, and in­
vestment brokers are just a few of the many types of people who spend much of their 
time speaking to others—in both formal and informal ways. Especially as members 
of the academy, whether by choice or by accident, we find ourselves speaking in the 
classroom, in our organizations, with our professors (and students), on our dorm 
floors, among many other locations.
Studying public speaking and communication in general is important in U.S. 
society for several reasons. First, for nearly two decades, the National Association 
of Colleges and Employers (http://naceweb.org/s02242016/verbal-communication
-important-job-candidate-skill.aspx?terms=communication%20skills) has identified 
“communication skills” as paramount to securing and maintaining a job. Second, 
public speaking, by definition, suggests that as a society we are receptive to listen­
ing to views of others, even views that may conflict with our own. Deliberation and 
debate in the United States are hallmarks of a democracy (West, 2012). Third, when 
one speaks before a group, the information resonates beyond that group of people. 
For instance, when a politician speaks to a small group of constituents in southwest 
Missouri, what she says frequently gets told and retold to others. When a minister 
consoles his congregation after a fatal shooting at a local middle school, the words 
reverberate even into the living rooms of those who were not present at the service. 
Finally, effective communication is identified as paramount in communication 
among individuals from various parts of the globe (Williams & Remillard, 2016); it 
is not just a topic that resonates solely in the United States. Clearly, effective public 
speaking has the ability to affect individuals beyond the listening audience, and it is a 
critical skill for us as citizens of a democratic society.
Despite the importance of public speaking in our lives, it remains a dreaded 
activity. In fact, some opinion polls state that people fear public speaking more than 
they fear death! Comedian Jerry Seinfeld reflects on this dilemma: ­“According to 
most studies, people’s number one fear is public speaking. Number two is death. 
Death is number two. Does that seem right? This means to the average person, if 
you have to go to a funeral, you’re better off in the casket than doing the eulogy” 
(youtube.com/watch?v=kL7fTLjFzAg). 
Public speaking is not so funny to people like Camille Ramirez. She must work 
through not only her anxiety about speaking before a group, but also her anxiety 
about discussing a very personal topic. For Camille, having a sense of what to speak 
about and what strategies to adopt are foremost in her mind. Based on her classmates’ 
reactions, her speech remains effective. Camille may not know that the reasons for 
her success may lie in the writings of Aristotle, published more than 25 centuries ago.
Aristotle is generally credited with explaining the dynamics of public speak­
ing. The Rhetoric consists of three books: one primarily concerned with public 
speakers, the second focusing on the audience, and the third attending to the 

308     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Theory At a Glance  •  The Rhetoric
Rhetorical Theory centers on the notion of rhetoric, which Aristotle calls the 
available means of persuasion. That is, a speaker who is interested in per­
suading his or her audience should consider three rhetorical proofs: logic 
(logos), emotion (pathos), and ethics/credibility (ethos). Audiences are key to 
effective persuasiveness, and rhetorical syllogisms, requiring audiences to 
supply missing pieces of a speech, are used in persuasion.
speech itself. His Rhetoric is considered by historians, philosophers, and commu­
nication experts to be one of the most influential pieces of writing in the Western 
world. In addition, many still consider Aristotle’s works to be the most significant 
writing on speech preparation and speech making. In a sense, Aristotle was the 
first to provide the “how to” for public speaking. Lane Cooper (1932) agrees. 
Nearly 90 years ago, Cooper observed that “the rhetoric of Aristotle is a practical 
psychology, and the most helpful book extant for writers of prose and for speakers 
of every sort” (p. vi). According to Cooper, people in all walks of life—attorneys, 
legislators, clergy, teachers, and media writers—can benefit in some way when 
they read Aristotle’s writings. That is some accolade for a man who has been dead 
for over 2,500 years!
To understand the power behind Aristotle’s words, it’s important first to under­
stand the nature of the Rhetoric. In doing so, we will be able to present the simple 
eloquence of Rhetorical Theory. First, in order for you to understand the historical 
context of the theory, we present a brief history of life in ­Aristotle’s day followed by 
a discussion of his definition of rhetoric.
The Rhetorical Tradition
The son of a physician, Aristotle was encouraged to be a thinker about the world 
around him. He went to study with his mentor, Plato, at the age of 17. Aristotle 
and Plato had conflicting worldviews; therefore, their philosophies differed as 
well. Plato was always in search of absolute truths about the world. He didn’t 
care much whether these truths had practical value. Plato felt that as long as 
people could agree on matters of importance, society would survive. Aristotle, 
however, was more interested in dealing with the here and now. He wasn’t as 
interested in achieving absolute truth as he was in attaining a logical, realistic, 
and rational view of society. In other words, we could argue that ­Aristotle was 
much more grounded than Plato, trying to understand the ­various types of people 
in Athenian society.
Because he taught diverse groups of people in Greek society, Aristotle became 
known as a man committed to helping the ordinary citizen—at the time, a land-
owning male. During the day, common citizens (men) were asked to judge murder 

T H E  R H E T O R I C
	
Assumptions of The Rhetoric     309
trials, oversee city boundaries, travel as emissaries, and defend their property against 
would-be land collectors (Golden, Berquist, Coleman, & Sproule, 2011). Because 
there were no professional attorneys at that time, many citizens hired Sophists, 
teachers of public speaking, to instruct them in basic principles of persuasion. These 
teachers established small schools where they taught students about the public speak­
ing process and where they produced public speaking handbooks discussing practical 
ways to become more effective public speakers. Aristotle, however, believed that 
many of these handbooks were problematic in that they focused on the judicial sys­
tem to the neglect of other contexts. Also, he thought that authors spent too much 
time on ways to arouse judges and juries: “It is not right to pervert the judge by 
moving him to anger or envy or pity—one might as well warp a carpenter’s rule 
before using it,” Aristotle observes (cited in Rhys & Bywater, 1954, p. 20). Aristotle 
reminds speakers not to forget the importance of logic in their presentations.
The Rhetoric could be considered Aristotle’s way of responding to the prob­
lems he saw in these handbooks. Although he challenges a number of ­prevailing as­
sumptions about what constitutes an effective presentation, what remains especially 
important is Aristotle’s definition of rhetoric: the available means of persuasion. 
For Aristotle, however, availing oneself of all means of persuasion does not trans­
late into bribery or torture, common practices in ancient Greece, where slavery was 
institutionalized. What Aristotle envisions and recommends is for speakers to work 
beyond their first instincts when they want to persuade others. They need to consider 
all aspects of speech making, including their audience members. When Camille pre­
pared for her speech by assessing both her words and her audience’s needs, she was 
adhering to ­Aristotle’s suggestions for successful speaking.
For some of you, interpreting rhetoric in this way may be unfamiliar. After all, 
the word has been tossed around by so many different types of people that it may 
have lost Aristotle’s original intent. For instance, Jasper Neel (1994) comments that 
“the term rhetoric has taken on such warm and cuddly connotations in the postmod­
ern era” (p. 15) that we tend to forget that its meaning is very specific. For people 
like Neel, we must return to Aristotle’s interpretation of rhetoric or we will miss the 
essence of his theory. Politicians often indict their ­opponents by stating that their 
“rhetoric is empty” or that they’re all “rhetoric, with little action.” These sorts of 
criticisms only trivialize the active and dynamic process of rhetoric and its role in 
the public speaking process. ­Indeed, rhetoric is an “art of using language” (Cuddon, 
2013, p. 606) and therefore, simply ­because someone talks or chats aimlessly does 
not mean that person is using rhetorical discourse. Consider this important caveat as 
you ­review this chapter.
Assumptions of The Rhetoric
Hundreds of various interpretations of Aristotle have been cataloged over the years. 
We understand the difficulty in distilling this information in a chapter such as this. 
Nonetheless, we have found that much of The Rhetoric can be understood with 
two primary assumptions in mind. We examine the following two:
∙∙
Effective public speakers must consider their audience.
∙∙
Effective public speakers employ a number of proofs in their presentations.
sophists 
teachers of public 
speaking (rhetoric) 
in ancient Greece
rhetoric
the available means 
of persuasion

310     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
The first assumption underscores the interpretation of communication that we pre­
sented in Chapter 1: Communication is a transactional process. Within a public 
speaking context, Aristotle suggests that the speaker–audience relationship must be 
acknowledged and even primary in the speaking process. Speakers should not con­
struct or deliver their speeches without considering their ­audiences. Speakers need to 
be audience centered. They should think about the audience as a group of individuals 
with motivations, decisions, and choices and not as some undifferentiated mass of 
homogeneous people. The effectiveness of Camille’s speech on drinking and driving 
derived from her ability to understand her audience. She knew that students, primar­
ily under the age of 25, rarely think about death, and, therefore, her speech prompted 
them to think about something that they normally would not consider. Camille, like 
many other public speakers, engaged in audience analysis, which is the process of 
evaluating an audience and its background (e.g., age, sex, educational level, etc.) and 
tailoring one’s speech so that listeners respond as the speaker hopes they will.
Aristotle believed that audiences are crucial to a speaker’s ultimate effective­
ness. He observes, “Of the three elements in speech-making—speaker, subject, and 
person addressed—it is the last one, the hearer, that determines the speech’s end and 
object” (http://www.americanrhetoric.com/aristotleonrhetoric.htm). Each ­listener, 
however, is unique, and what works with one listener may fail with ­another. Ex­
panding on this notion, Christopher Tindale (2015) observes that audiences are not 
always open to rational argument. Consider Camille’s speech on drinking and driv­
ing. Her speech may have worked wonderfully in the public speaking classroom, but 
she might have different results with a group of alcohol distributors. As you can see, 
understanding the audience is critical before a speaker begins constructing his or her 
speech. Further, as James Herrick (2016) asserts: In the end, rhetoric is about gaining 
compliance and in order to do that, the audience must be considered.
The second assumption underlying Aristotle’s theory pertains to what speak­
ers do in their speech preparation and their speech making. Aristotle’s proofs refer 
to the means of persuasion, and, for Aristotle, three proofs exist: ethos, pathos, and 
logos. Ethos refers to the perceived character, intelligence, and goodwill of a speaker 
as they become revealed through his or her speech. Eugene Ryan (1984) notes that 
ethos is a broad term that refers to the mutual influence that speakers and listen­
ers have on each other. Ryan contends that Aristotle believed that the speaker can 
be influenced by the audience in much the same way that audiences can be influ­
enced by the speaker. Interviewing Kenneth Andersen, a communication ethicist, Pat 
Arneson (2007) relates ­Andersen’s thoughts about Aristotle and ethos. Ethos, ac­
cording to Andersen, is “something you create on the occasion” (p. 131). To that end, 
a speaker’s ethos is not simply something that is brought into a speaking experience; 
it is the speaking experience. Melissa Waresh (2012) contends that ethos must nec­
essarily take into consideration the relationship between speaker and audience. She 
states: “Ethos is character. Character implicates trust. Trust is based on ­relationship. 
Relationship persuades” (p. 229). 
Aristotle felt that a speech by a trustworthy individual was more persuasive than 
a speech by an individual whose trust was in question. Michael Hyde (2004) con­
tends that Aristotle felt that ethos is part of the virtue of another and, therefore, 
“can be trained and made habitual” (p. xvi). Logos is the ­logical proof that speakers 
employ—their arguments and rationalizations. For Aristotle, logos involves using a 
audience analysis 
an assessment 
and evaluation of 
listeners
ethos 
the perceived  
character,  
intelligence, and 
goodwill of a 
speaker
logos 
logical proof; the 
use of arguments 
and evidence in a 
speech

	
The Syllogism: A Three-Tiered Argument     311
T H E  R H E T O R I C
number of practices, including using logical claims and clear language. To speak in 
poetic phrases results in a lack of clarity and naturalness. Pathos pertains to the emo­
tions that are drawn out of listeners. Aristotle argues that listeners become the instru­
ments of proof when emotion is stirred in them; listeners judge differently when they 
are influenced by joy, pain, hatred, or fear. Let’s return to our example of Camille to 
illustrate these three Aristotelian proofs.
The ethos that Camille evokes during her presentation is important. ­Relating 
a personal account of her relationship with her Uncle Jake and ­describing his sub­
sequent death at the hands of a drunk driver bolster perceptions of her credibility. 
Undoubtedly, her audience feels that she is a credible speaker by virtue of her rela­
tionship with Jake and her knowledge of the consequences of drinking and driving. 
Logos is evident in Camille’s speech when she decides to logically argue that although 
drinking is a part of recreation, mixing it with driving can be deadly. Using examples 
to support her claims underscores Camille’s use of logical proof. The pathos inherent 
in the speech should be apparent from the subject matter. She chooses a topic that 
appeals to her college listeners. They most likely will feel for Camille and reflect on 
how many times they or their friends have gotten behind the wheel after having a few 
drinks. The proofs of Aristotelian theory, therefore, guide Camille’s effectiveness.
Each of these three—ethos, logos, and pathos—is critical to speech effective­
ness. But each, alone, may not be sufficient. Keep in mind Kenneth Burke’s belief 
that according to Aristotle, “an audience’s confidence in the speaker is the most 
convincing proof of all” (Burke, 2007, p. 335). 
For Aristotle, logos is much more than offering evidence in a speech. He delin­
eates this proof in more detail in his writings. In his discussion, he notes that speakers 
who consider logos must necessarily consider syllogisms. We now turn our attention 
to this critical Aristotelian principle.
The Syllogism: A Three-Tiered Argument
We noted that logos is one of the three proofs that, according to Aristotle, create a 
more effective message. Nestled in these logical proofs is something called syllo­
gisms. The term requires clarification because there is some debate among scholars 
on its precise meaning.
Communication scholars have studied the Rhetoric and its meaning for years 
and have attempted to untangle some of Aristotle’s words. We look here at the term 
syllogism, defined as a set of propositions that are related to one another and draw 
a conclusion from the major and minor premises. Typically, syllogisms contain two 
premises and a conclusion. A syllogism is nothing more than a deductive argument, 
a group of statements (premises) that lead to another group of statements (conclu­
sions). In other words, premises are starting points or beginners used by speakers. 
They establish justification for a ­conclusion. In a syllogism, both major and minor 
premises exist. Symbolically, a syllogism looks like this:
A → B
B → C
Therefore, A → C
pathos 
emotional proof; 
emotions drawn 
from audience 
members
syllogism 
a set of propositions 
that are related to 
one another and 
draw a conclusion 
from the major and 
minor premises

312     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Consider this classic example of a syllogism:
Major Premise:	
All people are mortal.
Minor Premise:	
Aristotle is a person.
Conclusion:	
Therefore, Aristotle is mortal.
Let’s use the beginning story about Camille and construct a syllogism that she might 
employ in her speech:
Major Premise:	
Drunk driving can kill people.
Minor Premise:	
College students drink and drive.
Conclusion:	
Therefore, college students can kill others (by drinking and 
driving).
As a speaker, you might (unwittingly) incorporate syllogisms to persuade your audi­
ence. However, in an often complex and convoluted society, drawing such a clear 
conclusion from preliminary premises may not be appropriate. Syllogistic reasoning 
may undercut a point you’re making. For example, it is usually difficult to draw a 
clear conclusion when dealing with the behaviors of close friends or family mem­
bers. Personality, relational history, and timing all intersect to make drawing a sim­
ple conclusion quite difficult. Further, syllogistic reasoning is, like many issues in 
this book, impacted by culture. Audience members do not always share a speaker’s 
logical progression of ideas. Therefore, speakers need to be cautious in expecting 
audience members to draw ­conclusions in similar ways.
Syllogisms are a critical part of the speaking process for Aristotle. Speakers use 
them to enhance effectiveness in their speeches. In addition, speakers also incorpo­
rate other techniques that are labeled canons.
Canons of Rhetoric
Aristotle was convinced that, for a persuasive speech to be effective, speakers must 
follow certain guidelines or principles, which he called canons (Campbell, Schultz-
Huxman, & Burkholder, 2015). These are recommendations for making a speech 
more compelling. Classical rhetoricians have maintained Aristotle’s observations, 
and to this day, most writers of public speaking texts in communication follow can­
ons for effective speaking that early Greeks and Romans advocated.
Although his writings in the Rhetoric focused on persuasion, these canons 
have been applied in a number of speaking situations. Five prescriptions for 
­effective oratory exist and we now discuss these canons, which are highlighted in 
Table 18.1.
Invention
The first canon is invention. This term can be confusing because invention of a 
speech does not mean invention in a scientific sense. Invention is defined as the 
construction or development of an argument that is relevant to the purpose of a 
invention 
a canon of rhetoric 
that pertains to the 
construction or 
development of an 
argument related to 
a particular speech

T H E  R H E T O R I C
	
Canons of Rhetoric     313
speech. Invention is discovering all the proofs a speaker plans to use. Invention is 
broadly interpreted as the body of information and knowledge that a speaker brings 
to the speaking situation. This stockpile of information can help a speaker in his or 
her persuasive approaches.
Suppose, for instance, you are presenting a speech on DNA testing. Invention as­
sociated with this speech would include appeals woven throughout your speech (e.g., 
“DNA helps living organisms pass along information to their offspring,” “DNA is 
the fundamental blueprint for all life,” or “DNA testing has proven to be instrumental 
in capturing rapists”). In constructing your arguments, you may draw on all these 
examples.
Aids to invention are identified as topics. Topics, in this sense, refer to the lines 
of argument or modes of reasoning a speaker uses in a speech. Speakers may draw on 
these invention aids as they decide which speaking strategy will persuade their audi­
ences. Topics, therefore, help speakers enhance their ­persuasiveness. 
Speakers look to what are called civic spaces, or the metaphorical locations 
where rhetoric has the opportunity to effect change, “where a speaker can look for 
‘available means of persuasion’” (Kennedy, 1991, p. 45). Recall, for instance, Ca­
mille’s decision to talk about drinking and driving in her public speaking class. As 
she speaks, she defines her terms, looks at opposing arguments, and considers ideas 
similar to her own. That is, she identifies a “location” in her speech where she is able 
to adapt to an audience that may be losing attention. Camille does whatever it takes 
to ensure that she has the chance to persuade her audience.
topics 
an aid to invention 
that refers to the  
arguments a 
speaker uses
civic spaces 
a metaphor suggest-
ing that speakers 
have “locations” 
where the  
opportunity to  
persuade others 
exists
Table 18.1  Aristotle’s Canons of Rhetoric
CANON
DEFINITION
DESCRIPTION
Invention
Integration of reasoning 
and arguments in speech
Using logic and evidence in speech
makes a speech more powerful and 
more persuasive.
Arrangement
Organization of speech
Maintaining a speech structure—
Introduction, Body, Conclusion—
bolsters speaker credibility, en­
hances persuasiveness, and re­
duces listener frustration.
Style
Use of language in speech
Incorporating style ensures that 
a speech is memorable and that a 
speaker’s ideas are clarified.
Delivery
Presentation of speech
Delivering an effective speech 
complements a speaker’s words 
and helps to reduce speaker 
anxiety.
Memory
Storing information in 
speaker’s mind
Knowing what to say and when to 
say it eases speaker anxiety and 
­allows a speaker to respond to 
­unanticipated events.

314     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Arrangement
A second canon identified by Aristotle is called arrangement. Arrangement 
pertains to a speaker’s ability to organize a speech. Aristotle felt that speakers 
should seek out organizational patterns for their speeches to enhance the speech’s 
effectiveness. Artistic unity among different thoughts should be foremost in a 
speaker’s mind. Simplicity should also be a priority because Aristotle believed 
that there are essentially two parts to a speech: stating the subject and finding the 
proof, or what he calls “demonstrating it” (Kennedy, 1991, p. 258). At the time, 
he felt that speakers were organizing their speeches haphazardly, making them 
less-effective speakers.
Aristotle, however, is very clear in his organizational strategy. Speeches should 
generally follow a threefold approach: introduction, body, and conclusion. The 
introduction should first gain the audience’s attention, then suggest a connection 
with the audience, and finally provide an overview of the speech’s purpose.
Introductions can be quite effective in speeches that are intended to arouse emo­
tionally. Gaining attention by incorporating emotional wording is an effective per­
suasive technique. Consider Camille’s introductory words. She obviously captures 
the audience’s attention by personalizing a very difficult subject. She then suggests 
her relationship with the topic, followed by an overview of her speaking purpose:
Jake McCain was killed by someone he didn’t know. Jake was a wonderful 
man and the person who killed him never knew that. Yet, Jake’s death could 
have been prevented. You see, he was killed by someone who was drunk. The 
driver may have a future, but Jake will never have a chance to see his grand­
child grow up or see his sister get married. I know about Jake McCain: He’s 
my uncle. Today, I wish to discuss the dangers of drunk driving and identify 
how you can avoid becoming one of the many thousands who get behind a 
wheel after drinking too much.
Arrangement also includes the body and conclusion of the speech. The body 
includes all of the arguments, supporting details, and necessary examples to make a 
point. In addition to the entire speech being organized, the body of the speech also 
follows some sort of organizational structure. Aristotle states that audiences need to 
be led from one point to another.
Finally, the conclusion or epilogue of a speech is aimed at summarizing 
the speaker’s points and arousing emotions in the audience. Conclusions should 
be arrived at logically and should also attempt to reconnect with listeners. 
Camille’s conclusion clearly demonstrates her desire to leave her listeners with 
a message:
So I leave you today after examining the prevalence of drunk driving, the cur­
rent laws associated with this behavior, and what you and I can personally do 
to help rid our society of this terrible and overlooked part of being a college 
student. The next time you go and have a drink, don’t forget to give your keys 
to a friend. Or get a cab. I’m sure your family will thank you. Do it for me. Do 
it for my Uncle Jake.
We can feel Camille’s passion for a topic that is both personal and personally 
difficult.
arrangement 
a canon of rhetoric 
that pertains to a 
speaker’s ability to 
organize a speech
introduction 
part of an  
organizational  
strategy in a speech 
that includes  
gaining the  
audience’s  
attention,  
connecting with the 
audience, and  
providing an 
overview of the 
speaker’s purpose
body 
part of an  
organizational  
strategy in a speech 
that includes  
arguments,  
examples, and 
important details to 
make a point
conclusion 
part of an  
organizational  
strategy in a speech 
that is aimed at 
summarizing a 
speaker’s main 
points and  
arousing emotions 
in an audience

T H E  R H E T O R I C
	
Canons of Rhetoric     315
Style
The use of language to express ideas in a certain manner is called style. In his discus­
sion of style, Aristotle includes word choice, word imagery, and word appropriate­
ness. He believes that each type of rhetoric has its own style, yet style is often over­
looked. He notes that strange words or glosses (e.g., antiquated words and phrases, 
such as “gyp” or “girl Friday”) should be avoided. Speaking in terms that are too 
simplistic will also turn off an audience. To bridge this gap between the unfamiliar 
and the too familiar, Aristotle introduces the notion of metaphor, or a figure of 
speech that helps to make the unclear more understandable. Metaphors are critical 
devices to employ in speeches, according to Aristotle, because they have the capacity 
to change the perceptions and the minds of listeners.
Style can be better understood through an example from Camille’s speech on 
drunk driving. If Camille were concentrating on style, her speech would have the 
following passage:
Drinking is often viewed as a means to release. After a very long day at work 
or at school, there may be nothing better than having a cold beer. So they say. 
Yet, too often, one beer turns into two, which by the end of a few hours, has 
turned into a six-pack. And the result can be tragic: How many times have you 
watched your friend or family member get into a car after a six-pack? This 
person can be as dangerous as a bullet, unleashed from a gun that is randomly 
pointed at someone. If you must drink, it’s not only your business; but, it’s my 
business, too.
Camille’s words evoke some strong imagery; mentally, we can recreate the scene 
that she has laid out. Her word choice is unmistakable in that she uses familiar words. 
Finally, she uses the compelling metaphor of a bullet.
style 
a canon of rhetoric 
that includes the 
use of language to 
express ideas in a 
speech
glosses 
outdated words in a 
speech
metaphor 
a figure of speech 
that helps to make 
the unclear more 
understandable
www.CartoonStock.com

316     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Memory
Storing invention, arrangement, and style in a speaker’s mind is memory. In contrast 
to the previous four canons, Aristotle does not spend significant time delineating the 
importance of memory in speech presentation. Rather, he ­alludes to memory in his 
writings. Throughout the Rhetoric, for instance, Aristotle ­reminds us to consider a 
number of issues prior to the presentation (e.g., ­examples, signs, metaphors, delivery 
techniques, etc.). He further notes that to speak persuasively, a speaker has to have 
a basic understanding of many of these devices when constructing and presenting a 
speech. In other words, speakers need to have memorized a great deal before getting 
up to speak.
memory 
a canon of rhetoric 
that refers to a 
speaker’s effort in 
storing information 
for a speech
Theory-Into-Practice
Theoretical Claim: Audience analysis influences speaking effectiveness.
Practical Implication: When a politician speaks to senior citizens, she should con-
sider talking about topics that resonate with this group (e.g., telemarketing fraud, 
Medicare, etc.). In doing so, it’s likely her audience will be more apt to listen  
attentively and act accordingly.
T*I*P
Today, people interpret memory in speech-making differently from ­Aristotle. 
Memorizing a speech often means having a basic understanding of material and tech-
niques. Although other rhetoricians like Quintilian made specific recommendations 
on memorizing, Aristotle felt that familiarizing oneself with the speech’s content was 
understood. When Camille presents her speech on drinking and driving, for example, 
she has some parts of her speech committed to memory and other parts overviewed 
on notes.
Delivery
Thus far we have concentrated on how a speech is constructed. Aristotle, however, 
was also interested in how a speech is delivered. In this case, delivery refers to the 
delivery 
a canon of rhetoric 
that refers to the 
nonverbal  
presentation of a 
speaker’s ideas
Student Voices
Vlad
I know that I’m probably oversimplifying a great theory, but a lot of the Rhetoric is 
something that I remember from my public speaking class. I was always told to keep 
my speeches organized and to persuade people by getting to them emotionally. I did 
my persuasive speech on organ donation because my sister was waiting for a kidney. 
I know my delivery was pretty smooth because I believed in what I was saying. That 
probably also improved my ethos.

	
Types of Rhetoric     317
T H E  R H E T O R I C
nonverbal presentation of a speaker’s ideas. Delivery normally includes a host of be­
haviors, including eye contact, vocal cues, pronunciation, enunciation, dialect, body 
movement, and physical appearance. For Aristotle, delivery specifically pertains to 
the manipulation of the voice. He especially encouraged speakers to use appropriate 
levels of pitch, rhythm, volume, and emotion. He believed that the way in which 
something is said affects its ­intelligibility.
Aristotle believed that delivery could not be easily taught, yet it is crucial for a 
speaker to consider. He also taught that speakers should strive to be natural in their 
delivery. Speakers should not use any vocal techniques that may detract from the 
words and should strive to capture a comfortable presence in front of an audience. 
In other words, speakers should avoid being “gimmicky” in their presentations and 
strive for authenticity.
The canons of rhetoric are incorporated into a number of different persuasive 
speeches. Our exploration of Aristotle’s Rhetorical Theory concludes with a discus­
sion of the three types of rhetoric.
Types of Rhetoric
You will recall that during Aristotle’s time citizens were asked to take part in a num­
ber of speaking activities—from judge to attorney to legislator. It was in this spirit 
that Aristotle identified different speaking situations for citizens to consider when 
conversing on trade, finance, national defense, and war. He denoted three types of 
rhetoric, or what he called three types of oratory: forensic, epideictic, and delibera­
tive. Forensic rhetoric pertains to establishing a fact; at the core of forensic rhetoric 
is justice. Epideictic rhetoric is discourse related to praise or blame. Deliberative 
rhetoric concerns speakers who must determine a course of action—something 
should or should not be done. The three types refer to three different time periods: 
forensic to the past, epideictic to the present, and deliberative to the future. We dis­
cuss these three rhetorical types next and illustrate them in Figure 18.1.
forensic rhetoric 
a type of rhetoric 
that pertains to 
speakers prompting 
feelings of guilt or 
innocence from an 
audience
epideictic rhetoric
a type of rhetoric 
that pertains to 
praising or blaming
deliberative  
rhetoric 
a type of rhetoric 
that determines an 
audience’s course 
of action
Types of  Rhetoric
Forensic
Courtroom
speaking
Epideictic
Ceremonial
speaking
Deliberative
Political
speaking
Figure 18.1 
Types of Rhetoric

318     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Forensic oratory, or judicial rhetoric, specifically refers to speaking in court­
rooms. Its intent is to establish guilt or innocence; in Aristotle’s day, forensic speak­
ers directed their presentation to courtroom judges. Aristotle ­examined forensic 
rhetoric within a legal framework, and thus many of his ­beliefs on the law are found 
in the Rhetoric. Amelie Rorty (1996) notes that forensic speaking requires focusing 
on arguments that tap into judges’ psyches, including their beliefs about why certain 
criminals act the way they do and which types of circumstances tempt people to 
break the law. Because past actions are frequently indicative of a person’s current 
behavior, forensics orators rely on previous behaviors.
Aristotle recognized that a person’s character is critical in forensic rhetoric. He 
interprets character as both status (i.e., whether a person is young or old, rich or 
poor, fortunate or unfortunate) and morality (i.e., whether a person is just or unjust, 
reasonable or unreasonable). If people act voluntarily, Aristotle argued, the choices 
they make have consequences. To establish guilt, the forensic speaker needs to estab­
lish motivation for doing wrong. In speaking before an audience, then, speakers will 
invoke what Aristotle called the “moral habits” of a person.
Examples of forensic rhetoric abound in our society. Forensic speakers have 
played prominent roles in U.S. courtrooms. Attorneys, in particular, have effec­
tively and persuasively used their forensic rhetoric over the years. One of the most 
memorable forensic presentations in history took place in the closely watched trial 
of football legend O. J. Simpson. Prosecutors tried to implicate Simpson’s morals 
by playing a tape recording of a 911 call in which Simpson could be heard yelling 
at his wife and by showing pictures of her beaten body to the jury. More recent 
forensic efforts by prosecutors include the legal proceedings of corruption charges 
by former Illinois governor, Rod Blagojevich, the Bernie Madoff investment scan­
dal, and the trial of home décor guru Martha Stewart, who was found guilty of 
lying to government agents about stock trading. In all these cases, forensic speak­
ing was used to undercut the moral integrity of the defendant and to establish guilt 
(Stewart, 2012).
The second type of rhetoric, epideictic, is also called ceremonial speaking. 
Speeches during Aristotle’s time were given in public arenas with the goal of prais­
ing, honoring, blaming, or shaming. Epideictic rhetors include people, events, orga­
nizations, or nations in their speeches. These speeches usually focus on social issues 
because, according to Aristotle, people are interested in the here and now. Epideictic 
speaking cannot be separated from ethos, ­Aristotle stated. He believed that by under­
standing the need to praise or blame, epideictic speakers understand the importance 
of their own character. For ­instance, a speech criticizing prison conditions may not 
resonate deeply with an audience if the speaker is on death row for rape and murder. 
At times, there are speeches that simply are generic in nature and yet, the target 
of blame is implied. In 2012, for instance, the Sandy Hook Elementary School kill­
ings of more than 20 school children and staff resulted in many epideictic speeches 
about the need for stricter gun laws and the lax oversight of semiautomatic weapons. 
While many speeches did not name the National Rifle Association by name, it was 
clear that many speakers were blaming this organization for its influence on restrict­
ing gun legislation.
Epideictic speaking is greatly informed by the study of virtues or values—a 
theme that Aristotle borrowed from Plato. The epideictic speaker must be able to 

	
Types of Rhetoric     319
T H E  R H E T O R I C
relate the virtues of the topic to a diverse audience. Aristotle felt that courage and 
justice ranked above all virtues, but virtue is defined according to the law of the land.
Epideictic rhetoric is exemplified in funeral practices in our country. ­Eulogies, 
which are commonplace at many funerals, usually laud the life of the deceased. 
Commenting on contemporary values, the epideictic speaker at a ­funeral frequently 
compares the virtues of the dead person with those of ­society. For instance, after 
the death of his grandmother, one of your authors was asked to give the eulogy at 
the funeral. During his speech, he talked about his grandmother’s uplifting spirit 
and how she rarely complained about her ailments or about her financial situation. 
He evoked images of contemporary ­society in his speech, noting how unusual it is 
today for someone to ­refrain from self-centered complaining. His speech centered on 
a prevailing virtue of his grandmother—her selflessness—and also commented on 
society as a whole.
The third type is deliberative rhetoric, also called political rhetoric, and it was 
the focus of much of Aristotle’s comments on rhetorical discourse. As we mentioned 
earlier, deliberative rhetoric is associated with the future—what an audience will do 
or think as a result of a speaker’s efforts. Deliberative speaking, then, requires the 
speaker to be adept at understanding how his or her thoughts are aligned with those 
of the audience. The deliberative speaker should be prepared to consider subjects that 
are relevant to the audience and to which the speaker can personally relate. Aristotle 
identified five subjects on which people deliberated in his day: revenue, war and 
peace, the defense of the country, commerce, and legislation (san.beck.org/EC22
-Aristotle.html). Today’s list of deliberative topics might include health insurance, 
taxes, relationships, education, and civil rights. Deliberative speakers might try to 
raise interest in these topics, and once interest is piqued, they might find that listeners 
are more prone to being persuaded.
Larry Arnhart (1981) comments that the deliberative rhetorician needs to know 
not only the actual subject of deliberation but also the elements of human nature that 
influence deliberation. There are a number of topics, therefore, which are suited for 
deliberation and others that are not. Aristotle focused on what deliberative speakers 
can say to an assembly (a body of legislators, for example), and today this delib­
erative oratory continues. Consider the following example. When asked to give a 
short presentation to her state’s legislative committee on health insurance, Beverly, 
a 64-year-old mother of four, spoke about the health insurance of elderly people. As 
the caretaker of her 90-year-old mother-in-law, a patient in a local nursing home, 
Beverly knew precisely the kinds of persuasive strategies to use with the group of 
politicians. Her speech focused on the difficulties of being old and how these prob­
lems are amplified by not having enough insurance. She asked the legislators to con­
sider their own aging parents in their discussions. She outlined five points of action 
for the committee to follow. Three of the points could be undertaken immediately: 
establishing a task force, interviewing elderly citizens, and setting up a toll-free num­
ber to solicit citizen concerns and complaints. The remaining two required funding 
from the legislature. At the conclusion of her brief speech, Beverly was satisfied that 
her suggestions would not be ignored.
Aristotle would have approved of Beverly’s rhetoric. Her recommendations were 
doable (the committee enacted three of the five), and she made her experiences rel­
evant to her audience by asking the group to think about their own parents. This 

320     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
approach elicited personal identification, which is an important tactic in deliberative 
speaking. By eliciting these feelings, Beverly knew that she would be able to get her 
audience to agree with her thinking.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Aristotle’s Rhetoric remains an influential theoretical foundation in communication 
studies. You can pick up any public speaking text and find discussions on delivery, 
organization, and style. Students of public speaking have benefited greatly from the 
words and values of Aristotle, and for this reason the theory will resonate deeply for 
years to come. With a few exceptions, his theory has drawn the attention of scholars 
who primarily identify as interpretive and critical, making the theory aligned with 
the qualitative approach. However, keep in mind that some offshoots of the theory 
(e.g., communication apprehension) are studied within an experimental lens. There­
fore, one could say that both the quantitative and qualitative approaches are honored 
within this theory. The evaluative criteria for communication we wish to discuss 
center on three primary areas: logical consistency, heurism, and test of time.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Logical Consistency
Critics of Aristotle’s theory have taken issue with some tenets of the theory perhaps 
because some scholars believe that conclusions are often drawn based on Aristo­
tle’s “scattered remarks and examples” (Curzer, 2015, p. 129). For instance, Aris­
totle has been criticized for contradiction and incoherence. Charles Marsh (2006), 
for instance, reports on one critic who undercut the ­notion of ethos as proposed 
by Aristotle: “In a society so small, where everyone knew one another, how could 
[Aristotle] think—was he really that dumb—that a person of bad character could 
hoodwink the other leaders of society?” (p. 339). Lord (1994) contends that in de­
veloping his theory, Aristotle blasts his contemporaries for focusing too much on the 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     321
T H E  R H E T O R I C
audience’s emotions. ­Although Aristotle encourages speakers to avoid focusing on 
emotions while making their points, he proceeds to do just that when he stresses the 
importance of presenting emotions and invoking audience passions (pathos) during a 
speech. This makes the theory somewhat inconsistent. 
John Cooper (1996) challenges Lord’s critique. He argues that Aristotle was sim­
ply responding to the Sophists’ messages of the day. Because most of the speeches in 
ancient Greece were directed to judges and rulers, Aristotle indicated that speakers 
should try to elicit feelings of pity in the courtroom. To do that, Aristotle felt that 
speakers should try to view judges in congenial ways. 
Further criticism of the logical consistency of the theory has been offered. First, 
as we alluded to a bit earlier, scholars agree that the Rhetoric is a rather unorganized 
undertaking; in fact, the theory is assembled from Aristotle’s lecture notes. It is not 
surprising, then, that Aristotle seems to discuss topics in a random and ­arbitrary 
manner. At times, Aristotle introduces a topic and then drops it, only to return to it 
later. His terminology is especially problematic for some scholars. You may not find 
this too earth-shattering, but recall that researchers need clear foundations of terms 
before they can embark upon testing or clarifying theory. Larry Arnhart (1991) con­
cludes that Aristotle defined his terms in less than precise ways so that audiences 
(readers) would have a broader understanding of his words and ideas. Arnhart be­
lieves that this conscious decision to remain unclear does not mean that Aristotle’s 
thoughts should be discarded.
Finally, the logical consistency is further challenged by an examination of how 
Aristotle views the audience. Critics charge Aristotle with ignoring the critical na­
ture of listeners. For instance, Jasper Neel (1994) states, “Aristotle makes clear that 
the introduction [of a speech] has nothing to do with the ‘speech itself.’ It exists 
only because of the hearer’s weak-minded tendency to listen to what is beside the 
point” (p. 156). Eugene Ryan (1984) is more blunt: “Aristotle is thinking of listen­
ers who have some difficulty keeping their minds on the speaker’s business, are 
easily distracted, tend to forget what has gone on before, [and] are not absorbed 
with abstract ideas” (p. 47). From these writers, we get the impression that Aristotle 
perceived audiences to be incapable of being discriminating listeners or critical 
thinkers. It’s important to note, though, that Aristotle was writing at a time when 
people were rather passive listeners; they did not watch the evening news and did 
not have access to information about world events. Furthermore, when one consid­
ers that the Rhetoric is based on lecture notes and that students back then were not 
accustomed to openly challenging their mentors, Aristotle’s view of the audience 
is not so implausible.
Heurism
Few would argue that Aristotle’s Rhetoric is one of the most heuristic theories found 
in communication. Scholars in political science, medicine, English composition, and 
philosophy have studied Rhetorical Theory and incorporated Aristotelian thinking in 
their research. The theory has spawned a number of subareas in the communication 
discipline, such as communication apprehension, and has generated research. In fact, 
much of the writing in public speaking is based on the writings of Aristotle. Some 
interesting research has discussed the deliberative rhetoric of an African American 

322     Chapter 18  •  The Rhetoric
T H E  R H E T O R I C
Student Voices
Ned
When I gave my first speech in public speaking, I was pretty amazed that the three 
proofs of Aristotle worked so well. I gave my speech on physician-assisted suicide. 
My aunt wanted her doctor to help her commit suicide, and my whole family was 
against it. I was, too. So I was trying to persuade the class that we should never 
allow this to happen anywhere. I had credibility because it was right in my family 
(ethos), I used emotion and caused emotion in my speech (pathos), and I offered 
some ­statistics on how many people try to get their doctors to help in suicides 
(logos). I had a lot of students come up to me after the speech and tell me how 
effective my speech was. And all of that was thanks to Aristotle!
activist (McClish, 2007). Much of the discussion related to preaching in churches 
can be directly attributed to Aristotle’s thinking (Broadus, 2012). Aristotelian proofs 
have been employed to student umbilical cord blood banking (White, 2006), and 
in the analyses of environmental reports (Higgins & Walker, 2012). In addition, 
Aristotle has been invoked in a wide range of studies examining such diverse topics 
as military digital games (Sparrow, Harrison, Oakley, & Keogh, 2015), the Scottish 
vote on independence (Mackay, 2015), and hip-hop music (Sciullo, 2014). Aristo­
tle’s theory will continue to resonate with scholars across disciplines and in a ­variety 
of contexts.
Test of Time
No other theory in the communication discipline has withstood the test of time as 
well as Aristotle’s Rhetoric. With centuries behind it and public speaking text­
books, teachers, and researchers communicating Aristotelian principles, it’s hard 
to believe that any other theory in the field of communication will ever achieve 
such longevity!
Closing
As the 21st century continues, we are in an informed position to reflect on some of 
the greatest written works of all time. The Rhetoric is clearly such a work. Aristotle’s 
words continue to resonate in a society that is far different from his day. Some people 
may reject his thoughts as outdated in an age in which multiple ways of knowing are 
embraced. Yet, some scholars are more direct in their acclaims of this thinker: “The 
rationale, scientific, and technological culture that pervades much of the Western 
world owes more to him than anyone else” (Woodfin & Groves, 2012, p. 3). Clearly, 
a theory focusing on how speakers use and engender emotions, logic, and trustwor­
thiness cannot be ignored.

T H E  R H E T O R I C
	
Discussion Starters     323
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Aristotle never could envision social media as he was 
discussing public speaking. Considering the vast availability of various 
social media platforms such as LinkedIn and Instagram, discuss how public 
speeches can be both enhanced and undermined by social media. 
	
1.  In the chapter-opening scene, Camille Ramirez relied on Aristotle’s view of 
public speaking. Do you believe that she could have been more effective? 
In what way? Use examples in your response.
	
2.  Aristotle’s critics have focused on the fact that his theory is simply a collec­
tion of lecture notes that are contradictory, vague, and often narrow. Do you agree 
or disagree, based on the information in this chapter? What ­examples can you point 
to for support?
	
3.  Employ syllogistic reasoning for and against each of the following topics: 
physician-assisted suicide, same-sex marriage, and medicinal marijuana use.
	
4.  Discuss what canon of rhetoric is most important when politicians speak to 
their constituents. Use examples to defend your view.
	
5.  If Aristotle were alive today and you were his student, what additional 
suggestions would you offer him for a new edition of the Rhetoric? Why do you 
believe your suggestions are important to address in public speaking? ­Incorporate 
examples in your response.
	
6.  Aristotle spent a great deal of time discussing the role of the audience. If 
you were giving a speech on safety to a group of convenience store employees, 
what sort of audience analysis would you undertake?
	
7.  Explain how principles from the Rhetoric relate to job interviews.

D R A M A T I S M
Dramatism
Based on the research of Kenneth Burke
C H A P T E R	19
Karl Nelson really 
looked forward to this 
part of his morning rou­
tine. He settled down with his first cup of coffee 
and the morning paper. Although he loved his 
tablet and smart phone, he loved the feel of a news­
paper in his hands, something that he knew was 
fast becoming a lost practice. Karl allowed himself 
an hour to read all the news of the day and to savor 
his caffeine fix. In many ways this was his favorite 
part of the day, and he got up extra early to make 
sure he would have enough time for it after his 
workout and before he left for the office. But, today 
he was not happy. He looked at the headlines with 
disgust. He was so sick of reading about politicians 
who had no common sense. Today he was reading 
about Alan Spector, the mayor of Grenada, New 
Mexico, where Karl lived. The article was about 
the fact that ­Spector had campaigned on a “clean” 
platform, claiming that he would make government 
respectable again, and now he was apologizing to 
his wife for having had an affair with their nanny. 
Undoubtedly he would never have confessed, but 
the tabloids had just revealed that he’d had a child, 
who was now 10, with this woman!
Karl looked up from his paper just as his 
partner, Max, came into the breakfast room. Karl 
asked, “Max, have you read about Spector? That 
man is such an incredible low-life hypocrite. How 
could he pretend to be Mr. Clean during his cam­
paign, talking all about family values, when he’s 
cheating on his wife with their nanny?”
Max just shrugged and laughed. He was 
used to seeing Karl getting worked up over cur­
rent events. It didn’t seem all that important to 
him, but Karl certainly cared about this stuff. Max 
grabbed a cup of coffee and left to go to work. 
Karl went back to reading the paper.
The article described how Spector admitted 
the affair and had apologized profusely to his 
family and to his constituents. The nanny hadn’t 
made a public statement. Karl thought the story in 
the paper made Spector look pretty bad, and he 
wondered if he should be impeached. He hoped 
Spector wouldn’t be able to escape punishment 
because he really felt let down and deceived.
Karl noticed that it was getting late, so he 
put the rest of the newspaper in his briefcase 
and left for work. When he got to the office, a 
couple of people were talking about the Spector 
scandal. His colleague Diane agreed with him, 
saying that Spector was a hypocrite. But another 
colleague, Randy, disagreed, saying that we are 
always forgiving people for mistakes, and that the 
United States was a country of second chances. 
Randy said that this was really between Spector 
and his wife anyway.
As Karl drove home from work that night, he 
listened to the local news on the radio. A com­
mentator said that people in the United States 
loved to build up public figures, but then they 
loved even more to see them fall. The commen­
tator agreed with Karl’s coworker, Randy. She 
said that we are a nation that loves a comeback, 
Stories are equipment for living.
—Kenneth Burke
Karl Nelson
324   

D R A M A T I S M
	
Dramatism 
     ﻿    
325
S
ome rhetoricians might analyze Alan Spector’s problems and Karl’s ­responses 
to them using Dramatism, a theoretical position seeking to understand the 
actions of human life as drama. Kenneth Burke is known as the originator of 
Dramatism, although he did not initially use that term himself. Burke, who died in 
1993 at the age of 96, was a fascinating person, and he was unlike many of the other 
theorists we cover in this book. Burke never earned an undergraduate degree, much 
less a Ph.D. He was self-taught in the areas of literary criticism, philosophy, com­
munication, sociology, economics, theology, and linguistics. He taught for almost 
20 years at several universities, including Harvard, Princeton, and the University 
of Chicago. His breadth of interests and perhaps his lack of formal training in any 
one discipline made him one of the most interdisciplinary theorists we will study. 
His ideas have been applied widely in various areas including literature, theater, 
communication, history, and sociology. No doubt one reason Burke is so widely 
read and ­applied has to do with his focus on symbol systems. Dramatism provides 
researchers with the flexibility to scrutinize an object of study from a variety of 
angles. It’s likely, therefore, that regardless of your major, you will find something 
useful in Burke’s theory. 
Dramatism, as its name implies, conceptualizes life as a drama, placing a critical 
focus on the acts performed by various players. Just as in a play, the acts in life are 
central to revealing human motives. Dramatism provides us with a method that is 
well suited to address the act of communication between a text (e.g., the newspaper 
story about Alan Spector), and the audience for that text (e.g., Karl), as well as the 
inner action of the text (e.g., Spector’s motives and choices). When Karl reads about 
Spector’s case, it is as if he sees him as an actor. In Burke’s terms, Karl understands 
Spector as an actor in a scene, trying to accomplish purposes because of certain 
motives. Thus, he comments on his motives as he evaluates his act of cheating on 
his wife with their nanny. Burke’s theory of Dramatism allows us to analyze both 
Spector’s rhetorical choices in this situation (how he framed his case) and Karl’s 
responses to his choices.
Drama is a useful metaphor for Burke’s ideas for three reasons: First, drama 
indicates a grand sweep, and Burke does not make limited claims; his goal is to 
theorize about the whole range of human experience. The dramatic metaphor is 
particularly useful in describing human relationships because it is grounded in 
interaction or dialogue. In its dialogue, drama both models relationships and illu­
minates relationships (Daas, 2011). Secondly, drama tends to follow recognizable 
types or genres: comedy, musical, melodrama, and so forth. Burke feels that the 
very way we structure and use language may be ­related to the way these human 
dramas are played out. Thirdly, drama is always addressed to an audience. In this 
sense, drama is rhetorical. Burke views literature as “equipment for living,” which 
means that literature or texts speak to people’s lived experiences and problems and 
provide people with responses for dealing with these experiences (Winslow, 2010). 
and maybe Spector would be back in political life 
someday. Karl disagreed. He thought Spector de­
served disapproval because he’d done the wrong 
thing and because he’d been so judgmental about 
other people who made mistakes in the past. This 
Spector case was disgusting, Karl thought, and he 
hoped the guy never got into public office again.

326     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
In this way, Dramatism studies the ways in which language and its usage relate to 
audiences (French & Brown, 2011).
Assumptions of Dramatism
Similar to a few other theorists in this book, Kenneth Burke’s thinking is so com­
plex that it is difficult to ­reduce it to one set of assumptions or to a specific 
ontology, a term we introduced to you in Chapter 3. Some of the assumptions 
that follow illustrate the difficulty of labeling Burke’s ontology. ­Researchers such 
as Brummett (1993) have called Burke’s assumptions a symbolic ontology be­
cause of his emphasis on language. Yet, as Brummett cautions, “The best one can 
do, in searching for the heart of Burke’s thought, is to find a partial ontology, a 
grounding-for-the-most-part. For Burke, people mainly do what they do, and the 
world is largely the way it is, because of the nature of symbol systems ­themselves” 
(p. xii; emphasis in original). Brummett’s comment prefigures the following three 
assumptions of Burke’s Dramatism Theory:
∙∙
Humans are animals who use symbols.
∙∙
Language and symbols form a critically important system for humans.
∙∙
Humans are choice makers.
The first assumption speaks to Burke’s realization that some of what we do is 
motivated by our animal nature and some of what we do is motivated by symbols. 
Recall the semiotic tradition we discussed in Chapter 2 to understand this notion. For 
example, when Karl drinks his morning coffee, he is satisfying his thirst, an animal 
need. When he reads the morning paper and thinks about the ideas he encounters 
there, he is being influenced by symbols. The idea that humans are animals who use 
symbols represents a tension in Burke’s thought. As Brummett (1993) observes, this 
assumption “teeters between the realizations that some of what we do is motivated by 
animality and some of it by ­symbolicity” (p. xii). Of all the symbols that humans use, 
language is the most important for Burke. To further understand the role of symbols 
in human interaction, recall the discussion we undertook in Chapter 4 on Symbolic 
Interaction Theory.
Theory At a Glance  •  Dramatism
Burke’s theory compares life to a play and states that, as in a theatrical piece, 
life requires an actor, a scene, an action, some means for the action to take 
place, and a purpose. The theory allows a rhetorical critic to analyze a speak­
er’s motives by identifying and examining these elements. Furthermore, Burke 
believes, guilt is the ultimate motive for speakers, and Dramatism suggests 
that rhetors are most successful when they provide their audiences with a 
means for purging their guilt.

	
Assumptions of Dramatism     327
D R A M A T I S M
In the second assumption (the critical importance of language), Burke’s position 
is somewhat similar to the concept of linguistic relativity known as the Sapir–Whorf 
hypothesis (Sapir, 1921; Whorf, 1956). Edward Sapir and ­Benjamin Whorf noted that 
it is difficult to think about concepts or objects without words for them. Thus, people 
are restricted (to an extent) in what they can conceive by the limits of their language. 
For Burke, as well as for Sapir and Whorf, when people use their language, they are 
used by it as well. When Karl tells Max that Spector is a hypocrite, he is choosing the 
symbols he wishes to use, but at the same time his opinions and thoughts are shaped 
by hearing himself use these symbols. Furthermore, when a culture’s language does 
not have symbols for a given motive, then speakers of that language are unlikely to 
have that motive. Thus, because English does not afford many symbols that express 
much nuance of opinion about Spector’s behavior and motivations, our discussions 
are often polarized. When Karl talks with his colleagues Diane and Randy, the dis­
cussion is focused on whether Spector was right or wrong. There is not much choice 
in between, and Burke would argue that this is a direct result of our symbol system. 
Think back to other controversies you have talked about (e.g., the moral implications 
of cloning, stem cell research, contrasts ­between presidential candidates, invading 
Iraq, etc.). You may remember the discussions as either/or propositions—positions 
were cast as either right or wrong. Burke’s response is that symbols shape our either/
or approach to these complex issues.
Burke asserts that words, thoughts, and actions have extremely close ­connections 
with one another. Burke’s expression for this is that words act as “terministic 
screens” leading to “trained incapacities,” meaning that people cannot see beyond 
what their words lead them to believe (Burke, 1965). For example, despite educa­
tional efforts, U.S. public health officials still have difficulty persuading people 
to think of the misuse of alcohol and tranquilizers when they hear the words drug 
abuse. Most people in the United States ­respond to “drug abuse” as the misuse of 
illegal drugs, such as heroin and ­cocaine (Brummett, 1993). The words drug abuse 
are “terministic screens,” screening out some meanings and including others. For 
Burke, language has a life of its own, and “anything we can see or feel is already in 
language, given to us by language, and even produced as us by language” (Nelson, 
1989, p. 169; emphasis in original). This explanation is somewhat at odds with the 
final assumption of Dramatism.
The second assumption suggests that language exerts a determining influence 
over people, but the final assumption states that human beings are choice makers. 
Burke persistently suggests that behaviorism has to be rejected because it conflicts 
with human choice. Thus, as Karl reads about Alan Spector, he forms his opinions 
about his behavior through his own free will. Much of what we discuss in the rest of 
the chapter rests on the conceptualization of agency, or the ability of a social actor 
to act out of choice.
As Charles Conrad and Elizabeth Macom (1995) observe, “The essence of 
agency is choice” (p. 11). Yet, as Conrad and Macom go on to discuss, Burke grap­
pled with the concept of agency throughout his career, largely because of the difficult 
task of negotiating a space between complete free will and ­complete determinism. 
Despite this, Burke kept agency in the forefront of his theorizing. More recently 
(French & Brown, 2011) researchers continue to struggle with how agency affects 
people’s symbolic actions and allocations of blame.

328     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
To understand Burke’s scope in this theory, we need to discuss how he framed 
his thinking relative to Aristotelian rhetoric.
Dramatism as New Rhetoric
In his book A Rhetoric of Motives (1950), Burke is concerned with persuasion, 
and he provides an ample discussion of the traditional principles of rhetoric ar­
ticulated by Aristotle (see Chapter 18). Burke maintains that the definition of 
rhetoric is, in essence, persuasion, and his writings explore the ways in which 
persuasion takes place. In so doing, Burke proposes a new rhetoric (Nichols, 
1952) that focuses on several key issues, chief among them being the notion of 
identification. In 1952, Marie Nichols said the following about the difference 
between Burke’s approach and Aristotle’s: “The difference between the ‘old’ 
rhetoric and the ‘new’ rhetoric may be summed up in this manner: whereas the 
key term for the ‘old’ rhetoric was persuasion and its stress was upon deliberate 
design, the key term for the ‘new’ rhetoric is identification and this may ­include 
partially ‘unconscious’ factors in its appeal” (p. 323; emphasis in ­original). Yet, 
Burke’s purpose was not to displace Aristotle’s conceptualizations, but rather to 
supplement the traditional approach.
Identification and Substance
Burke asserts that all things have substance, which he defines as the general 
­nature of something. Substance can be described in a person by listing demo­
graphic characteristics as well as background information and facts about the 
present situation, such as talents and occupation. Thus, from our opening sce­
nario, we may understand Karl’s substance by noting he is a 38-year-old Polish 
American male, high school math teacher, collector of rare coins, tennis player, 
and crossword puzzle enthusiast. In addition, Karl has been in a relationship with 
Max for seven years and lives in Grenada, New Mexico. Of course, many other 
pieces of information make up Karl’s substance as well, but these facts give us 
a starting point.
Burke argues that when there is overlap between two people in terms of their 
substance, they have identification. The more overlap that exists, the greater the 
identification. The opposite is also true, so the less overlap between individuals, the 
greater the division that exists between them. For instance, the fact that Alan Spector 
is a wealthy, Jewish, married man who is the mayor of Grenada, New Mexico, and 
appears in the media frequently provides little in terms of identification between him 
and Karl. They are both white, male professionals who live in the United States, but 
they overlap on little else.
However, it is also the case that two people can never completely over­
lap with each other. Burke recognizes this and notes that the “ambiguities of 
­substance” dictate that identification always rests on both unity and division. As 
Shane Borrowman and Marcia Kmetz (2011) note, identification and division are 
­inevitably paired, and it is difficult to talk about one without the other. Burke ob­
served that individuals will unite on certain matters of substance, but at the same 
substance 
the general nature 
of something
identification 
when two people 
have overlap in 
their substances
division 
when two people 
fail to have overlap 
in their substances

	
Dramatism as New Rhetoric     329
D R A M A T I S M
time remain unique, being “both joined and separated” (Burke, 1950, pp. 20–21). 
Furthermore, Burke indicates that rhetoric is needed to bridge ­divisions and es­
tablish unity. Rukhsana Ahmed (2009) demonstrated in a rhetorical analysis of a 
political speech made by Begum Zia in Bangladesh, that the Burkean concept of 
identification has applications in non-Western discourse. In Ahmed’s analysis Zia 
was able to make rhetorical appeals convincing her audience that the divisions 
between them could be bridged. Theodore Sheckels (2009) used Burke’s concept 
of identification to make a similar argument about Thabo Mbeki’s 1996 speech 
in South Africa. Burke refers to this process as consubstantiation, or increasing 
their identification with each other. Finally, as Debora Antunes stated in 2016, 
we should note that symbols are “carriers of identification” (http://kbjournal.org
/antunes), underscoring one of our assumptions of the theory that we discussed 
earlier in the chapter. 
The Process of Guilt and Redemption
Consubstantiality, or issues of identification and substance, are related to the guilt/
redemption cycle because guilt can be assuaged as a result of identification and divi­
sions. For Burke, the process of guilt and redemption undergirds the ­entire concept 
of symbolizing. Guilt is the central motive for all symbolic activities, and Burke 
defines guilt broadly to include any type of tension, embarrassment, shame, disgust, 
or other unpleasant feeling. Central to Burke’s theory is the notion that guilt is in­
trinsic to the human condition. ­Because we are continuously feeling guilt, we are 
also continuously engaging in attempts to purge ­ourselves of guilt’s discomfort. This 
process of feeling guilt and attempting to reduce it finds its expression in Burke’s 
cycle, which follows a predictable ­pattern: order (or hierarchy), the negative, victim­
age (scapegoat or mortification), and redemption.
Order or Hierarchy  Burke suggests that society exists in the form of an order, or 
hierarchy, which is created through our ability to use language. Language enables 
us to create categories like richer and more powerful—the haves and the have-nots. 
These categories form social hierarchies. Often we feel guilt as a result of our place 
in the hierarchy. If we are privileged, we may feel we have power at the expense of 
those with less wealth and power. This feeling prompts guilt.
consubstantiation 
when appeals are 
made to increase 
overlap between 
people
guilt 
tension, embar-
rassment, shame, 
disgust, or other 
unpleasant feeling
order or hierarchy 
a ranking that 
exists in society 
primarily because 
of our ability to use 
language
Student Voices
Nina
How I could have anything in common with singers of the 1960s is beyond me. I’m 
a 20-year-old born in the 21st century but I can completely understand the need for 
protest music. Burke’s identification comes to mind as I think about the words of 
the songs and their messages: safe working conditions, civil rights, nonviolence, etc. 
Singers like Joan Biaz and Bob Dylan may have sung them 60 years ago, but the 
words are still true today.

330     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
The Negative  The negative comes into play when people see their place in the 
social order and seek to reject it. Saying no to the existing order is both a function 
of our language abilities and evidence of humans as choice makers. When Burke 
penned his often-quoted definition of Man, he emphasized the negative:
Man is 
the symbol-using inventor of the negative 
separated from his natural condition by instruments 
of his own making goaded by the spirit of hierarchy 
and rotten with perfection. (1966, p. 16)
When Burke coined the phrase “rotten with perfection,” he meant that ­because our 
symbols allow us to imagine perfection, we always feel guilty about the ­difference 
between the real state of affairs and the perfection that we can imagine. Further, 
“rotten with perfection” also means that our ability with symbols allows us to get 
stuck in symbolic “ruts” and fail to see the fact that we are merely constructing 
our perspectives. This leads us to believe in the “rightness” of our perspectives so 
strongly that we become closed minded, which is detrimental to ourselves and others 
(Steiner, 2009).
Victimage  Victimage is the way in which we attempt to purge the guilt that 
we feel as part of the human condition. There are two basic types of victimage, 
or two methods to purge our guilt. Burke calls the type of victimage that we turn 
in on ourselves mortification. When we apologize for wrongdoing and blame 
ourselves, we engage in mortification. When Alan Spector said he did the wrong 
thing and apologized, he was engaging in mortification. Let’s use an unfortu­
nate historical example to demonstrate this point. In 1998, ­Republican leaders 
said they would have felt more sympathetic about President Clinton’s affair if 
he had admitted he was wrong and had not perjured himself. ­Clinton refused to 
engage in mortification. Instead he turned to another purging technique called 
scapegoating.
In scapegoating, blame is placed on some sacrificial vessel. By sacrificing the 
scapegoat, the actor is purged of sin. Clinton attempted to scapegoat the Republicans 
and others (Ole-Acevedo, 2012) as deserving the real blame for the country’s prob­
lems after confessing to an inappropriate relationship with Monica Lewinsky. When 
the news first broke in 1998, before Clinton admitted his ­relationship with Lewinsky, 
Hillary Rodham Clinton appeared on television suggesting that the rumors about her 
husband were the result of a complex “right-wing conspiracy” that was out to get 
her and her husband. This type of rhetoric illustrates Burke’s concept of scapegoat­
ing. Interestingly, in 2014—over 15 years later—Monica Lewinsky felt that she was 
the scapegoat (http://www.foxnews.com/politics/2014/05/06/monica-lewinsky-speaks
-out-says-was-made-scapegoat.html), suggesting two very different interpretations 
of the term.
Redemption  The final step in the process is redemption, which involves a 
­rejection of the unclean and a return to a new order after guilt has been temporarily 
purged. Inherent in the term redemption is the notion of a redeemer. The redeemer in 
the Judeo-Christian tradition is the Savior (Christ) or God. When politicians blame 
the negative 
rejecting one’s 
place in the social 
order; exhibiting 
resistance
victimage 
the way we attempt 
to purge the guilt 
we feel as part of 
being human
mortification 
one method of 
purging guilt, by 
blaming ourselves
scapegoating 
one method of 
purging guilt, by 
blaming others
redemption 
a rejection of the 
unclean and a 
return to a new 
order after guilt has 
been temporarily 
purged

	
Dramatism as New Rhetoric     331
D R A M A T I S M
problems on the media or on the opposing party, they offer themselves as potential 
redeemers—those who can lead the people out of their troubles. A key in the redemp­
tion phase is the fact that guilt is only ­temporarily relieved, through the redeemer or 
any other method. As any order or hierarchy becomes reestablished, guilt returns to 
plague the human condition.
The Pentad
In addition to devising the theory of Dramatism, Burke (1945) created a method for 
applying his theory toward an understanding of symbolic activities. He called his 
method the pentad because it consists of five points for analyzing a symbolic text 
like a speech or a series of articles about a particular topic, for instance. The pentad 
may help determine why a speaker selects a particular rhetorical strategy for identi­
fying with an audience. The five points that make up the pentad include the act, the 
scene, the agent, agency, and purpose. Almost 20 years after creating this research 
tool, Burke (1968) added a sixth point, attitude, to the pentad, making it a hexad, 
although most people still refer to it as the pentad (Figure 19.1). We will examine 
each of the points in turn.
The Act  Burke considered the act to be what is done by a person. In the case of 
Alan Spector, the act would be getting caught having an affair that resulted in a child 
while he was married. 
The Scene  The scene provides the context surrounding the act. In Spector’s case, 
the scene would include a time period in which American politicians are under fire 
for corruption and hypocrisy. We don’t have much information about the way Alan 
Spector would contextualize the scene because he has provided very ­limited infor­
mation publicly about any contributing factors to the act.
The Agent  The agent is the person or persons performing the act. In the case of 
Alan Spector, he is the agent. However, if a researcher wished to analyze Karl’s act 
of deciding he did not support Spector, then Karl would be the agent.
Agency  Agency refers to the means used by the agent to accomplish the act. Possible 
forms of agency include message strategies, storytelling, apologies, speech making, 
pentad 
Burke’s method for 
applying Dramatism
act
one prong of the 
pentad; that which 
is done by a person
scene
one prong of the 
pentad; the context 
surrounding the act
agent
one prong of the 
pentad; the person 
performing the act
agency
one prong of the 
pentad; the means 
used to perform 
the act
Act
Agent
Agency
Attitude
Scene
Purpose
Figure 19.1 
Burke’s Pentad 

332     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
and so forth. In Spector’s case, the agency included the justifications and apologies 
he made publicly.
Purpose  The purpose refers to the goal that the agent had in mind for the act—that 
is, why the act was done. In Spector’s case, the purpose was unclear. He provided no 
reasons. Karl believed he did it because he was weak.
Attitude  Attitude refers to the manner in which an actor positions himself or herself 
relative to others. Again, in Spector’s case, this is a contested point. Karl might say 
that he acted from an attitude of superiority. Many of the articles he read commented 
that Spector believed himself to be above the law.
The pentad has been used as a guide for those of us who use symbols in our 
conversations with others (Rountree & Rountree, 2015). When using the pentad to 
analyze a symbolic interaction, the analyst first determines all the elements of the 
pentad and identifies what occurred in a particular act. After labeling the points of 
the pentad and fully explicating each, the analyst then examines the pentadic or 
dramatistic ratios, or the proportions of one element relative to another. By iso­
lating any two parts of the pentad and examining their relationship to each other, 
we determine a ratio. An agent–act ratio, for instance, is at issue when we attempt 
to understand how a good person might do a bad thing. In analyzing the ratios in 
this manner, the researcher is able to discover a dominant element. Is the agent em­
phasized more than the ­situation or vice versa? An examination of the dramatistic 
ratio suggests something about point of view and rhetorical strategies. Steven Hunt 
(2003) calls these ratios the “interaction effects of two or more elements” (p. 379) 
and argues that observing these interactions is one criterion by which to judge the 
worth of a piece of rhetorical criticism. And, according to Floyd Anderson and 
Matthew Althouse in 2016, a minimum of 24 different ratios exist (http://kbjournal
.org/anderson). 
pentadic or 
dramatistic ratios 
the proportions of 
one element of the 
pentad relative to 
another element
purpose 
one prong of the 
pentad; the goal 
the agent had for 
the act
attitude 
a later addition 
to the pentad; the 
manner in which 
the agent positions 
himself or herself 
relative to others
Writing about one of the most historical races in political history between 
Massachusetts incumbent U.S. Senator, Scott Brown and challenger Elizabeth 
Warren, David Cantanese explains the importance of identification and divi­
sion to the campaign rhetoric. He notes that Warren was able to stage a big 
comeback in the polls because of her ability to convince women voters that 
Brown was not consubstantial with them while she was. Cantanese states 
that Warren was persuasive to Massachusetts’ independent women voters 
by shifting the focus from Brown’s message of working together across dif­
ferences to her message of identifying with women’s issues.
Source: Catanese, D. (2012). “How Elizabeth Warren Staged Her Comeback,” Politico.com, 
November 3, politico.com/news/stories/1112/83253.html.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Burke’s Ideas in Political Persuasion

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     333
D R A M A T I S M
Integration, Critique, and Closing
There is no question that Kenneth Burke has made an immeasurable contribution 
to the field of communication with his theory of Dramatism. Various researchers 
have praised Burke in the following terms: “He has become the most profound stu­
dent of rhetoric now writing in America” (Nichols, 1952, p. 331); “Kenneth Burke 
is more than a single intellectual worker; he is the ore for a scholarly industry” 
(Brummett, 1993, p. xi); and in 1981, the New York Times recognized Burke as a 
leading American critic, saying he was “the strongest living representative of the 
American critical tradition, and perhaps the largest single source of that tradition 
since its founder, Ralph Waldo ­Emerson” (cited in Chesebro, 1993, p. xi). Burke’s 
work is widely praised and frequently cited. In fact, the National Communication 
Association, one of the main organizations for communication teachers, research­
ers, and professionals, has an entire division devoted to Burkean criticism and there 
is an entire journal devoted to him (kbjournal.org). And, to be sure, the research sur­
rounding Dramatism has almost exclusively been qualitative, honoring the notion of 
“voice” that Burke felt was important. 
As we analyze Dramatism, four criteria become relevant: scope, parsimony, utility, 
and heurism.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  | 
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational | 
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach  
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Scope
Dramatism has been criticized for being too wide in scope. Burke’s goal is no less 
than to explain the whole of human experience with symbolic interaction. This is 
an extremely broad and ambitious goal, and some critics believe it renders the the­
ory too broad to be meaningful. When you contrast Dramatism with a theory like 
Uncertainty Reduction Theory, which we discussed in Chapter 8, you can see the 
two extremes of theoretical scope. URT seeks to explain the first few ­minutes of 
an initial encounter between strangers. Dramatism ­encompasses all human sym­
bolic interaction. Some critics might suggest that when a theory ­attempts such a 

334     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
lofty goal it is doomed to be overly complex and obtuse. Whether or not you see 
the range of Dramatism’s goal as a weakness is somewhat subjective. Interest­
ingly, for Burke and many who followed him, the wide scope of Dramatism is 
part of its appeal.
Parsimony
Some critics complain that Burke’s theory is too unclear and obtuse to be useful. 
Herbert Simons (2004) states that Burke was more “convolutionist than revolu­
tionist” (p. 152). Dramatism is seen by some as overly complex and confusing 
(Foss, Foss, & Trapp, 1991). Even proponents of Burke acknowledge that he is 
difficult to read. Marie Hochmuth Nichols concluded her pioneering 1952 essay 
on Burke by saying,
Burke is difficult and often confusing. He cannot be understood by casual 
reading of his various volumes. In part the difficulty arises from the ­numerous 
vocabularies he employs. His words in isolation are usually simple enough, but 
he often uses them in new contexts. To read one of his volumes independently, 
without regard to the chronology of publication, makes the problem of com­
prehension even more difficult because of the specialized meaning attached to 
various words and phrases. (p. 330)
However, Nichols also provides a rebuttal to some of these criticisms by conclud­
ing that some of the difficulty arises from “the compactness of his writing, the unique­
ness of his organizational patterns, the penetration of his thought, and the breadth 
of his endeavor” (p. 330). In other words, Burke is a genius and worth the effort it 
requires to understand his original thinking. When a student is diligent, Burke’s theory 
repays the hard work with many rewards.
Utility
Some researchers (Condit, 1992; Murray, 2003) observe that Dramatism falls 
short on the criterion of utility. This critique is lodged mainly because of what 
Burke leaves out of the theory. For example, Celeste Condit (1992) argues that the 
theory would be more useful if it addressed gender and culture more expansively. 
Condit observes that although Burke was supportive of feminism, his support came 
mainly in the form of including women under the sign of “man.” She notes that 
given the historical context in which Burke wrote, his support for women was not 
inconsequential. Many writers in Burke’s generation completely ignored women, 
so Burke was making a contribution by ­including women at all. Condit maintains, 
however, that now the scene has ­altered, and it is inappropriate to subsume women 
under the word man. Here Condit is talking both about the use of the generic man 
to represent all people and about our ability as a society to begin to think in new 
ways about sex and gender.
As Condit notes, “We must extend our language beyond duality to a broad ‘hu­
manity’ and to ‘human beings,’ discovering ways to speak that emphasize human 
plurality” (p. 351). Condit says the definition of man that Burke provides, which we 
discussed earlier in the chapter, is not adequate to include women. She recasts the 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     335
D R A M A T I S M
definition from the perspective of a radical feminist who would see the following as 
descriptive of man’s woman:
Woman is 
the symbol-receiving (hearing, passive) animal 
inventor of nothing (moralized by priests and saints) 
submerged in her natural conditions by instruments of man’s making 
goaded at the bottom of hierarchy (moved to a sense of orderliness) 
and rotted by perfection. (p. 351)
Then she recasts the definition to move beyond an essentialism defining men and 
women as opposite to each other and essentially the same as others of the same sex:
People are 
players with symbols 
inventors of the negative and the possibility of morality 
grown from their natural condition by tools of their collective making 
trapped between hierarchy and equality (moved constantly to reorder) 
neither rotten nor perfect, but now and again lunging down both paths.
(p. 352)
Condit’s argument is that Burke’s approach needs to be broadened both to in­
clude women and to move past a focus on one sex or the other to be truly inclusive 
of both. But, she asserts that merely broadening the language of “man/his” to include 
“people/their” will not in itself be sufficient to challenge the hold that language ex­
erts as a terministic screen against women in the United States. We need to change 
both our language and our thinking about women, men, gender, and inclusivity for 
significant progress to occur.
Condit also suggests that Burke emphasizes universality among cultures at 
the expense of particularity. For Condit, this is especially the case in the matter 
of Burke’s contention that victimage is a transcultural experience—a method for 
purging guilt in all cultures. She argues that cultures other than Western ­Christian 
ones (from which Burke draws almost exclusively) might not see victimage as the 
dominant motive for human conduct. For example, Buddhism might provide differ­
ent motives than Christianity does. Furthermore, if we examine trickster tales from 
Native American or African American cultures, we might see victimage character­
ized in a strikingly different fashion from what Burke describes. The trickster is in a 
low-power position relative to the rest of the society, but is able to triumph through 
wits and cleverness. The trickster is not a victim in the Christian sense that we see 
in Dramatism; rather, the trickster emerges victorious by turning the rules of the 
system against those in power.
In sum, Condit’s critique does not deny the enormous contribution made by 
Burke’s theory. Instead, she simply suggests some extensions and modifications for 
improving the theory. Jeffery Murray (2003) agrees with Condit, asserting that al­
though Burke’s theory continues to be widely used, it is necessary to expand it to 
include the voices of those who have been marginalized. Murray uses what he calls 
an “Other-Burkean” frame to analyze Nazi propaganda and a speech former U,S. 
Senator Ted Kennedy made after the death of Mary Jo Kopechne, a passenger in his 
car who died when he drove off a bridge in ­Massachusetts. In both cases, Murray ar­
gues that paying attention to what was omitted in the rhetoric and to “Others” whose 

336     Chapter 19  •  Dramatism
D R A M A T I S M
concerns are not highlighted by the pentad (such as the Jews in relationship to the 
Nazis, and Mary Jo Kopechne) provides a rich analysis.
Heurism
With regard to heurism, most critics agree that Dramatism is very successful. For 
instance, Dramatism was originally used in rhetorical analyses of speeches, but 
now the focus has widened to other discourse in the public sphere including “edi­
torials, pamphlets and monographs, books, docudramas, radio and television news, 
movies, music, and even the Internet” (Hunt, 2003, p. 378). The manner in which 
Dramatistic principles and concepts has been applied is vast. For example, Burke’s 
thinking has been applied to the Syrian Civil War and President Assad (Bakke & 
Kuypers, 2016). Facebook has been analyzed using the pentad (Castelen, Mottart, & 
Rutten, 2009). Amanda Nell Edgar (2014) employed the Dramatistic lens to un­
derstand the R & B culture and Chris Brown’s assault on Rihanna. The medi­
cal profession (e.g., Bareiss, 2015) utilized Dramatism to understand non-suicidal 
self-injuries. Finally, Luke Rowland’s (2016) assessment of Japanese multilingual 
signage used Burkean principles in its research. Clearly, Burke has influenced 
scholars from across a swath of disciplines.
Closing
There is general consensus that Burke’s theory provides us with imaginative and in­
novative insights into human motives and interaction. Dramatism provides us with 
a theory that models the big picture. It allows an analysis of human motivations and 
behavior, and its focus on language as the critical symbol system makes it especially 
attractive to communication researchers.
Student Voices
Amber
I can see applying Dramatism for real. When I look at President Bush’s speeches 
about invading Iraq, I see how he’s the agent and the U.S. public is the audience. 
The act would be invading Iraq itself—although there are a lot of subacts involved, 
like going after (and capturing) Saddam Hussein. I am pretty sure Bush had a lot 
of purposes going on there too. For one thing, there are the purposes he stated 
in his speeches. First he said that Iraq harbored terrorists and so had something 
to do with 9/11, and that they were hiding weapons of mass destruction. Now he’s 
changed the purpose to how bad Hussein was and how cruel he was to the people 
of Iraq. Then there are all the reasons that other people say are going on. Like, 
maybe he wanted to do it for oil or to get revenge for his father’s problems with 
Saddam. This whole situation is pretty confusing, but I think using Dramatism to sort 
it out might really help clarify it. I guess we’ll never really know why public figures 
like the president do what they do, but a rhetorician can really go to town trying to 
figure it out.

D R A M A T I S M
	
Discussion Starters     337
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: The notion that language usage is related to an audience is 
one fundamental argument of Dramatism. Explore the limitations of using 
texting and email to convey your emotions in a message.
	
1.  How could Karl talk about Alan Spector’s situation in a less polarized 
fashion? What are the linguistic barriers to such a discussion? Does a feminist 
critique of Burke’s theory enable you to think of less polarized language? ­Explain 
your answer.
	
2.  Use the pentad to analyze a public figure and the discourse surrounding 
some current controversy involving this figure.
	
3.  How do you understand the use of the pentad as a method relative to 
­Dramatism as a theory? Do all theories have specific methods that are used only 
with them? Why or why not?
	
4.  Do you agree with Burke that guilt is the primary human motive? If not, 
what do you think is the primary human motive?
	
5.  Burke believes that symbols, and language, in particular, are critical in life. 
When he says that symbolic action is more than mere physical or material reality, 
what do you think he means?
	
6.  Do you agree with Condit that Burke’s theory is culture specific rather than 
universal? Explain your answer.
	
7.  Apply any element of Dramatism to your life.

T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
The Narrative Paradigm
Based on the research of Walter Fisher
Miles Campbell rolled 
over in bed and turned 
off his screaming alarm. 
He burrowed under the covers for a minute be­
fore he realized he’d better get up or he would 
miss his chem lab. He was tempted to sleep in, but 
a vision of his mother’s face flashed before him, 
and he thought about how hard she had worked 
to help him get to college. He didn’t want to disap­
point her by not doing his very best now that he 
was here. So Miles sighed and shrugged off the 
covers. He slipped out of bed and splashed cold 
water on his face. By the time he was dressed 
and headed for the kitchen, he felt better about 
his day and about life in general.
	
In the kitchen he heard his housemates, Robert 
and Carlos, arguing about something. Seems like 
a normal morning, Miles thought. Those two can 
never get along. “What has got you guys up and 
yelling so early in the morning?” Miles asked as 
he began making his breakfast. Both Robert and 
­Carlos looked up and grinned at Miles. “You won’t 
think it’s a big deal, Miles,” Carlos said, “but we 
are discussing the candidates who are running 
for ­president of the Student Multicultural Associa­
tion.” “Yeah, you’re right, Carlos,” Miles laughed. 
“That doesn’t seem like something worth arguing 
about to me!”
	
Robert handed Miles a copy of two campaign 
flyers. “Well, you might not think it’s all that big 
a deal, but look at the difference between these 
two and tell me that Laura Huyge doesn’t make 
more sense than Jorge Vega.” Miles glanced at 
the two flyers that Robert had given him. Huyge 
was an Asian American graduate student, and 
she had presented a list of 10 points that repre­
sented her platform. She stated her interest in 
promoting ­cultural sensitivity and appreciation 
for diversity within the student body. Her flyer 
also listed a few ways that she planned to accom­
plish her goals. Her first big initiative, if she were 
elected, would be to sponsor a workshop with 
outside speakers and several hands-on activities 
to get students of different ethnicities talking to 
one another about ­difference and respect.
	
Miles looked up at Robert and Carlos and 
said, “Well, Laura sounds reasonable enough.” 
Robert clapped Miles on the back, smiling broadly. 
Carlos interrupted, saying, “Hey, man, you haven’t 
even looked at what Jorge has to say. Keep read­
ing, man.”
	
Miles put Laura’s flyer aside and took up 
Jorge’s. Jorge had chosen a completely different 
presentation style for his campaign flyer. Instead 
of laying out a specific platform point by point 
as Laura had, Jorge’s flyer told a series of short 
stories. In the first one, Jorge related an incident 
in class when an African American woman could 
not get the professor’s attention for anything she 
had to say. Every time she tried to contribute 
in class, the professor ignored her and asked a 
European ­American’s opinion. Because she was 
The narrative paradigm does not deny reason and rationality; it reconsti­
tutes them, making them amenable to all forms of human communication.
—Walter Fisher
Miles Campbell
338    
C H A P T E R	20

T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
	
The Narrative Paradigm 
     ﻿    
339
T
hroughout this book we have begun each chapter with a story about a person 
or several people who experience something through which we can ­illustrate 
the chapter’s theory. The reason we have made this choice may be found within the 
theory of narration that Walter Fisher calls the Narrative ­Paradigm. The Narrative 
Paradigm promotes the belief that humans are storytellers and that values, emotions, 
and aesthetic considerations ground our ­beliefs and behaviors. In other words, we 
are more persuaded by a good story than by a good argument. Thus, Fisher would 
explain Miles’s decision to vote for Jorge on the basis of the stories Jorge presented 
in his campaign flyer. Fisher asserts that the essence of human nature is storytelling.1
Fisher is not alone in this belief. Some researchers acknowledge the legacy of 
narrative. Robin Clair, Stephanie Carlo, Chervin Lam, Jon Nussman, Canek Phillips, 
Virginia Sanchez, Elaine Schnabel, and Liliya Yakova (2014) succinctly note: “The 
history of narrative might be traced to the origin of language, to the first symbolic 
sound or gesture” (p. 2). Other researchers (e.g., Ramsey, Venette, & Rabalais, 2011) 
have examined what they call “narrative malleability” of constructs observing that 
people’s minds can be changed about something based on good stories told by a cred­
ible storyteller. Jody Koenig Kellas and Haley Kranstuber Horstman (2015) contend 
that stories have the potential to make sense of the complex, help socialize people 
into groups (e.g., the family), and can create, reinforce, or challenge an individual’s 
identity. And, Koenig Kellas (2015) tells us that stories and storytelling have been 
adopted by many different disciplines including sociolinguisitics, English, sociology, 
and psychology. For many years, Communication Studies has also been influenced by 
the interest in narration. John Lucaites and Celeste Condit (1985) assert “the growing 
belief that narrative represents a universal medium of human consciousness” (p. 90). 
Kirsten Theye (2008) agrees, arguing that “narratives are crucial in human communi­
cation as a way of explaining the world” (p. 163). In addition, scholars (e.g., Koenig 
Kellas, 2013) assert that ­stories do more than explain the world, they shape our world. 
Finally, Art Bochner (2014) sums up narrative this way: “Narrative can be a dense, 
cerebral, and complicated topic” (p. 13).
the only Black person in the class, this woman 
believed the professor was prejudiced, but she 
wasn’t sure what she could do about it. Another 
story in the flyer described a classroom situation 
in which the only two Latino students believed 
that they were called on to give the “Latin per­
spective” on every issue the ­professor raised. 
They were both really tired of being tokens. A 
third story talked about how certain bars on cam­
pus were considered “Black” and others were 
“Latino” and others were “White.” This story told 
of two African American students who went to a 
White bar and felt really isolated.
	
As Miles read these stories, he thought that 
Jorge had it down cold. His description of life 
at the university was totally accurate. He him­
self had been ignored in classes and wondered 
if it had been because of his race. He’d also ex­
perienced being asked for the “Black” opinion, 
and he really ­resented that. Also, his social life 
rarely included people outside his own race, ex­
cept for Carlos and a couple of Carlos’s friends 
who were also Latinos. He never socialized with 
the Whites on campus. Jorge had given Miles a 
lot to think about, and he decided he would vote 
for Jorge.
1Although some scholars differentiate between stories and narrative, for purposes of illustration, we 
will use the terms interchangeably as argued by Koenig Kellas (2015).

T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
340     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
It is notable that Fisher calls his approach a paradigm rather than a theory. 
Fisher uses that term to signal the breadth of his vision because a paradigm is 
considered broader than a theory. Fisher states that “there is no genre, including 
technical communication, that is not an episode in the story of life” (1985, 
p. 347). Thus, Fisher has constructed an approach to theoretical thinking that is 
more encompassing than any one specific theory. Fisher states that his use of the 
term paradigm refers to an effort to formalize and direct our understanding of the 
experience of all human communication (Koenig Kellas, 2008).
Furthermore, the use of the term paradigm indicates that Fisher’s thinking rep­
resents a major shift from the thinking that had supported most previous theories of 
communication. Fisher believes he is capturing the fundamental ­nature of human 
beings with the insight that we are storytellers and that we ­experience our lives in 
narrative form. He contrasts his approach with what he calls the rational paradigm, 
which characterized previous Western thinking. In this way, Fisher presents what can 
be called a paradigm shift, or a significant change in the way people think about the 
world and its meanings.
Fisher (1987) explains the paradigm shift by recounting a brief history of para­
digms that have guided Western thinking. He notes that originally logos meant a 
combination of concepts including story, rationale, discourse, and thought. Fisher 
explains that this meaning held until the time of Plato and ­Aristotle, who distin­
guished between logos as reason and mythos as story and emotion. In this division, 
mythos, representing poetical discourse, was assigned a negative status relative 
to logos, or reason. The concept of rhetoric fell somewhere between the elevated 
logic of logos and the inferior status of poetics or mythos. Ranking mythos, logos, 
and rhetoric in this way reinforced the concept that not all discourse is equal. In 
fact, according to Aristotle (see Chapter 18), some discourse is superior to others 
by virtue of its relationship to true knowledge. Only logos, Aristotle asserted, leads 
to true knowledge ­because it provides a system of logic that can be proven valid. 
Logos was found in the discourse of philosophy. Other forms of discourse lead to 
knowledge, but the knowledge they produce is probabilistic, not true in an absolute, 
­invariable sense.
This Aristotelian distinction did not prevent Aristotle himself from valuing all the 
different forms of communication equally, but it did provide a rationale for later theo­
rists’ preference for logic and reason over mythos, or story, and rhetoric. Much subse­
quent scholarship has focused on a struggle over these forms of discourse. Beginning at 
the end of the Renaissance period in Europe, the scientific revolution changed people’s 
way of thinking about the world. It dethroned philosophy as the source of logic, placing 
logic instead within ­science and technology. But Fisher contends that this change was 
not a far-reaching one because both philosophy and science privilege a formal system 
of logic that continues to leave poetics or rhetoric in a devalued position. The mind-set, 
employed by many scholars, that regards logical thinking as primary is what Fisher 
calls the rational world paradigm.
Struggles among these different branches of knowledge continue today, but 
Fisher asserts that the Narrative Paradigm finds a way to transcend these struggles. 
Fisher argues that “acceptance of the narrative paradigm shifts the controversy from 
a focus on who ‘owns’ logos to a focus on what specific instances of discourse, 
regardless of form, provide the most trustworthy, reliable, and desirable guides to 
paradigm shift
a significant 
change in the way 
most people see 
the world and its 
meanings
rational world 
paradigm 
a system of logic 
employed by many 
researchers and 
professionals

	
Assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm     341
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
belief and to behavior, and under what conditions” (1987, p. 6). Thus, the Narrative 
Paradigm represents a different way of thinking about the world than that posited by 
the rational world paradigm. With narrative, Fisher suggests, we move away from 
an either/or dualism toward a more unified sense that embodies science, philosophy, 
story, myth, and logic. The Narrative Paradigm presents an alternative to the rational 
world paradigm without negating traditional rationality.
Fisher argues that the Narrative Paradigm accomplishes this shift through rec­
ognizing that “some discourse is more veracious, reliable, and trustworthy in respect 
to knowledge, truth, and reality than some other discourse, but no form or genre has 
final claim to these virtues” (1987, p. 19; emphasis in ­original). In asserting this, 
Fisher lays the groundwork for reclaiming the importance of the narrative, or story, 
without denigrating logic and reason, and he establishes a new way of conceptual­
izing rhetoric. Furthermore, Fisher asserts that story, or mythos, is imbued in all 
human communication endeavors (even those involving logic) because all arguments 
include “ideas that cannot be verified or proved in any absolute way. Such ideas arise 
in metaphor, values, gestures, and so on” (1987, p. 19). Fisher thus attempts to bridge 
the divide ­between logos (rational argument) and mythos (story or narrative).
Theory At a Glance  •  The Narrative Paradigm
This approach is founded on the principle that humans are storytelling ani­
mals. Furthermore, narrative logic is preferred over the traditional logic used 
in argument. Narrative logic, or the logic of good reasons, suggests that peo­
ple judge the credibility of speakers by whether their stories hang together 
(have coherence) and ring true (have fidelity). The Narrative Paradigm allows 
a democratic judgment of speakers because no one has to be specially trained 
in persuasion to be able to draw conclusions based on the concepts of coher­
ence and fidelity.
Assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm
Despite Fisher’s attempt to show the Narrative Paradigm as a fusion of logic and 
aesthetic, he does point out that narrative logic is different from traditional logic 
and reasoning. We will discuss how these two differ throughout the chapter because 
this is an important distinction for Fisher and one that he continually refined as his 
thinking about the Narrative Paradigm evolved. An ­important aspect of the assump­
tions of the Narrative Paradigm is that they contrast with those of the rational world 
paradigm, just as the two logics ­differ. Fisher (1987) stipulated five assumptions: 
∙∙
Humans are naturally storytellers.
∙∙
Decisions about a story’s worth are based on “good reasons.”
∙∙
Good reasons are determined by history, biography, culture, and character.

342     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
∙∙
Rationality is based on people’s judgments of a story’s consistency and 
truthfulness.
∙∙
We experience the world as filled with stories, and we must choose among them.
We can see how these clearly contrast to the parallel assumptions Fisher highlights in 
the rational world paradigm. This contrast is revealed in Table 20.1. We will briefly 
discuss each of the assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm, comparing them with 
their opposites in the rational world paradigm.
First, the Narrative Paradigm assumes that the essential nature of ­humans is 
rooted in story and storytelling. As our opening example of Miles illustrates, sto­
ries persuade us, move us, and form the basis for our beliefs and actions. Miles had 
not heard much about the election for the president of the Multicultural Student 
Association on campus. In fact, Miles was rather apathetic about the election and 
had no real interest in, or opinions about, either candidate. Yet, after reading the 
compelling stories that Jorge included in his campaign ­literature, Miles decided to 
vote for Jorge. Miles found Laura’s campaign material interesting but not nearly 
as involving as Jorge’s. If the assumption of the rational world paradigm held 
true, we would expect the more rational argument to hold sway over Miles, and 
he should have decided to vote for Laura. The Narrative Paradigm explains his 
preference for Jorge.
Fisher also believes in this first assumption because he observes that narrative is 
universal—found in all cultures and time periods. Fisher asserts, “Any ethic, whether 
social, political, legal, or otherwise, involves narrative” (1984, p. 3). This universality 
of narrative prompts Fisher to suggest the term Homo narrans as the overarching 
metaphor for defining humanity. Fisher was influenced in his approach by reading 
moral theory espoused by Alasdair ­MacIntyre (1981). MacIntyre observes that “man 
[sic] is in his ­actions and practice, as well as in his fictions, essentially a story-telling 
animal” (p. 201).
Table 20.1  Contrast Between Narrative and Rational World Paradigms
NARRATIVE PARADIGM
RATIONAL WORLD PARADIGM
1.	 Humans are storytellers.
1.	 Humans are rational beings.
2.	Decision making and communication 
are based on “good reasons.”
2.	Decision making is based on 
arguments.
3.	Good reasons are determined by matters 
of history, biography, culture, and 
character.
3.	Arguments adhere to specific 
criteria for soundness and logic.
4.	 Rationality is based in people’s awareness 
of how internally consistent and truthful 
to lived experience stories appear.
4.	 Rationality is based in the quality 
of knowledge and formal reasoning 
processes.
5.	The world is experienced by people as 
a set of stories from which to choose 
among. As we choose, we live life in a 
­process of ­continual recreation.
5.	The world can be reduced to a 
series of logical relationships that 
are uncovered through reasoning.

	
Assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm     343
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
Fisher used MacIntyre’s ideas as the foundation for the Narrative Paradigm. 
James Elkins (2001) agrees with Fisher’s assumption about the centrality of stories 
for humans. Elkins observes that people “turn to stories to both survive and to imag­
ine, as well as for a host of instrumental purposes, for pleasure, and because we must. 
Stories are part of our human inheritance” (p. 1). Other researchers (e.g., Bute & 
Jensen, 2011) concur noting stories provide humans the means to account for their 
own experiences and behaviors.
The second assumption of the Narrative Paradigm asserts that people make deci­
sions about which stories to accept and which to reject on the basis of what makes 
sense to them, or good reasons. We will discuss what Fisher means by good reasons 
later in the chapter, but he does not mean strict logic or argument. This assumption 
recognizes that not all stories are equally effective; instead, the deciding factor in 
choosing among stories is personal rather than an abstract code of argument, or what 
we traditionally call reason. From Fisher’s point of view, in our chapter-opening 
vignette, Laura has told a story in her campaign flyer, too. Miles simply chooses to 
reject her story and accept Jorge’s because it is more personally involving to him. 
Events such as a presidential election to a war in the Middle East to protesters in front 
of the U.S. Supreme Court show us the reality of competing stories.
As people listen to these conflicting stories, they choose among them. Their 
choices do not stem from traditional logic but from narrative logic. When people 
shift from traditional logic to narrative logic, Fisher believes their lives will be 
improved because narrative logic is more democratic than formal logic. As Fisher 
(1984) asserts, “All persons have the capacity to be rational in the ­narrative para­
digm” (p. 10). Whereas formal logic calls for an elite trained in the complexities 
of the logical system, the Narrative Paradigm calls on the practical wisdom that 
everyone possesses.
The theory’s third assumption deals with what specifically influences people’s 
choices and provides good reasons for them. The rational world paradigm assumes 
that argument is ruled by the dictates of soundness (Toulmin, 1958). For Stephen 
Toulmin, the anatomy of an argument is the movement from data to a conclusion. 
This movement needs to be judged by soundness, or an examination of the formal 
logic that guides the conclusion. In contrast, the Narrative Paradigm suggests that 
soundness is not the only way to evaluate good ­reasons. In fact, soundness may not 
even be an accurate way of ­describing how people make this judgment. The Narra­
tive Paradigm assumes that narrative ­rationality is affected by history, biography, 
culture, and character. Thus, Fisher also introduces the notion of context into the 
Narrative Paradigm. People are influenced by the context in which they are embed­
ded. Therefore, the material that appears persuasive to Miles is the material that is 
specifically relevant to him personally. It is not material that adheres to a code of 
formal logic and ­persuasion.
The fourth assumption forms a core issue of the narrative approach. It asserts 
that people believe stories insofar as the stories seem internally consistent and truth­
ful. We will discuss this further in the next section when we describe the concept of 
narrative rationality.
Finally, Fisher’s perspective is based on the assumption that the world is a set of 
stories, and as we choose among them, we experience life differently, allowing us to 
recreate our lives. Miles’s choice to support Jorge may cause him to cast his own life 

344     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
story differently. He may no longer see himself as a loner. He may change his sense 
of political action based on his choice of Jorge’s story. You can see how the Narrative 
Paradigm contrasts with the rational world paradigm, which tends to see the world 
as less transient and shifting and which discovers truth through rational analysis, not 
through narrative logic’s emotional responses to compelling stories.
A study illustrating these assumptions in a courtroom context examined the Nar­
rative Paradigm’s utility for professional communication. Consider one of the most 
watched trials in U.S. history. Christine Kelly and Michele Zak (1999) assert that for­
mer football player O. J. ­Simpson’s acquittal was due to the triumph of narrative argu­
ment over rational ­argument. The defense was victorious because it framed Simpson’s 
story in a manner that resonated with the jury whereas the prosecution relied on the 
rational world paradigm, directed more toward the judge and the opposing lawyers. 
Kelly and Zak note that the prosecutors “drew on the language of technical expertise 
and took responsibility for presenting a careful case in a court of law without reference 
to the lives of the jury” (p. 301). Other ­research examines how narratives exert influ­
ence in health care settings (e.g., Gray, 2009; Wamucii, 2011), with reference to tabloid 
news (e.g., ­McCartha & Strauman, 2009), and political campaigns (e.g., Falk, 2009; 
­Underation, 2009).
Key Concepts in the Narrative Approach
Tracing the assumptions of the Narrative Paradigm leads us to a consideration of 
some of the key concepts that form the core of the theoretical framework: narration, 
narrative rationality (which includes coherence and fidelity). Coherence is made up 
of three types:  structural, material, and characterological; and fidelity leads to the 
logic of good reasons.
Narration
Narration is often thought of simply as a story, but for Fisher, narration is much 
more than a plotted story with a beginning, middle, and end. In Fisher’s perspective, 
narration includes any verbal or nonverbal account with a sequence of events to 
which listeners assign a meaning. Specifically, Fisher states, “When I use the term 
‘narration,’ I do not mean a fictive composition whose propositions may be true or 
false and have no necessary relationship to the message of that composition. By 
‘narration,’ I mean symbolic actions—words and/or deeds—that have sequence and 
meaning for those who live, create, or interpret them” (1987, p. 58). This definition 
implies the need for a storyteller and a listener. Jody Koenig Kellas (2015) articu­
lates this narration process: “Most stories also include a description of characters, a 
dramatic tension that moves toward explanation or resolution, temporal sequencing, 
and a moral or story point” (p. 2). 
Fisher’s definition is extremely broad and parallels what many people think 
of as communication itself. This, of course, is Fisher’s point: All communication 
is narrative. He argues that narrative is not a specific genre (stories as opposed to 
poems, for example), but rather, it is a mode of social influence. Furthermore, it 
is his contention that all life is composed of narratives. When you listen to a class 
narration 
an account to which 
listeners assign 
meaning

	
Key Concepts in the Narrative Approach     345
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
lecture, when you give an excuse to a professor for not turning in a paper on time, 
and when you read the newspaper, send a Tweet, talk to your friends, you are hear­
ing and shaping narratives.
Narrative Rationality
Given that our lives are experienced in narratives, we need a method for judg­
ing which ones to believe and which to disregard. This standard can be found in 
narrative rationality, which provides us with a means for judging narratives that 
is quite different from the traditional methods found in the rational world paradigm. 
As we mentioned previously, traditional tests of rationality include whether claims 
correspond to actual facts, whether all relevant facts have been considered, whether 
arguments are internally consistent, and whether the reasoning used conforms to 
standards of formal and informal logic (Fisher, 1978). Narrative rationality, in con­
trast to traditional logic, operates on the basis of two different principles: coherence 
and fidelity.
Coherence  The principle of coherence is an important standard for assessing nar­
rative rationality, which will ultimately determine whether or not a person accepts 
a particular narrative or rejects it. Coherence refers to the internal consistency 
of a narrative. When judging a story’s coherence, the listener would ask whether 
the narrative seemed to hang together in a consistent manner. Narratives possess 
coherence when all the pieces of the story are present; we do not feel that the sto­
ryteller has left out important details or contradicted ­elements of the story in any 
way. Coherence is the standard of sensemaking ­applied to a given narrative and 
“sensemaking is at the heart of all narrative” (Koenig Kellas, 2015, p. 4). This 
sensemaking is usually obtained when the characters in a story behave in relatively 
consistent ways.
When Miles read the narratives contained in Jorge’s campaign literature, he saw 
a consistent thread running through them: His university has racial problems. If Jorge 
had presented some problems based on race and then shaped the narrative to con­
clude that all was well with race relations at the university, Miles would have rejected 
the story for being inconsistent.
Coherence is often measured by the organizational and structural elements 
of a narrative. Art Bochner (2014) notes that “coherence is an achievement, not 
a given” (p. 287). When a storyteller skips around and leaves out important in­
formation, interrupts the flow of the story to add elements forgotten earlier, and 
generally is not smooth in structuring the narrative, the listener may reject the 
narrative for not possessing coherence. Coherence is based on three specific types 
of consistency: structural coherence, material coherence, and characterological 
coherence.
structural coherence 
The type of consistency Fisher calls structural 
coherence rests on the degree to which the elements of the story flow smoothly. 
When stories are confusing, when one part does not seem to lead to the next, or when 
the plot is unclear, then they lack structural coherence. If a friend tells you a story 
about breaking up with her boyfriend on email, but she fails to explain any of the 
narrative rationality
a standard for 
judging which 
stories to believe  
and which 
to disregard
coherence
a principle of 
narrative rational-
ity related to the 
internal consistency 
of a story
structural coherence 
a type of coherence 
referring to the flow 
of the story

346     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
events leading up to the breakup or why she chose to send an email, and then skips 
back to telling you how she and her boyfriend first met, you would think her story 
lacked structural coherence.
material coherence 
Material coherence refers to the degree of congru­
ence between one story and other stories that seem related to it. For example, 
you may have heard several stories about why two friends of yours have stopped 
speaking to each other. If all the stories but one attribute the problem to one friend 
having misled the other, causing an embarrassing situation, you are unlikely to 
believe the one unique story. You would believe that the different story lacked 
material coherence.
characterological coherence 
Characterological coherence refers to 
the ­believability of the characters in the story. For instance, let’s imagine that you 
have a professor whom you dislike a great deal. This professor ridicules you and 
other students in the class whenever anyone contributes to class discussions. In 
addition, the professor makes racist, homophobic, and sexist jokes in class. Your 
impression is that this professor is a thoroughly objectionable person. Given this 
background, you would be unlikely to accept a story in which this ­professor was 
shown in an admirable or even heroic light. You would reject the story for not pos­
sessing characterological coherence.
Fidelity  The other critical standard for assessing narrative rationality is fidelity, or 
the truthfulness or reliability of the story. Stories with fidelity ring true to a listener. 
When Miles reads the stories that Jorge has in his campaign literature, he thinks to 
himself that those events have happened to him at the university. Miles wonders if 
Jorge has been following him around campus, watching what goes on in his life. This 
makes the stories powerful to Miles. They possess a great deal of fidelity for him. 
Fisher (1987) notes that when the elements of a story “represent accurate assertions 
about social reality” (p. 105), they have fidelity.
material coherence 
a type of coherence  
referring to the 
­congruence between 
one story and other 
related stories
characterological 
coherence 
a type of coherence 
referring to the 
believability of the 
characters in the 
story
fidelity 
a principle of 
narrative rationality  
judging the credibility 
of a story
Student Voices
Justin
I understand Fisher’s point about coherence and how hard it is to accept a story 
about someone you really dislike doing something great. But I’m wondering 
how the theory explains a story that makes you change your mind about 
someone. If I didn’t like a ­professor but then found out that he was doing some 
great things for the planet like starting some big recycling center or something, 
I might change my mind and start ­liking him a little bit more. I know in the past, 
learning more information about someone has made me like them more (if it was 
good information). When I first met my ­girlfriend, I didn’t like her right off the 
bat, but the more I learned about her, the better I liked her. I don’t see that idea 
explained in the theory.

	
Key Concepts in the Narrative Approach     347
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
The Logic of Good Reasons
Related to Fisher’s notion of fidelity is the primary method that he proposes for as­
sessing narrative fidelity: the logic of good reasons (Koenig Kellas, 2015). Fisher 
asserts that when narratives possess fidelity, they constitute good reasons for a per­
son to hold a particular belief or take an ­action. For example, Miles sees Jorge’s 
stories as possessing fidelity, which makes the stories persuasive; the stories form 
good reasons for Miles to vote for Jorge.
Fisher (1987) explains his concept of logic by saying that it means “a ­systematic 
set of procedures that will aid in the analysis and assessment of ­elements of reasoning 
in rhetorical interactions” (p. 106). Thus, logic for the narrative paradigm enables a 
person to judge the worth of stories. The logic of good reasons presents a listener 
with a set of values that appeal to her or him and form warrants for accepting or 
rejecting the advice advanced by any form of narrative. This does not mean that any 
good reason is equal to any other; it simply means that whatever prompts a person to 
believe a narrative is bound to a value or a conception of what is good.
As Fisher describes it, this logic is a process consisting of two series of five 
questions that the listener asks about the narrative. The first five questions are the 
following:
1.	 Are the statements that claim to be factual in the narrative really factual?
2.	 Have any relevant facts been omitted from the narrative or distorted in its telling?
3.	 What are the patterns of reasoning that exist in the narrative?
4.	 How relevant are the arguments in the story to any decision the listener may make?
5.	 How well does the narrative address the important and significant issues 
of this case?
These questions constitute a logic of reasons. To transform this into a logic of good 
reasons, there are five more questions that introduce the concept of values into the 
process of assessing practical knowledge. These questions are as follows:
1.	 What are the implicit and explicit values contained in the narrative?
2.	 Are the values appropriate to the decision that is relevant to the ­narrative?
3.	 What would be the effects of adhering to the values embedded in the ­narrative?
4.	 Are the values confirmed or validated in lived experience?
5.	 Are the values of the narrative the basis for ideal human conduct?
Fisher illustrates the logic of good reasons with a book written by Jonathan 
Schell (1982). The Fate of the Earth, which was a very popular book in the 1980s, 
argues that the nuclear weapons race must cease. Fisher asserts that even though 
experts found the book inaccurate on technical grounds, the narrative it espoused 
was extremely popular with the general public. Fisher ­argues that this was because 
the book tells a story that meets the criteria of ­coherence and fidelity. It focuses on a 
set of values that many people found ­relevant at that point in history. As the Narra­
tive Paradigm predicts, the ­well-told story—consisting of narrative rationality—was 
more compelling to ­readers than the expert testimony that refuted the factual ac­
curacy of the ­narrative. The relationship among the elements making up narrative 
rationality is illustrated by Figure 20.1.
good reasons 
a set of values for 
accepting a story 
as true and worthy 
of acceptance; pro-
vides a method for 
assessing fidelity

348     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Fisher’s Narrative Paradigm offers new insights into communication behavior and 
directs our attention to democratic processes in the area of rhetorical criticism. Fisher 
contributes the idea that people’s lived experiences make them ­capable of analyzing 
rhetoric. Furthermore, the Narrative Paradigm helps us to see the nature of multiple 
logics at work in our communication encounters. Thus, the Narrative Paradigm has 
Narrative Rationality
Logic of good reasons
Structural coherence
Material coherence
Characterological coherence
Coherence
Fidelity
Figure 20.1 
Elements of 
Narrative 
Rationality
After the vice presidential debate in 2012 between Joe Biden and Paul Ryan, 
the New York Times online opinion editors asked frequent contributors to 
their pages to comment on the performances of the debaters, as well as 
on the campaign in general. Gary Gutting, a professor at Notre Dame, noted 
that aside from how Biden performed as a debater, a striking difference ex­
isted in how Democrats responded to Biden’s debate in comparison to their 
response to Obama’s performance in the first presidential debate, which was 
considered poor and unenthusiastic by most observers. Gutting asserts that 
“debates are often won or lost in the first hour of post-game analysis. Demo­
crats gave up on Obama immediately and let their opponents construct the 
narrative of a weak president run over by a forceful challenger. They could 
have, for example, put forward a counternarrative of a calm and reflective 
president, quietly demolishing the flagrant misrepresentations of an arrogant 
opponent” (n.p.). Gutting’s comments lend support to the Narrative Paradigm’s 
assertions of narrative logic holding sway over rational logic.
Source: Debating points, vice presidential edition, (2012, October 11). New York Times online, 
campaignstops.blogs.nytimes.com/2012/10/11/debating-points-vice-presidential-edition/?emc=eta1.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Political Debates and the 
Narrative Paradigm

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     349
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
made a substantial contribution to our ­understanding of human communication and 
human nature in general. And, clearly, the theory has been studied almost exclu­
sively using a qualitative lens.
As you think about the Narrative Paradigm, consider the criteria of scope, logi­
cal consistency, utility, and heurism.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Scope 
The critique that the Narrative Paradigm is too broad mainly focuses on Fisher’s 
claim that all communication is narrative. Researchers object to that claim for two 
reasons: First, some have questioned the utility of a definition that includes every­
thing. How meaningful is the definition of narrative if it means all communication 
behavior? Critics have directed us to consider the question: Is there value in treat­
ing a ritual greeting (“Hi, how was your day?”) and an involved narrative explain­
ing one’s desire for a divorce in the same way? Second, some researchers, notably 
Robert Rowland (1987, 1989), suggest that some forms of communication are not 
narrative in the way that Fisher maintains. According to Rowland, science fiction 
and fantasy do not conform to most people’s values. Rather, these genres often 
challenge existing values. Rowland also questions the utility of considering a novel 
(such as Arthur Koestler’s Darkness at Noon) and a political pamphlet (such as one 
produced by the Committee on the Present Danger) both as narratives as Fisher 
does. ­Although both tell stories about the repressive character of the former Soviet 
system, they do so in such different ways that Rowland believes it does a disservice 
to both writings to place them in the same category. Furthermore, it complicates our 
understanding of the definition of narrative when two such disparate ­examples can 
both be labeled as narrative. 
Logical Consistency
The Narrative Paradigm has been faulted for failing to be consistent with some of 
the claims that Fisher makes about it. For instance, Rowland (1987) finds that the 

350     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
narrative approach does not actually provide a more democratic structure com­
pared with the hierarchical system espoused by the rational world paradigm, nor 
does it completely offer an alternative to that paradigm. Rowland says that Fisher 
overstates the problem of domination of the public by the elite, or by the expert, 
in the rational world paradigm. In addition, Rowland argues that “there is nothing 
inherent in storytelling that guarantees that the elites will not control a society” 
(p. 272).
Utility
The Narrative Paradigm has elicited both criticism and praise with respect to its use­
fulness. K. McClure (2009) argues that the Narrative ­Paradigm is an overly conserva­
tive theory because its focus on fidelity actually weds it to normative conceptions of 
rationality rather than freeing us from them as Fisher proposes he will do. William 
Kirkwood (1992) observes that Fisher’s logic of good reasons focuses on prevailing 
values and fails to ­account for the ways in which stories can promote social change. 
In some ways, both Kirkwood and Fisher agree that this observation is more of an 
­extension to the theory than a punishing critique.
Kirsten Theye (2008) argues that her analysis of Vice President Dick ­Cheney’s 
apologies, after shooting his friend in a hunting accident in 2006, shows that 
Fisher’s distinction between narrative coherence and narrative fidelity is not useful. 
She states that it’s impossible to separate the two. Her suggestion is to forget the two 
components as separate concepts and instead focus on the basic question underly­
ing narrative rationality: “whether a story rings true to the audience based on their 
experiences” (p. 174).
Interestingly, narrative theorists other than Fisher have embraced the utility of 
the theory. Clair et al. (2014), for instance, has concluded that “narrative [theory] 
has found its permanent spot in health communication literature” (p. 7), literature 
Student Voices
Colin
I understand exactly what Fisher meant with the terms coherence and fidelity. I 
have a friend named Marco who constantly tells crazy stories, and I spend a lot of 
time trying to figure out whether to believe him or not. And I do use coherence and 
fidelity to ­decide if he’s being truthful or just trying to get me to fall for a bunch of 
bull. When he told me about how he got trapped in his car the other day in a park­
ing ramp—I guess the locks froze and he couldn’t open the doors—I first thought 
about the stories he’s told me before (which I believed) to see if this one fit with 
those. Then I considered him as a character and whether this was something likely 
to happen to him. I also tried to judge how well the story hung together—I asked him 
a bunch of questions to see if he’d contradict himself or anything. Finally, I decided 
to believe him. It was a pretty funny story.

T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
	
Discussion Starters     351
that includes important topics such as medical decision making, aging, and health 
care organizations. Clearly, while some may consider limited usefulness with the 
theory, others contend that its value and utility are expansive.
Heurism
Despite criticisms, which primarily urge refinements of the theory, not its aban­
donment, Fisher’s Narrative Paradigm has contributed a great deal to the study 
of human communication. For one thing, the idea of people as storytellers has 
proved captivating and heuristic. Storytelling seems an apt metaphor for under­
standing how humans use communication to make sense of the world (Johnson, 
2016; Suter, Koenig Kellas, Webb, & Allen, 2016; Thompson & Schrodt, 2015). 
Fisher has provided a new paradigm for understanding human nature, squarely 
located in the symbolic realm of communication. Further, some research shows 
that stories can improve the healing process, particularly with marginalized and 
vulnerable populations (Lee, Fawcett, & DeMarco, 2016). Finally, further dem­
onstrating the value of storytelling outside of the academy, Jennifer Gray (2015) 
found that there were differences in stories between women who continued their 
pregnancies and those who chose not to continue. Both populations, however, 
strived to make sense of their experiences.
Closing
Future scholarship will extend the framework of the Narrative Paradigm to remedi­
ate its shortcomings and capitalize on its strengths. In constructing the Narrative 
Paradigm, Fisher has provided a rich framework for such scholarship to take place. 
Since both Eastern and Western societies rely upon stories for meaning, we will see 
this theory utilized across the globe by scholars.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  With Twitter and other forms of social media, many people 
are becoming involved quickly in stories for which they may not have 
firsthand knowledge. What do you think this might mean for the Narrative 
Paradigm? If many storytellers elaborate and change a story, does that make it more 
or less likely to have coherence and fidelity? Or do you think these two elements 
might be less important in an age of social media?
	
1.  Can you think of any other explanations besides the Narrative ­Paradigm for 
Miles’s preference for Jorge’s candidacy after he read the campaign flyers?
	
2.  Do you agree with Fisher that humans are storytellers? What does that mean 
to you in a practical sense? 
	
3.  When you listen to others’ stories, do you evaluate them based on 
­coherence and fidelity? Can you think of any other criteria that you use to evaluate 
the stories that you hear?

352     Chapter 20  •  The Narrative Paradigm
T H E  N A R R A T I V E  P A R A D I G M
	
4.  What support does Fisher have for his contention that all communication 
is narration? Can you think of some communication that is not narrative in 
nature? If all communication is narration, do you think the theory is too broad 
in scope?
	
5.  The Narrative Paradigm suggests that when an expert argument is compared 
to a good story, the expert argument will fail because it will lack the coherence and 
the fidelity that a narrative possesses. Do you agree or disagree with this claim? 
Give an example where expert testimony failed to persuade you. Give an example 
of a good story that failed to ­persuade you.
	
6.  Choose a story that has been in the news recently and analyze it for narrative 
rationality.
	
7.  If Fisher discards the rational world paradigm, why does he advocate narrative 
rationality? How are they different?

353
The Media
ARGUABLY, VERY FEW INSTITUTIONS IN OUR LIVES 
affect us more than media. Mediated messages and images 
­surround us, and provide us with information and entertain­
ment, as well as ways to connect with others. Television, 
film, Netflix, cell phones, the Internet, and social media are 
more than a small part of our lives, and it’s apparent we’ll 
never be able to reverse this fact, even if we would want 
to. Imagine ­trying to spend a week (or even a day) without 
your computer, your phone, or your TV. For most of us, that 
would be impossible!
	
It is in this spirit that we offer the six theories in this 
section called “The Media.” Each theory places media, in 
some format, as central to our lives, and the media theo­
rists represented here believe that we respond in differ­
ent ways to the barrage of electronic technology. Agenda 
Setting suggests that media sources, like television and 
radio, act as gatekeepers in putting an agenda out to the 
public. Then members of the public determine what they think about that agenda 
on their own—so, media don’t tell us what to think, they just tell us what to 
think about. The central feature of the Spiral of Silence Theory pertains to 
the influence of media on whether or not people will speak out about an issue. 
Uses and Gratifications Theory suggests that the viewer/listener is active in 
their media consumption. The theory concerns itself with what people do with 
particular media. Cultivation Theory focuses on the role of television in our 
lives. This theory is concerned with the effects of heavy television viewing on 
people’s perceptions of the world, especially with reference to how much vio­
lence takes place in reality. In “exposing” the media for their role in maintaining 
power relationships in society, Cultural Studies highlights the influence that 
mediated structures have on culture. Cultural theorists aim to unravel the power 
Chapter 21
Agenda Setting Theory 
(McCombs & Shaw) 355
Chapter 22
Spiral of Silence Theory 
(Noelle-Neumann) 369
Chapter 23
Uses and Gratifications 
Theory (Katz, Blumler, & 
Gurevitch) 387
Chapter 24
Cultivation Theory 
(Gerbner) 403
Chapter 25
Cultural Studies (Hall) 420
Chapter 26
Media Ecology Theory 
(McLuhan) 436

relationships in society in order to provide marginalized populations more voice. 
Examining how ­technology has ruled our lives, Media Ecology Theory argues 
that the primary media of the age (currently the Internet, for instance) usually 
take precedence over the ­content of the message.
	
We will continue to be affected by media throughout our lives. Technology 
­continues to develop, and even as we write these words, new ways of bringing 
­messages to people are being conceptualized. While learning about the theo­
ries in this section, you will encounter a number of timely topics pertaining to 
the media: dominance, patriarchy, personal needs and values, and the ethics 
associated with media ­reporting.
354
The Media

355
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
Sally was fixing dinner 
for her extended fam­
ily and she had the TV 
playing in the background. She was only half 
listening, but she stopped peeling carrots when 
the news came on and she heard the story of 
Isaiah Shepherd. Sally couldn’t remember having 
heard of him before, but she paused in her din­
ner preparations to ­listen. Shepherd was a star 
football player at Northwestern University who 
came from Washington, D.C. The newscaster 
spoke of how Shepherd had told people that his 
grandmother and girlfriend, both living in D.C., had 
died on the same day. His grandmother had been 
ill, and his girlfriend had been in a car accident 
and then contracted leukemia. This story was 
­especially remarkable because on the day they 
died, Northwestern had a game and Shepherd 
went on to play well despite his sorrow. Now it 
was being revealed that the girlfriend had never 
existed, and all of Shepherd’s interactions with 
her had taken place online. Either Shepherd had 
been the victim of a cruel hoax or he, himself, had 
participated in fooling the public about this. Sally 
thought that was a very weird story. All during 
dinner, she talked to her family about how such a 
thing could happen. They debated back and forth 
as to whether Shepherd had been a part of the 
hoax or if he’d been fooled along with others. 
Sally was pretty sure Isaiah had to be in on it.
	
A few weeks later, Sally was at the nursing 
home where she worked as an aide. She was in 
the break room and the radio was on; she stopped 
to listen as she sipped her coffee. As the news 
anchor was talking about presidential inaugura­
tions over the years, she mentioned President 
Obama’s in particular. Although much could be 
said of the 2008 historical inauguration, in­
stead, the focus was on whether Beyonce had 
lip-synched the national anthem. Just then, Sally’s 
friend and colleague, Nathan, came into the break 
room and Sally asked him what he thought about 
Beyonce’s performance at the inauguration. 
Interestingly, despite all that they could talk 
about, the two couldn’t get the lip-synching out of 
their minds, even talking about other famous lip-
synching singers like Eminem, Ashlee Simpson, 
and Kanye West. 
	
The following week, Sally was at her com­
puter at home working on a paper for her class 
in Contemporary Problems at the local college. 
Sally was trying to finish the BA she had started 
15 years ago so she could go on to become a reg­
istered nurse. This class satisfied a social-cultural 
core requirement, and she was actually enjoying it 
even though it didn’t seem to have anything to do 
with nursing. The professor had asked the class 
to write about what they thought had been one of 
the most compelling social problems of the past 
10 years. Sally typed in “social problems in the 
Agenda Setting Theory
Based on the research of Maxwell McCombs and Donald Shaw
C H A P T E R 	21
Sally D’Amato 
In some instances, established traditions are used to inform agenda-
setting research. In other instances, agenda setting informs older 
traditions. 
—Maxwell E. McCombs and Donald Shaw

356     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
S
ally’s interactions with the media and her subsequent conversations with friends 
and family about various topics can be explained by the theory we profile in this 
chapter: Agenda Setting. Agenda Setting Theory explains that media set the agenda 
for the public; they tell people what is important by the number of times a story is 
reported and, by implication, if they do not report on a story (or bury it on the back 
pages of the newspaper), they indicate what stories are unimportant. Media sources 
also tell the public what is ­important by what features of a story they emphasize and 
which they do not. For example, the story about Isaiah Shepherd focused on whether 
he was in on the hoax or not, and this question structured the conversations that Sally 
had with others about the story. Newscasters could have emphasized other issues 
such as online relationships in general, the media spotlight that is on student athletes, 
or the culture of Washington, D.C. but because they didn’t, Sally didn’t spend too 
much time talking about those aspects of the story. Agenda Setting Theory argues that 
the media exert an influence over their consumers in these ways. However, the ­theory 
also suggests that the influence isn’t all one way, and Sally (and other members of the 
public) also have an impact on the media.
	
Over time scholars have had various ideas about how influential the media are in 
people’s lives. In the early days of mass media, people were seen as helpless victims 
of the powerful mass media. This notion was eventually discredited and replaced by 
what is called a limited effects model of the mass media which acknowledge that media 
influence people, but they also assert that media’s influence is minimized or limited by 
certain aspects of individual audience members’ personal and social lives. In addition, 
researchers argue, audience members, themselves, play a role in the mass communi­
cation process (see our more complete discussion of this history of media effects in 
our chapter on Uses and Gratifications Theory, Chapter 23). Agenda Setting research 
began with a belief in the powerful effects of the media, but later refinements put it into 
the camp of limited effects (McCombs, 2004; McCombs & Bell, 1996; McCombs & 
Shaw, 1993; Min & McCombs, 2016). 
History of Agenda Setting Research
Before delving into the assumptions of the theory, let’s provide some relevant back­
ground. The history of agenda setting research can be conceptualized in two stages: 
(1) pretheoretical conceptualization, and (2) the establishment of the theory. We will 
discuss each of these two historical stages briefly. 
U.S.” for a Google search and she was amazed 
at the results. She stopped counting the vari­
ous problems after she got to 100. Sally realized 
there were a lot of issues in the world that she 
hadn’t thought about much, and wondered a bit 
about why that was the case. She thought back 
over the past few weeks and considered some 
of the issues she had been thinking and talking 
about. Upon reflection, she had to admit some of 
them weren’t too significant. Sally doubted that 
Isiah Shepherd’s fake girlfriend or ­Beyonce’s lip-
synching the national anthem would even make 
the list for the top 200 social issues! And yet 
these things had been given a lot of coverage in 
the media. Sally got to work on her paper. She 
knew she had a lot of work ahead of her.

	
History of Agenda Setting Research     357
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
Pretheoretical Conceptualizing
Most researchers (e.g., Dearing & Rogers, 1996) talk about the first stage of agenda 
setting research as consisting of the conceptualizations of several scholars in different 
fields beginning to think and write about the relationships among the media, the 
audience, and the policymakers in the United States. The first person to contribute 
to this line of thought according to James Dearing and Everett Rogers was Robert 
E. Park. Park was a sociologist at the University of Chicago (1915–1935), and he 
is thought to be the first scholar of mass communication. He devised the notion of 
media gatekeeping and began to discuss some of the issues that are now incorporated 
into Agenda Setting Theory. Park noted that editors are gatekeepers because they 
have the power to “kill” stories and to promote other stories that are submitted to 
them by correspondents, reporters, and news agencies. This statement related to the 
later developments in Agenda Setting Theory because Park distinguished between 
issues that become public and those that do not come to the public’s attention. 
	
After Park’s contributions, Walter Lippmann was a pioneer of the pretheoreti­
cal stage. Walter Lippmann was a scholar of propaganda and public opinion as well 
as an influential newspaper columnist and presidential adviser. In 1922, he wrote a 
book called Public Opinion, and he titled the first chapter “The World Outside and 
the Pictures in Our Heads.” He made the argument that the mass media connect the 
two. According to Lippmann, the events that happen in the world are brought to 
people by the mass media and the way these events are reported shape how people 
structure the images of these events in their minds (Fahmy, Bock, & Wanta, 2014). 
Lippmann did not use the term agenda setting, but his writing was very influential in 
later development of the theory.
	
In 1948, Harold D. Lasswell, a political scientist at the University of Chicago, 
contributed an important chapter to an anthology about communication that had far-
reaching implications for Agenda Setting Theory. In this chapter, Lasswell talked about 
two important functions of mass media: surveillance and correlation. Surveillance is 
the process of newspeople scanning the information that is in the environment and 
deciding which of the many events that are occurring deserve attention in their news 
outlets. In discussing this function, Lasswell was echoing Park’s notion of gatekeeping. 
Lasswell argued that news reporters, editors, and so forth decide which of the multitude 
of possible stories will be the ones to reach the public via their papers or other outlets. 
Obviously in this process the media do exert powerful effects—they are in charge of 
what the public gets information about and how that information is presented. People 
often complain that the news is all bad and that the good things that happen don’t get 
reported (the old adage “if it bleeds, it leads” refers to the likelihood that bad news will 
be featured in the media). This speaks to the surveillance process that is controlled 
by newspeople.
	
Lasswell (1948) describes the function of correlation as the way that media 
direct our attention to certain issues through communicating them to the public and 
policymakers. In this function, media synchronize the various groups in ­society to 
pay attention to the same things at the same time. Lasswell spoke of the “correlation 
of the parts of society in responding to the environment” (p. 38). The result of the 
media orchestration of our attention was “a correlation of attention on certain issues at 
the same time by the media, the public, and ­policymakers” (Dearing & Rogers, 1996, 
surveillance
the process of 
newspeople 
scanning the 
information that is 
in the environment 
and deciding which 
of the many events 
that are occurring 
deserve attention in 
their news outlets
correlation
the way that 
media direct our 
attention to certain 
issues through 
communicating 
them to the public 
and to policymakers

358     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
pp. 11–12). This function is illustrated when there is a national/international event (like 
a presidential inauguration, the Super Bowl, or the Olympics) or a national catastrophe 
(like the Boston Marathon bombing or Hurricane Sandy). The media correlate our 
­attention to these things in real time, so that it’s likely we will hear about storm damage 
at the same time we hear or read about a dress of the First Lady.
Establishing the Theory of Agenda Setting
All of these ideas by earlier researchers came together in the second stage of agenda 
setting research. This stage is marked by the study that Maxwell ­McCombs and 
Donald Shaw (1972) published which took these early concepts and put them to an 
empirical test. This landmark study examined the public and the media’s agendas 
during the 1968 presidential election. Agenda Setting Theory was focused on issues 
of political import in its beginnings. McCombs and Shaw were interested to test the 
hypothesis, derived from the ideas of scholars like ­Lasswell, Park, and Lippmann, 
that the mass media create an agenda through their selection of what to include in 
the news, and this agenda influences public perception of what is important. In this 
first study, McCombs and Shaw hypothesized a causal relationship between the 
media and the public agendas, which stated that the media agenda would, over time, 
become the agenda for the public. 
	
To test their hypothesis, they interviewed 100 undecided voters during the three 
weeks just prior to the presidential election in November of 1968. Although elements 
of their hypotheses changed in subsequent studies, one of the enduring contribu­
tions of this early work was the way they measured the two variables of interest: 
the public agenda and the media agenda. The public agenda for these undecided 
voters was measured by their responses to a survey question: “What are you most 
concerned about these days? That is, regardless of what politicians say, what are the 
two or three main things that you think the government should concentrate on doing 
something about?” (McCombs & Shaw, 1972, p. 178). They ranked the issues based 
on the frequency with which they were mentioned and found five main issues—
foreign policy, law and order, fiscal policy, public welfare, and civil rights, which 
were mentioned most frequently by the respondents. These five issues formed the 
public agenda. 
	
They measured the media agenda by counting the number of news articles, edi­
torials, and broadcast stories in the nine main mass-media outlets that served the 
area where the undecided voters lived. These mass-media sources ­included televi­
sion, newspapers, and news magazines. McCombs and Shaw found an almost perfect 
correlation (1967) between the rank order of the five issues on the media agenda as 
measured by their content analysis of the media coverage of the election campaign, 
and the five issues on the public agenda as determined by their survey of the 
100 undecided voters. 
	
At this point in the history, the ideas articulated by Lippmann and others now 
had a name: “McCombs and Shaw named this transfer of salience from the media 
agenda to the public agenda the agenda setting influence of mass communication” 
(McCombs & Bell, 1996, p. 96). The theory was launched and hundreds of articles, 
books, and monographs have followed. Since its ­inception, over 400 studies have 
utilized Agenda Setting Theory (Zhou, Kim, & Kim, 2015) in some form. Even a 

	
Assumptions of Agenda Setting Theory     359
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
Google search of the theory yields millions and millions of results. Clearly, the 
theory has resonated with both scholars and laypeople with many modifications 
undertaken over the years. We now examine a few of the theory’s assumptions and 
key terminology. 
Assumptions of Agenda Setting Theory
Agenda Setting Theory rests on three basic assumptions: 
∙∙
The media establish an agenda and in so doing are not simply reflecting reality, 
but are shaping and filtering reality for the public.
∙∙
The media’s concentration on the issues that comprise their agenda influence 
the public’s agenda, and these together influence the policymakers’ agenda.
∙∙
The public and policymakers have the possibility to influence the media’s 
agenda as well.
These three assumptions are woven into Agenda Setting Theory and suggest the 
interaction that the theorists specified among the media, the public, and policymakers. 
First, the media both shape and filter the reality in which we live. We may not be 
aware of it, but media are constantly providing us a lens both to understand and to 
reflect our social reality. Along the way, the media also establish an agenda for us to 
consider. Imagine, for instance, all of the information around us. Now, imagine the 
various media (e.g., radio, television, the Internet, social media, etc.). Somehow all of 
this information has to be packaged in some way and the media ensures the way that 
we receive information and the extent to which the information reaches us. In other 
words, media shape what we hear, read, or attend to and we are usually unwittingly 
compliant in that process. Consider, for instance, our opening story. Nate and Sally 
focused on lip-synching rather than on the groundbreaking presidential inauguration. 
It’s likely that the media influenced the conversation by filtering out other (more 
important) information related to the 2008 celebration. 
Theory At a Glance  •  Agenda Setting Theory
In choosing and displaying news, editors, newsroom staff, webcasters, and 
anchors play an important part in shaping social and political reality. When 
readers and viewers consume news, they not only learn about a given issue, but 
they also learn how much importance to attach to that issue by the amount and 
position it’s given by the press. In thinking about what candidates are saying 
during a campaign, the mass media may well determine the important issues—
that is, the media may set the “agenda” of the campaign. How influential the 
media are in this agenda setting function depends on several factors including 
media credibility, the extent of conflicting evidence, shared values, and the audi­
ence’s need for guidance.

360     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
	
A second assumption of Agenda Setting Theory relates to the gatekeeping function 
of the media. In particular, the media’s focus on the issues that comprise an agenda and 
in turn, influence the public’s agenda and subsequently the agenda of decision makers. 
Let’s think about this a bit further with an example. Over the past several years, there has 
been a concerted effort to deal with bullying episodes taking place in schools. Although 
the number of kids being bullied is high, it was the media’s sustained attention to the 
topic that inevitably prompted parents to talk to school boards to demand local policy 
change and ultimately prompted state legislatures to enact anti-bullying laws. This one 
topic of bullying, then, allowed the media to become gatekeepers of the bullying topic 
in that it highlighted the kids who were bullied, their stories of survival, and the ways in 
which schools could/should reduce bullying.
	
One final assumption of the theory assumes that the policymakers and the public 
can affect the media’s agenda. Because an interrelationship exists among the three 
elements (the media, the public, and those in prominent decision-making roles), it’s 
possible that the media will initiate an agenda because of the influence (or pressure) 
brought about by the other two elements. For example, consider the increase in atten­
tion pertaining to bathroom use of transgendered individuals. Lawmakers either voted 
to narrow the laws on bathroom use or in a few cases, expanded them to accommodate 
preferential bathroom usage. Few would argue against the fact that legal changes 
were undertaken because of trans activism. Clearly, although some media outlets 
were reporting on this topic for a few years prior to any national dialogue, it was the 
policymakers and the public who prompted the issue to come to the forefront of the 
media’s agenda.  
Two Levels of Agenda Setting
Agenda Setting Theory proposes that the agenda setting function has three levels 
(Rogerson & Roselle, 2016). The original conception of the theory identified only 
the first level of agenda setting. This level focuses on the list of important issues 
that comprises the agenda as decided by some entity such as the media. A second 
level, sometimes called attribute agenda setting, was added to the ­theory that 
agenda
a list of the most 
important issues of 
the day as decided 
by an entity, such as 
the media
Student Voices
Liza
This theory is even more spot on when we talk about politics. The last presidential 
election kept showing us a biased view of what we could call a “conservative” 
candidate. It was all like “he’s extreme on this issue” or “he’s very much out of step on 
that issue.” The truth is that millions of people like me felt the same way as the guy felt! 
But, the media kept “telling me” what to think and even on some social media, I was 
told how to vote. The idea that the media informs is not as truthful as the fact that the 
media tries to persuade.

	
Three-Part Process of Agenda Setting     361
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
focuses on which parts (or attributes) of those issues are most important. The third 
level is rather recent and acknowledges the interplay between news and reality. In 
particular, Lei Guo (2016) suggests “network agenda setting” as a third level. In 
particular, Guo notes: “The news tells us not only what to think and how to think, 
but also determines how we associate different messages to conceptualize social 
reality” (p. 3). 
	
The first level speaks to the broad media agenda, and the second level refers to 
the process known as media framing or the way media depictions of events (that 
have made it onto the media agenda) influence and constrain how consumers can 
interpret them. The third level presupposes the first and second level, in that the media 
still set the agenda, but do so in much more “complicated ways” (Guo, 2016, 
pp. 3–4). 
	
Framing was first discussed by Todd Gitlin (1980) in his examination of how 
CBS television coverage of the 1960s student movement made it seem less important 
than it actually was. Researchers noted that framing could be accomplished in many 
ways. In newspapers, things like the size of headlines, photographs included with the 
story, a story’s overall length and placement allow the editors to frame its importance 
and highlight the aspects of it that are deemed most important. On television, the 
visuals accompanying the story add to the ability of newspeople to frame a story. 
Some research (e.g., Miller & Roberts, 2010) has examined what they call visual 
agenda setting, which is concerned exclusively with visuals. This study asked 466 
Louisiana State University students to respond to imagery about Hurricane Katrina 
six weeks after the storm. They found that most people chose the compelling, repeti­
tious imagery shown in the dominant media. So they concluded that the principles of 
visual agenda setting were supported. However, they also found that the result was 
qualified by how close the respondent was to the news event. Students who were 
more personally ­affected by Katrina chose more personal images and abandoned the 
images that the media selected.
	
Other researchers expanded the notion of framing to include affect, for ­instance 
(e.g., Coleman & Wu, 2010; Entman, 1993), and also talked about a related process: 
priming (Clausen & Oxley, 2017), a cognitive process whereby what the media 
present temporarily, at least, influences what ­people think about afterwards in pro­
cessing additional information. For ­example, if you watch or hear news reports about 
the ongoing nuclear tests conducted by North Korea, you might be primed to have 
more anxiety about that country’s ability to bomb the United States than if you had 
not paid attention to those news reports. 
Three-Part Process of Agenda Setting
The agenda setting process consists of three parts: setting the media agenda, setting 
the public agenda, and setting the policy agenda. The media agenda refers to the 
priority of issues to be discussed in mediated sources. The public agenda is the result 
of the media agenda interacting with what the public thinks. And, finally, the public 
agenda interacts with what is considered important by policymakers to create the 
policy agenda. In a simple format, the theory states that the media agenda affects the 
media agenda
the priority placed 
on issues discussed 
in mediated sources
public agenda
the result of the 
media agenda 
interacting with 
what the public 
thinks
policy agenda
the result of the 
public agenda 
interacting with 
what policy makers 
think
media framing
how media 
depictions of 
events influence 
and constrain the 
way consumers can 
interpret the events
priming
a cognitive process 
whereby what the 
media present 
temporarily, at 
least, influences 
what people think 
about afterwards 
in processing 
additional 
information

362     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
public agenda, which in turn, impacts the policy agenda, a process we suggested in 
one of the assumptions of the model. (See Figure 21.1).
	
In addition, this simple formulation is complicated by a few other factors. First, 
agenda setting is concerned with salience, or the degree to which an agenda issue 
is perceived as important relative to the other issues on the agenda (McCombs, 2014). 
Agenda setting researchers are more interested in salience than in the usual con­
cerns of public opinion researchers such as positive and negative attitudes toward an 
issue. Salience allows agenda setting researchers to capture what the media agenda 
is and what the media are telling the public to think about. Thus, how salient or impor­
tant an issue is perceived to be by the audience will have an effect on the degree of 
influence felt. Although you might disagree with Sally and Nate talking about lip-
synching rather than presidential inaugurations in our opening, the Westernized 
“celebrity culture” focus seems to be one reason for their attention to the topic. 
Further, Agenda Setting became a limited effects model in part because of the later 
recognition that the power of the media agenda is dependent on a variety of factors 
including: media credibility, the extent of conflicting ­evidence available to the 
consumer, the extent to which people share the values of the media, and the public’s 
need for guidance or orientation (Sevenans & Walgrave, 2016; Walgrave & Van 
Aelst, 2006).
	
If an audience member does not believe a media source is credible, he or 
she will likely dismiss the agenda promoted on that source. If Mandy is a liberal, 
she would be unlikely to believe much of what she might hear from a source like 
Glenn Beck on the radio, for example. And, if Samuel is conservative, he will 
probably dismiss most of the agenda promoted on Full Frontal with Samantha Bee 
or on any political podcast perceived as liberal or progressive. Thus, the public 
agenda will be swayed only by the media sources they find credible. Conflicting 
information also complicates the tenets of Agenda Setting and provides a contin­
gency that the theory has to incorporate. If Tina listens to several news programs 
and they all tell her something slightly different about the economy, for instance, 
the Agenda Setting function is complicated. Further, if Randy listens to talk shows 
that promote the value of the sanctity of marriage, he will likely be convinced by 
their agenda because he shares that value. However, if Marianne believes that 
salience
the degree to which 
an agenda issue 
is perceived as 
important relative to 
the other issues on 
the agenda
Figure 21.1
The Impact of 
Public and Media 
Agenda on Policy 
Agenda
Source: Rogers and 
Dearing (1988).
Personal experience and interpersonal a
communication among elites and other individuals
Real-world indicators of the importance
of an agenda issue or event
Public
agenda
Media
agenda
Gatekeepers, inﬂuential media,
and spectacular new events
Policy
agenda

	
Three-Part Process of Agenda Setting     363
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
marriage is an oppressive institution, she will probably not accept the agenda on 
those shows. 
	
The contingency condition that Agenda Setting researchers have discussed the 
most is the need for guidance or orientation (McCombs, 2004). This factor explains 
why people sometimes do not adopt the media agenda by discussing two key vari­
ables: relevance and uncertainty. Relevance is defined as a motivation to seek orien­
tation on an issue from the media due to the perception of personal importance that 
the issue holds for someone. If people believe they are not at all involved in an issue 
such as greenhouse gases, for instance, they will not look to the media for guidance 
on the issue and thus will not be affected by the media agenda. Uncertainty refers 
to how much information people think they have about an issue. If they believe they 
have a great deal of information about the two candidates in a presidential election, 
their uncertainty is low, and thus they will not have a need for guidance from the 
media. If, however, they are unsure if they have enough information, they need more 
relevance
a factor explaining 
why people seek 
guidance from the 
media agenda. 
It refers to how 
personally affected 
they feel by an issue
uncertainty
a factor explaining 
why people seek 
guidance from the 
media agenda. 
It refers to how 
much ­information a 
person believes they 
already possess 
about an issue
Theory in Popular Press  •  Combatting the Media Agenda
Priscilla Gilman writes about how  the media agenda posed a problem for 
her in the aftermath of the Sandy Hook Elementary/Newtown, Connecticut, 
killings in 2012. Gilman, the mother of an autistic child, notes that the me­
dia seemed to be trying to explain the killer’s horrific behaviors by labeling 
him as suffering from autism. She writes, “It began as insinuation, but quickly 
flowered into outright declaration. Words used to describe the killer, Adam 
Lanza, began with “odd,” “aloof,” and “a loner,” shaded into “lacked empathy,” 
and finally slipped into “on the autism spectrum” and suffering from “a mental 
illness like Asperger’s.” By Sunday, it had snowballed into a veritable storm of 
accusation and stigmatization.” Gilman is using her column to try to counteract 
the framing that occupied many media stories about the tragedy in Newtown. 
She points out that there are factual errors in this framing: first, she argues 
that autism is not a mental illness, it is a neurodevelopmental disability or 
disorder. Further, those who are on the autism spectrum, according to Gilman, 
do not necessarily lack empathy. They can be very empathic although they may 
express their empathy and concern for others in unconventional ways.
	
Gilman concludes by stating that countless studies have shown that people 
with autism are no more likely than those without it to engage in violence, 
and to the contrary, are more likely to be the victims of violence (i.e., bullying 
behaviors) than the perpetrators. It remains to be seen if the media agenda, 
the public agenda, and the policy agenda will converge in policies that respect 
the value of each child as Gilman urges, or will take up the frame that Gilman 
disputes here.
Source: Gilman, P. (2012, December 17). Don’t blame autism for Newtown. New York Times 
online, nytimes.com/2012/12/18/opinion/dont-blame-autism-for-newtown.html.

364     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
guidance from the agenda the media present. These two variables work together to 
explain deviations from the general principles of Agenda Setting Theory. If relevance 
and uncertainty are both high, then Agenda Setting should be predictive. If relevance 
and uncertainty are both low, then these are contingency conditions that allow 
the theory to be more flexible. What sort of relevance and uncertainty did Sally 
possess in the opening vignette?
Expansions and Refinements to Agenda Setting Theory
The original study that McCombs and Shaw published in 1972, was predicated on 
a powerful effects model of the media. McCombs and Shaw’s hypothesis, that the 
media agenda impacts the public’s agenda, was founded on the image of a rather 
passive audience. The second phase of research on the theory moderated that stance. 
This phase merged Agenda Setting with some of the ideas of Uses and Gratifications 
Theory (see Chapter 23). In the Uses and Gratifications approach, the audience is 
pictured as a group of active seekers, employing media for specific uses, and to satisfy 
particular gratifications. This next phase of Agenda Setting incorporated that notion 
and began to ask about why some voters expose themselves to certain messages more 
than other voters do. 
	
Further research (Weaver, Graber, McCombs, & Eyal, 1981) expanded Agenda 
Setting Theory beyond the public issues that McCombs and Shaw had begun exploring 
in 1972. Other key political elements were added to the agenda like candidate image 
and voter interest in campaigns. More recent research added the question: Who sets 
the media agenda? This is a complicated question and research has suggested a variety 
of answers. Steven Littlejohn and Karen Foss (2011) suggest that there are four types 
of power relations between the media and other sources that might provide an answer: 
(1) high-power source and high-power media; (2) high-power source and low-power 
media; (3) lower-power source and high-power media; and (4) both media and source 
are low power. 
	
In the first case, a popular president could be a source to a well-funded media 
outlet with a decent reputation like CNN. In this situation, the two would be equals in 
setting the agenda, which will work well for them if they see things similarly; but this 
will result in struggles if they are not on the same side of the important issues of the 
day. In the second scenario, the source (an influential politician) has more power than 
the media (a local paper), and so then the source will be able to set the agenda for the 
media. In the third relationship, the media are able to set their own agenda because the 
source is not considered to have much of a voice. In this case, the media may margin­
alize the source and the source will have trouble getting access to the public to discuss 
their issues. A welfare group who wants to have their agenda broadcast on national 
television may be in this situation. Finally, in the last relationship Littlejohn and Foss 
suggest that events will probably set the public agenda because neither the source nor 
the media have much power (a local official and a small town website).
	
In addition, researchers have examined what they call intermedia influence 
on the agenda setting process and have noted that news organizations affect one 
another’s agendas. For example, some research (Lim, 2011) has investigated the 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     365
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
influence major news websites have on each other’s agendas. This study, which 
was set in South Korea, found that the major news websites there did influence the 
agendas of online newspapers as well as, to a certain extent, each other. Other studies 
(e.g., Johnson, 2011; Maier, 2010; Meraz, 2011; Ragas & Kiousis, 2010) found 
some support for the influence that various media have on one another. In addition, 
Maxwell McCombs and Tamara Bell (1996) observed that the intermedia effect can 
come from individual newsworkers as well as news organizations. As they note, 
journalists live in “an ambiguous social world” so they often rely on one another for 
confirmation and as a source of ideas. McCombs and Bell mention several studies 
of cases where journalists ­followed one another in reporting about specific issues. 
They refer to this agenda influence as pack journalism. To some extent, pack jour­
nalism is similar to groupthink, a theoretical model we discussed in Chapter 14. 
McCombs and ­colleagues (e.g., McCombs & Funk, 2011) have suggested that 
intermedia ­influence is the wave of the future for agenda setting research. With this 
backdrop, we now turn our attention to several key assumptions and terms related 
to the theory.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Agenda Setting Theory is a venerable theory of mass communication; it has a history 
spanning back to the beginning of the twentieth century, and it is still being employed 
today in studies of media and public communication. ­It is clearly a theory that has 
been understood using an empirical approach, making it aligned with quantitative 
methods. Although it has its detractors, and some of its central concepts may need 
adaptation in an era of new media and fragmented publics, it still has many adherents 
and it fares well as measured against the traditional criteria for evaluating theories, 
especially empirical theories.
pack journalism
the phenomenon of 
journalists having 
their agendas 
influenced by other 
journalists
Student Voices
Christian
I like parts of this theory. It makes sense to me that what I talk about with my 
friends and family is influenced by what I hear and see in media. If that weren’t 
the case, I’d just be talking about stuff that actually happens in front of me here 
at school. So, that part of the theory seems right to me. But, I just can’t see how 
there can be a public agenda anymore. We all read and listen to such different 
sources, how can there be topics that occupy everyone at the same time? If I’m 
reading a blog about aviation and my sister is reading Motherlode (because she 
has a new baby), I can’t see us having the same agenda. I think this theory was 
right when it was first developed in the 1970s, but it has to be changed to keep up 
with the times.

366     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
Scope
Some researchers have critiqued the scope of Agenda Setting Theory. Occasionally, the 
complaint is that the scope is too large and sometimes the opposite is discussed. 
Some of the problems around this issue have to do with the concept of framing. 
First, some research (e.g., Takeshita, 2006) asserts that framing is a ­separate theory 
from Agenda Setting, and could supersede it altogether. This is ­labeled an identity 
problem with Agenda Setting. Toshio Takeshita comments that some researchers 
believe Agenda Setting Theory, in adding the second level of attribute agenda setting 
(or framing), is actually colonizing other theories and overreaching the appropriate 
scope for the theory. Takeshita concludes that the two theories can coexist and more 
empirical work will determine which one ­provides the better explanation for media’s 
influence on the public. Further, Takeshita notes that Agenda Setting Theory has 
the advantage over framing theory in methodological terms because scholars have 
developed clear operational definitions of the media and the ­public agendas which 
work well in quantitative studies.
Utility
With regard to utility, some questions have been raised about whether the theory 
remains useful given the new media environment. When people have so much freedom 
in their quests for information and the media sources are multiple and fragmented, 
perhaps the tenets of Agenda Setting Theory will not be supported. Some studies 
have been conducted to test this question and the results have been somewhat mixed, 
although on the whole, they suggest that Agenda Setting Theory can still be applied in 
a media environment that is anything but monolithic. In a study exploring age-related 
differences in agenda setting (Coleman & McCombs, 2007), the researchers found 
that even though media use differentiated the generations (the youngest generation 
used newspapers and television significantly less than the older two generations and 
used the Internet significantly more), the agenda setting effect was still apparent 
regardless of which type of media was used.
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach to 
Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     367
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
	
Jennifer Brubaker (2008), however, found that television viewers and ­Internet 
users ranked a series of issues differently than the general media did. Brubaker con­
cluded that Agenda Setting is not useful as a theoretical framework when people have 
so much more freedom in their media choices. Still other research (e.g., Ragas & 
Kiousis, 2010) did find evidence of first- and ­second-level agenda setting relation­
ships. This study examined the agenda setting effects among explicitly partisan news 
media coverage, political activist groups, citizen activists, and official campaign 
advertisements on YouTube, all in support of the same candidate, Barack Obama, in 
2008. The authors concluded that Agenda Setting Theory is applicable across a variety 
of new media. 
	
Sharon Meraz (2011) found a slightly more complicated result in that her study 
revealed that traditional media were unable to set the agenda for political blogs. Yet, 
she also found that ideologically diverse political blog networks were able to have an 
impact on traditional media’s online news agenda, and, to a lesser extent, their news­
room blog agenda. She concluded that there was a reduction of traditional media’s 
agenda setting influence. But, she also argued that Agenda ­Setting Theory could 
work to explain the greater interdependence between traditional media and political 
blogs, and in fact, noted that some blogs like the ­Huffington Post were operating like 
the traditional media and may exert an agenda setting function of their own. Other 
studies (e.g., Johnson, 2011; Maier, 2010) concurred noting that although traditional 
news media have less of an ability to set the public agenda than in the past, they still 
perform an agenda setting function, and what is found on news websites and in citizen-
journalists’ postings often correlates strongly with what appears on mainstream 
media’s agenda. 
	
Finally, a study in 2010 (Weeks & Southwell) used a novel approach to test the 
agenda setting effects of the traditional media (television and newspapers) on the use 
of newer media (Google searches). This study examined the relationship of televi­
sion and newspaper coverage of the rumor circulating during the 2008 presidential 
campaign that Barack Obama was actually a Muslim. The results showed, as Agenda 
Setting Theory would predict, that the more this rumor was covered in traditional 
media the more Google searches there were on the topic. 
Heurism
With respect to heurism, Agenda Setting Theory certainly has been successful. It has 
supported hundreds of studies since 1972, and these studies have been situated in a 
wide variety of fields and topics. Although many Agenda ­Setting studies focus on 
politics, they are not confined to that topic, and they are not confined to political issues 
in the United States as evidenced by studies that have examined and situated the the­
ory in Iraq, Taiwan, Mainland China, and Poland (Guo, Chen, Vu, Wang, Aksamit, 
Guzek, Jachimowski, & McCombs, 2015), for example. Further, the theory’s appli­
cation to such important topics as human trafficking (Papdouka, Evangelopoulos, & 
Ignatow, 2016) and physician time management and patient satisfaction (Robinson, 
Tate, & Heritage, 2016) further suggests a heuristic and valuable line of scholarship. 
As we have discussed throughout the chapter, Agenda Setting research examining new 
media, traditional media, political issues, and ­responses to visual stimuli among other 
issues, attest to the robust, heuristic quality of this theory. 

368     Chapter 21  •  Agenda Setting Theory
A G E N D A  S E T T I N G  T H E O R Y
Closing
Agenda Setting is a theoretical model that despite having its roots many decades 
ago, continues to be relevant today. All around the globe we have seen media trans­
form and evolve and there can be no doubt that media resonate with millions of 
people. We have seen the agenda-setting function of the media front and center in 
a number of different areas. Moreover, media consumers are often unaware of the 
influence that the mediated agenda has upon them. As we move further into new 
forms of media and ways for the media to communicate a message, we are likely to 
see Agenda Setting Theory take on more prominence than ever.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Agenda Setting Theory was created in a time when there were 
only three television channels, relatively few radio stations, and a limited number 
of big city newspapers. Now, of course, the media landscape is totally different. 
How could you design a study that you think would contribute to answering whether 
online news media operate in the manner that Agenda Setting Theory predicts?
	
1.  Does Sally’s situation ring true for you? Are the topics that she hears about 
through media actually charting an agenda for her to think about? Have you ever 
had the experience that Sally has of realizing that there are a lot of issues in the 
world that you haven’t thought about before? Do you think that is the case because 
the media haven’t directed you to these issues or is it due to some other reasons? If 
there are other reasons, what are they?
	
2.  (Why) do you think it’s important to know the history of Agenda ­Setting 
Theory? (How) does it help you to understand and/or apply the ­theory to know 
about its evolution over time?
	
3.  Pick a recent news event and discuss how the second level of agenda setting 
might have been at work during the reporting of it. For instance, how did the media 
cover the 2012 Presidential election? What were the issues that emerged as impor­
tant and what elements of media framing were used to ­establish their importance?
	
4.  Do you agree that framing is a part of Agenda Setting Theory or do you 
think that it is a competing theory that suggests Agenda Setting is no longer useful?
	
5.  Discuss a news event that has gone through the three-stage process sug­
gested by Agenda Setting Theory: first it is placed on the media agenda, then the 
public’s agenda, and finally it reaches the policymakers’ agenda where actual 
policy is made that relates to the news event.
	
6.  Do you agree that Agenda Setting is a limited effects model? As the chapter 
notes the theory’s originator, Maxwell McCombs has alternated in how he has framed 
the type of effects claimed by Agenda Setting. What do you think? Explain your answer.
	
7.  Who do you think sets the agenda for the media? Do you agree with the 
material in the chapter about how the media agenda gets established? ­Explain your 
answer.

369
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Each morning, Carol 
Johansen eats at the 
“Eldergarten” breakfast 
at the local senior center. She certainly can af­
ford to go out to a restaurant, but she likes the 
center because she enjoys the company since 
her husband died. Carol encounters a rambunc­
tious cast of characters each breakfast, including 
Earl, a World War II veteran who sings Broad­
way songs; Nancy, a former nurse who tells lively 
stories about former patients; and Nick, a tech-
savvy New England lobsterman who is an avid 
newspaper reader and blogger. This morning’s 
breakfast was especially interesting because 
the conversation quickly turned to an article on 
spanking children that Nick read online.
After reading the brief article to the group, Nick 
offered his opinion on the topic: “I agree with this 
writer. I don’t see anything wrong with spanking a 
kid. Look at this survey in the paper. Over 60 percent 
of the state believes it’s okay to spank, but only 
40 percent of the country does. Nowadays, you 
can’t lay a hand on a kid. They’re ready to sue you, 
or you’ll get some state worker to come into your 
own house and take your kid away. It’s not right.”
“I agree,” said Nancy. “I can tell you that my 
neighbor’s daughter is almost 8 and a holy terror. 
But, noooo, her mother won’t touch her! I don’t get 
it. If that was my child, I wouldn’t mind putting her 
over my knee and giving her a good wallop! The 
girl’s mom and dad don’t want to send ‘the wrong 
message’ to her so she gets away with a lot.”
Earl became more interested in the subject 
as Nancy spoke. Like the others, Earl had a strong 
opinion on the subject: “Look. How many people 
at this table were spanked when they were little?” 
All raised their hands. “And how many of you think 
that you’re violent people?” None showed any re­
sponse. “There. That’s my point. Today, they tell 
you that if you spank your own kid, then that kid is 
going to end up violent. But look at us. We aren’t 
violent. We don’t hurt anyone. There’s just too 
much of this ­political correctness out there, and 
too many parents simply have no rights anymore.”
Carol continued glancing at one of the cen­
ter’s flyers on the table. She, like the others, 
had an opinion on the subject. But her thoughts 
differed from those of the others. She did not 
believe in spanking a child at all. She had been 
spanked like the rest of her friends, but her dad 
didn’t know when to stop. Carol had often been 
physically abused. She thought about the number 
of parents who are not able to stop at just one 
slap on the ­behind. She also thought about what 
hitting accomplished. Children can be taught 
right and wrong, she thought, without being hit.
“Hey, Carol,” Nick interrupted, “you’re pretty 
quiet. What’s your take on all this?”
Carol thought for a quick moment. Should 
she disagree with the rest of them? What about 
Spiral of Silence Theory
Based on the research of Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann
Carol Johansen
Journalism can be improved by harnessing the new efficiency of social 
research. It can be made more realistic, quicker, and more discriminating 
in reporting and interpreting.
—Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann
C H A P T E R	22

370     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
O
ur opinions of events, people, and topics change periodically in our lives. Con­
sider, for example, your opinions about dating when you were a 15-year-old and 
your opinions about dating now. Or consider the opinions you held of your family 
members during your adolescence and those you hold today. Your opinions on vari­
ous topics—including cohabiting sex and raising children—have likely evolved over 
the years. Opinions are not static and frequently change over the years.
One important influence on our opinions is the media. As this section of the text 
emphasizes, media help to shape who we are today. Often, this influence is subtle; 
at other times it is more direct. The media’s influence on public opinion is what 
Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann studied, dating back to the 1930s and 1940s. It was in the 
early 1970s, however, that she conceptualized the Spiral of Silence Theory. And, yet, 
as we will learn later, today scholars continue to discuss this theory in many ways.
Originally, the theory focused on traditional types of media such as newspapers 
and television. Yet, as the theory attracted new attention over the years, the applica­
tion of its concepts to new media emerged (Eilders & Porten-Chee, 2015). Later in 
the chapter, we will include a brief discussion of the newer research integrating online 
communication and the Spiral of Silence Theory.
Noelle-Neumann’s Spiral of Silence Theory is important to address for several 
reasons. The theory “directly relates to speech freedom, which is the cornerstone of our 
democracy” (Liu, 2006). Further it is a theory that weaves communication and public 
opinion, two critical areas in virtually any democracy around the globe (Donsbach, 
Salmon, & Tsfati, 2013). Third, it has intellectual roots in six fields (Donsbach, Tsfati, & 
Salmon, 2014). Finally, Spiral of Silence scholars have made efforts to make their 
theory culturally relevant in societies where media remain important and influential 
(Neill, 2009). To this end, while the theory resonates with those interested in public 
opinion, it also has relevancy for those interested in the effect that media has upon us.
Noelle-Neumann focuses on what happens when people provide their opinions 
on a variety of issues that the media have defined for the public (for more ­information 
on how the media influence public discourse, look at Chapter 21). The Spiral of 
all the people in her community who also agree 
with spanking? Carol recalled seeing a news pro­
gram on the topic about a month ago, and the 
reporter had interviewed several adult children 
who had been abused. She wondered how many 
of them were spanked when they were young and 
yet, all of them stated that they spank their chil­
dren and they don’t feel it’s abuse in any way. 
Carol knew that she disagreed with her 
breakfast colleagues, but how could she begin to 
explain all of her thoughts? They wouldn’t under­
stand. It’s probably better simply to go with the 
flow, she surmised.
“Oh, I don’t know. I can see how some kids 
need special attention. But sometimes, parents 
get too angry.”
“C’mon Carol,” Nancy interrupted. “There are 
a lot of . . .”
“Well, I guess I agree with it. I hope that it’s 
not done that often, though.” As the volunteer 
­arrived at the table to pour more coffee, the con­
versation quickly turned to other news. Privately, 
Carol thought about why she had deferred to 
the group’s will. She didn’t want to be alone in 
her viewpoint, nor did she want to explain the 
­personal and sordid details of her past. As Nick 
began to talk about last night’s city council meet­
ing, Carol wondered whether she would ever 
speak up on the subject again.

S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
	
Spiral of Silence Theory 
     ﻿    
371
Silence Theory suggests that people who believe that they hold a minority viewpoint 
on a public issue will remain in the background where their communication will be 
restrained; those who believe that they hold a ­majority viewpoint will be more encour­
aged to speak. Noelle-Neumann (1983) contends that the media will focus more on the 
majority views, underestimating the ­minority views. Those in the minority will be less 
assertive in communicating their opinions, thereby leading to a downward spiral of 
communication. ­Interestingly, those in the majority will overestimate their influence 
and may ­become emboldened in their communication. Subsequently, the media will 
report on their opinions and activities. This theory, then, ­adheres to the belief that we 
­alluded to in Chapter 2: Groups are highly ­influential in our lives.
Theory At a Glance  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
Because of their enormous power, media have a lasting and profound effect 
on public opinion. Mass media work simultaneously with majority opinion to 
silence minority beliefs on cultural and social issues in particular. A fear of 
isolation prompts those with minority views to examine the beliefs of others. 
Individuals who fear being socially isolated are prone to conform to what 
they perceive to be the majority view. Every so often, however, the silent 
majority raises its voice in activist ways.
The minority views of Carol Johansen and the behavior of her breakfast friends 
underscore the gist of the Spiral of Silence Theory. Listening to her ­colleagues’ opin­
ions on spanking, Carol feels that she is alone in thinking that spanking is wrong. 
The theory suggests that Carol is influenced by media reports of over 60 percent of 
the state supporting spanking for discipline and also by her own recollection of a 
television news show featuring abused children who as grownups spanked their own 
children and who did not believe it was abusive. Carol perceives her opinion to be a 
minority view, and consequently she speaks less. Conversely, those in our sample who 
agree with spanking as discipline (Nick, Nancy, and Earl) are no doubt inspired by the 
state survey responses; this prompts even more assertive communication on their part.
The difference between this majority and minority view at the senior center is 
further clarified by Noelle-Neumann (1991). She believes that those in the majority 
have the confidence to speak out. They may even display their convictions by wearing 
buttons, brandishing bumper stickers, and emblazoning their opinions on the clothes 
they wear. (Today, these individuals will likely be blogging about their convictions.) 
Holders of minority views, however, are usually cautious and silent, which reinforces 
the public’s perceptions of their weakness. Nick, Nancy, and Earl are clearly confident 
in their opinions, whereas Carol ­fosters a sense of nonassertiveness by her lack of as­
sertiveness in expressing her opinion.
The Spiral of Silence Theory uniquely intersects public opinion and media. To 
understand this interface better, we first unravel the notion of public opinion, a key 
component of the theory. We then examine three assumptions of the theory.

372     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
The Court of Public Opinion
As a researcher, Noelle-Neumann was interested in clarifying terms that may have 
multiple meanings. At the core of the Spiral of Silence Theory is a term that is com­
monly accepted but one that she felt was misconstrued: public opinion. As a founder 
and director of the Allensbach Institute, a polling agency in Germany, Noelle-
Neumann contended that interpretations of public opinion have been misguided. In 
fact, although she identified more than 50 definitions of the term since the theory’s 
inception, none satisfied her and she further lamented that most researchers errone­
ously link public opinion with government, resulting in a limited understanding of 
the term (Noelle-Neumann, 2014).
Although many years have passed since the theory’s original expression, the con­
cept of public opinion “is particularly encumbered by the thicket of confusion, mis­
understandings, and communication problems” (Noelle-Neumann & Petersen, 2004, 
pp. 339–340). Further, writers continue to state that public opinion is more important 
than ever (Claussen & Oxley, 2016). Attempting to provide some understanding of 
this key term in the theory, Noelle-Neumann (1984, 1993) has provided some clarity. 
She appropriately separates public opinion into two discrete terms: public and opinion.
She notes that there are three meanings of public. First, there is a legal association 
with the term. Public suggests that it is open to everyone, as in “public lands” or “pub­
lic place.” Second, public pertains to the concerns or issues of people, as in “the public 
responsibility of journalists.” Finally, public represents the social-psychological side 
of people. That is, people not only think inwardly but also think about their relation­
ships to others. The phrase “public eye” is relevant here. Noelle-Neumann concludes 
that individuals know whether they are exposed to or sheltered from public view, 
and they adjust themselves accordingly. She claims that the social-psychological 
side of public has been neglected in previous interpretations of public opinion, and 
yet, “this is the meaning felt by people in their sensitive social skin” (1993, p. 62).
An opinion is an expression of an attitude. Opinions may vary in both ­intensity 
and stability. Invoking the early French and English interpretation of opinions, Noelle-
Neumann notes that opinion is a level of agreement of a particular population. In the spi­
ral of silence process, opinion is synonymous with something regarded as acceptable.
Putting all of this together, Noelle-Neumann defines public opinion as the “atti­
tudes or behaviors one must express in public if one is not to isolate oneself; in areas of 
controversy or change, public opinions are those attitudes one can express without run­
ning the danger of isolating oneself” (p. 178). So, for Carol Johansen, her opinion on 
spanking would not be regarded as acceptable by her breakfast club. Because she fears 
being isolated from her particular early-morning community, she silences her opinions.
Noelle-Neumann and Petersen (2004) argue that public opinion is a dynamic 
process and limited by time and place. To that end, they note that “a spiral of ­silence 
only holds sway over a society for a limited period of time” (p. 350). So, there are 
both short- and long-term components to public opinion. For instance, the public’s 
opinion on legalizing marijuana has changed dramatically over the years. Suppose, 
in 1969, we were asked to answer the question: Should marijuana use be legalized? 
At that time, per the Gallup poll, only about 12 percent of respondents would have 
answered affirmingly. Today, that Gallup poll shows that almost 60 percent of re­
spondents support legalizing marijuana use (http://www.gallup.com/poll/186260
public
legal, social, and 
social-psychological 
concerns of people
opinion
expression  
of attitude
public opinion
attitudes and  
behaviors  
expressed in public 
in order to avoid 
isolation

	
The Court of Public Opinion     373
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
/back-legal-marijuana.aspx). Think about the dynamics related to the changes in re­
sponse to the question. Two reasons for changing public opinion seem reasonable. 
First, an increase in support is likely due to the belief that medical marijuana use can 
have lasting benefits for sick patients. Second, this upward trend in support may also 
be due to the fact that crime rates are down considerably since the 1960s, prompting 
some people to think that criminalizing usage is a waste of time. These and other rea­
sons help to explain the dynamism surrounding public opinion (look at Figure 22.1 
for an illustration of this topic as it relates to the theory).
Essentially, public opinion refers to the collective sentiments of a population 
on a particular subject. Most often, the media determine what subjects will be of 
interest to people, and the media often make a subject controversial. For example, 
the drug Viagra, used to treat impotence, was considered a medical marvel until the 
media discovered that many health plans covered this drug but did not cover female 
contraceptives. Many media outlets subsequently ­reported that this was an overtly 
sexist practice.
Noelle-Neumann (1991) notes that public opinion may be influenced by who ap­
proves or disapproves of our views. In 2011, for instance, President Obama instructed 
the Department of Justice not to defend the Defense of ­Marriage Act, a law, at the 
time, that prohibited same-sex partners to marry. Your opinion on whether you support 
this congressional action will likely be shaped by spokespeople on both sides of the 
issue as well as by friends and family members. A spiral of silence is the response to 
the shifting opinions of others.
Majority View [as reported by the media]
“People should be able to smoke pot for medicinal reasons.”
[but because of a fear of isolation...many remain silent]
“I don’t want to be perceived as without
compassion for the sick and suﬀering.”
PUBLIC OPINION AS COMMUNICATED BY THE MEDIA
Willingness to Speak Out/Silent Minority
“Marijuana is a drug that
should be completely illegal.”
Figure 22.1
The Spiral of 
Silence: Medicinal 
Marijuana

374     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Spiral of Silence Theory
With public opinion as our backdrop to the theory, we now explore three assump­
tions of the Spiral of Silence Theory. Noelle-Neumann (1991, 1993) has previously 
addressed these assertions:
∙∙
Society threatens deviant individuals with isolation; fear of isolation is pervasive.
∙∙
This fear of isolation causes individuals to try to assess the climate of opinion 
at all times.
∙∙
Public behavior is affected by public opinion assessment.
The first assumption asserts that society holds power over those who do not con­
form through threat of isolation. Noelle-Neumann believes that the very essence of 
our society depends on people commonly recognizing and endorsing a set of values. 
And it’s public opinion that determines whether these values have equal conviction 
across the populations. When people agree on a common set of values, then their fear 
of isolation decreases. When there is a difference in values, fear of isolation sets in.
Like many theorists, Noelle-Neumann is concerned with the testability of this 
assumption. After all, she notes, are members of a society really threatened with isola­
tion? How could this be? She believes that simple polling could not tap this area (e.g., 
How much do you fear isolation?). Questions such as these ask respondents to think too 
abstractly, because it’s likely that few respondents have ever thought about isolation.
Noelle-Neumann employs the research values of Solomon Asch (1951), a social 
psychologist in the 1950s. Asch conducted the following laboratory experiment more 
than 50 times with 8–10 research subjects:
Which of the following lines on the right is equal to the line on the left?
	
____________	
1. ________
	
	
2. __________________
	
	
3. ____________
Student Voices
Carmine
I read about the Spiral of Silence Theory. At first, I thought it was too old a theory 
for someone like me (20 years old) to relate to. But I thought about how, when I’m 
around my fraternity brothers, I don’t really speak up as I should. A few weeks ago, 
about five of us were talking about euthanasia. I felt that only God has the power to 
end a life; doctors should not be able to do that. Well, the other guys all said that it’s 
“their right” to tell a doctor to do it. And they were knocking down those of us who 
think that no one—but God—should terminate a life. I didn’t say a word, though, be­
cause they all were for it. This is, as I think about it, a lot like the Spiral of Silence. It 
certainly does apply to me today.

	
Assumptions of Spiral of Silence Theory     375
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
You are probably quick to say that line 3 is equal to the line provided in the question. 
The group of research subjects, however, disagreed. After going around the room, 
the experimenter’s assistants (who were in on the experiment) all named line 1 as the 
one that was equal to the line on the left. The unsuspecting subjects began to name 
line 1 as the correct response. In fact, Asch discovered that several times around, the 
unsuspecting subjects named the incorrect response. Asch believed that individuals 
frequently feel great pressure to agree with others, even though the others are incor­
rect. Borrowing from the ­theory, there is a very real fear of isolation.
Elizabeth Blakeslee (2005) of the New York Times notes that Asch’s ­research 
conclusions on social conformity still exist today. She reports on the implications of 
following a group in many areas of society, including jury decisions and elections. 
She notes that “the unpleasantness of standing alone can make a majority opinion 
seem more appealing than sticking to one’s own beliefs” (p. D3). Others agree that 
particularly in the United States, there may be more conformity than people either 
perceive or believe (Fischer, 2010). 
Responding to primary criticisms of the Asch studies—that people did not have 
a real fear of isolation but rather a lack of confidence in their own ­judgment—Noelle-
Neumann engaged in a more realistic threat-of-isolation test. She believed that re­
quiring subjects to assess a moral or aesthetic conviction was more realistic than any 
laboratory experiments conducted by Asch. In fact, Noelle-Neumann felt that there 
had to be “topical controversy” on a “morally charged” topic that prompted people 
to be involved (Eilders & Porten-Chee, 2015) in order for a spiral of silence to be 
present. ­Indeed, these moral issues should be contemporary (in the public spotlight) 
and issues on which the public is divided. Think about same-sex marriage, abortion 
rights, human cloning, and other topics on which divergent points of view exist. 
For Noelle-Neumann, freedom to smoke was (and continues to be) an issue “in 
the spotlight.” During interviews with smokers, she showed them a picture with a 
person angrily saying, “It seems to me that smokers are terribly inconsiderate. They 
force others to inhale their health-endangering smoke.” Respondents were asked to 
phrase responses to the statement. The results indicated that in the presence of non­
smokers, many smokers were less willing to support smokers’ rights overtly. 
The second assumption of the theory identifies people as constant assessors of 
the climate of public opinion. Noelle-Neumann contends that individuals receive 
information about public opinion from two sources: personal observation and the 
media. First, let’s discuss how people are able to personally observe public opinion 
and then examine the role of the media.
Noelle-Neumann (1991) states that people engage in a quasi-statistical ability 
to appraise public opinion. A quasi-statistical sense means that people are able to 
estimate the strength of opposing sides in a public debate. They are able to do this 
by listening to the views of others and incorporating that knowledge into their own 
viewpoints. For instance, Carol Johansen’s quasi-statistical sense makes her believe 
that she is the only person at her breakfast table who opposes spanking. She can 
see that she is vastly outnumbered on the topic and therefore is able to assess the 
local public opinion on the subject. Noelle-Neumann calls this a quasi-statistical 
frequency “organ” in that she believes that people like Carol are able to numerically 
estimate where others fall on the topic. The theorist states that this organ is on “high 
alert” during periods of ­instability. So our quasi-statistical sense works overtime 
quasi-statistical 
sense 
personal estimation 
of the strength of 
opposing sides on a 
public issue

376     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
when we see that our opinions on a subject are different from those of the majority 
around us. This sense is, as a rule, an unconscious process.
Personal observations of public opinion can often be distorted and inaccurate. 
Noelle-Neumann (1993) calls the mistaken observations about how most people feel 
pluralistic ignorance. She notes that people “mix their own direct perceptions and 
the perceptions filtered through the eyes of the media into an indivisible whole that 
seems to derive from their own thoughts and experiences” (p. 169). Consider Carol’s 
assessment of the opinions on spanking. With the vast majority of people around her 
supporting this type of discipline, she may believe that she is clearly in the minority. 
One or both sides in the debate, however, can overestimate their ability to estimate 
opinion. Especially with such lopsided ­support on a topic (as with the group at the 
senior center), Noelle-Neumann ­believes that people can become disillusioned.
People not only employ their personal observations of public opinion, but as 
we’ve argued earlier in this chapter and in others, but also rely on the media. Yet, 
Noelle-Neumann insists that the media’s effects are frequently indirect. Because 
people are inherently social in nature, they talk about their observations to others. 
And, people seek out the media to confirm or disconfirm their observations and then 
interpret their own observations through the media. This can be illustrated through 
Carol’s future behaviors. First, if she returns home from the senior center and reveals 
her beliefs on spanking to others, she may encounter several neighbors who share her 
opinion. Next, if she watches the evening news and learns that the majority of the 
country oppose spanking, this will likely resonate deeply with her. She will also be 
affected by any media reports that disproportionately publicize opposition to spank­
ing. Finally, later discussions that Carol might have on the subject may invoke the 
media. She may tell others that even the blogs she read online tend to support her 
point of view. 
The final assumption of the theory is that the public’s behavior is influenced by 
evaluations of public opinion. Noelle-Neumann (1991) proposes that public behavior 
takes the form of either speaking out on a subject or keeping silent. If individuals 
sense support for a topic, then they are likely to communicate about it; if they feel 
that others do not support a topic, then they maintain silence. She continues, “The 
strength of one camp’s signals, or the weakness of the other’s, is the driving force 
setting the spiral in motion” (p. 271). In sum, people seem to act according to how 
other people feel.
Noelle-Neumann believes that human beings have an aversion to discussing top­
ics that do not have the support of the majority. To test this assumption, consider 
interviewing people on your campus about a controversial issue such as physician-
assisted suicide. If straw polls in your campus newspaper show that almost 70 percent 
of the campus opposes this, then according to the theory, students, faculty, and staff 
may be less inclined to speak out in favor of the practice. A willingness to speak out 
may have more to do with one’s convictions and an assessment of overall trends in 
society. That is, if there is a liberal climate on your campus, there may be more will­
ingness to speak out; if a conservative climate exists, people may feel less inclined 
to offer their opposition.
These three assumptions are important to consider as we further delineate 
Noelle-Neumann’s theory. In Figure 22.1, we illustrate several concepts and themes 
emerging from the theory’s assumptions.
pluralistic  
ignorance 
mistaken  
observation of how 
most people feel

	
The Media’s Influence     377
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Personal opinions, a fear of being alone in those opinions, and public sentiment 
lay the groundwork for discussing the remainder of the theory. Each of these areas 
is influenced by a powerful part of U.S. society: the media. Let’s now overview the 
powerful influence of the media in the Spiral of Silence Theory.
The Media’s Influence
As we have discussed, the Spiral of Silence Theory rests on public opinion. Noelle-
Neumann (1993) cautions, however, that “much of the population adjusts its atti­
tudes to the tenor of the media” (p. 272). Nancy Eckstein and Paul Turman (2002) 
agree. They claim that “the media may provide the force behind the spiral of silence 
because it is considered a one-sided conversation, an indirect public form of commu­
nication where people feel helpless to respond” (p. 173). Further, as Francis Delisay 
(2012) concludes, “[M]edia can influence the public’s perceptions of opinion cli­
mates” (p. 485). Finally, some authors boldly state that “media essentially tell the 
public which key policy issues to think about and to some degree how they should 
form opinions about those ­issues” (Spencer, Croucher, & McKee, 2011, p. 28). 
A willingness to speak out depends greatly on the media. Without support from 
others for divergent views, people will remain consonant with the views offered in 
the media. In fact, Noelle-Neumann (1993) believes that the media even provide 
sometimes biased words and phrases so people can confidently speak about a subject. 
And, if certain words or phrases are favored by the media, then many people will fall 
silent (Consider the difference, for instance, if the media used “abuse” rather than 
the word “spanking.”) The extent to which Carol Johansen in our chapter-opening 
scenario will offer her views about spanking, then, will likely rest on what position 
the various media have taken on the subject. And, although many of us rely on the 
Internet, George Gerbner (Cultivation Analysis, Chapter 24) reminds us that televi­
sion is the most influential of all media forms.
In explaining why the media have such influence, Noelle-Neumann believes that 
the public is not offered a broad and balanced interpretation of news events. Con­
sequently, the public is given a limited view of reality. This restrictive approach to 
covering cultural events and activities narrows an individual’s perception. Certainly, 
many audiences are active and critical and not all will be so passive in believing 
everything the media say. Yet, as W. James Potter (2016) acknowledges, most people 
in the United States seek out media that are aligned with their values and practices. 
Inevitably, Potter concludes, many suffer from media and information literacy. 
Consider the theorist’s three characteristics of the news media: ubiquity, cumu­
lativeness, and consonance. Ubiquity refers to the fact that the media are pervasive 
sources of information. Because media are everywhere, they are relied on when 
people seek out information. The morning television news, the Internet, the office 
gossip, and so forth, all point to the media’s ubiquity. Nick, a member of Carol 
Johansen’s morning group, is quick to talk about the recent surveys done in the state 
about perceptions of spanking. He has the source immediately at hand. Even Carol 
recalls a television program as she thinks about spanking. 
The cumulativeness of the media refers to the process of the media repeating 
themselves across programs and across time. Frequently, you will read a story in the 
ubiquity
the belief that  
media are  
everywhere
cumulativeness
the belief that  
media repeat  
themselves

378     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
morning newspaper, listen to the same story on the radio as you drive to work, and 
then watch the story on the evening news. You may also pull up a website during the 
day and find the story there. Noelle-Neumann calls this a “reciprocal influence in 
building up frames of reference” (1993, p. 71). It can become problematic when the 
original source is left unquestioned, and yet, four media (newspaper, radio, television, 
and the Internet) rely on that source. The theory suggests that conformity of voice in­
fluences what information gets ­released to the public to help them develop an opinion.
Finally, consonance pertains to the similarities of beliefs, attitudes, and ­values 
held by the media. In fact, events or news items are frequently shared by multiple 
news agencies (e.g., the Associated Press, etc.). Noelle-Neumann states that conso­
nance is produced from a tendency for newspeople to confirm their own thoughts and 
opinions, making it look as if those opinions were ­emanating from the public.
Each of these three qualities—ubiquity, cumulativeness, consonance—allows 
for majority opinions to be heard. Those wishing to avoid isolation will usually 
remain silent.
It is not surprising that the media are influential in public opinion. Many surveys 
have demonstrated that people consider the media to have too much power in U.S. so­
ciety. In fact, 66 percent of the U.S. population believes that the media have too much 
influence and political clout (http://www.rasmussenreports.com/public_content
/politics/general_politics/february_2016/voters_say_money_media_have_too_much
_political_clout). Consider also that information is frequently filtered through news 
reporters and their agencies. As a result, what is presented—or in the case of this 
theory, what is perceived—may not be an accurate picture of ­reality. Imagine, for 
consonance
the belief that all 
media are similar 
in attitudes, beliefs, 
and values
A bill in the Russian parliament passed in 2012 that effectively shut down 
popular websites in the country. Author David Herszenhorn of the Interna­
tional Herald Tribune, writes that because of the government’s steps to shut 
down popular Internet sites like Wikipedia, there will be unexpected reper­
cussions from across the globe. Herszenhorn identifies a journalism profes­
sor at Moscow State University who stated, “[T]he Internet is the only thing 
that stands between Russia and the Spiral of Silence.” The author argues 
that the efforts to shut down various web content is an effort to repress 
free speech and protest, thereby making it difficult for those “at the end of 
the spiral” to speak up. Fearing isolation, Herszenhorn notes, people will 
likely silence their own (political) views. While some protection was needed 
to protect children from unsavory Internet content, Herszenhorn quotes the 
professor who believes that the Internet “has given life to political discourse 
in a very free and independent way.”
Source: Herszenhorn, D. (2012, July 12). In Russia, critics decry law to limit web content. 
International Herald Tribune, p. 13. 
Theory in Popular Press  •  Russian Internet Usage 
and the Spiral of Silence

	
The Train Test     379
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
instance, the frustration of many unemployed disabled individuals as they read or 
listen to reports about the success of the Americans with Disabilities Act. Or, maybe 
you have watched stories about the many people who have been forced off of wel­
fare, but you probably haven’t seen many stories describing the dire circumstances of 
many families as a result of funding cuts. And, although there have been news reports 
on employers hiring ­military veterans, this is hardly helpful to the many vets still 
looking for long-term ­employment. If the media report these “success” stories often 
enough, Noelle-Neumann says they are identifying what should be noticed, deciding 
what questions should be asked, and determining whether various social policies and 
­programs are effective, a point we noted earlier. In other words, people experience 
the climate of public opinion through the mass media.
As you can see, then, when people look to media for a glimpse into the percep­
tions and beliefs of the population, they are likely to receive anything but an impar­
tial representation. Dual climates of opinion often exist—that is, a ­climate that the 
population perceives directly and the climate the media report. For ­instance, Carol 
Johansen may compare her personal perceptions of spanking with those surveyed per­
ceptions published in the newspaper. What is ­remarkable is that despite the differences 
in opinion, many people decide to ­remain silent. To understand what motivates people 
to speak out, Noelle-­Neumann developed the train test.
The Train Test
For Spiral of Silence theorists, examining whether or not people will speak out re­
quires a methodology that is clear, testable, representative, and replicable. To sup­
port her claims, Noelle-Neumann conceptualized the train test (or plane or bus as 
well). The train test is an assessment of the extent to which people will speak out 
with their own opinion. According to the Spiral of Silence Theory, people on two 
different sides of an issue will vary in their willingness to express views in public. 
To study this, the researchers gave respondents sketches showing two people in con­
versation. The researcher asked a respondent, “Which of the two would you agree 
with, Person A or Person B?” This question would then be followed up with a more 
pivotal question; for example, one that might test opinions pertaining to food safety. 
Essentially, the train test asks people a question such as the following:
Suppose that you have a five-hour train ride ahead of you and a person sits 
next to you and starts to discuss the problems of food safety. Would you talk 
or not talk about the topic to the person?
This question was repeated several times with various subjects. It focused on a 
number of topics, ranging from nuclear power plants to abortion to racial segrega­
tion. The test revealed a number of factors that help determine whether a person will 
voice an opinion. They include the following:
∙∙
Supporters of a dominant opinion are more willing to voice an opinion than 
those in the minority opinion.
∙∙
Because of a fear of isolation, people tend to refrain from publicly stating their 
position if they perceive that this perception will attract laughter, mockery, or 
similar threats of isolation.
dual climates  
of opinion 
difference between 
the population’s  
perception of a 
public issue and 
the way the media 
report on the issue
train test
an experiment used 
to assess the extent 
to which people will 
speak out

380     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
∙∙
There are various ways of speaking out—for example, hanging posters, dis­
playing bumper stickers, and distributing flyers.
∙∙
Men (ages 45–59) from large cities are more likely to speak out. 
∙∙
People are more likely to voice an opinion if it agrees with their own convic­
tions as well as fits within current trends and the spirit of the era. 
∙∙
People will voice an opinion if it aligns with societal views.
∙∙
People tend to share their opinions with those who agree with them more than 
with those who disagree.
∙∙
People draw the strength of their convictions from a variety of sources, includ­
ing family, friends, and acquaintances.
∙∙
People may engage in last-minute swing, or jumping on the bandwagon of the 
popular opinion during the final moments of conversation.
The train test proved to be an interesting approach to studying public opinion. The 
method simulates public behavior when two schools of thought exist on a subject. For 
those who are willing to speak out, there are opportunities to sway others. And there 
are times when the minority opinion speaks out loudly. We now examine this group.
The Hard Core
Every now and then, the silent minority rises up. This group, called the hard core, 
“remains at the end of a spiral of silence process in defiance of the threats of isolation” 
(Noelle-Neumann, 1993, p. 170). The hard core represents a group of individuals who 
know that there is a price to pay for their assertiveness. They try to buck the dominant 
way of thinking and are prepared to ­directly confront anyone who gets in their way or 
who refuses to allow their voices to be heard (Figure 22.2).
last-minute swing
jumping on the 
bandwagon of  
popular opinion 
after opinions have 
been expressed
hard core
group(s) at the end of 
the spiral willing to 
speak out at any cost
THE HARD CORE 
“Individuals Willing to Buck the Trend”
Animal rights groups
Environmental advocates
Antiwar coalition
  Animal Liberation Front
  People for the Ethical 
  Treatment of Animals
  (PETA)
   Greenpeace
   Sierra Club
  Paux Christi
  Win Without War
Figure 22.2 
Examples of the 
“Hard Core” in the 
United States

	
The Hard Core     381
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Noelle-Neumann invokes the work of social psychologist Gary Shulman in 
attempting to understand the hard core better. Shulman argues that if the majority 
opinion becomes large enough, the majority voice becomes less powerful because 
no alternative opinions exist. Several years ago, for example, when AIDS first 
appeared in the United States, it was common for many to believe that those di­
agnosed with the disease should be quarantined (majority opinion). It didn’t take 
long, however, for people’s opinions to reject this narrow-minded view, primarily 
as a result of the hard core’s efforts to educate the ­public. In fact, ironically, the 
media were pressed into educating the public about AIDS. It was not long before 
this silent hard core discovered that others had adopted their view. In this situa­
tion, the hard core was instrumental in changing public opinion, although it is true 
that the hard core frequently ­engaged in both rational and irrational acts to make 
its point.
For further evidence of the hard core, let’s discuss an example pertaining to re­
ligion and religious opinion. Although we realize that not all people believe in God, 
God pervades our intellectual, political, and popular culture (people say “God Bless 
you” when others sneeze, we have “In God We Trust” on our dollar bills, politicians 
end their speeches with “God Bless America,” and etc.).
Despite pervasive references to God, many people do not believe in God. 
Some of these individuals contend that the country’s Constitution requires a sepa­
ration between church and state, and therefore any religious references in tax-
supported venues should be eliminated. However, this opinion may not be shared 
by the majority because over half of the country affiliates with an organized re­
ligion (Lindner, 2012). Whether the media report on visits by the Pope, present 
video clips of politicians leaving religious services each week, or solicit quotes 
for news stories from the clergy, they continue to imply that religion is an integral 
part of people’s lives.
The minority—civil libertarians who advocate extracting religion from public-
supported activities—have been vocal regarding their opinions; these hard-core dis­
senters have not blended into the background. For instance, over the past several 
years, atheist families, in particular, have sued in courts either to remove “under 
God” or to allow young children to abstain from the reci­tation. Although courts have 
almost always dismissed such cases, they have brought this issue to the forefront 
of cultural discourse. The hard core might also claim victory as they witness cities 
­removing religious icons (nativity sets, crucifixes, etc.) from city parks during holi­
days. And, interestingly, with media outlets covering such legal ­victories, the hard 
core may be reconfiguring majority opinion.
If we think about more contemporary examples of the hard core, three groups 
seem particularly relevant: the Tea Party, Occupy Wall Street, and Black Lives 
Matter—all movements that were influential at some point from 2011 to 2017. 
These groups decided to defy expectations and cast themselves in unique, inno­
vative, and controversial ways. The Tea Party—an offshoot of the Republican 
Party—worked aggressively to ensure that politicians they supported were aligned 
with their conservative values and practices. Occupy Wall Street, a protest move­
ment that addressed social and economic inequality, greed, and corruption, ad­
vocated on behalf of the “99 percent,” or the people they claimed were paying 

382     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
for the errors of those in power—the 1 percent. And Black Lives Matter, a social 
activist group fighting for equality, peace, and justice for all Blacks and a group 
dedicated to promoting the dignity and integrity of Black people everywhere. All 
three groups—despite having very diverse missions—clearly championed their 
goals and causes in the media and, despite not representing the majority of the 
population, the three received great media attention and continued to do so in 
various ways. 
The Spiral of Silence and Social Media
As we alluded to earlier in the chapter, the Spiral of Silence Theory had its in­
fancy during a time when social media did not exist. Yet, over the years, a number 
of researchers have employed the theory into their studies on social media. We 
present three of the many findings to demonstrate the new ways of thinking about 
the theory.
A study looking at online social capital was undertaken by Kim. She investi­
gated social capital, or the sum of an individual’s network of social connections, 
resources, and support, and the willingness of social network participants to speak 
out on an issue.
Bartel Sheehan (2015; http://uncommonculture.org/ojs/index.php/fm/article
/view/5414/4468) examined three different “hot topics”: immigration, a national gas 
tax, and an invasion of North Korea by the South. She found that online social capital 
did influence a willingness to speak up. In particular, it was discovered that on sites 
such as Facebook and Twitter, speaking up was related to “bridging” social capital. 
That is, people were most comfortable speaking up on these topics when they felt a 
connection with others who held similar views and values.
In addition to Bartel Sheehan’s research, others have examined the theory 
within a cultural context. For example, Ali Dashti, Hamed Al-Abdullah, and Hasan 
Johar (2015) explored online political participation of Kuwaiti women. Up until 
2006, Kuwaiti women were the only female population in the Arab states who 
were not afforded full political rights, including the right to run for office and 
vote. Technology—particularly Twitter—was instrumental as women (and others) 
began to express their views and talk about their political activities. This study was 
motivated out of this backdrop. 
Dashti et al. (2015) hypothesized that while women may not be willing to share 
their views face to face, social networks such as Twitter facilitated these sorts of 
views. Their study was conducted with 323 female students in media and polit­
ical science courses. The researchers discovered that gender and who a woman/
participant knows influenced the willingness to talk about an issue. With men that 
women do not know, the women/participants acted according to the basic prem­
ises of the theory (e.g., silent when dominant voices were present). However, when 
these women/participants interacted with women they did not know, the women/
participants had little problem challenging the majority. When discussing matters 
related to local political issues, there were no differences in those speaking face to 
face or via Twitter. The research team concluded that Twitter is one way to ease the 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     383
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
obstacles that women often experience while discussing politics because the fear of 
isolation is reduced. 
A third study is quite pioneering in nature and reflects a more modern approach 
to Noelle-Neumann’s “train test” we discussed earlier in the chapter. Looking at 
the Edward Snowden’s 2013 “revelations of widespread government surveillance 
of Americans’ phone and email records, a team of writers” (Hampton, Rainie, Lu, 
Dwyer, Shin, & Purcell, 2014) at the Pew Research Center, surveyed over 1,800 
adults about several issues related to the National Security Agency (NSA). They 
specifically were interested in their opinions about the leaks, their willingness to 
speak out both in face to face and online settings, and their perceptions of the differ­
ent opinions of the topic.
Like Noelle-Neumann, several conclusions were drawn from this “test.” Overall, 
the Pew Research team concluded, if people felt that their social media friends and 
followers disagreed with their opinions, they were less likely to state their views in 
public gatherings (e.g., restaurant, etc.). In addition, five additional conclusions were 
made from the survey:
1.	 People were less likely to discuss the Snowden/NSA story via social media 
than in person.
2.	 Social media did not provide an alternative discussion platform for those who 
were not willing to discuss the Snowden/NSA story.
3.	 In both personal settings and online settings, people were more willing to share 
their views if they thought their audience agreed with them.
4.	 Previous theoretical findings as to people’s willingness to speak up in various 
settings also applies to social media users.
5.	 Facebook and Twitter users were less likely to share their opinions in many 
face-to-face settings.
Contributing to the theory’s evolution, Hampton et al. (2014) identified three 
influential factors related to speaking out: a confidence in how much they knew, an 
intensity of their opinions, and the extent of their interest. 
The previous three studies are just a handful of the current surplus of new re­
search using the Spiral of Silence Theory. As more social media platforms come and 
go, the theory will have ongoing modifications.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
The Spiral of Silence Theory is one of the few theories in communication that focuses 
on public opinion. Indeed, the theory has been identified as an important foundation 
for examining the human condition (Csikszentmihalyi, 1991) and it has deep roots 
in quantitative methods. Noelle-Neumann, as a scholar, is credited for introducing 
survey research in Germany and co-founded the International Journal of Public Opin­
ion Research (Petersen, 2012). To evaluate the theory, we draw attention to two areas: 
logical consistency and heurism.

384     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Logical Consistency
Noelle-Neumann’s theory has not avoided substantial criticism. And much of that 
criticism pertains to the lack of logical consistency in several of the terms and con­
cepts. Charles Salmon and F. Gerald Kline (1985) state that the Spiral of Silence 
fails to acknowledge a person’s ego involvement in an issue. At times, people may 
be willing to speak because their ego is involved in the topic (e.g., if a promotion at 
work depends on assertiveness). Carroll Glynn, Andrew Hayes, and James Shanahan 
(1997) raise the issue of various selectivity processes, such as cognitive dissonance, 
which we explored in Chapter 6. ­Individuals will avoid a topic that conflicts with their 
own views.
Carroll Glynn and Jack McLeod (1985) note two additional shortcomings per­
taining to the logical consistency of the theory. First, they believe that the fear of 
isolation may not motivate people to express their opinions. They claim that Noelle-
Neumann did not empirically test her belief that fear of isolation prompts people to 
speak out. Yet, some scholars have found a direct relationship between fear of isola­
tion and an examination of opinion climates and opinion expression (Kim, 2012). 
Second, Glynn and McLeod were troubled by how the theory was developed, and 
relied extensively upon, West Germany media. They doubt whether the characteris­
tics of the media then and there (ubiquitous, cumulative, and consonant) apply to the 
media in the United States today. 
Noelle-Neumann has responded to several of her critics, notably in defend­
ing her emphasis on the media. She remains convinced that the media is instru­
mental in public opinion. She writes that “by using words and arguments taken 
from the media to discuss a topic, people cause the point of view to be heard 
in public and give it visibility, thus creating a situation in which the danger of 
isolation is reduced” (Noelle-Neumann, 1985, p. 80). She continues by noting 
that not once did the spiral of silence process contradict the media’s ­position on 
a topic (Noelle-Neumann, 1993). In terms of application across cultures, Noelle-
Neumann agrees that any theory of public opinion must have cross-cultural ap­
plicability. However, she posits, it is important to note that most U.S. researchers 
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group | Organizational |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     385
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
desire a rational explanation for human behavior, but not all behavior can be 
explained sensibly. 
Still, she does accept that the train test may be limited in cross-cultural adapta­
tion. As a result, Noelle-Neumann updated the version to read:
Assume you are on a five-hour bus trip, and the bus makes a rest stop and 
everyone gets out for a long break. In a group of passengers, someone starts 
talking about whether we should support [insert topic] or not. Would you like 
to talk to this person, to get to know his or her point of view better, or would 
you prefer not to? (p. 217)
Of course, you may doubt whether simply changing a train test to a bus test broadens 
the cross-cultural application of the theory.
Student Voices
Marco
I can think of myself sometimes as that person at the “end of the spiral.” I was one 
of the students on campus that had a sit-in at my congressperson’s office because 
he ­supported the Afghanistan war. I was told I wasn’t a patriot and was told that I 
should “get a job” and not spend time wasting the time of others. I still decided to 
make my voice heard and I know it wasn’t popular because we are “supposed” to 
support our troops. Well, I DID support the troops: I wanted them to come home so 
they could live and be with their families.
Heurism
The theory has attracted writers and scholars who have discussed its merits in a variety 
of ways. First, some writers (Simpson, 1996) have attempted to discredit the theory 
because of its lack of application beyond one culture; other scholars, however, have 
supported the cross-cultural application of the theory (Kim, 2012). This sort of schol­
arly dialogue enhances the heuristic appeal of the theory. Perhaps Donald Shaw (2014), 
while reviewing the corpus of research using the Spiral of Silence Theory, said it most 
succinctly: “her theories have taken hold worldwide” (p. 841). 
Researchers have employed the theory and many of its central concepts in their 
studies, including the following topics: a declaration to make English the official lan­
guage of the United States (Lin & Salwen, 1997), religion in the classroom (Eckstein & 
Turman, 2002), Twitter usage and speaking out (Miyata, Yamamoto, & Ogawa, 
2015), college student sexual values (Chia & Lee, 2008), online surveillance and 
willingness to voice opinions (Stoycheff, 2016), and the theory’s influence upon 
Facebook views of immigration, same-sex marriage, and abortion (Gearhart & 
Zhang, 2015). Further, a compendium of essays that examine ­Spiral of Silence 
­Theory—over 50 years after its inception—has been published (Donsbach, 2013), 
suggesting further heuristic opportunities. Clearly, in the eyes of many, this theory is 
worth studying.

386     Chapter 22  •  Spiral of Silence Theory
S P I R A L  O F  S I L E N C E  T H E O R Y
Closing
The Spiral of Silence will continue to generate discussion among media scholars. The 
theory has sustained considerable criticism, and with a central emphasis on political 
discussion, researchers will continue to assess the theory’s vitality. Still, “but there is  
certainly accordance, even among the most ferocious critics of this theory, that it has 
been one of the most influential of all theories developed in communication research 
and political communication over the last half century” (Donsbach, Tsfati, &  
Salmon, 2014, p. 1). 
Whether people openly express majority or minority viewpoints on an issue may 
not be directly proportional to the media’s involvement on the issue, but it is clear 
that the public has come to rely on the media in global society. The theory, therefore, 
will likely have lasting effects that have not yet been imagined.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: The Spiral of Silence Theory contends that people will frequently 
remain silent on controversial issues. Think about Throwback Thursday on Face-
book. What would you say (if anything) if you saw pictures from a friend which 
were offensive, but which were taken more than 15 years ago? 
	
1.  Carol Johansen feels embarrassed about offering her opinions to a 
group that does not share her beliefs. Consider a similar time in your life. 
Did you speak out, or did you decide to remain quiet? What motivated your 
decision?
	
2.  Discuss the times that you have been part of the hard-core minority. How 
did you behave? How did your confidence and self-esteem influence your behavior?
	
3.  Does it make a difference to you to learn that Noelle-Neumann was once a 
newspaper journalist for Nazi publications? Why or why not?
	
4.  Do you believe that given all the different mediated sources available 
today, the U.S. media are ubiquitous, consonant, or cumulative? Exemplify your 
responses.
	
5.  Noelle-Neumann believes that the media help to influence minority views. 
Based on your observations of the media over the past several years, do you agree or 
disagree with this claim? What examples can you provide to defend your position?
	
6.  Comment on the influence of the Internet on public opinion.
	
7.  What do you suppose influences the “last-minute swings” of people?

387
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
It was a dreary Friday 
night and 20-year-old 
Ryan Grant was trying 
to figure out what he wanted to do. He worked 
for his ­father part time in his hardware store, and 
without question, this had been a rough week. He 
had to put in a lot of extra hours because they 
were doing inventory and his dad needed him to 
help catalog the merchandise. This morning he 
took an exam in his com­munication class at the 
university. Because he ­hadn’t studied last week, 
Ryan crammed until 2  a.m. Now it was Friday, 
and time to escape both work and school.
Ryan felt exhausted and burned out. He 
wanted to be with others, but he knew he wouldn’t 
be the best company. He considered two choices: 
He could stay home and watch television, either 
with friends or alone, or he could try to get a group 
of friends ­together to go to the movies. It could be 
good to go out with people who would help him 
loosen up. But, he could also see being at home, 
and not exerting so much energy.
Ryan was faced with two opposing arguments. 
Here was the argument for watching television: 
First, he wouldn’t have to spend anything. He 
could dress and look how he wanted, and he could 
watch what he wanted when he wanted. There 
were a couple of shows on Fridays that Ryan liked. 
At home, he could also command the best seat in 
the house. If he wanted to, he could invite over 
friends, making the night more social.
But, the argument for going out to the mov­
ies seemed just as strong. He could see that new 
­action/ adventure movie he’d been waiting to see. 
Also, ­because Ryan was a “techie” who appreci­
ated all technology, the movie theater’s excellent 
THX system and huge screen was far better than 
what he had at home. Finally, he could easily have 
fun going out. Although he had never really thought 
about it too seriously, he enjoyed sitting with his 
friends in the dark, sharing the same ­experience, 
and he loved movie popcorn!
Still, he was torn, so Ryan weighed the posi­
tives and negatives of each medium. If he chose 
television, he would have to deal with watching 
on a small screen. Also, if he did have friends 
over, he might have to endure fighting over what 
to watch. On the other hand, he could turn off 
the television if nothing good was on and simply 
hang out with his friends. The arguments for and 
against going to the movies seemed equivalent. 
On the plus side, he knew that watching a  movie 
was a great escape from his real life, and he 
would be able to talk about the movie on Monday 
with his friends. But, it was also true that he’d 
have to drive to the multiplex and try to find a 
Uses and Gratifications Theory
Based on the research of Elihu Katz, Jay G. Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch
C H A P T E R	23
Ryan Grant
Books and cinema have been found to cater to needs concerned with 
self-fulfillment and self-gratification: they help to connect individuals 
to themselves. Newspapers, radio, and television all seem to connect 
individuals to society.
—Elihu Katz, Jay G. Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch

388     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
R
yan is doing what we all do when dealing with the mass media: he is thinking 
about different media and making choices. Consider how many times you have 
found yourself in a situation similar to Ryan’s. You may have decided that you needed 
some relaxation and thought about all the options before making up your mind. The 
process may not have taken very long, but it was a  process that required thinking about 
what was available.
In the early days of mass media (the era of the penny newspaper, radio, and 
silent movies), Mass Society Theory—the idea that average people are helpless 
victims of powerful mass media—defined the relationship between audiences and 
the media they consumed (see our discussion of the Spiral of Silence Theory in 
Chapter 22). This notion was eventually discredited, in large part because ­social 
science—and simple observation—could not confirm the notion of all-powerful 
media and media messages. Not only were most people not ­directly affected by 
media messages, but when they were influenced, they were not all influenced in 
exactly the same way.
In time, Mass Society Theory was replaced by what we now call the ­limited ef­
fects theories (recall that we introduced this notion of limited effects in Chapter 21). 
Limited effects theories conceptualize media influence as limited or minimized by 
some aspects of individual audience members’ personal or social lives. Two ap­
proaches to the limited effects orientation have been identified. First, the Individual 
Differences Perspective sees media’s power as shaped by personal factors such as 
intelligence and self-esteem. For example, smart people and more secure people are 
better able to resist unwanted media impact. A second limited effects approach, the 
Social Categories Model, views media’s power as limited by audience members’ 
associations and group affiliations. For example, Republicans tend to spend time 
with other Republicans, who help them interpret media messages in a consistent, 
Republican-friendly manner. This effectively limits any influence media messages 
alone might have.
You may have noticed that neither of these views affords audience members 
much credibility. The first (Mass Society) suggests that people simply are not smart 
or strong enough to protect themselves against unwanted media ­effects. The second 
(limited effects) suggests that most people have relatively little personal choice in 
interpreting the meaning of the messages they consume and in determining the level 
of impact those messages will have on them. Eventually, in response to these unflat­
tering views of typical audience members, ­theorists Elihu Katz, Jay G. Blumler, and 
Michael Gurevitch (1974) presented a systematic and comprehensive articulation 
of audience members’ role in the mass communication process. Their thinking was 
formalized as Uses and Gratifications Theory (UGT). While it is still a limited ef­
fects model, researchers working in Uses and Gratifications believe its value lies in 
its ability to clarify how effects can and do happen. Further, Marianne Dainton and 
Mass Society 
Theory
the idea that 
average people are 
the victims of the 
powerful forces of 
mass media 
limited effects
the perspective 
replacing Mass 
Society Theory; 
holds that media 
effects are limited 
by aspects of the 
audience’s personal 
and social lives
Individual  
Differences  
Perspective
a specific approach 
to the idea of  
limited effects; 
concentrates on 
the limits posed by 
personal  
characteristics
Social Categories 
Model
a specific  
approach to the 
idea of limited  
effects;  
concentrates on 
the limits posed by 
group membership
parking space. He also might have to stand in a 
long line, which he hated. To top it off, he would 
have to pay close to $15 for the movie ticket and 
popcorn. Ryan’s decision about what to do came 
down to a simple question: What does a movie 
offer versus what television offers? As Ryan 
considered this question, a third ­alternative oc­
curred to him: going to bed early.

U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
	
Assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Theory     389
Alexandra Stokes (2015) note that although the theory was initially proposed to study 
one-way media (think about the linear model we explained in Chapter 1), it is now 
being investigated with newer forms of media.
Further, while granting the media some effects, the theory gives the audi­
ence more credibility and holds that people actively seek out specific media and 
specific content to generate specific gratifications (or results). Theorists in Uses 
and Gratifications view people as active because they are able to examine and 
evaluate various types of media to accomplish communication goals. As we saw 
in our opening, Ryan not only identified the specific media that he was willing to 
consider, but was also able to determine for himself the uses he could and would 
make of each, and the personal values of those uses. Researchers in Uses and 
Gratifications Theory ask the following question: What do consumers do with 
the media?
Assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Theory
Uses and Gratifications Theory provides a framework for understanding when and 
how individual media consumers become more or less active and the ­con­sequences 
of that increased or decreased involvement. Many of the assumptions of UGT were 
clearly articulated by the founders of the approach (Katz et al., 1974). They contend 
that there are five basic ­assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Theory:
∙∙
The audience is active and its media use is goal oriented.
∙∙
The initiative in linking need gratification to a specific medium choice rests 
with the audience member.
∙∙
The media compete with other sources for need satisfaction.
∙∙
People have enough self-awareness of their media use, interests, and motives to 
be able to provide researchers with an accurate picture of that use.
∙∙
Value judgments of media content can only be assessed by the audience.
The theory’s first assumption, about an active audience and goal-­oriented media 
use, is fairly straightforward. Individual audience members can bring differ­
ent levels of activity to their use of media. Audience members are also driven to 
­accomplish goals via the media. What is not so straightforward, however, is that 
the term, audience, can resonate in different ways. Sonia Livingston (2015), for 
instance, notes: “although the notion of audience remains the most commonly ac­
cepted collective term for people’s relations (now pluralized) to the media in all 
their forms, this does not bring consensus” (p. 132). That is, an authentic interpreta­
tion of the audience may be fraught with challenges because an audience member 
may be a reader, viewer, watcher, or listener, each with various responsibilities and 
engagement levels.
Denis McQuail and his colleagues (1972) identify several ways of classifying au­
dience needs and gratifications. They include ­diversion, which is defined as escaping 
from routines or daily problems; personal relationships, which occurs when people 
substitute the media for companionship; personal identity, or ways to reinforce an 
individual’s values; and surveillance, or information about how media will help an 
diversion
a category of  
gratifications  
coming from media 
use; involves  
escaping from  
routines and  
problems
personal  
relationships
a category of  
gratifications  
coming from media 
use; involves  
substituting media 
for companionship
personal identity
a category of  
gratifications 
coming from media 
use; involves ways 
to reinforce  
individual values
surveillance 
a category of  
gratifications  
coming from media 
use; involves  
collecting needed 
information

390     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
individual accomplish something. In Table  23.1 we present additional ­categories of 
needs that are fulfilled by the media.
In our chapter opening, we saw Ryan choosing between two competing media: 
television and film. All of us have our favorite content within a given medium, and 
we all have reasons for selecting a particular medium. At the movies, for instance, 
many of us like love stories rather than historical war films; some of us prefer to be 
entertained at the end of a long day rather than be educated about a historical event 
(diversion). Although it’s getting more difficult to do because of state laws, some 
drivers prefer to talk on their cell phones over long trips; it not only passes the time 
but also allows people to stay connected with their family and friends (personal rela­
tionships). Truck drivers, for example, may prefer to listen to call-in radio talk shows 
rather than spend their long nights driving in silence (personal identity). ­Finally, 
there are people who enjoy watching home improvement shows on cable so that they 
can learn how to do projects around the house (surveillance). Audience members 
choose among various media, then, for different gratifications.
Uses and Gratifications’ second assumption links need gratification to a spe­
cific medium choice that rests with the audience member. Because people are ac­
tive agents, they take initiative. We may choose shows like Ellen when we want to 
laugh and National Public Radio’s programming when we want to be informed, but 
no one decides for us what we want from a given medium or piece of content. We 
may well choose NPR because we want to be entertained by the anchors. The im­
plication here is that audience members have a great deal of autonomy in the mass 
communication process.
Table 23.1  Needs Gratified by the Media
NEED TYPE
DESCRIPTION
MEDIA EXAMPLES
Cognitive
Acquiring information, 
knowledge, comprehension
Television (news), video (“How 
to Install Ceramic Tile”), movies 
(documentaries or films based 
on history, e.g., Stonewall 
Uprising)
Affective
Emotional, pleasant, or 
aesthetic experience
Movies, television (sitcoms)
Personal integrative
Enhancing credibility, 
confidence, and status
Video (“Speaking With 
Conviction”)
Social integrative
Enhancing connections 
with family, friends, and 
so forth
Internet (email, Facebook, 
Instagram, Listservs)
Tension release
Escape and diversion
Television, movies, video, radio, 
Internet
Source: Adapted from Katz, Gurevitch, & Haas (1973). On the use of the mass media for 
important things. American Sociological Review, 38, 164–181.

	
Assumptions of Uses and Gratifications Theory     391
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
The third assumption—that media compete with other sources for need 
­satisfaction—means that the media and their audiences do not exist in a vacuum. 
Both are part of the larger society, and the relationship between media and audi­
ences is influenced by that society. On a first date, for example, going out to the 
movies is a more likely use of media than is renting a video and watching it at 
home. Someone who is an infrequent consumer of media—who, for example, 
finds more gratification in conversations with friends and ­family—may turn to 
the media with greater frequency when seeking information during a national 
political election.
The fourth assumption of UGT relates to a methodological issue that has to 
do with researchers’ ability to collect reliable and accurate information from media 
consumers. To argue that people are aware enough of their own media use, inter­
ests, and motives to be able to provide researchers with an accurate picture of that 
use reaffirms the belief in an active audience; it also implies that people are cogni­
zant of that activity. In fact, the early research in Uses and Gratifications included 
questioning respondents about why they consumed particular media. This qualitative 
approach, which we explained in Chapter 3, ­included interviewing respondents and 
directly observing their reactions during conversations about media. The thinking 
surrounding this data collection technique was that people are in the best position 
to explain what they do and why they do it. Interestingly, as the theory evolved, the 
methodology also changed. Researchers began to abandon their qualitative analysis 
in favor of more quantitative procedures. Yet, the questionnaires employed in these 
procedures emanated from many of the interviews and observations collected in the 
qualitative period.
The fifth assumption is also less about the audience than it is about those who 
study it. It asserts that researchers should suspend value judgments linking the audi­
ence’s needs to specific media or content. Uses and Gratifications theorists argue 
that because it is individual audience members who decide to use certain content 
for certain ends, the value of media content can be assessed only by the audience. 
Even tacky and offensive content found in reality shows like “Duck Dynasty” may be 
functional if it provides gratification for the audience.
Some contemporary mass communication researchers (such as Turow, 2013) 
lament what they see as the negative, debasing influence of consumer product 
­advertising on U.S. culture. The United States has become a nation of ­consumers: 
Love has been reduced to giving someone flowers; freedom now means the abil­
ity to buy a Slurpee rather than a canned soda at 7-Eleven; a “good” mother 
is one who packs Lunchables in her child’s lunchbox. In the absence of hard 
­evidence of the large-scale effect some critics fear, it’s easier to assume that 
watching ads for these products—and the subsequent purchase of flowers, a Slur­
pee, and Lunchables—is not only an individual choice, but a harmless one. (See 
our discussion of the intersection of media, culture, and individuals in Chapter 25 
on Cultural Studies.)
As you can see, UGT underscores an active media consumer. Considering that 
this overarching principle contradicts the views offered by other media theorists 
and other theoretical perspectives, it is important to trace the theory’s ­development, 
which we do in the next section.

392     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
Stages of Uses and Gratifications Research
Unlike many of the theories we explore in this text, Uses and Gratifications theorists 
have investigated the use/gratification perspective in stages. The first stage of UG re­
search (prior to the formulation of the theory itself), consisted of acknowledging that 
people can and do actively participate in the mass communication process. The pio­
neering work of Herta Herzog (1944) was instrumental in establishing this perspec­
tive. Herzog sought to classify the reasons people engage in different forms of media 
behavior, such as newspaper reading and radio listening. Wanting to understand why 
so many women were attracted to radio soap operas, Herzog interviewed dozens of 
soap opera fans and identified three major types of gratification. First, some people 
enjoyed the dramas because of the emotional release they found in listening to the 
problems of others. Second, listeners seemed to ­engage in wishful thinking—that 
is, they gained a vicarious satisfaction from listening to the experiences of others. 
Finally, some people felt that they could learn from these programs because “if you 
listen to these programs and something turns up in your life, you would know what to 
do about it” (p. 25). Herzog’s work was critical to developing UGT because she was 
the first published researcher to provide an in-depth examination of media gratifica­
tions. She is sometimes credited with having originated UGT ­(although its label was 
to come much later).
Ten years later Wilbur Schramm (1954) developed a means of determining 
“which offerings of mass communication will be selected by a given individual” 
(p. 19). His fraction of selection visually represents precisely the process that Ryan 
goes through when he makes his choice of a movie or a television show:
Expectation of reward
Effort required
Schramm sought to make clear that audience members judge the level of ­reward 
(gratification) they expect from a given medium or message against how much effort 
they must make to secure that reward—an important component of what would later 
become known as the Uses and Gratifications perspective. 
The second stage of Uses and Gratifications research began when research­
ers created typologies representing all the reasons people had for media use. For 
fraction of selection
Schramm’s idea of 
how media choices 
are made: the  
expectation of  
reward divided by 
the effort required
Theory At a Glance  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
People are active in choosing and using particular media to satisfy specific 
needs. Emphasizing a limited effects position, this theory views the media as 
having a limited effect because users are able to exercise choice and con­
trol. People are self-aware, and they are able to understand and articulate 
the reasons they use media. They see media use as one way to gratify the 
needs they have. Uses and Gratifications Theory is primarily concerned with 
the following question: What do people do with media?

	
Media Effects     393
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
example, Alan Rubin (1981) found that motivations for television use clustered into 
the following categories: to pass time, for companionship, excitement, escape, en­
joyment, social interaction, relaxation, information, and to learn about a specific 
content. Other researchers (McQuail, Blumler, & Brown, 1972) asserted that media 
use could be categorized with only four basic divisions: diversion, personal relation­
ships, personal identity, and surveillance.
Jay Blumler and another colleague, Denis McQuail (1969), began untangling 
reasons that people watch political programs. They found a number of motives for 
watching political broadcasts. This work formed an important foundation for re­
searchers in Uses and Gratifications. Later work would begin to point out specifi­
cally how people see mass media. These teams of researchers found that there was a 
need either to connect with or to disconnect from others. Researchers found catego­
ries of needs associated with acquiring information or knowledge, pleasure, status, 
strengthening relationships, and relax. As you will recall, Ryan Grant was trying to 
work through two simultaneous needs: the need for strengthening friendships and 
the need to relax.
In the third stage, Uses and Gratifications researchers have been interested in 
linking specific reasons for media use with variables such as needs, goals, benefits, 
the consequences of media use, and individual factors. In this ­effort, researchers 
are working to make the theory more explanatory and predictive. Alan Rubin and 
Mary Step (2000) conducted a study that exemplifies this stage of UG research. 
Rubin and Step examined the relationship of motivation, interpersonal attraction, and 
parasocial interaction (the relationship we feel we have with people we know only 
through the media) to listening to public affairs talk radio. They found that motiva­
tions for exciting entertainment and information acquisition interacted with percep­
tions of the parasocial relationship to explain why listeners tuned in to talk radio and 
why they found a host credible.
Currently, researchers using UGT are interested in how the theory operates with 
respect to newer media, and we will discuss this research a bit later in the chapter. In 
addition, contemporary research using UGT continues to explore how and why audi­
ences consume traditional media for their own gratifications. For example, Darrin 
Brown, Sharon Lauricella, Aziz Douai, and ­Arshida Zaidi (2012) were interested in 
the motivations people had for watching crime dramas on TV. They found some sup­
port for the idea that people ­satisfied their curiosity through watching these shows. 
Media Effects
The history of UGT has much to do with how researchers shifted and changed their 
positions on the media effects. As we explained previously, researchers moved 
from a position where they saw the media as very powerful to one where media 
effects were seen as more limited. Uses and Gratifications Theory moved even fur­
ther to the position of the active audience and less powerful media. However, there 
was controversy about how in control audience members might be under the theory. 
Jay Blumler (1979), one of the originators of UGT, believed that some scholars had 
gone too far in describing the active audience. He ­argued that the theory meant to 
assert that even when audience members are ­active—even when they determine 
parasocial  
interaction
the relationship we 
feel we have with 
people we know 
only through the 
media

394     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
for themselves the uses they wish to make of mass media and the gratifications 
they seek from those uses—effects can and do occur. The failure of researchers in 
traditional Uses and Gratifications to consider the possibility of important media 
effects led the ­authors of the original work to chastise their colleagues 11 years 
later by noting that a “vulgar gratificationism” (Blumler, 1985, p. 259) should be 
purged from the theory. Blumler asserted that it was not the theorists’ intention to 
imply that audience members are always ­totally free in either the uses they make of 
media or the gratifications they seek from them; the world in which media consum­
ers live shapes them just as surely as they shape it, and content does have intended 
meaning.
Student Voices
Andre
It’s funny what some people think demands their attention—all the “infotainment” and 
reality shows on TV seem to be showing that people just really want to know about 
people partying on the Jersey shore or Kim and Kanye. The book talks about how 
­people are hungry for information about a current event such as the presidential 
­election or the shootings in Connecticut, but it seems like people care more about the 
latest movie star mental breakdown than they do about real news. I’m not sure what 
the theory would say about this, but people’s motivations for watching TV seem only 
to be escapism now, and I don’t know if that’s our choice or just what media offers us.
Blumler and his colleagues point to a second set of premises that make clear 
their belief that people’s use of media and the gratifications they seek from it are 
inextricably intertwined with the world in which they live. Elihu Katz, Jay G. 
Blumler, and Michael Gurevitch (1974) originally wrote in ­de­veloping UGT that “so­
cial situations” in which people find themselves can be “involved in the generation 
of media-related needs” (p. 27) in five ways. First, social situations can produce ten­
sions and conflicts, leading to pressure for their easement through the consumption 
of media. That is, we live in the world, and events in it can compel us to seek specific 
media and content. For a time in 2012 nearly everyone was talking about Super 
Storm Sandy. It was a sizeable catastrophe in U.S. history, and all media provided 
a great deal of information about the natural disaster and the human problems that 
resulted. This was a social situation wrought with tension and conflict. Where did 
you go to ease the pressure? Did you seek out more ­information through TV, radio, 
or the Internet? Did you use social media sites (SNSs) to find out if your East Coast 
friends were safe?
Second, social situations can create an awareness of problems that demand 
attention, information about which may be sought in the media. Simply stated, 
the world in which we live contains information that makes us aware of things 
that are of interest to us, and we can find out more about those interests through 
the media. Everyone everywhere—work, school, virtually every social situation 

	
Media Effects     395
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
you entered—was talking about the storm and the rescue efforts. This problem 
demanded your attention. You probably turned to the media—for ­information, per­
spective, and analysis.
Third, social situations can impoverish real-life opportunities to satisfy cer­
tain needs, and the media can serve as substitutes or supplements. In other words, 
sometimes the situations in which you find yourself make the media the best, if 
not the only, source possible. Your social situation as a college student made it 
difficult, if not impossible, for you to go to New Jersey to see for yourself how 
the rescue was proceeding. You weren’t able to ask the U.S. President or other 
officials about available supplies and money, or whether political considerations 
held up important resources for the rebuilding efforts, as Governor Christie sug­
gested. You needed to know what was going on in this disaster, but the reality of 
your position in society meant that you had little choice but to rely on the media 
to meet that need.
Fourth, social situations often elicit specific values, and their affirmation and re­
inforcement can be facilitated by the consumption of related media ­materials. Again, 
you are a college student. You are an educated person. The media offer an appropri­
ate location for the affirmation and reinforcement of the knowledge and awareness 
that you value.
Finally, social situations demand familiarity with media; these demands must be 
met to sustain membership in specific social groups. As a college student, you are 
viewed as the future of our country. Not only should you have had an opinion about 
the government’s response to Sandy, but you should have had something to say about 
the media’s performance throughout that crisis. Lacking those opinions, you may 
have been regarded as out of it or ­uninformed.
In rejecting “vulgar gratificationism,” Katz and his colleagues (1974) note that 
we should ask three things. First, are the mass media instrumental in creating this 
social situation? What role did various media outlets play? Based on what informa­
tion did we form our opinions? Second, are the mass media ­instrumental in making 
the satisfaction of this situation’s related needs so ­crucial? Why, for instance, was it 
important to have an opinion at all? Who put this issue on the public’s agenda? Who 
determined that it was more important than any of the myriad events that were hap­
pening in the world?
Uses and Gratifications Theory and its assumptions gained acceptance for a 
number of reasons. First, the limited effects researchers began to run out of things 
to study. Once all the variables that limited media influence were chronicled, what 
was left to say about the process of mass communication? Second, the limited effects 
perspective failed to explain why advertisers spend billions of dollars a year to place 
their ads in the media or why so many people spend so much time consuming the 
media. Third, some observers speculate that people often decide whether specific 
media effects are desirable and intentionally set out to achieve those effects. If this 
is so, researchers ask, what does this say about limited effects? Finally, while many 
negative effects were documented by limited effects researchers such as the relation­
ship between viewing mediated violence and subsequent aggressive behavior, posi­
tive uses of media were left unexamined.
These factors produced a subtle shift in the focus of those researchers working 
within the limited effects paradigm. Their attention moved from the things media 

396     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
do to people to the things people do with media. If effects occur at all, either posi­
tive or negative, it is because audience members want them to happen, or at least let 
them happen.
Key Concepts: The Audience as Active
By now, you know that Uses and Gratifications Theory is a model that takes into 
consideration the importance of audience. And it is this word—audience—that com­
prises the foundation for a discussion of the key terms related to the theory. We 
briefly expand our discussion of the theory by identifying the various types of audi­
ence embedded in the theory. A theory that is based on the assumption that media 
consumers are active must delineate what it means by “the active audience.” The 
interpretation of an “active audience” is an important part of consumer/consumption 
activity (Grob, Heusinkveld, & Clark, 2015). For our purposes, however, we draw 
upon the words of Mark Levy and Sven Windahl (1985) who deal with the topic 
this way:
As commonly understood by gratifications researchers, the term ­“audience ac­
tivity” postulates a voluntaristic and selective orientation by audiences toward 
the communication process. In brief, it suggests that media use is motivated 
by needs and goals that are defined by audience members themselves, and 
that active participation in the communication process may facilitate, limit, 
or otherwise influence the gratifications and effects associated with exposure. 
Current thinking also suggests that ­audience activity is best conceptualized as 
a variable construct, with ­audiences exhibiting varying kinds and degrees of 
activity. (p. 110)
Jay G. Blumler (1979) offers several suggestions as to the kinds of audience ­activity 
in which media consumers could engage. They include utility, intentionality, selectiv­
ity, and imperviousness to influence. and these form the essence of the important terms 
for UGT.
First, the media have uses for people, and people can put media to those uses. 
This is termed utility. People listen to the car radio or check an app (e.g., Waze) 
on their cell phones to find out about traffic. They go online to download Spotify. 
They read Consumer Reports to find out about the latest ratings on new car options. 
Intentionality occurs when people’s prior motivations determine their consump­
tion of media content. When people want to be entertained, they usually tune in to 
comedy. When  they want greater detail about a news story, they usually tune into 
news-centered networks such as CNN or MSNBC. A third type of audience activ­
ity is termed selectivity, which means that audience members’ use of media may 
reflect their existing interests and preferences. If you like jazz, you might listen to 
the jazz program on the local radio station. If you’re interested in tech trends, you 
are a likely reader of Wired. If you’re interested in local politics, you probably sub­
scribe to Politico or read political blogs. Finally, an imperviousness to influence 
suggests that audience members construct their own meaning from content and that 
meaning influences what they think and do. They often actively avoid certain types 
of media influence. For example, some people buy products on the basis of qual­
ity and value rather than in response to advertising campaigns. Or they exhibit no 
the active audience
a variable concept 
focused on an 
audience engaging 
with the media on 
a voluntary basis, 
motivated by their 
needs and goals
utility
using the media to 
accomplish specific 
tasks
intentionality
a cognitive behavior 
that occurs when 
people’s prior  
motives determine 
use of media
selectivity
audience members’ 
use of media  
reflects their  
existing interests
imperviousness  
to influence
refers to audience 
members  
constructing their 
own meaning from 
media content

	
Uses and Gratifications and the Internet, Social Media, and Cell Phones     397
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
aggression against others, no matter how much they enjoy action/adventure films 
and television shows.
In addition to audience activity as a central concept of UGT, activity and active­
ness, too, remain central. UGT also distinguishes between activity and activeness to 
understand better the degrees of audience activity. Although the terms are related, 
activity refers more to what the media consumer does (e.g., she chooses to go online 
for news rather than read it in the newspaper). Activeness is closer to what really in­
terests researchers in Uses and Gratifications: the audience’s freedom and ­autonomy 
in the mass communication situation.
Activeness is relative. Some people are active participants in the mass commu­
nication process; others are more passive. We all know people who live their lives 
through TV or who follow every fad and fashion presented in the mass media. Terms 
like couch potato and sofa spud developed from the idea that many folks simply sit 
back and take in whatever is presented on the TV set in front of them. On the other 
hand, we also know people who are quite adroit at consuming media. Your friend 
may listen to rap because of the beat. You may listen to rap not only for its rhythms, 
but also for its social commentary. For you, watching a documentary on climate 
change may prompt you to think about the amazing photography. For your sister, 
however, the movie may have been interpreted as a social commentary about the lack 
of U.S. action on global warming.
Activeness is also individually variable. A person can be inactive at times (“I’ll 
just turn on the television for background noise”) and then become quite active (“The 
news is on! I’d better watch”). Our level of activeness often varies by time of day and 
type of content. We can be active users of the Internet by day and passive consumers 
of Jimmy Fallon on television.
Uses and Gratifications and the Internet, Social Media, 
and Cell Phones
Throughout this book, we have tried to provide you the most recent research related 
to a particular theory that may have its origins during an earlier time in the field’s his­
tory. Uses and Gratifications Theory, as you know, is one such theory. To this end, 
we wish to provide you an overview, however, of how the emergence of computer-
mediated communication has revived the integrity of the theory. Let’s examine a few 
areas that will illustrate the theory’s durability. We maintain our focus on the user in 
this discussion. In 1994, George Gilder predicted the way a hybrid of the television 
and the computer would affect our culture:
Rather than exalting mass culture, the teleputer will enhance individualism. 
Rather than cultivating passivity, the teleputer will promote creativity. Instead 
of a master-slave architecture, the teleputer will have an ­interactive architec­
ture in which every receiver can function as a processor and transmitter of video 
images and other information. The teleputer will usher in a culture compat­
ible with the immense powers of today’s ascendant technology. Perhaps most 
important, the teleputer will enrich and strengthen democracy and capitalism 
around the world. (p. 46)
activity
refers to what the 
media consumer 
does
activeness
refers to how much 
freedom the  
audience really has 
in the face of mass 
media

398     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
In the years since Gilder’s predictions, some of what he suggests has come to pass. 
Television viewing has changed and can now be individually customized to a larger 
degree. It now must compete with multiple media, but much of what Gilder spoke of 
remains unrealized.
Although Gilder’s predictions are not (yet) reality, almost everyone expects that 
new media will continue to change our future. And, many researchers believe that 
UGT will be able to explain the ways that people use the Internet, SMS, as well as 
cell phone technology, and other media. As James Shanahan and Michael Morgan 
(1999) observed, there is an “underlying consistency of the content of the messages 
we consume and the nature of the symbolic environment in which we  live” (p. 199) 
even if the delivery technology changes. They assert that new technologies have 
always developed by adopting the message content from the technology that was 
previously dominant. They argue, for example, that films took their content from 
serialized literature, radio did the same, and television simply repackaged radio pro­
gramming. Marshall McLuhan (see Chapter 26) noted that new media merely pro­
vide new bottles for old wine. The question for Uses and Gratifications researchers 
is whether the motivations people brought to their use of “old” media will apply to 
“new” media. Theorists are interested in finding out whether new media so alters the 
message and the experience that Uses and Gratifications Theory no longer applies or 
has to be radically modified. ­Access to new technologies has changed and extended 
our abilities for entertainment and information gathering, and media researchers re­
quire greater understanding of the personal and social reasons people have for using 
new media.
Boonsri Dickinson reported on the Business Insider blog in 2012 that com­
panies are getting smarter about how they use social media, and indeed, are 
able to target specific media for specific needs. Dickinson notes that a com­
pany called Grip has worked with other companies to satisfy the following 
specific gratifications:
•	 Using social media to help hedge funds analyze consumer sentiment about cer­
tain kinds of investments.
•	 Tracking tweets and Flickr shots to help firefighting professionals fight forest 
fires.
•	 Using Twitter in Mexico to help the government see crime reports and patterns.
•	 Using Twitter and Facebook to help agencies predict election results.
•	 Using Twitter to aid the CDC in predicting flu outbreaks among other things.
Source: Dickinson, B. (2012, March 19). Nine unusual ways social media is being used to 
predict the future. Business Insider, businessinsider.com/9-ways-social-media-data-is-being
-used-2012-3?op=1.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Using Social Media

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     399
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
Researchers using UGT thinking have found it to be a valuable theoretical frame­
work to understand cell phone usage (Lauricella, Cingel, Blackwell, Wartella, & 
Conway, 2014; Leung & Wei, 2000), social media use and privacy concerns and 
privacy strategies (Quinn, 2016), digital game playing (De Shutter & Malliet, 
2014; Lucas & Sherry, 2004), and social networking websites such as Facebook 
(Dainton & Stokes, 2015) and its Chinese equivalent, Renren (Lanming & 
Hanasono, 2016). However, some research (e.g., Anderson, 2011; Zeng, 2011) sug­
gests that while the basic logic of UGT holds in studies of a variety of media, the 
exact list of gratifications will change based on the specific medium. For instance, 
Isolde Anderson (2011) found that people utilizing CaringBridge, an online re­
source offering personalized websites for those in need of care (e.g., those un­
dergoing a serious illness, military deployment, adoption, etc.), reported at least 
two different kinds of gratifications from CaringBridge than for traditional media. 
These include spiritual support from a higher power and social presence, or feeling 
tied to the greater community.
Robert LaRose and Matthew Eastin (2004) suggest that Uses and Grati­fications 
Theory can also be ­enhanced by the addition of some new variables such as expected 
activity outcomes and social outcomes. Expected activity outcomes concern what peo­
ple think they will obtain from the medium. LaRose and Eastin found that people ex­
pect that using the Internet will improve their lot in life. Social outcomes involve social 
status and identity. LaRose and Eastin speculate that people may enhance their social 
status by finding like-minded others through the Internet and expressing their ideas to 
them. They also suggest that “perhaps the Internet is a means of constantly exploring 
and trying out new, improved versions of our selves” (p. 373).
A few studies have examined how new media satisfy users’ gratifications com­
pared to traditional media (e.g., Ha & Fang, 2012; Min & Kim, 2012). These studies 
found that media such as email and websites are perceived as superior to traditional 
media and provide more gratifications for both getting news and mobilizing people 
to action than do traditional media. This finding held true across cultures in that the 
usage and adoption of social networking sites, in particular, were influenced by cul­
tural background (Ifinedo, 2016). 
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Uses and Gratifications, as a recognizable, discrete theory, had its greatest influ­
ence in the 1970s and 1980s although the relevance of the theory today is clear. As 
Elizabeth Perse (2014) notes, UGT is “one of the most widely used theoretical under­
pinnings in communication research.” The limited effects paradigm held sway at the 
time, and media theorists needed a framework within which they could discuss the 
obvious presence of media effects without straying too far from disciplinary ortho­
doxy. As you might surmise, the theory has been investigated largely using quantita­
tive approaches, although limited research has been qualitative in nature (De Shutter & 
Malliet, 2014). 
Uses and Gratifications is quite straightforward when discussing how people use 
newspapers (newspapers are made up of discrete sections, each aimed at a specific 
type of reader seeking specific types of information) or magazines (publications 

400     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
with very specific, demographically targeted readers) to come to some specific de­
cision or judgment. As you read earlier, the most recent research integrating the 
theory relates to the online communities. Thus, the theory is ­experiencing a bit of 
a resurgence as ­researchers work to test its premises with new media. As you think 
about this theory, consider the following criteria: ­logical consistency, ­utility, and 
heurism.
Student Voices
Mason
I thought the chapter-opening story about Ryan was so funny because I had the 
same internal debate last weekend. I was completely wiped, and I couldn’t decide if I 
just wanted to veg out in front of the TV or hang out with my friends. I knew I would 
miss seeing my friends if I stayed home, but the idea of letting mindless TV wash 
over me was really appealing because I’d had such a hectic week. Frankly, I was 
kind of sick of talking to people, so sitting and watching something amusing sounded 
good. I definitely was looking for “tension release.” But then my friends stopped by 
and ­convinced me to go to a movie with them. I guess I decided those “social 
integrative” needs were more important at that moment.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  | 
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Logical Consistency
Denis McQuail (1984) believes that the theory suffers from a lack of theoretical 
coherence. He thinks that some of the theory’s terminology needs to be further de­
fined. He notes that the theory relies too heavily on the functional use of media, 
because there are times when the media can be reckless. For ­example, there have 

U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     401
been instances of sloppy, inaccurate, or unethical journalism. In addition, new 
media allow for citizen journalism where anyone with a smart phone can publish 
ideas, allegations, and photos without the checks and balances or the training that 
accompanies professional journalism. 
Utility
The theory has been criticized because some of its central tenets may be ques­
tionable. If the key concepts of the theory are shaky, then the theory may not 
have full utility. In other words, it may be limited in how it explains. Yet, it 
should be noted that some UGT scholars believe that because most of the re­
search employed self-report instruments, it renders the audience member as 
less dynamic than if personal observations were used (Roggiero, 2000). Further 
more nuanced views of the theory have accepted the fact that audiences have 
indeed become more engaged and active since the original writings of the theory 
(e.g., Perse, 2014).
Still, some researchers (Kubey & Csikszentmihalyi, 2014) note that people 
­report that their television watching in particular is passive and requires little con­
centration. Furthermore, the theory seems to highlight a reasoning media consumer, 
one who does not accept everything the media present. The theory does not take into 
consideration the fact that individuals may not have considered all available choices 
in media consumption. For instance, Ryan Grant has considered two choices: stay 
at home or go out to the movies. What other options could he consider? Uses and 
Gratifications does not pay too much attention to the myriad unconscious decisions 
made by individuals.
Heurism
We can see that the heuristic nature of the theory is without question. The ­research 
has spanned several decades, and the theory has framed a number of research stud­
ies. In addition to the early pioneers Katz, Blumler, Gurevitch, and their colleagues, 
others have employed the theory and its thinking in their research on gay and bi­
sexual men (Miller, 2015), information sources related to college students (Parker & 
Plank, 2015), texting and public health emergency messaging (Karasz, Li-Vollmer, 
Bogan, & Offenbecher, 2014), and digital photo sharing on Facebook (Malik, Dhir, & 
Nieminen, 2016. 
Closing
The value of Uses and Gratifications Theory today is in its ability to provide a frame­
work for the consideration of the audience and individual media consumers in con­
temporary mass communication research and theory. Uses and Gratifications may 
not be the defining theory in the field of mass communication, but it serves the 
discipline well as we seek to understand the intersection between media choice and 
consumer use. 

402     Chapter 23  •  Uses and Gratifications Theory
U S E S  A N D  G R A T I F I C A T I O N S  T H E O R Y
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:   Today’s “new media” was not considered in the earlier dis­
cussions of Uses and Gratifications Theory. Yet, we can all agree that we use 
various media in different ways. Explain how social network users might use 
online sites to gratify their relational needs, such as meeting new people, maintain­
ing office relationships, and so forth. 
	
1.  Are there choices other than those identified for Ryan Grant to consider in his 
decision to do something on Friday night? How do these alternatives ­relate to Uses 
and Gratifications Theory? Use examples in your response.
	
2.  How active a media consumer are you? Are you always thoughtful in your 
choice of media content? Do you bring different levels of activeness to different 
media—newspapers versus radio, for example?
	
3.  UGT has been criticized for being too apologetic of the media industries 
and overly supportive of the status quo. Can you explain why this is so? Do you 
agree with these criticisms? Does such criticism have any place in ­scientific theory?
	
4.  Uses and Gratifications Theory assumes that media present content and 
consumers consume it. How does the Internet threaten to disrupt this model? How 
might UGT adapt to allow for this transformation of traditional media consumers 
into online media users?
	
5.  Discuss the relevance of UGT in the early 21st century. Incorporate ex­
amples into your response.
	
6.  What difference would it make, according to the theory, if Ryan’s movie 
choice was an action/adventure film and the main choices on TV were romantic 
comedies? How does Uses and Gratifications Theory account for media content?
	
7.  Are there other uses and gratifications that people may get from media that 
the chapter doesn’t discuss? Explain your answer.

403
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Joyce 
Jensen 
was 
preparing to vote for the 
very first time. She had 
been looking forward to this privilege since she 
was 12 years old. She considered herself a news 
junkie, and she was always reading news blogs 
such as The Huffington Post and The Drudge 
Report—she tried to get all sides of an issue. 
She continued to devour the morning newspa­
per and watch both local TV news and CNN. She 
made it a point to watch C-SPAN, a cable station 
dedicated to the world of politics. She knew that 
she was one of only a handful in her class who 
could identify all of the U.S. Supreme Court jus­
tices. She was ready to take some flak for being 
a news nerd because the world fascinated her. 
She wanted to be prepared for the right and re­
sponsibility of voting.
Now she was about to vote in her first local 
election. She was choosing between two candi­
dates for her state’s governor. She had read a 
lot about the candidates and watched all the de­
bates. Although she was still undecided, she was 
leaning ­toward Roberta Johndrew, the tough-on-
crime candidate. Johndrew favored greater use 
of the death penalty, limits on appeals by people 
convicted of crimes, and putting more police on 
the street. Yet, Joyce thought that Frank Milnes, 
the education ­candidate, had some good ideas as 
well. Crime—in Joyce’s state and in the country 
as a whole—was down for the eighth consecu­
tive year. And Milnes argued that, despite high-
profile crimes like the tragic killings at Sandy 
Hook ­Elementary School in Connecticut, accord­
ing to FBI statistics all types of violent crime had 
actually been in decline for several years. Milnes 
argued that money being spent for more police, 
more prisons, and more executions would be bet­
ter spent on ­improving schools. After all, Milnes 
asserted, more dollars in their state were being 
spent on incar­ceration than on educating young 
people. Better schools, he argued, would mean 
even less crime in the future. “What kind of state 
do we live in,” he demanded in his campaign 
­literature, “when we refuse to give raises to our 
teachers and pay our prison guards more than 
our teachers?”
Those were powerful arguments, thought 
Joyce. She regretted that teachers were not 
getting paid commensurate with their expertise 
and responsibilities. She knew that she wanted 
to have children eventually, and she wanted them 
to get the best education possible. She could see 
how paying teachers more might help achieve 
that.
But as a young, single woman, these argu­
ments were secondary to safety considerations. 
There seemed to be so much crime in the city. 
Every night when she watched the news on tele­
vision, there seemed to be more crimes reported. 
She was often uncomfortable when she was out 
at night. At times, she even felt uneasy being at 
Cultivation Theory
Based on the research of George Gerbner
C H A P T E R	24
Joyce Jensen
Unlike other media use, viewing is a ritual; people watch by the clock and 
not by the program.
—George Gerbner

404     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
A
s Walter Lippmann (1922) noted almost a century ago, people’s opinions 
transcend their lived experiences. George Gerbner (1999) agreed with this 
and observed, “[M]ost of what we know, or think we know, we have never per­
sonally experienced” (p. ix). This is possible, in large part, because of the im­
pact of media and the stories told through the media that bring events and ideas 
to media consumers that are beyond their own realities (Northrup, 2010). We 
“know” many things from the stories we see and hear in the media (Buffington & 
Fraley, 2008).
One of the most popular media sources providing us with this information is 
television. Regardless of the influence and pervasiveness of social media, televi­
sion still holds a central place in our experience: Although the upswing in com­
puter usage cannot be denied, it’s also interesting to note that there has actually 
been an uptick in television usage, as well. For instance, in 2012, there were ap­
proximately 114 million TV households in the United States. In 2016, that num­
ber rose to 116 million (http://www.statista.com/statistics/243789/number-of
-tv-households-in-the-us/). Children (kids who are just turning nine and older) in 
the United States spend, on average, 35 hours per week watching television (http://
entertainment.time.com/2013/11/20/fyi-parents-your-kids-watch-a-full-time-jobs
-worth-of-tv-each-week), which is 2.2 hours more than in 2009. Adults (15 years 
and older) spend approximately 2.8 hours per day, accounting nearly half of their daily 
leisure activities (http://www.bls.gov/news.release/atus.nr0.htm). Clearly, television remains 
pervasive and potentially influential in an average U.S. home. In addition, the televi­
sion set regularly ushers in “mass-mediated storytelling,” providing for the “dominant 
entertainment medium” (Romer, Jamieson, Bleakley, & Jamieson, 2016, p. 115). 
The theory profiled in this chapter, Cultivation Theory began as a way to 
test the impact that all this television viewing had on viewers, particularly with 
regard to violence. It is true that television has changed a great deal since it 
became widely available to U.S. viewers in 1948. Yet, despite dramatic trans­
formations in technology and social systems, the model of cultivation devel­
oped by George Gerbner in the 1960s remains healthy and thriving (Morgan & 
Shanahan, 2010). 
Gerbner began the Cultural Indicators Project in 1967 and its existence continues 
today (http://web.asc.upenn.edu/gerbner/archive.aspx?sectionID=19), conducting 
regular, periodic examinations of television programming and the “concep­
tions of social reality that viewing cultivates in child and adult audiences” 
(Gerbner & Gross, 1972, p. 174). In initiating what would become known as Cul­
tivation Theory, Gerbner and his colleagues were making a causal argument 
causal argument 
an assertion of 
cause and effect, 
including the  
direction of the 
causality
home alone. Maybe it is an irrational fear, she 
thought to herself, but it was there and it felt real.
As Joyce pondered how she would cast her 
vote in the booth, so much was going through 
her mind. She considered her present situation 
as a single woman as well as her desire for fu­
ture ­children. She reflected on both Roberta 
Johndrew and Frank Milnes and their comments 
from the past several months. As she contem­
plated her ­options for another moment or two, 
she felt she would be able to make a good deci­
sion. So much depended on citizens making in­
formed choices. Joyce was thrilled to exercise 
her right as a U.S. citizen.

C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Cultivation Theory 
     ﻿    
405
(television ­cultivates—causes—conceptions of social reality in people’s minds). 
Cultivation Theory is a theory that predicts and explains the long-term forma­
tion and shaping of perceptions, understandings, and beliefs about the world as a 
result of consumption of media messages. Gerbner’s line of thinking in Cultiva­
tion Theory suggests that mass communication, particularly television, cultivates 
­certain beliefs about reality that are held in common by mass communication 
consumers.
Cultivation researchers can easily explain Joyce Jensen’s voting quandary. 
Official statistics that indicate that violent crime is in steady decline are certainly real 
enough. But so, too, is Joyce’s feeling of unease and insecurity when she is alone. 
Cultivation Theory would refer to these feelings of insecurity as her social reality. 
Moreover, that reality is as real as any other for Joyce, and it is media ­fueled, if not 
media created and maintained.
Iver Peterson (2002) made a similar observation about the anthrax scares in 
the United States post–September 11, 2001. He notes that although the media-
fueled fears about anthrax are very pervasive and real, the actual cases of ­anthrax 
contamination are rare. Peterson quotes Clifton R. Lacy, commissioner of the NJ 
Department of Health and Senior Services, as saying that the risks to the citizens 
of New Jersey by anthrax spores are “vanishingly small” (p. A21). In the 1970s, 
Gerbner’s view that media messages alter traditional notions of time, space, and 
social groupings was a direct challenge to the prevailing thought that media had 
little, if any, effect on individuals and on the culture. Like Uses and Gratifications 
Theory, which we discussed in Chapter 23, Cultivation Theory was developed in 
response to the beliefs about the media’s limited effects that were dominant at 
the time. More important, however, it reflects media theory’s slow transformation 
from reliance on the transmissional perspective to greater acceptance of the ritual 
perspective of mass communication.
The transmissional perspective sees media as senders of messages—­discrete 
bits of information—across space (Baran & Davis, 2016). This perspective and lim­
ited effects theories are comfortable partners. If all media do is transmit bits of infor­
mation, people can choose to use or not use that information as they wish. In the ritual 
perspective, however, media are conceptualized not as a means of transmitting 
transmissional 
perspective 
a position depicting 
the media as  
senders of  
messages across 
space
ritual perspective 
a position depicting 
the media as  
representers of 
shared beliefs
CALVIN AND HOBBES ©1995 Watterson. Dist. By UNIVERSAL UCLICK. Reprinted with 
permission. All rights reserved.

406     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
“messages in space,” but as central to “the maintenance of society in time” (Carey, 
1975, p. 6). Mass communication is “not the act of imparting ­information, but the 
representation of shared beliefs” (p. 6).
Developing Cultivation Theory
Gerbner first used the term cultivation in 1969; however, Cultivation Theory, as a 
discrete and powerful theory, did not emerge for a number of years. It evolved over 
time through a series of methodological and theoretical steps by Gerbner and his col­
leagues and, as such, reflects that development. The method that Gerbner and others 
use to investigate questions of mass media cultivation is called Cultivation Analysis, 
and sometimes people use the terms Cultivation Analysis and Cultivation Theory 
interchangeably.
During the 1960s, interest in media effects, particularly effects of television, 
ran very high. The federal government was concerned about media’s influence on 
society, especially media’s possible contribution to rising levels of violence among 
young people. In 1967, President Lyndon Johnson ordered the creation of the 
National Commission on the Causes and Prevention of Violence. It was followed 
in 1972, by the surgeon general’s Scientific Advisory Committee on Television and 
Social Behavior. Both groups examined media (especially television) and their im­
pact (especially the effects of aggression and violence). Gerbner, a respected social 
scientist, was involved in both efforts.
Gerbner’s task was to produce an annual Violence Index, a yearly content 
analysis of a sample week of network television prime-time content that would 
show, from season to season, how much violence was actually present on televi­
sion. Its value to those interested in the media violence issue was obvious: If the 
link between television fare and subsequent viewer aggression was to be made, 
the presence of violence on television needed to be demonstrated. Moreover, 
­observers would be able to correlate annual increases in the amount of ­violent 
television content with annual increases in the amount of real-world ­violent 
crime. But, the index was immediately challenged by both media industry and 
limited-effects researchers. How was violence defined? Was verbal ­aggression 
­violence? Was obviously fake violence on a comedy counted the same as more 
­realistically portrayed violence on a drama? Why examine only prime-time net­
work television, because children’s heaviest viewing occurs at other times of the 
day? Why focus on violence? Why not examine other social ills, such as racism 
and sexism?
Gerbner and his associates continuously refined the Index to meet the com­
plaints of its critics, and what their annual counting demonstrated was that violence 
appeared on prime-time television at levels unmatched in the real world. The 1982 
Index, for example, showed that “crime in prime time is at least 10 times as rampant 
as in the real world (and) an average of five to six acts of overt physical violence 
per hour involves over half of all major characters” (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & 
Signorielli, 1982, p. 106).
Violence Index 
a yearly content 
analysis of  
prime-time network 
programming to  
assess the amount 
of violence  
represented

	
Assumptions of Cultivation Theory     407
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Assumptions of Cultivation Theory
In advancing the position that “the more time people spend ‘living’ in the television 
world, the more likely they are to believe social reality is congruent with television’s 
reality” (Riddle, 2010, p. 156), Cultivation Theory makes a number of assumptions. 
Because it was and still remains primarily a television-based theory, these three as­
sumptions speak to the relationship between that medium and the culture:
∙∙
Television is essentially and fundamentally different from other forms of mass 
media.
∙∙
Television shapes our society’s way of thinking and relating.
∙∙
The influence of television is limited.
The first assumption of Cultivation Theory underscores the uniqueness of television. 
First, it requires no literacy, as do print media. Unlike the movies, it can be free 
(beyond the initial cost of the set and the cost of advertising added to the products 
we buy). Unlike radio, it combines pictures and sound. It requires no mobility, as do 
church attendance and going to the movies or the theater. Television is the only me­
dium ever invented that is ageless—that is, people can use it at the earliest and latest 
years of life, as well as all those years in ­between.
Because it is accessible and available to everyone, television is the “central cul­
tural arm” of our society (Gerbner, Gross, Jackson-Beeck, Jeffries-Fox, & Signorielli, 
1978, p. 178). Television draws together dissimilar groups and can make them forget 
their differences for a time by providing them with a common experience. For ex­
ample, in 2012, four billion people around the globe watched the Olympics in Lon­
don. Regardless of their nationality, ethnicity, gender, politics, or other potentially 
divisive identities, these people had a common experience. In other words, television 
is the culture’s primary storyteller and has the ability to gather together different 
groups. In addition, no one can doubt the role that television has played in the United 
States working through the tragedies of 9–11, Super Storm Sandy, the shootings at 
the movie theatre in Colorado, among others.
Theory At a Glance  •  Cultivation Theory
Television and other media play an extremely important role in how people 
view their world because they tell us stories in a compelling fashion. In 
today’s society, most people get their information from mediated sources 
rather than through direct experience. Therefore, mediated sources can 
shape a person’s sense of reality. This is especially the case with regard to 
violence. Heavy television viewing cultivates a sense of the world as a vio­
lent place, and heavy television viewers perceive that there is more violence 
in the world than there actually is or than lighter viewers perceive.

408     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
The second assumption pertains to the influence of television. Gerbner and 
Gross (1972) comment that “the substance of the consciousness cultivated by TV 
is not so much specific attitudes and opinions as more basic assumptions about 
the ‘facts’ of life and standards of judgment on which conclusions are based” 
(p. 175). That is, television doesn’t so much persuade us (it didn’t try to convince 
Joyce Jensen that the streets are unsafe) as paint a more or less ­convincing picture 
of what the world is like (Riddle, Potter, Metzger, Nabi, & Linz, 2011). Gerbner 
agrees with Walter Fisher, whom we discussed in ­Chapter 20, that people live in sto­
ries. Gerbner, however, asserts that most of the stories in current society now come 
from television. In an interview with Gerbner posted on YouTube (youtube.com
/watch?v=toc5KHWZx4A) he states that we get a stable vision of life from the sto­
ries on TV and this vision teaches us much about our fates. And, in many cases, our 
fates are scary and include victimization.
Television’s major cultural function is to stabilize social patterns, to cultivate 
resistance to change. Television is a medium of socialization and enculturation. 
Gerbner and his cohorts eloquently state the following:
[T]he repetitive pattern of television’s mass-produced messages and ­images 
forms the mainstream of the common symbolic environment that cultivates 
the most widely shared conceptions of reality. We live in terms of the stories 
we tell—stories about what things exist, stories about how things work, and 
stories about what to do—and television tells them all through news, drama, 
and advertising to almost everybody most of the time. (Gerbner et al., 1978, 
p. 178)
Where did Joyce Jensen’s—and other voters’—shared conceptions of reality 
about crime and personal safety come from? Cultivation researchers would immedi­
ately point to television, where, despite a nationwide 20 percent drop in the homicide 
rate between 1993 and 1996, for example, the number of murder stories on the net­
work evening news soared 721 percent (Kurtz, 1998). This distortion has continued 
in ways that the theory would predict. Barbara Wilson and her colleagues (Wilson, 
Martins, & Marske, 2005) found that parents who paid a great deal of attention to 
television news thought their children were more at risk for kidnapping than those 
parents who watched less TV. Yet, the Bureau of Justice Statistics rate of violent 
crimes among 12- to 17-year-olds since 1994 does not support this belief. The find­
ings indicate that from 1994 to 2010 the rate of violent crimes against children ages 
12–17 decreased for youth in married households by 86 percent and for those in 
unmarried households by 65 percent (White & Lauritsen, 2012). Further, kidnap­
ping makes up less than 2 percent of all violent crimes against youth (Finklehor & 
Ormrod, 2000).
Based on this assumption, Cultivation Theory supplies an alternative way of 
thinking about TV violence. Some theories, like Social Learning Theory ­(Bandura, 
1977), assume that we become more violent after being exposed to violence. Other 
approaches, like the notion of catharsis, would suggest that watching violence purges 
us of our own violent impulses and we actually become less violent. Cultivation The­
ory does not speak to what we will do based on watching violent television; instead, 
it assumes that watching violent TV makes us feel afraid because it cultivates within 
us the image of a mean and dangerous world.

	
Processes and Products of Cultivation Theory     409
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
The third assumption of Cultivation Theory states that television’s effects are 
limited. This may sound peculiar, given the fact that television is so pervasive. 
Yet, the observable, measurable, and independent contributions of television to 
the culture are relatively small. This may sound like a restatement of minimal 
effects thinking, but Gerbner uses an ice age analogy to distance Cultivation 
Theory from limited effects. The ice age analogy states that “just as an aver­
age temperature shift of a few degrees can lead to an ice age or the outcomes of 
elections can be determined by slight margins, so too can a relatively small but 
pervasive influence make a crucial difference. The ‘size’ of an ‘effect’ is far less 
critical than the direction of its steady contribution” (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & 
Signorielli, 1980, p. 14). The argument is not that television’s ­impact is inconse­
quential. Rather, although television’s measurable, observable, and independent 
effect on the culture at any point in time might be small, that impact is nonethe­
less present and significant. Further, Gerbner and his associates argue that it is 
not the case that watching a specific television program causes a specific behav­
ior (e.g., that watching NCIS will cause someone to kill a naval officer) but rather 
that watching television in general has a cumulative and pervasive impact on our 
vision of the world.
ice age analogy 
a position  
stating that  
television doesn’t 
have to have a 
single major impact, 
but influences  
viewers through 
steady limited  
effects
Student Voices
Milly
I’m one of those few 19-year-olds who watches TV almost constantly. I have Hulu 
and that means I can watch TV shows online. And, that means it doesn’t matter 
where or when (except in class and at my job). So, according to Gerbner (and I 
know I’m simplifying the theory here), because I watch TV a lot, I’m getting exposed 
to a world that I believe is more violent than it really is. But, I love Law & Order and 
even some of the horror shows on FX. But, I’m not afraid to go out at night. And, 
I don’t think the police are any more corrupt than any other profession, even though 
the media portray law enforcement as pathetic and prone to violence.
Processes and Products of Cultivation Theory
Cultivation Theory has been applied to a wide variety of effects issues, as well as 
to different situations in which television viewers find themselves. In doing so, re­
searchers have developed specific processes and products related to the theory.
The Four-Step Process
To empirically demonstrate their belief that television has an important causal ef­
fect on the culture, cultivation researchers developed a four-step process. The first 
step, message system analysis, consists of detailed content analyses of television 

410     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
programming in order to demonstrate its most recurring and consistent presentations 
of images, themes, values, and portrayals. For example, it is possible to conduct a 
message system analysis of the number of episodes of bodily harm on such shows 
as Criminal Minds.
The second step, formulation of questions about viewers’ social realities, 
involves developing questions about people’s understandings of their everyday lives. 
For example, a typical Cultivation Theory question is, “In any given week, what 
are the chances that you will be involved in some kind of violence? About 1 in 10 
or about 1 in 100?” Another is, “Of all the crime that occurs in the United States in 
any year, what proportion is violent crime like rape, murder, ­assault, and robbery?” 
The third step, surveying the audience, requires that the questions from step two be 
posed to audience members and that ­researchers ask these viewers about their levels 
of television consumption.
Finally, step four entails comparing the social realities of light and heavy viewers. 
For Gerbner, a “cultivation differential” exists between light and heavy viewers and 
perceptions of violence. A cultivation differential can be defined as the percentage 
of difference in response between light and heavy television viewers. Gerbner (1998) 
explains that “amount of viewing” is used in relative terms. Thus, heavy viewers are 
those who watch the most in any sample of people that are measured, whereas light 
viewers are those who watch the least.
Mainstreaming and Resonance
How does television contribute to viewers’ conceptions of social reality? The pro­
cess of cultivation occurs in two ways. One is mainstreaming. Mainstreaming occurs 
when, especially for heavier viewers, television’s symbols dominate other sources 
of information and ideas about the world. As a result of heavy viewing, people’s 
constructed social realities move toward the mainstream—not a mainstream in any 
political sense, but a culturally dominant reality that is more ­similar to television’s 
reality than to any measurable, objective external ­reality. Heavy viewers tend to 
believe the mainstreamed realities that the world is a more dangerous place than it 
really is, that all politicians are corrupt, that teen crime is at record high levels, that 
all poor families are all on welfare, that illegitimate births are skyrocketing, and so 
forth. Jennifer Good (2009) found that a mainstreaming effect occurred when people 
who were concerned about the natural environment were also heavy TV consumers. 
The mainstreaming effect had the result of decreasing these viewers’ concerns about 
the environment.
Mainstreaming means that heavy television viewers of different co-­cultures are 
more similar in their beliefs about the world than their varying group membership 
might suggest. Thus, African Americans and European Americans who are heavy 
television viewers would perceive the world more similarly than might be expected 
(although we are very cautious as we relate this conclusion as we consider, for ex­
ample, the 2014 Ferguson, Missouri shooting of Michael Brown, an 18-year-old 
African American man by a white police officer, as well as many other similar epi­
sodes). As Gerbner (1998) states, “Differences that usually are associated with the 
varied cultural, social, and political characteristics of these groups are diminished 
in the responses of heavy viewers in these same groups” (p. 183). Jerel Calzo and 
cultivation  
differential 
the percentage 
of difference in 
response between 
light and heavy 
television viewers
mainstreaming 
the tendency for 
heavy viewers to 
perceive a similar 
culturally dominant 
reality to that  
pictured on the 
media although this 
differs from actual 
reality

	
Processes and Products of Cultivation Theory     411
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Monique Ward (2009) found support for mainstreaming effects in their study of 
television viewing and attitudes toward ­homosexuality. They found that more expo­
sure to media representation of gay characters tended to promote more acceptance 
of homosexuality.
The second way cultivation operates is through resonance. Resonance occurs 
when things on television are, in fact, congruent with viewers’ actual everyday 
­realities. In other words, people’s objective external reality resonates with that of 
television. Some urban dwellers, for example, may see the violent world of television 
resonated in their deteriorating neighborhoods. As Gerbner (1998) notes, this pro­
vides “a ‘double dose’ of messages that ‘resonate’ and amplify cultivation” (p. 182). 
The social reality that is cultivated for these viewers may in fact match their objective 
reality, but its possible effect is to ­preclude the formation of a more optimistic social 
reality; it denies them hope that they can build a better life. See Figure 24.1 for a 
representation of the effects of mainstreaming and resonance.
resonance 
a behavior that 
occurs when a 
viewer’s lived reality 
coincides with the 
reality pictured in 
the media
Monica Davey reported in the New York Times online that overall crime 
in the city of Chicago dropped by 9 percent in 2012, but the homicide 
rate actually increased by 16 percent in 2012. Furthermore, the increase 
in homicides and the drop in overall crimes was not distributed evenly 
across the city. Davey states “More than 80 percent of the city’s homicides 
took place last year in only about half of Chicago’s 23 police districts, 
largely on the city’s South and West Sides. The police district that includes 
parts of the business district downtown reported no killings at all.” Davey’s 
article focuses on the resonance between people’s experiences on the 
South and West Sides of Chicago and televised violence. As CT would 
predict, the article indicates that the people living through a mediated and 
a social reality of violence have little hope for a better future. Davey notes 
that “mothers spoke of keeping their children inside from the moment 
school ended, and businessmen of decisions to lock the front doors of their 
shops during business hours.” 
Source: Davey, M. (2013, January 2). A soaring homicide rate, a divide in Chicago. New York 
Times online, nytimes.com/2013/01/03/us/a-soaring-homicide-rate-a-divide-in-chicago.html.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Effects of Resonance
Cultivation, either as mainstreaming or as resonance, produces effects on two 
levels. First order effects refer to the learning of facts such as how many employed 
males are involved in law enforcement or what proportion of marriages end in di­
vorce. For example, Joyce Jensen knew from candidate Milnes’s television spots 
that the amount of crime in her state was in decline. Second order ­effects involve 
“hypotheses about more general issues and assumptions” that people make about 
first order effects 
a method for 
cultivation to occur; 
refers to  
learning facts from 
the media
second order  
effects 
a method for 
cultivation to occur; 
refers to learning 
values and  
assumptions from 
the media

412     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
their environments (Gerbner, Gross, Morgan, & ­Signorielli, 1986, p. 28). Questions 
like, “Do you think people are basically honest?” and “Do you think police should 
be allowed to use greater force to subdue criminals?” are aimed at these second 
order effects.
The Mean World Index
A product of Cultivation Theory is the Mean World Index (Gerbner et al., 1980; 
Morgan, Shanahan, & Signorielli, 2016), which consists of a series of three statements:
1.	 Most people are just looking out for themselves.
2.	 You can’t be too careful in dealing with people.
3.	 Most people would take advantage of you if they got the chance.
Cultivation Theory predicts that agreement with these statements from heavy and 
light viewers will differ, with heavy viewers seeing the world as a meaner place than 
light viewers. It also predicts that the amount of television viewing is the best predic­
tor of people’s answers, overwhelming other kinds of distinctions among different 
people—for example, income and education. 
Gerbner and his colleagues (1980) demonstrated their confidence in the 
Mean World Index in a study that showed heavy viewers were much more likely 
to see the world as a mean place than were light viewers. Better-educated, 
Mainstreaming eﬀects
0
17
27
46
40
19
29
26
46
White
Race
Light viewers
Heavy viewers
Of color
Percentage saying that fear 
of crime is a very serious 
personal problem
Resonance eﬀects
0
Suburb
Residence
Urban
Percentage saying that fear 
of crime is a very serious 
personal problem
Figure 24.1 
Effects of 
Mainstreaming 
and Resonance
Source: Adapted 
from Gerber et al., 
“The mainstreaming 
of America: Violence 
profile no. 11” Journal 
of Communication, 
vol. 7 (1980), p. 16, 
Figure 2. Reprinted 
by permission of 
John Wiley & Sons, 
Ltd.

	
Cultivation Theory as Critical Theory     413
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
financially better-off viewers in general saw the world as less mean than did 
those with less education and income. But in testing the power of television, the 
researchers demonstrated that heavy viewers from the better-educated, better-
off groups saw the world as being as dangerous as did low-income and less-
educated people. In other words, heavy viewers held a mainstreamed perception 
of the world as a mean place, regardless of factors such as education and income. 
Cultivation researchers see this as evidence that television content is a factor in 
the construction of social realities for heavy viewers, regardless of individual or 
social differences.
Gerbner and his associates identify a number of other areas where the two types 
of viewers might differ. They include their beliefs about the likelihood of involve­
ment with a violent crime, their fear of walking at night, and their perceptions of law 
enforcement. The findings are intriguing. First, they found that people with light 
viewing habits believed that about 1 in 100 will be a victim of violence; heavy view­
ers of television predicted that about 1 in 10 will be ­involved in violence. Second, 
they found that more women than men were fearful of walking alone at night and 
that heavy viewers overestimated the amount of violent crime. Third, heavy viewers 
felt that 5 percent of the culture is involved in law enforcement, whereas light view­
ers felt that 1 percent is ­involved. Important to the logic of Cultivation Theory is 
that the responses of the heavy viewers mirror quite accurately the results of content 
analyses of television, where violence is usually recorded in heavy doses: Because 
violence is so common on television, heavy viewers are more likely to be fearful 
or mistrustful of the real world. Given what we’ve presented here, Joyce Jensen’s 
viewing habits may be influencing her thinking about her choice between Milnes 
and Johndrew.
One more final point is germane to our discussion. The relevancy of the Mean 
World Index to politics is especially important to consider. Although most people 
in the United States find politics to be of a combustible nature, when heavy viewers 
and politics mix, the perception of “meanness” is unequivocal. Morgan et al. (2016, 
p. 257) summed up this notion by stating an “in your face” political environment 
where “talk radio, cable news channels, Internet blogs, discussion boards, partisan 
websites, online videos, and pervasive social media” have cultivated a sense of “po­
litical incivility” that ultimately affects our political perceptions and voting patterns.
Cultivation Theory as Critical Theory
Cultivation Theory has made an important contribution to contemporary thinking 
about mass communication. Horace Newcomb (1978), an early commen­tator about 
Cultivation Theory, wrote of Gerbner and his colleagues: “Their foresight to collect 
data on a systematic, long-term basis, to move out of the laboratory and away from 
the closed experimental model, will enable other researchers to avoid costly mistakes. 
Their material holds a wealth of ­information” (p. 281).
But just what is the role of television in our culture uncovered by Cultiva­
tion Theory researchers? Cultivation theorists would argue that Joyce Jensen’s 
apprehension—and the vote for the tough-on-crime candidate it might produce—is 
based on a view of the world that is cultivated by television. Learning from television 

414     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
produces not only perceptions of a mean world (which ­researchers in Cultivation 
Theory argue become a self-fulfilling prophecy as people’s distrust of others breeds 
an atmosphere of further distrust) but also a warping of political, social, and cultural 
discourse. How many political candidates, they ask, have the courage to argue against 
the building of more prisons or against the death penalty? The issue is not the validity 
of these positions but the absence of meaningful, objective debate on them. The argu­
ment here is similar to that offered in Chapter 22, when we explained the Spiral of 
Silence Theory: People may be less willing to speak out about alternative approaches 
to crime and crime prevention because the media, especially television, cultivate a 
dominant social reality that renders these conversations out of step with the voters.
How can television be so powerful a force if its influence occurs as slowly 
as the coming of the ice age? Gerbner answers this question with his three Bs of 
television. Television, he wrote, blurs traditional distinctions of people’s views 
of their world, blends people’s realities into television’s cultural mainstream, 
and bends that mainstream to the institutional interests of television and its 
sponsors (Table 24.1). Television’s power rests in its utilization by powerful 
industries and elites to meet their own, rather than the culture’s, interests. Cultivation 
Theory is a critical theory, as we described it in Chapter 3, because it is concerned 
with the way that communication perpetuates the dominance of one group over an­
other (Littlejohn & Foss, 2011). As James Shanahan and ­Victoria Jones (1999) argue,
Cultivation is sometimes taken as a return to a strong “powerful effects” view 
of mass media. This view isn’t completely incorrect, but it misses the point 
that cultivation was originally conceived as a critical theory, which happens 
to address media issues precisely and only because the mass media (especially 
television) serve the function of storytelling. (p. 32)
Cultivation Theory, as a critical theory, examines an important social institution 
(television) in terms of how it uses its storytelling function (a theme we introduced 
earlier in the chapter) to serve ends other than the benefit of the larger society. In 
1996, Gerbner helped found the worldwide Cultural Environment Movement to 
assist people in their struggle against powerful media industries. Its Viewers’ Decla­
ration of Independence reads, in part,
Let the world hear the reasons that compel us to assert our rights and take an 
active role in the shaping of our common cultural environment. . . . Humans 
Table 24.1  The Three Bs of Television
TERM
DEFINITION
EXAMPLE
Blurring
Traditional distinctions are blurred.
Educated people see the world
similarly to those who have
less education.
Blending
“Reality” is blended into a cultural 
mainstream.
We agree on what’s real.
Bending
The mainstream reality benefits 
the elite.
We all want to buy 
more products.

	
Cultivation Theory as Critical Theory     415
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Theory-Into-Practice
Cultivation Theory
Theoretical Claim: People who watch a lot of television are influenced by the way 
the world is framed by television programs.
Practical Implication: As an elderly disabled man, Clarence watches a great deal 
of television programming because he has little opportunity to venture out of his 
apartment alone. He sees newscasts that focus on manhunts, refugee deaths, world 
starvation, handgun violence, stock market slides, abuse, and other unfavorable 
reports.  Clarence doesn’t second-guess his television sources and thus, has 
conceptualized a “world view” that is distorted.
T*I*P
live and learn by stories. Today they are no longer hand-crafted, home-made, 
community-inspired. They are no longer told by families, schools, or churches 
but are the products of a complex mass-production and marketing process. 
(http://web.asc.upenn.edu/gerbner/Asset.aspx?assetID=542)
Gerbner was deeply concerned with the effects created by stories told by agencies that 
do not aim to teach but rather aim to sell.
In addition, Cultivation Theory shares another characteristic with other criti­
cal theories: It is political; that is, in accepting its assumptions, its proponents must 
commit to doing something about the situation. George Gerbner has taken to heart 
the critical researcher’s call to action. In the mid-1990s, he developed the PROD 
(Proportional Representation of Diversity) index. The goal of the index was to ex­
amine the distortion in representation of various co‑cultures “across the demography 
of the media landscape” (Shanahan & Morgan, 1999, p. 223). The index determined 
how well or poorly groups were represented on television relative to their numbers 
in the population. The first index Gerbner produced surveyed broadcast network pro­
gramming and major Hollywood films for 1995–1996. Almost every group (women, 
African Americans, Latinos, Asian Americans, Native Americans, under age 18, 
over age 65, gay men and lesbians, disabled, and the poor or lower class) listed in 
the diversity index was grossly underrepresented in the media. The only group that 
was not was Native Americans, and this is probably explained by their relatively low 
population proportionally.
Gerbner took his critical role seriously and stated in a press release associated 
with the presentation of the index, 
Far from being “quotas” to be imposed on creative people, the Index reflects 
the limitations on creative freedom in the television and motion picture in­
dustries. This is a “report card” of industry performance. We look forward to 
steady improvement in the diversity and equity of the cultural environment 
into which our children are born and in which they come to define themselves 
and others. (Gerbner, 1997, cited in Shanahan & Morgan, 1999, p. 223)
Gerbner believed it is important to highlight how the media industries reflect the 
needs and perspectives of dominant groups. 

416     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Gerbner and his colleagues have been influential in identifying television as a shap­
ing force in society. Cultivation Theory helps explain the implications of viewing 
habits, and it has been a very popular theory in mass communication research. In 
a study conducted by Jennings Bryant and Dorina Miron (2004) surveying almost 
2,000 articles published in the three top mass communication journals since 1956, 
the theory was the third most frequently utilized theory. In addition, since 2013, 
more than 600 studies have been published and authored by researchers unrelated 
to Gerbner and his team (Morgan et al., 2016). The methods employed while un­
derstanding cultivation have been primarily experimental in nature, although, as we 
mentioned earlier, the theory has been studied using a critical lens as well. As you 
think about Cultivation Theory, the following criteria for evaluation are addressed: 
logical consistency, utility, heurism, and test of time.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical 
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Logical Consistency
Critics who fault the logical consistency of CT note that the methods employed by 
Cultivation Theory researchers do not match the conceptual reach of the theory. They 
note that the research supporting Cultivation Theory employs social scientific meth­
ods typically identified with the limited effects findings. Yet, Cultivation Theory ex­
amines larger cultural questions most often raised by humanists. Horace Newcomb 
(1978) writes, “More than any other research effort in the area of television studies 
the work of ­Gerbner and Gross and their associates sits squarely at the juncture of 
the social sciences and the humanities” (p. 265). In some ways, ­Cultivation Theory 
offends many humanists, who feel that their turf has been improperly ­appropriated 
and misinterpreted. In addition, the theory’s logical consistency has been called 
into question when examining the perception of the viewer. In particular, Elizabeth 
Skewes (2016) advances the belief that viewing is really a function of “available time 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     417
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
for most people” (p. 26). So, the theory may be suspect in that—as Skewes posits—
viewing is “ritualistic” (p. 26) and therefore, the amount of content is more relevant 
to cultivation than what is being viewed at the time.
Utility
Cultivation Theory is also criticized because its claims are not always useful in ex­
plaining the phenomenon of interest: how people see the world (Mutz & Nir, 2010). 
Newcomb (1978) argues that violence is not presented as uniformly on television as 
the theory assumes, so television cannot be reliably responsible for cultivating the 
same sense of reality for all viewers. In addition, Cultivation ­Theory is criticized for 
ignoring other issues such as the perceived realism of the televised content, which 
might be critical in explaining people’s understanding of reality (Minnebo & Van 
Acker, 2004). Furthermore, other researchers (Wilson et al., 2005) found that atten­
tion to television might be more ­important to cultivating perceptions than simply the 
amount of TV viewing. The fact that the theory seems to ignore cognitive processes 
such as attention or ­rational thinking style renders it less useful than is desired ac­
cording to some ­researchers (Berger, 2005). Further, because in the earlier versions 
of the theory, Gerbner failed to establish a clear interpretation of what constitutes 
“violence,” some writers (e.g., Hanson, 2016) contend that it can become problem­
atic (and subsequently, less useful). For example, as Ralph Hanson points out: There 
is a difference between “a fantasy violence of a Road Runner cartoon and the more 
graphic gore of a Saw or Hostel movie” (p. 42). Gerbner later (http://web.asc.upenn
.edu/gerbner/archive.aspx?sectionID=19) explained that violence can vary quite a 
bit by stating “there is blood in fairy tales, gore in mythology, murder in Shake­
speare. Not all violence is alike.” In the end, the utility of Cultivation Theory may be 
not so profound given that individuals could have a hard time effectively determin­
ing some basic foundations (e.g., definition of violence) of the theory.
Heurism
When we examine Cultivation Theory against our criteria from Chapter 3, we find 
that it measures up quite well with regard to heurism. Indeed, the research that has 
employed the theory has been prolific by any measure (Morgan et al., 2016). For ex­
ample, the theory has been applied to prime time dramas (Jamieson & Romer, 2014), 
cultural relations in the United States (Ortiz & Behm-Morowitz, 2016), adolescent’s 
cooperation tactics with law enforcement (Dirikx & Van den Bulck, 2014), video 
gaming (Breuer, Kowert, Festl, & Thorsten, 2015), and perceptions of immigrants 
(Seate & Mastro, 2015). The diversity of topics, as evidenced above, continue as this 
theory attracts scholars from around the globe.
Test of Time
As we’ve noted, Cultivation Theory is heuristic and long lasting, but two issues 
may be working against it almost 50 years after its inception. First, some stud­
ies based on its tenets are failing to find results consistent with the theory’s pre­
dictions. Leo Jeffres, David Atkin, and Kimberly Neuendorf (2001), for instance, 

418     Chapter 24  •  Cultivation Theory
C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
found that heavy television viewing seemed to be cultivating more diversity of 
opinion about public issues rather than mainstreaming people’s perceptions as 
Cultivation Theory predicts. In other words, the three Bs that Gerbner and his col­
leagues discussed were not found in Jeffres, Atkin, and Neuendorf’s study. Jeffres 
and his colleagues called the effect they found “scatter-streaming” and noted that 
it provided weak support for Cultivation Theory. Consistent with the Mean World 
Hypothesis, they did find that ­heavier users of TV expressed a greater need for gun 
control than did lighter users.
Second, as James Shanahan and Michael Morgan (1999) observe, times and 
media use are changing: “As more and more people grow up with TV, it is pos­
sible that it will become increasingly difficult to discern differences between light 
and heavy viewers” (p. 161). In addition, as TiVo, DVDs, digital cable, and other 
technologies alter our manner of TV viewing, it is likely that some of the theory’s 
contentions will no longer hold true. For instance, if viewers can organize program­
ming for themselves, it is unlikely that heavy viewing will mean the same thing for 
all viewers. Heavy viewing of cooking shows such as Chopped, for example, would 
be expected to cultivate a different reality from heavy viewing of crime shows such 
as Law & Order or NCIS. Kathleen Beullens, Keith Roe, and Jan Van den Buick 
(2011) concur, finding that what people watch on television is more ­important to 
the cultivation effect than simply the amount they watch. Their research showed that 
teens who watched more TV news programs appeared to take fewer risks as driv­
ers, but teens who watched more action shows exhibited more risk-taking behaviors 
while driving. 
Cultivation offers responses to these criticisms. First, although there may be 
many more channels and people may have greater control over selectivity than they 
once had, television’s dramatic and aesthetic conventions produce ­remarkably uni­
form content within as well as across genres. Second, because most television watch­
ing is ritual—that is, selected more by time of day than by specific program or the 
availability of multiple channels—heavy viewers will be exposed overall to more of 
television’s dominant images. Further, most viewers, even with dozens of channels 
available to them, primarily select from only five or six, evidencing a very limited 
range of selection.
Student Voices
Bree
I know that the criticisms of Cultivation Theory make sense. Gerbner came up with 
his ideas so long ago, and TV is completely different now than it was in the 1960s. 
Still, I have to think that some of what the theory says is true. I was so surprised to 
hear that violent crime was falling in the United States. I could have sworn it was 
on the rise. And I am thinking I get that idea because I do watch a ton of TV. And I 
watch a lot of crime shows: NCIS, Law & Order: SVU, and Person of Interest are 
some of my favorites.

C U L T I V A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     419
Closing
Cultivation Theory has been and remains one of the most influential mass communi­
cation theories of the last several decades. It is the foundation of much contemporary 
research and, as we’ve seen, has even become an ­international social movement. 
Another source of its influence is that it can be ­applied by anyone. It asks people to 
assess their own media use alongside the ­socially constructed reality of the world 
they inhabit. Imagine yourself as Joyce Jensen preparing to cast an important vote. 
You may well undergo the same mental debate as she. Yet, think of how even a pass­
ing understanding of ­Cultivation Theory might help you arrive at your decision and 
understand your motivations.
Discussion Starters
t e c h  q u e s t :  Originally, Gerbner and his colleagues constructed Cul­
tivation Theory about television and later discussed other forms of media 
such as films. How do you think the theory operates with regard to social 
media? For instance, people post a lot of drinking party pictures on Facebook. 
Do you think that people who spend a lot of time visiting these Facebook pages 
would cultivate a view of reality that overemphasizes drinking behavior as CT 
would predict?
	
1.  Are you like Joyce Jensen in that you do not feel safe walking in your 
neighborhood at night? How much television do you watch? Do you fit the profile 
offered by Cultivation Theory? Why or why not?
	
2.  Cultivation Theory is a critical theory and demands action from its adher­
ents. Do you believe researchers and theorists should become politically active in 
the fields they study? Why or why not?
	
3.  Do you agree with the hypothesis concerning the Mean World Index? Why 
or why not?
	
4.  How do you define violence on television? Do you think it is possible to 
calculate violent acts as Gerbner and his colleagues have done? Explain your 
answer.
	
5.  Do you believe that the world is a mean place? What real-world ­evidence 
do you have that it is? What television evidence do you have that it is?
	
6.  How do you respond to the criticism that more television channels and more 
divisions among viewers mean that the assumptions of Cultivation Theory are no 
longer valid?
	
7.  What other variables might affect people’s perception of the world in addi­
tion to their amount of television viewing?

420
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
infomercials that promote “Five Ways to Get Your 
American Dream.” They look at each other, won­
dering why they continue to live the way they do—
two children, two bedrooms, and a common bath­
ing area in the migrant camp. They both know that 
they don’t have the money to purchase a home, 
but they also know that they aren’t happy with the 
way things are.
	
Recently, DeMoss’s farm was investigated 
by the government for unsanitary living and 
working conditions. DeMoss was told to clean 
up the place and was threatened with daily 
stiff fines unless he improved the situation. 
Immediately, he had authorized spending a lot 
of money for individual lavatory facilities and 
began talking to the local grocery chain to work 
on establishing discounts to employees at the 
egg farm. As a gesture that will likely increase 
employee productivity and deter media attacks, 
DeMoss was also prepared to increase each 
worker’s paycheck by 15 percent by the end 
of the month. He also promised to help relo­
cate families with children to more suitable 
accommodations.
	
The Petrillos were ecstatic. They dreaded 
the “communal” bathing area and welcomed 
more privacy for their children and themselves. 
They were very excited about the opportunity to 
save money on food, and, of course, they were 
thrilled that their paychecks would increase 
Cultural Studies
Based on the research of Stuart Hall
Luisa and John Petrillo 
have lived in the same 
trailer park for four years 
with their two young 
children.
	
They realize that the wages they earn as 
migrant workers will make it difficult for the two 
to own their own home. They appreciate that 
Mr. DeMoss, the owner of the egg farm where 
they work, has provided housing for them, but 
they wish that they could have more privacy so 
that their neighbors would not be able to hear 
every word they say in the evening. The Petrillos 
do not have any desire to leave their tiny town 
because they realize that jobs are not that 
plentiful in northern New England. So they get 
by in the trailer park, and still dream about a 
big backyard where their two kids and their dog, 
Scooter, can play.
	
The Petrillos’ dream often unfolds on the 
­television shows they watch at night. Even though 
cable TV is expensive and not a necessity, they 
both love to watch shows that help them escape 
their daily routines. Watching TV, Luisa and John 
are bombarded with messages about interest 
rates being at an all-time low accompanied by rela­
tively low home selling prices. Whether watching 
network or cable TV, they keep seeing the same 
commercials over and over again promoting home 
ownership as the “American Dream.” They watch 
Luisa and John 
Petrillo
There is no understanding Englishness without understanding its 
imperial and colonial dimensions.
—Stuart Hall
C H A P T E R	25

C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
	
Cultural Studies 
     ﻿    
421
W
e cannot overstate how much the U.S. culture relies on the media. Each 
day, for instance, millions of homes tune in to dozens of different “news” 
programs on television. And, although newspapers remain the top source for 
­information on cultural events, most adults under the age of 40 rely upon a blend of 
sources (e.g., the Internet, social media, etc.) for their news (http://www.niemanlab
.org/2015/07/new-pew-data-more-americans-are-getting-news-on-facebook-and
-twitter/).
	
Although the media have become the primary sources for how individuals learn 
about events around the globe (Baran & Davis, 2016), it is the manner in which the 
media report events that vary significantly. Some journalists depend on fact finding. 
Others rely on personal testimony or stories. Still others seek out experts to com­
ment on events and topics as they unfold, whether they pertain to celebrity trials, 
natural disasters, refugees’ plight, war, terrorist attacks, or school shootings. In fact, 
a common template for following a school shooting, for instance, resulted from the 
coverage of the 2012 Newtown, Connecticut, the deadliest mass shooting in a school 
in U.S. history in which 26 students and teachers were killed. It is now predictable: 
First, the tragedy is usually reported in “real time,” that is, as it happens, via social 
media such as Twitter. Next, reporters interview witnesses to get first hand accounts 
of the shootings. Finally, journalists gather experts on both sides of the gun control 
issue to assess whether gun control laws are sufficiently tough. This last effort in­
volving experts seems to beg other questions about the media’s role in such events: 
Are they trying to convey a larger message about society in general? Is the reporting 
of images and stories done thoughtfully and conscientiously or is sensationalism a 
primary goal? 
	
Reporting events with hidden or disingenuous ambitions has several ­implications. 
When the media fail to report all aspects of a story, someone or some group is inevita­
bly affected. Nowhere is this more apparent than in the early coverage of AIDS, which 
was first diagnosed in the gay community. ­Edward Alwood (1997) notes that because 
most news editors did not consider gay deaths to be newsworthy, major news outlets 
(including the esteemed New York Times) failed to provide coverage of the disease. 
In fact, the disease was killing far more people than the 34 who died from Legion­
naires’ disease in 1976 and the 84 women who died of toxic shock syndrome in 1980. 
Yet, it wasn’t until the death of actor Rock Hudson in 1985 that major news stories 
were devoted to the subject of AIDS. By that time, however, more than 6,000 people 
had died from the disease. This perception has been reiterated more recently, and 
writers have further argued that the New York Times executive editor assigned news 
stories that aimed to “demonize homosexuality” (huffingtonpost.com/2012/11/28
/new-york-times-gays-lesbians-aids-homophobia_n_2200684.html). The media’s 
almost immediately. This, they thought, was the 
beginning of saving for their Dream. They knew 
that they made just enough money to pay all of 
their bills, and now with the raise, the extra 
money would go into a rainy day fund that 
could eventually be used to purchase a home. 
For now, though, Luisa was excited about the 
chance to move to what DeMoss called “suit­
able” housing. “It has to be better than this,” 
she thought.

422     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
message related to the reporting of AIDS was implied but significant: Gay men are 
aberrant and their deaths are not newsworthy.
	
Theorist Stuart Hall questioned the role of the media and their frequently sensational, 
false, and misleading images. Unlike other communication theorists, however, Hall 
focused on the role of the media and their ability to shape public opinions of marginal­
ized populations, including people of color, the poor, and others who do not reflect a 
White, male, heterosexual (and wealthy) point of view.
	
For Hall, the personal is the political. A former high school teacher who taught 
English, math, and geography, Hall’s background likely influenced his conceptu­
alization of cultural studies. He spoke of doing graduate work and, as a Jamaican, 
tried to understand his Jamaican culture and how it influenced his thinking and 
behavior (MacCabe, 2008). Hall was very much concerned with how “cultural forces” 
influenced the culture at large (Horowitz, 2012). And, many scholars who embraced 
Hall’s thinking simultaneously embraced the scholar himself. Ann Courthoys and 
John Docker (2016) offered that Hall was a “public intellectual, academic leader, 
writer, editor, teacher, political activist, family man and friend” (p. 302). This sort of 
posturing and orientation resonates throughout Cultural Studies. 
	
Cultural Studies is a theoretical perspective that focuses on how culture is influ­
enced by powerful, dominant groups. Cultural Studies is rooted in politics, but not 
the sort of electoral politics that characterize much of your understanding of politics. 
Rather, the theory is aligned with the politics of identity, namely the interplay be­
tween and among culture and race, ethnicity, gender, sexuality, and other markers 
of one’s identity. Unlike several other theoretical traditions in this book, Cultural 
Studies does not refer to a single doctrine of human behavior. In fact, Stuart Hall 
(1992) persuasively argues that “Cultural Studies has multiple discourses; it has a 
number of different histories. It is a whole set of formations; it has its own different 
conjunctures and moments in the past. . . . I want to insist on that!” (p. 278).
	
Cultural Studies has its background and its beginnings in Britain, although 
scholars in the United States have also advanced our understanding of Stuart Hall’s 
theory. As a cultural theorist and the former director of the Center for Contemporary 
Cultural Studies (CCCS) at the University of Birmingham in England, Hall (1981, 
1989) contends that the media are powerful tools of the elite. Media serve to com­
municate dominant ways of thinking, regardless of the efficacy of such thinking. 
Cultural Studies emphasizes that the media keep the powerful people in control 
while the less powerful absorb what is presented to them. Luisa and John Petrillo, for 
Theory At a Glance  •  Cultural Studies
The media represent ideologies of the dominant class in a society. Because 
media are controlled by corporations (the elite), the information presented to 
the public is consequently influenced and targeted with profit in mind. The 
media’s influence and the role of power must be taken into consideration 
when interpreting a culture.

	
The Marxist Legacy: Power to the People     423
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
instance, exemplify a marginalized group (the poor) who have been enamored by the 
“American Dream” of owning a home. Of course, Cultural Studies theorists would 
argue that the media—in this case, the infomercial sponsors—are taking advantage 
of a couple who will probably never have enough money to own a home. Yet, the 
message from the popular media is that it is possible. All that is needed, according to 
the message, is “good sense and good money.”
	
Cultural Studies is a tradition rooted in the writings of German philosopher Karl 
Marx. Because Marxist principles form the foundation of the theory, let’s look fur­
ther into this backdrop. We then examine two assumptions of ­Cultural Studies.
The Marxist Legacy: Power to the People
Philosopher Karl Marx (1818–1883) is generally credited with identifying how 
the powerful (the elite) exploit the powerless (the working class). He believed that 
being powerless could lead to alienation, or the psychological condition whereby 
people begin to feel that they have little control over their future. For Marx, 
though, alienation is most destructive under capitalism. Specifically, when people 
lose control over their own means of production (as happens in capitalism) and 
must sell their time to some employer, they become alienated. Capitalism results in 
a profit-driven society, and workers in a capitalistic society are measured by their 
labor potential.
	
Marx believed that the class system—a monolithic system that pervades all 
society—must be unearthed by the collective working class, or proletariat. He felt 
that laborers were often subjected to poor working and living conditions because the 
elite were unwilling to yield their control. As with Luisa and John Petrillo, laborers 
across society are constantly relegated to secondary status. The elite, or ruling, class’s 
interests become socially ingrained, and therefore people become enslaved in society. 
One of Marx’s principal concerns was ensuring that some revolutionary action of 
the proletariat be undertaken to break the chains of slavery and ultimately to subvert 
alienation under a capitalistic society. The capitalistic society, according to Marxist 
tradition, shapes society and the individuals within it (Weedon, 2016). 
alienation 
perception that one 
has little control over 
his or her future
Student Voices
Wil
The 2012 election was fascinating to watch while I was studying Hall’s theory. 
It was ­interesting to read about how surprised some in the media were because 
President Obama was an “articulate” person in the debates. He loved his family, as 
if that was something that needed to be mentioned by the media. The ads attacking 
the President focused on welfare and food stamps. Some other commercials talked 
about Obama being “lazy.” In the end, I think those in power—the white men—(still) 
had a problem with a black man being President and they did everything they could 
to cut into his credibility.

424     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
	
Marxist thinkers who believed the working class was oppressed because of cor­
porate-owned media have been called the Frankfurt School theorists. These think­
ers and writers believed that the media’s messages were constructed and delivered 
with one goal in mind: capitalism. That is, although the media might claim that they 
are delivering information for the “common good,” the bottom line (money) frames 
each message. Those affiliated with the Frankfurt School felt that the media could 
be considered an “authoritarian personality,” which meant that they were opposed to 
the male-centered/male-owned media. In fact, Herbert Marcuse, a Frankfurt thinker, 
was the leader of a group of social revolutionaries whose goal was to break down this 
patriarchal system.
	
The application of Marxist principles to Cultural Studies is more subtle than di­
rect. This has prompted some scholars to consider the theory to be more neo-Marxist, 
which means the theory diverges from classical Marxism to some extent. First, un­
like Marx, those in Cultural Studies have integrated a variety of perspectives into 
their thinking, including those from the arts, the humanities, and the social sciences. 
Second, theorists in Cultural Studies expand the subordinate group to include ad­
ditional powerless and marginalized people, not just laborers. These groups include 
gay men and lesbians, racial/ethnic ­minorities, women, and even children. Third, ev­
eryday life for Marx was centered on work and the family. Writers in Cultural Stud­
ies have also studied recreational activities, hobbies, and sporting events in seeking 
to understand how individuals function in society. In sum, Marx’s original thinking 
may have been appropriate for post–World War II populations, but his ideas now re­
quire clarification, elaboration, and application to a diverse society. Cultural Studies 
moves beyond a strict, limited interpretation of society toward a broader conception 
of culture. In short, as Janice Radway (2016) has acknowledged, the work of Stuart 
Hall has been both “extraordinary” and “consequential” (p. 312).
	
Now that you have a brief understanding of how Hall and other theorists in 
Cultural Studies were influenced by the writings of Marx, we examine two primary 
assumptions of Cultural Studies.
Assumptions of Cultural Studies
Cultural Studies is essentially concerned with how elite groups such as the media 
exercise their power over subordinate groups. The theory is rooted in a few fundamental 
claims about culture and power:
∙∙
Culture pervades and invades all facets of human behavior.
∙∙
People are part of a hierarchical structure of power.
	
The first assumption pertains to the notion of culture, a concept we addressed in 
Chapter 2. To review, we identified culture as a community of meaning. In Cultural 
Studies, we need a slightly modified interpretation of the word, one that underscores 
the nature of the theory. The various norms, ideas, values, and forms of understanding 
in a society that help people interpret their reality are part of a culture’s ideology. 
According to Hall (1981), ideology refers to “those images, concepts and premises 
which provide the frameworks through which we represent, interpret, understand, and 
‘make sense’ of some aspect of social existence” (p. 31). Hall believes that ideologies 
Frankfurt School 
theorists
a group of scholars 
who believed that 
the media were more 
concerned with 
making money than 
with presenting news
neo-Marxist 
limited embracement 
of Marxism
ideology
framework used to 
make sense of our 
existence

	
Assumptions of Cultural Studies     425
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
include the languages, the concepts, and the categories that different social groups 
collect in order to make sense of their environments.
	
To a great extent, cultural practices and institutions permeate our ideologies. We 
cannot escape the cultural reality that, as a global community, actions are not performed 
in a vacuum. Graham Murdock (1989) emphasizes the ­pervasiveness of culture by 
noting that “all groups are constantly engaged in creating and remaking meaning 
systems and embodying these meanings in expressive forms, social practices, and 
institutions” (p. 436). Interestingly, however, Murdock notes, being part of a diverse 
cultural community often results in struggles over meaning, interpretation, identity, 
and control. These struggles, or culture wars, suggest that there are frequently deep 
divisions in the perception of the significance of a cultural issue or event. Individuals 
often compete to help shape a nation’s identity. For example, during the peak of the 
arguments related to same-sex marriage in 2015, both nonsupporters and supporters of 
same-sex marriage wanted to interpret what “marriage” is. One wanted to define mar­
riage in traditional (man–woman) ways and the other defined it in less tangible (love) 
ways. Both groups strove to make their meanings dominant. Although ultimately, in 
2015, the nine members of the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in favor of same-sex cou­
ples to marry, the struggle occurred both in the legal courts as well as in the “court” of 
public opinion. 
	
Dreama Moon (2008) notes that culture includes a number of diverse activities 
of a population. In the United States, there are many behaviors, some done daily and 
others less frequently. For instance, it is common for men to ask women out on a 
date, for families to visit one another during holidays, and for people to attend reli­
gious services at least once a week. There are also more mundane behaviors, such as 
getting your driver’s ­license renewed, running on the treadmill, pulling weeds from 
your garden, or listening to the radio while driving home from work. For those inter­
ested in ­Cultural Studies, it is crucial to examine these activities to understand how 
the ideology of a population is maintained. Paul du Gay, Stuart Hall, Linda Janes, 
Hugh Mackay, and Keith Negus (1997) explain that these practices intersect to help 
us understand the production and dissemination of meaning in a culture. At the same 
time, the meaning of a culture is reflected by such practices. Culture, then, cannot be 
separated from meaning in society. 
	
Meaning in our culture is profoundly sculpted by the media. The media could 
simply be considered the technological carrier of culture, but as this chapter will point 
out, the media are so much more. Consider the words of Michael Real (1996) regarding 
the media’s role in U.S. culture: “Media invade our living space, shape the taste of those 
around us, inform and persuade us on products and policies, intrude into our private 
dreams and public fears, and in turn, invite us to inhabit them” (pp. xiii–xiv). No 
doubt, for example, that the media contain both intentional and unintentional mes­
sages that entice the Petrillos to accept mediated interpretations of what constitutes 
the dream of home ownership.
	
A second assumption of cultural theory pertains to people as an important part 
of a powerful social hierarchy. Power operates at all levels in society. However, 
power in this sense is not role-based. Rather, Hall is interested in the power held by 
social groups or the power between groups. (Goggin, 2016). Meaning and power are 
intricately related, for as Hall (1989) contends, “meaning cannot be conceptualized 
outside the field of play of power relations” (p. 48). In keeping with the Marxist 
culture wars 
cultural struggles 
over meaning, 
identity, and 
influence

426     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
tradition, power is something that subordinate groups desire but cannot achieve. 
Often there is a struggle for power, and the victor is usually the person at the top of 
the social hierarchy. An example of what we are discussing here can be observed in 
the U.S. culture’s preoccupation with beauty. Theorists in Cultural Studies would 
contend that because beauty is often defined as thin and good looking, anyone not 
matching these qualities would be considered unattractive. Hall may believe that the 
attractive ­people—those usually at the top of the social hierarchy—are able to wield 
more power than those at the bottom (the unattractive).
	
It appears that the ultimate source of power in our society is the media. Hall 
(1989) maintains that the media are simply too powerful. He is not shy in his indict­
ment of the media’s character by calling the media dishonest and “fundamentally 
dirty” (p. 48). In a diverse culture, Hall argues, no institution should have the power 
to decide what the public hears. Gary Woodward (1997) draws a similar conclusion 
when he states that there is a tradition whereby journalists serve as guardians of the 
nation’s cultural activities: If the media deem something to have importance, then 
something has importance; an otherwise unimportant event suddenly carries impor­
tance. Today, the Society of Professional Journalists (www.spj.org) asserts that blog­
gers have now emerged as society’s cultural guardians. 
	
Let’s revisit our story of Luisa and John Petrillo. Cultural Studies advocates would 
argue that as members of a minority population, the Petrillos have been inherently 
relegated to a subordinate position in society. Their work environment—as migrant 
workers on a large egg farm—is the product of a capitalistic society, one in which 
laborers work under difficult conditions. Although they will inevitably have difficulty 
owning their own home because of their low wages, writers in Cultural Studies would 
point to the media’s barrage of images and stories touting the “American Dream.” 
Although the message may convey hope for the Petrillos, their dream of owning their 
own home might better be called a fantasy because the elite power structure (the media) 
does not honestly convey the reality of their circumstances. Likely unknown to the 
Petrillos is the fact that the media are a tool of the dominant class. The future of Luisa 
and John Petrillo, then, will overtly and covertly be influenced by the ruling class.
Hegemony: The Influence on the Masses
The concept of hegemony is an important feature of Cultural Studies, and much of the 
theory rests on an understanding of this term. Scott Lash (2007) contends that “from the 
beginnings of cultural studies in the 1970s, ‘hegemony’ has been perhaps the pivotal 
concept” (p. 55). Hegemony can be generally defined as the influence, power, or domi­
nance of one social group over another. Embedded in hegemony is a master-narrative, 
which is a “grand story told by the dominant groups to legitimate and justify their ac­
tions and policies” (Campbell & Kean, 2016, p. 18). The idea is a complex one that 
can be traced back to the work of Antonio Gramsci, one of the founders of the Italian 
Communist Party who was later imprisoned by the Italian fascists. Writers in Cultural 
Studies have called Gramsci a “second progenitor Marxist” (Inglis, 1993, p. 74) be­
cause he openly questioned why the masses never revolted against the privileged class:
The study of hegemony was for him [Gramsci], and is for us, the study of the 
question why so many people assent to and vote for political arrangements 
hegemony
the domination of 
one group over 
another, usually 
weaker, group

	
Hegemony: The Influence on the Masses     427
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
which palpably work against their own happiness and sense of justice. What 
on earth is it, in schools or on the telly [television], which makes rational peo­
ple accept unemployment, killing queues [wards] in hospitals, ludicrous waste 
on needless weaponry, and all the other awful details of life under modern 
capitalism? (Inglis, 1993, p. 76)
	
Gramsci’s notion of hegemony was based on Marx’s idea of false consciousness, 
a state in which individuals are unaware of the domination in their lives. Gramsci 
contended that audiences can be exploited by the same social system they support 
(financially). From popular culture to religion, Gramsci felt the dominant groups in 
society manage to direct people into complacency. Consent is a principal component 
of hegemony. Consent is given by populations if they are given enough “stuff” (e.g., 
freedoms, material goods, etc.). ­Ultimately, people will prefer to live in a society with 
these “rights” and consent to the dominant culture’s ideologies.
	
The application of Gramsci’s thinking on hegemony is quite applicable to to­
day’s society. Under a hegemonic culture, some profit (literally) while others lose 
out. What happens in hegemonic societies is that people become susceptible to a 
subtle imbalance in power. That is, people are likely to support tacitly the dominant 
ideology of a culture. The complexity of the concept is further discussed by Hall 
(1989). He notes that hegemony can be multifaceted in that the dominant, or rul­
ing, class is frequently divided in its ideologies. That means that during the subtle 
course of being influenced, the public may find itself pushed and pulled in several 
directions. Unraveling such complexity is one goal of researchers in Cultural Stud­
ies. Think about, for instance, the water crisis that happened in Flint, Michigan in 
2016. During that time, state officials were blaming the EPA for the contamination 
found in the city’s drinking water. The EPA, however, pointed fingers at the state 
officials. In the meantime, nearly 12,000 children who were overwhelmingly African 
American were exposed to very high levels of lead in their water and may have long-
term problems as a result. This “water democracy” would be of particular interest 
to Hall and his associates. Although the “audience” was given vastly different inter­
pretations to the problem, in the end, the dominant (political) culture was trying to 
influence the discourse and the public’s opinion of the crisis. As Ann Ryder (2016) 
observed: The contamination debacle was “covered up and informing the public was 
drastically delayed” (p. 23).
	
Hegemony can be further understood by looking at today’s corporate ­culture, 
where—using Marx’s thinking—ruling ideas are ideas of the ruling class. In most cor­
porate cultures, decision making is predominantly made by White, heterosexual males, 
a fact made even more compelling when examining the fact that less than 96 percent of 
Fortune 500 companies have male CEOs (http://fortune.com/2014/06/03/number-of
-fortune-500-women-ceos-reaches-historic-high/). Hall challenges this dominant way 
of thinking and relating and argues that a homogenous leadership may simply lead to 
a subordination of the people (workers). How is consciousness raised and how is new 
consciousness presented? Perhaps it is the language used in an organization, for as 
Hall (1997) states, “Language in its widest sense is the vehicle of practical reasoning, 
calculation, and consciousness, because of the ways by which certain meanings and 
references have been historically secured” (p. 40). People must share the same way of 
interpreting language; however, Hall notes that meanings change from one culture or 
era to another. So what exists in one organizational setting may not exist in another. 
false consciousness
Gramsci’s belief that 
people are unaware 
of the domination in 
their lives

428     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
	
What all this means is that there are multiple ideologies in a society as com­
plex as the United States. This translates into what Hall calls a theatre of struggle, 
which means that various ideologies in society compete and are in temporary states 
of conflict. Thus, as attitudes and values on different topics shift in society, so do 
the various ideologies associated with these topics. For example, think about what it 
meant to be a woman before 1920 and what it means to be a woman today. Before 
1920, women were unable to vote and were generally ­regarded as subordinate and 
subservient to men. Then in ­August 1920, the amendment giving women the right to 
vote was ratified. Today, of course, women not only vote but also hold high political 
theatre of struggle
competition of 
various cultural 
ideologies
One of the globe’s largest and most profitable industries is tobacco. In an 
essay from The Guardian, a leading U.K. newspaper, Kristin Palitza under­
scores one of the leading notions related to Cultural Studies: the exploitation 
of laborers by large corporate behemoths. Palitza features a five-year-old who 
works every day with his parents in Malawi’s “tobacco district.” The young 
boy doesn’t attend school and his 12-year-old sister rarely attends school 
because of coughing, chest pains, and ongoing headaches. The author posits 
that there are 80,000 child tobacco workers in Malawi who suffer from 
nicotine poisoning. Farm owners deny knowing about the dangers and more 
importantly, tobacco corporate giants Philip Morris and British American 
Tobacco claim that they do not employ children in their operations. None­
theless, Palitza reports, the “intermediaries” who purchase tobacco “make it 
difficult to trace the country from which they buy the [tobacco leaf].” In fact, 
“the tobacco giants, who all have anti-child labor policies in place, insist they 
abide by the rules.” In other words, no one is taking responsibility for the 
growing nicotine poisoning in Malawi youth, children who often work 12-hour 
days and who may receive an average of $0.25 for a day’s work. 
	
In spite of both the financial (70 percent of exports earnings come from 
tobacco) and health (40 percent of Malawians live below the poverty line of 
$1.25 a day) consequences, Palitza reports that the Malawi government remains 
complicit; most violators receive a $34.00 fine. Most Cultural Studies theorists 
would agree with a researcher at the University of California tobacco control 
research and education center: “If major tobacco companies were genuinely 
committed to improving the socio-economic conditions of child workers, they 
should rectify harmful business practices by enforcing a policy that they will not 
purchase any tobacco grown using child labor.” 
Source: Palitza, K. (2011, September 14). Child labour: The tobacco industry’s smoking gun. 
The Guardian online, guardian.co.uk/global-development/2011/sep/14/malawi-child-labour
-tobacco-industry. 
Theory in Popular Press  •  Tobacco Companies and Child Labor

	
Counter-Hegemony: The Masses Start to Influence the Dominant Forces     429
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
office. Although U.S. society still does not provide entirely equal opportunity for 
women, and women continue to be targets of discrimination, the culture and ideology 
pertaining to women’s rights have changed with the times.
	
Hegemony is but one component of the intellectual currents associated with 
Cultural Studies. Although people (audiences) are frequently influenced by domi­
nant societal forces, at times hegemonic tendencies will emerge in the population. 
We explore this notion further.
Counter-Hegemony: The Masses Start to Influence 
the Dominant Forces
We have noted that hegemony is one of the core concepts associated with ­Cultural 
Studies. Yet, audiences are not always duped into accepting and ­believing everything 
presented by the dominant forces. At times, audiences will use the same resources 
and strategies of dominant social groups. To some ­extent, individuals will use the 
same practices of hegemonic domination to challenge that domination. This is what 
Gramsci called counter-hegemony.
	
Counter-hegemony becomes a critical part of Cultural Studies thinking because 
it suggests that audiences are not necessarily willing and compliant. In other words, 
we—as audience members—are always the dumb and submissive people some have 
us made out to be! Danny Lesh of the Counter Hegemony ­Project, writes in Coun­
ter Heg (a blog dedicated to the counter-hegemonic movement, available at: http://
counterheg.blogspot.com) that part of the goal of counter-hegemony “is to under­
stand history from other lenses, particularly from women’s, workers’, and racial mi­
norities’ perspectives.” That is, in counter-hegemony, researchers try to raise the vol­
ume on voices that have been voiceless. Think of counter-hegemony as a point where 
individuals recognize their consent and try to do something about it. In Chapter 29 
on Muted Group Theory, you will be reintroduced to how silenced voices deal with 
dominant groups.
	
Counter-hegemonic messages, interestingly enough, occur quite a bit in television, 
affecting viewers in subtle ways. Over the years, television has been a major vehicle for 
counter-hegemonic messages. For instance, in the 1990s, The Cosby Show, the number 
1 show at the time, showed a well-to-do African American couple living in an upscale 
neighborhood in New York City, raising their children with values of honesty, respect, 
and responsibility (Gray, 1989). Another example can be found in the show, American 
Horror Story. In a few episodes, Chad and his partner, Chad, are house stagers, going 
into homes to make them more attractive to potential buyers. Brian Klingenfus (http://
blogs.longwood.edu/klingenfus/2013/04/19/counter-hegemony-in-american-horror
-story/) observes that although Chad would be considered to be “stereotypically gay” 
(e.g., fashion-centered, “sassy,” etc.), Patrick would be considered to be “straight from 
the eye of the typical viewer.” The blogger contends that this relational dynamic is 
counter-hegemonic since the show’s producers and director decided to portray Patrick 
as counter to the dominant view of gay men in Western society. A third example of 
counter-hegemony can be found in many daytime television talk shows. Since many 
of the shows (e.g., The Talk, The View, etc.) are comprised of solely women, viewers 
find topics that have been normally relegated to men (e.g., sex, politics, power, etc.). 
counter-hegemony
when, at times, people 
use hegemonic 
behaviors to challenge 
the domination in 
their lives

430     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
Further, as Karin Wetchanow (http://www.iwm.at/wp-content/uploads/jc-08-101.pdf) 
points out, this genre embraces audience-centeredness as well as topics that relate 
to everyday people. This approach counters many dominant Westernized views and 
Wetchanow contends that such shows (starting with Oprah many years ago) “challenge 
authority and expertise” in ways that were unseen prior to this new female-only genre. 
While these shows may appear to be nothing but entertainment exemplars, they in their 
own ways, demonstrate how television content challenges the priorities ­established by 
the dominant forces, and subsequently, influence viewer attitudes and behaviors.
Before leaving this discussion, let’s address one more point related to counter-
hegemony and use one of the most popular television shows in history. The 
Simpsons, the longest-running comedy on television, also contains satiric counter-
hegemonic messages aimed at showing that individuals who are dominated use 
the same symbolic resources to challenge that domination. The relevance of The 
Simpsons to the lives of people has been persuasively argued. Tim Delaney (2008) 
succinctly notes that the show reveals so much about us because so much of the show 
intersects with the social institutions (family, school, jobs, houses of worship, etc.) 
to which we belong. The show has included references to such diverse topics as talk 
shows, Kafka, the Beatles, ­Tennessee Williams, same-sex marriage, the invention 
of television, and hormone therapy! The core cast of characters—Marge (mother), 
Homer (father), Bart (son), Lisa (daughter), and Maggie (infant daughter)—all present 
different counter-­hegemonic messages. For Marge, although cultural representations of 
a homemaker/housewife suggest a doting and supportive wife and mother, she is argu­
ably the most independent of all the characters. She has tried a number of other profes­
sions, from police officer to protester against handgun violence. Homer, an employee at 
a local nuclear power plant, shows that despite what the government may tell us about 
the safety of these facilities, people like Homer continue to stay employed. Lisa, con­
testing societal expectations that a child should be seen and not heard, shows that she is 
intellectually curious, artistically savvy, and environmentally aware.
	
One of the more central characters of the show is Bart Simpson. Interestingly, 
although society tends to shut down boys of Bart’s age (and girls to some extent), 
Bart manages to shut down the same society that tries to subdue him. His pranks 
range from harassing a local bar with sophomoric phone calls to disrespecting his 
grade school principal to calling his father by his first name. In the end, however, 
despite the 20 minutes of chaos, the family members show that they have high 
regard for one another in personal ways. As Carl Matheson (2001) notes, the show 
advocates “a moral position of caring at the level of the individual, one which 
favors the family over the institution” (p. 4).
	
A closer look at the television series illustrates other counter-hegemonic tones. 
Brian Ott (2003), for example, calls The Simpsons the “anti-show show” (p. 58). 
He states that “The Simpsons has always represented a sort of anti-show, spoofing, 
challenging, and collapsing the traditional codes, structures, and formulas of network 
television” (p. 59). Ott contends that the characters of Bart, Homer, and Lisa help 
viewers understand “lessons about selfhood” (p. 61) and that the show is watched by 
a number of different cultural communities, ­including Whites, African Americans, 
and Hispanics. Ott and other scholars contend that the show has managed to tran­
scend traditional images of the family that demonstrated and embraced patriarchal 
control. Indeed, a close examination of the series shows that children are frequently 

	
Audience Decoding     431
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
viewed as subverting or overthrowing parental control and asserting dominance in 
their family. The Simpsons continues to challenge prevailing religious, political, and 
cultural ­notions that the family is weakening.
Audience Decoding
No hegemonic or counter-hegemonic message can exist without an audience’s abil­
ity to receive the message and compare it with meanings already stored in their 
minds (O’ Donnell, 2017). This is called decoding, the final topic of Cultural 
Studies we wish to address. When we receive messages from others, we decode them 
according to our perceptions, thoughts, and past experiences. So, for instance, when 
Luisa Petrillo, from our chapter-opening story, interprets information on purchasing 
a home, she is relying on several mental behaviors. These include her desire to have a 
home, her conversations with people who have already purchased a home, her library 
visits, and the fact that she and her family have never owned a home. Luisa will store 
the information she receives pertaining to a new home and retrieve it when someone 
engages her in a conversation on the topic. All of this is done instantaneously; that 
is, she will make immediate decisions about how to interpret a message once she 
receives it.
	
Decoding is central to Cultural Studies. But, before we delve further into this, 
let’s review the gist of Cultural Studies up to this point. You will recall that the 
public receives a great deal of information from the elite and that people uncon­
sciously consent to what dominant ideologies suggest. Theorists reason that the 
public should be envisioned as part of a larger cultural context, one in which those 
struggling for a voice are oppressed (Barker & Jane, 2016). As we discussed previ­
ously, hierarchical social relations (between the elite bosses and the subordinate 
decoding
receiving and 
comparing messages
Student Voices
Alexandra
Of the different ideas related to Cultural Studies, the one that sticks out the most 
for me is that there is a perpetuation of power by those in power. I saw it in my 
town newspaper when I was home for break. On the front page, there was a huge 
story on the high school football team losing in the playoffs. The article talked about 
their wins and losses through the year and even they had a picture of the coach 
and his family. That same weekend, though, the speech and debate team won state 
finals and there was a small boxed article on page 8. There were no pictures and 
the coach of the team certainly didn’t have her family pictured. I think this goes to 
show that football and sports perpetuates a dominant patriarchal script (complete 
with boys and a male coach) and that things like the speech and debate team (with a 
female coach and mostly female debaters) gets shortchanged. Oh: The editor of the 
paper is a father of the son who’s on the football team.

432     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
workers, for example) exist in an uneven society. This results in subordinate cul­
tures decoding the messages of the ruling class. Usually, according to Hall, the 
media connote the ruling class in Western society. Hall (1980a) elaborates on how 
decoding works in the media. He recognizes that an audience decodes a message 
from three vantage points, or positions: dominant, negotiated, and oppositional. We 
explore each of these next.
	
Hall claims that individuals operate within a code that dominates and exercises 
more power than other codes. He terms this the dominant position. The profes­
sional code of television broadcasters, for instance, will always operate within the 
hegemony of the dominant code. Hall relates that professional codes reproduce 
hegemonic interpretations of reality. This is done with subtle persuasion. Consider 
John and Luisa Petrillo from our, opener. The television images of owning a home 
prompt the Petrillos to believe that owning a home is within their reach. The 
selection of words, the presentation of pictures, and the choice of spokespeople in 
infomercials are all part of the staging in the professional code. Audiences, like the 
Petrillos, are prone to either misunderstanding a message or selectively perceiving 
only certain parts of a message. Why? Hall writes, “The viewer does not know the 
terms employed, cannot follow the complex logic of argument or exposition, is 
unfamiliar with the language, finds the concepts too alien or difficult or is foxed 
by the expository narrative” (1980a, p. 135). Television producers are worried that 
people like the Petrillos will not accept the intended and preferred media message 
of owning a home. They (the media) therefore place their professional code placed 
in the larger, dominant cultural code of meaning. This ensures that John and Luisa 
Petrillo will work toward buying a home.
	
The second position is a negotiated position; audience members are able to 
accept dominant ideologies, but will operate with some exceptions to the cultural rule. 
Hall holds that audience members always reserve the right to apply local conditions 
to large-scale events. This happens frequently when the media report on laws that are 
enacted at the national level and interpreted at the state or community level. For exam­
ple, Hall might argue that although audiences may accept the elite’s interpretation of a 
welfare reform bill in Washington, D.C. (“All people should work if they are able to”), 
they may have to negotiate when it does not coincide with a local or personal principle 
(“Children need parents at home”). Hall notes that due to the difficulty of negotiations, 
people are prone to communication failures.
	
The final way in which audiences decode messages is by engaging in an 
­oppo­sitional position. An oppositional position occurs when audience members 
substitute an alternative code for the code supplied by the media. Critical consum­
ers reject the media’s intended and preferred meaning of the message and instead 
­replace it with their own way of thinking about a subject. Consider, for instance, the 
manner in which the media communicate feminine images of beauty. To many, the 
media present feminine beauty as a way to serve the sexual desire of men (Reimer & 
Ahmed, 2012). Some consumers, however, reject this capitalistic message and sub­
stitute more realistic portrayals.
	
Hall accepts the fact that the media frame messages with the covert intent to 
persuade. Audience members have the capacity to avoid being swallowed up in 
the dominant ideology, yet, as with the Petrillo family, the messages the audience 
receives are often part of a more subtle campaign. Theorists in Cultural Studies do 
dominant position
operating within a 
code that allows 
one person to 
have control over 
another
negotiated position
accepting dominant 
ideologies, but 
allowing for cultural 
exceptions
oppositional position
substituting 
alternative messages 
presented by the 
media

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     433
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
not suggest that people are gullible, but rather that they often unknowingly become 
a part of the agenda of others (Hall, 1980b).
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Although Cultural Studies began at the CCCS in England, its influence in the United 
States has been vast. The theory has attracted the attention of critical theorists in 
particular because it is founded on the principles of criticism. Its Marxist influence 
has also drawn scholars from philosophy, economics, and social psychology, and its 
emphasis on underrepresented groups in society has enticed writers in sociology and 
women’s studies to take notice (Steiner, 2017). In addition, Cultural Studies theorists 
would/could never consider using experimental methods, making this theory reliant 
upon qualitative investigation. For additional criticism, we discuss three criteria for 
evaluating a theory: logical consistency, utility, and heurism.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach to 
Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Critique
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Logical Consistency
Despite some glowing endorsements, the logical consistency of the theory has been 
challenged. This criticism relates to the audience. Even though some audiences resist 
the role of dupe, are they able to become interpretive and active resisters? In other 
words, to what extent can audiences be counter-hegemonic? Mike Budd, Robert 
Entman, and Clay Steinman (1990) suggest that some cultural and critical theorists 
overestimate the ability of oppressed and marginalized populations to escape their 
culture. Particularly those communities that lack the skills, insights, and networks, 
escaping is very difficult. In fact, as we consider the television-viewing habits of 
people like the Petrillos from our chapter opening, counter-hegemony may not even 
be considered. That is, the family may simply be repackaging and reframing the 
information they receive about home ownership and critically applying relevant 
information to their lives. This dialogue is not likely to go away because “debates 

434     Chapter 25  •  Cultural Studies
C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
over the audience were once, and continue to be, a major field of contestation in 
cultural studies” (Kellner & Hammer, 2004, p. 79). 
Utility
Cultural Studies “makes up a vehicle that can alter our self-image” (Carey, 1989, 
p. 94). Therefore, it’s possible to translate some of the theory into daily life, making 
it useful to some extent. Its utility can also be found in its dedication to studying the 
cultural struggles of the underprivileged. According to Hall, these populations have 
remained subordinate for too long. By concentrating on these marginalized social 
groups, a number of subfields have emerged, namely, ethnic studies and gay, lesbian, 
bisexual, transgender studies (Surber, 1998). Hall’s theory has been called “empirically 
elegant” (Carey, 1989, p. 31), and its usefulness beyond the written page has been widely 
articulated (e.g., Grossberg, 2010). Writers have also noted that “It has experienced a 
period of rapid growth in the academy, appearing at many universities in a variety of 
forms and locations” (http://science.jrank.org/pages/7610/Cultural-Studies.html). 
Student Voices
Mirri
When someone said that Stuart Hall was concerned with oppression, I couldn’t 
help but think of my own background in Haiti. The country is very poor, and we 
don’t have a lot of resources like the United States. We rely on other countries a 
lot, which makes the dominance of the elites over ordinary people pretty common. 
The ­government acts like the people’s voice is important, but everyone knows that 
simply is not the case. Media there are controlled by the government in a lot of 
ways and tells people both truthful and deceitful things. It’s a perfect example of 
the ­dominance over the masses.
Heurism
Many of the principles and features of Cultural Studies have been investigated. 
Ideology has been examined (Lewis & Morgan, 2001; Soar, 2000), and the concept 
of hegemony has been applied to episodes of television shows, including The Mary 
Tyler Moore Show (Dow, 1990), Saturday Night Live (Davis, 2012), and Sex in the 
City (Brasfield, 2007). Hegemony has even been applied to the singing of the national 
anthem at sporting events (Molnar & Kelly, 2012) as well as used in a study to under­
stand educational reform in Brazil (Gandin, 2015). Research by Janice Radway (1984, 
1986) focused on romance novels and the women who read them. She discovered 
that many women read these books silently to protest male domination in society. 
Feminists have embraced Cultural Studies and the efforts by Stuart Hall as he helped 
shape an understanding of voices that usually go unnoticed (e.g., Driscoll, 2016). In 
addition, focusing on the multicultural underpinning of the theory, Chris Weedon 
(2016) has looked at the appeal of Islamism to Western Muslims and the decision by 
many women to either join a jihad or marry jihadist fighters. 

C U L T U R A L  S T U D I E S
	
Discussion Starters     435
	
One final piece of heuristic evidence of Cultural Studies can be found in the 
expansive undertakings by scholars who have honored the tradition and the concepts 
of Cultural Studies. For instance, it is common to see entire issues of journals dedicated to 
Stuart Hall (e.g., International Journal of Cultural Studies) as well as written pieces 
showering praise and admiration on his work (e.g., Jordan, 2016). It is remarkably 
clear that thinkers, writers, researchers, and essayists continue to laud a theorist who 
had a profound effect on research and society. 
Closing
Cultural Studies remains one of the few theoretical traditions that has attracted the 
attention of scholars from a variety of disciplines outside communication. For that 
reason alone, it is uniquely both interdisciplinary and multidisciplinary. Researchers 
interested in understanding the thinking, experiences, and activities of historically 
oppressed populations usually endorse Cultural Studies as a model. Although some 
critics have faulted the theory for a number of reasons, Stuart Hall is credited with 
criticizing the elite and for drawing attention to oppressed voices in society. 
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Much of the research surrounding Cultural Studies is political 
in nature; affecting cultural change remains a goal. In particular, hegemony is 
identified as a process that keeps the haves in power over the have-nots. Relate 
this thinking to the retweeting process. 
	
1.  Is the Petrillo family responsible for not trying to leave their current situation? 
If they are not able to achieve the “American Dream” of owning a home, should the 
media be blamed? Include examples when expressing your opinion.
	
2. Discuss how hegemony functions in world events. Now apply the concept to 
your campus. Identify any similarities and differences between the two applications. 
Use examples in your response.
	
3. What other cultural artifacts exist in our society that could be studied within 
a Cultural Studies framework?
	
4. British Cultural Studies is strongly focused on class differences. What do you 
think about applying the thinking of British Cultural Studies to Cultural Studies in 
North America? Do you believe that the concepts and principles are relevant to all 
countries? Why or why not?
	
5. Do you agree or disagree with the belief that oppressed populations have 
little voice in the United States? How does this view relate to how you feel about 
the theory?
	
6. How might Cultural Studies theorists view poverty in the United States?
	
7. Apply counter-hegemony to a contemporary television show.

M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
As an expert on so­
cial media, Professor 
Margaret Randall was 
used to traveling around 
the country. She is an 
accomplished author, with her most recent book 
examining the isolation caused by people’s reliance 
upon technology. Professor Randall’s research has 
been celebrated by both scholars and practitioners, 
and she has received numerous awards and recog­
nitions for her work on the influence of media upon 
our social lives. Margaret’s most recent invitation 
was to present the keynote speech to an interna­
tional group of social media professors in Costa 
Rica. She was both anxious and excited to go.
A week before the trip, Professor Randall was 
under pressure to get her speech written. She had 
written a few paragraphs, but she had much more 
homework to do. She couldn’t rely on her “stump” 
speech with this group, given their expertise. In 
fact, as she sat in her office on her computer 
finding new research in the area, she felt that it 
was important to include cultural examples of her 
points to make her speech more compelling. Some 
materials she wanted required her to visit the li­
brary. So, she went across campus to (literally) 
check out a few materials on Costa Rica’s history. 
When Margaret returned to her office, she con­
tinued her research on the library’s databases, 
finding some news stories on Central and South 
American youth and social media usage. 
As Professor Randall sat reading the infor­
mation, she visited chat rooms with younger 
people from around the globe. She thought she’d 
ask them about their social media use when the 
chance arose. And, it occurred to her that per­
haps her former colleague, Bella, who was teach­
ing in Central America, could provide some “local 
­perspective” on the topic. It wasn’t long before 
Margaret and her friend were Skyping. After 
some back-and-forth repartee, the conversation 
evolved into a conversation about their fami­
lies, their ­research, and even their reactions to 
the U.S. presidential debates, which Bella had 
watched from her Costa Rica home. After a few 
minutes, the two ­finally got to the reason for their 
connection and soon Professor Randall had some 
firsthand examples to splice into her speech.
Later that evening, as she watched televi­
sion, Margaret Randall was thinking a lot about 
her upcoming speech. She knew that the speech 
was going to be taped and that it would inevita­
bly ­appear on YouTube. She also knew that she 
couldn’t afford any flubs. Her anxiety was palpa­
ble. She still had several days to refine the speech 
and yet, she always became nervous when she 
stopped to consider that her presentation was 
not only mediated, but also that it was her first 
speech given outside of the United States. And, 
the use of Prezi software always made her quite 
nervous about using a virtual canvas in her 
speeches.
Media Ecology Theory
Based on the research of Marshall McLuhan
C H A P T E R	26
Professor 
Margaret 
Randall
Our conventional response to all media, namely that it is how they are 
used that counts, is the numb stance of the technological idiot.
—Marshall McLuhan
436   

M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
	
Media Ecology Theory 
     ﻿    
437
C
ommunication theorists often accounted for technology in their theories, but 
until recently, rarely embraced it as a fundamental feature in their theories. In 
Chapter 13, we underscored one theory—Social Information Processing Theory—
that addressed the complex intersection between technology and human relation­
ships. We argued that theorists such as Joseph Walther focus on the coming together 
of people and how individuals get to know one another online. All of this is done 
without the benefit of nonverbal cues. 
Unlike Social Information Processing Theory, theorists interested in media en­
vironment look at the entire “mediated picture”—from its history to how it ­affects 
our perceptions or feelings, among other areas. When an interplay ­between media 
and their environments occurs, the foundation of Media ­Ecology Theory (MET) has 
been established.
Professor Randall’s experiences in our chapter opening would be of interest to 
Media Ecology theorists. Her embrace of technology and its effect upon both her 
professional and personal lives are of interest to scholars in media ecology. In addi­
tion, the fact that Margaret used to rely only on email, but later used other technolo­
gies to communicate with her daughter says a great deal about how technology has 
influenced their relationship values.
One theorist who could understand and interpret Professor Randall’s relational 
and technological circumstances is Marshall McLuhan. In his groundbreaking 
book, Understanding Media (1964), McLuhan wrote about the influence of tech­
nologies, including clocks, televisions, radios, movies, telephones, and even roads 
and games. Although today we would not classify some of these as technologies, 
at the time, McLuhan was interested in the social impact of these primal mediated 
forms of communication. He was interested in, among other areas, answering the 
following question: What is the relationship between technology and members of 
a culture? 
It’s fair to say that McLuhan himself was part of the culture’s media. He ap­
peared regularly on television talk shows, spoke to policymakers, had a cameo role 
in the Woody Allen film Annie Hall, and even was interviewed by Playboy magazine. 
He was so enigmatic and ubiquitous that one writer called him the “high priest of 
popcult and metaphysician of media” (nextnature.net/2009/12/the-playboy-interview
-marshall-mcluhan/). 
McLuhan was a Canadian scholar of literary criticism who used poetry, fic­
tion, politics, musical theater, and history to suggest that mediated technology shapes 
people’s feelings, thoughts, and actions. He suggests that we have a symbiotic rela­
tionship with mediated technology; we create technology, and technology in turn 
recreates who we are.
Margaret knew that there was only one per­
son who could calm her down: her 21-year-old 
daughter, Emma. She texted Emma to ask if she 
had a few minutes to talk on the phone. Emma is 
credited with getting her mom to Skype and text. 
­Before Emma’s insistence that her mother—a col­
lege professor—use other media to communicate, 
Professor Randall simply called her daughter or 
sent her email. Now, given that her daughter is 
several ­hundred miles away in college, Margaret 
relies on technology to ­ensure that she and her 
daughter remain connected. And, it is this con­
nection that the two of them forge today as Emma 
dials her cell phone.

438     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
Electronic media have revolutionized society, according to McLuhan. In es­sence, 
McLuhan feels that societies are highly dependent on mediated ­technology and that a  
society’s social order is based on its ability to deal with that technology. Recall that 
this theory was conceptualized over 50 years ago and, especially today, McLuhan’s 
assertion about technology rings true. Indeed, “since the public’s growing conscious-
ness of the Internet . . . starting in the mid-1990s, McLuhan’s reputation has expe-
rienced an astounding upsurge” (Morrison, 2006, p. 170). As Megan Garber (2011) 
writes, McLuhan is still a “Media Guru of the first order.”
Media, in general, act directly to mold and organize a culture. This is McLuhan’s 
theory. Because the theory centralizes the many types of media and views media as 
an environment unto itself, scholars aptly term McLuhan’s work Media Ecology. 
The word ecology, in this sense, is simply the study of how environments influence 
individuals. For our purposes, we define media ecology as the study of how media 
and communication processes influence human perception, feeling, understanding, 
and 
value 
(media-ecology.org/media_ecology/index.html#An%20Overview%20
of%20Media%20Ecology%20(Lance%20Strate). Carlos Scolari (2012–2013) writes 
that the notion of media ecology was borne out of conversations McLuhan had with 
his colleagues. Given that McLuhan’s writing spans a number of different academic 
disciplines, given that it focuses on a variety of technologies (e.g., radio, television, 
etc.), and given that it pertains to the ­intersection of technology and human relation-
ships and how media affect human perception and understanding (Postman, 1971), 
the ecological view of media is appropriate and sensible (Note: It should be pointed 
out that it was Postman, not McLuhan, who formally introduced the phrase “media 
ecology”). Paul Levinson (2000) describes the relationship of Media Ecology to 
communication this way: “McLuhan’s work was startlingly distinct from the oth-
ers [scholars] in that he put communications at center stage. Indeed, in McLuhan’s 
schema, there was nothing else on the stage (p. 18).” Media Ecology Theory, then, 
is the communication field’s attempt to understand the pervasive influence of media 
upon cultures (across the globe). Finally, discussing the interrelationship between 
media and technology, Niall Stephens (2014) concludes that “the media ecology 
ecology 
the study of 
environments and 
their influence upon 
people
media ecology 
the study of how 
media and  
communication 
processes affect 
human perception, 
feeling, emotion,  
and value
Theory At a Glance  •  Media Ecology Theory
Society has evolved as its technology has evolved. From the alphabet to the 
Internet, we have been affected by, and affect, electronic media. In other words, 
the medium is the message. The laws of media—enhancement, obsolescence, 
retrieval, and reversal—demonstrate that technology affects communication 
through new technology. Media Ecology Theory centers on the principles that 
society cannot escape the influence of technology, technology brings global 
lands together, and technology will remain central to virtually all walks of life. In 
learning about the Media, we ultimately learn about ourselves.

	
Assumptions of Media Ecology Theory     439
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
tradition tends to view all technologies as media, so that ‘technology’ and ‘media’ 
are usually synonymous” (p. 2034). 
McLuhan (1964) based much of his thinking on his mentor, Canadian ­political 
economist Harold Adams Innis (1951). Innis believed that major empires in his­
tory (Rome, Greece, and Egypt) were built by those in control of the written word. 
Innis argued that Canadian elites used a number of communication technologies 
to build their “empires.” Those in power were given more power because of the 
development of technology. Innis referred to the shaping power of technology on a 
society as the bias of communication. For Innis, people use media to gain politi­
cal and economic power and, therefore, change the social order of a society. Innis 
claimed that communication media have a built-in bias to control the flow of ideas 
in a society.
McLuhan extended the work of Innis. Philip Marchand (1989) observes that 
“not long after Innis’s death, McLuhan found an opportunity to explore the new 
intellectual landscape opened up by his [Innis’s] work” (p. 115). McLuhan, like 
Innis, felt that it’s nearly impossible to find a society that is unaffected by electronic 
media. In fact, Susan Greener (2016) posits that the range of media (e.g., screen­
shots, video, conversations, etc.) allows for a society of learned individuals. Our 
perceptions of the media and how we interpret those perceptions are the core issues 
associated with MET. We now discuss these themes in the three main assumptions 
of the theory.
Assumptions of Media Ecology Theory
We have noted that the influence of media technology on society is the main idea 
behind Media Ecology Theory. Let’s examine this notion a bit further in the three 
assumptions framing the theory:
∙∙
Media infuse nearly every act and action in society.
∙∙
Media fix our perceptions and organize our experiences.
∙∙
Media tie the world together.
Our first assumption underscores the notion that we cannot escape media in our 
lives. As we alluded above, media permeate our very existence. We cannot avoid nor 
evade media, particularly if we subscribe to McLuhan’s broad interpretation of what 
constitutes media. Think about Professor Randall from our chapter-opening story. 
She clearly has found herself employing media in multiple ways. In fact, we could 
easily argue that her livelihood is contingent upon her ability to navigate multiple 
media environments and platforms. 
Many Media Ecology theorists interpret media in expansive ways. Today, for 
instance, although McLuhan did not foresee the various (digital) media available 
for consumption (e.g., TiVo, etc.), scholars (e.g., Coupland, 2010) ­acknowledge that 
McLuhan’s thinking would have relevance to these digital forms. Still, in addition to 
looking at traditional forms of media (e.g., radios, movies, and television), McLuhan 
also looks at the influence that numbers, games, and even money can have on society. 
bias of  
communication 
Harold Innis’s  
contention that 
technology has the 
power to shape 
society

440     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
We explore these three in more ­detail in order for you to understand the breadth and 
historical thinking of McLuhan’s interpretation of media.
McLuhan (1964) views numbers as mediated. He explains: “In the theater, 
at a ball game, in church, every individual enjoys all those others present. The 
pleasure of being among the masses is the sense of the joy in the multiplication 
of numbers, which has long been suspect among the literate members of West­
ern society” (p. 107). McLuhan felt that in numbers a “mass mind” (p. 107) was 
constructed by the elites in society to establish a “profile of the crowd” (p. 106). 
Therefore, it may be possible to create a homogenized population, capable of 
being influenced.
In addition to numbers, McLuhan looks at games in society as mediated. He 
observes that “games are popular art, collective, social reactions to the main drive or 
action of any culture” (p. 235). Games are ways to cope with everyday stresses and, 
McLuhan notes, they are models of our psychological lives. He further argues that 
“all games are media of interpersonal communication” (p. 237), which are exten­
sions of our social selves. Games become mass media because they allow for people 
to simultaneously participate in an activity that is generally fun and games that rep­
resent an individual’s identity. Today, as you consider the various online and video 
games available to you (e.g., Xbox), it is not surprising that McLuhan’s insights still 
retain relevancy since these games elicit a variety of emotions, including anger, ridi­
cule, joy, among others. 
An additional mediated form is money. McLuhan concludes that “like any other 
medium, it is a staple, a natural resource” (p. 133). The theorist also calls money a 
“corporate image” that relies on society for its status and sustenance. Money has 
some sort of magical power that allows people access. Money allows people to travel 
the globe, serving as transmitters of knowledge, infor­mation, and culture. McLuhan 
notes that money is really a language that ­communicates to a diverse group, includ­
ing farmers, engineers, plumbers, and physicians.
McLuhan, then, contends that media—interpreted in the broadest sense—are 
ever present in our lives. These media transform our society, whether through the 
games we play, the radios we listen to, or the televisions we watch. At the same time, 
media depend on society for “interplay and evolution” (p. 49).
A second assumption of Media Ecology Theory relates to our previous discus­
sion: We are directly influenced by media. Although we alluded to this influence 
previously, let’s be more specific about how McLuhan views the influence of media 
in our lives.
Media Ecology theorists believe that media help to alter perceptions and orga­
nize our lives. McLuhan suggests here that media are quite powerful in our views of 
the world. Consider, for instance, what occurs when we watch television. If television 
news reports that the United States is experiencing a “moral meltdown,” we may be 
watching stories on child abductions, illegal drug use, or teen pregnancies. In our 
private conversations, we may begin to talk about the lack of morals in society. In 
fact, we may begin to live our lives according to the types of stories we watch (we 
address this notion in detail in Chapter 23). We may be more suspicious of even 
friendly strangers, fearing they may try to kidnap our child. We may be unwilling to 
support laws legalizing medicinal marijuana, regardless of their merits, because we 

	
Assumptions of Media Ecology Theory     441
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
are concerned about possible increases in drug activity. We may also aggressively 
advocate an “abstinence-only” sex education program in schools, fearing that any 
other model would cause more unwanted pregnancies.
What occurs with each of these examples is what McLuhan asserts ­happens all 
the time: We become (sometimes unwittingly) manipulated by ­television. Our at­
titudes and experiences are directly influenced by what we watch on television, and 
our belief systems apparently can be negatively affected by television. Some writers 
(e.g., Bugeja, 2005) contend that McLuhan perceived television as instrumental to 
the erosion of family values. 
A third assumption of Media Ecology Theory has elicited quite a bit of popular 
conversation: Media connect the world. McLuhan used the phrase global village 
to describe how media tie the world into one great political, economic, social, and 
cultural system. Recall that although the phrase is ­almost a cliché these days, (there 
are hundreds of millions of results on a Google search, for instance), it was McLuhan 
who argued that the media can organize societies socially. Electronic media, in par­
ticular, have the ­ability to bridge cultures that would not have communicated prior 
to this ­connection.
The effect of this global village, according to McLuhan (1964), is the ability to 
receive information instantaneously (an issue we return to later in the chapter). As a 
result, we should be concerned with global events, rather than remaining focused on 
our own communities. He observes that “the globe is no more than a village” (p. 5) 
and that we should feel responsible for others. ­Others “are now involved in our lives, 
as we in theirs, thanks to the electric media” (p. 5).
Let’s revisit our chapter-opening example of Professor Randall to illustrate this 
assumption further. It is clear that a presentation to a group of international scholars 
requires an understanding of various global issues. Further, given that her presen­
tation is in Costa Rica, Randall felt that it was important to get some understand­
ing of how local citizens utilize social media. She consulted both the Internet and 
her colleague in Central America. Further, consider the fact that both Bella and 
Margaret watched the U.S. presidential debates, shrinking the distance between the 
two countries and the events that take place in those countries. All of these efforts 
would not have been possible if technology (telephone and computers) was not 
available. 
The global village of Marshall McLuhan follows the General Systems per­
spective we outlined in Chapter 3. You will recall that Systems theorists believe 
that one part of a system will affect the entire system. Media Ecology theorists 
believe that the action of one society will necessarily affect the entire global 
village. Therefore, such things as wars in Africa and economic strife in Europe 
affect the United States, Australia, and China. According to McLuhan, we can 
no longer live in isolation because of “electronic interdependence” (McLuhan & 
Fiore, 1996).
You have now been introduced to the primary assumptions of MET. McLuhan’s 
theory relies heavily on a historical understanding of media. He asserts that the 
media of a particular time period were instrumental in organizing societies. He 
identifies four distinct time periods, or epochs, in history (Table 26.1). We address 
them next.
global village 
the notion that  
humans can no 
longer live in  
isolation, but rather 
will always be  
connected by  
continuous and 
instantaneous  
electronic media
epoch
era or historical age

442     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
Making Media History and Making “Sense”
McLuhan (1962, 1964) and Quentin Fiore (McLuhan & Fiore, 1967, 1996) claim 
that the media of an era define the essence of a society. They present four eras, 
or epochs, in media history, each of which corresponds to the dominant mode of 
communication of the time (Sparks, 2016). In one of the more provocative claims, 
McLuhan contends that media act as extensions of the human senses in each era, 
and communication (technology) is the primary cause of social change (gingkopress
.com/02-mcl/z_mcluhan-and-the-senses.html).
The Tribal Era
According to McLuhan, during the tribal era, hearing, smell, and taste were the 
dominant senses. During this time, McLuhan argues, cultures were “ear-centered” in 
that people heard with no real ability to censor messages. This era was characterized 
by the oral tradition of storytelling whereby people revealed their traditions, rituals, 
and values through the spoken word. In this era, the ear became the sensory “tribal 
chief” and for people, hearing was believing.
tribal era
age when oral  
tradition was  
embraced and 
hearing was the 
paramount sense
Table 26.1  McLuhan’s Media History
HISTORICAL 
EPOCH
PROMINENT TECHNOLOGY/ 
DOMINANT SENSE
McLUHAN’S COMMENTS
Tribal Era
Face-to-Face Contact/Hearing
“An oral or tribal society has the 
means of stability far beyond 
­anything possible to a visual or 
­civilized and fragmented world” 
(McLuhan & Fiore, 1968, p. 23).
Literate Era
Phonetic Alphabet/Seeing
“Western man [woman] has done 
little to study or to understand 
the effects of the phonetic 
alphabet in creating many of his 
[her] basic patterns of culture” 
(McLuhan, 1964, p. 82).
Print Era
Printing Press/Seeing
“Perhaps the most significant of 
the gifts of typography to man 
[woman] is that of detachment and 
noninvolvement—the power to act 
without reacting” (McLuhan, 1964, 
p. 173).
Electronic 
Era
Computer/Seeing, Hearing, 
Touching
“The computer is by all odds the 
most extraordinary of all the 
tech­nological clothing ever 
devised . . . since it is the 
extension of our cen­tral nervous 
system” (McLuhan & Fiore, 1968, 
p. 35).

	
Making Media History and Making “Sense”     443
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
The Literate Era
This epoch, emphasized by the visual sense, was marked by the introduction of the 
alphabet. The eye became the dominant sensory organ. McLuhan and Fiore (1996) 
state that the alphabet caused people to look at their environment in visual and spa­
tial terms. McLuhan (1964) also maintains that the alphabet made knowledge more 
accessible and “shattered the bonds of tribal man” (p. 173). Whereas the tribal era 
was characterized by people speaking, the ­literate era was a time when written com­
munication flourished. People’s messages became centered on linear and rational 
thinking. Out was storytelling; in were mathematics and other forms of analytic 
logic. This “scribal world” had the unintended consequence of forcing communities 
to become more individualistic rather than collectivistic (McLuhan & Fiore, 1967). 
People were able to get their information without help from their communities. This 
was the beginning of people communicating without the need to be face to face.
The Print Era
The invention of the printing press heralded the print era in civilization and the be­
ginning of the Industrial Revolution. Although it was possible to do a great deal of 
printing by woodcut prior to this era, the printing press made it possible to make cop­
ies of essays, books, and announcements. This provided for even more permanency 
of record than in the literate age. The printing press also allowed people other than the 
elite to gain access to information. Today, think about self-publishing and its implica­
tions as you think about this era. Then, as today, with printing, people didn’t have to 
rely on their memories for information as they had to do in the past. Publication made 
it possible for permanency of record to be achieved.
McLuhan (1964) observes that the book was “the first teaching machine”
(p. 174). Consider his words today. Very few courses in college exist without a text­
book. Even with technological teaching approaches such as distance learning or inter­
active television, the large majority of courses still require textbooks. Books remain 
indispensable in the teaching–learning process.
Exemplifying the print era more specifically, McLuhan writes:
Margaret Mead has reported that when she brought several copies of the same 
book to a Pacific island there was great excitement. The natives had seen 
books, but only one copy of each, which they had assumed to be unique. Their 
astonishment at the identical character of several books was a natural response 
to what is after all the most magical and potent aspect of print and mass 
production. It involves a principle of extension by homogenization that is the 
key to understanding Western power. (p. 174)
What McLuhan notes here is that mass production produces citizens who are similar 
to each other. The same content is delivered over and over again by the same means. 
This visual-dependent era, however, produced a fragmented population because peo­
ple could remain in isolation reading their mass-produced media. 
The Electronic Era
The age we live in now is electronic. Interestingly, McLuhan (1964) and his col­
league (McLuhan & Fiore, 1967) note that this epoch, characterized by the telegraph, 
literate era
age when written 
communication 
flourished and the 
eye became the 
dominant sense 
organ
print era
the age when 
gaining information 
through the printed 
word was  
customary, and  
seeing continued as 
the dominant sense

444     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
telephone, typewriter, radio, and television, has brought us back to tribalization and the 
art of oral communication. Instead of books being the central repository of information, 
electronic media decentralized information to the extent that individuals are now one 
of several primary sources of information. This era has returned us to a primitive-like 
reliance on talking to one another although as we know, some would argue that the art 
of conversation has really been lost (Turkle, 2015). Today, though, we define talking 
differently than the way it occurred in the tribal era. We talk through television, radio, 
books on tape, voice mail, cell phones, blogs, and email. The electronic era allows dif­
ferent communities in different parts of the world to remain connected, a concept we 
discussed previously as the global village.
McLuhan (1964) relates a description of various technologies in the electronic 
age:
The telephone: speech without walls.
The phonograph: music hall without walls. 
The photograph: museum without walls.
The electric light: space without walls.
The movie, radio, and TV: classroom without walls. (p. 283)
The electronic era presents unique opportunities to reevaluate how media 
influence the people they serve. This age allows for ear and eye and voice to 
work together. 
This historical presentation of media by McLuhan suggests that the primary 
media of an age prompts a certain sensory reaction in people. McLuhan and Fiore 
(1968) theorize that a ratio of the senses is required by people, which is a conversa­
tion of sorts between and among the senses. That is, a balance of the senses is re­
quired, regardless of the time in history. For instance, with the Internet, we reconcile 
a variety of senses, including visual stimulation of website pictures and the auditory 
arousal of downloaded music. When we develop online relationships, we already 
know that our nonverbal communication is severely limited (for more on this infor­
mation, see Chapter 13 on Social Information Processing Theory).
The Medium Is the Message
Media Ecology Theory is perhaps best known for the catchphrase “the medium is 
the message” (McLuhan, 1964), a “humble and fascinating” phrase (Hodge, 2003, 
p. 342). Although followers of McLuhan continue to debate the precise meaning 
of this equation, it appears to represent McLuhan’s scholarly values: The content 
of a mediated message is secondary to the medium (or communication channel). 
The medium has the ability to change how we think about ­others, ourselves, and the 
world around us. So, for instance, in our opening ­example of Professor Randall, what 
she and Marcus communicated is less important than that they communicated via a 
computer, the Internet, and email.
McLuhan does not dismiss the importance of content altogether. Rather, as 
Paul Levinson (2001) points out, McLuhan argues that content gets our attention 
more than the medium does. McLuhan thinks that although a message affects our 
electronic era
age in which  
electronic media 
pervades our 
senses, allowing for 
people across the 
world to be  
connected
ratio of the senses 
phrase referring 
to the way people 
adapt to their  
environment
the medium is the 
message 
phrase referring 
to the power and 
influence of the 
medium—not the 
content—on a 
society

	
Gauging the Temperature: Hot and Cool Media     445
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
conscious state, it is the medium that largely affects our unconscious state. So, for 
example, we often unconsciously embrace television as a medium while receiving 
a message broadcast around the world. Consider the fact that the 2001 terrorist at­
tacks in New York City, Hurricane Katrina’s devastating effects in 2005, the 2013 
Boston Marathon bombings, and the 2016 flow of Syrian immigrants to Europe were 
reported not only immediately after the events but, in some cases, during the events. 
Many of us went to TV immediately and were captivated by the horror and the im­
ages as they occurred. We were pretty much unconscious of the medium, but rather 
consumed with the message. Nonetheless, we turned to television and our laptops 
again and again for updates as the days and months ­progressed, rather unaware of 
its importance in our lives. This represents McLuhan’s hypothesis that the medium 
shapes the message and it is, ironically enough, our unawareness of the medium that 
makes a message all the more ­important.
McLuhan and Fiore (1967) claim that in addition to the medium being the mes­
sage, the medium is the “massage.” By changing one letter, they creatively present 
readers with another view of media. It’s not clear whether the authors were making a 
pun on the “mass-age” or whether they were reinforcing McLuhan’s earlier writings 
on the power of the media. McLuhan and Fiore argue that not only are we influenced 
by the media, but we can become seduced by it. As a population, we are entranced with 
new technologies. For instance, it is now customary for national media such as the New 
York Times and USA Today to feature special sections on technology and culture. New 
gadgets, gizmos, and technological inventions (and their prices) are featured for those 
desiring the latest. Indeed, the medium massages the masses, is part of the “mess-age” 
(McLuhan & Parker, 1969), and can be understood in a “mass-age” (McLuhan & 
Nevitt, 1972). James Morrison (2006) sums it up by stating that “‘the medium is the 
message’ because the contents of a medium vary and may even be contradictory, but 
the medium’s effects remain the same, no matter what the content” (p. 178).
We have presented several key assumptions and issues associated with MET. We 
have also discussed media in very broad terms. McLuhan says that some unifying 
and systematic way of differentiating media is necessary. The result is an interesting 
analysis of hot and cool media.
Gauging the Temperature: Hot and Cool Media
To understand the “large structural changes in human outlook” (McLuhan, 1964, 
p. vi) of the 1960s, McLuhan set out to classify media. He explains that media can 
be classified as either hot or cool, language he borrowed from jazz slang. This clas­
sification system remains confounding to many scholars, and yet it is pivotal to the 
theory. We distinguish between the two media next and provide examples of each 
in Figure 26.1.
Hot media are described as media that demand little from a listener, reader, or 
viewer. Hot media are high-definition communications that have relatively complete 
sensory data; very little is left to the audience’s imagination. Hot media, therefore, 
are low in audience participation. Meaning is essentially provided. An example of a 
hot medium is a movie, because it requires very little of us. We sit down, watch the 
film, react, maybe eat some popcorn, and then watch the credits. Hot media provide 
hot media
high-definition 
communication 
that demands little 
involvement from a 
viewer, listener, or 
reader

446     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
the audience what they need—in this case, entertainment. Today, one could state that 
tweeting a 140-character does not require high sensory involvement.
McLuhan believes that radio is a hot medium. He acknowledges that radio can 
serve as background sound, as noise-level control, or for listening pleasure. Little 
involvement is needed with radio. However, McLuhan wrote before the proliferation 
of radio talk shows such as Rush Limbaugh, a bombastic radio host. Given the audi­
ence engagement today in much of talk radio, we need to think about McLuhan’s era 
rather than our contemporary day.
Unlike hot media, cool media require a high degree of participation; they are 
low definition. Little is provided by the medium, so much has to be filled in by the 
listener, reader, or viewer. Cool media require audiences to create meaning through 
high sensory and imaginative involvement. Consider, for instance, cartoons. Gener­
ally, we get a few frames of illustrations and perhaps some brief phrases. Cartoons 
are low definition and provide very little visual information. We need to determine 
the meaning of the words and the pictures, and even supply missing words or ideas 
that are not provided in the cartoon.
Let’s make one more point about cool media. Interestingly, McLuhan (1964) 
contends that television can be considered a cool medium. He argues that TV is a 
medium that requires viewers to be actively involved. In fact, he notes that television 
“engages you. You have to be with it” (p. 312). Yet with the digital age upon us, 
television has taken on new meaning that perhaps even McLuhan could never have 
imagined. Would he still consider television a cool medium today? As we think about 
current forms of hot media, Facebook, with its uploading of images and pictures, 
“friending” of others, iChatting, and “liking” requires more sensory involvement, 
thereby exemplifying a modern-day example of cool media.
Let’s provide you two different examples of hot and cool media. First, McLuhan 
believed that a marked difference exists between a lecture and seminar. A lecture is 
determined to be hot because generally, it encompasses a person standing before a 
cool media 
low-definition  
communication that 
demands active 
involvement from a 
viewer, listener, or 
reader
Radio
Movies
Film
Lectures
Books
Twitter
Digital
photographs
Cartoons
Television
YouTube
Conversations
Seminars
Facebook
Telephone
COOL MEDIA
HOT MEDIA
Figure 26.1
Examples of 
McLuhan’s Hot 
and Cool Media

	
The Circle Is Complete: The Tetrad     447
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
large group talking. It requires little except to listen to the information. A seminar, 
however, is cool, smaller in nature with the discussion leader facilitating questions 
and participants sharing ideas and life experiences. 
McLuhan also differentiated between hot and cool media using the 1960 
presidential debates between John F. Kennedy and Richard Nixon. McLuhan 
discovered that for those who watched the debate on television, Kennedy had won 
because he exuded an objective, cool persona, perfect for the cool medium. For those 
who listened to the debates on the radio (a hot medium), Nixon was the winner. He 
was considered hot (which, in fact, his sweating showed he was!). So, the medium 
influences others’ perceptions. 
Arthur Asa Berger (2007) notes that McLuhan’s thinking pertaining to hot and 
cool media is prompting more research interest as communication theorists try to 
understand the passion that people have for their cell phones. As the 21st century 
continues, we need to be cautious in interpreting hot and cool media in straightfor­
ward ways. For instance, multitasking (tweeting and watching television at the same 
time) makes a distinction between hot and cool media more difficult. Moreover, as 
we try to categorize various forms of (social) media as either hot or cool, we need 
to remind ourselves of David Bobbit: “McLuhan was not concerned with provid­
ing consistent, linear meanings of the terms ‘hot’ versus ‘cool’ media. For him, it 
was the effect the medium had that he was trying to get at” (http://enculturation.net/
teaching-mcluhan).
The Circle Is Complete: The Tetrad
We continue our discussion of Media Ecology Theory by examining the most recent 
expansion of McLuhan’s thinking about the media. With his son, Eric (McLuhan & 
McLuhan, 1988), and to respond to those who believed that there was no scientific 
grounding in his work, McLuhan developed a way to look further into the effects of 
technology on society. His expansion of the theory included a thorough discussion 
of the laws of media.
Although McLuhan’s earlier work identified in this chapter does not fully take 
into account the advent of the computer, his posthumous work with his son takes 
into consideration the influence of the Internet. Their work was an effort to bring 
the theory full circle: Technology affects communication through new technol­
ogy, the impact of the new technology affects society, and the changes in society 
cause further changes in technology. McLuhan and McLuhan offer the tetrad as an 
organizing concept that allows scholars to understand the past, present, and current 
effects of media.
To give us a new way of looking at the role of technology in our culture, McLuhan 
and McLuhan offer four laws, phrased as questions, to understand technology: (1) What 
do media enhance? (2) What do media make obsolete? (3) What do media retrieve? (4) 
What do media reverse? Each of these is aligned with the Media Effects research that 
we articulated in Chapter 23 (Uses and Gratifications). Let’s examine and identify ex­
amples of their roles in culture (Table 26.2). We pay particular ­attention to the role of 
the Internet in our discussion.
laws of media 
further expansion 
of Media Ecology 
Theory with focus 
on the impact of 
technology on 
society
tetrad 
organizing concept 
to understand the 
laws of media

448     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
Enhancement
The first law of media is enhancement; that is, media enhance or amplify ­society. 
The telephone enhanced the spoken word found in face-to-face ­conversations. Radio, 
of course, amplified the voice across distance. Television amplified the word and the 
visual across continents.
The Internet has enhanced society in different ways. First, it has the ­poten­tial 
to enhance a number of senses, including sight and sound. Second, the existence of 
the Internet has enhanced the accessibility of information. For instance, we can now 
obtain birth records, credit card balances, and missing person information over the 
Internet. Third, the Internet can enhance class ­division. The “haves and the have-nots” 
exist along this information superhighway. Finally, decentralization of authority is 
enhanced by the Internet. People have access to information and events that years ago, 
were completely out of reach. Further, no longer do our political, scientific, or cor­
porate leaders solely possess information; that information becomes available online.
Obsolescence
McLuhan and McLuhan (1988) note that the second law of media is that media even­
tually render something obsolete or out of date. Television made radio obsolete, al­
though many of us continue to turn to radio each day while we drive. Levinson (2001) 
notes that radio rendered motion pictures obsolete, which in turn resulted in fewer 
movies to watch. DVRs may have also attempted to make movies obsolete, but we 
know that their efforts have been only somewhat successful.
The Internet, too, has brought about obsolescence. For example, as we learned ear­
lier, the global village now exists, thanks to the Internet. The geographical splits are pretty 
hard to find; even the remote villages of Africa are becoming accessible by the Internet. 
Second, the Internet is slowly targeting micromedia (specific audiences) rather than mac­
romedia (large masses), thereby making traditional media outlets such as CBS, NBC, and 
ABC change their news reporting. Finally, face-to-face dialogues are becoming outdated 
with the Internet. Former “tribal” conversations are now electronically derived.
Retrieval
The third law is retrieval, meaning that media recover or restore something that was 
once lost. What older, previously obsolesced media is brought back? Television, for 
enhancement
law that states 
media amplify or 
strengthen society
obsolescence
law that states 
media eventually 
render something 
obsolete or out of 
date
retrieval
law that states 
media restore 
something that was 
once lost
Table 26.2  Laws of Media
LAWS OF MEDIA
DESCRIPTION
Enhancement
What does the medium enhance or amplify?
Obsolescence
What does the medium push aside or make obsolete?
Retrieval
What does the medium retrieve from the past?
Reversal
When pushed to its limits, what does the medium reverse or 
flip into?

	
The Circle Is Complete: The Tetrad     449
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
instance, restored the importance of the visual that radio did not achieve, but that 
was once in face-to-face conversations. Radio retrieved the town crier, the prominent 
voice of newsworthy events nearly 200 years ago in the United States. Print retrieved 
the tribe’s universality of knowledge. And the Internet recovers a community that 
was once lost to other media. For instance, chat rooms visited by people like Profes­
sor Randall from our chapter-opening vignette have electronically rekindled conver­
sations that flourished before radio and television.
Reversal
When “pushed to the limit of its potential” (McLuhan & McLuhan, 1988, p. 99), 
what do media produce or become? What do media reverse into? When too many 
constraints exist on a medium, it will “overheat” and become ­inef­fective. Reversal 
contains characteristics of the system from which it arose. For instance, the public’s 
desire to have access to entertainment in a relatively cheap medium led to the creation 
of radio dramas and comedy programs. The need to “see” what was heard led to the 
creation of these programs on ­television. Yet we can DVR television programs and 
what was once seen by millions of people at the same time is reversed into private 
“performances.” Television, then, reversed into the early days of the print era when 
people could consume media privately.
reversal
law that states 
media will—when 
pushed to their 
limit—produce or 
become something 
else
Theory-Into-Practice
Theoretical Claim: The “Medium is the Message”: The media’s format—perhaps even 
more than the message itself—affects and changes people and society.
Practical Claim: Anastasia was interested in learning more about the surrender of 
the Germans in 1945. She started in the library and reviewed some books and peri­
odicals on the topic. Then she sat down and went online to Google to see how vari­
ous websites introduced the subject. Finally, she went to YouTube and watched a 
Combat Camera Unit Video of the surrender as it happened. Each mediated option 
was valuable and Anastasia found one to be more compelling than the next.
T*I*P
Student Voices
Olga
When I read about the “global village,” considering that McLuhan wrote about this in 
the 1960s, I thought it was amazing! Here’s this pretty zany guy who over 
50 years ago was writing about how we are connected with the rest of the world. 
And he was right! As someone who has lived in four countries, I have turned on the 
TV, gone to a website, or blogged about what is happening around the world. We 
are all connected more than ever, and McLuhan knew this before anyone else did.

450     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
The Internet—as a medium pushed to its potential—reverses society into a new 
and unique place. The Internet has the potential to bring tribal people ­together when 
they discuss websites or chat room conversations with one another. Looking at the 
number of people who “surf the net” each day alone, the Internet can isolate people 
just as television can. Also, with the ability to download music, television shows, and 
films, the Internet—specifically iTunes and Hulu—has reversed itself into a medium 
with significant visual and auditory appeal. Finally, the Internet is a medium that 
“flips” on its user. That is, although it can serve to erode power, it can also perpetuate 
power differences among people. As a result, the Internet provides opportunities for 
both those in power and those who seek power or who are powerless.
Finally, to exemplify a tetrad using a 2014 CBS News report on driverless auto­
mobiles, Eric McLuhan (Zhuang & McLuhan, 2016) identified a tetrad that may help 
you better understand it. Specifically, he stated:
Enhances: AUTOnomy.
Obsolesces: control(ler).
Retrieves: car as robot.
Reversal: driver becomes passenger (p. 223). Clearly, as you think about cul­
tural issues, you most likely can also develop a tetrad in much the same way 
McLuhan did. 
Carrying the McLuhan Banner: Postman and Meyrowitz
The former president of the Media Ecology Association believes that thinking about 
McLuhan is like taking part in a “moveable feast” in that “if you are lucky enough to 
have encountered McLuhan’s legacy, wherever you go for the rest of your life, his 
legacy stays with you” (Sternberg, 2011, p. 111). Although score of scholars identify 
and accept the tenets of Media Ecology Theory, two influential scholars are of partic­
ular note. Neil Postman and Joshua Meyrowitz were dedicated scholarly followers of 
McLuhan. Although each retained much of the ­values related to McLuhan’s writings, 
each scholar adapted an individual lens as they talked about technology. We close our 
discussion with an overview of these two “McLuhanites.”
Neil Postman’s biography is an interesting one and is available elsewhere (http://
neilpostman.org). Still, let’s give you a glimpse into his credentials. 
As Thomas Gencarelli (2006) observes, “Postman is first and foremost an edu­
cator” (p. 239). Indeed, most of his books pertain to public education in the United 
States and in many cases, his writing is quite satirical. In some cases, he encourages 
changes to the educational system by stating that it needs to be revitalized. Nowhere 
can that revitalization occur other than with an infusion of technology, according to 
Postman. The media environment, he believes, helps shape children’s lives. Televi­
sion, in particular, is ripe for allowing young people to be exposed to all sorts of 
information that was originally intended for adults. This conflation of the child and 
adult worlds is an ongoing concern for Postman.
Postman is clearly a man who practices what he preaches. Jim Benning (2003) 
relates a relevant anecdote. Postman is deeply concerned about technology’s ­imprint 
in society. He states, “The tendency of American culture [is] to turn over to technology 

	
Carrying the McLuhan Banner: Postman and Meyrowitz     451
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
sovereignty, command, control over all our social institutions” (http://www.c-span.org
/video/?7-1/life-career-neil-postman122756). In shopping for a new car, Postman has 
been quoted as ­saying, “Why do I need electric windows? My arm and hand work. If I 
were paralyzed I could use an electric window.” His colleague and friend note that “Neil 
would always take what he would call an ecological perspective, a balanced view.”
Postman has written more than 200 articles for the public and over 20 popu­
lar and scholarly books. Postman’s research is underscored by a central theme: “All 
technologies are human impositions into the natural order of things and, as a re­
sult, change that order” (Gencarelli, 2006, p. 244). Among the most influential of 
his published works is Technopoly: The Surrender of Culture to Technology. In the 
book, Postman (1992) hypothesizes that ­technology negatively changes the fabric of 
society. Specifically, he believes that culture is subservient to the invisible (e.g., I.Q. 
scores) and visible (e.g., computers). 
Postman coined the term technopoly, which means that we live in a culture in 
which technology dominates our thinking and behaviors. In a technopoly, Postman ar­
gues, technological tools serve to take over the culture in which they thrive. We live in 
a society where being technologically driven may result in being driven mad! We trust 
that our technology will bring us safety and ­salvation, and seem to lose any sense of hu­
mility, discipline, and rationality regarding our reliance on and trust in current media. 
As a result, Postman laments that “tradition, social mores, myth, politics, ritual, and 
religion have to fight for their lives” (p. 28). Postman, like McLuhan, asks whether we 
want to live in a culture with such unwavering dependence on technology and such a 
conclusion has led scholars to call him a “pillar of media ecology” (Strate, 2004, p. 3). 
In addition to Postman, Joshua Meyrowitz’s (1985) research interconnects with 
McLuhan’s work. Meyrowitz’s No Sense of Place ushered in a unique way of thinking 
related to space. First, he argues that space is more than physical (Dresner, 2006). That 
is, social situations such as contesting a parking ticket at city hall include more than 
the physical surroundings of the building and courtroom. Meyrowitz contends that the 
influence that communication has on the situation also needs to be considered.
As a communication scholar, Meyrowitz is interested in uncovering the effects 
of communication technology, primarily television, on a social situation. Consider, 
for instance, a private discussion between a husband and wife on marital infidel­
ity. The discussion is likely to be free-wheeling, underscoring the intimacy that the 
couple shares. Now, put that discussion in front of a live Dr. Phil television audience. 
A new pattern of communication will likely begin, with different information flow 
and new rules of conduct. It is this new communication medium that Meyrowitz is 
interested in and one that has cultural consequences. 
Meyrowitz agrees with McLuhan that electronic media have social consequences. 
Meyrowitz expands the notion that power relations and social class can be traced to 
electronic media. He draws on sociology research to conclude that media have brought 
about a blurring of formerly distinct roles or places. He states that “many Americans 
may no longer seem to ‘know their place’ because the traditionally interlocking com­
ponents of ‘place’ have been split apart by electronic media. Wherever one is now—at 
home, at work, or in the car—one may be in touch and tuned in” (p. 308).
As noted earlier, Meyrowitz points to television for evidence of the “blurring.” 
For instance, examine talk shows and you can get a sense of how the blurring of 
place occurs. What was once private (e.g., discussing your mother’s alcoholism) is 
technopoly 
a term coined by 
Postman that means 
we live in a society 
dominated by  
technology

452     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
now public on Maury Povich. Even television programming has blurred gender lines; 
shows like RuPaul’s Drag Race presents gendered images that do not fit neatly into 
preconceived notions of masculinity and femininity.
The writings of both Postman and Meyrowitz remain effective examples of 
Marshall McLuhan’s legacy. The two carry the banner that boldly proclaims that 
electronic media have shaken Western society’s foundation and many of its core 
values. Clearly, the two scholars prompt us to consider McLuhan’s work in more 
contemporary ways. Even after more than a century after his birth, McLuhan remains 
relevant (siliconvalleywatcher.com/mt/archives/2011/07/the_importance_2.php). 
Integration, Critique, and Closing
You probably have already figured out that Marshall McLuhan has caused quite 
a reaction in both academic and public circles. His ideas are provocative, and at 
times, have been both unilaterally dismissed and embraced. In fact, if you reviewed 
his original work, you may be challenged by his frequently eccentric writing style. 
Some have labeled his thinking “McLuhanacy” (Gordon, 1982), while others feel his 
writing is equivalent to “genre bending” (Carey, 1998). Without doubt, however, the 
research undertaken by Media Ecology theorists has been qualitative and rarely, if 
ever, has a study been undertaken experimentally using the theory as a foundation.
McLuhan’s work and reputation, however, have been invoked with con­siderable 
regard. Let’s provide you a snapshot of the kudos celebrating McLuhan. Wired maga­
zine named him their “patron saint,” and Life magazine called him the “Oracle of the 
Electronic Age.” A concentration in McLuhan studies exists at the University of To­
ronto. In addition, there is a McLuhan newsletter, the International Journal of McLuhan 
Studies, symposia on McLuhan’s research, a McLuhan festival, a McLuhan reading club, 
and even a secondary high school in Canada named the Marshall McLuhan Catholic 
­Secondary School. Finally, the San Francisco Chronicle once called him “the hottest 
academic property around.” It’s hard to escape his influence both in research and in soci­
eties around the world. The theory, despite its popularity, has been evaluated by scholars 
and writers. We examine these critiques using the criteria of testability and heurism.
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical 
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     453
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
Testability
MET has been criticized because many of its concepts are difficult to understand, 
thereby making testability of the theory challenging and, indeed, nearly impossible 
(Gordon & Willmarth, 2012). The question becomes apparent: How does one test 
something one has trouble understanding?
Criticism pertaining to the testability of the theory is represented in comments 
that have been offered by media scholars over the years. For instance, critics have 
blasted MET as “overly optimistic” about the role of technology in society (Baran & 
Davis, 2016). They believe that McLuhan put too much emphasis on how much 
technology influences society, making the very foundation of the theory rather 
shaky. George Gordon (1982) is more direct: “Not one bit of sustained and 
replicated scientific evidence, inductive or deductive, has to date justified any 
one of McLuhan’s most famous slogans, metaphors, or dicta” (p. 42). Dwight 
Macdonald (1967) also attacked McLuhan’s writing, noting that “he has looted 
all culture from cave painting to Mad magazine for fragments to shore up his 
system against ruin” (p. 203).
A great deal of criticism has been directed at McLuhan’s use of words and his 
clarity. To some, his ideas make little sense. Some writers believe that McLuhan 
failed to define his words carefully and used too much exaggeration. Yet some be­
lieve that his exaggerations were simply “ploys” to get the attention of his readers 
and students (Logan, 2011, p. 28). It is true that McLuhan tended to write in a zigzag 
fashion, weaving in one point after another with no apparent topic ­sentence or sus­
tained idea. One website author believed that his writing was “overgrown with ar­
cane literary and historic allusions” (nextnature.net/ 2009/12/the-playboy-interview
-marshall-mcluhan). Yet, another believed that McLuhan simply dismissed any criti­
cism since he felt that “clear prose indicates the absence of thought” (http://www
.thenewatlantis.com/publications/why-bother-with-marshall-mcluhan). 
Although it’s clear that some writers indict his thinking and theorizing, McLuhan 
(1967) offers no apology: “I don’t explain—I explore” (p. i). Or, perhaps McLuhan’s 
one line in Annie Hall may offer his ultimate response to critics: “You know nothing 
of my work!”
Heurism
Media Ecology Theory and McLuhan’s thinking have been met with considerable 
enthusiasm. Because McLuhan was a key figure in popular culture, it’s important 
to keep in mind that his writing prompted all sorts of responses. One indicator of 
the heuristic value of MET is the fact that there is now a Media Ecology Associa­
tion (media-ecology.org). This organization is dedicated to promoting the theory 
in both practical and theoretical ways, thereby ensuring the theory’s visibility. The 
association publishes a journal (EME: Explorations in Media Ecology) dedicated to 
the theory, a testimony to the fact that media communication scholars continue to 
integrate the theory into their research. There is even an “official estate” of McLuhan 
“to ensure the integrity of his name and legacy” (http://www.marshallmcluhan.com). 
The site is quite interesting with an entire section devoted to “McLuhanisms” (e.g., 
“All advertising advertises advertising,” etc.).

454     Chapter 26  •  Media Ecology Theory
M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
Researchers have discussed McLuhan and his contributions in a variety of 
ways. Scholars have provided a comprehensive understanding of the theory and 
have discussed the theory’s influential pioneers (Lum, 2006) and some have 
“taken up McLuhan’s cause” (Anton, Logan, & Strate, 2016). Additional writ­
ers over the years have applied several of McLuhan’s premises in their research 
(Strate & Wachtel, 2005). Furthermore, many of the theory’s concepts have been 
incorporated into research on such diverse topics as school shootings (O’Dea, 
2015), online racism (August & Liu, 2015), and YouTube as “cool” media 
(Trier, 2007). 
Finally, in what could be considered to be a 21st century response to McLuhan’s 
20th century theory, the thinking and research of Sherri Turkle (2015) sustains much 
of what Media Ecologists advance. In her book Reclaiming Conversation: The Power 
of Talk in the Digital Age, Turkle contends that technology has allowed us to make 
connections, but we are rarely communicating. She espouses one of the fundamental 
tenets of media ecologists: “The forms and biases of our media technologies impact 
our everyday lives” (Zimmer, 2005, p. 5). Turkle, for example, contends that social 
media such as Facebook has resulted in so much “friending” and yet, surveys show 
that most people report having fewer friends than ever. She is clear in stating that 
while “mobile technology . . . is here to stay,” it’s time that we also understand that “it 
is time for us to consider how it may get in the way of other things that we hold dear” 
(e.g., intimacy, community, etc.) (p. 7). In sum, one cannot ignore Turkle’s belief that 
new technologies are preventing ­authentic human connections. Further, she believes 
that “technological promiscuity,” or the belief that technology can be introduced into 
any setting or environment, is already part of corporate life in the United States.
Closing
Marshall McLuhan and Media Ecology Theory will continue to resonate for years 
to come. Perhaps one day we will revisit McLuhan’s original thinking on histori­
cal epochs in media history! New media will continue to evolve in our ­society and 
so will the application of McLuhan’s thinking. Was McLuhan an ­absurd reaction­
ary? Or was McLuhan a cultural prophet? On his gravestone are the words “The 
Truth Will Set You Free.” Did McLuhan think he discovered Truth? Or, even in his 
death, does he continue to play with our imaginations? Perhaps one of McLuhan’s 
biographers, Philip Marchand (1989), best illustrates McLuhan’s contribution to the 
study of media: “McLuhan’s comments had at least one virtue: They seemed to sug­
gest that the world was more interesting than any of us had previously thought it to 
be” (p. xiii).
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: The medium we use to communicate was of paramount 
importance to McLuhan as he developed Media Ecology Theory. If McLuhan 
and Mark Zuckerberg (founder of Facebook) had lunch today, what do you 
think the two would talk about today?

M E D I A  E C O L O G Y  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     455
	
1. Discuss whether you believe that Professor Randall should rely less on tech­
nology in preparing her speech and more on her life experiences. Is there too much 
reliance, for instance, with her consultation of the Internet databases, chat rooms, 
Skype, and email?
	
2. Describe how Media Ecology theorists might react to the current news on 
television today? What would be his major criticisms and his major objections? 
What would he be particularly interested in?
	
3. Do you agree or disagree with McLuhan regarding television being a cool 
medium? Use examples to defend your view.
	
4. Interpret and comment on the following statement: “Technology is the end 
of our beginning.” Use examples to defend your view.
	
5. Discuss your response to theorists who choose to be part of the popular 
culture, including participating on talk shows and appearing in films.
	
6. Apply any principle of MET to (a) YouTube, (b) Google, (c) Facebook, 
(d) LinkedIn.
	
7. Why do you think little quantitative research has been undertaken with 
Media Ecology Theory?

This page intentionally left blank

457
Culture and Diversity
WE ALL BELONG TO SOME SORT OF A CULTURAL 
COMMUNITY. Some of us are members of a culture with 
a long history in the United States. Others of us belong 
to cultures that have recently found prominence in this 
country. As you learned in Chapter  1, the term culture 
is a complex term that carries many ­interpretations. The 
theories presented in this section underscore the various 
viewpoints and issues related to culture and highlight the 
importance of looking at culture and human ­behavior.
	
We have selected four communication theories that 
fall under “Culture and Diversity”: Face-Negotiation Theory, 
Communication Accommodation Theory, Muted Group 
Theory, and Feminist Standpoint Theory. We chose these 
theories because they represent a cross section of what it means to be a mem­
ber of a cultural community and because each theory, in some way, provides you 
some evidence of the expansiveness of culture.
	
Each of these theories takes into consideration what happens when we 
communicate with people who come from different cultural backgrounds and 
with different cultural expectations. For example, Face-Negotiation Theory 
points to the cultural ­effects of conflict. The theory answers the question 
“How do members from different cultures manage their interpersonal conflict?” 
Focusing on the role of both verbal and nonverbal communication in conversa­
tions, Communication Accommodation Theory rests on the belief that people 
from various cultural communities will adjust and adapt their communication 
to accommodate others. In Muted Group Theory, women are viewed as less 
powerful and less effective than men because their words have been provided 
by men to suit men’s experiences. Finally, Feminist Standpoint Theory states 
that people view the world according to their positions in life. So the theory 
considers socioeconomic class and its application to a variety of marginalized 
Chapter 27
Face-Negotiation Theory 
(Ting-Toomey) 459
Chapter 28
Communication 
Accommodation Theory 
(Giles) 476
Chapter 29
Muted Group Theory 
(Kramarae) 494
Chapter 30
Feminist Standpoint Theory 
(Hartsock and Wood) 510

458
Culture and Diversity
(and often vulnerable) ­populations, ­including women, the poor, gay men and les­
bians, and many racial and ethnic ­communities.
	
The theories in this section center on the role that society plays in com­
munication between and among cultural groups. Reading and learning about the 
theories will expose you to a variety of important themes: dominance, control, 
oppression, power, cultural identity, conflict, and politeness. In societies that 
are becoming increasingly diverse and electronically connected, understanding 
the information in this section remains critical.

459
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
The first 10 weeks of 
her academic term in the 
United States had gone 
quite well. As a faculty 
member from China, Jie 
Yang felt that the communication courses she 
taught were well attended by students who were 
eager to participate. Students frequently asked 
her questions about what Chinese life was like, 
often concentrating on college life in particular. 
Jie was more than willing to answer their ques­
tions. She, too, had asked students about life in the 
United States and about what students thought 
of ­Chinese–U.S. relations. Although there were a 
few intercultural difficulties in translation, overall 
Yang felt that excellent relationships had been 
cultivated in such a short period of time. She had 
every reason to think that things would continue 
to unfold comfortably.
	
Yang’s instincts, however, proved incorrect. 
As her intercultural communication class began 
to prepare for their individual presentations, class 
members were showing signs of tension. In addi­
tion to a written final project on a research topic 
of their choice, the professor had asked that each 
student provide a brief oral presentation of what 
they had studied. Throughout the term, she had lis­
tened to student complaints about the library staff, 
about how certain journal articles were not avail­
able online, and a lot of concerns about the time 
crunch. Still, she felt that her assignments were 
important and despite the complaining, didn’t back 
down.
	
One evening after class, Kevin Bruner, a 
graduating senior, challenged Professor Yang di­
rectly. He stated that there simply wasn’t going to 
be enough time to complete his final presentation. 
He believed that the professor was asking too much 
of him, considering that he had missed two weeks 
of class early in the term because of pneumonia. 
“It’s completely unfair,” Kevin lamented. “This is 
way too much for me right now.”
	
Professor Yang was sympathetic to Kevin’s 
concerns. She agreed that he was under some 
pressure and reassured him that he was capable 
of finishing his project despite his past attendance 
record. “Look, you’re an excellent student, Kevin,” 
the professor related. “And obviously I can tell that 
you’re very upset. But, you’re a hard worker and I 
know you want to do your best. You surely don’t 
want me to treat you any differently than the oth­
ers. Everyone is under pressure here.”
	
Kevin wouldn’t hear of it. “I don’t want to be 
disrespectful, but this is too much! I refuse to 
believe that you won’t let a good student have 
some extra time. It’s not like I’m not going to do 
Face-Negotiation Theory
Based on the research of Stella Ting-Toomey
C H A P T E R	27
Professor Jie 
Yang and Kevin 
Bruner
The manner in which individuals conceive of their self-images should 
have a profound influence on how they construct meanings, interpret 
speech codes, form relationships, and infer underlying speech rules 
and premises from their unique identity lens.
—Stella Ting-Toomey

460     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
W
orking out conflicts like Kevin’s is not easy. In the United States particularly, 
individuals try to manage their conflicts in a solution-oriented manner, fre­
quently disregarding the other’s cultural values or norms. Although people from a num­
ber of different cultures share Kevin’s approach, some cultures would not endorse his 
strategies for conflict resolution.
	
Kevin finds himself in a situation common to many students. Yet, unlike many 
students, Kevin overtly confronts Professor Yang about her expectations. Although 
he was given the assignment in the early part of the term, he knows that the remaining 
time will not be sufficient to complete the task. He then tries to negotiate a different 
result with his professor. His dominating approach does little to rattle Professor 
Yang; she calmly works toward closure on this conflict.
	
Kevin’s conflict with Professor Yang underscores much of the thinking ­behind 
Face-Negotiation Theory (FNT) by Stella Ting-Toomey. The theory is multifaceted, 
incorporating research from intercultural communication, conflict, politeness, and 
“facework,” a topic we explore later in the chapter. Face-­Negotiation Theory has 
cross-cultural appeal and application because Ting-Toomey has focused on a number 
of different cultural populations, including those in Japan, South Korea, Taiwan, 
China, and the United States. As Ting-Toomey (1988) comments: “Culture provides 
it.” Kevin continued by outlining his plan. If she 
would give him an “incomplete,” then he would 
turn in the final paper two weeks after the class 
ended. “I’ll try to give my presentation on what 
I’ve written,” he continued, “but I’m not sure it’s 
going to be that good.”
	
Professor Yang grew weary with the discus­
sion. “Kevin, you underestimate yourself. You have 
a few weeks left. I trust you’ll be able to finish it 
thoroughly.”
	
The tone of the conversation quickly changed. 
“Well, let me see,” Kevin interrupted, “I don’t think 
you know the American system yet. I’m being up 
front and honest about the fact that I won’t be 
able to finish the project. You keep telling me that 
I will. I know that you’ve only been in the States 
a short time and I don’t think you know how our 
system works. You’ve got to give students a 
chance. Right now, I feel like I’m talking to a brick 
wall.” His voice now matched the passion of 
his words.
	
Professor Yang maintained her composure, de­
spite the offending words: “Kevin, in this class, we 
all have time constraints and outside responsibili­
ties. I, like everyone else, have a lot to finish before 
the end of the term. But we can’t simply abandon 
our responsibilities. I know you’re a reasonable stu­
dent and I don’t want to give you a special accom­
modation that I don’t give to other students. But, 
I know that you were out sick, so how about this: 
Turn in a detailed outline of your paper by Monday. 
You have the weekend to get it into good shape. 
I will look it over on Monday and then you take my 
comments and rework the outline into a paper. 
Instead of the 8–10 page requirement, you can 
have a 5–7 page requirement. 
	
Kevin followed her lead. “I can’t promise you 
that my paper is gonna be the best. But, definitely, 
if you’ll look it over before I turn it in, that’ll help 
a lot.”
	
“I may be from China, but I can say that almost 
anywhere, professors simply want their students 
to do their best and have high standards,” Pro­
fessor Yang replied, wondering if she made the 
right decision. “And you should know that I do 
expect you to do your best. I’m sure you will get 
everything done on time.” As Kevin walked away 
from his conversation, he couldn’t help but think 
about a different approach to his conflict. He 
knew that he had work to do and that the bound­
aries had been clearly set for him by Professor 
Yang.

	
About Face     461
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
the larger interpretive frame in which ‘face’ and ‘conflict style’ can be meaning­
fully expressed and maintained” (p. 213). Ting-Toomey asserts that members from 
different cultural backgrounds have various concerns for the “face” of others. This 
concern leads them to ­handle conflict in different ways. These comments form the 
backdrop to Face-Negotiation Theory (FNT).
	
Our chapter-opening example of Kevin Bruner and Professor Yang represents 
the heart of FNT. Representing two different cultural backgrounds, Kevin and his 
professor seem to have two different interpretations of how to manage the difficulty 
that Kevin is having with his final project. Kevin clearly desires to turn his work in 
late, whereas Professor Yang wants him to turn it in with the rest of the class. She 
tries to ease the conflict between the two by highlighting Kevin’s qualities, and clearly 
she does not want to embarrass Kevin. Rather, she encourages him to work out this 
conflict by focusing on his ability to get things done, not the remaining time left in the 
term.
	
Professor Yang and Kevin Bruner engage in behavior that researchers have 
termed face. Because face is an extension of one’s self-concept, it has become the 
focus of much research in a number of fields of study, including management, interna­
tional diplomacy, anthropology, sociology, linguistics, among others. In fact, because 
Face-Negotiation Theory rests primarily on this concept, let’s first interpret the mean­
ing behind the term and then ­examine some central assumptions of the theory.
About Face
Ting-Toomey bases much of her theory on face and facework. Face is clearly an 
important feature of life, a metaphor for self-image that pervades all aspects of social 
life. The concept of face has evolved in interpretation over the years. It originates 
with the Chinese who have two conceptualizations of face: lien and mien-tzu, two 
terms describing identity and ego (Ho, 1944).
	
Erving Goffman (1967) is generally credited with situating face in contemporary 
Western research. He noted that face is the image of the self that people display in their 
conversations with others. Ting-Toomey and her colleagues (Oetzel, Ting-Toomey, 
Yokochi, Masumoto, & Takai, 2000) observe that face pertains to a favorable self-
worth and/or projected other worth in interpersonal situations. People do not “see” 
another’s face; rather, face is a metaphor for the boundaries that people have in their 
relationships with others. In essence, then, face is the desirable self-image that a person 
wishes to convey to another based upon society’s interpretation of what is “appropriate 
and successful” (Samp, 2015, p. 1). 
	
Goffman (1967) described face as something that is maintained, lost, or strength­
ened. At the time of his writing, Goffman did not envision that the term would be 
applied to close relationships. As a sociologist, he believed that face and all that it 
entailed was more applicable to the study of social groups. Over time, however, the 
study of face has been applied to a number of contexts, including close relationships 
and small groups.
	
Ting-Toomey incorporates thinking from research on politeness that con­
cludes that the desire for face is a universal concern (Brown & Levinson, 1978). 
face
a metaphor for the 
public image people 
display

462     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Hongyan Lan (2016) asserts: “Face and facework are regarded as universal phenom­
ena and people of every culture are always negotiating face” (p. 41). Ting-Toomey 
(1988, 1991, 2004) expands on Goffman’s thinking and argues that face is a pro­
jected image of one’s self and the claim of self-respect in a relationship. She believes 
that face “entails the presentation of a civilized front to another individual” (Ting-
Toomey, 1994a, p. 1) and that face is an identity that two people conjointly define in a 
relational episode. Further, face is a “socially approved self-image and other-image 
consideration issues” (Ting-Toomey & Chung, 2005, p. 268). Ting-Toomey and her 
colleague Beth Ann Cocroft (1994) identify face as a “pancultural phenomenon” 
(p. 310), meaning that individuals in all cultures share and manage face; face cuts 
across all cultures. 
	
Regarding our opening, Ting-Toomey and other Face-Negotiation theorists would 
likely be interested in knowing that Professor Yang is from China and Kevin Bruner 
was born in the United States. Their cultural backgrounds influence the way that they 
relate to each other and the way face is enacted. That is, Ting-Toomey believes that 
­although face is a universal concept, there are various representations of it in various 
cultures. Face needs exist in all cultures, but all cultures do not manage the needs simi­
larly. Ting-Toomey contends that face can be interpreted in two primary ways: face 
concern and face need. Face concern may relate to either one’s own face or the face 
of another. In other words, there is a self-concern and an other-concern. Face concern 
answers the question, “Do I want attention drawn toward myself or toward another?” 
Face need refers to an inclusion– ­autonomy dichotomy. That is, “Do I want to be 
associated with others (inclusion) or do I want dissociation (autonomy)?”
Face and Politeness Theory
As we noted earlier, Ting-Toomey was influenced by research on politeness. In a 
general sense, politeness is concerned with appropriateness of behavior and pro­
cedures as they relate to establishing and maintaining harmony in relationships 
(Kerbrat-Orecchioni, 2012). In particular, politeness theorists (Brown & Levinson, 
1978, 1987) contend that people will use a politeness strategy based on the perception 
of face threat. Politeness theory suggests that a single message can provoke more 
than one face threat and can both support and threaten face needs simultaneously, 
and that ­politeness and face threats influence subsequent messages. Drawing on 
over a dozen different cultures around the world, and based on field work of at least 
three languages (Feng, 2015), politeness researchers discovered that two types of 
universal needs exist: positive face needs and negative face needs. Positive face is 
the desire to be liked and admired by significant others in our lives; negative face 
refers to the desire to be autonomous and unconstrained. Karen Tracy and Sheryl 
Baratz (1994) note that these “face wants” are necessarily a part of relationships. 
They support their claim as follows:
Recognition of existing face wants explains why a college student who wanted 
to borrow a classmate’s notes typically would not ask for them boldly (“Lend 
me your notes, would you?”), but more frequently would ask in a manner that 
paid attention to a person’s negative face wants (“Would it be at all possible 
for me to borrow your notes for just an hour? I’ll Xerox them and get them 
back to you right away”). (p. 288)
face concern 
interest in 
maintaining one’s 
face or the face of 
others
face need 
desire to be 
associated or 
disassociated with 
others
positive face 
desire to be liked 
and admired by 
others
negative face 
desire to be 
autonomous and 
free from others

	
Facework     463
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Brown and Levinson’s research illustrates a dilemma for individuals who try 
to meet both types of face needs in a conversation. Trying to satisfy one face need 
usually affects the other face need. For instance, our opening example shows that 
Professor Yang wants Kevin to work at achieving his full potential. Her positive 
face needs, however, are met with the challenges of putting in more time with Kevin, 
thereby costing her negative face needs.
Facework
When communicators’ positive or negative face is threatened, they tend to seek 
some recourse or way to restore their or their partner’s face. Ting-Toomey (1994a), 
following Brown and Levinson, defines this as facework, or the “actions taken to deal 
with the face wants of one and/or the other” (p. 8). Ting-Toomey and Leeva Chung 
(2005) also comment that facework is “about the verbal and nonverbal strategies that 
we use to maintain, defend, or upgrade our own social self-image and attack or defend 
(or ‘save’) the social image of others” (p. 268). In other words, facework pertains to 
how people make whatever they’re doing consistent with their face. Ting-Toomey 
equates facework with a “communication dance that tiptoes” between respect for 
one’s face and the face of another. Catherine Kerbrat-Orecchioni (2012) interprets 
facework as a way to “smooth over” the actions that may damage or threaten conver­
sations and relationships (we return to this issue a bit later in the chapter). 
	
Tae-Seop Lim and his co-authors (Lim & Bowers, 1991; Lim & Ahn, 2015) 
extend the discussion by identifying three types of facework: tact, solidarity, and 
approbation. First, tact facework refers to the extent that one respects another’s 
autonomy. This allows a person freedom to act as he or she pleases while minimiz­
ing any impositions that may restrict this freedom. For instance, Professor Yang 
engages in tact facework with Kevin while he relates his problems with the course 
assignments. She could, of course, respond to him by stating that he should just keep 
quiet and work, but instead she uses tact facework strategies—she asks him for sug­
gestions while avoiding directives.
	
The second type of facework, solidarity facework, pertains to a person ­ac­cepting 
the other as a member of an in-group. Solidarity enhances the ­connec­tion between 
two speakers. That is, differences are minimized and commonalities are high­
lighted through informal language and shared experiences. For instance, Professor 
facework 
actions used to deal 
with face needs/
wants of self and 
others
tact facework 
extent to which a 
person respects 
another’s autonomy
solidarity facework
accepting another  
as a member of an  
in-group
Theory At a Glance  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
How do people in individualistic and collectivistic cultures negotiate face 
in conflicts? Face-Negotiation Theory is based on face management, which 
describes how people from different cultures manage conflict negotiation to 
maintain face. Self-face and other-face concerns explain the conflict nego­
tiation between people from various cultures.

464     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Yang notes that, like Kevin, she has responsibilities, and people cannot simply go 
back on their duties because of a time crunch. Her conversational style reflects an 
approachable professor, not one who uses language reflecting a status difference.
	
The final type of facework is approbation facework, which involves minimiz­
ing blame and maximizing praise of another. Approbation facework exists when an 
individual focuses less on the negative aspects of another and more on the positive 
aspects. It is clear that despite her real feelings about Kevin’s experiences, Professor 
Yang employs approbation facework by noting that he is a hard worker and an excel­
lent student. She also explains that he has the ability to get everything accomplished. 
In other words, she recognizes Kevin’s positive attributes while avoiding blame.
	
Our introductory comments on face and facework form an important backdrop to 
the understanding of Face-Negotiation Theory. The theory proposed by Ting-Toomey 
also rests on a number of other issues needing attention and clarification. We begin to 
unravel the theory in more detail by presenting three key assumptions of FNT.
Assumptions of Face-Negotiation Theory
Several assumptions of Face-Negotiation Theory take into consideration the key 
components of the theory: face, conflict, and culture. With that in mind, the following 
guide the thinking of Ting-Toomey’s theory:
∙∙
Self-identity is important in interpersonal interactions, with individuals 
negotiating their identities differently across cultures.
∙∙
The management of conflict is mediated by face and culture.
∙∙
Certain acts threaten one’s projected self-image (face).
	
The first assumption highlights self-identity, or the personal features or character 
attributes of an individual. In their discussion of face, William Cupach and Sandra 
Metts (1994) observe that when people meet, they present an image of who they are 
in the interaction. This image is “an identity that he or she wants to assume and wants 
others to accept” (p. 3). Self-identity includes a person’s collective experiences, 
thoughts, ideas, memories, and plans. People’s self-identities do not remain stagnant, 
but rather are negotiated in their interactions with others. People have a concern with 
both their own identity or face (self-face) and the identity or face of another (other-
face) (West & Turner, 2016).
	
Just as culture and ethnicity influence self-identity, the manner in which indi­
viduals project their self-identities varies across cultures. Mary Jane Collier (1998) 
relates that cultural identity is enacted and “contested in particular historical, political, 
economic, and social contexts” (p. 132). Delores Tanno and Alberto Gonzalez (1998) 
note that there are “sites of identity,” which they define as “the physical, intellectual, 
social, and political locations where identity develops its dimensions” (p. 4). Self-
identity, therefore, is influenced by time and experience. Consider, for example, the 
self-identity of a politician as she begins her new term in office. She most likely will 
be overwhelmed and perhaps frustrated by her new position and the responsibilities 
that go along with it. Yet, over time and with experience, that frustration will be 
replaced with confidence and a new perspective on her identity as a representative 
of others.
approbation  
facework 
focusing less on the 
negative aspects  
and more on the 
positive aspects of 
another
self-identity 
personal attributes 
of an individual

	
Assumptions of Face-Negotiation Theory     465
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Inherent in this first assumption is the belief that individuals in all cultures 
hold a number of different self-images and that they negotiate these images con­
tinuously. Ting-Toomey (1993) states that a person’s sense of self is both conscious 
and unconscious. That is, in scores of different cultures, people carry images that 
they habitually or strategically present to others. Ting-Toomey believes that how we 
perceive our sense of self and how we wish others to perceive us are paramount to our 
communication experiences.
	
The second assumption of Face-Negotiation Theory relates to conflict, which is a 
central component of the theory. Conflict in this theory, however, works in tandem 
with face and culture. For Ting-Toomey (1994b), conflict can damage the social 
face of individuals and can serve to reduce the relational closeness between two 
people. As she relates, conflict is a “forum” for face loss and face humiliation. Con­
flict threatens both partners’ faces, and when there is an incompatible negotiation over 
how to resolve the conflict (such as insulting the other, imposing one’s will, etc.), 
the conflict can exacerbate the situation. Ting-Toomey states that the way humans 
are socialized into their culture influences how they will manage conflict. That is, 
some cultures, like the United States, value the open airing of differences between 
two people; other cultures believe conflict should be handled discreetly. We return to 
these cultural orientations a bit later in the chapter.
	
This confluence of conflict, face, and culture can be exemplified in our story of 
Professor Yang and Kevin Bruner. It is apparent that Kevin’s conflict with Professor 
Yang centers on his desire to receive an “incomplete” and her determination to have 
him complete the project. Because Professor Yang does not ­acquiesce to his wishes, 
Kevin tries to maintain his face by agreeing to his professor’s compromise. In other 
words, he expresses a need to preserve his face with his professor. 
	
A third assumption of Face-Negotiation Theory pertains to the effects that various 
acts have on one’s face. Incorporating politeness research, Ting-Toomey (1988) 
asserts that face-threatening acts (FTAs) threaten either the positive or the negative 
face of the interactants. FTAs can be either direct or indirect and occur when people’s 
desired identity is challenged (Tracy, 1990). Direct FTAs are more threatening to the 
face of others, whereas indirect FTAs are less so.
	
Ting-Toomey and Mark Cole (1990) note that two actions make up the face-
threatening process: face-saving and face restoration. Face-saving involves efforts 
to prevent events that either elicit vulnerability or impair one’s image. Face-saving 
face-saving
efforts to avoid 
embarrassment or 
vulnerability
Student Voices
Irene
I can tell you that coming from China, the discussion about face(work) rings true 
to me. In Beijing, we are very concerned not to make others feel bad. We also try 
to stay clear of conflict because we believe that arguing is not the best way to 
get to a resolution. I remember in one of my classes in America my professor said 
something that was very incorrect. But, I didn’t say anything because I knew it 
would cause more problems in our conversation.

466     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
often prevents embarrassment. For instance, French is the primary language of the 
friend of one of your authors. Although he does speak fluent English, he periodically 
splices French phrases into his conversations with others. Because others are usually 
not prepared for this, your author introduces him as someone whose primary language 
is French. In this example, your ­author is using a face-saving technique.
	
Face restoration occurs after the loss of face has happened. Ting-Toomey and 
Cole (1990) observe that people attempt to restore face in response to the events. 
For instance, people’s excuses are face-restoration techniques when ­embarrassing 
events occur (Cupach & Metts, 1994). Excuses (“I thought it was her job”) and 
justifications (“I’m not a morning person”) are commonplace in face restoration. 
These face-maintenance strategies and their relationship to each other are repre­
sented in Figure 27.1.
	
So far, we have detailed face and facework as well as three primary ­assump­tions 
of Face-Negotiation Theory. We now turn our attention to a discussion of additional 
areas of the theory. First, we explore individualism and collectivism, and then we 
examine how conflict functions in the theory.
Individualistic and Collectivistic Cultures
Culture is not a static variable. It is interpreted along many dimensions. To this end, 
Ting-Toomey examines culture and how it interrelates with face and conflict by em­
ploying thinking derived from both Harry Triandis (1972, 1988) and Geert Hofstede 
(1980, 2001). Both were instrumental in identifying the cultural variability used to 
explain cultural differences in behavior. In FNT, ­culture can be organized around 
two ends of a continuum: individualism and collectivism (Ting-Toomey, 2010). At 
one end is a culture that places a premium on the value of individual identity; at 
the other end is a culture that values group identity. ­Individualistic cultures are “in­
dependent self” cultures, and collectivistic cultures are “interdependent self” cul­
tures. Cultures across the world vary in individualism and collectivism (Table 27.1). 
These two dimensions play a prominent role in the way that facework and conflict 
are managed but Hofstede reminds us that cultural comparisons can change over 
face restoration 
strategy used to 
preserve autonomy 
and avoid loss of 
face
Face-Saving
(preventing or stopping
embarrassment or
predicament)
Face-Restoration
(oﬀering excuse for
embarrassment
or predicament)
Face-Threatening
Acts (FTAs)
Figure 27.1 
Face-Maintenance 
Framework Source
Source: Adapted 
from Ting-Toomey & 
Cole, 1990.

	
Individualistic and Collectivistic Cultures     467
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
time, as changes in population demographics and health opportunities, for instance, 
continue to influence a particular society (https://geert-hofstede.com/national
-culture.html).
	
Ting-Toomey (2010) and her colleagues Ge Gao, Paula Trubisky, Shizhong 
Yang, Hak Soo Kim, Sung-Ling Lin, and Tsukasa Nishida (1991) clarify that 
­individualism and collectivism apply not only to national cultures, but also to 
­co‑cultures within national cultures. That is, different racial and ethnic groups 
within the United States may vary in their individualism and collectivism. For 
­example, Ting-Toomey and her research team observe that whereas many ­European 
Americans in the United States identify with individualistic values and beliefs, when 
first-generation immigrant groups from Mexico or Japan ­arrive, they tend to retain 
their collectivistic orientation. Let’s explore the ­concepts of ­individualism and 
collectivism a bit further.
Table 27.1  Rankings of Individualism and Collectivism Around the World*
RANK	
COUNTRY	
RANK	
COUNTRY
1	
United States	
      28	
Turkey
2	
Australia	
      29	
Uruguay
3	
Great Britain	
      30	
Greece
4/5	
Canada/Netherlands	
      31	
Philippines
4/5	
Netherlands	
      32	
Mexico
6	
New Zealand	
33/35	
Yugoslavia
7	
Italy	
33/35	
Portugal
8	
Belgium	
33/35	
East Africa
9	
Denmark	
      36	
Malaysia
 10/11	
Sweden	
      37	
Hong Kong
 10/11	
France	
      38	
Chile
12	
Ireland	
39/41	
Singapore
13	
Norway	
39/41	
Thailand
14	
Switzerland	
39/41	
West Africa
15	
Germany	
      42	
Salvador
16	
South Africa	
      43	
South Korea
17	
Finland	
      44	
Taiwan
18	
Austria	
      45	
Peru
19	
Israel	
      46	
Costa Rica
 20	
Spain	
47/48	
Pakistan
 21	
India	
47/48	
Indonesia
22/23	
Japan	
      49	
Colombia
22/23	
Argentina	
      50	
Venezuela
24	
Iran	
      51	
Panama
  25	
Jamaica	
      52	
Ecuador
26/27	
Brazil	
      53	
Guatemala
26/27	
Arab countries	
	
*The lower the number, the more individualistic the country is rated; the higher the number, the 
more collectivistic the country is rated.
Although there are some surveys that show the United States, Australia, and Great Britain varying 
in ranking, demographers agree that these three countries are clearly the most individualistic in 
the world.
Source: Hofstede (2001).

468     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
In Chapter 5, we briefly discussed the terms individualism and collectivism. 
But as you may recall, although a theorist may use the same word as another theorist, 
there may be slight variations in meaning. Thus, we briefly address these two within 
an FNT framework. In a general sense, when people emphasize the individual over 
the group, they are articulating an individualistic perspective. Individualism refers 
to the tendency of people to highlight individual identity over group identity, individ­
ual rights over group rights, and individual needs over group needs (Ting-Toomey, 
1994b). Individualism is the “I” identity (I want, I need, etc.). Larry Samovar, 
Richard Porter, Edwin ­McDaniel, and Carolyn Roy (2016) believe that individualism 
was likely the first value that developed in the early formation of the United States. 
Samovar and Porter (1995) believe that “[i]ndividualism emphasizes individual ini­
tiative (‘Pull yourself up by your own boot straps’), independence (‘Do your own 
thing’), individual expression (‘The squeaky wheel gets the grease’), and privacy 
individualism 
a cultural value that 
places emphasis on 
the individual over 
the group
Boston Globe author Claude Fischer is one of the first journalists in the country 
to publicly question whether the United States is really an individualistic society. 
Drawing on the research that states people in the United States value and 
practice individualism, Fischer contends that the notion of “personal liberty”—a 
prized value in the States—is really not as pervasive as one may think. The 
author compares the United States with Europe, a continent often identified as 
collectivistic. The intrigue becomes clear. Fischer claims that “Americans 
are much more likely than Europeans to say that employees should follow a 
boss’s orders even if the boss is wrong; to say that children ‘must’ love their 
parents; and to believe that parents have a duty to sacrifice themselves for 
their children. We are more likely to defer to church leaders and to insist on 
abiding by the law.”
	
In his essay, Fischer seems to believe that because of the complexity 
related to individualism, people living in the United States often have issues 
“where individual rights conflict with group interests.” This, then, contradicts 
the perception (and some of the research of Face-Negotiation theorists) that 
“American” citizens are highly “I-centered.” In fact, Fischer boldly advances 
that those in the United States “seem much more willing to submerge personal 
liberty to the group than Europeans are.” Fischer’s provocative thinking is 
underscored in many ways, including providing evidence of surveys that show 
among all nationalities, Americans “turned out to be the most likely to embrace 
the statement: ‘People should support their country even if the country is in 
the wrong.’”
Source: Fisher, C. (2010). Sweet land of . . . conformity? Americans aren’t the rugged individuals 
we think we are. Boston Globe online, boston.com/bostonglobe/ideas/articles/2010/06/06
/sweet_land_of_conformity/.
Theory in Popular Press  •  The United States—A Collectivist Nation?

	
Face Management and Culture     469
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
(‘A man’s [woman’s] home is his [her] castle’)” (p. 85). Values that are individualistic 
­highlight freedom, honesty, comfort, and personal equality, among others (Ting-
Toomey & Chung, 2005).
	
As you see, individualism involves self-motivation, autonomy, and independent 
thinking. Individualism suggests direct communication with another. Think about 
Kevin Bruner’s comments expressing his desire to complete his project on his own 
time. He is projecting individualism to Professor Yang.
	
According to intercultural communication scholars, individualism is esteemed in 
the United States (Jandt, 2015). In addition to the United States, a number of other cul­
tures are viewed as individualistic. Australia, Great Britain, Canada, the Netherlands, and 
New Zealand are examples of individualistic cultures. Italy, Belgium, and Denmark are 
also considered individualistic. These cultures stress individual achievement and value 
independence.
	
Whereas individualism focuses on one’s personal identity, collectivism looks 
outside the self. Ting-Toomey (1994b) comments that collectivism is the emphasis 
of group goals over individual goals, group obligations over individual rights, and 
in-group needs over individual wants. Collectivism is the “we” identity (“we can do 
this,” “we are a team,” etc.). People in a collectivistic culture value working together 
and viewing themselves as part of a larger group. Collectivistic societies, consequently, 
value inclusion. Collectivistic values emphasize harmony, respecting parents’ wishes, 
and fulfillment of another’s needs, among others. Examples of collectivistic cultures 
include Indonesia, Venezuela, Panama, Mexico, Ecuador, and Guatemala. 
Face Management and Culture
So, how do individualism and collectivism relate to Ting-Toomey’s theory? Ting-
Toomey and Chung (2005) argue that “members [of cultures] who subscribe to 
individualistic values tend to be more self-face-oriented and members who subscribe 
to group-oriented values tend to be more other- or mutual-face oriented in conflict” 
(p. 274). If you are a citizen of an individualistic society, you are more likely to be 
concerned with controlling your own autonomy and boundaries for behavior. You 
would also want choices to satisfy self-face needs. Dissatisfied with the assignment 
and its deadline, Kevin Bruner is seeking autonomy and wants another choice 
from his professor. Ting-Toomey believes that in individualistic cultures, face 
management is overt in that it involves protecting one’s face, even if it comes to 
bargaining. Kevin Bruner engages in face negotiation that promotes confrontation, 
and as Ting-Toomey notes, members of individualistic cultures like Kevin will tend 
to use more ­autonomy-preserving face strategies in managing their conflict than will 
members of collectivistic societies.
	
Collectivistic cultures “are concerned with the adaptability of self-­presentation 
image” (Ting-Toomey, 1988, p. 224). Adaptability, then, allows for ­interdependent 
bonds with others (positive face). What this means is that members of collectivistic 
communities consider their relationship to others when discussing matters and feel that 
a conversation requires ongoing maintenance by both communicators. For instance, 
Professor Yang makes efforts to ­demonstrate her connection to Kevin by empathizing 
with his conflict. She also demonstrates a collectivistic orientation by asking whether 
collectivism 
a cultural value that 
places emphasis on 
the group over the 
individual
face management 
the protection of 
one’s face

470     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
it would be fair to grant Kevin an extension and not offer the same alternative to other 
students. Professor Yang, then, as a member of a collectivistic culture, seeks both self-
face and other-face needs. 
	
Ting-Toomey believes that conflict is opportunistic when members from two 
different cultures—individualistic and collectivistic—come together with a disre­
gard for how the other handles conflictual situations. In fact, “interpersonal conflict, 
when managed competently, can bring about positive changes in an interpersonal 
relationship” (Ting-Toomey & Oetzel, 2016, p. 1). To this end, Face-Negotiation 
Theory takes into consideration the influence culture has on the way conflict is han­
dled within relationships across the globe.
Managing Conflict Across Cultures
The individualistic–collectivistic cultural dimension influences the selection of conflict 
styles. These styles refer to patterned responses, or typical ways of handling conflict 
across a variety of communication encounters (Ting-Toomey & Chung, 2005; Ting-
Toomey & Oetzel, 2001). The styles include avoiding (AV), obliging (OB), compro­
mising (CO), dominating (DO), and integrating (IN). In avoiding, people will try to stay 
away from disagreements and dodge unpleasant exchanges with others (“I’m busy” or 
“I don’t want to talk about that”). The obliging style includes a passive accommodation 
that tries to satisfy the needs of others or goes along with the suggestions of others 
(“Whatever you want to do is fine”). In compromising, individuals try to find a 
middle road to resolve impasses and use give-and-take so that a compromise can be 
reached (“Why don’t I just give up one week of my vacation and you give up a week 
of yours?”).
	
The dominating style includes those behaviors that involve using influence, 
authority, or expertise to get ideas across or to make decisions (“I’m in the best 
position to talk about this issue”). Finally, the integrating style is used by ­people to 
find a solution to a problem (“I think we need to work this out together”). As opposed 
to compromising, integrating requires a high degree of concern for yourself and for 
others. In compromising, a moderate degree ­exists.
	
Ting-Toomey believes that the decision to use one or more of these styles will 
depend on the cultural variability of communicators. Yet, conflict management neces­
sarily takes into consideration the concern for self-face and other-face. We illustrate 
this relationship in Figure 27.2. From our chapter-opening story, Kevin Bruner, using 
a dominating style of conflict management, apparently has little concern for the face of 
his professor (self-face). Professor Yang, however, is more compromising in the way 
that she handles the conflict with her student (other-face).
	
Let’s continue to clarify Ting-Toomey’s discussion of conflict management by 
identifying the relationship of conflict style to facework. Ting-Toomey notes several 
relationships between conflict styles and face concern/face need. First, both AV and 
OB styles of conflict management reflect a passive approach to handling conflicts. 
A CO style represents a mutual-face need by finding middle-ground solutions to a 
conflict. Finally, a DO style reflects a high self-face need and a need for control of 
the conflict, whereas the IN conflict style indicates a high self-face/other-face need 
for conflict resolution.
avoiding 
staying away from 
disagreements 
obliging 
satisfying the needs 
of others
compromising 
a behavior that 
employs give-and-
take to achieve 
a middle-road 
resolution
dominating 
using influence or 
authority to make 
decisions
integrating 
collaborating with 
others to find 
solutions

	
Managing Conflict Across Cultures     471
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
With respect to comparisons across five cultures (Japan, China, South Korea, 
Taiwan, and the United States), Ting-Toomey and her research colleagues (1991) 
discovered the following:
∙∙
Members of U.S. cultures use significantly more dominating styles of conflict 
management (than Japanese and Koreans).
∙∙
The Taiwanese report using significantly more integrating styles of conflict 
management.
∙∙
The Chinese and Taiwanese use significantly more obliging conflict styles 
(than Americans).
∙∙
The Chinese use higher degrees of avoidance as a conflict style than other 
cultural groups.
∙∙
The Chinese use a higher degree of compromising than other cultures.
	
Additional research also showed that collectivistic cultures (China, Korea, 
and Taiwan) had a higher degree of other-face concern. Other research has found 
that Arab participants preferred more integrating and avoiding styles while U.S. 
participants identified more with a dominating style (Khakimova, Zhang, & 
Hall, 2013). Further, in a study examining Ecuador and the United States, James 
Neuliep and Morgan Johnson (2016) discovered that Ecuadorians preferred 
avoiding and compromising much more than U.S. respondents. Finally, one ad­
ditional study (Croucher,  et al., 2011) employing Ting-Toomey’s intercultural 
conflict styles concluded that among Indians, Hindus prefer integrating and dom­
inating styles, with little use of avoiding and obliging styles. Muslims prefer 
integrating and compromising styles, with little preference toward dominating 
and avoiding styles.
	
It is clear from the research on face and conflict that cultural variability influences 
the way conflict is managed. Let’s revisit our opening discussion of Kevin Bruner 
and Professor Yang. According to Face-Negotiation Theory, because Professor 
Yang is a member of the Chinese culture—defined as a collectivistic society—she 
Face needs and
face concerns
Conﬂict style/strategy
(verbal, nonverbal,
direct, indirect)
Cultural Variability
In
ﬂ
u
e
n
c
e
s
In
ﬂ
u
e
n
c
e
s
Figure 27.2 
Cultural Variability, 
Face, and Conflict

472     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
is likely to compromise with Kevin in their conflict. As you saw in our opening, 
she does try to compromise by asking him to write up a detailed outline and then 
alters the page parameters of the assignment. She also has a high degree of other-
face concern. Kevin, on the other hand, is very dominating in his conflict style and 
possesses a great deal of self-face concern.
	
Finally, a word about culture and negotiation, two primary themes in Face-
Negotiation Theory. While you may be tempted to ask about the differences ­between 
and among cultures with respect to negotiation skills, keep in mind that just as con­
flict styles are culturally based, so are negotiation styles. And, to be sure, negotiation 
is a “Westernized” concept that is not easily translatable to other cultures, namely 
Eastern societies (LeBaron, 2003). What all of this means is that we all need to be 
cautious and sensible when applying terminology across the globe.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Face-Negotiation Theory assumes that people of various cultures are concerned 
with the presentation of their face. It is a theory that artfully infuses conflict into 
its framework, explaining why members of two different cultures, for instance, 
manage conflict differently. Ting-Toomey asserts that different cultural values 
exist in dealing with conflict, and these conflictual episodes, in turn, are influ­
enced by the face concerns and face needs of communicators. FNT has a rich 
history, and a research agenda that has been nearly all quantitative in nature. We 
now discuss two criteria to discuss the theory’s effectiveness: heurism and logical 
consistency.
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational |
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach to 
Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Logical Consistency
Interestingly, Face-Negotiation Theory has received some clarification from Ting-
Toomey herself, prompting refinement of the theory. Recall that the theory rests 
on the differing experiences and perceptions of individualistic and collectivist 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     473
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
­cultures. Ting-Toomey uses this foundation to lay out the essence of her theory. 
At times, however, this cultural dimension may not fully explain cultural differ­
ences. In her own research, Ting-Toomey and colleagues (1991) discovered some 
discrepancies. She found that Japanese respondents showed more concern for 
self-face than U.S. respondents. In addition, although Ting-Toomey proposes that 
individualistic cultures are not usually compromising in their conflict styles, the 
highly individualistic U.S. respondents used a significantly higher degree of com­
promising when faced with a conflict. In this study, then, the “I” identity of the 
U.S. respondents was displaced.
	
Ting-Toomey and Cocroft (1994) respond to these differences in expectations by 
noting that looking at facework from the individualistic and collectivistic orientation 
“is a necessary starting point for facework behavior research” (p. 314). The researchers 
also state that many of the facework category systems in research reflect individualism–
collectivism thinking, and therefore, Face-Negotiation Theory must necessarily begin 
from this vantage point.
	
Additional issues surrounding the logical consistency of Face-Negotiation 
Theory remain. As we have mentioned, Ting-Toomey (1988) has positioned the 
theory within the politeness perspective of Brown and Levinson (1987). She 
­incorporates a number of the components of their thinking, including positive face 
and negative face. Ting-Toomey seems to be aligning herself with the notion that 
people use politeness strategies to reduce face threats (Feng, 2015). Yet, Tracy 
and Baratz (1994) believe that such labeling in Brown and Levinson’s framework 
“may be too general to capture the face-­concern most central to an interactant” 
(p. 290). That is, other issues pertaining to face concerns exist that are not identi­
fied by the researchers. Still, Susan ­Shimanoff (2009) states that politeness is, 
indeed, a practice people use to ­redress face-threatening acts. Ting-Toomey and 
Cocroft (1994) agree with the fact that Brown and Levinson have presented an 
original template from which to draw, but report data that demonstrates several 
problems with their research.
Heurism
Ting-Toomey’s Face-Negotiation Theory continues to spark interest among in­
tercultural communication researchers, making it highly heuristic. Several of the 
key concepts and features of the theory have been studied. For instance, conflict 
management examined within the framework of “face” has been investigated with 
juvenile delinquents and youth-at-risk (Lim, Vadrevu, Chan, & Basnyat, 2012). 
In addition, face has been investigated across cultures, including Malaysia, China, 
Japan, Germany, Mexico, and the United States (Oetzel et al., 2003; Quinn, Oetzel, 
Ting-Toomey, & Zhang, 2015; Rose, Suppiah, Uli, & Othman, 2008). The 
theory has been woven into research looking at family problems in Japan (Child, 
Pearson, & Nagao, 2006) and family secrets (Cho & Sillars, 2015) and it has 
been expanded beyond intercultural issues and has been applied to forgiveness 
(Zhang, Ting-Toomey, & Oetzel, 2014) and to crisis communication in Nigeria 
(George, 2016). In addition, on a more practical note, the theory has been 
incorporated into ­research on intercultural training and development pertaining 
to conflict (Ting-Toomey, 2007). 

474     Chapter 27  •  Face-Negotiation Theory
F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Closing
Face-Negotiation Theory will continue to intrigue communication ­re­searchers most 
importantly, because culture continues to be a critical issue in many societies. Par­
ticularly at a time when culture pervades all aspects of life and the global village is 
becoming smaller, the theory will have lasting ­appeal. When people from various 
cultures have a conflict, understanding how they maintain and negotiate face will 
have implications beyond the ­encounter. Ting-Toomey has given us an opportunity 
to think about how we can mediate the potential difficulties in communication among 
cultures, and she elegantly presents important information on a world dependent on 
communication.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: When contextualized in Face-Negotiation Theory, face refers 
to how we present ourselves to others. Outline how this identity can be influ­
enced when this image is presented on such social networks as Pinterest.  
	
1.  If he had to do it over again, what communication strategies would you 
recommend for Kevin Bruner in his conflict with Professor Yang? How might he 
save his own face and the face of his professor?
	
2.  Have you been to one of the countries categorized here as collectivistic? 
If so, what communication differences did you notice between that culture and 
U.S. culture?
	
3.  Do you believe that Face-Negotiation Theory relies on people being 
reasonable agents who are capable of handling conflict? Can conflict become 
unreasonable? Explain with examples.
Student Voices
Lulu
I come from a culture where we love our family, where we value our family’s input, 
and where family is really everything. The only thing I see in the United States is that 
family is not all that important. I’m sure it is to some people, but I really don’t see it. I 
remember getting into some disagreements with a friend of mine from Pakistan. She 
was really concerned that my opinion get heard and she was also very patient with 
me as I struggled to get my words out. Maybe it’s because she was more collectivist 
and she had more face concern than others I’ve met in America. Whatever it was, I 
really respected the fact that she was very thoughtful even though we were having 
an argument.

F A C E - N E G O T I A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     475
	
4.  Interpret the following statement by Ting-Toomey through description and 
example: “Collectivists need to work on their ethnocentric biases as much as the 
individualists need to work out their sense of egocentric superiority.” Do you agree 
or disagree with her view?
	
5.  What evidence do you have that face maintenance is a critical part of U.S. 
society? Use examples in your response.
	
6.  Look at the Popular Press insert and comment on whether or not you agree 
with what the author is saying. 
	
7.  Apply any concept or feature of FNT to a job interview.

476
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
“Oh, it was great. I like to fly, Mr. Hernandez. 
This time, I got a chance to watch a movie that I 
hadn’t seen yet. Personally, I love movies while I 
fly. It distracts me from the other noise and loud 
talking,” Luke responded.
	
Their conversation continued. Luke was cer­
tainly a bit on edge, but noticed that his nervous 
accelerated speech rate slowed to match that of his 
interviewer. Yet, Luke still felt awkward because he 
did not know exactly when Mr. Hernandez would 
change the subject from flying to the job.
	
Roberto began to talk further about his two 
sons, both of whom love to fly. “Like you, I love 
to fly,” Roberto related. “My wife, though, is a 
different story. I wish she had the same attitude 
as you.”
	
Luke replied, “Hey, maybe it’s simply ma­chismo, 
but I’m never afraid to fly.”
	
Roberto was struck by Luke’s use of the 
term machismo. Was he adjusting his speech 
to Spanish simply because Roberto was Mexi­
can? As an interviewer, he knew that job candi­
dates get nervous, and maybe this was simply a 
nervous habit of his. Of course, it didn’t escape 
Roberto’s notice that Luke was speaking Spanish 
to a Mexican American man who happened to 
have a strong accent. And, Roberto knew that 
Spanish was one of his majors in college. Yet, 
he didn’t want to make anything out of it. “I trust 
you’ve come here with a lot of questions, Luke. 
Communication Accommodation Theory
Based on the research of Howard Giles
As an upcoming spring 
graduate, 22-year-old 
Luke Merrill was already 
preparing for the on­
slaught of ­interviews he 
would face graduating with a 3.86 grade point 
average. Luke knew that his grades were excel­
lent, and as a double major (Spanish and Com­
munication), he felt that his chances of landing a 
good job were pretty good.
	
Luke’s chance to show what he’s got finally 
came. He got an interview with a large accounting 
firm looking to hire someone in their client relations 
department. The position preferred a candidate 
with proficiency in two languages so he was even 
more excited. Luke flew to Denver for his first 
face-to-face interview with Roberto Hernandez, 
the department’s director. The interview would 
be one that both men would remember for quite 
some time.
	
“Good morning, Luke. It’s great to meet you,” 
Roberto, said,
	
“Good morn . . . I mean, buenos días to you, 
Mr. Hernandez,” Luke replied, realizing that he 
­already interrupted his soon-to-be boss. And yet, 
the initial tension seemed to ease. 
	
Roberto continued, “Please, have a seat. I hope 
your flight last night was fine. I know that this time 
of the year can get a little bumpy, especially over 
the Rockies.”
Luke Merrill and 
Roberto 
Hernandez 
As an evolving and adaptive specie’s, we naturally have to adjust to our 
surroundings; this means accommodating as well as non-accommodating 
each other.
—Howard Giles
C H A P T E R	28

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Communication Accommodation Theory 
     ﻿    
477
W
hen two people speak, they sometimes mimic each other’s speech and behavior. 
We may talk to another who uses the same language we do, gestures simi­
larly, and even speaks at a similar rate. We, in turn, may respond in kind to the other 
communicator. Think of this as “conversational echo,” where someone ­repeats—
both verbally and nonverbally—what has been presented earlier in the conversation 
sequence. 
	
Imagine, for instance, situations where you speak to someone who has gone to 
college. You both are probably going to use phrases and jargon that are unique to 
college life, including “prereqs,” “electives,” “independent study,” “gen ed,” etc. If 
we are speaking to someone who has not gone to college, we may make efforts to 
clarify our speech or use examples that the other person will ­understand.
	
Although we all have these types of experiences at the interpersonal level, some­
times there are group- or culture-based differences, such as perceived differences 
in age group, in accent or ethnicity, or in the pace and rate of speech. Whether in 
an interpersonal relationship, in a small group, or across cultures, people tend to 
adjust their communication to others. This adaptation is at the core of Communication 
Accommodation Theory (CAT), developed by Howard Giles. Formerly known 
as Speech Accommodation Theory (but later conceptualized more broadly to in­
clude nonverbal behaviors and speaking ­patterns), Communication Accommodation 
Let me begin by answering one that we haven’t 
really addressed over the phone—the job’s travel 
schedule.”
“I’m cool with pretty much anything, 
Mr. ­Hernandez. You might say that I’m comfort­
able with nearly any assignment you’d give to me. 
We are definitely simpatico on that one.”
	
Roberto was now getting visibly agitated by 
Luke’s frequent insertion of Spanish words into 
the conversation. He could handle the initial 
­greeting; after all, he had initiated it. But Luke’s 
continuing in this manner only made Roberto 
more uneasy. He didn’t know whether to ask Luke 
to leave or simply to say how confused he was 
over Luke’s persistent behavior. Of course, he 
could choose to remain silent and simply send 
Luke a rejection letter. Roberto decided to con­
front the young college student instead.
	
“Luke, I have to admit that I think it’s a bit 
weird that you’re including Spanish here. Ok, I re­
alize that you’re interviewing with someone who 
is from Mexico and yes, I began our conversation 
with a friendly Spanish welcome. But, frankly, it’s 
a bit much, don’t you think? Maybe I’m reaching 
here, but it’s . . . .” Roberto stared at the young job 
candidate.
	
“Mr. Hernandez,” Luke explained, wishing he 
could start the entire interview over, “I’m sorry 
if I’ve offended you. I realize that I broke into 
Spanish, and to be honest with you, yeah, I guess 
it was inappropriate. I should know better. I was 
using Spanish to show you some respect, to ah . . . 
to show that I can weave Spanish into our con­
versation. . . . I’m really sorry if I was out of place. 
I blew this, right?”
	
Luke was extremely nervous. He wasn’t sure 
what Mr. Hernandez would say next. He was mad 
at himself for sounding like an idiot and assumed 
that he had lost the job. Maybe he had tried too 
hard to adapt to his interviewer. Maybe an inter­
view was the worst place for him to demonstrate 
his fluency in Spanish. Maybe he had misread the 
situation.
	
“Listen, Luke,” Roberto advised. “I’ve been 
around this firm for almost 15 years. I’ve seen 
people come and go. I. . . .”
	
“. . . and I think,” Luke interrupted, “that I 
should keep my mouth shut and not pretend I’m 
some expert in a foreign language! Really, I’m 
sorry about this.”
	
Roberto smile, albeit awkwardly. “Now, let’s 
get on with the rest of this interview.”

478     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Theory rests on the premise that when speakers interact, they modify their speech, 
their vocal patterns, and their gestures to accommodate others. Giles and his col­
leagues believe that speakers have various reasons for being accommodative to oth­
ers. Some people wish to (1) evoke a listener’s approval, (2) achieve communication 
efficiency, (3) assert a dominant position, and (4) maintain a positive social identity 
(Giles, Mulac, Bradac, & Johnson, 1987; Hogg & Giles, 2012). As you can see in our 
chapter-opening story, however, we do not always achieve what we aim for. 
	
Communication Accommodation Theory had its beginnings in 1973, almost in 
tandem with the “accent mobility” model (Giles, 1973), which is based on various 
accents heard in interview situations (similar to the situation with Luke and Roberto). 
As the mobility model was being researched, Giles clarified and conceptualized CAT. 
Much of the subsequent theory and research since then has remained sensitive to the 
various communication accommodations undertaken in conversations among diverse 
cultural groups, including senior citizens, people of color, immigrants, and the visu­
ally impaired. For Giles and other accommodation theorists, culture is an expansive 
term and includes much more than, say, race and gender. Adding to the importance 
of discussing this theory within a cultural context, Jordan Soliz and Howard Giles 
(2016) observe that the theory has appealed to those who are “cross disciplinary.” 
Further, the researchers argue that CAT has not only attracted international 
scholars, but that a body of this research has been published in multiple languages, 
making this theory truly global in nature. We discuss this theory with this cultural 
variability in mind.
	
To get a sense of the central characteristic of CAT, we first delineate what is 
meant by the word accommodation. For our purposes, accommodation is defined 
as the ability to adjust, modify, or regulate one’s behavior in response to another. 
Accommodation, to a large extent, requires multiple levels of communication (Gallois & 
Giles, 2015) in that it also includes the motivations behind accommodation and 
the consequences related to the adjustment (Soliz & Giles, 2016). Further, since 
accommodation effectively requires adjustment, it’s important to understand that 
inappropriate or insufficient ­adjustment can result in conversational misunderstand­
ings (Gasiorek & Giles, 2012). 
	
Accommodation also usually is done unconsciously. We tend to have internal cog­
nitive scripts that we draw on when we find ourselves in conversations with others. In 
a conversation with a 15-year-old girl, you might find yourself using teen vocabulary 
(e.g., “whatever”) and while referencing with an 85-year-old, you might slow your 
speech. This is all done without much thought and can occur overtly or covertly.
	
Like several other theories in this book, Communication Accommodation The­
ory has its infancy in another field and in this case, in social psychology. To this end, 
it’s important to address the theoretical vehicle that launched Giles’s thinking: Social 
Identity Theory.
Social Psychology and Social Identity
Much of the research and theory in the field of social psychology pertain directly 
to how people search for meaning in the behaviors of others and how this mean­
ing influences future interactions with others. One of the key concepts discussed 
accommodation 
adjusting, modifying, 
or regulating 
behavior in 
response to others

	
Social Psychology and Social Identity     479
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
in the research of social psychology is identity. According to Jessica Abrams, Joan 
O’Connor, and Howard Giles (2003), “[A]ccommodation is fundamental to identity 
construction” (p. 221). Recognizing the importance of the self and its relationship 
to group identity, Henri Tajfel and John Turner (1986) developed Social Identity 
Theory. This theory suggests that a person’s self-concept comprises personal identity 
(e.g., body characteristics, psychological behaviors) as well as a social identity (e.g., 
affiliation with a group) (Ellemers & Haslam, 2012). Researchers and theorists in 
Social Identity suggest that people are “motivated to join the most attractive groups 
and/or give an advantage to the groups to which one belongs (in-group)” (Worchel, 
Rothgerber, Day, Hart, & Butemeyer, 1998, p. 390). When people are given an 
opportunity, Worchel and colleagues contend, they will provide more resources 
to their own groups, rather than to out-groups. And when in-groups are identified, 
an individual decides the extent to which the group is central to his or her identity. 
Social identity, then, is primarily based on the comparisons that people make between 
in-groups (groups to which a person feels he or she belongs) and out-groups (groups 
to which a person feels he or she does not belong).
	
People strive to acquire or maintain positive social identity (Hughes, Kiecolt, 
Keith, & Demo, 2015; Tajfel & Turner, 1986), and when social identity is perceived as 
unsatisfactory, they will either join a group they feel more at home in or make the ex­
isting group a more positive experience. Summing up the Social Identity perspective, 
Tajfel and Turner observe that in-group/out-group comparisons lead social groups to 
differentiate themselves from one another. They note that commu­nication exists 
on a continuum from “interindividual” to “intergroup.” So, ­according to the theory, 
the more that Luke perceives Roberto to be either a “Mexican” or a “boss” rather 
than simply “Mr. Hernandez,” the more Luke will rely on stereotypes or group-level 
impressions to understand Roberto’s ­behavior.
	
Giles drew from some of the thinking related to Social Identity Theory (Giles, 
2017). He felt that we accommodate not only to specific others, but also to those we 
perceive as members of other groups. Thus, intergroup variables and goals influence 
the communication process. Giles, like many social ­psychologists, believes that people 
are influenced by a number of behaviors. Specifically, he argues that an individual’s 
speech style (accent, pitch, rate, interruption patterns) can affect the impressions that 
Social Identity 
Theory 
a theory that 
proposes a 
person’s identity 
is shaped by both 
personal and social 
characteristics 
in-groups 
groups in which a 
person feels he or 
she belongs
out-groups 
groups in which a 
person feels he or 
she does not belong
Theory At a Glance  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
This theory considers the underlying motivations and consequences of what 
hap­pens when two speakers, usually with different cultural backgrounds, 
shift their communication styles. During communication encounters, people 
will try to accom­modate or adjust their style of speaking to others. This is 
primarily done in two ways: divergence and convergence. Groups with strong 
cultural pride often use divergence to highlight group identity. Convergence 
occurs when there is a strong need for social approval, frequently from 
powerless individuals.

480     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
others have of the individual. Giles and Smith (1979) also comment that the nature of 
the setting, the conversation topic, and the type of person with whom one communi­
cates will all intersect to determine the speech manner one adopts in a given situation. 
In its simplest form, if an individual is viewed favorably, communicator A will shift his 
or her speech style to become more like that of communicator B; that is, communicator 
A has accommodated communicator B. Giles and Smith maintain that people adjust 
their speech style to accommodate how they ­believe others in the conversation will 
best receive it. In our opening, you can see how Luke shifts his speech to accommodate 
what he believes (incorrectly) Mr. Hernandez will appreciate.
	
Giles (2012) was influenced by the belief that when members of different groups 
come together, they compare themselves. If their comparisons are favorable, a posi­
tive social identity will result. Jake Harwood (2006) sums up the importance of so­
cial identity and group membership: “Even our closest interpersonal relationships 
are imbued with group identifications that both join us to those within our groups and 
separate us from those not in our groups” (p. 89).
	
With this theoretical footing in place, we now turn our attention to the ­as­sumptions 
guiding the development of Communication Accommodation Theory. As we discuss 
these, you will be able to sense the influence of social psychology, and Social Identity 
Theory in particular.
Assumptions of Communication Accommodation Theory
Accommodation Theory proponents would be interested in the accommodation tak­
ing place between Luke Merrill and Roberto Hernandez. Their conversation exem­
plifies a number of issues that underlie the basic assumptions of the theory. Recalling 
that accommodation is influenced by a number of personal, situational, and cultural 
circumstances, we identify several assumptions below:
∙∙
Speech and behavioral similarities and dissimilarities exist in all ­conversations.
∙∙
The manner in which we perceive the speech and behaviors of another will 
determine how we evaluate a conversation.
∙∙
Language and behaviors impart information about social status and group 
belonging.
∙∙
Accommodation varies in its degree of appropriateness, and norms guide the 
accommodation process.
Many principles of CAT rest on the first assumption that there are similarities and 
dissimilarities between communicators in a conversation. Past experiences, you may 
recall, form a person’s field of experience, a concept we discussed in Chapter 1. 
Whether in speech or behaviors, people bring their ­various fields of experiences into 
a conversation (West & Turner, 2016). These varied experiences and backgrounds 
will determine the extent to which one person will accommodate another. The more 
similar our attitudes and beliefs are to those of others, the more we will be attracted to 
and accommodate those others.
	
Let’s look at a few examples to illustrate this assumption. Consider our opening 
scenario with Luke and Roberto. They are clearly from different professional 

	
Assumptions of Communication Accommodation Theory     481
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
backgrounds with different levels of work experience. Presumably, they are products 
of different family backgrounds with different beliefs and values. The two are clearly 
dissimilar in some ways, yet, they are similar in ­others—for example, they both like 
to fly and they both have an interest in working at the accounting firm.
	
To illustrate this assumption further, consider the following dialogue between a 
grandparent and a teenage granddaughter as the two talk about the girl’s prom dress:
Grandmother: I don’t know why you’re wearing all black. You’ll have people 
talking. You look like you’re at your own funeral!
Granddaughter: Whatever. People talked about your generation wearing weird 
stuff too. It’s the style now.
Grandmother: But, we only wore black during very solemn times.
Granddaughter: Oh yeah, Nana. Sure. Your generation never had any fun at all! 
When you look at all the old photographs, no one is ever ­smiling!
Grandmother: You would be surprised how much fun we had. It was different 
from what you think now. We did a lot when I was younger, but you just 
wouldn’t understand.
	
In this conversation, the granddaughter draws conclusions about the grandpar­
ent using group-based expectations: Older people can’t understand teenagers. This 
expectation influences the teenager’s communication with her grandmother.
	
The second assumption rests on both perception and evaluation. Communication 
Accommodation is a theory concerned with how people both perceive and evaluate 
what takes place in a conversation (Dragojevich, Gasiorek, & Giles, 2016). Perception 
is the process of attending to and interpreting a message, whereas evaluation 
is the process of judging a conversation. People first perceive what takes place in a 
conversation (e.g., the other person’s speaking abilities) before they decide how to 
behave in a conversation. Consider, for example, Luke’s response to Roberto. The 
interviewer’s informality at the ­beginning of the interview is perceived by Luke as a 
good way to break the ice and eliminate some of his tension. Luke’s subsequent behav­
ior reflects a ­relaxed style (too relaxed we might conclude). Luke is like most people in 
an interview: He gets a sense of the interview atmosphere (perception) and then reacts 
accordingly (evaluation).
	
Motivation is a key part of the perception and evaluation process in Communi­
cation Accommodation Theory (Dragojevich et al., 2016). That is, we may perceive 
another person’s speech and behaviors, but we may not always choose to evaluate 
them. This often happens, for instance, when we greet another person, engage in 
small talk, and simply walk on. We normally don’t take the time to evaluate such a 
conversational encounter.
	
Yet, there are times when perceiving the words and behaviors of another leads to 
our evaluation of the other person. We may greet someone, for ­instance, and engage 
in small talk, but then be surprised when we hear that the other person recently got 
divorced. According to Giles and colleagues (1987), it is then that we decide our evalu­
ative and communicative responses. We may express our happiness, our sorrow, or our 
support. We do this by engaging in an accommodating communication style.
	
The third assumption of Communication Accommodation Theory pertains to the 
effects that language has on others. Specifically, language has the ability to communicate 
perception 
process of attending 
to and interpreting a 
message
evaluation 
process of judging a 
conversation

482     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
status and group belonging between communicators in a conversation. Consider what 
occurs when two people who speak different languages try to communicate with each 
other. Giles and John Wiemann (1987) discuss this situation:
In bilingual, or even bidialectal, situations, where ethnic majority and minority 
peoples coexist, second language learning is dramatically ­unidirectional: that 
is, it is very common for the dominant group to ­acquire the linguistic habits of 
the subordinate collectivity. . . . Indeed, it is no ­accident that cross-culturally 
what is “standard,” “correct,” and ­“cultivated” language behavior is that of the 
aristocracy, the upper or ruling classes and their institutions. (p. 361)
The language used in a conversation, then, will likely reflect the individual with the 
higher social status. In addition, inferred in this quotation is a desire to be part of the 
“dominant” group. And, dominant groups, especially when dealing with language 
use and policies, determine how things are going to be said and whether or not any 
“minority” views will be entertained (Bourhis, Sioufi, & Sachdev, 2012). 
	
To understand this assumption better, let’s return to our opening story. In the 
­interview situation with Mr. Hernandez, Luke’s language and behaviors are guided 
by the interviewer. This is what normally occurs in interviews: The individual with 
the higher social status sets the tone through his or her language and behaviors. 
Although Roberto is a member of a co-culture that has been historically oppressed, 
he nonetheless has the power to establish the interview’s direction. Those wishing to 
identify with or to become part of another’s group—for example, Luke wishing to be 
offered a job by Mr. Hernandez—will usually accommodate.
	
The fourth and final assumption focuses on norms and issues of social ap­
propriateness. We note that accommodation can vary in social appropriateness 
and that accommodation is rooted in norm usage. Norms have been shown to play 
a pivotal role in Giles’s theory (Gallois & Giles, 2015; Hogg & Giles, 2012). Norms 
are expectations of behaviors that individuals feel should or should not occur in a 
conversation. The varied backgrounds of communicators like Luke and Roberto, 
for instance, or those of a grandparent and grandchild will influence what they 
expect in their conversations. The relationship ­between norms and accommoda­
tion is made clear by ­Cynthia Gallois and Victor Callan (1991): “Norms put con­
straints of varying degree . . . on the accommodative moves that are perceived as 
norms 
expectations 
of behavior in 
conversations
Student Voices
Cassie
I’m originally from Botswana so I don’t have the best English. So, it’s always apparent 
to me when I visit doctors’ offices here in the states. The doctors are so much worse 
than in Africa because it’s almost like they enjoy “talking down” to me. They use 
words that are just full of different meanings and it’s as if they are consciously trying 
to diverge in their communication style. It’s not only annoying, it’s also very serious if 
I ever have a serious thing to discuss.

	
Ways to Adapt     483
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
desirable in an interaction” (p. 253). Therefore, the general norm that a younger 
person is obedient to an older person or that an interviewee is deferential to an 
­employer ­suggests that Luke will be more accommodative in his communication to 
Mr. Hernandez.
	
It’s important to understand that while normative behavior may suggest one 
accommodate, accommodation may not always be worthwhile and beneficial. For 
instance, Melanie Booth-Butterfield and Felicia Jordan (1989) found that people 
from marginalized cultures are usually expected to adapt (accommodate) to others 
and at times, these cultures lose their identity (Bourhis et al., 2012). 
	
These four assumptions form the foundation for the remainder of our discussion of 
the theory. We now examine the ways that people adapt in ­conversations.
Ways to Adapt
Communication Accommodation Theory suggests that in conversations ­people have 
options. It’s important to acknowledge that accommodation is an optional process 
in which two communicators decide to accommodate, one does, or neither does. 
That is, we may either accommodate strategically (conscious) or we may be doing it 
instinctively (unconscious). Further, conversants may be accommodating, but it does 
not mean that they necessarily agree with things. We may disagree with someone in 
a conversation but for the sake of ­argument (e.g., to make a point), we may accom­
modate the other. 
	
Individuals may create a conversational community that includes using the same 
or similar language or nonverbal system, they may distinguish themselves from 
others, or they may try too hard to adapt. These choices are labeled (a) convergence, 
(b) divergence, and (c) overaccommodation (Gallois & Giles, 2015). We examine 
each next and identify them in Figure 28.1.
Convergence: Merging Thoughts Ahead
The first process associated with CAT is termed convergence. Giles, Nikolas 
Coupland, and Justine Coupland (1991) define convergence as “a strategy whereby 
individuals adapt to each other’s communicative behaviors” (p. 7). People may adapt 
to speech rate, pause, smiling, eye gaze, and other verbal and nonverbal behaviors. 
Convergence is a selective process; as we noted earlier, we may perceive but choose 
not to act with people. When people do converge, they rely on their perceptions 
of the other person’s speech or behaviors. What this means is that Luke Merrill’s 
decision to use Spanish in his interview is partially based on his knowledge that 
Mr. Hernandez began the interview with a greeting in Spanish; Luke attempts to 
converge with the opening tone set by his interviewer.
	
In addition to the perception of the other’s communication, convergence is also 
based on attraction (Gasiorek, Giles, & Soliz, 2015; Giles, 2008). Usually, when 
communicators are attracted to others, they will converge in their conversations. 
Attraction is a broad term that encompasses a number of other characteristics, such 
as liking, charisma, and credibility. Giles and Smith (1979) believe that a number 
of ­factors affect our attraction for others—for example, the possibility of future 
convergence 
strategy used to 
adapt to another’s 
behavior

484     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
interactions with the listener, the speaker’s ability to communicate, and the ­status 
differential between communicators. Having similar beliefs, having a similar per­
sonality, or behaving in similar ways causes people to be attracted to each other and 
is likely to prompt convergence. Remember, however, that uncovering similarities 
occurs over time. People may not instantly know whether they are attracted to each 
other and whether this will lead to identifying their similarities. And the relational 
history between communicators may be a critical issue in convergence. For instance, 
Richard Street’s (1991) research indicates that physicians differ in their convergence 
patterns with first-time ­patients and with repeat patients. He cautions, however, that 
differences in convergence may be explained by looking at the traditional roles of 
doctor and patient as well as the time lag between visits.
	
At first view, convergence may be seen as a favorable way to accommo­
date another person, and it usually is. Our discussion so far implies that the other 
person is viewed as similar to the individual or that at least one is attracted to the 
other in a conversation. We already learned that attraction is a necessary precur­
sor to convergence. Yet, as we explained previously, ­convergence may be based on 
stereotypical perceptions. As Giles and colleagues (1987) conclude, “Convergence 
is often cognitively mediated by our stereotypes of how socially categorized others 
will speak” (p. 18). What this means is that people may converge toward stereotypes 
rather than toward real speech and behaviors.
It ticks me oﬀ that I can’t even
smoke in my own apartment.
Man, that sucks!  You light
up where you want!
It ticks me oﬀ that I can’t even
smoke in my own apartment. 
Convergence
Hmm. Smoking goes on
everywhere, even smoking
in an apartment. 
It ticks me oﬀ that I can’t even
smoke in my own apartment. 
That should tick you oﬀ!
That’s not American! 
Smoking’s your right.  
They’re ripping you oﬀ.
Divergence
Overaccommodation
Figure 28.1 
Ways to Adapt or 
Accommodate in 
Conversation

	
Ways to Adapt     485
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
There are obvious implications of stereotypical convergence. For example, many 
gay fathers and lesbian mothers report that too many people—including educators—
rely on outdated stereotypes of gay men and lesbians when they communicate with 
them. Examining the cultural experiences of African Americans, Mark Orbe (1998) 
notes that African Americans are often identified in stereotypical ways. He points out 
that indirect stereotyping exists; that is, stereotyping when European Americans talk 
to their African American friends about what they believe to be African American 
“subjects” (sports, music, etc.). Some African Americans report that if they speak 
nonstandard dialect, they are especially prone to stereotypical reactions. Marsha 
Houston (2015) agrees. She notes that when describing themselves, White women 
indirect 
stereotyping 
imposing 
outdated and rigid 
assumptions of a 
cultural group upon 
that group
Writer John Kass underscores the potential negative implications of con­
vergence in this story he wrote for the Chicago Tribune. Kass believes that 
during the 2012 presidential campaign, Vice President Joe Biden, in an 
effort to connect with African American voters, used both verbal and non­
verbal communication to demonstrate what accommodation theorists would 
likely claim to be “stereotypical convergence”: “Biden began waving his right 
hand, palm up, and he adopted what he must have thought was the accent of 
a black minister.” Discussing President Obama’s 2012 challenger (Governor 
Romney), Vice President Biden stated that Romney’s policies would allow 
the banks to write the economic policies of the United States. Then the vice 
president said the following: “Unchain Wall Street . . . . They’re going to put 
y’all back in chains.” 
	
Kass, comparing the vice president to a “Black preacher” who “raised his 
hands to the heavens,” believes that not only the hand waving, but also the 
use of the phrases “y’all” and “back in chains” were examples of “nonsensical 
babbling.” Kass describes the vice president’s language as an example of 
“verpes.” In a not-so-veiled critique of the vice president’s proclivity to using 
inappropriate language with various groups, Kass states that verpes is the 
process of “repeatedly taking your shoe with your foot still inside it and 
shoving it all the way into your mouth so that it smacks that little punching 
bag thing back there called a uvula.” Perhaps the vice president was relying 
on stereotypes in his language or perhaps he was simply passionate about 
his thoughts and invoked language that caused a stir. Regardless, Kass con­
tends that “the race card” was played in a presidential election and that it 
was a strategic overture to a key demographic.
Source: Kass, J. (2012). Biden gets in mud pit, plays the race card. Chicago Tribune online,  
articles.chicagotribune.com/2012-08-15/news/ct-met-kass-0815-20120815_1_slight-indian
-accent-vice-president-joe-biden-race-card.
Theory in Popular Press  •  The Vice President Plays the “Race Card”?

486     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
in particular identify their speech as appropriate and standard and describe African 
American female speech as nonstandard, incorrect, or deviant.
	
Other cultural groups have also been the target of stereotyping. Edwin Vaughan 
(1998), for example, contends that blind people are repeatedly ­ad­dressed as if they 
are deaf. Brenda Allen (2015) believes that many biracial lesbian relationships 
heavily rely upon outdated and narrow views of relational intimacy.  Shobha Pais 
(1997) maintains that Asian Indian women in the United States are often perceived 
as strange because of their sari (fabric draped over the shoulder and head) or salwar 
kameez (pantsuit). And Charmaine Shutiva (2015) bemoans the fact that the Native 
American culture is erroneously viewed as stoic and unemotional, when in reality, it 
involves a great deal of humor and joy. These examples demonstrate that a number 
of cultural groups continue to be stereotyped. Stereotyped ­perceptions, then, may 
influence the extent to which an individual will ­converge.
	
Before we leave our discussion of convergence, let’s briefly discuss the ­evaluation 
of convergence. Specifically, what occurs when people attempt to ­converge in their 
conversations? How do people respond? We have already ­illustrated a number of 
examples that demonstrate both positive and negative consequences of convergence. 
But how do we know how our convergence will be met?
	
First, we need to consider that an evaluation of convergence usually depends on 
whether the convergence is done thoughtfully. When convergence is perceived as good, 
it can enhance the dialogue; when it is perceived as bad, it can break down the communi­
cation process. If a communicator speaks or ­behaves in a style similar to a listener’s, the 
convergence will probably be ­favorably perceived. But converging to ridicule, tease, or 
patronize will most likely be perceived negatively. There is a fine line between whether 
or not convergence will be perceived in the intended way. Consider, for instance, what 
happens when a nurse speaks to a patient in a nursing home about eating lunch (Ryan, 
Maclean, & Orange, 1994):	
Nurse: It’s time for lunch, Mrs. James.
Resident: But I’m not hungry. And I don’t particularly like this kind of soup.
Nurse: Everyone has to eat now, Mary. We have to get on with our day’s work. 
Besides that, we can’t suit everyone’s tastes all of the time. We don’t make the 
soup just for you, you know.
Resident: I’d really rather just rest in my room and have a cup of tea later.
Nurse: Look, dearie, if you don’t eat now, you won’t get anything later. Let’s stop 
being so fussy, all right?
Resident: Fine.
	
In this conversation, you can see how convergence by the nurse might be construed 
as condescending by the patient. In fact, Ryan and colleagues found that this style of 
communicating was rated as less respectful, less nurturing, and more frustrating for the 
resident. There are other standards of evaluating convergence, including the norms of 
the situation (Did the speaker converge in an offensive way?), the ability to pull it off 
effectively (How does a 50-year-old use the “cool” talk of a high school student?), and 
the value of a language to a community (Should European Americans employ Black 
English vernacular in their interactions with African Americans?).

	
Ways to Adapt     487
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Divergence: Vive la Différence
Giles (1980) believes speakers sometimes accentuate the verbal and nonver­
bal differences between themselves and others. He terms this divergence or non­
accommodation. Divergence differs greatly from convergence in that it is a 
dissociation process. Instead of showing how two speakers are alike in speech rate, 
gestures, or posture, divergence is when there are no attempts to demonstrate simi­
larities between speakers. In other words, two people speak to each other with no 
concern about accommodating each other. No effort is made to “reduce social dis­
tance or to make communication smoother” (Giles et al., 2007, p. 144). Divergence 
has not received as much research attention as convergence, and so our knowledge 
about the process is limited to a few claims about its function in Communication 
Accommodation Theory.
	
First, divergence should not be misconstrued as an effort to disagree or to not 
respond to another communicator. Divergence is not the same as inattentiveness. 
When people diverge, they have simply chosen to dissociate themselves from the 
communicator and the conversation. The reasons for divergence vary, including 
asserting “one’s own identity, making a statement or fulfill[ing] personal prefer­
ences” (Yoneoka, 2011). And, yet, according to Giles (2008), not all divergences 
are negatively perceived.
	
Divergence is a way for members of various cultural communities to maintain 
social identity. Giles and his colleagues (1987) observe that there are ­occa­sions when 
people—namely, racial and ethnic groups—“deliberately use their language or speech 
style as a symbolic tactic for maintaining their identity, cultural pride, and distinctive­
ness” (p. 28). Individuals may not wish to converge in order to preserve their cultural 
heritage. Let’s give a classic example that many of you may understand: Imagine 
that you are traveling in France; everywhere you go the French people you encounter 
encourage you to speak French. You are surprised at that until you realize that you, as 
a visitor, should not expect the French to converge to your language.
	
We’ve already learned that some cultural groups are immediately stereotyped 
and that people communicate with this categorization in mind. It’s no wonder, then, 
that some cultural groups remain committed to divergence in their conversations with 
others. To illustrate this point, consider the conclusions of Richard Bourhis and Giles 
(1977). In this classic study, the research team studied Welsh people who were very 
proud of their ethnic identity, but who did not know the Welsh language. As they 
learned the language, the researchers asked several questions in a standard English 
format. During the question-and-answer period, the researchers asked the group why 
they wanted to learn Welsh since it is “a dying language with a dismal future.” The 
Welsh sample rebutted with not only a strong Welsh dialect, but also Welsh words 
and phrases. Remarkably, the group could link together difficult Welsh words! The 
group, then, began to diverge from the English that was spoken to them, ­ostensibly out 
of ethnic pride.
	
A second reason people diverge pertains to power and role differences in conver­
sations. In this case, think of the cultural issue of socio-economic class. Divergence 
frequently occurs in conversations when there is a power difference between the 
communicators and when there are distinct role differences in the conversation (e.g., 
physician–patient) (Street, 1991; Street & Giles, 1982). Street (1991), for instance, 
divergence 
strategy used to 
accentuate the 
verbal and nonverbal 
differences between 
communicators

488     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
comments that “interactants having greater status may speak for longer periods, ini­
tiate most of the conversational topics, speak more slowly, and maintain a more 
relaxed body posture than does the less powerful”(p. 135). 
	
Finally, although not as often as for the reasons cited previously, divergence 
is likely to occur because the other in the conversation is viewed to be a “member 
of undesirable groups, considered to hold noxious attitudes, or ­display a deplorable 
appearance” (Street & Giles, 1982, p. 195). To this end, Giles and his colleagues 
(1987) contend that divergence is used to contrast self-images in a conversation. 
To understand this point, consider the number of so-called undesirable groups in 
society today. Whitney Herrington (2012), for ­instance, notes that homeless people 
are historically part of what society labels as unappealing or hapless. Employing the 
accommodation principle of divergence, then, a homeless man asking for money out­
side a movie theater may find himself in a conversation with a communicator (we’ll 
call this person Pat) who wishes to diverge to demonstrate differences between the 
two. Pat’s divergence may take the form of an ­increased rate of speech or a more 
clipped manner. Pat may also use vocabulary and pronunciation that clearly mark 
him as a member of the upper-middle class and may even state that the homeless man 
should get a job. In each case, the ­divergence is carried out by the individual who 
wishes to imply a status difference between the two.
Student Voices
Angel
My dad is almost 75 and he is in great physical shape. He swims almost every day 
and he doesn’t smoke or drink. One of the things that bother him the most about 
getting old is how a lot of people treat him. When he’s getting coffee at McDonald’s, 
the worker shouts at him as if he is hard of hearing. My sister constantly reminds 
him to take his thyroid medicine, even though he has a cell phone reminder each 
morning. He doesn’t mind when people open the door for him at the aquatic center, 
but he tells me that barely a week goes by without someone saying “You look really 
great for your age” or “You must be very proud of yourself” after his laps at the 
pool. Giles would probably say that people are overaccommodating because of his 
age. Knowing my dad, he would say people are irritating and annoying because of 
what they say!
Overaccommodation: Miscommunicating with a Purpose
Jane Zuengler (1991) observes that overaccommodation is a term attributed to 
the behavior of people who, although acting from good intentions, are perceived, 
instead, as patronizing or demeaning. Overaccommodation has the ­effect of making 
the target feel worse and is also viewed as a non-accommodation technique (Speer, 
Giles, & Denes, 2013) . Consider, for example, the overaccommodation taking place 
in Luke Merrill’s interview. Luke’s efforts in speaking Spanish are undermined 
by Roberto’s perception that Luke is patronizing him. In this case, and as some 
over­accommodation
attempt to overdo 
efforts in regulating, 
modifying, or 
responding to others

	
Ways to Adapt     489
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
researchers (Coupland, Coupland, Giles, & Henwood, 1988) believe, much overac­
commodation yields poor communication. Luke is not trying to patronize Roberto 
Hernandez. Although the speaker ­apparently has the intention of showing respect, 
the listener perceives it as distracting and dis­respectful.
	
Overaccommodation can be done instinctively (as we noted earlier), but much 
of it is strategic. Further, it can exist in three forms: sensory overaccommodation, 
dependency overaccommodation, and intergroup overaccommodation (Zuengler, 
1991). Let’s define these and present an example of each.
	
Sensory overaccommodation occurs when a speaker overly adapts to ­an­other 
who is perceived as limited in some way. There is an assumption that a person has a 
physical or sensory limitation/handicap, such as a hearing impairment. Limitation, 
in this sense, refers to either a linguistic or a physical ­limitation. That is, a speaker 
may believe that he or she is sensitive to another’s language disability or physical 
disability, but overdoes the accommodation. For example, in her study on patients 
with Alzheimer’s disease, Heidi Hamilton (1991) felt that she had underestimated 
the level of competence of an Alzheimer’s patient and found herself overaccommo­
dating. Because Hamilton believed that Alzheimer’s patients typically respond better 
to questions about the here and now rather than about past times or places, she kept 
this in mind as she framed her conversations with patients.
	
It turned out, however, that she underestimated the mental capabilities of her 
interviewees. Hamilton believed that she spent much more interview time on the 
environment surrounding the Alzheimer’s patient than was necessary. This resulted 
in making patients seem more incompetent than they actually were.
	
The second type of overaccommodation is dependency overaccommodation, 
which occurs when a speaker places the listener in a lower-status role, and the 
­listener is made to appear dependent on the speaker. In dependency overaccom­
modation, the listener also believes that the speaker controls the conversation 
to demonstrate higher status. This can be seen by examining the treatment of a num­
ber of immigrant populations in the United States.
	
Many cultural groups are marginalized in the United States, and dependency 
overaccommodation, it appears, may be one reason for this ostracizing. For ­instance, 
during assimilation into their new communities, many refugees are made to feel sub­
ordinate when conversing with others. Although government workers may believe 
that during their conversations with refugees they are doing what is right (helping 
refugees understand various procedures and rules associated with documentation), 
refugees may feel quite dependent on the speaker (immigration official). Given that 
many newly arrived strangers do not know the English language, do not have a basic 
understanding of cultural values or norms, and do not have a clear sense of their job 
skills, their perceptions of dependency are warranted.
	
In addition to sensory and dependency overaccommodation, there is a third 
type of overaccommodation called intergroup overaccommodation. This in­
volves speakers lumping listeners into a particular group, failing to treat each 
person as an individual. At the heart of this overaccommodation is stereo­typing, 
and there can be far-reaching consequences to this perceptual bias—ranging from 
discrimination to matters of life and death (Dragojevich, Giles, & Watson, 2012). 
Although maintaining racial and ethnic identity is critical, individual identity is 
equally important.
sensory over-
accommodation 
overly adapting to 
others who are 
perceived as limited  
in their abilities 
(physical, linguistic, 
or other)
dependency over-
accommodation
a behavior that 
occurs when 
speakers place 
listeners in a lower-
status role
intergroup over­
accommodation 
a behavior that 
occurs when 
speakers place 
listeners in cultural 
groups without 
acknowledging 
individual uniqueness

490     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Consider when a speaker uses language that assigns a listener to a particular cul­
tural group. The speaker may feel comfortable suggesting, for instance, that Mexican 
Americans have never been given a chance to succeed in the United States because 
they have been busy raising their families. To a Mexican American, this generaliza­
tion may be perceived negatively. Communicating with this perception in mind may 
cause some Mexican Americans to accommodate negatively.
	
Overaccommodation usually results in listeners perceiving that they are less 
than equal. There are serious implications to overaccommodation, including losing 
motivation for further language acquisition, avoiding conversations, and forming 
negative attitudes toward speakers and society (Zuengler, 1991). Since one primary 
goal of communication is achieving intended meaning, overaccommodation is a sig­
nificant roadblock to that goal.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Communication Accommodation Theory focuses on the role of conversations in 
our lives and how people’s communication influences those dialogues. The cultural 
backgrounds and expectations of the communicators remain important sources as 
we try to unpack the theory. Further, over the several decades of investigation, the 
research has consistently followed a quantitative approach. We now turn our attention 
to three criteria as we evaluate this communication theory: scope, logical consistency, 
and heurism.
Evaluation 
Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach to 
Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Integration
Scope
The boundaries of the theory are rather expansive. You may recall that the ­theory 
originally examined speech; it was later expanded to include the nonverbal arena. Giles 
(2008) underscores the broad scope of Communication ­Accom­modation Theory by 
stating that over the years, it “began to take propositional forms that became increas­
ingly more complex and, arguably, more demanding on readers” (p. 166). Its scope, 

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     491
however, does not necessarily undermine the theory’s integrity. The cross-disciplinary 
interest in the theory suggests that efforts to delimit it may not be the best course of 
action (Giles, 2017). The changing nature of culture in Western society suggests that a 
theory of this ­nature may need to be extensive in order to understand multiple popula­
tions, particularly those who have recently migrated to the United States.
Logical Consistency
The strengths of the theory may be quite significant because the theory has elicited 
little scholarly criticism. Still, a few concerns pertaining to the logical consistency 
of the concepts have been identified. In short, some scholars contend that a few of 
the central features of the theory warrant further examination. Judee Burgoon, Leesa 
Dillman, and Lesa Stern (1993), for example, question the convergence–divergence 
frame advanced by Giles. They believe that conversations are too complex to be 
reduced simply to these processes. They also challenge the notion that people’s 
accommodation can be explained by just these two practices. For instance, what 
occurs if people both converge and diverge in conversations? Are there consequences 
for the speaker? The listener? Giles and his colleagues (Dragojevic et al., 2016) have 
responded to some of these issues. They assert that there are “complex accommoda­
tive dilemmas” (p. 5) which are often unpredictable, thus accepting the complexity of 
conversations that often take place between people. 
	
One might also question whether the theory relies too heavily on a rational way 
of communicating. That is, although the theory acknowledges conflict between com­
municators, it also rests on a reasonable standard of conflict. Perhaps you have been in 
conflicts that are downright nasty and with people who have no sense of reason. It ap­
pears that the theory ignores this possible negative side of communication (Cupach & 
Spitzberg, 2011; Gilchrist-Petty & Long, 2016). Further, we know from conflict re­
search, too, that conflicts are often handled and managed differently across cultures, 
prompting some questions into the notion of what to do when convergence and di­
vergence “collide.”  Still, Giles (Gallois, Ogay, & Giles, 2005) does not ignore this 
perception and believes a great deal of work is still to be done before the process of 
accommodation can be fully ­understood.
Student Voices
Michael
I work in a nursing home that specializes in Alzheimer’s disease. We have more 
than a hundred residents with the disease, all of whom are at various stages of the 
disease. I have heard the “baby talk” from staff to residents before, and I’ve heard 
it a lot. We’re trained and told not to talk this way and to treat every resident with 
dignity—that ­includes talking like an adult. But, I’ve seen my coworkers talk down 
to the residents, and the residents, in turn, talk that way. It’s pathetic. If anything, 
I wish the staff would ­accommodate with speech that is less demeaning and more 
considerate. 

492     Chapter 28  •  Communication Accommodation Theory
C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
Heurism
Without doubt, Giles and his colleagues have conceptualized a theory rich in heu­
ristic value. The theory has been incorporated in a number of different studies. 
For instance, accommodation has been studied with populations that until this 
theory, were rarely researched, including law enforcement (Giles, Linz, Bonilla, & 
Gomez, 2012), patient–providers (Farzadnia & Giles, 2014), native and nonnative 
speakers (Rogerson-Revell, 2010), immigrant women (Marlow & Giles, 2013), gay 
men (Hajek, 2016), and the elderly (Harwood, 2002; Hehl & ­McDonald, 2012). It 
addition, it has been studied with advertising (Moon & Nelson, 2008), in conjunction 
with Twitter (Tamburrini, Cinnirella, Jansen, & Bryden, 2015), in business meetings 
(Robinson-Nevell, 2010), in families (Guntzviller, 2015) and even with messages 
left on telephone answering machines (Buzzanell, Burrell, Stafford, & Berkowitz, 
1996). There is no doubt that the theory is heuristic and has lasting scholarly value 
in the communication field.
Closing
In his earlier writings on the theory, Giles challenged researchers to apply Communi­
cation Accommodation Theory across the life span and in different cultural settings. 
For the most part, his suggestions have been heeded. His research has broadened 
our understanding of why conversations are so complex, especially with individuals 
from different cultural backgrounds. Through convergence, Giles sheds light on why 
people adapt to others in their interactions. Through divergence, we can understand 
why people choose to ignore adapting strategies. He has championed a theory that has 
helped us better understand the culture around us and the influences of accommoda­
tion on the diverse relationships within society.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t:  Two key issues of Communication Accommodation 
Theory are convergence and divergence. How might these two principles be 
applied to email conversations between a supervisor and an employee?
	
1. Rewrite the opening example of Luke Merrill and Roberto Hernandez. This 
time, place the two individuals in the context of teacher and student.
	
2. Explain how convergence might function in the following relationships: po­
lice officer–driver, therapist–client, and supervisor–subordinate. In your ­response, 
choose a conversational topic that might be unique to the relationship and integrate 
convergence accordingly.
	
3. We have noted that overaccommodation results in miscommunication. Some 
research in Communication Accommodation Theory has also examined underac­
commodation, or the process of not adapting sufficiently to another communicator. 
What do you believe are some examples of ­under­accommodation?

C O M M U N I C A T I O N  A C C O M M O D A T I O N  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     493
	
4. Giles contends that self-perception can influence the accommodation 
process. How does a person’s self-perception affect accommodation? Provide 
examples to illustrate your thoughts.
	
5. CAT has been framed in the intercultural communication context. Based on 
your understanding of the theory, under what additional context(s) can the theory 
be understood?
	
6. How might divergence be explained using social identity? Explain using 
examples from your life.
	
7. Discuss a situation in which accommodation might backfire on an 
­individual.

M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
494
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Patricia 
Fitzpatrick 
sat in the back row in 
her 
political 
science 
classroom; she closed 
her eyes, letting the professor’s words wash over 
her. She was wondering what in the world had 
possessed her to go back to college at the age 
of 40. It seemed like a good idea when she first 
thought about finishing the BA she had begun 
over 20 years ago, but now she thought she must 
have been out of her mind to try this. She felt 
like she didn’t understand a word her professors 
said, and she was having an extremely difficult 
time keeping up with all her assignments. Most 
of the other students were much younger than 
she and seemed to have a lot more disposable 
income, too. She really hadn’t spoken to many of 
them beyond a quick hello. All in all, this college 
idea was turning into a big hassle.
It wasn’t supposed to be this way. Initially, 
­Patricia thought finishing her degree would 
improve her self-esteem. She also hoped it 
would get her out of the dead-end job she cur­
rently had with Hudson’s Department Store. 
She worked nights as a shipping clerk for the 
store, sending out orders for their mail-order 
business. She has worked for Hudson’s for the 
past seven years, and it does not seem as if she 
will advance there. It is a pretty ­boring job with 
low pay, and Patricia was hopeful that a degree 
might give her more opportunities. As a single 
mom with three kids, she really needs a better 
job.
But Patricia is starting to despair about her 
prospects. One of the most disturbing things 
so far has been how tongue tied she feels in 
class. She has so much trouble articulating 
what she wants to say about the material that 
she ends up not saying anything in most of her 
classes. Patricia worries that this will count 
against her, especially in her smaller classes, 
where the professors really seem to encour­
age class participation. She had expected that 
she would have a lot to say as she learned new 
things, but she is finding it difficult to express 
her opinions. So, instead of increasing her 
self-esteem, college is making her feel worse 
about herself.
This isn’t the first time that Patricia has 
felt inarticulate. She admits to herself that 
she has had a hard time speaking up long be­
fore she returned to college. At work, she is 
the only woman on her shift, and the men don’t 
seem to pay attention to her when she speaks. 
Once she had tried to compare an experience 
at work to teaching her son to read, and her 
coworkers had looked at her like she was nuts. 
Then they all started laughing and calling her 
Muted Group Theory
Based on the research of Cheris Kramarae
Patricia 
Fitzpatrick
What if we think of ourselves as collectively having those thousand arms 
to work together, aided by a feminist history of connecting to ask and 
answer questions that are of concern to many?
—Cheris Kramarae
C H A P T E R	29

M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
	
Muted Group Theory     495
S
ome researchers analyzing Patricia’s situation might be tempted to examine her 
individual traits, noting that she might have problems with shyness or a fear of 
communicating. However, the theory that we discuss in this chapter offers a different 
approach to explaining Patricia’s situation. Muted Group Theory (MGT) asserts that, 
as a female, as a single mom, and as a person of low income, Patricia is a member 
of several groups whose power base does not allow her to express her voice, or even 
to always hear her own voice in her head. The groups to which Patricia belongs have 
experiences that are not well expressed in their language system—a language system 
that was devised primarily by well-to-do men to represent their own experiences. 
According to MGT, Patricia and others are muted because their native language often 
does not provide a good fit with their life experiences. 
MGT focuses on the power to name experiences and explains that women try­
ing to use man-made language to describe their experiences is somewhat like native 
English speakers learning to converse in Spanish. To do so, they have to go through 
an internal translation process, scanning the foreign vocabulary for the best word 
to express themselves. This process makes them hesitant and often inarticulate as 
they are unable to use the language fluently for their purposes. In the process, muted 
groups metaphorically lose their voice (Wood, 2017). As Cheris Kramarae (1981), 
the researcher who adapted MGT for the field of communication, observes:
The language of a particular culture does not serve all its speakers equally, for 
not all speakers contribute in an equal fashion to its formulation. Women (and 
members of other subordinate groups) are not as free or as able as men are to 
say what they wish, when and where they wish, because the words and the 
norms for their use have been formulated by the dominant group, men. (p. 1)
Yet, it isn’t the case that all women are silenced and all men have voice. MGT al­
lows us to understand any group that is silenced by the inadequacies of their language. 
For instance, Kami Kosenko (2010) notes that MGT offers a heuristic explanation 
for how the transgender individuals in her study were “rendered mute by a bio­
medical discourse that fails to represent the transgender body or sexual experience” 
(p. 140). Furthermore, muting may take place as a result of the unpopularity of the 
views that a person is trying to express. Muted Group theorists criticize dominant 
groups and argue that hegemonic ideas often silence other ideas. Anita Taylor and 
M. J. Hardman (2000) ­comment that some feminist groups can become dominant 
within the feminist movement and then mute the voices of other women who question 
“Mom.” Another time she had been the chair 
of a committee at her daughter’s school. The 
committee was supposed to research ways 
the school could raise money for more com­
puter equipment. Patricia had to get up in front 
of ­repre­sentatives from the parents’ group, 
teachers, and administrators and report on the 
committee’s findings. Although the report had 
been okay, ­Patricia thought she had paused too 
much while she spoke. Even though she had 
spent a great deal of time preparing for the 
speech, she had still found herself occasionally 
groping for words.
She hoped that college would help her be­
come more articulate. It would be wonderful to 
be able to speak up and say what is on her mind. 
­Patricia isn’t ready to give up, but things certainly 
aren’t going as planned.

496     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
their ­ideology. Taylor and Hardman ­advance the example of Matilde Joslyn Gage, a 
nineteenth-­century feminist, who argued views that made her unpopular with the 
other feminists of the day such as Elizabeth Cady Stanton. As a result of advanc­
ing ideas that were considered too radical, “she became a persona non grata among 
the women of the movement” (pp. 2–3) who had more power; consequently, Gage’s 
voice was muted and lost to future generations.
As you can probably guess from our discussion thus far, MGT points out prob­
lems with the status quo and suggests ways to remediate these problems. Later in 
this chapter, we describe some of the action steps advocated by Muted Group pro­
ponents. Further, MGT is a theory that examines power issues (Nangabo, 2015). 
As Cheris Kramarae (2005) observes, “people attached or assigned to subordinate 
groups may have a lot to say, but they tend to have relatively little power to say it” 
(p. 55). Or if they do venture to speak, those in a greater power position may ignore, 
ridicule, or disrespect their contribution in a variety of ways. As Cheris Kramarae 
(2009) notes, muted groups “get in trouble” when they speak out in their own voices. 
Origins of Muted Group Theory
Muted Group Theory originated with the work of Edwin and Shirley Ardener, social 
anthropologists who were concerned with social structure and hierarchy. In 1975, 
Edwin Ardener noted that groups making up the top end of the social hierarchy 
determine the communication system for the culture. Lower-power groups in the 
society, such as women, the poor, and people of color, have to learn to work within 
the communication system that the dominant group has established. Turning this 
generalization to the specific case of women in a culture, Edwin Ardener observes 
that social anthropologists studied women’s experiences by talking almost exclu­
sively to men. Thus, not only do women have to contend with the difficulties of a 
language that does not completely give voice to their thoughts, but their experiences 
are represented through a male perspective (Ardener, 2005).
In 1975, Edwin Ardener commented on why researchers (who at the time 
were mainly men) tended to speak and listen to men in the cultures they studied. 
Theory At a Glance  •  Muted Group Theory
Language serves its creators (and those who belong to the same groups 
as its creators) better than those in other groups who have to learn to use 
the language as best they can. This is the case because the experiences 
of the creators are named clearly in language, whereas the experiences 
of other groups are not. Due to their problems adapting to a language they 
did not create, people from other groups appear less articulate than those 
from groups like the creators. Sometimes these muted groups create their 
own language to compensate for their problems with the dominant group’s 
language.

	
Origins of Muted Group Theory     497
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Ardener believes that these scholars “have a bias towards the kinds of model that 
men are ready to provide (or to concur in) rather than towards any that women 
might provide. If the men appear ‘articulate’ compared with the women, it is a 
case of like speaking like” (p. 2). Further, Shirley Ardener (1978) observes that 
women’s mutedness is the counterpart to men’s deafness. She explains that women 
(or members of any subordinate group) do speak, but their words fall on deaf 
ears, and when this happens over time, they tend to stop trying to articulate their 
thoughts, and they may even stop thinking them. In Ardener’s view, “Words which 
continually fall upon deaf ears may, of course, in the end become unspoken, or 
even unthought” (p. 20).
The Ardeners might argue that Patricia Fitzpatrick is twice muted: once by the 
failure of her language to act as an accurate tool for her use and once by anyone who 
labels her negatively rather than acknowledging she is poorly served by her language. 
For Edwin Ardener, muted groups are rendered inarticulate by the dominant group’s 
language system, which grows directly out of their worldview and experience. For 
the muted group, what they say first has to shift out of their own worldview and be 
compared to the experiences of the dominant group. Thus, articulations for the muted 
group are indirect and broken (Figure 29.1). 
In 1981, Kramarae published an influential book called Women and Men 
Speaking: Frameworks for Analysis. In this book, Kramarae profiles several the­
ories that come from other disciplines like MGT and suggests how these theoreti­
cal frameworks can help explain questions of communication. In her discussion 
of MGT, Kramarae states that her aims are somewhat more limited than those of 
the Ardeners, who were concerned with applying Muted Group Theory across 
many cultures. Kramarae’s interest is in the “questions the theory raises and [the] 
explanations it . . . ­provide[s] for the communication patterns among and between 
women and men in Great Britain and the United States” (1981, p. 4). Kramarae 
asserts that MGT’s assertions are especially true for the English language because 
English was developed and formalized by male clerics and academics. Because 
women were not instrumental in formalizing the English language and were in a 
lower power position in the culture that created it, Kramarae asserts that women 
would be a muted group.
Dominant
group
P-R
P-R = Perceptions of reality
P-R
P-R
P-R
Muted
group
Figure 29.1
Muted Group 
Theory 
Source: Adapted 
from Ardener, 1975.

498     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Kramarae’s work on Muted Group Theory led to insights about how the English 
language affects women’s communication behaviors. Speaking about MGT, Anita 
Taylor and M. J. Hardman (2000) observe that:
English does not name concepts important to women, but to men (e.g., one can 
have a “seminal” idea; but was one ever described as “ovular”?). English also 
devalues concepts important to women, but not to men (again, the “seminal” 
idea is an example; if one nurtured or incubated an idea it would have quite a 
different feeling, as would ovulating it). English uses male referents and terms 
(e.g., the “generic” he and the conclusion that number is more important than 
gender for the third-­person indefinite pronoun). (p. 8)
In a similar vein, Dennis Nangabo (2015) states more succinctly notes that it is 
quite challenging to communicate in a language that the majority or dominant group 
has created for those who are in the minority. 
Makeup of Muted Groups
Much of the theorizing and application of Muted Group Theory has focused on 
women as a muted group. Yet, as researchers such as Mark Orbe (1998, 2005), 
Michael Hechter (2004), and Liliana Heradova (2009) note, the theory can be 
validly applied to any nondominant group. Orbe suggests that in the United 
States and several other cultures, society privileges specific characteristics and 
perspectives: male, European American, heterosexual, able-bodied, youthful, 
middle and upper class, and Christian. People with these characteristics form the 
dominant group or the group that holds the power in the culture. Other groups 
that coexist with the dominant group are generally subordinate to it in that they 
do not have access to as much power as do members of the dominant group. 
Thus, non-European groups like African Americans or Asian Americans, gays 
and lesbians, the elderly, the lower class, disabled people, and non-Christians, all 
can be members of muted groups, in the same way that women are. Orbe (1998, 
2012) developed Co-Cultural Theory, based on Muted Group Theory, to capture 
these ideas.
Some researchers have suggested that men might be part of a muted group as 
well. Radhika Chopra (2001) examines the issue of muting for nurturing ­fathers. 
Chopra argues that the discourse of mothering represented by some feminists reduced 
the father to a “depersonalized cipher” whose presence is “posited as an absence, in 
contrast with the hands-on vital involvement of the mother” (p. 447). Chopra notes 
that this discourse not only silences the father but also fails to account for fathering 
in other societies or periods of history where the distant, silent father did not exist. 
Chopra points to fathers in the early American colonial period who were very in­
volved in teaching their ­children both reading and writing skills as well as moral and 
religious lessons. 
Although some Muted Group theorists might disagree that fathers (or any men) 
are ever in a low-power position, Chopra concludes that giving voice to “father-
care” is a critical process that will remove the category of caregiving from female 
ownership and in so doing transform the concept of gender identity completely. Yet, 
because most of the research in the area of Muted Group Theory has focused on men 
dominant group 
the group that holds 
the power in a given 
culture

	
Assumptions of Muted Group Theory     499
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
as the dominant group and women as the muted group, we pay most attention to that 
relationship in this chapter.
Differentiating Between Sex and Gender
In training our focus on men and women, we need to clarify two terms: sex and 
gender. Generally, researchers use the term sex to mean biological categories, male 
and female, determined by the presence of XX chromosomes for females and XY 
chromosomes for males. In contrast, gender is defined as the learned behaviors that 
constitute femininity and masculinity in a given culture. Thus, gender is changeable 
and reflects whatever the culture accepts at a given time for these roles. Currently, 
it is within the definition of masculinity to have pierced ears, and it is within the 
definition of femininity to have tattoos. At an earlier time, these attributes would not 
have been deemed appropriate. However, it is also the case that the terms sex and 
gender are often blurred because women are socialized to be feminine and men are 
encouraged to be masculine. Therefore, we will use the terms interchangeably in this 
chapter.
Assumptions of Muted Group Theory
Cheris Kramarae (1981) isolated three assumptions she believes are central to Muted 
Group Theory. We review each of her tenets in turn:
∙∙
Women perceive the world differently than men because of women’s and men’s 
different experiences and activities rooted in the division of labor.
∙∙
Because of their political dominance, men’s system of perception is ­dominant, 
impeding the free expression of women’s alternative models of the world.
∙∙
In order to participate in society, women must transform their own ­models in 
terms of the received male system of expression. (p. 3)
This first assumption begins with the premise that the world is a different place 
for women and men and that their experiences differ. Furthermore, the assumption 
posits an explanation for these differences. The explanation lies in the division of 
labor that allocates work on the basis of sex, such that women are responsible for tasks 
in the home and men are responsible for work outside the home. The division of labor 
began in Western countries in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries as a result of so­
cial transformations, in large part related to the Industrial Revolution (Coontz, 1988). 
The Industrial Revolution took work out of the home and made it a paid activity. Prior 
to that, work had been intertwined with home life because all members of the family 
contributed to the family’s survival, usually on subsistence farms. No one was literally 
paid for their specific labor; the money the family realized came from selling their 
produce or livestock, the result of collective work by the entire family.
The separation of the workplace from the home led to a recognition of the two 
as separate spheres; the conceptualization of public and private came about, and 
the family was classed as private life (Butler & Modaff, 2015). The result of this 
division was to cast women’s role in the home, or private life, and men’s role in the 
workplace, or public life. This had the effect of clearly ­delineating women’s tasks 
sex 
biological category 
divided into male 
and female
gender 
social category 
consisting of the 
learned behaviors 
that constitute 
masculinity and 
femininity for a 
given culture

500     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
in the home and sharply dividing what women’s responsibilities were in contrast 
to men’s. Stephanie Coontz (1988) notes that this trend occurred in all classes and 
ethnic groups in the United States except African Americans.
You can see the logic of blaming the division of labor for men’s and women’s 
differing worldviews. When people’s occupations differ greatly, they tend to see the 
world in different ways. If your day is spent caring for children and the home, your 
experiences will vary a great deal from those of someone whose day is spent sell­
ing merchandise to others. Sandra Bem (1993) argues that this division also created 
what she labels a gender polarization lens that causes people to see women and men 
as very different from each other. In 1909, Clara E. Hasse, a student at Milwaukee 
Downer Women’s College, wrote a senior essay that illustrates the lens of gender 
polarization. She wrote about the topic of single-sex schooling, saying, “It were far 
better not to class girls with boys while receiving their education, the most impor­
tant reason being that they are so entirely dif­ferent and therefore should be taught 
­diversely” (p. 10). When people believe that women and men are radically ­different 
from each other, we might expect that they get treated differently. Different treatment 
certainly ­results in different experiences.
As we have written elsewhere with Judy Pearson (Pearson, West, & Turner, 
1995), “From birth it is clear that male and female babies are treated differently. . . . 
Male [infants] are more likely than female infants to be described as ‘strong,’ ‘solid,’ 
or ‘independent.’ Female infants, on the other hand, are often described as ‘loving,’ 
‘cute,’ and ‘sweet’” (p. 49). Males and females are treated differently and expected to 
do different activities. Even when women work outside the home, they are often still 
expected to take primary responsibility for the home and care for children or elderly 
parents as the need arises (Wood, 2017). Arlie Hochschild’s research (Blair-Loy, 
Hochschild, Pugh, Williams, & Hartman, 2015; Hochschild, 1989) talks about the 
phenomenon of the second shift, where working mothers put in eight hours at their 
paid job and then come home to do a second shift there.
Sometimes the differing experiences of men and women are subtle. One study 
(Turner, 1992) asked respondents to describe situations that they believe are uniquely 
experienced by their own sex and for which, currently, no word exists and then to 
give those experiences a name. This was patterned after an activity Judy Pearson 
(1985) calls creating “genlets” or “sexlets.” The results were not completely support­
ive of Muted Group Theory because men generated essentially the same number of 
“genlets” as women, indicating that language fails men as well as women.
However, the types of words created did differ between men and women. Men 
coined words concerned with drinking and competition, whereas women created 
words focusing on relationships and personal issues such as appearance. Women also 
noted experiences where they felt fearful or uncertain, and this concern was not in­
cluded in the men’s words. For instance, women coined the word herdastudaphobia, 
which meant feeling fear when passing a group of strange men on the street, and 
they created the word piglabelphobia, to designate a woman’s tendency to limit what 
she eats in front of a date for fear of being labeled a pig. Men created words such 
as scarfaholic, an eating contest among men and gearheaditis, an obsession with 
fixing up one’s car to make it the best on the road. Interestingly, when men focused 
on issues of eating and bodybuilding, their concern was competitive. When women 
addressed these same issues, their concern was for their own insecurities and their 
gender polarization 
lens
viewing men and 
women as polar 
opposites
second shift 
the phenomenon of 
working women put­
ting in eight hours 
on the job and 
another day’s work 
at home

	
Assumptions of Muted Group Theory     501
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
desire to please others. Thus, the first assumption of MGT, that men and women have 
different experiences, was supported by these results. 
The second assumption of Muted Group Theory goes beyond simply noting that 
women and men have different experiences. This assumption states that men are the 
dominant group, and their experiences are given preference over women’s. Specifi­
cally, men are in charge of naming and labeling social life, and women’s experiences 
are often unnamed as a result. Women then have difficulties talking about their ex­
periences. For example, Kramarae (1981) tells the following story about a woman 
who attended a workshop on the topic of women as a muted group and spoke about 
a common problem she experienced with her husband:
She and her husband, both working full-time outside the home, usually arrive 
home at about the same time. She would like him to share the ­dinner-making re­
sponsibilities, but the job always falls upon her. Occasionally, he says, “I would 
be glad to make dinner. But you do it so much better than I.” She was pleased 
to receive this compliment, but as she found herself in the kitchen each time she 
realized that he was using a verbal strategy for which she had no word and thus 
had more difficulty identifying and bringing [it] to his awareness. She told the 
people at the seminar, “I had to tell you the whole story to explain to you how 
he was using flattery to keep me in my female place.” She said she needed a 
word to define the strategy, or a word to define the person who uses the strategy, 
a word which would be commonly understood by both women and men. (p. 7)
In this example, the woman had difficulty naming her experience although she knew 
something was occurring that she wished to talk about. In a ­similar fashion, Patricia 
Fitzpatrick from our chapter-opening vignette is experiencing problems speaking 
out in class, talking to the other students, speaking to her coworkers, and generally 
articulating her ideas. She is uncomfortable about her difficulties, and she is blam­
ing herself because things are not working out as she planned. Muted Group Theory 
takes a different perspective, however, noting that these problems are not the result 
of women’s inadequacies, but rather are caused by the unresponsiveness of the lan­
guage women have to express themselves. MGT argues that any speaker would be 
inarticulate if there were no words in their language to describe their thoughts.
Muted Group Theory asserts that men’s political dominance allows their per­
ceptions to be dominant. This forces alternative perceptions—those that women 
hold as a result of their different experiences—into a subordinate position. Women’s 
communication is constrained because of this subordinate position. Ann Burnett 
and her colleagues (2009) used MGT and Co-cultural Theory to investigate men’s 
dominance on college campuses. They found that the way rape was talked about on 
campus tended to mute female students, ­potentially contributing to the creation and 
perpetuation of a campus rape culture.
Cindy Reuther and Gail Fairhurst (2000) discuss the “glass ceiling” for women 
in organizational hierarchies and comment on how (White) men’s experiences 
dominate the world of work. They observe that patriarchal values tend to reproduce 
themselves in organizations to men’s advantage. They note: 
The practices leading to the replication of white males in senior levels are 
based in ideology. In often subtle and unconscious ways (e.g., in language, 
dress, and work rituals), white women and men and women of color are 

502     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Overall, then, MGT assumes that men’s, especially White men’s, experiences 
are dominant and women and people of color need to subordinate their own expe­
riences to the extent that they can in order to partake in social and organizational 
success.
The final assumption of Muted Group Theory speaks to the process of transla­
tion that women must go through in order to participate in social life. Women’s task 
is to conceptualize a thought and then scan the vocabulary, which is really better 
suited to men’s thinking, for the best words for encoding that thought. You can see 
how this renders women less fluent speakers than men. Tillie Olsen (1978), the au­
thor of Silences, says that although men are supposed to tell it straight, women have 
to “tell it slant” (p. 23).
The pauses that worry Patricia Fitzpatrick in our chapter-opening scenario 
are attributable, according to MGT, to this cumbersome process of translation 
that women have to engage in when speaking. Some researchers (e.g., Hayden, 
1994) suggest that women’s groups engage in a great deal of overlaps and si­
multaneous speaking because they are helping one another cope with a language 
system that is not well suited to their tasks. Thus, when women speak with one 
another, they collaborate on storytelling—not so much because women are col­
laborative by nature, but rather because they need to help one another find the 
right words to encode their thoughts.
Some of the problems inherent in the translation process are highlighted by 
examining instances when women’s words for experiences do become part of the 
pressured to commit to patriarchal and white interests and value systems. The 
upshot is that replication promotes conformity rather than a pluralistic system 
in which individuals can interact and work according to personal principles. 
(p. 242)
Theory-Into-Practice
Theoretical Claim: Men have created and controlled language that has rendered 
them as superior and women as subordinate.
Practical Implication: It didn’t take long for Alicia to see the “man’s world” in tech. 
During breaks with her coworkers, she heard the guys telling her to “man up.” Even 
some of the “everyday” terms like “hard drive” or “joy stick” or “RAM” Alicia found 
very offensive and yet, she was rather disempowered because she was a new em­
ployee in a male-dominant company. It wasn’t long, though, before a female VP was 
hired and one of her first directives was related to throwing out any perceived or 
real sexist language in policies and procedures as well as establishing a statement 
discouraging and prohibiting its usage. 
Source: Bassett, L. (2012, August 20). Huffington Post online, huffingtonpost.com/2012/08/20
/todd-akin-missouri_n_1811232.html.
T*I*P

	
The Process of Silencing     503
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
general vocabulary. Before the 1970s, the term sexual harassment did not exist but 
it, nonetheless, existed. Monica Hesse (2016), for example, writes in the Washing­
ton Post that it was common in the nineteenth century. She writes: “The issue had 
been addressed in the 19th century, when an 1887 report on ‘women wage-workers’ 
declared that household service ‘has become synonymous with the worst degra­
dation that comes to a woman,’ because male employers so commonly assaulted 
their maids” (https://www.washingtonpost.com/lifestyle/style/anita-hills-testimony
-compelled-america-to-look-closely-at-sexual-harassment/2016/04/13/36999612
-ea2e-11e5-bc08-3e03a5b41910_story.html). Ultimately, in the 1970s, activists at 
Cornell University coined the term (http://now.org/blog/a-brief-history-of-sexual
-harassment-in-the-united-states/). Women who experienced what we now call sex­
ual harassment had nothing to use for labeling their experiences. As Gloria Steinem 
has said, before the term was accepted into the vocabulary, women simply accepted 
harassment as part of life. For instance, Angie had a job in a library years ago, and her 
boss was a man who liked to comment on her figure and compare it to his wife’s. At 
the time, Angie could only say that she had a bad job with a horrible boss. Without 
a label, the experience seems individual and the inappropriateness of that behavior 
is minimized. Labeling it sexual harassment places it in a category, suggests some 
coping strategies, and points to its seriousness. Furthermore, giving the experience 
a term, sexual harassment, allows us to see that it exists broadly and is supported at 
many levels of society. ­Social change is possible when we recognize the phenomenon 
with a label. Similarly, the terms domestic violence, date rape, marital rape, and 
stalking all name crimes that without the labels might simply be seen as individual 
problems and not recognized as serious offenses. Without these words, women faced 
silence when they wanted to talk about their experiences, and they were at a loss for 
instituting social change.
Marsha Houston and Cheris Kramarae (1991) point out that women ­participate 
in silencing as well, which is illustrated by examining some talk ­between African 
American and European American women. Houston and ­Kramarae observe that si­
lencing occurs not only through preventing talk, but also by shaping and controlling 
the talk of others. When White women criticize African American women’s talk as 
“confrontational,” “the message to black women is, ‘Talk like me, or I won’t listen’” 
(p. 389). If subordinate group members hear this message and try to conform to it, 
their talk is slowed and disempowered. When Patricia Fitzpatrick, from our opening 
story, thinks about how her contributions sound and attempts to speak like the other 
­students, she is hampered in her fluency.
The Process of Silencing
The central premise of Muted Group Theory is that members of marginalized groups 
are silenced and rendered inarticulate as speakers. This silencing does not rely on ex­
plicit enforcement or coercion. As Robin Sheriff (2000) observes, silencing of muted 
groups is a socially shared phenomenon. According to ­Sheriff, “unlike the activity 
of speech, which does not require more than a single actor, silence demands collabo­
ration and the tacit communal understandings that such collaboration presupposes. 
Although it is contractual in nature, a critical feature of this type of silence is that it 

504     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
is both a consequence and an index of an unequal distribution of power” (p. 114). 
Thus, silence is accomplished through a social understanding of who holds the power 
and who does not ­(Gendrin, 2000). In this section we will briefly review a few of the 
methods used to accomplish this power distribution and resulting silencing. These 
­methods ­include: ridicule, ritual, control, and harassment. This is not an exhaustive 
list of methods of silencing. Perhaps you can think of other ways you have experi­
enced or observed.
Ridicule
Houston and Kramarae (1991) point out that women’s speech is trivialized. “Men 
label women’s talk chattering, gossiping, nagging, whining, bitching (Cut the 
cackle!)” (p. 390). Men often say that women talk about meaningless things and 
claim that they cannot understand how women spend so much time talking to their 
girlfriends. Women themselves often refer to their own talk as gabbing or gossiping. 
Women are also told that they have no sense of humor, and this is an opportunity for 
ridicule. Also, women’s concerns are often trivialized by men as not being important 
enough to listen to, yet women are expected to be supportive listeners for men. Even 
in the medical context, women report that their doctors may ridicule or trivialize their 
concerns (Brann & Mattson, 2004).
Ritual
Some people have pointed out that many social rituals have the effect of silenc­
ing women or advocating that women are subordinate to men. One such ritual is 
the wedding ceremony. There are a number of aspects in a traditional ceremony 
that silence the bride. First, the groom stands at the front while the bride is “de­
livered” to him on the arm of her father. The father then “gives her away” to 
the groom. Furthermore, the groom stands at the right hand of the minister (or 
whoever officiates), and this is traditionally a place of higher status than the 
bride’s position, to the left. The groom says the vows first. The bride wears a 
veil and a white gown to indicate that she has been “preserved” for the groom. 
The groom is told at the end that he may kiss the bride. The couple is pronounced 
“man” and “wife,” and traditionally, the bride changes her name to the groom’s. 
In many services, the couple is introduced immediately after the vows as Mr. and 
Mrs. John Smith. In her (1981) book, ­Kramarae talks about the process she went 
through concerning her name changes. When she married, her husband’s name 
was Kramer and her name upon marriage became Cheris Rae Kramer. At the time 
of her marriage, it was not legal for a wife to keep her own name. Later the laws 
changed, and Kramarae combined her husband’s last name with her middle name 
and created her own name. This change was accomplished with a great deal of 
discussion and controversy, and many people questioned her judgment. Kramarae 
points out that no one questioned her husband throughout the entire process, and 
his name remained unchanged. Although many couples work to individualize the 
ceremony and have changed some of these aspects, the traditional ritual ­implies 
subordination of the bride.

	
The Process of Silencing     505
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Control 
Researchers have noted that men control many decisions, such as what goes into 
history books, leaving women’s history untapped (Wood, 2017). In addition, the 
media are controlled by men; women’s talk and contributions get less coverage 
in mainstream media. Furthermore, many communication practices place men 
as central and women as eclipsed. For instance, men talk more than women in 
mixed-sex interactions despite conventional wisdom to the contrary. In an analy­
sis of 66 previous studies examining U.S. men’s and women’s talk in a variety 
of contexts, men’s talk time exceeded women’s in 61 of the cases (James & 
Drackich, 1993). 
A communication behavior that keeps men in control is interruptions. When men 
interrupt women, the women often switch to talk about whatever topic the men raise. 
When women interrupt men, this is usually not the case. Men frequently go back to 
what they originally were talking about (DeFrancisco, 1991). In addition, Victoria 
DeFrancisco has concluded that men often fail to attend to their partners’ talk; they 
refuse to consider what the women are speaking about and shift the conversation to 
a topic of their preference.
Harassment
Holly Kearl (2015) writes about street harassment, noting that women do not have 
free access to public streets. Men dominate public spaces in that women walk­
ing there may receive verbal threats (sometimes couched as compliments). Sexual 
harassment in the workplace is another method of telling women that they do not 
belong out of the domestic sphere. Mary Strine (1992) shows how some talk in 
universities naturalizes harassment, making it seem like an acceptable practice. 
When women who have experienced sexual harassment are labeled as hysterical, 
overly sensitive, or troublemakers, their concerns are generally dismissed and 
defined as unimportant.
Student Voices
Ethan
When I started reading about Muted Group Theory, it really seemed wrong to me. 
I mean there are a lot of times I am not sure exactly how to put my thoughts into 
words and I’m a white, heterosexual guy, so I don’t qualify for any of the muted 
groups that the book talks about. But, when I read that sexual harassment didn’t 
have a name for a long time, it did make me think that maybe the theory had a point. 
I guess it would be pretty hard to talk about something if there were literally no 
words to describe it. And I can see how you’d think it was something that just hap­
pened to you and not some big thing that was going on with a lot of people if there 
were no words for it.

506     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Strategies of Resistance
As we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, Muted Group Theory is a criti­
cal theory; as such, it goes beyond explaining a phenomenon—such as women’s 
muting—to advocating change in the status quo. Houston and ­Kramarae (1991) offer 
several strategies for this purpose. One strategy of resistance consists of naming the 
strategies of silencing we have just reviewed. Through this process, the silencing is 
made accessible and a topic for discussion. A second approach advocated by Houston 
and Kramarae is to reclaim, elevate, and celebrate women’s discourse. Houston and 
Kramarae mention that women are beginning to celebrate and study oral histories, 
diaries and journals, and the so-called alternative means of expression like sewing, 
weaving, and other handwork that is often done by women. Through examining 
these forums for ­expression, women are recognizing the “effectiveness, impact, and 
eloquence of women’s communicative experiences as well as men’s” (Foss & Foss, 
1991, p. 21). Other researchers (Hoover, Hastings, & Musambira, 2009) have exam­
ined communication venues where women’s voices are celebrated and their particu­
lar outlook is valorized, such as websites for the bereaved. While still others have 
investigated how women’s music might provide a way to give women voice literally 
and ­figuratively (Huber, 2010; Moody, 2011).
Women also are creating a new and more representative language to capture 
their experiences. Although changing the language is an ambitious task, language is 
malleable, and as new concepts enter our culture, new words are created to describe 
them. Although much of our computer jargon has rather sexist roots (e.g., joystick, 
floppy, hard drive, etc.), there are newer tech words that are gender neutral (e.g., fire­
wall, screenshot, etc.). Think of all the words we now have to talk about computers 
and computer-mediated communication (itself a new term!). Suzette Elgin (1988) 
invented a whole language, which she calls Laadan, focusing on women’s experi­
ences. Kramarae and Paula Treichler (1992) compiled a feminist dictionary to give 
woman-centered definitions to words of importance in women’s experiences.
In addition to Houston and Kramarae’s (1991) suggestions, Ezster Hargittai and 
Aaron Shaw (2015) note that new media offer opportunities to give voice to previ­
ously muted groups. Yet, they caution that even communication conducted via the 
Internet does not take place in a vacuum, and when using new media people have 
to be mindful of structural inequities that can keep some groups muted even online. 
They note that there are “profound gender inequalities” (p. 424) that exist which must 
be reduced and ultimately eliminated. 
Through a variety of resistance strategies including naming strategies of 
­silencing, reclaiming, elevating, and celebrating women’s discourse, creating new 
words for uniquely gendered experiences, and using new media, muting can be re­
sisted. In short, there are many approaches to changing the situation that MGT de­
lineates and explains.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Muted Group Theory has many adherents, but as you would expect with such a 
politically charged theory, it also prompted some concerns by others. The theory, as 

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     507
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
you likely know by now, is immersed in qualitative thinking, honoring voices and 
life experiences. Let’s consider the criteria of utility and test of time in particular as 
we evaluate MGT.
Integration
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  Organizational  |  
Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach(es) 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Evaluation 
­Citeria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time
Critique
Utility
First, Muted Group Theory has sometimes been criticized for not being useful be­
cause it engages in essentialism, or the belief that all men are essentially the same and 
all women are essentially the same and the two differ from each other. These critics 
note that there is great difference within groups; sometimes the difference within a 
group (such as women) can be greater than the difference between groups (women 
and men). Some theorists note other influences on communication besides gender, 
including socioeconomic status, age, ethnicity, or upbringing. Others disavow the 
notion of influences altogether, claiming that both individuals and groups are con­
stantly changing through communication. Therefore, any attempt to state unequivo­
cally what women or men are like falsely “freezes” those groups in time, as if they 
have a natural, unchangeable essence. (Ivy, 2012)
Student Voices
Vanessa
When we talked about this theory in class, all the guys in the room were quiet. 
It was interesting that the girls talked about when they were silenced or muted 
at their jobs, in class, or other places. But, not one guy said that they had been 
silenced. Also, I think it was sad that no guy “stood up” for the girls by saying that 
they were sad about it or that they would do something about it. I’m trying not to be 
radical here, but I wanted to just grab the guy next to me and say: You don’t get it, 
do you?! 

508     Chapter 29  •  Muted Group Theory
M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
Supporters of MGT agree there are many groups besides women that are muted 
in U.S. society. However, being female is to be part of a central group in our culture, 
and thus, even though MGT acknowledges that women are not all alike and there 
is no essential womanness that all women possess, women in the United States are 
often treated alike. This treatment forms a common set of experiences that allows 
MGT to make generalizations about men and women.
Furthermore, some critics fault the usefulness of MGT because they note that 
women do speak out in public forums, and they point to women such as Hillary 
Rodham Clinton and Sheryl Sandberg as examples of women who are not muted 
at all. Muted Group theorists would agree that some women have gained a public 
forum, but they would also point out that they may have done so by becoming ex­
tremely adept at translation. Women who bring a uniquely female perspective to the 
table have not fared as well, according to these theorists. Proponents of MGT argue 
that until we are able to hear from a wide diversity of voices rather than forcing all 
who wish to speak out to conform to a narrow range of options de fined by the dom­
inant group, we will still need the critical commentary of Muted Group Theory.
Test of Time
Some critics of MGT assert that the theory has not been utilized much in commu­
nication research and occasionally when it has been employed, its tenets have not 
been supported. Elspeth Tilley (2010), for instance, found that men were not more 
likely than women to speak out in public when confronted with an employee who 
had breached ethical standards. Related to this notion is the fact that the theory was 
derived many decades ago, and the theory’s assumptions have not been updated. 
However, Heather Kissack (2010) tested some of MGT’s assumptions and found 
that they still hold true in the context of organizational emails. Further, with con­
temporary topics such as athlete’s concussions (Sanderson, Weathers, Snedaker, & 
Gramlich, 2016) and cervical cancer (Kutto & Mulwo, 2015), it is difficult to argue 
against the theory’s contemporariness and longevity.
Closing
Certainly Muted Group Theory is provocative and causes us to think about biases 
in language. It also shines a light on what we accept and what we reject from 
speakers. MGT also explains some problems women experience in speaking out 
in many settings. It is up to us to decide if these issues form a systematic bias 
against subordinate groups and in favor of the dominant group, as Muted Group 
Theory asserts.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Muted Group Theory focuses on the man-made language 
that is used in society and its consequences, primarily as words relate to 
women. Identify how cyberbullying relates to the principles of the theory and 

M U T E D  G R O U P  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     509
your impression of how men and women might react similarly and differently to 
this digital behavior.
	
1.  Do you think Muted Group Theory provides a good explanation for the dif­
ficulties faced by Patricia Fitzpatrick from our chapter opening story? Why or why 
not? What other explanations might you offer to understand her ­situation?
	
2.  Have you had the experience of fumbling for words to describe something 
that you were feeling or something that happened to you? Do you think Muted 
Group Theory explains that experience for you? Why or why not?
	
3.  Can you coin terms for experiences that women have and men do not? What 
about the reverse? Do you agree with MGT that the English language fits the male 
experience of the world better than the female experience? ­Explain your answer.
	
4.  We mentioned that one criticism of MGT is that it overstates the ­problem 
that women have with language. Do you agree or disagree with this criticism?
	
5.  Have any of the reforms that are suggested by MGT taken hold in our lan­
guage? Give examples of changes in the language that have made it more respon­
sive to women’s experiences.
	
6.  What other social groups might be muted in the United States? Does MGT 
provide a good explanation for groups, other than women, who are ­silenced? Why 
or why not?
	
7.  If MGT is a critical theory, what actions has it stimulated? How has it advo­
cated for change?

F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
510
Angela Coburn ban­
ged her books together 
and left class with a 
frown. Usually she en­
joys her linguistics class and she likes Professor 
Townsend. But today she is upset and offended. 
Professor Townsend had explained the concepts 
of denotation and connotation by discussing a 
case that was in the news about 10 years ago. 
The case concerned a European American aide 
to the mayor of ­Washington, DC, who had lost 
his job for using the word niggardly to mean 
“sparingly” in a meeting with two others, one 
European American and one African American. 
Angela gasped out loud listening to the lecture. 
As an African American, the sound of that word 
is extremely offensive to her. It doesn’t matter 
what the aide had said it meant; she knew a ra­
cial slur when she heard one. She is older than 
most of the students at Mead University, and she 
remembers the civil rights struggles of the 1960s 
even though she’d only been a little girl at the 
time. Further, she knows that there is a lot of rac­
ism in the United States, even today. So Angela 
couldn’t believe it when Professor Townsend told 
that story to illustrate the lesson. There are rac­
ist students at Mead—even in class with her—and 
­Angela feels that using that example sent the 
wrong message.
She was still fuming later that evening 
when she met Latria Harris at the coffee shop 
for their study group. Latria is also in Professor 
Townsend’s linguistics class, and she and Angela 
study together every Wednesday. Angela enjoys 
their meetings; they help her keep on top of the 
assignments for a challenging class, and it is 
nice to socialize with ­another African American 
woman at the ­university. Angela and Latria got 
along well despite the difference in their ages and 
circumstances. ­Angela was a 58-year-old mother 
of three grown children; her husband left her many 
years ago, and she had raised the kids alone. She 
has always struggled financially and has been on 
welfare, but now things are looking up. She began 
her studies ­toward a BA six years ago, and she is 
hoping to finish this year. Latria is a 21-year-old 
single woman who had come to college straight 
from a college-prep high school, and her parents 
are quite wealthy.
As soon as Angela sat down, she burst out with 
her displeasure at Professor Townsend and the 
linguistics class. She spoke for some time about 
how upset she was until she noticed a blank look 
on ­Latria’s face. “Don’t you agree with me, Latria?” 
Angela asked. “Well,” Latria responded, “I saw how 
upset it made you, but I can’t say that I feel the same. 
My family doesn’t use that word, but it doesn’t really 
bother me to hear it. I know a lot of people who use 
it, and rappers seem to have made it mainstream. 
Also, I understood Townsend’s point. The words 
sound alike but are defined completely differently. 
I guess Townsend was trying to say that people’s 
connotations about the meaning of the one word 
may poison their ­responses to the other word.”
Feminist Standpoint Theory
Based on the research of Nancy C. M. Hartsock and Julia T. Wood 
Angela Coburn 
and Latria Harris
C H A P T E R	30
I never set out to be a feminist theorist. 
—Nancy Hartsock

F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
	
Feminist Standpoint Theory     511
Angela looked at Latria in silence for a while. 
Finally, she spoke: “Latria, I understand the point, 
too. I just think a different example should have 
been used. Those words sound too much alike for 
me. And that’s all some of the racists around here 
need to hear—a professor speaking a word like 
that. They will start to think it’s okay to say such a 
thing. And it is not okay. No way. People have died 
because of that word.”
Latria looked at Angela in some disbelief. “I 
know you’re upset, but I think you’re carrying this 
too far. I want to stand by you, but I just can’t see 
it as a big deal.”
Angela and Latria fell silent, each pursu­
ing her own thoughts. Finally, Angela said, “Girl, 
I guess we aren’t going to agree about this. 
Maybe we should just get to studying this week’s 
assignments.” Angela smiled as she spoke and 
looked warmly at her friend, so Latria opened 
her book with relief. The last thing she wants to 
do is to ­offend or disrespect Angela. Latria gives 
Angela a lot of credit for everything she has gone 
through and for how hard she works at all her 
classes. ­Really, Angela is an inspiration to Latria. 
She grinned back at Angela as they began their 
work.
F
eminist Standpoint Theory (FST) provides an entry point for understand­
ing some of the dynamics illustrated above. FST offers a framework for un­
derstanding women’s positions relative to the systems of power. This framework is 
built on knowledge generated from the everyday lives of people—acknowledging 
that individuals are active consumers of their own reality and that individuals’ own 
perspectives are the most important sources of information about their experiences 
(Johnston, Friedman, & Peach, 2011; Wood & Fixmer-Oraiz, 2017). FST gives au­
thority to women’s own voices.
The theory claims that women’s (and all people’s) experiences, knowledge, and 
communication behaviors are shaped in large part by the social groups to which they 
belong. Thus, insofar as Angela and Latria share membership in ­social groups, they 
may share similar experiences. The fact that they are both African American women 
students gives them common ground, but standpoints are derived from multiple so­
cial locations (Jaggar, 2016), and Angela and Latria’s ­economic differences and ages 
make a difference in their positions of power (Cox & Ebbers, 2010). And the key to 
developing a standpoint rests with the concept of power or, as Sandra Harding (2016) 
contends, the “power of the weak” (p. 336).
Everyday people, not the elite, provide the framework for Feminist Standpoint 
Theory because of the belief that they possess knowledge different from that of 
those in power. This knowledge forges standpoints in opposition to those in power. 
Standpoints come from resisting those in power and refusing to accept the way society 
defines their group (Wood, 2004). FST advocates criticizing the status quo because 
the status quo represents a power structure of dominance and oppression. Alison 
Jaggar (2016) advances that “from the point of view of the capitalist [for instance] 
society appears very differently from the working class” (p. 304). She goes on to say 
that while capitalists try to forge perceptions of “freedom, human rights and material 
abundance” (p. 303), members of the working class view capitalism as “coercion, 
violence, and material scarcity” (p. 303). To this end, “envisioning more just social 
practices” (Hartsock, 1997, p. 373) is crucial. Thus, ­Feminist Standpoint Theory 
points to problems in the social order and suggests new ways of organizing social 
life so that it will be more equitable and just. Some research (e.g., Blackwell, 2010; 
Elmore, 2009) focuses specifically on how women forge strategies of resistance to 

512     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
the inequities in the social system. In this regard, the theory belongs to the class of 
theories we call critical ­theories (see Chapters 2 and 3).
Historical Foundations of Feminist Standpoint Theory
Although communication researchers have only recently begun to apply Feminist 
Standpoint Theory to studies of communication behavior (see, e.g., Wood, 2008), it is a 
theoretical framework with a long history. Feminist Standpoint Theory is derived from 
Standpoint Theory, which originated in 1807, when the German philosopher Georg 
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel discussed how the ­master–slave ­relationship engendered 
different standpoints in its participants. Hegel wrote that although slaves and masters 
live in a common society, their knowledge of that society is vastly different. These dif­
ferences stem from the very different ­positions they occupy within the society. Hegel 
argued that there can be no single vision concerning social life. Each social group per­
ceives a partial view of society. Karl Marx also claimed that the position of the worker 
(vis-à-vis class) shapes the worker’s access to knowledge.
Nancy Hartsock drew on Hegel’s ideas and Marxist theory to begin to adapt 
Standpoint Theory for use in examining relations between women and men, thus creating 
Feminist Standpoint Theory. Hartsock published “The Feminist Standpoint: Developing 
the Ground for a Specifically Feminist ­Historical Materialism” in 1983, beginning the 
adaptation of ST into FST. Hartsock was concerned with the debates regarding feminism 
and Marxism that occurred in the 1970s and early 1980s, focusing on the absence of 
women’s issues in Marxist theory. Hartsock’s interest was to “make women present” 
in Marx’s theory and, in so doing, to forge a feminist-Marxist theory (Hartsock, 1997).
Hartsock was interested in expanding Marx’s account to include all human activ­
ity rather than simply focusing on what was primarily male activity within capitalism. 
She used Marx’s claim that “a correct vision of class ­society is ­available from only one 
of the two major class positions in capitalist society” (Hartsock, 1983, p. 106, emphasis 
added). On the basis of this idea, Hartsock observed that Marx developed a powerful 
critique of class structure. Hartsock suggested that it is Marx’s critique of class rela­
tionships rather than his critique of capitalism that is most helpful to feminists.
Hartsock applied Hegel’s concepts about masters and slaves and Marx’s notions of 
class and capitalism to issues of sex (the biological categories of male and female) and 
gender (the behavioral categories of masculinity and femininity). In some ways this 
complicates matters because there is no consensus on the exact meaning of “feminist.” 
Many authors have noted that there are different kinds of feminism (Barker & 
Jane, 2016). For our purposes, we need to acknowledge this diversity, yet stipulate 
that the defining characteristic that unites all types of feminism is a focus on women’s 
particular social position and a desire to end any suppression based on sex or gender.
In the early 1990s, Julia Wood (e.g., 1992) brought the tenets of FST to the field of 
communication studies. Wood shows how it isn’t women’s essential ­nature that affects 
their communication behaviors as much as it is their shared standpoints. Communication 
researchers became interested in how one’s social location relative to the power struc­
ture impacts women’s interactions. Wood and her colleague (Dennis & Wood, 2012) for 
instance, explored how Black mothers’ reluctance to discuss sex with their daughters 
could be a result of their knowledge of how Black women were exploited sexually.
feminism 
an ideology and a 
movement focus­
ing on women’s 
social position and 
desiring to end 
oppression based 
on ­gender and sex

	
The Critique of Theory and Research by Feminist Theorists     513
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
The Critique of Theory and Research 
by Feminist Theorists
This historical overview points out an interesting difference between FST and many 
others in this book. As we’ve mentioned, FST is a critical theory, but in many ways, 
it also expresses and embodies a critique of other mainstream theories and approaches 
to research. The critique lodged by Feminist Standpoint theorists begins with the ob­
servation that most research in the past has flowed from one common perspective: 
that of the White, middle-class male. Some feminist researchers argue that traditional 
approaches to research inquiry are male defined and block women’s unique perspec­
tives. Thus, the critique continues, this White, middle-class male perspective has 
served to silence any other perspective as a valued contributor to scientific knowledge 
(Chaftez, 1997). 
Deanna Blackwell (2010) notes that even within avowed antiracist classrooms, 
White sensibilities may prevail. Blackwell talks about how even when classrooms try 
to foster antiracism, this is done with White students in mind (i.e., with the goal of 
raising the White students’ awareness about race) and in so doing, students of color 
are rendered less visible or seen only as mentors to their White peers. Blackwell 
turns to a variant of FST—Black Feminist ­Theory—to explain and protest this 
phenomenon (Collins, 2000; Kovolova, 2016).
Feminist Standpoint Theory, unlike many other theories, begins by highlighting 
the relationship between power and knowledge. In doing so, FST
tries to hold together two tensions: the search for better knowledge and the 
commitment to the idea that knowledge is always intertwined with issues 
of power and politics. As a consequence, the foundational tenet of feminist 
­standpoint theory is that knowledge always arises in social locations and is 
structured by power relations. (O’Brien Hallstein, 2000, p. 3)
In other words, FST began with an imperfect epistemology, one devised by men 
in power, and seeks to develop a better epistemology, while recognizing that 
knowledge is not separable from politics.
Theory At a Glance  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
Women are situated in specific social locations; they occupy different plac­
es in the social hierarchy based on their membership in social groups (poor, 
wealthy, European American, African American, Latino, uneducated, well 
educated, etc.). Because of these social locations, they view the social situa­
tion from particular vantage points. Those vantage points formed in opposi­
tion to those in power, resisting the social definition given to them by those 
in power, become standpoints. No standpoint allows a person to view the 
entire social situation completely—all standpoints are partial—but people on 
the lower rungs of the social hierarchy do see more than their own position.

514     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
It is important to keep in mind that although the feminist version of Standpoint 
Theory is the one that is commonly conceptualized, Standpoint Theory can be used 
to analyze a variety of standpoints, such as, for example, those that Angela brings 
to her conversation with Latria, based on race, class, and economic status. In this 
chapter, we explain the theory as Nancy Hartsock originally detailed it, applying its 
principles to women’s particular standpoint. Yet, it’s wise to remember that a variety 
of standpoints, such as those provided by status, race, and so on, can be explained 
by the theory, which also lends itself well to application in other co-cultural groups: 
“Standpoint focuses on perspectives of women, but could also take the perspectives 
of African American women, poor White women/men, nonwhite women and men 
and individuals belonging to ­minority ethnic and religious groups outside modern 
Western society” ­(Wallace & Wolf, 1995, p. 270). Other theorists, such as Mark Orbe 
(e.g., Orbe & Harris, 2015), use Standpoint Theory to examine race and culture.
The social hierarchy is not fixed. There are continual struggles in society to deter­
mine which group is dominant and who has the right to speak for them and for others 
(Figure 30.1). For instance, the ongoing global debate over undocumented immigrants 
reflects this struggle. Who has the right to “speak” on behalf of this population? And, 
what does their standpoint allow them to see and voice that others cannot?
Assumptions of Feminist Standpoint Theory
Feminist Standpoint Theory rests first on a few general beliefs that Janet ­Saltzman 
Chafetz (1997) says characterize any feminist theory: (1) Sex or gender is a cen­
tral focus for the theory; (2) sex or gender relations are viewed as problematic, 
and the theory seeks to understand how sex or gender is related to ­inequities and 
Gay Men and
Lesbians
Women
Muslims
Asians
Latinos
The Poor
Dominant
Groups
Figure 30.1
Relationship of 
Multiple Groups in 
U.S. Society
Source: Adapted 
from Wood (2004).

	
Assumptions of Feminist Standpoint Theory     515
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
contradictions; (3) sex or gender relations are viewed as changeable; and (4) feminist 
theory can be used to challenge the status quo when the status quo debases or devalues 
women.
In addition, FST, as Hartsock conceptualizes it, rests on five specific ­assump­tions 
about the nature of social life:
∙∙
Material life (or class position) structures and limits understandings of social 
relations.
∙∙
When material life is structured in two opposing ways for two different groups, 
the understanding of each will be an inversion of the other. When there is a 
dominant and a subordinate group, the understanding of the dominant group 
will be both partial and harmful.
∙∙
The vision of the ruling group structures the material relations in which all 
groups are forced to participate.
∙∙
The vision available to an oppressed group represents struggle and an 
achievement.
∙∙
The potential understanding of the oppressed (the standpoint) makes ­visible the 
inhumanity of the existing relations among groups and moves us toward a bet-
ter and more just world.
We will discuss each of these assumptions briefly. They are framed in the modi-
fied Marxist perspective that Hartsock favors.
The first assumption sets forth the notion that individuals’ location in the class 
structure shapes and limits their understandings of social relations. Our chapter 
opening story of Angela and Latria illustrates the power of one’s location in society 
for shaping understanding. Because of Angela’s standpoint, based on her difficult 
circumstances raising her children alone, her struggles to finish her degree, and her 
age, her response to the class discussion differs sharply from Latria’s perspective, 
whose class background and age have somewhat shielded her from Angela’s position. 
Second, Feminist Standpoint Theory assumes that all standpoints are partial, but 
those of the ruling class (or the ones in power) can actually harm those of the sub-
ordinate group. This point leads naturally to the third assumption, which asserts that 
the ruling group structures life in such a way as to remove some choices from the 
Student Voices
Connie
The idea that a rich person’s idea of poverty is limited makes sense. I know when 
I started at the university, I made friends with a lot of girls who came from much 
­wealthier families than I do. It was pretty hard to make them understand that I re-
ally had to work part time and I couldn’t afford to go out for pizza every other night. 
They kind of looked at me funny and I knew they thought I was just making excuses 
for not hanging out with them. I definitely felt like they did not understand where I 
was coming from at all. But, I did see what their lives were like—or at least I thought 
I did.

516     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
subordinate group. Hartsock comments that in the United States people have very little 
choice about participating in a market economy, which is the preferred mode for the 
ruling class. As Hartsock (1997) comments, the vision of the rulers structures social 
life and forces all parties to participate in this structure. She states: “Truth is, to a 
large extent, what the dominant groups can make true; history is always written by the 
winners” (p. 96). Furthermore, the ruling class promotes propaganda that describes the 
market as beneficial and virtuous. Some of the controversies in the 2016 presidential 
campaign illustrate these assumptions. When Donald Trump talked about his business 
experience, some people questioned whether his experience of dismantling companies 
that weren’t succeeding economically or buying up foreclosed homes helped him to 
understand the experience of those that he put out of work in the process.
The fourth assumption asserts that the subordinate group has to struggle for 
their vision of social life. This leads to the final assumption, which claims that this 
struggle results in a clearer, more accurate vision for the subordinate group than that 
possessed by the ruling class. With this clear vision, the subordinate group can see 
the inherent inhumanity in the social order and can thus attempt to change the world 
for the better. This set of assumptions leads to the conclusion that although all stand­
points are partial, the standpoint of an ­oppressed group is formed through careful at­
tention to the dominant group. This isn’t true in reverse. Thus, members of oppressed 
groups have a more complete standpoint than do members of dominant groups.
Added to these assumptions that characterize Hartsock’s Marxist view of Femi­
nist Standpoint Theory, most conceptions of the theory also embody a set of four 
beliefs about knowledge and knowledge gathering (ontology and ­epistemology).
1.	 All knowledge is a product of social activity, and thus no knowledge can be 
truly objective.
2.	 Cultural conditions “typically surrounding women’s lives produce experiences 
and understandings that routinely differ from those produced by the conditions 
framing men’s lives” (Wood, 1992, p. 14). These different understandings often 
produce distinct communication patterns.
3.	 It is a worthwhile endeavor to understand the distinctive features of women’s 
experience.
4.	 We can only know women’s experience by attending to women’s interpreta­
tions of this experience.
The first belief states that knowledge is not an objective concept, but rather is 
shaped subjectively by knowers. Knowledge evolves from experience and this ex­
perience is a subjective one. This suggests an approach to ­knowing that is much 
different from that suggested by a belief in objective truth. 
The second conclusion points to the different social locations that men and 
women inhabit in the United States even when they work, and live in what seem to be 
similar situations. In a study examining sexual harassment in the workplace, Debbie 
Dougherty (2001) begins with a notion grounded in this ­assumption: while sexual 
harassment may be dysfunctional for women, it may serve some functions for men. 
She found that men interpreted sexual harassment as a form of coping behavior for 
work-related stressors, a mode of therapy, and a means for demonstrating camaraderie. 
Women saw none of these functions in sexual harassment. Dougherty concludes that 

	
Assumptions of Feminist Standpoint Theory     517
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
her findings indicate how different social locations have shaped men’s and women’s 
reactions. Other researchers (e.g., Richardson & Taylor, 2009) point out that this is true 
among women as well as between women and men. They note that sexual ­harassment 
is a different experience for Black and Hispanic women than for White women.
The third belief deals with ontology, or what is worth knowing. This notion places 
marginalized people (women) at the starting place for ­theorizing and research. Thus, 
Feminist Standpoint Theory is revolutionary as it replaces the dominant standpoint 
with standpoints outside the cultural mainstream. Sandra Harding (1991) comments 
on this by saying, “What ‘grounds’ feminist standpoint theory is not women’s experi­
ences, but the view from women’s lives . . . we start our thought from the perspective 
of lives at the margins” (p. 269). Anne Johnston and her colleagues (2011) agreed and 
found that women bloggers, contrary to the dominant opinion, blog a great deal about 
politics, but they do so in quite different ways from their male ­counterparts.
Theory in Popular Press  •  Women’s and Men’s Different 
Social Locations
Much has been written in the popular press about difference between 
women and men in the United States and worldwide. Writing in the New 
York Times online, Michael Trimble notes that women cry more than men. 
Women cry both more intensely and more often than do men, and Trimble 
suggests that while there is a biological explanation for this, it may also have 
something to do with the differing social locations (and resulting access 
to power) occupied by women and men. As Trimble asserts: “Like crying, 
depression is, around the world, more prevalent in women than in men. One 
explanation might be that women, who despite decades of social advances 
still suffer from economic inequality, discrimination and even violence, might 
have more to cry about.” 
Source: Trimble, M. (2012, November 10). I cry, therefore I am. New York Times Sunday 
Review online, nytimes.com/2012/11/11/opinion/sunday/i-cry-therefore-i-am.html.
Finally, Feminist Standpoint Theory operates from the belief that the only way 
to achieve Harding’s sentiment is by having women talk about their experiences and 
interpret them. The research participant is an active partner in the endeavor. It is a 
continuing goal for Feminist Standpoint theorists to develop new methodologies that 
give voice to those who have been silenced previously.
Through these assumptions and beliefs we get a picture of Feminist Standpoint 
Theory as an evolving framework, grounded in Marxism, but rejecting some of the 
central tenets of that perspective in favor of a feminist approach. FST seeks to under­
stand the influence that a particular location exerts on people’s views of the world 
and on their communication. In this quest, researchers in Feminist Standpoint Theory 
wish to begin with the marginalized and focus on their stories and interpretations. 

518     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
As Feminist Standpoint theorists work with research participants, they recognize the 
limited view of their own vision and they acknowledge the subjective nature of truth(s). 
Feminist Standpoint Theory and the Communication Field
After Julia Wood introduced the theory to the communication field, Feminist 
Standpoint Theory became popular with communication researchers. This oc­
curred because FST advances a reciprocal relationship between communication 
behavior and standpoints. Communication is responsible for shaping our stand­
points to the extent that we learn our place in society through interaction with 
others. Thus, we can imagine that when Angela’s mother told her stories about 
her African American heritage and about her ­ancestors who were slaves, Angela 
learned much about her standpoint. Every time a teacher told Angela that she prob­
ably could not go to college and receive a BA degree, communication shaped her 
standpoint. Latria’s situation was different, and she probably did not hear stories 
of slavery. She may have been encouraged to go to college by her teachers. Thus, 
the communication ­Latria engaged in didn’t encourage the struggle that Angela 
experienced. This results in two African American women who view the world 
from different ­locations. 
Similarly, one of the assumptions of the theory is that those who share a 
standpoint will also share certain communication styles and practices. Thus, for 
example, we expect that women who take care of children will communicate in a 
maternal fashion, whereas men who are not responsible for such caregiving will 
not develop the same communication behaviors (Ruddick, 1989). Marsha Houston 
(1992) has cited the example of communication behaviors among African American 
women—like loud talking and interrupting—that are shaped by their standpoints and 
misunderstood by those outside the group. Houston points out that some European 
American researchers interpret these communication behaviors differently (and usu­
ally more negatively) than do members of the group themselves.
In addition, Roseann Mandziuk (2003) points out how communication, in 
the form of commemorative campaigns, may try to establish standpoints in pub­
lic consciousness. Mandziuk analyzes three recent campaigns that sought to 
commemorate Sojourner Truth and observes how they competed for the right 
to establish her persona in public memory. As Mandziuk notes, each of the three 
campaigns set forth differing standpoints for Truth, and “the questions of location, 
character, and ownership variously occupied the center of the debates” (p. 287).
Feminist Standpoint Theory, therefore, illustrates the centrality of communi­
cation in both shaping and transmitting standpoints. The theory points to the use 
of communication as a tool for changing the status quo and producing change. By 
giving voice to those whose standpoints are infrequently heard (Zaytseva, 2012), 
the methods associated with the theory focus on communication practices (Jaggar, 
2016). As Julia Wood (1992) notes, “Whether women’s own voices are granted 
legitimacy seems especially pertinent to communication scholars’ assessments of 
the value of alternative theoretical positions” (p. 13). The concepts of voice, speak­
ing out, and speaking for others are important to Feminist Standpoint Theory and 
Standpoint epistemology, and they are all concepts rooted in communication.

	
Key Concepts of Standpoint Theory     519
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
Key Concepts of Standpoint Theory
Feminist Standpoint Theory rests on several key concepts: voice, standpoint, situated 
knowledges, and sexual division of labor. We will discuss each concept in the next section.
Voice
Many scholars have observed that voice means something about our identity. When we 
find our voice or use our voice, that means that we project to others who we are and what 
we are all about. Voice may be best defined by its opposition to silence. Jason Stanley 
(2011) wrote that the service of silencing ­others, politicians misappropriate words and 
twist meanings. He calls this ­“linguistic strategies for stealing the voices of others” 
(http://opinionator.blogs.nytimes.com/2011/06/25/the-ways-of-silencing/?_r=0). 
Stanley notes that silencing is robbing others of the ability to engage in speech acts, 
such as assertion. He goes on to observe that “there is another kind of silencing familiar 
in the political domain” (n.p.) as well. “It is possible to ­silence people by denying them 
access to the vocabulary to express their claims” (n.p.). This comment points to a key 
aspect for understanding voice, it is a ­relational concept; we have it to the extent that 
others listen to us, and do not actively work to rob us of our ability to express ourselves.
Standpoint
The central concept of the theory, standpoint is a location, shared by a group 
­expe­riencing outsider status, within the social structure, that lends a particular 
kind of sense making to a person’s lived experience. Furthermore, from ­Hartsock’s 
perspective, “A standpoint is not simply an interested position ­(interpreted as bias) 
but is interested in the sense of being engaged” (1998, p. 107). The concept of 
standpoint 
an achieved posi­
tion based on a 
social location that 
lends an interpre­
tative aspect to a 
person’s life
www.CartoonStock.com

520     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
engagement is amplified by researchers who distinguish between a standpoint and 
a perspective (Hirschmann, 1997; O’Brien Hallstein, 2000). It’s easy to confuse the 
two, but there is a critical difference. A perspective is shaped by experiences that 
are structured by a person’s place in the social hierarchy. A perspective may lead 
to the achievement of a standpoint but only through effort. As O’Brien Hallstein 
argues, standpoints are only achieved after thought, interaction, and struggle. 
Standpoints must be actively sought; they are not possessed by all people who 
have experienced oppression. Standpoints are achieved through experiences of 
oppression added to active ­engagement, reflection, and recognition of the ­political 
implications of these ­experiences. Thus, we might say that Latria has a perspective 
while Angela has a standpoint.
Furthermore, standpoints are not free of their social and political contexts. As 
Sandra Harding (1991) notes, “[S]tandpoints are socially mediated” (p. 276). Because 
standpoints are defined by specific social locations, they are by necessity partial, or 
incomplete. The location allows only a portion of social life to be viewed by any 
particular group. In addition, the political aspect of standpoints stresses that individu­
als go through a developmental process in ­acquiring them. Julia Wood and Natalie 
Fixmer-Oraiz (2017) conclude that a standpoint is “earned” (p. 51). As Welton (1997) 
states, developing a standpoint requires ­“active, political resistance to work against 
the material embodiment of the perspective and experience of the dominant group. 
It is the act of having to push against the experience-made-reality of the hegemonic 
group, that makes it a political standpoint and ­potentially liberating” (p. 11). More­
over, as O’Brien Hallstein (1999, 2000) argues, standpoints are political because they 
are achieved in collaboration and ­dialogue with others rather than in isolation.
A specific type of standpoint is described by Patricia Hill Collins (1986, 1989, 
1991) when she describes herself as an African American woman academic. This 
social position places her as an outsider within, or a person who normally would be 
marginalized, but has somehow gained access to the inside. In the case of outsiders 
moving into a social location that historically excluded them, Collins suggests that a 
particular clarity of vision occurs. Yang Zhao (2016) remarks that, as an immigrant, 
she was situated as an outsider within as she investigated the notion of transnational 
adoptions. Ruth ­Frankenberg (1993) concurs, saying that “the oppressed can see with 
the greatest clarity, not only their own position but . . . indeed the shape of social 
systems as a whole” (p. 8). This clarity of vision suggests, as Feminist Standpoint 
Theory argues, that the lower positions on the hierarchy possess the greatest accuracy 
in their standpoints, where accuracy refers to the ability to transcend the limits of 
partial ­vision and see beyond one’s own specific social location.
Situated Knowledges
Donna Haraway (1988) contributes the term situated knowledges, meaning that any 
person’s knowledge is grounded in context and circumstances. Haraway’s concept sug­
gests that knowledges are multiple and are situated in experience. For example, what one 
person learns from her position as a caregiver for her ailing parents is different from the 
knowledge that another person develops from her position as an electrical engineer. The 
notion of situated knowledges reminds us that what we know and do is not innate, but 
rather is the ­result of learning from our experiences. So if the engineer cared for elderly 
partial 
a recognition that 
no one has a com­
plete view of the 
social hierarchy
outsider within 
a person in a 
normally marginal­
ized social position 
who has gained 
access to a more 
privileged location
accuracy
the ability to see 
more than what’s 
available to one’s 
own specific social 
location
situated 
knowledges
what anyone 
knows is grounded 
in context and 
circumstance

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     521
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
family members, she also would learn the caregiving knowledge. A similar point is made 
in discussions of Black feminist standpoints (Reynolds, 2002). Different local communi­
ties may define the standpoint somewhat differently depending on their ­experiences. In 
addition, some research (e.g., Hine, 2011) suggests that aging women share a standpoint, 
but also diverge from one another based on other variables such as social, health, and 
lifestyle factors that affect them individually at any given point in time.
Sexual Division of Labor
Hartsock’s Marxist-inspired Feminist Standpoint Theory rests on the notion that men 
and women engage in different occupations based on their sex, which results in a 
sexual division of labor. Not only does this division simply assign people to different 
tasks based on sex, but it also exploits women by demanding work without providing 
wages. In addition, Julia Wood (2005) states that “patriarchy naturalizes male and female 
divisions, making it seem natural, right, unremarkable that women are subordinate to 
men” (p. 61). Furthermore, the inequities that women suffer in the workplace when in­
volved in labor for wages are linked to their responsibility for unwaged domestic work. In 
addition, as Nancy Hirschmann (1997) points out, a feminist standpoint “enables women 
to identify the activities they perform in the home as ‘work’ and ‘labor,’ productive of 
‘value,’ rather than simply the necessary and ­essential byproducts of ‘nature’ or the func­
tion of biology which women ‘passively’ experience” (p. 81). Thus, Feminist Standpoint 
Theory highlights the ­exploitation and ­distortion that result when labor is divided by sex.
Integration, Critique, and Closing
Feminist Standpoint Theory has generated a great deal of research, interest, and 
spirited controversy. This theory has a rich history employing critical methods, mak­
ing it primarily qualitative in nature. As you examine the value of this theory, keep 
in mind one of the most critical of all evaluation criteria and one that has prompted 
quite a bit of scholarly discussion: utility.
Integration
sexual division of 
labor 
allocation of work 
on the basis of sex
Communication 
Tradition
Rhetorical  |  Semiotic  |  Phenomenological  |  Cybernetic  |  
Socio-Psychological  |  Socio-Cultural  |  Critical
Communication 
Context
Intrapersonal  |  Interpersonal  |  Small Group  |  
Organizational  |  Public/Rhetorical  |  Mass/Media  |  Cultural
Approach 
to Knowing
Positivistic/Empirical  |  Interpretive/Hermeneutic  |  Critical
Critique
Evaluation 
­Criteria
Scope  |  Logical Consistency  |  Parsimony  |  Utility  |  
Testability  |  Heurism  |  Test of Time

522     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
Utility
The complaint most commonly leveled against Feminist Standpoint Theory revolves 
around essentialism, and a great deal has been written on this topic. As Sandra 
Harding (2004) has commented, the theory has caused “political, philosophic, and 
scientific debate” (p. 1). As we discussed in Chapter 29 with reference to Muted 
Group Theory, ­essentialism refers to the practice of generalizing about all women 
(or any group) as though they were essentially the same. Essentialism obscures 
the ­diversity that exists among women. Our chapter-opening story of Angela and 
Latria illustrates the mistake we make if we engage in essentialism. Although they 
are both African American wo men attending the same university, the differences 
between them cause them to interpret the classroom discussion differently. Because 
Feminist Standpoint Theory focuses on the location of social groups, many re­
searchers have argued that it is essentialist. For example, Catherine O’Leary (1997) 
argues that although FST has been helpful in ­reclaiming women’s experiences 
as suitable research topics, it contains a problematic ­emphasis on the universal­
ity of this experience at the expense of differences among women’s experiences. 
Sharlene Hesse-Biber (2014) agrees with this thinking by noting that essentializing 
“neglects the diversity of women’s lives, for example, race, class, and sexual ori­
entation” (p. 6).
Implicit (and often explicit) in this critique are the ways that many White 
women researchers have excluded the standpoints and voices of women of color, 
women who are disabled, lesbians, poor women, and women from ­developing 
nations (Blackwell, 2010). Yet, this criticism may be unfair to Hartsock’s concep­
tualization of the theory. Hartsock (1981) has stated that although there are many 
differences among women, she is pointing to specific aspects of women’s experi­
ence that are shared by many: unpaid household labor and provision of caregiving 
and nurturance. Kristen Intemann (2016), too, believes that more contemporary 
views of Standpoint Theory do not “essentialize women” (p. 263). Hirschmann 
(1997) argues that Feminist Standpoint Theory really does accommodate difference 
by allowing for a multiplicity of feminist standpoints. Hirschmann suggests that 
standpoints can be developed from Hartsock’s framework that will bring a useful 
­approach to the tension between shared identity and difference. Wood (1992) concurs 
with this rebuttal, and she suggests that Feminist Standpoint Theory is different from 
essentialist views of women in one important way. The theory does not suggest that 
men and women are fundamentally different (or have different essences); rather, FST 
begins with the assumption that social and ­cultural conditions that typically surround 
women’s lives produce different experiences and understandings from the social and 
cultural conditions ­typically surrounding men’s lives. Wood concludes, “There is 
nothing in the logic of standpoint epistemology that precludes analysis of the in­
tersections among conditions that structure race, class, and gender relations in any 
given culture” (p. 14).
More current studies conducted using a Standpoint framework have made the 
tension between difference and commonality central to their ­approach ­(Andrews, 
2002; Houle, 2009). For example, Katrina Bell, Mark Orbe, Darlene Drummond, and 
Sakile Camara (2000) used Black Feminist Standpoint Theory to examine African 
American women’s communication practices. Bell and her colleagues purposely 
essentialism
the belief that all 
women are essen­
tially the same, all 
men are essentially 
the same, and the 
two differ from 
each other

	
Integration, Critique, and Closing     523
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
collected information from very diverse women in an effort to capture different lived 
experiences. This resulted in a sample of women who shared a racial identity, but 
differed in terms of many of their other social locations including age, religion, sex­
ual identity, and so forth.
The researchers found that despite their diversity, the participants in their 
study did share a multiple consciousness of oppression as a result of racism, sex­
ism, classism, and heterosexism. Yet, the participants also voiced ways in which 
the issue of diversity existed among African American women. Throughout their 
data, the participants described other aspects of their identity that became salient 
in their interactions with others and in many instances impeded their sense of 
connection with African American women. As such, the researchers saw multiple 
consciousness as a “dynamic process of constant negotiation” (p. 50). Thus, the 
researchers conclude that Black Feminist Standpoint Theory allows for the as­
sumption of commonality of oppression while acknowledging various expressions 
of this common ­experience.
In a study of academic women, Debbie Dougherty and Kathleen Krone (2000) 
also sought to apply Feminist Standpoint Theory to a group of diverse women to capi­
talize on the creative tensions between similarity and difference. They interviewed 
four women in the same department in an academic institution and from the interviews 
they created a narrative that, although fictional, attempted to capture the standpoints 
voiced in the interviews. Then they had the parti­cipants comment on the narrative and 
identify areas for change and develop ­action plans. In this process, the researchers 
found both commonality and ­difference among the standpoints of the participants.
The women agreed that their standpoints were shaped by a sense of isolation, 
a strong desire for community, and the feeling of invisibility. Yet, they ­differed in 
their consciousness of their own oppression. The women used these differences 
to strengthen their relationship. The researchers note that the ­critique focused on 
­essentialism may miss the point. Dougherty and Krone ­observe that “differences and 
similarities create and recreate each other, ­becoming so intertwined that they are dif­
ficult to separate” (p. 26).
Student Voices
Jennie
I thought Feminist Standpoint Theory was interesting, but I noticed that none of 
the examples referred to my specific social location. I am a Cherokee Indian, and I 
am very proud of my heritage. But it’s certainly true that we Native Peoples are on 
the very ­bottom rungs of the social hierarchy. If anyone should have an accurate 
picture of the whole social structure by being on the bottom looking up, it’d be us. I 
guess there’s ­always another “out” group to study. I also was thinking about the ten­
sions between commonality and difference mentioned in the chapter. I know I get 
annoyed when White students assume that all Indians are the same and think that I 
know everything about the Crow or the Blackfeet, even though I am Cherokee and 
we have very different cultures.

524     Chapter 30  •  Feminist Standpoint Theory
F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
A second area of criticism related to utility concerns the notion of ­dualisms, or 
dualistic thinking. Feminists (Cirksena & Cuklanz, 1992) note that much of Western 
thought is organized around a set of oppositions, or dualisms. Reason and emotion, 
public and private, and nature and culture are just a few of the pairs of opposites 
that are common organizing principles in Western thinking. Feminists have been 
concerned with these dualisms for two related reasons: First, dualisms usually 
imply a hierarchical relationship between the terms, elevating one and devaluing the 
other. When we suggest that decisions should be made rationally, not emotionally, 
for example, we are showing that reason holds a higher value in our culture than 
does emotion. ­Related to this issue is the concern that these dualisms often become 
gendered in our culture. In this process, men are associated with one extreme and 
women with the other. In the case of reason and emotion, women are identified with 
emotion. Because our culture values emotion less than reason, women suffer from 
this association. Feminist critics are usually concerned with the fact that dualisms 
force false ­dichotomies onto women and men, failing to see that life is less either/or 
than both/and, as Relational Dialectics Theory (Chapter 11) holds.
O’Leary (1997) argues that Feminist Standpoint Theory does not present us with 
a sufficiently complex understanding of experience, and as a result, it still rests on 
a dualism between subjective experience and objective truth. O’Leary suggests that 
Hartsock’s framework cannot accommodate the complexities of multiple knowledges. 
Yet, Hartsock specifically allows for this within her original theory, arguing for 
clusters of standpoints. As Hartsock (1997) notes, the controversies engendered by 
FST indicate a “fertile terrain” for debate opening possibilities for expanding and 
refining the theory so that it is more ­responsive to diversity and clearer about the 
distinctions between subjectivity and ­objectivity.
Closing
Feminist Standpoint Theory presents us with another way of viewing the relative 
positions, experiences, and communication of various social groups. It has a clear 
political, critical bent, and it locates the place of power in social life. It has gener­
ated some controversy as people find it either offensive or compatible with their own 
views of social life. The theory may be compatible with other theories, enabling us to 
combine them to get more useful explanations for human communication behaviors. 
Feminist Standpoint Theory holds much promise for illuminating differences in the 
communication behaviors of different social groups, and suggesting tools for reme­
diating the inequities caused by the power structure in which these groups function.
Discussion Starters
t e c h q u e s t: Some researchers that we cite have examined how new 
communica­tion channels like blogs have given women a voice they may not 
have had previously. Yet, even in these venues, harassment may exist. One 
blogger even called the Internet a “sexist’s paradise.” How do you think social 
dualisms 
organizing things 
around pairs of 
opposites

F E M I N I S T  S T A N D P O I N T  T H E O R Y
	
Discussion Starters     525
media may or may not change some of the assumptions and tenets of Feminist 
Standpoint Theory?
	
1.  Do you accept the argument of Feminist Standpoint Theory that all stand­
points are partial? Explain your answer. How does the case of Angela and Latria, 
from the beginning of the chapter, illustrate this claim?
	
2.  Give an example of situated knowledges in a specific context.
	
3.  The chapter identifies this theory as a feminist theory. Discuss how a theory 
can be identified with a political ideology. Explain your answer.
	
4.  If all truths are understood as coming from some subjective standpoint, how 
is it possible for people to communicate? If there is no objective truth, how do we 
reach agreement among people with different standpoints?
	
5.  What are the limits of difference that ground a standpoint? Might we even­
tually end up with standpoints that are so particular that only relatively few people 
share them? How would this help us to understand communication between and 
among people?
	
6.  How well do you think more recent scholarship has done in incorporating 
the tension between sharing a common standpoint and recognizing ­differences? 
Give some examples.
	
7.  Take a position on the essentialist argument relative to Feminist ­Standpoint 
Theory, and defend your position.

This page intentionally left blank

527
Afterword
ConnectingQuests
A primary goal of this book is to introduce you to the richness and comprehensive­
ness of dozens of theories in communication. As you read throughout the book, 
each theory has approached communication and its numerous functions and tra­
jectories in exciting ways. We have provided you a cross section of a number of 
theories that have addressed a number of various issues and themes. Whether, 
for example, a theorist emphasized technology, culture, or gender and applied it 
within an interpersonal, organizational, or mediated environment, there can be no 
mistake that this area known as “communication theory” has something for every­
one. We have all shared this journey, and yet, we still have much more to learn 
and think about. 
We hope that our efforts in elucidating a theory’s background, assumptions, and 
key concepts and features of a particular theory have given you an understandable 
and workable framework from which to understand communication theory. All too 
often, textbook writers neglect to recall what it’s like to absorb challenging subject 
matter. We’re hopeful, and yes, confident that the template we followed in each 
chapter presented material in a way that allowed you to manage information effec­
tively and to retrieve it successfully.
We wish to close our book by presenting one additional way to make com­
munication theory more compelling and useful: connecting and integrating various 
theories. Communication theory is not created in a vacuum. Indeed, as you’ve read, 
theorists rely upon—and are influenced by—other theories to conceptualize and 
develop their own unique thinking. Further, many theories utilize terminology in 
different ways; being able to differentiate between each theory’s use of a term will 
be of high value. To illustrate theory connections, we return to each chapter of the 
text and offer questions to demonstrate the interrelationship between and among 
various theories of communication. We hope that not only will the questions show 
a theory connection that you otherwise would not have considered, but also that 
the questions prompt further reflection. Making connections in this way will likely 
prompt you to recall ­different theories, and ideally, you will return to a particular 
theory to think about it in a different light. Finally, such an effort will result in a 
better ­appre­ciation for the contexts, traditions, and approaches that are embedded 
in each theory. 
We offer this unique feature by asking questions for each chapter; we term this 
ConnectingQuests. Respond to each question privately and then compare your re­
sponses with others in the class. And, because you likely have not reviewed each 
theory in the book, to test your own knowledge, you might also develop your own 
ConnectingQuests for those chapters that you did review and now understand. Clos­
ing our book in this way is a beginning in illustrating the belief that theory building 
is an expansive enterprise.

528     Afterword
ConnectingQuests
So, below, find each theory in the book with accompanying connections and 
questions. These ConnectingQuests provide you one final effort at application and 
understanding:
Chapter 4: Symbolic Interaction Theory
How does Mead’s concept of the self relate to the understanding of the role of the self 
in Communication Accommodation Theory?
Chapter 5: Coordinated Management of Meaning
Culture is a universal theme in many theories. Discuss the relationship between how 
culture functions in CMM and in Face-Negotiation Theory.
Chapter 6: Cognitive Dissonance Theory
Compare the scope of Cognitive Dissonance Theory to that of Symbolic Interaction 
Theory. Can you justify calling explanatory systems with such differences “theories”?
Chapter 7: Expectancy Violations Theory
Expectancy Violations Theory is primarily concerned with our expectations for other 
people’s behavior, whereas Cognitive Dissonance Theory is concerned with our de­
sire for consistency in attitudes and behavior. Show the relationship between the two 
theories using expectations, attitudes, and behavior as your overarching principles.
Chapter 8: Uncertainty Reduction Theory
How does Uncertainty Reduction Theory’s view of uncertainty (and the world) relate 
to, or differ from, the viewpoint taken in Organizational Information Theory? Do 
they operate with similar or dissimilar assumptions about human behavior?
Chapter 9: Social Exchange Theory
Compare how individuals assess their relationships from both a Social Exchange 
perspective and from Social Penetration Theory. Explain how (or if) you see them 
having separate theoretical domains.
Chapter 10: Social Penetration Theory
Discuss how the principles of Social Penetration Theory and Social Information 
Processing Theory overlap. We already know that one rests on technology, namely 
texting and emailing. How is SPT be influenced by technology?

Afterword
ConnectingQuests     529
Chapter 11: Relational Dialectics Theory
Do you think that the concepts of Dialectics Theory intersect with the concepts of Un­
certainty Reduction Theory as Berger suggested? Do you think the meta­theoretical 
assumptions of the two theories are compatible? Explain your answer.
Chapter 12: Communication Privacy Management Theory
Discuss the (possible) interpretation and the role of silence in Communication Pri­
vacy Management Theory and in Relational Dialectics Theory. 
Chapter 13: Social Information Processing Theory
Discuss the differences and similarities in self-presentation in both Social 
­Information Processing Theory and Muted Group Theory. Although one theory 
relies on technology and another on FtF communication, what similarities can 
you glean?
Chapter 14: Groupthink
Determine how the role of expectations of individuals exists in both Groupthink and 
Expectancy Violations Theory. What sort of conversation would Janis and Burgoon 
have regarding expectations of behavior? 
Chapter 15: Structuration Theory
Decision making is an essential component in both Structuration Theory and Group­
think. Differentiate between the two theories as to how they use the ­decision-making 
process, how the theorists interpret the term, and what parameters should be used 
when discussing the decision-making process.
Chapter 16: Organizational Culture Theory
According to Organizational Culture Theory, stories are considered an important 
element in the culture of an organization. The Coordinated Management of Meaning 
centers on how meaning is achieved. Compare the two theories in regard to using 
stories and achieving meaning.
Chapter 17: Organizational Information Theory
Organizational Information Theory and Structuration Theory each deal with 
the role of communication activities in an organization. Differentiate between 
the two theories by discussing how communication functions in both theories. 

530     Afterword
ConnectingQuests
In particular, interpret what is meant by communication activities in each theory 
and how the theorists might interpret the information and relationships ­inherent 
in an organization.
Chapter 18: The Rhetoric
How does “the audience” function in the Rhetoric and in Cultural Studies? Further, 
discuss how technology would be influential on both theoretical ­models.
Chapter 19: Dramatism
Compare Burke’s concept of the dramatic structure of life with Fisher’s Narrative 
Paradigm. Would it be possible for a researcher to work comfortably with both 
theories without having ideational conflicts? 
Chapter 20: The Narrative Paradigm
Compare the process of persuasion as it is explained through the Narrative Paradigm 
and how it functions in Agenda Setting Theory? 
Chapter 21: Agenda Setting Theory
A fundamental issue underscoring Agenda Setting Theory is the influence of the 
others on the “agenda” of the media. Social Exchange Theory has its roots in 
economics, sociology, and psychology. To this end, explore and explain how eco­
nomic, sociological, and psychological principles are at play in Agenda ­Setting Theory. 
Chapter 22: Spiral of Silence Theory
Compare and contrast the role of the media in Spiral of Silence Theory and Cultural 
Studies. Drawing on each theorist’s interpretation of the media, be sure to address 
how media content and structure influence the communication process. Use terms 
from each theory in your analysis.
Chapter 23: Uses and Gratifications Theory
Theories such as Uses and Gratifications highlight the use of media such as television in 
people’s lives. In Cultivation Theory, television is seen as an instrumental tool as well. 
Delineate the role of television in communicating a “social reality” in both theories. 
Chapter 24: Cultivation Theory
Cultivation Theory concentrates on media effects that also involve an investigation 
of media messages (primarily messages representing violence). How does this com­

Afterword
ConnectingQuests     531
pare with the focus in McLuhan’s Media Ecology Theory about the media in gen­
eral? Can these two theories inform one another?
Chapter 25: Cultural Studies
Examine the role of culture in Cultural Studies and compare it to the role of culture 
in Organizational Culture Theory. What parameters exist on the interpretation of cul­
ture? What would Hall and Pacanowsky and O’Donnell-­Trujillo agree about? What 
would they disagree about?
Chapter 26: Media Ecology Theory
Compare McLuhan’s view of the audience in Media Ecology Theory with Katz, 
Blumler, and Gurevitch’s view of the audience in Uses and Gratifications Theory. 
What conclusions can you draw regarding how active or passive the audience is in 
each theory?
Chapter 27: Face-Negotiation Theory
Ting-Toomey’s theory addresses a concern for individual identity. Dramatism, too, 
focuses on identity, but the concept is situated very differently than the way it’s pro­
posed in FNT. Differentiate between the theories and each theorist’s perspective on 
the use of identity. 
Chapter 28: Communication Accommodation Theory
Communication Accommodation Theory emphasizes, among other things, the im­
portance of perception in diverse communities. Feminist Standpoint Theory, too, 
emphasizes perception in a different, but equally important way. Differentiate be­
tween the two theories employing the concept of perception. 
Chapter 29: Muted Group Theory
How would the assumptions of a researcher using Muted Group Theory compare 
to those of a researcher using Cognitive Dissonance Theory? Do you think that one 
researcher would be comfortable using both theories? Why or why not?
Chapter 30: Feminist Standpoint Theory
When discussing the Feminist Standpoint Theory, power becomes an essential con­
cept to consider. In Communication Privacy Management Theory, power may be a 
driving force in the decision to self-disclose. What role do you believe power plays 
in a discussion of both theories of communication? 

This page intentionally left blank

     G-1
Glossary
agent  a person engaging in behaviors or activities in so-
cial environments (Ch. 15) (p. 262)
agent  one prong of the pentad; the person performing the 
act (Ch. 19) (p. 331)
alienation  perception that one has little control over his 
or her future (p. 423)
allocative resources  material assistance used to help 
groups accomplish their goals (p. 264)
applied research  research to solve a problem or create 
a ­policy (p. 59)
approbation facework  focusing less on the negative as-
pects and more on the positive aspects of another (p. 464)
arousal  increased interest or attention when deviations 
from expectations occur (p. 127)
arrangement  a canon of rhetoric that pertains to a speaker’s 
ability to organize a speech (p. 314)
asynchronous communication  a process that occurs 
when both sender and receiver are online at different 
times, owing to time constraints (p. 223)
attitude  a later addition to the pentad; the manner in 
which the agent positions himself or herself relative to 
others (p. 332)
audience analysis  an assessment and evaluation of 
­listeners (p. 310)
authoritative resources  interpersonal assistance used to 
help groups accomplish their goals (p. 264)
autonomy and connection  an important relational ten-
sion that shows our conflicting desires to be close and to 
be separate (p. 192)
attributions  evaluations and judgments we make based 
on the actions or behaviors of others (p. 228)
avoiding  staying away from disagreements (p. 470)
axiology  the study of what it means to be human, which 
shapes the background understanding for theorizing about 
human communication (p. 48)
abstract symbol  symbol representing an idea or thought 
(p. 7)
accommodation  adjusting, modifying, or regulating be-
havior in response to others (p. 478)
accuracy  the ability to see more than what’s available to 
one’s own specific social location (p. 520)
act  communication behaviors indicating a person’s am-
biguity in receiving a message (Ch. 17) (p. 297)
act  one prong of the pentad; that which is done by a per-
son (Ch. 19) (p. 331)
actions  activities based on intentional choice responses 
(p. 52)
the active audience,  a variable concept focused on an 
audience engaging with the media on a voluntary basis, 
motivated by their needs and goals (p. 396)
active strategies  reducing uncertainties by means other 
than direct contact (p. 144)
activeness  refers to how much freedom the audience re-
ally has in the face of mass media (p. 397)
activity  refers to what the media consumer does (p. 397)
actual self  the attributes a person possesses (p. 220)
adjustment  organizational responses to equivocality  
(p. 297)
affective exchange stage  stage of social penetration that 
is spontaneous and quite comfortable for relational part-
ners (p. 182)
affiliative constraints  when members withhold their 
input rather than face rejection from the group (p. 241)
agency  behaviors or activities used in social environ-
ments (Ch. 15) (p. 262)
agency  one prong of the pentad; the means used to per-
form the act (Ch. 19) (p. 331)
agenda  a list of the most important issues of the day as 
­decided by an entity, such as the media (p. 360)
The following is a list of terms we identified throughout this text. As you review the list, keep in mind that there may be 
more than one way to define a particular term. This is a result of theorists interpreting a concept differently based on the 
context of a particular theory. When this occurs, we have listed the term twice and included the chapter number to which 
each definition refers (in parentheses).

G-2     Glossary
channel  pathway to communication (p. 9)
characterological coherence  a type of coherence referring 
to the believability of the characters in the story (p. 346)
charmed loop  rules of meaning are consistent through­
out the loop (p. 93)
chronemic cues  cues related to how people perceive, 
use, or respond to time (p. 225)
civic spaces  a metaphor suggesting that speakers have 
­“locations” where the opportunity to persuade others 
­exists (p. 313)
closed-mindedness  a group’s willingness to ignore dif­
ferences in people and warnings about poor group deci­
sions (p. 247)
co-cultures  groups of individuals who are part of the 
same larger culture, but who can be classified around vari­
ous identities (e.g., race, sex, age, etc.) (p. 39)
code  converting raw data to a category system (p. 59)
coercive power  perception that another person has the 
ability to punish you (p. 265)
cognitions  ways of knowing, beliefs, judgments, and 
thoughts (p. 105)
cognitive arousal  mental awareness of deviations from 
expectations (p. 127)
cognitive dissonance  feeling of discomfort resulting from 
inconsistent attitudes, thoughts, and behaviors (p. 105)
cognitive uncertainty  degree of uncertainty related to 
cognitions (p. 137)
coherence  a principle of narrative rationality related to 
the internal consistency of a story (p. 345)
cohesiveness  a cultural value that places emphasis on the 
group over the individual (Ch. 14) (p. 240)
cohesiveness  the degree of togetherness between and 
among communicators (Ch. 2) (p. 33)
collective boundary  a boundary around private informa­
tion that includes more than one person (p. 212)
collective rationalization  situation in which group 
members ignore warnings about their decisions (p. 247)
collectivism  a cultural value that prioritizes group needs 
or values over the needs or values of an individual (we-
identity) (Ch. 5) (p. 92)
collectivism a cultural value that places emphasis on the 
group over the individual (Ch. 27) (p. 469)
communication a social process in which individuals 
­employ symbols to establish and interpret meaning in 
their environment (p. 5)
axioms  truisms drawn from past research and common 
sense (p. 140)
behavior control  the power to change another’s ­behavior 
(p. 163)
behavioral sequences  a series of actions designed to 
achieve a goal (p. 163)
behavioral uncertainty  degree of uncertainty related to 
behaviors (p. 137)
belief in the inherent morality of the group  assumption 
that the group members are thoughtful and good; there­
fore the decisions they make will be good (p. 247)
bias of communication  Harold Innis’s contention that 
technology has the power to shape society (p. 439)
body  part of an organizational strategy in a speech that 
includes arguments, examples, and important details to 
make a point (p. 314)
boundaries  a property of systems theory stating that 
systems construct structures specifying their outer limits 
(p. 54)
boundary coordination  one of the processes in the pri­
vacy rule management system; describes how we manage 
private information that is co-owned (p. 212)
boundary linkage  the connections forming boundary 
­alliances between people (p. 212)
boundary ownership  rights and privileges accruing to 
co‑owners of private information (p. 213)
boundary permeability  the extent to which information 
is able to pass through a boundary (p. 214)
boundary turbulence  conflicts about boundary expecta­
tions and regulation (p. 214)
breadth  the number of topics discussed in a relationship 
(p. 176)
breadth time  amount of time spent by relational partners 
discussing various topics (p. 176)
buyer’s remorse  post-decision dissonance related to a 
purchase (p. 113)
calibration  a property of systems theory stating that sys­
tems periodically check the scale of allowable behaviors 
and reset the system (p. 55)
catalyst criteria one of the criteria related to the reasons 
why privacy rules may shift (p. 211)
causal argument  an assertion of cause and effect, in­
cluding the direction of the causality (p. 404)
cause  an antecedent condition that determines an effect 
(p. 51)

Glossary     G-3
communication apprehension  a generalized fear or 
anxiety regarding communicating in front of others (p. 37)
communicator reward valence the sum of the positive 
and negative characteristics of a person and the ­potential 
for him or her to carry out rewards or ­punishments 
(p. 129)
comparison level (CL)  a standard for what a person 
thinks he or she should get in a relationship (p. 161)
comparison level for alternatives (CLalt)  how people 
evaluate a relationship based on what their alternatives to 
the relationship are (p. 161)
compromising  a behavior that employs give-and-take to 
achieve a middle-road resolution (p. 470)
computer-mediated communication (CMC)  process 
in which people perceive, interpret, and exchange infor­
mation via large networked telecommunications systems 
(p. 223)
concepts  labels for the most important elements in a 
theory (p. 45)
conclusion  part of an organizational strategy in a speech 
that is aimed at summarizing a speaker’s main points and 
arousing emotions in an audience (p. 314)
concrete symbol  symbol representing an object (p. 7)
concurrence seeking  efforts to search out group con­
sensus (p. 245)
confirmatory bias occurs when people selectively pay 
attention to information that is consistent with previously 
held beliefs (p. 112)
conscientious objectors  group members who refuse to 
­participate because it would violate personal conscience 
(p. 251)
consonance  the belief that all media are similar in 
­attitudes, beliefs, and values (p. 378)
consonant relationship two elements in equilibrium with 
each other (p. 106)
constitutive rules rules that organize behavior and help 
us to ­understand how meaning should be interpreted 
(p. 97)
consubstantiation  when appeals are made to increase 
overlap between people (p. 329)
content  the conversion of raw data into meaning 
(p. 89)
contexts  environments in which communication takes 
place (p. 30)
contextual dialectics  tensions resulting from the place of 
the relationship within the culture (p. 195)
contradiction  a central feature of the dialectic ­ap­proach; 
refers to oppositions (p. 191)
control  direction over the important concepts in a theory 
(p. 47)
convergence  strategy used to adapt to another’s behavior 
(p. 483)
cool media  low-definition communication that demands 
active involvement from a viewer, listener, or reader 
(p. 446)
coordination  trying to make sense of message se­
quencing (p. 95)
core criteria  one of the criteria used for developing pri­
vacy rules that are more resilient and often function in the 
background (p. 211)
correlation  the way that media direct our attention to 
certain issues through communicating them to the public 
and to policymakers (p. 357)
costs  elements of relational life with negative value 
(p. 156)
counter-hegemony  when, at times, people use hege­
monic behaviors to challenge the domination in their lives 
(p. 429)
covering law approach  a guideline for creating theory 
suggesting that theories conform to a general law that is 
universal and invariant (p. 51)
critical approach  an approach stressing the researcher’s 
responsibility to change the inequities in the status quo 
(p. 47)
cues filtered-out theories  theories that address the lack 
of nonverbal cues as being detrimental to online relation­
ship development (p. 221)
cultivation differential  the percentage of difference in re­
sponse between light and heavy television viewers (p. 410)
cultural communication  communication between and 
among individuals whose cultural backgrounds vary (p. 38)
cultural patterns  images of the world and a person’s re­
lationship to it (p. 92)
culture  a community of meaning with, among other 
things, a shared body of knowledge (p. 38)
culture wars  cultural struggles over meaning, identity, 
and influence (p. 425)
cumulativeness  the belief that media repeat themselves 
(p. 377)
cycles  series of communication behaviors that serve to 
reduce equivocality (p. 297)

G-4     Glossary
cyclic alternation  a coping response to dialectical ten­
sions; refers to changes over time (p. 199)
data  the raw materials collected by the researcher to 
answer the questions posed in the research or to test a 
hypothesis (p. 59)
decoding  receiving and comparing messages (p. 431)
deductive logic  moving from the general (the theory) to 
the specific (the observations) (p. 59)
deliberative rhetoric  a type of rhetoric that determines 
an audience’s course of action (p. 317)
delivery  a canon of rhetoric that refers to the nonverbal 
presentation of a speaker’s ideas (p. 316)
dependency overaccommodation  a behavior that occurs 
when speakers place listeners in a lower-status role (p. 489)
depenetrate  slow deterioration of relationship (p. 173)
depth  degree of intimacy guiding topic discussion (p. 176)
dialectic approach  an approach framing contradiction as 
both/and (p. 188)
dialectical unity  the way people use communication to 
make sense of contradictions in their relationships (p. 190)
direct exchange  an exchange where two people recipro­
cate costs and rewards (p. 165)
discursive consciousness  a person’s ability to articulate 
personal goals or behaviors (p. 262)
disinhibition searching  a passive strategy involving 
watching a person’s natural or uninhibited behavior in an 
informal environment (p. 145)
dispositional matrix  the beliefs you have about relation­
ships (p. 164)
disqualifying  a substrategy of integration; refers to ex­
empting certain issues from the general pattern (p. 199)
dissonance ratio  a factor in determining magnitude of 
dissonance; the amount of consonant cognitions relative 
to the dissonant ones (p. 110)
dissonant relationship  two elements in disequilibrium 
with each other (p. 106)
divergence  strategy used to accentuate the verbal and 
nonverbal differences between communicators (p. 487)
diversion  a category of gratifications coming from 
media use; involves escaping from routines and problems 
(p. 389)
division  when two people fail to have overlap in their 
­substances (p. 328)
dominant group  the group that holds the power in a 
given culture (p. 498)
dominant-hegemonic position  operating within a code 
that allows one person to have control over another 
(p. 432)
dominating  using influence or authority to make deci­
sions (p. 470)
double-interact loops  cycles of an organization 
(e.g., interviews, meetings) to reduce equivocality 
(p. 297)
dual climates of opinion  difference between the popula­
tion’s perception of a public issue and the way the media 
report on the issue (p. 379)
dualisms  organizing things around pairs of opposites 
(p. 524)
dualistic approach  an approach framing contradiction 
as two separate entities (p. 188)
duality of structure  rules and resources used to guide 
organizational decisions about behaviors or actions 
(p. 263)
duration  organizational rule stating that decisions 
­regarding equivocality should be made in the least amount 
of time (p. 295)
dyadic uniqueness  distinctive relationship qualities 
(p. 183)
ecology the study of environments and their influence 
upon people (p. 438)
effect  a condition that inevitably follows a causative con­
dition (p. 51)
effective matrix  the transformations you are able to 
make to your given matrix, by learning a new skill, for 
example (p. 164)
effort  organizational rule stating that decisions regard­
ing equivocality should be made with the least amount of 
work (p. 297)
electronic era  age in which electronic media pervades 
our senses, allowing for people across the world to be 
connected (p. 444)
enactment  interpretation of the information received by 
the organization (p. 299)
enculturation performances  organizational behaviors 
that assist employees in discovering what it means to be a 
member of an organization (p. 283)

Glossary     G-5
enhancement  law that states media amplify or strengthen 
society (p. 448)
enmeshment  the extent to which partners identify them­
selves as part of a system (p. 91)
entry phase  the beginning stage of an interaction be­
tween strangers (p. 139)
environment  situation or context in which communica­
tion occurs (p. 8)
epideictic rhetoric  a type of rhetoric that pertains to 
praising or blaming (p. 317)
episodes  communication routines that have recognized 
beginnings, middles, and endings (p. 90)
epistemology  the nature, scope, and limits of human 
knowledge (p. 48)
epoch  era or historical age (p. 441)
equifinality  a property of systems theory stating that sys­
tems can achieve the same goals through different means 
(p. 55)
equivocality  the extent to which organizational messages 
are uncertain, ambiguous, and/or unpredictable (p. 293)
essentialism  the belief that all women are essentially the 
same, all men are essentially the same, and the two differ 
from each other (p. 522)
ethics  perceived rightness or wrongness of an action or 
behavior (p. 14)
ethos  the perceived character, intelligence, and goodwill 
of a speaker (p. 310)
evaluation  process of judging a conversation (p. 481)
exit phase  the stage in a relationship when people ­decide 
whether to continue or leave (p. 139)
expectancies  thoughts and behaviors anticipated in con­
versations (p. 124)
expert power  perception that another person has the 
ability to exert influence because of special knowledge or 
expertise (p. 266)
explanation  the ability to interpret the meaning of be­
havioral choices (p. 136)
exploratory affective exchange stage  stage of social 
penetration that results in the emergence of our personal­
ity to others (p. 181)
extractive strategy  an active information-seeking strat­
egy involving online searches to obtain information about 
a ­specific person (p. 148)
face  a metaphor for the public image people display (p. 461)
face concern  interest in maintaining one’s face or the 
face of others (p. 462)
face management  the protection of one’s face (p. 469)
face need  desire to be associated or disassociated with 
others (p. 462)
face restoration  strategy used to preserve autonomy and 
avoid loss of face (p. 466)
face-saving  efforts to avoid embarrassment or vulner­
ability (p. 465)
facework  actions used to deal with face needs/wants of 
self and others (p. 463)
false consciousness  Gramsci’s belief that people are un­
aware of the domination in their lives (p. 427)
fate control  the ability to affect a partner’s outcomes 
(p. 163)
feedback  a subprocess of calibration; information 
­allowing for change in the system (Ch. 3) (p. 55)
feedback  communication given to the source by the re­
ceiver to indicate understanding (Ch. 1) (p. 11)
feedback  the behavioral confirmation behaviors of send­
ers and receivers (Ch. 13) (p. 229)
feminism  an ideology and a movement focusing on 
women’s social position and desiring to end oppression 
based on ­gender and sex (p. 512)
fidelity  a principle of narrative rationality judging the 
credibility of a story (p. 346)
field journal  personal log to record feelings about com­
municating with people in a different culture from one’s 
own (p. 280)
field of experience  overlap of sender’s and receiver’s cul­
ture, experiences, and heredity in communication (p. 11)
first order effects  a method for cultivation to occur; re­
fers to learning facts from the media (p. 411)
forensic rhetoric  a type of rhetoric that pertains to 
speakers prompting feelings of guilt or innocence from an 
audience (p. 317)
fraction of selection  Schramm’s idea of how media 
choices are made; the expectation of reward divided by 
the effort required (p. 392)
Frankfurt School theorists  a group of scholars who be­
lieved that the media were more concerned with making 
money than with presenting news (p. 424)
fresh act  something new developed from action or be­
havior (p. 259)

G-6     Glossary
gender  social category consisting of the learned behav­
iors that constitute masculinity and femininity for a given 
culture (p. 499)
gender polarization lens  viewing men and women as 
polar opposites (p. 500)
generalized exchange  an exchange where reciprocation 
­involves the social network and isn’t confined to two in­
dividuals (p. 165)
generalized other  the attitude of the whole com­munity 
(p. 79)
given matrix  the constraints on your choices due to the 
environment and/or your own skill levels (p. 163)
global village  the notion that humans can no longer live 
in isolation, but rather will always be connected by con­
tinuous and instantaneous electronic media (p. 441)
glosses  outdated words in a speech (p. 315)
good reasons  a set of values for accepting a story as true 
and worthy of acceptance; provides a method for assess­
ing fidelity (p. 347)
group insulation  a group’s ability to remain unaffected 
by outside influences (p. 244)
groupthink  a way of group deliberation that minimizes 
conflict and emphasizes the need for unanimity (p. 238)
guilt  tension, embarrassment, shame, disgust, or other 
unpleasant feelings (p. 329)
habitual rules  nonnegotiable rules that are usually cre­
ated by an authority figure (p. 53)
hard core  group(s) at the end of the spiral willing to 
speak out at any cost (p. 380)
Hawthorne experiments  a set of investigations that 
ushered in a human relations approach to organizations 
(p. 35)
hegemony  the domination of one group over another, 
usually weaker, group (p. 426)
heurism  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to the 
amount of research and new thinking stimulated by the 
theory (p. 57)
hierarchy  a property of systems theory stating that sys­
tems consist of multiple levels (Ch. 3) (p. 54)
hierarchy  an organizing principle whereby things or 
people are ranked one above the other (Ch. 2) (p. 35)
high-context cultures  cultures, like Japan, where the 
meaning of a message is in the context or internalized in 
listeners (p. 149)
homeostatic  a term for a stable system that isn’t chang­
ing (p. 55)
homogeneity  group similarity (p. 242)
hot media  high-definition communication that demands 
little involvement from a viewer, listener, or reader 
(p. 445)
hyperpersonal perspective  an extension of Social In­
formation Processing theory that suggests people are able 
to ­develop more intimate relationships than those that are 
FtF (p. 227)
hypotheses  testable predictions of relationships between 
concepts that follow the general predictions made by a 
theory (p. 52)
I  the spontaneous, impulsive, creative self (p. 78)
ice age analogy  a position stating that television doesn’t 
have to have a single major impact, but influences viewers 
through steady limited effects (p. 409)
ideal self  the attributes a person ideally possesses (p. 220)
identification  when two people have overlap in their 
substances (p. 328)
ideology  framework used to make sense of our existence 
(p. 424)
illusion of invulnerability  belief that the group is special 
enough to overcome obstacles (p. 246)
illusion of unanimity  belief that silence equals agree­
ment (p. 248)
imperviousness to influence  refers to audience mem­
bers constructing their own meaning from media content 
(p. 396)
importance  a factor in determining magnitude of disso­
nance; refers to how significant the issue is (p. 109)
impression management  the strategic or unconscious 
effort to influence (p. 220)
in-groups  groups in which a person feels he or she be­
longs (p. 479)
indirect stereotyping  imposing outdated and rigid as­
sumptions of a cultural group upon that group (p. 485)
Individual Differences Perspective  a specific approach 
to the idea of limited effects; concentrates on the limits 
posed by personal characteristics (p. 388)
individualism prioritizing personal needs or values over 
the needs or values of a group (I-identity) (Ch. 5) (p. 92)
individualism  a cultural value that places emphasis on 
the individual over the group (Ch. 27) (p. 468)

Glossary     G-7
inductive logic  moving from the specific (the observa­
tions) to the general (the theory) (p. 59)
information environment  the availability of all stimuli 
in an organization (p. 294)
integrating  collaborating with others to find solutions 
(p. 470)
integration  a coping response to dialectical tensions; 
refers to synthesizing the opposition; composed of three 
substrategies (p. 199)
intentionality  a cognitive behavior that occurs when 
people’s prior motives determine use of media (p. 396)
interactional  dialectics tensions resulting from and con­
structed by communication (p. 195)
interactional expectations  an individual’s ability to 
carry out the interaction (p. 125)
interactional model of communication  view of com­
munication as the sharing of meaning with feedback that 
links source and receiver (p. 10)
interactive strategies  reducing uncertainties by engag­
ing in conversation (p. 144)
interdependence  a property of systems theory stating 
that the elements of a system affect one another (p. 54)
intergroup overaccommodation  a behavior that occurs 
when speakers place listeners in cultural groups without 
acknowledging individual uniqueness (p. 489)
internal and external stress  pressure exerted on the 
group by issues and events both inside and outside of the 
group (p. 245)
interpersonal communication  face-to-face communi­
cation between people (p. 32)
interpersonal meaning  the result when two people agree 
on each other’s interpretations of an interaction (p. 88)
interpretive approach  an approach viewing truth as 
sub­jective and stressing the participation of the ­researcher 
in the research process (p. 47)
intimate distance  very close spatial zone spanning 0–18 
inches, usually reserved for those whom we share per­
sonal feelings (p. 122)
intrapersonal communication  communication with 
oneself (p. 30)
introduction  part of an organizational strategy in a 
speech that includes gaining the audience’s attention, 
connecting with the audience, and providing an overview 
of the speaker’s purpose (p. 314)
invention  a canon of rhetoric that pertains to the con­
struction or development of an argument related to a par­
ticular speech (p. 312)
irrelevant relationship  two elements that have no mean­
ingful relation to each other (p. 106)
lack of decision-making procedures  failure to provide 
norms for solving group issues (p. 244)
lack of impartial leadership  groups led by individuals 
who put their personal agendas first (p. 244)
language  a shared system of verbal and nonverbal sym­
bols (p. 76)
last-minute swing  jumping on the bandwagon of popular 
opinion after opinions have been expressed (p. 380)
laws of media  further expansion of Media Ecology Theory 
with focus on the impact of technology on ­society (p. 447)
legitimate power  perception that another person has 
the ability to exert influence because of title or position 
(p. 266)
life scripts  clusters of past or present episodes that create 
a system of manageable meanings with others (p. 91)
limited effects  the perspective replacing Mass Society 
Theory; holds that media effects are limited by aspects of 
the audience’s personal and social lives (p. 388)
linear model of communication  one-way view of com­
munication that assumes a message is sent by a source to 
a receiver through a channel (p. 9)
literate era  age when written communication flourished 
and the eye became the dominant sense organ (p. 443)
logical consistency  a criterion for evaluating theories; re­
fers to the internal logic in the theoretical statements (p. 56)
logos  logical proof; the use of arguments and evidence in 
a speech (p. 310)
looking-glass self  our ability to see ourselves as ­another 
sees us (p. 77)
loop  the reflexiveness of levels in the hierarchy of mean­
ing (p. 93)
low-context cultures  cultures, as in the United States, 
where most of the meaning is in the code or message (p. 149)
macrotheory  a theory with extensive boundaries (p. 206)
magnitude of dissonance  the quantitative amount of dis­
comfort felt (p. 109)
mainstreaming  the tendency for heavy viewers to perceive 
a similar culturally dominant reality to that pictured on the 
media although this differs from actual reality (p. 410)

G-8     Glossary
mass communication  communication to a large audi­
ence via various channels (e.g., radio, Internet, television, 
etc.) (p. 37)
mass media  channels or delivery modes for mass mes­
sages (p. 37)
Mass Society Theory  the idea that average people 
are the victims of the powerful forces of mass media 
(p. 388)
material coherence  a type of coherence referring to the 
congruence between one story and other related ­stories 
(p. 346)
me  the reflective, socially aware self (p. 79)
meaning  what people extract from a message (p. 7)
media agenda  the priority placed on issues discussed in 
mediated sources (p. 361)
media ecology  the study of how media and communica­
tion processes affect human perception, feeling, emotion, 
and value (p. 438)
media framing  how media depictions of events influ­
ence and constrain the way consumers can interpret the 
events (p. 361)
Media Richness Theory  a theory that advances the no­
tion that communication can be classified according to 
message complexity (p. 222)
the medium is the message  phrase referring to the 
power and influence of the medium—not the content—on 
a society (p. 444)
memory  a canon of rhetoric that refers to a speaker’s ef­
fort in storing information for a speech (p. 316)
message  words, sounds, actions, or gestures in an inter­
action (p. 9)
metaphor  a figure of speech that helps to make the un­
clear more understandable (p. 315)
microtheory  a theory with limited boundaries (p. 206)
mind  the ability to use symbols with common social 
meanings (p. 76)
minimal justification  offering the least amount of 
­in­centive necessary to obtain compliance (p. 112)
models  simplified representations of the communication 
process (p. 8)
monologic approach  an approach framing contradiction 
as either/or (p. 188)
morphogenic  a process that occurs when a system reca­
librates (or changes) (p. 55)
mortification  one method of purging guilt, by blaming 
ourselves (p. 330)
motion  the processual nature of relationships (p. 191)
movements  activities based on stimulus-response (p. 52)
narration  an account to which listeners assign meaning 
(p. 344)
narrative rationality  a standard for judging which sto­
ries to believe and which to disregard (p. 345)
negative face  desire to be autonomous and free from 
­others (p. 462)
negotiated position  accepting dominant ideologies, but 
allowing for cultural exceptions (p. 432)
neo-Marxist  limited embracement of Marxism (p. 424)
networks  communication patterns through which infor­
mation flows (p. 34)
neutralizing  a substrategy of integration; refers to com­
promising between the oppositions (p. 199)
new media  computer-related technology (p. 37)
noise  distortion in channel not intended by the source 
(p. 9)
nominal concepts  concepts that are not directly 
­observable (p. 45)
norms  expectations of behavior in conversations (p. 482)
novelty and predictability  an important relational ten­
sion that shows our conflicting desires to have both stabil­
ity and change (p. 194)
obliging  satisfying the needs of others (p. 470)
observations  focused examination within a context of 
interest; may be guided by hypotheses or research ques­
tions (p. 59)
obsolescence law that states media eventually render 
something obsolete or out of date (p. 448)
ontology  the study of what it means to be human, which 
shapes the background understanding for theorizing about 
human communication (p. 48)
openness  the acknowledgment that within all human 
systems the boundaries are permeable (p. 54)
openness and protection  an important relational tension 
that shows our conflicting desires to tell our secrets and to 
keep them hidden (p. 194)
operationalize  making an abstract idea measurable and 
observable (p. 59)
opinion  expression of attitude (p. 372)

Glossary     G-9
oppositional position  substituting alternative messages 
presented by the media (p. 432)
order or hierarchy  a ranking that exists in society pri­
marily because of our ability to use language (p. 329)
organizational communication  communication within 
and among large, extended environments (p. 34)
organizational culture  the essence of organizational life 
(p. 275)
organizational rituals  routines that pertain to the 
­organization overall (p. 282)
orientation stage  stage of social penetration that in­
cludes ­revealing small parts of ourselves (p. 180)
ought self  the attributes a person should possess (p. 220)
out-group stereotypes  stereotyped perceptions of group 
­ene­mies or competitors (p. 247)
out-groups  groups in which a person feels he or she does 
not belong (p. 479)
outcome  whether people continue in a relationship or 
terminate it (p. 157)
outsider within  a person in a normally marginalized so­
cial position who has gained access to a more privileged 
location (p. 520)
overaccommodation  attempt to overdo efforts in regu­
lating, modifying, or responding to others (p. 488)
overestimation of the group  erroneous belief that the 
group is more than it is (p. 246)
pack journalism  the phenomenon of journalists having 
their agendas influenced by other journalists (p. 365)
paradigm shift  a significant change in the way most 
people see the world and its meanings (p. 340)
parametric rules  rules that are set by an authority figure 
but are subject to some negotiation (p. 53)
parasocial interaction  the relationship we feel we have 
with people we know only through the media (p. 393)
parsimony  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to the 
simplicity of the explanation provided by the theory (p. 56)
partial  recognition that no one has a complete view of 
the social hierarchy (p. 520)
particular others  individuals who are significant to us 
(p. 79)
passion performances  organizational stories that em­
ployees share with one another (p. 282)
passive strategies  reducing uncertainties by unobtrusive 
observation (p. 144)
pathos  emotional proof; emotions drawn from audience 
members (p. 311)
pentad  Burke’s method for applying Dramatism (p. 331)
pentadic (or dramatisic) ratios  the proportions of 
one element of the pentad relative to another element 
(p. 332)
perception  process of attending to and interpreting a 
message (p. 481)
performance  metaphor suggesting that organizational 
life is like a theatrical presentation (p. 281)
personal boundary  a boundary around private informa­
tion that includes just one person (p. 212)
personal distance spatial zone of 18 inches to 4 feet, re­
served for family and friends (p. 122)
personal identity  a category of gratifications coming from 
media use; involves ways to reinforce individual values 
(p. 389)
personal idioms  private, intimate expressions stated in a 
relationship (p. 182)
personal meaning  the meaning achieved when a per­
son brings his or her unique experiences to an interaction 
(p. 87)
personal phase  the stage in a relationship when people 
begin to communicate more spontaneously and person­
ally (p. 139)
personal relationships  a category of gratifications com­
ing from media use; involves substituting media for com­
panionship (p. 389)
personal rituals  routines done at the workplace each day 
(p. 282)
personal space  individual’s variable use of space and 
distance (p. 121)
personnel  organizational rule stating the most knowl­
edgeable workers should resolve equivocality (p. 296)
phenomenology  a personal interpretation of everyday 
life and activities (p. 27)
physical arousal  bodily changes as a result of deviations 
from expectations (p. 127)
physical (external) noise  bodily influences on reception 
of message (p. 10)
physiological noise  biological influences on reception of 
message (p. 10)
pluralistic ignorance  mistaken observation of how most 
people feel (p. 376)

G-10     Glossary
policy agenda  the result of the public agenda interacting 
with what policy makers think (p. 361)
political performances  organizational behaviors that 
demonstrate power or control (p. 283)
positive face  desire to be liked and admired by others 
(p. 462)
positivistic/empirical approach  an approach assuming 
the existence of objective reality and value-neutral re­
search (p. 47)
power  imposition of personal will on others (Ch. 15) (p. 261)
power  the degree of dependence a person has on another 
for outcomes (Ch. 9) (p. 163)
practical consciousness  a person’s inability to articulate 
personal goals or behaviors (p. 262)
praxis  refers to the choice-making capacity of humans 
(p. 192)
prediction  the ability to forecast one’s own and others’ 
behavioral choices (p. 136)
pre-interactional expectations  the knowledge or skills 
a communicator brings to an interaction (p. 125)
pressure toward uniformity  occurs when group mem­
bers go along to get along (p. 248)
pressures on dissenters  direct influence on group mem­
bers who provide thoughts contrary to the group’s (p. 248)
primary territories  signal a person’s exclusive domain 
over an area or object (p. 123)
priming  a cognitive process whereby what the media 
present temporarily, at least, influences what people think 
about afterwards in processing additional information 
(p. 361)
print era  the age when gaining information through the 
printed word was customary, and seeing continued as the 
dominant sense (p. 443)
privacy rule attributes  one of the features of privacy rules; 
they refer to the ways people acquire rules and the properties 
of the rules (p. 212)
private boundaries  the demarcation between private in­
formation and public information (p. 210)
private disclosures  the process of communicating pri­
vate information to another (p. 208)
private information  information about things that mat­
ter deeply to a person (p. 208)
problem-solving groups  sets of individuals whose main 
task is to make decisions and provide policy recommen­
dations (p. 240)
process  ongoing, dynamic, and unending occurrence 
(p. 5)
productive exchange  an exchange where both partners 
incur costs and benefits simultaneously (p. 165)
proxemics  study of a person’s use of space (p. 121)
psychological noise  cognitive influences on reception of 
message (p. 10)
public  legal, social, and social-psychological concerns of 
people (p. 372)
public agenda  the result of the media agenda interacting 
with what the public thinks (p. 361)
public and private dialectic  a contextual dialectic re­
sulting from a private relationship and public life (p. 195)
public communication  the dissemination of information 
from one person to many others (audience) (p. 36)
public distance  spatial zone of 12 feet and beyond, re­
served for very formal discussions such as between pro­
fessor and students in class (p. 123)
public image  outer layer of a person; what is available to 
­others (p. 175)
public opinion  attitudes and behaviors expressed in pub­
lic in order to avoid isolation (p. 372)
public territories  locations that signal open spaces for 
everyone, including beaches and parks (p. 123)
punctuation  process of identifying when an episode be­
gins or ends (p. 90)
pure research  research to generate knowledge (p. 59)
purpose  one prong of the pentad; the goal the agent had 
for the act (p. 332)
Pygmalion effect  living up to or down to another’s ex­
pectations of us (p. 78)
quasi-statistical sense  personal estimation of the strength 
of opposing sides on a public issue (p. 375)
ratio of the senses  phrase referring to the way people 
adapt to their environment (p. 444)
rational world paradigm  a system of logic employed by 
many researchers and professionals (p. 340)
rationale  a factor in determining magnitude of disso­
nance; refers to the reasoning employed to explain the 
inconsistency (p. 110)
reactivity searching  a passive strategy involving watch­
ing a person doing something (p. 145)
real and ideal dialectic  a contextual dialectic resulting 
from the difference between idealized relationships and 
lived relationships (p. 195)

Glossary     G-11
real concepts  concepts that are directly observable 
(p. 45)
receiver  recipient of a message (p. 9)
reciprocity  the return of openness from one person to 
another (Ch. 10) (p. 175)
redemption  a rejection of the unclean and a return 
to a new order after guilt has been temporarily purged 
(p. 330)
referent power  perception that another person has the 
ability to achieve compliance because of established per­
sonal ­relationships (p. 266)
reflexivity  a person’s ability to monitor his or her actions 
or behaviors (p. 262)
reframing  a substrategy of integration; refers to trans­
forming the oppositions (p. 199)
regulative  rules guidelines for people’s behavior 
(p. 98)
relational uncertainty  a lack of certainty about the fu­
ture and status of a relationship (p. 147)
relationship  agreement and understanding between two 
people (p. 91)
relationships  the ways in which the concepts of a theory 
relate to one another (p. 45)
relevance  a factor explaining why people seek guidance 
from the media agenda. It refers to how personally af­
fected they feel by an issue (p. 363)
reliability  the stability and predictability of an observa­
tion (p. 62)
resonance  a behavior that occurs when a viewer’s lived 
reality coincides with the reality pictured in the media 
(p. 411)
resources  attributes or material goods that can be used to 
exert power in an organization (Ch. 15) (p. 264)
resources  stories, symbols, and images that people use 
to make sense of their world (Ch. 5) (p. 96)
response  reaction to equivocality (p. 297)
retention  collective memory allowing people to accom­
plish goals (p. 301)
retrieval  law that states media restore something that 
was once lost (p. 448)
reversal  law that states media will—when pushed to 
their limit—produce or become something else (p. 449)
reward power  perception that another person has the 
ability to provide positive outcomes (p. 264)
reward-cost ratio  balance between positive and nega­
tive relationship experiences (p. 177)
rewards  elements of relational life with positive value 
(p. 156)
rhetoric  a speaker’s available means of persuasion (p. 36)
ritual performances  regular and recurring presentations 
in the workplace (p. 282)
ritual perspective  a position depicting the media as rep­
resenters of shared beliefs (p. 405)
role taking  the ability to put oneself in another’s place 
(p. 77)
roles  positions of group members and their relationship 
to the group (p. 34)
rule development  one of the features of privacy rule 
characteristics; describes how rules come to be decided 
(p. 211)
rules approach  a guideline for creating theory that 
builds human choice into explanations (p. 51)
rules  general routines that the organization or group fol­
lows in accomplishing goals (Ch. 15) (p. 263)
rules  guidelines in organizations as they review re­
sponses to equivocal information (Ch. 17) (p. 295)
salience  the degree to which an agenda issue is perceived 
as important relative to the other issues on the agenda 
(p. 362)
scapegoating  one method of purging guilt, by blaming 
others (p. 330)
scene  one prong of the pentad; the context surrounding 
the act (p. 331)
scientific method  the traditional method for doing re­
search involving controlled observations and analysis to 
test the principles of a theory (p. 59)
scope  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to the 
breadth of communication behaviors covered in the ­theory 
(p. 56)
second order effects  a method for cultivation to occur; 
refers to learning values and assumptions from the media 
(p. 411)
second shift  the phenomenon of working women putting 
in eight hours on the job and another day’s work at home 
(p. 500)
secondary territories  locations that signal a person’s af­
filiation with an area or object (p. 123)
segmentation  a coping response to dialectical tensions; 
refers to changes due to context (p. 199)

G-12     Glossary
selection  a coping response to dialectical tensions; refers 
to prioritizing oppositions (Ch. 11) (p. 199)
selection  choosing the best method for obtaining infor­
mation (Ch. 17) (p. 300)
selective attention  a method for reducing dissonance by 
paying attention to information that is consonant with cur­
rent beliefs and actions (p. 111)
selective exposure  a method for reducing dissonance by 
seeking information that is consonant with current beliefs 
and actions (p. 111)
selective interpretation  a method for reducing disso­
nance by interpreting ambiguous information so that it be­
comes consistent with current beliefs and actions (p. 111)
selective retention  a method for reducing dissonance by 
remembering information that is consonant with current 
beliefs and actions (p. 111)
selectivity  audience members’ use of media reflects their 
­existing interests (p. 396)
self  imagining how we look to another person (p. 77)
self-appointed mindguards  individuals who protect the 
group from adverse information (p. 248)
self-censorship  group members minimize personal 
doubts and counterarguments (p. 248)
self-concept  a relatively stable set of perceptions people 
hold about themselves (p. 73)
self-disclosure personal messages about the self dis­
closed to another (p. 137)
self-esteem  the degree of positive orientation people 
have about themselves (p. 32)
self-fulfilling prophecy  a prediction about yourself caus­
ing you to behave in such a way that it comes true (p. 74)
self-identity  personal attributes of an individual (p. 464)
semantic noise  linguistic influences on reception of 
­message (p. 9)
semiotics the study of signs (p. 27)
sensemaking  creating awareness and understanding in 
situations that are complex or uncertain (p. 299)
sensory overaccommodation overly adapting to others 
who are perceived as limited in their abilities (physical, 
linguistic, or other) (p. 489)
sex biological category divided into male and female 
(p. 499)
sexual division of labor allocation of work on the basis 
of sex (p. 521)
significant symbols symbols whose meaning is generally 
agreed upon by many people (p. 76)
situated knowledges what anyone knows is grounded in 
­context and circumstance (p. 520)
situational contexts environments that are limited by such 
factors as the number of people present, the feedback, the 
space between communicators, among others (p. 30)
small group communication communication among at 
least three individuals (p. 33)
social the notion that people and interactions are part of 
the communication process (p. 5)
Social Categories Model a specific approach to the idea 
of limited effects; concentrates on the limits posed by 
group membership (p. 388)
social constructionism belief that people co-construct 
their social reality in conversations (p. 86)
social distance  spatial zone of 4–12 feet, reserved for more 
formal relationships such as those with ­coworkers (p. 122)
Social Identity Theory a theory that proposes a person’s 
identity is shaped by both personal and social character­
istics (p. 479)
social integration reciprocity of communication ­behaviors 
in interaction (p. 267)
social penetration process of bonding that moves a rela­
tionship from superficial to more intimate (p. 171)
social performances organizational behaviors intended 
to demonstrate cooperation and politeness with others 
(p. 283)
Social Presence Theory a theory that posits the extent 
to which people are aware of each other via various com­
munication media (p. 222)
social reality a person’s beliefs about how meaning and 
action fit within an interpersonal interaction (p. 87)
social rituals routines that involve relationships with oth­
ers in the workplace (p. 282)
society the web of social relationships humans create and 
respond to (p. 79)
solidarity facework accepting another as a member of an 
in-group (p. 463)
Sophists teachers of public speaking (rhetoric) in ancient 
Greece (p. 309)
source originator of a message (p. 9)
speech act action we perform by speaking (e.g., question­
ing, complimenting, or threatening) (p. 90)

Glossary     G-13
stable exchange stage stage of social penetration that re­
sults in complete openness and spontaneity for relational 
partners (p. 183)
standpoint an achieved position based on a social loca­
tion that lends an interpretative aspect to a person’s life 
(p. 519)
strange loop rules of meaning change within the loop 
(p. 94)
stranger-on-the-train the event that occurs when strang­
ers reveal personal information to others in public places 
(p. 174)
structural coherence a type of coherence referring to the 
flow of the story (p. 345)
structuration the production, reproduction, and trans­
formation of social environments through rules and re­
sources in relationships (p. 258)
structure the rules and resources used to sustain a group 
or organization (p. 257)
style a canon of rhetoric that includes the use of language 
to express ideas in a speech (p. 315)
substance the general nature of something (p. 328)
subsystems smaller systems that are embedded in larger 
ones (p. 54)
success organizational rule stating that a successful plan 
of the past will be used to reduce current equivocality 
(p. 296)
suprasystems larger systems that hold smaller ones 
within them (p. 54)
surveillance the process of newspeople scanning the in­
formation that is in the environment and deciding which 
of the many events that are occurring deserve attention in 
their news outlets (Ch. 21) (p. 357)
surveillance a category of gratifications coming from 
media use; involves collecting needed information (Ch. 23) 
(p. 389)
syllogism a set of propositions that are related to one an­
other and draw a conclusion from the major and minor 
premises (p. 311)
symbol arbitrary label given to a phenomenon (p. 7)
synchronous communication a process that occurs when 
both sender and receiver are online simultaneously (p. 223)
synergy the intersection of multiple perspectives in a 
small group (p. 34)
system a group or organization and the behaviors that the 
group engages in to pursue its goals (p. 257)
systems approach a guideline for creating theory that 
acknowledges human choice and the constraints of the 
systems involved (p. 51)
tact facework extent to which a person respects another’s 
­autonomy (p. 463)
tactical rules unstated rules used to achieve a personal or 
­interpersonal goal (p. 53)
task rituals routines associated with a particular job in 
the workplace (p. 282)
task-oriented groups sets of individuals whose main 
goal is to work toward completing jobs assigned to them 
(p. 240)
technopoly  a term coined by Postman that means we live 
in a society dominated by technology (p. 451)
territoriality  person’s ownership of an area or object 
(p. 123)
test of time  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to 
the theory’s durability over time (p. 57)
testability  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to 
our ability to test the accuracy of a theory’s claims (p. 57)
tetrad  organizing concept to understand the laws of 
media (p. 447)
the negative  rejecting one’s place in the social order; ex­
hibiting resistance (p. 330)
theater of struggle  competition of various cultural ide­
ologies (p. 428)
theorems  theoretical statements derived from axioms, 
positing a relationship between two concepts (p. 142)
theory  an abstract system of concepts and their relation­
ships that help us to understand a phenomenon (p. 44)
theory of sociocultural evolution  Darwin’s belief that 
only the fittest can survive challenging surroundings 
(p. 291)
thick boundaries  closed boundaries allowing little or no 
information to pass through (p. 214)
thick description  explanation of the layers of meaning 
in a culture (p. 280)
thin boundaries  open boundaries allowing all informa­
tion to pass through (p. 214)
thought  an inner conversation (p. 77)
threat threshold  tolerance for distance violations 
(p. 127)
topics  an aid to invention that refers to the arguments a 
speaker uses (p. 313)

G-14     Glossary
totality  acknowledges the interdependence of people in a 
relationship (p. 191)
train test  an experiment used to assess the extent to 
which people will speak out (p. 379)
trajectory  pathway to closeness (p. 171)
transactional model of communication  view of com­
munication as the simultaneous sending and receiving of 
messages (p. 12)
transgression  a violation of relational rules, practices, 
and expectations (p. 173)
transmissional perspective  a position depicting the 
media as senders of messages across space (p. 405)
tribal era  age when oral tradition was embraced and 
hearing was the paramount sense (p. 442)
ubiquity  the belief that media are everywhere (p. 377)
uncertainty  a factor explaining why people seek guidance 
from the media agenda. It refers to how much ­information a 
person believes they already possess about an issue (p. 363)
uncertainty avoidance  an attempt to avoid ambiguous 
situations (p. 149)
unwanted repetitive patterns (URPs)  recurring, unde­
sirable conflicts in a relationship (p. 98)
utility  a criterion for evaluating theories; refers to the 
theory’s usefulness or practical value (Ch. 3) (p. 56)
utility  using the media to accomplish specific tasks 
(Ch. 23) (p. 396)
validity  the truth value of an observation (p. 63)
victimage  the way we attempt to purge the guilt we feel 
as part of being human (p. 330)
violation valence  perceived negative or positive assess­
ment of an unexpected behavior (p. 128)
violence index  a yearly content analysis of prime-time 
network programming to assess the amount of violence 
represented (p. 406)
warranting  the perceived legitimacy and validity of in­
formation about another person that one may receive or 
observe online (p. 230)
whistle-blowing  process in which individuals report 
unethical or illegal behaviors or practices to others 
(p. 250)
wholeness  a fundamental property of systems theory stat­
ing that systems are more than the sum of their individual 
parts (p. 54)

     R-1
Anderson, I. K. (2011). The uses and gratifications of 
online care pages: A study of CaringBridge. Health 
Communication, 26(6), 546–559.
Anderson, K., & Cantor, M. (2011). Inventing a gay agenda: 
Students’ perceptions of lesbian and gay professors. 
Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 41, 1538–1564.
Anderson, R., & Ross, V. (2002). Questions of communica­
tion: A practical introduction to theory, 2nd ed. New 
York, NY: St. Martin’s Press.
Anderson, T. L., & Emmers-Sommer, T. M. (2006). 
Predictors of relationship satisfaction in online romantic 
relationships. Communication Studies, 57, 153–172.
Andrews, M. (2002). Feminist research with non-feminist 
and anti-feminist women: Meeting the challenge. 
Feminism & Psychology, 12, 55–77.
Anguiano, C., Milstein, T., De Larkin, I., Chen, Y., & 
Sandoval, J. (2012). Connecting community voices: 
Using a Latino/a critical race theory lens on environ­
mental justice advocacy. Journal of International and 
Intercultural Communication, 5(2), 124–143.
Antheunis, M. L., Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2010). 
Getting acquainted through social network sites: Test­
ing a model of online uncertainty reduction and so­
cial attraction. Computers in Human Behavior, 26(1), 
100–109.
Apker, J., Propp, K. M., & Ford, W. S. Z. (2005). Negotiat­
ing status and identity tensions in health-care team inter­
actions: An exploration of nurse role dialectics. Journal 
of Applied Communication Research, 33, 93–115.
Appel, E. C. (2003). Rush to judgment: Burlesque, trag­
edy, and hierarchical alchemy in the rhetoric of 
America’s foremost political talkshow host. Southern 
Communication Journal, 68, 217–230.
Ardener, E. (1975). The “problem” revisited. In S. Ardener 
(Ed.), Perceiving women (pp. 19–27). London: Malaby 
Press.
Ardener, S. (1978). Introduction: The nature of women 
in society. In S. Ardener (Ed.), Defining females 
(pp. 9–48). New York, NY: Wiley.
Abrams, J., O’Connor, J., & Giles, H. (2003). Identity 
and intergroup communication. In W. B. Gudykunst 
(Ed.), Cross-cultural and intercultural communication 
(pp. 209–224). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Acquisti, A., John, L. K., & Lowenstein, G. (2012). The im­
pact of relative standards on the propensity to disclose. 
Journal of Marketing Research, 49, 160–174.
Afifi, W. A., & Burgoon, J. K. (2000). The impact of viola­
tions on uncertainty and the consequences for attractive­
ness. Human Communication Research, 26, 203–233.
Ahmed, R. (2009). Interface of political opportunism and 
Islamic extremism in Bangladesh: Rhetorical identifica­
tion in government response. Communication Studies, 
60(1), 82–96.
Alkhazraji, K. M. (1997). The acculturation of immigrants 
to U.S. organizations: The case of Muslim employees. 
Management Communication Quarterly, 11, 217–265.
Allen, B. J. (2007). Theorizing communication and race. 
Communication Monographs, 74, 259–264.
Altman, I. (1975). The environment and social behavior. 
Monterey, CA: Brooks/Cole.
Altman, I., & Taylor, D. A. (1973). Social penetration: The 
development of interpersonal relationships. New York, 
NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Altman, I., Vinsel, A., & Brown, B. (1981). Dialectic con­
ceptions in social psychology: An application to social 
penetration and privacy regulation. In L. Berkowitz 
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology 
(pp. 130–145). New York, NY: Academic Press.
Alwood, E. (1997, October 14). The power of persuasion: 
The media’s role in addressing homosexual issues in the 
future. The Advocate, p. 54.
An overview of media ecology. Retrieved from http://
www.media-ecology.org/media_ecology/index.html#An
%20Overview%20of%20Media%20Ecology%20(Lance
%20Strate)
Andersen, K. E. (2003). Recovering the civic culture: The 
imperative of ethical communication. Boston, MA: 
Pearson/Allyn & Bacon.
References

R-2     References
Ballard-Reisch, D. (2010). Muted groups in health commu­
nication policy and practice: The case of older adults 
in rural and frontier areas. Women & Language, 33(2), 
87–93.
Bandura, A. (1977). Social learning theory. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Banks, S. P., & Riley, P. (1993). Structuration theory as 
ontology for communication research. In S. A. Deetz 
(Ed.), Communication yearbook 16 (pp. 167–196). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Bantz, C. R. (1989). Organizing and the social psychology 
of organizing. Communication Studies, 40, 231–240.
Baran, J. S. (2012). Introduction to mass communica­
tion: Media literacy and culture. New York, NY: 
McGraw-Hill.
Baran, S. J., & Davis, D. K. (2009). Mass communication 
theory: Foundations, ferment, and future, 5th ed. Bel­
mont, CA: Wadsworth.
Baran, S. J., & Davis, D. K. (2012). Mass communication 
theory: Foundations, ferment and future, 6th ed. Bel­
mont, CA: Wadsworth.
Bareket-Bojmel, L., & Sharar, G. (2011a). Emotional 
and interpersonal consequences of self-disclosure in a 
lived online interaction. Journal of Clinical and Social 
Psychology, 30, 225–250.
Bareket-Bojmel, L., & Shahar, G. (2011b). Emotional 
and interpersonal consequences of self-disclosure in a 
lived, online interaction. Journal of Social and Clinical 
Psychology, 30, 732–759.
Barge, J. K., & Pearce, W. B. (2004). A reconnaissance of 
CMM research. Human Systems, 13, 13–32.
Barker, R. T., Rimler, G. W., Moreno, E., & Kaplan, T. 
E. (2004). Family business members’ narrative percep­
tions: Values, succession, and commitment. Journal of 
Technical Writing and Communication, 34, 291–320.
Barnlund, D. C. (1970). A transactional model of commu­
nication. In K. K. Sereno & C. D. Mortensen (Eds.), 
Foundations of communication theory (pp. 83–102). 
New York, NY: Harper.
Basic McLuhan: Marshall McLuhan and the senses. Re­
trieved from http://ns.gingkopress.net/02-mcl/z_mcluhan
-and-the-senses.html
Baym N., Campbell, S. W., Horst, H., Kalyanaraman, S., 
Oliver, M. B., Rothenbuhler, E., … Miller, K. (2012). 
Communication theory and research in the age of new 
media: A conversation from the CM café. Communica­
tion Monographs, 79(2), 256–267.
Ardener, S. (2005). Muted group theory excerpts. Women 
and Language, 28, 50–72.
Argo, J. J., & Shiv, B. (2012). Are white lies as innocu­
ous as we think? Journal of Consumer Research, 38(6), 
1093–1102.
Arneson, P. (2007). A conversation about communication 
ethics with Kenneth A. Andersen. In P. Arneson (Ed.), 
Exploring communication ethics (pp. 131–142). New 
York, NY: Peter Lang.
Arnhart, L. (1981). Aristotle on political reasoning: A com­
mentary on rhetoric. DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois Uni­
versity Press.
Aron, A., & Aron, E. N. (1989). The heart of social 
psychology: A backstage view of a passionate science, 
2nd ed. Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Aronson, E. (1969). The theory of cognitive dissonance: A 
current perspective. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in 
experimental social psychology (pp. 1–34). New York, 
NY: Academic Press.
Asante, M. K. (1987). The Afrocentric idea: Philadelphia, 
PA: Temple University.
Asch, S. E. (1951). Effects of group pressure upon the mod­
ification and distortion of judgments. In J. Guetzkow 
(Ed.), Groups, leadership, and men: Research in human 
relations (pp. 177–190). New York, NY: Russell & 
Russell. 
Atkins, D. C., Rubin, T. N., Steyvers, M., Doeden, M. A., 
Baucom, B. R., & Christensen, A. (2012). Topic mod­
els: A novel method for modeling couple and family 
text data. Journal of Family Psychology, 5, 816–827.
Aubrey, J. S., Olson, L., Fine, M., Hauser, T., Rhea, D., 
Kaylor, B., & Yang, A. (2012). Investigating personality 
and viewing-motivation correlates of reality television 
exposure. Communication Quarterly, 60(1), 80–102.
Austin, J. L. (1975). How to do things with words. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ayyad, K. (2011). Internet usage vs. traditional media 
usage among university students in the United Arab 
Emirates. Journal of Arab & Muslim Media Research, 
4(1), 41–61.
Bachman, G. F., & Guerrero, L. K. (2006). Forgiveness, 
apology, and communicative responses to hurtful 
events. Communication Reports, 19, 45–56.
Bachman, G. F., & Guerrero, L. K. (2008). Relational qual­
ity and relationships: An expectancy violations analy­
sis. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 23, 
943–963.

References     R-3
Baxter, L. A. (1988). A dialectical perspective on com­
munication strategies in relationship development. In 
S. Duck (Ed.), Handbook of personal relationships 
(pp. 257–273). New York, NY: Wiley.
Baxter, L. A. (1990). Dialectical contradictions in rela­
tionship development. Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 7, 69–88.
Baxter, L. A. (2006). Relational dialectics theory: 
Multivocal dialogues of family communication. In D. 
O. Braithwaite & L. A. Baxter (Eds.), Engaging theo­
ries in family communication: Multiple perspectives 
(pp. 130–145). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Baxter, L. A. (2011). Voicing relationships. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Baxter, L. A., & Babbie, E. R. (2004). The basics of com­
munication research. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Baxter, L. A., & Braithwaite, D. O. (2008). Relational 
dialectics theory. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite 
(Eds.), Engaging theories in interpersonal communica­
tion: Multiple perspectives (pp. 349– 361). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Baxter, L. A., & Braithwaite, D. O. (2010). Relational dia­
lectics theory, applied. In S. W. Smith & S. R. Wilson 
(Eds.), New directions in interpersonal communication 
(pp. 48–66). Thousand Oaks, CA. Sage.
Baxter, L. A., Braithwaite, D. O., Bryant, L., & Wagner, A. 
(2004). Stepchildren’s perceptions of the contradictions 
in communication with step-parents. Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 21, 447–467.
Baxter, L. A., Braithwaite, D. O., Golish, T. D., & Olson, 
L. N. (2002). Contradictions of interaction for wives 
of elderly husbands with adult dementia. Journal of 
Applied Communication Research, 30, 1–26.
Baxter, L. A., & Montgomery, B. M. (1996). Relating: Dia­
logues and dialectics. New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Baxter, L. A., & Sahlstein, E. M. (2000). Some possible 
directions for future research. In S. Petronio (Ed.), 
Balancing the secrets of private disclosures (pp. 289–
300). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Bean, C. J., & Eisenberg, E. (2006). Employee sense­
making in the transition to nomadic work. Journal of 
Organizational Change Management, 19, 210–222.
Beaver, D. G. (2011). Teacher fashion, classroom homoph­
ily, and the impact on student evaluations. Unpublished 
Masters thesis. Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX.
Beavin-Bevelas, J. (1990). Equivocal communication. 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Bell, K. E., Orbe, M. P., Drummond, D. K., & Camara, 
S. K. (2000). Accepting the challenge of centralizing 
without essentializing: Black feminist thought and 
African American women’s communicative experi­
ences. Women’s Studies in Communication, 23, 41–62.
Bellamy, R. V., & Walker, J. R. (1996). Television and 
the remote control: Grazing on a vast wasteland. New 
York, NY: Guilford Press. 
Bem, D. J. (1967). Self-perception: An alternative in­
terpretation of cognitive dissonance phenomena. 
Psychological Review, 74, 183–200.
Bem, S. (1993). The lenses of gender: Transforming the 
debate on sexual inequality. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Benning, J. (2003). Remembering Neil Postman. Retrieved 
from www.alternet.org
Bentley, J. M. (2012). A uses and gratifications study of 
contemporary Christian radio websites. Journal of 
Radio & Audio Media, 19(1), 2–16.
Berbary, L. A. (2012). “Don’t be a whore, that’s not lady­
like”: Discursive discipline and sorority women’s gen­
dered subjectivity. Qualitative Inquiry, 18, 606–625.
Berger, A. A. (2007). Media & society: A critical perspec­
tive. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield.
Berger, C. R. (1977). The covering law perspective as a 
theoretical basis for the study of human communication. 
Communication Quarterly, 25, 7–18.
Berger, C. R. (1979). Beyond initial interaction: Uncertainty, 
understanding, and the development of interpersonal re­
lationships. In H. Giles & R. St. Clair (Eds.), Language 
and social psychology (pp. 122–144). Oxford: Blackwell.
Berger, C. R. (1982). Social cognition and the development 
of interpersonal relationships: The quest for social 
knowledge. Paper presented at the First International 
Conference on Personal Relationships, Madison, WI.
Berger, C. R. (1986). Uncertain outcome values in pre­
dicted relationships: Uncertainty reduction theory then 
and now. Human Communication Research, 13, 34–38.
Berger, C. R. (1987). Communicating under uncertainty. 
In M. E. Roloff & G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal 
processes: New directions in communication research 
(pp. 39–62). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Berger, C. R. (1995). Inscrutable goals, uncertain plans, and 
the production of communicative action. In C. R. Berger 
& M. Burgoon (Eds.), Communication and social pro­
cesses (pp. 1–28). East Lansing, MI: Michigan State 
University Press.

R-4     References
Berger, C. R. (2005). Slippery slopes to apprehension: 
Rationality and graphical depictions of increasingly 
threatening trends. Communication Research, 32, 3–28.
Berger, C. R. (2011). From explanation to application. 
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 39(2), 
214–222.
Berger, C. R., & Bradac, J. J. (1982). Language and so­
cial knowledge: Uncertainty in interpersonal relations. 
London: Arnold.
Berger, C. R., & Calabrese, R. J. (1975). Some explorations 
in initial interaction and beyond: Toward a develop­
mental theory of interpersonal communication. Human 
Communication Research, 1, 99–112.
Berger, C. R., & Gudykunst, W. B. (1991). Uncertainty and 
communication. In. B. Dervin & M. J. Voight (Eds.), 
Progress in communication sciences (Vol. 10, pp. 21–
66). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.
Berger, C. R., & Kellerman, K. (1994). Acquiring social 
information. In J. A. Daly & J. Weimann (Eds.), Strate­
gic interpersonal communication (pp. 1–31). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Berger, C. R., & Roloff, M. E. (1980). Social cognition 
self-awareness and interpersonal communication. In 
B. Dervin & M. Voigt (Eds.), Progress in communi­
cation sciences (Vol. 2, pp. 158–172). Norwood, NJ: 
Ablex.
Berkowitz, D., & Belgrave, L. L. (2010). “She works hard 
for the money”: Drag queens and the management of 
their contradictory status of celebrity and marginality. 
Journal of Contemporary Ethnography, 39(2), 159.
Bern-Klug, M. (2009). A framework for categorizing social 
interactions related to end of life care in nursing homes. 
The Gerontologist, 49(4), 495–507.
Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. H. (1978). Interpersonal 
attraction. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Beullens, K., Roe, K., & Van den Bulk, J. (2011). The im­
pact of adolescents’ news and action movie viewing on 
risky driving behavior: A longitudinal study. Human 
Communication Research, 37(4), 488–508.
Bienenstock, E. J., & Bianchi, A. J. (2004). Activating per­
formance expectations and status differences through 
gift exchange: Experimental results. Social Psychology 
Quarterly, 67, 310–318.
Bignell J. (2013). An introduction to television studies. 
New York, NY: Routledge.
Bisel, R. S., & Arterburn, E. N. (2012). Making sense of 
organizational members’ silence: A sensemaking-
resource model. Communication Research Reports, 29, 
217–226.
Bishop, J. W., Scott, K. D., Goldsby, M. G., & Cropanzano, 
R. (2005). A construct validity study of commitment 
and perceived support variables: A multifoci approach 
across different team environments. Group Organiza­
tional Management, 30, 153–180.
Blackwell, D. M. (2010). Sidelines and separate spaces: 
Making education anti-racist for students of color. Race, 
Ethnicity & Education, 13(4), 473–494.
Blair-Loy, M., Hochschild, A., Pugh, A. J., Williams, 
J. C., & Hartman, H. (2015). Stability and transfor­
mation in gender, work, and family: Insights from the 
second shift for the next quarter century. Community, 
Work & Family, 18, 435–454.
Blakeslee, S. (2005, June 28). What other people say may 
change what you see. New York Times, p. 11.
Blalock, H. M. (1969). Theory construction: From verbal 
to mathematical formulations. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall.
Blau, P. M. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. New 
York, NY: Wiley.
Blomme, R. (2012). How managers can conduct planned 
change in self-organizing systems: Actor network the­
ory as a perspective to manager’s actions. International 
Journal of Business Administration, 3, 9–22.
Blumer, H. (1969). Symbolic interactionism: Perspective 
and method. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Blumler, J. G. (1979). The role of theory in uses and gratifi­
cations studies. Communication Research, 6, 9–36.
Blumler, J. G. (1985). The social character of media grati­
fications. In K. E. Rosengren, L. A. Wenner, & P. 
Palmgreen (Eds.), Media gratifications research: Cur­
rent perspectives (pp. 41–60). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Blumler, J. G., & McQuail, D. (1969). Television in poli­
tics: Its uses and influence. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Bodie, G. D., & Jones, S. M. (2012). The nature of support­
ive listening II: The role of verbal person centeredness 
and nonverbal immediacy. Western Journal of Commu­
nication, 76(3), 250–269.
Bolkan, S., & Goodboy, A. K. (2011). Leadership in the 
classroom: The use of charismatic leadership as a de­
terrent to student resistance strategies. Journal of 
Classroom Interaction, 46, 4–10.
Bolkan, S., Goodboy, A. K., & Bachman, G. F. (2012). 
Antecedents of consumer repatronage intentions and 
negative word-of-mouth behaviors following an organi­
zational failure: A test of investment model predictions. 
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 40(1), 
107–125.

References     R-5
Book discussion on Technopoly. Retrieved from https://
www.c-span.org/video/?31627-1/technopoly
Book, P. L. (1996). How does the family narrative influ­
ence the individual’s ability to communicate about 
death? Omega, 33, 323–341.
Booth-Butterfield, M., Booth-Butterfield, S., & Koester, J. 
(1988). The function of uncertainty reduction in allevi­
ating primary tension in small groups. Communication 
Research Reports, 5, 146–153.
Booth-Butterfield, M., & Jordan, F. (1989). Communica­
tion adaptation among racially homogeneous and het­
erogeneous groups. Southern Communication Journal, 
54, 253–272.
Bormann, E. G. (1996). Symbolic convergence theory and 
communication in group decision making. In R. Y. 
Hirokawa & M. S. Poole (Eds.), Communication and 
group decision making (pp. 81–113). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Borrowman, S., & Kmetz, M. (2011). Divided we stand: 
Beyond Burkean identification. Rhetoric Review, 30(3), 
275–292.
Bostrom, R. N. (2003). Theories, data, and communication 
research. Communication Monographs, 70, 275–294.
Bostrom, R. N. (2004). Empiricism, paradigms, and data. 
Communication Monographs, 71, 343–351.
Boulding, K. (1990). Three faces of power. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage.
Bourhis, R. Y., & Giles, H. (1977). The language of inter­
group distinctiveness. In H. Giles (Ed.), Language, eth­
nicity and intergroup relations (pp. 119–135). London: 
Academic Press.
Bourhis, R. Y., Sioufi, R., & Sachdev, I. (2012). Ethnolin­
guistic interaction and multilingual communication. In 
H. Giles (Ed.), The handbook of intergroup communica­
tion (pp. 100–115). New York, NY: Routledge.
Boyle, M. P., Schmierbach, M., Armstrong, C. L., McLeod, 
D. M., Shah, D. V., & Pan, Z. (2004). Information 
seeking and emotional reactions to the September 11 
terrorist attacks. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 81, 155–167.
Boysen, G. A. (2008). Revenge and student evaluations of 
teaching. Teaching of Psychology, 35, 218–222.
Braithwaite, D. O., & Baxter, L. A. (1995). “I do” again: 
The relational dialectics of renewing marriage vows. 
Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 12, 
177–198.
Braithwaite, D. O., Toller, P. W., Daas, K. L., Durham, 
W. T., & Jones, A. C. (2008). Centered but not caught 
in the middle: Stepchildren’s perceptions of dialectical 
contradictions in the communication of co-parents. Jour­
nal of Applied Communication Research, 36, 33–55.
Brann, M., & Mattson, M. (2004). Reframing communi­
cation during gynecological exams: A feminist virtue 
ethic of care perspective. In P. M. Buzzanell, H. Sterk, 
& L. H. Turner (Eds.), Gender in applied commu­
nication contexts (pp. 147–168). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Brasfield, R. (2007). Rereading Sex and the City: Exposing 
the hegemonic feminist narrative. Journal of Popular 
Film and Television, 34, 130–139.
Brashers, D. E. (2001). Communication and uncertainty 
management. Journal of Communication, 3, 477–497.
Bremer, M. (2012). Organizational culture. Netherlands: 
Kikker Group.
Brenders, D. A. (1987). Fallacies in the coordinated man­
agement of meaning: A philosophy of language critique 
of the hierarchical organization of coherent conversa­
tion and related theory. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 
73, 329–348.
Breuer, J., Kowert, R., Festl, R., & Thorsten, Q. (2015). 
Sexist games=sexist gamers? A longitudinal study on 
the relationship between video game use and sexist atti­
tudes. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Network­
ing, 18, 197–202.
Brewer, P. R., & Ley, B. L. (2010). Media use and public 
perceptions of DNA evidence. Science Communication, 
32, 93–117.
Briefing paper: Social media and public opinion. Retrieved 
from http://www.langerresearch.com/uploads/Langer
_Research_Briefing_Paper-Social_Media_and_Public
_Opinion_Oct2012_update.pdf 
Broadus, J. (2012). On the preparation and delivery of ser­
mons. Mulberry, IN: Southern Grace Publishers.
Brody, H. (2012). From an ethics of rationing to an ethics 
of waste avoidance. New England Journal of Medicine, 
366, 1949–1951.
Broger, D. (2011). Structuration theory and organization 
research. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University 
of St. Gallen, St. Gallen, Switzerland.
Brooks, D. E., & Ward, C. J. (2007). “Crash” course: As­
sessing students’ engagement with pedagogies of diver­
sity. Journalism & Mass Communication Educator, 62, 
244–262.
Brown, D., Lauricella, S., Douai, A., & Zaidi, A. (2012). 
Consuming television crime drama: A uses and 
gratifications approach. American Communication 
Journal, 14(1), 47–61.

R-6     References
Brown, R. (1965). Social psychology. New York, NY: Free 
Press.
Brown, R. D., (2012). Dying on the job: Murder and 
mayhem in the American workplace. Lanham, MD: 
Rowman & Littlefield.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1978). Universals in language 
usage: Politeness phenomenon. In E. Goody (Ed.), 
Questions and politeness (pp. 56–89). Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press.
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. C. (1987). Politeness: Some uni­
versals in language use. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press.
Brownstein, A. L., Read, S. J., & Simon, D. (2004). Bias 
at the racetrack: Effects of individual expertise and task 
importance on predecision reevaluation of alternatives. 
Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 891–909.
Brubaker, J. (2008). The freedom to choose a personal 
agenda: Removing our reliance on the media agenda. 
American Communication Journal, 10(3), 1–14.
Brummett, B. (1993). Introduction. In B. Brummett (Ed.), 
Landmark essays on Kenneth Burke (pp. xi–xix). Davis, 
CA: Hermagoras Press.
Bryant, E. M., & Marmo, J. M. (2012). The rules of Facebook 
friendship: A two-stage examination of interaction rules 
in close, casual, and acquaintance friendships. Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 1013–1025.
Bryant, E. M., Marmo, J., & Ramirez, A. (2011) A func­
tional approach to social networking sites. In K. 
Wright & L. Webb (Eds.), Computer-mediated com­
munication in personal relationships (pp. 3–20). New 
York, NY: Peter Lang.
Bryant, J., & Miron, D. (2004). Theory and research in 
mass communication. Journal of Communication, 54, 
662–704.
Bryant, L. E. (2003). Stepchildren’s perceptions of the con­
tradictions in communication with stepfamilies formed 
post bereavement. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
University of Nebraska, Lincoln, NE.
Budd, M., Entman, R. M., & Steinman, C. (1990). The 
affirmative character of U.S. cultural studies. Critical 
Studies in Mass Communication, 7, 169–184.
Budd, M., & Steinman, C. (1992). Cultural studies and 
the politics of encoding research. In S. A. Deetz (Ed.), 
Communication yearbook 15 (pp. 251–262). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage
Buffington, D., & Fraley, T. (2008). Skill in black and white: 
Negotiating media images of race in a sporting context. 
Journal of Communication Inquiry, 32, 292–310.
Bugeja, M. (2005). Interpersonal divide: The search for 
community in a technological age. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Buldioski, D. (2012). The electronic storyteller. Retrieved 
from http://www.youtube.com/watch?v= toc5KHWZx4A
Bullingham, L., & Vasconcelos, A. C. (2013). ‘The pre­
sentation of self in the online world’: Goffman and 
the study of online identities. Journal of Information 
Science, 39, 1–29.
Bunz, U., & Campbell, S. W. (2004). Politeness accom­
modation in electronic mail. Communication Research 
Reports, 21, 11–25.
Burgess, E. W., & Locke, H. J. (1953). The family: From 
institution to companionship, 2nd ed. New York, NY: 
American Book Company.
Burgoon, J. K. (1978). A communication model of personal 
space violations: Explication and an initial test. Human 
Communication Research, 4, 129–142.
Burgoon, J. K. (1994). Nonverbal signals. In M. L. 
Knapp & G. R. Miller (Eds.), Handbook of interper­
sonal communication (pp. 229–285). Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage. 
Burgoon, J. K., Coker, D. A., & Coker, R. A. (1986). 
Communicative effects of gaze behavior: A test of two 
contrasting explanations. Human Communication Re­
search, 12, 495–524.
Burgoon, J. K., Dillman, L., & Stern, L. A. (1993). Adap­
tion in dyadic interaction: Defining and operationalizing 
patterns of reciprocity and compensation. Communica­
tion Theory, 3, 295–316.
Burgoon, J. K., & Hale, J. L. (1988). Nonverbal expectancy 
violations: Model elaboration and application to im­
mediacy behaviors. Communication Monographs, 55, 
58–79.
Burgoon, J. K., & Jones, S. B. (1976). Toward a theory of 
personal space expectations and their violations. Human 
Communication Research, 2, 131–146.
Burgoon, J. K., & Walther, J. B. (1990). Nonverbal 
expectancies and the evaluative consequences of 
violations. Human Communication Research, 17, 
232–265.
Burke, K. (1945). A grammar of motives. New York, NY: 
Prentice Hall.
Burke, K. (1950). A rhetoric of motives. New York, NY: 
Prentice Hall.
Burke, K. (1965). Permanence and change. Indianapolis, 
IN: Bobbs-Merrill.

References     R-7
Burke, K. (1966). Language as symbolic action: Essays on 
life, literature, and method. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press.
Burke, K. (1968). Dramatism. In D. L. Sills (Ed.), The 
international encyclopedia of the social sciences, 7 
(pp. 445–452). New York, NY: Macmillan/Free Press.
Burke, K. (2007). On persuasion, identification, and dialec­
tical symbols. Philosophy and Rhetoric, 39, 333–339.
Burnett, A., Mattern, J. L., Herakova, L. L., Kahl, D. H., 
Tobola, C., & Bornsen, S. E. (2009). Communicating
/muting date rape: A co-cultural theoretical analysis 
of communication factors related to rape culture on a 
college campus. Journal of Applied Communication 
Research, 37(4), 465–485.
Burns, M. E. (2009). Gold medal storytelling: NBC’s he­
gemonic use of Olympic athlete narratives. Journal of 
the Communication, Speech & Theatre Association of 
North Dakota, 22, 19–29.
Bute, J. J., & Jensen, R. E. (2011). Narrative sensemaking 
and time lapse: Interviews with low-income women 
about sex education. Communication Monographs, 
78(2), 212–232.
Bute, J. J., & Vik, T. A. (2010). Privacy management as 
unfinished business: Shifting boundaries in the context 
of infertility. Communication Studies, 61(1), 1–20.
Buzzanell, P. M. (2004). Revisiting sexual harassment 
in academe: Using feminist ethical and sensemaking 
approaches to analyze macrodiscourses and micro­
practices of sexual harassment. In P. M. Buzzanell, 
H. Sterk, & L. H. Turner (Eds.), Gender in applied 
communication contexts (pp. 25–46). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Buzzanell, P. M., Burrell, N. A., Stafford, R. S., & Berkow­
itz, S. (1996). When I call you up and you’re not there: 
Application of communication accommodation theory 
to telephone answering machine messages. Western 
Journal of Communication, 60, 310–336.
Buzzanell, P. M., & Turner, L. H. (2003). Emotion work 
revealed by job loss discourse: Backgrounding-fore­
grounding of feelings, construction of normalcy, and 
(re)instituting of traditional masculinities. Journal of 
Applied Communication Research, 31, 27–57.
Buzzanell, P. M., & Turner, L. H. (2012). Effective family 
communication and job loss: Crafting the narrative for 
family crisis. In F. C. Dickson & L. M. Webb (Eds.), 
Communication for families in crisis: Theories, re­
search, strategies (pp. 281–306). New York, NY: Peter 
Lang.
Calzo, J. P., & Ward, L. M. (2009). Media exposure and 
viewers’ attitudes toward homosexuality: Evidence for 
mainstreaming or resonance? Journal of Broadcasting 
& Electronic Media, 53(2), 280–299. 
Campbell, D. T. (1965). Variation and selective retention in 
socio-cultural evolution. In H. R. Barringer, G. I. Blank­
sten, & R. W. Mack (Eds.), Social change in developing 
areas (pp. 19–49). Cambridge, MA: Schenkman.
Career guide to the safety profession. Retrieved from http://
www.com.edu/gcsi/docs/careergd.pdf
Carey, J. W. (1975). A cultural approach to communica­
tion. Communication, 2, 1–22.
Carey, J. W. (1989). Communication as culture. Boston, 
MA: Unwin Hyman.
Carey, J. W. (1998). Marshall McLuhan: Genealogy and 
legacy. Canadian Journal of Communication, 23, 
13–21.
Carlson, J. M. (1983). Crime show viewing by pre-
adults: The impact on attitudes toward civil liberties. 
Communication Research, 10, 529–552.
Carr, K., & Wang, T. R. (2012). “Forgiveness isn’t a simple 
process: It’s a vast undertaking”: Negotiating and com­
municating forgiveness in nonvoluntary family relation­
ships. Journal of Family Communication, 12(1), 40–56.
Casteleyn, J., Mottart, A., & Rutten, K. (2009). How to 
use Facebook in your market research. International 
Journal of Market Research, 51(4), 439–447.
Chafetz, J. S. (1997). Feminist theory and sociology: Unde­
rutilized contributions for main stream theory. Annual 
Review of Sociology, 23, 97–120.
Chen, K. (2011). A test of the spiral of silence theory on 
young adults’ use of social networking sites for political 
purposes. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Iowa State 
University, Ames, IA.
Chen, Y. W. (2006). The Twain have met! Investigating 
crucial indicators for intercultural friendship levels 
between international students from four East Asian 
countries and U.S. Americans. Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the International Communication 
Association, Singapore.
Chen, Y. & Nakazawa, M. (2012). Measuring patterns of 
self-disclosure in intercultural friendship: Adjusting 
differential item functioning using multiple-indica­
tors, multiple-causes models. Journal of Intercultural 
Communication Research, 41, 131–151.
Cheney, G., Munshi, D., May, S., & Ortiz, S. (Eds.). 
(2010). Handbook of communication ethics. New 
York, NY: Routledge. 

R-8     References
Chesebro, J. W. (1993). Preface. In J. W. Chesebro (Ed.), 
Extensions of the Burkeian system (pp. vii–xxi). Tusca­
loosa, AL: University of Alabama Press.
Chia, S. C., & Lee, W. (2008). Pluralistic ignorance about 
sex: The direct and the indirect effects of media con­
sumption on college students’ misperception of sex-re­
lated peer norms. International Journal of Public Opin­
ion Research, 20, 53–73.
Child, J. T., Pearson, J. C., & Nagao, M. (2006). Elusive 
family problems reported by Japanese college students: 
An examination of theme variation and methodology. 
Journal of Intercultural Communication Research, 35, 
45–59.
Child, J. T., Pearson, J. C., & Petronio, S. (2009). Blog­
ging, communication, and privacy management: Devel­
opment of the blogging privacy management measure. 
Journal of the American Society for Information Sci­
ence & Technology, 60(10), 2079–2094.
Cho, H., Rivera-Sánchez, M., & Lim, S. S. (2009). A mul­
tinational study on online privacy: Global concerns 
and local responses. New Media & Society, 11(3), 
395–416.
Chopra, R. (2001). Retrieving the father: Gender studies, 
“father love” and the discourse of mothering. Women’s 
Studies International Forum, 24, 445–455.
Chory-Assad, R. M., & Tamborini, R. (2003). Television 
exposure and the public’s perceptions of physicians. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 47(2), 
197–215.
Cirksena, K., & Cuklanz, L. (1992). Male is to female 
as 
 is to: A guided tour of five feminist frame­
works for communication studies. In L. Rakow (Ed.), 
Women making meaning: New feminist directions in 
communication (pp. 18–44). New York, NY: Routledge.
Clair, R. P. (1993). The use of framing devices to sequester 
organizational narratives: Hegemony and harassment. 
Communication Monographs, 60, 113–136.
Clark, G. (2004). Rhetorical landscapes in America: Varia­
tions on a theme from Kenneth Burke. Columbia, SC: 
University of South Carolina Press.
Clason, M. (2008). Constructions of masculinity and femi­
ninity and their impact on sexual harassment in the 
workplace. Unpublished dissertation, Marquette Uni­
versity, Milwaukee, WI.
Clawson, R., & Oxley, Z. (2017). Public opinion: Demo­
cratic ideals, democratic practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
CQ Press.
Cohen, B. (1963). The press and foreign policy. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press.
Cohen, E. (2007). Expectancy violations in relationships 
with friends and media figures. Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the International Communication 
Association, San Francisco, CA.
Cohen, E. L. (2010). Expectancy violations in relation­
ships with friends and media figures. Communication 
Research Reports, 27, 97–111.
Cohen, L. J., & DeBenedet, A. T. (2012, July 17). Penn 
State cover-up: Groupthink in action. Time, 180.
Coleman, R., & McCombs, M. (2007). The young and 
agenda-less? Exploring age-related differences in 
agenda setting on the youngest generation, baby boom­
ers, and the civic generation. Journalism & Mass 
Communication Quarterly, 84(3), 495–508.
Coleman, R., & Wu, H. D. (2010). Proposing emotion as a 
dimension of affective agenda setting: Separating affect 
into two components and comparing their second-level 
effects. Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 
87(2), 315–327.
Collier, M. J. (1998). Researching cultural identity: 
Reconciling interpretive and postcolonial perspectives. 
In D. V. Tanno & A. Gonzalez (Eds.), Communication 
and identity across cultures (pp. 122–147). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Collins, P. H. (1986). Learning from the outsider within: 
The sociological significance of black feminist thought. 
Social Problems, 33, 14–32.
Collins, P. H. (1989). A comparison of two works on Black 
family life. Signs, 14, 875–884.
Collins, P. H. (1991). Black feminist thought: Knowledge, 
consciousness, and the politics of empowerment. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Collins, P. H. (2000). The power of self-definition. In 
P. H. Collins (Ed.), Black feminist thought: Knowledge, 
consciousness, and the politics of empowerment 
(pp. 105–132). New York, NY: Routledge.
Condit, C. M. (1992). Post-Burke: Transcending the sub­
stance of dramatism. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 78, 
349–355.
Conquergood, D. (1992). Life in Big Red: Struggles and 
accommodations in a Chicago polyethnic tenement. In 
L. Lamphere (Ed.), Structuring diversity: Ethnographic 
perspectives on the new immigration (pp. 95–144). 
Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.
Conquergood, D. (1994). Homeboys and hoods: Gang 
communication and cultural space. In L. R. Frey (Ed.), 
Group communication in context: Studies of natural 
groups (pp. 23–55). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.

References     R-9
Conrad, C., & Macom, E. A. (1995). Revisiting Kenneth 
Burke: Dramatism/logology and the problem of 
agency. Southern Communication Journal, 61, 11–28.
Cook, K. S., & Rice, E. (2003). Social exchange theory. 
In J. Delamater (Ed.), Handbook of social psychol­
ogy (pp. 53–76). New York, NY: Kluwer Academic/
Plenum.
Cooley, C. H. (1972). Human nature and social order. 
Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Coontz, S. (1988). The social origins of private life. New 
York, NY: Verso.
Cooper, J. M. (1996). An Aristotelian theory of the emo­
tions. In A. O. Rorty (Ed.), Essays on Aristotle’s 
Rhetoric (pp. 238–257). Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press.
Cooper, L. (1932). The rhetoric of Aristotle. New York, 
NY: Appleton-Century-Crofts.
Cooper, J., & Fazio, R. H. (1984). A new look at disso­
nance theory. In L. Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in ex­
perimental social psychology (pp. 229–266). Orlando, 
FL: Academic Press.
Cooper, J., & Stone, J. (2000). Cognitive dissonance and 
the social group. In D. J. Terry & M. A. Hogg (Eds.), At­
titudes, behavior, and social context: The role of norms 
and group membership (pp. 227–244). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Cottrell, N. B., Wack, D. L., Sekerak, G. J., & Rittle, H. 
(1968). Social facilitation of dominant responses by the 
presence of an audience and the mere presence of oth­
ers. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 9, 
245–250.
Coupland, D. (2010). Marshall McLuhan: You know noth­
ing of my work! New York, NY: Atlas & Company.
Coupland, N., Coupland, J., Giles, H., & Henwood, K. 
(1988). Accommodating the elderly: Invoking and ex­
tending a theory. Language in Society, 17, 1–41.
Cox, E. M., & Ebbers, L. H. (2010). Exploring the persis­
tence of adult women at a Midwest community college. 
Community College Journal of Research & Practice, 
34(4), 337–359.
Cox, S. A., & Kramer, M. W. (1995). Communication dur­
ing employee dismissals: Social exchange principles 
and group influences on employee exit. Management 
Communication Quarterly, 9, 156–190.
Craig, R. T. (1999). Communication theory as a field. 
Communication Theory, 9, 119–161.
Craig, R. T. (2007). Communication theory as a field. 
In R. T. Craig & H. L. Muller (Eds.), Theorizing 
communication: Readings across traditions (pp. 63–
98). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Craig, R. T., & Muller, H. L. (2007). Theorizing commu­
nication: Readings across traditions. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Creede, C., Fisher-Yoshida, B., & Gallegos, P. V. (Eds.). 
(2012). The reflective, facilitative, and interpretive 
practice of the Coordinated Management of Meaning: 
Making lives and making meaning. Madison, NJ: Far­
leigh Dickinson University Press.
Cronen, V. E. (1995a). Coordinated management of mean­
ing: The consequentiality of communication and the 
recapturing of experience. In S. J. Sigman (Ed.), The 
consequentiality of communication (pp. 17–66). Hills­
dale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Cronen, V. E. (1995b). Practical theory and the tasks ahead 
for social approaches to communication. In W. Leeds-
Hurwitz (Ed.), Social approaches to communication 
(pp. 217–242). New York, NY: Guilford Press.
Cronen, V. E., & Pearce, W. B. (1981). Logical force in 
interpersonal communication: A new concept of the 
“necessity” in social behaviors. Communication, 6, 5–67.
Cronen, V. E., Pearce, W. B., & Harris, L. M. (1982). 
The Coordinated Management of Meaning: A theory 
of communication. In F. E. X. Dance (Ed.), Human 
communication theory (pp. 67–89). New York, NY: 
Harper & Row. 
Cronen, V. E., Pearce, W. B., & Snavely, L. M. (1979). 
A theory of rule-structure and types of episodes, and a 
study of perceived enmeshment in undesired repetitive 
patterns (URPs). In D. Nimmo (Ed.), Communication 
yearbook 3 (pp. 225–239). New Brunswick, NJ: Trans­
action Books.
Croucher, S. M., Holody, K. J., Hicks, M. V., Oommen, D., 
& DeMaris, A. (2011). An examination of conflict style 
preferences in India. International Journal of Conflict 
Management, 22, 10–34.
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1991). Reflections on the “Spiral of 
Silence.” In J. A. Anderson (Ed.), Communication year­
book 14 (pp. 294–298). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cuddon, J. A. (2013). Dictionary of literary terms and liter­
ary theory. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley-Blackwell.
Culnan, M. J. & Markus, M. L. (1987). Information tech­
nologies. In F. M. Jablin, L. Putnam, K. H. Roberts, & 
L. W. Porter (Eds.), Handbook of organizational com­
munication: An interdisciplinary perspective (pp. 420–
443). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Cupach, W. R., & Spitzberg, B. H. (2011). The dark side of 
close relationships II. New York, NY: Routledge.

R-10     References
Cushman, D. P., & Cahn, D. D. (1985). Communication in 
interpersonal relationships. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Cushman, D. P., & Pearce, W. B. (1977). Generality and 
necessity in three types of human communication the­
ory: Special attention to rules theory. In B. Ruben (Ed.), 
Communication yearbook 1 (pp. 173–182). New Bruns­
wick, NJ: Transaction Books.
Cushman, D., & Whiting, G. C. (1972). An approach to 
communication theory: Toward consensus on rules. The 
Journal of Communication, 22, 217–238.
Cultural Environment Movement. (1996). Viewers’ decla­
ration of independence. Cultural environment monitor, 
1, 1.
Cupach, W. R., & Metts, S. (1994). Facework. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Currier, J. M., & Holland, J. M. (2012). Examining the role 
of combat loss among Vietnam veterans. Journal of 
Traumatic Stress, 25, 102–105.
Daas, K. L. (2011). The pieties of death: A Burkean analy­
sis of the Tri-State crematory case. Texas Speech Com­
munication Journal, 36(1), 82–93.
Daft, R. L. & Lengel, R. H. (1986). Organizational informa­
tion requirements, media richness and structural design. 
Management Science, 32, 554–571.
Dainton, M., & Aylor, B. (2001). A relational uncertainty 
analysis of jealousy, trust, and maintenance in long-dis­
tance versus geographically close relationships. Com­
munication Quarterly, 49, 172–188.
Dainton, M., & Zelley, E. D. (2014). Applying communica­
tion theory for professional life. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Dance, F. E. X. (1967). Toward a theory of human commu­
nication. In F. E. X. Dance (Ed.), Human communica­
tion theory (pp. 288–309). New York, NY: Holt.
Daniels, T. D., Spiker, B. D., & Papa, M. J. (2008). Per­
spectives on organizational communication. Boston, 
MA: McGraw-Hill.
Darwin, C. (1948). The origin of species. New York, NY: 
Random House.
Davis, A. J. (2012). Defining mixed race on television: 
Defining Barack Obama and Saturday Night Live. Un­
published Master’s thesis. California State University, 
Sacramento, CA. 
Davis, J. (2010). Architecture of the personal interactive 
homepage: Constructing the self through MySpace. 
New Media & Society, 12(7), 1103–1119.
D’Angelo, J., & Van Der Heide, B. (2013). The forma­
tion of physician impressions in online communities: 
Negativity, positivity, and nonnormativity effects. 
Communication Research, 41, 49–72.
DeAndrea, D. C., & Walther, J. B. (2011). Attributions 
for inconsistencies between online and offline self-
presentations. Communication Research, 38, 805–825.
Dearing, J. W., & Rogers, E. M. (1996). Agenda-setting. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
DeFrancisco, V. (1991). The sounds of silence: How men 
silence women in marital relationships. Discourse and 
Society, 2, 355–370.
DeHart, P. (2012). Laws common and unwritten: On the 
natural law and the possibility of civic cooperation for 
the common good. APSA 2012 Annual Meeting Paper. 
Retrieved from http://ssrn.com/abstract=2110682
Delaney, T. (2008). Simpsonology. Amherst, NY: Pro-
metheus Books.
Delisay, F. (2012). The spiral of silence and conflict avoid­
ance: Examining antecedents of opinion expression 
concerning the U.S. military buildup in the Pacific Is­
land of Guam. Communication Quarterly, 60, 481–503.
Dennis, A. C., & Wood, J. T. (2012). “We’re not going to 
have this conversation, but you get it”: Black mother–
daughter communication about sexual relations. Wom­
en’s Studies in Communication, 35(2), 204–223.
deSousa, R. (2011). Local perspectives on empowerment 
and responsibility in the new public health. Health 
Communication, 26(1), 25–36.
DeWitt, L. (2006). Face-Negotiation theory. North Dakota 
Speech and Theatre Journal, 19, 38–42.
DeWitt, D. M., & DeWitt, L. J. (2012). Case of high school 
hazing: Applying restorative justice to promote organi­
zational learning. NASSP Bulletin, 96, 13–22.
Deyo, J., Walt, P., & Davis, L. (2011). Rapidly recognizing 
relationships: Observing speed dating in the south. Quali­
tative Research Reports in Communication, 12(1), 71–78.
de Zúñiga, H. G., Jung, N., & Valenzuela, S. (2012). So­
cial media use for news and individuals’ social capital, 
civic engagement and political participation. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 17, 319–336.
Dijkstra, A. (2009). Disengagement beliefs in smokers: 
Do they influence the effects of a tailored persuasive 
message advocating smoking cessation? Psychology & 
Health, 24(7), 791–804.
Dillow, M. R., Malachowski, C. C., Brann, M., & Weber, 
K. D. (2011). An experimental examination of the ef­
fects of communicative infidelity motives on communi­
cation and relational outcomes in romantic relationships. 
Western Journal of Communication, 75(5), 473–499.

References     R-11
Dimmick, J., Chen, Y., & Li, Z. (2004). Competition be­
tween the Internet and traditional news media: The grat­
ification-opportunities niche dimension. The Journal of 
Media Economics, 17, 19–33.
Dimmick, J., Sikand, J., & Patterson, S. J. (1994). The grati­
fications of the household telephone: Sociability, instru­
mentality, and reassurance. Communication Reports, 
21, 643–663.
Dindia, K. (2003). Definitions and perspectives on rela­
tional maintenance communication. In D. J. Canary & 
M. Dainton (Eds.), Maintaining relationships through 
communication: Relational, contextual, and cultural 
variations (pp. 1–30). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
DiVerniero, R. A., & Hosek, A. M. (2012). Students’ per­
ceptions and communicative management of instructors’ 
online self-disclosure. Communication Quarterly, 59, 
428–449.
Dobkin, B. A., & Pace, R. C. (2006). Communication in a 
changing world. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Doherty, W. J., Boss, P. G., LaRossa, R., Schumm, W. R., & 
Steinmetz, S. K. (1993). Family theory and methods. In 
P. G. Boss, W. J. Doherty, R. LaRossa, W. R. Schumm, 
& S. K. Steinmetz (Eds.), Sourcebook of family theories 
and methods: A contextual approach (pp. 313–341). 
New York, NY: Plenum.
Domenici, K., & Littlejohn, S. W. (2006). Facework: Bridg­
ing theory and practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Donnelly, J. H., & Ivancevich, J. M. (1970). Post-purchase 
reinforcement and back-out behavior. Journal of Mar­
keting Research, 7, 399–400.
Donovan-Kicken, E., Tollison, A. C., & Goins, E. S. 
(2011). A grounded theory of control over communica­
tion among individuals with cancer. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 39(3), 310–330.
Donsbach, W. (Ed.). (2013). The spiral of silence: New per­
spectives on communication and public opinion. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Donsbach, W., Salmon, C. T., & Tsfati, Y. (2013). The 
spiral of silence: New perspectives on communica­
tion and public opinion. New York, NY: Taylor & 
Francis.
Dougherty, D. S. (2001). Sexual harassment as [dys]
functional process: A feminist standpoint analysis. 
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 29, 
372–391.
Dougherty, D. S., & Krone, K. J. (2000). Overcoming the 
dichotomy: Cultivating standpoints in organizations 
through research. Women’s Studies in Communication, 
23, 16–40.
Dow, B. J. (1990). Hegemony, feminist criticism and The 
Mary Tyler Moore Show. Critical Studies in Mass 
Communication, 7, 261–274.
Dragojevic, M., Giles, H., & Watson, B. M. (2012). Lan­
guage ideologies and language attitudes. In H. Giles & 
B. M. Watson (Eds.), The social meanings of language, 
dialect and accent: International perspectives on speech 
styles (pp. 1–25). New York, NY: Peter Lang.
Dray, W. (1957). Laws and explanation in history. London: 
Oxford University Press.
Dresner, E. (2006). Middle region phenomena and global­
ization. The International Communication Gazette, 68, 
363–378.
Drum, K. (2011). On the importance of public opinion. 
Mother Jones, 36, 3. 
Dubbelman, T. (2011). Playing the hero: How games take 
the concept of storytelling from representation to pre­
sentation. Journal of Media Practice, 12(2), 157–172.
Duck, S. (1994). Meaningful relationships. Thousand Oaks,
 CA: Sage.
duGay, P., Hall, S., Janes, L., Mackay, H., & Negus, 
K. (1997). Doing cultural studies: The story of the Sony 
Walkman. London: Sage/The Open University.
Dunbar, N. E., & Segrin, C. (2011). Clothing and teacher 
credibility: An application of Expectancy Violations 
Theory. ISRN Education, 2012.
Dunleavy, K. N., & Martin, M. M. (2010). Instructors’ and 
students’ perspectives of student nagging: Frequency, 
appropriateness, and effectiveness. Communication 
Research Reports, 27(4), 310–319.
Eckstein, N. J., & Turman, P. D. (2002). “Children are to be 
seen and not heard”: Silencing students’ religious voices 
in the university classroom. Journal of Communication 
and Religion, 25, 166–192.
Edmonds-Cady, C. (2009). Getting to the grassroots: Fem­
inist standpoints within the welfare rights movement. 
Journal of Sociology & Social Welfare, 36(2), 11–33.
Edsall, R. (2007). Cultural factors in digital cartographic 
design: Implications for communication to diverse 
users. Cartography and Geographic Information Sci­
ence, 34, 121–129.
Eilders, C., & Porten-Cheen, P. (2015). The Spiral of 
Silence revisited. In G. Vowe & P. Henn (Eds.), Political 
communication in the online world (pp. 88–102). New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Eisenberg, E. M. (2007). Strategic ambiguities: Essays on 
communication, organization, and identity. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.

R-12     References
Eisenberg, E. M., & Goodall, H. L. (2004). Organizational 
communication: Balancing creativity and constraint. 
Boston, MA: Bedford/St. Martin’s.
Eisenberg, E. M., Goodall, H. L., & Tretheway, A. 
(2010). Organizational communication: Balancing 
creativity and constraint. New York, NY: Bedford/
St. Martin’s.
Elgin, S. (1988). A first dictionary and grammar of Laadan, 
2nd ed. Madison, WI: Society for the Furtherance and 
Study of Fantasy and Science Fiction.
Elkin, R. A., & Leippe, M. R. (1986). Physiological 
arousal, dissonance, and attitude change: Evidence for 
a dissonance-arousal link and a don’t remind me ef­
fect. Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 51, 
55–65.
Elkins, J. R. (2001). Narrative theory and literary criticism. 
Retrieved from www.wvu.edu/lawfac/jelkins/lawyerslit
/theories.html
Ellemers, N., & Haslam, S. A. (2012). Social Identity 
theory. In P. van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & T. Higgins 
(Eds.), Handbook of theories of social psychology 
(pp. 379–398). London: Sage.
Ellison, N. B., Heino, R., & Gibbs, J. (2006). Managing 
impressions online: Self-presentation processes in 
the online dating environment. Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication, 11. Retrieved from http://
jcmc.indiana.edu/vol11/issue2/ellison.html 
Elmore, C. (2009). Turning points and turnover among 
female journalists: Communicating resistance and re­
pression. Women’s Studies in Communication, 32(2), 
232–254.
Emmers, T. M., & Canary, D. J. (1996). The effect of un­
certainty reduction strategies on young couples’ rela­
tional repair and intimacy. Communication Quarterly, 
44, 166–182.
England, P. (1989). A feminist critique of rational-choice 
theories: Implications for Sociology. The American So­
ciologist, 20, 14–28.
Engleberg, I. N., & Wynn, D. R. (2013). Working in groups. 
Boston, MA: Pearson.
Entman, R. M. (1993). Framing: Toward clarification of a 
fractured paradigm. Journal of Communication, 43(4), 
51–58.
Erbert, L. A. (2000). Conflict and dialectics: Perceptions of 
dialectical contradiction in marital conflict. Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 638–659.
Englehardt, E. E. (2001). Ethical issues in interpersonal 
communication. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt.
Espinoza, A., Garcia-Fornes, A., & Sierra, C. (2012). Self-
disclosure decision making based on intimacy and pri­
vacy. Information Sciences, 211, 93–11.
Ethics of Isocrates, Aristotle, and Diogenes. Retrieved from 
http://www.san.beck.org/EC22-Aristotle.html
Eyal, K., & Finnerty, K. (2007). The portrayal of conse­
quences of sexual intercourse on prime-time program­
ming. Communication Research Reports, 24, 225–233.
Faber, R. J. (2000). The urge to buy: A uses and grati­
fications perspective on compulsive buying. In S. 
Ratneshwar, D. G. Mick, & C. Huffman (Eds.), The why 
of consumption (pp. 177–196). London: Routledge.
Falk, E. (2009). Press, passion, and Portsmouth: Narratives 
about “crying” on the campaign trail. Argumentation & 
Advocacy, 46(1), 51–63.
Farber, B. A., Shafron, G., Hamandi, J., Wald, E., & Nitzburgh, 
G. (2012). Children, technology, problems, and prefer­
ences. Journal of Clinical Psychology, 8, 1225–1229.
Faulkner, S. L. (2015). That baby will cost you: An in­
tended ambivalent pregnancy. Qualitative Inquiry, 18, 
333–340.
Faulkner, S. L., & Ruby, P. D. (2015). Feminist identity in 
romantic relationships: A relational dialectics analysis 
of e-mail discourse as collaborative found poetry. Wom­
en’s Studies in Communication, 38, 206–226.
Ferguson, D. A. (1992). Channel repertoire in the presence 
of remote control devices, VCRs and cable television. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 36, 83–91.
Fernback, J. (2007). Beyond the diluted community con­
cept: A symbolic interactionist perspective on online 
social relations. New Media & Society, 9, 49–69.
Ferrara, M. H., & Levine, T. R. (2009). Can’t live with 
them or can’t live without them? The effects of betrayal 
on relational outcomes in college dating relationships. 
Communication Quarterly, 57(2), 187–204.
Festinger, L. (1957). A theory of cognitive dissonance. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Festinger, L., & Carlsmith, J. M. (1959). Cognitive conse­
quences of forced compliance. Journal of Abnormal and 
Social Psychology, 58, 203–210.
Festinger, L., Riecken, H. W., & Schacter, S. (1956). When 
prophecy fails. Minneapolis, MN: University of Min­
nesota Press.
Ficara, L. C., & Mongeau, P. A. (2000, November). Re­
lational uncertainty in long-distance college student 
dating relationships. Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the National Communication Association, 
Seattle, WA.

References     R-13
Fiese, B. H. (2003). Coherent accounts of coping with a 
chronic illness: Convergences and divergences in fam­
ily measurement using a narrative analysis. Family Pro­
cess, 42, 439–451.
Fine, M. G. (2009). Women leaders’ discursive construc­
tions of leadership. Women’s Studies in Communica­
tion, 32(2), 180–202.
Finklehor, D., & Ormrod, R. (2000, June). Kidnapping of 
juveniles: Patterns from NIBRS. Juvenile Justice Bul­
letin. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Justice, Of­
fice of Justice Programs: Office of Juvenile Justice and 
Delinquency Prevention.
Finn, A. N., & Schrodt, P. (2012). Students’ perceived un­
derstanding mediates the effects of teacher clarity and 
nonverbal immediacy on learner empowerment. Com­
munication Education, 61, 111–130.
Fischer, C. (2010). Sweet land of . . . conformity. Boston 
Globe, p. K1.
Fisher, R. (2012). The social psychology of intergroup and 
international conflict. New York, NY: Springer.
Fisher, W. R. (1984). Narration as a human communication 
paradigm: The case of public moral argument. Commu­
nication Monographs, 51, 1–22.
Fisher, W. R. (1985). The narrative paradigm: An elabora­
tion. Communication Monographs, 52, 347–367.
Fisher, W. R. (1987). Human communication as narra­
tion: Toward a philosophy of reason, value, and action. 
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Fisher-Yoshida, B. (2012). Coordinated Management of 
Meaning (CMM) as reflective practice. In C. Creede, 
B. Fisher-Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflec­
tive, facilitative, and interpretive practice of the Coor­
dinated Management of Meaning (pp. 219–240). Madi­
son, NJ: Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (1984). Social cognition. Read­
ing, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Flaherty, K. E., & Pappas, J. M. (2009). Expanding the 
sales professional’s role: A strategic re-orientation? In­
dustrial Marketing Management, 38(7), 806–813.
Flanagin, A. J. (2007). Commercial markets as communi­
cation markets: Uncertainty reduction through mediated 
information exchange in online auctions. New Media & 
Society, 9, 401–423.
Flint, D. J. (2006). Innovation, symbolic interaction and cus­
tomer valuing: Thoughts stemming from a service-domi­
nant logic of marketing. Marketing Theory, 6, 349–362.
Foa, U., & Foa, E. (1974). Societal structures of the mind. 
Springfield, IL: Thomas.
Foa, U. G., & Foa, E. B. (1976). Resource theory of so­
cial exchange. In J. W. Thibaut, J. T. Spence, & R. C. 
Carson (Eds.), Contemporary topics in social Psychol­
ogy (pp. 133–149). Morristown, NJ: General Learning 
Press.
Fogel, J. M. (2012). A modern family: The performance of 
“family” and familialism in contemporary television 
series. Unpublished doctoral dissertation. University of 
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI.
Ford, L. A., & Crabtree, R. D. (2002). Telling, re-telling 
and talking about telling: Disclosure and/as surviving 
incest. Women’s Studies in Communication, 25, 53–87.
Forsythe, L. (2012). CMM and healthcare qualitative 
simulation research. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-Yoshida, 
& P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, facilitative, 
and interpretive practice of the Coordinated Manage­
ment of Meaning: Making lives and making mean­
ing (pp. 95–106). Madison, NJ: Farleigh Dickinson 
University Press.
Forte, J. A. (2004). Symbolic interactionism and social 
work: A forgotten legacy, part 2. Families in Society, 
85, 521–530.
Forte, J. A., Barrett, A. V., & Campbell, M. H. (1996). Pat­
terns of social connectedness and shared grief work: A 
symbolic interactionist perspective. Social Work with 
Groups, 19, 29–51.
Foss, K., & Foss, S. (1991). Women speak: The eloquence 
of women’s lives. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press.
Foss, S., Foss, K., & Trapp, R. (1991). Contemporary per­
spectives on rhetoric. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland 
Press.
Fox, C. (2002). Beyond the “tyranny of the real”: Revisit­
ing Burke’s pentad as research method for professional 
communication. Technical Communication Quarterly, 
11, 365–388.
Frankenberg, R. (1993). White women, race matters: The 
social construction of Whiteness. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press.
Freeth, R. (2012). We are human too. Therapy Today, 23, 7.
French, J. R. & Raven, B. (1959). The bases of social 
power. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.
French, S. L., & Brown, S. C. (2011). It’s all your fault: 
Kenneth Burke, symbolic action, and the assigning of 
guilt and blame to women. Southern Communication 
Journal, 76(1), 1–16.
Frewin, K., & Tuffin, K. (1998). Police status, conformity 
and internal pressure: A discursive analysis of police 
culture. Discourse & Society, 9, 173–185.

R-14     References
Frymier, A. B. (2005). Students’ classroom communication 
effectiveness. Communication Quarterly, 53, 197–212.
Frymier, A. B., & Houser, M. A. (2002). The teacher-stu­
dent relationship as an interpersonal relationship. Com­
munication Education, 49, 207–219.
Frey, L. R., Botan, C. H., & Kreps, G. L. (2000). Investigat­
ing communication: An introduction to research meth­
ods, 2nd ed. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Galanes, G., & Adams, K. (2013). Effective group 
discussion: Theory and practice. Boston, MA: 
McGraw-Hill.
Gallois, C., & Callan, V. J. (1991). Interethnic accommo­
dation: The role of norms. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & 
N. Coupland (Eds.), Contexts of accommodation: De­
velopments in applied socio-linguistics (pp. 245–269). 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Gallois, C., Ogay, T., & Giles, H. (2005). Communication 
accommodation theory. In W. Gudykunst (Ed.), Theo­
rizing about intercultural communication (pp. 121–
148). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Garber, M. (2011). Webs and whirligigs: Marshall McLuhan 
in his time and ours. Retrieved from http://ffffound.com
/image/cfc6c98c37b262a79c7b436e5c9c08d1dad35835 
Garcia-Jimenez, L., & Craig, R. (2010). What kind of dif­
ference do we want to make? Communication Mono­
graphs, 77, 429–431.
Garnett, J., & Kouzmin, A. (2009). Crisis communication 
post-Katrina: What are we learning. Public Organiza­
tional Review, 9, 385–398.
Gasiorek, J., & Giles, H. (2012). Effects of inferred motive 
on evaluations of nonaccommodative communication. 
Human Communication Research, 38, 309–331.
Gaudine, A., & Thorne, L. (2012). Nurses’ ethical conflict 
with hospitals: A longitudinal study of outcomes. Nurs­
ing Ethics, 19, 727–737.
Gearhart, S., & Zhang, W. (2015). Gay bullying and online 
opinion expression testing Spiral of Silence in the social 
media environment. Social Science Computer Review, 
32, 18–36.
Gecas, V., & Burke, P. J. (1995). Self and identity. In K. S. 
Cook, G. A. Fine, & J. S. House (Eds.), Sociological 
perspectives on social psychology (pp. 41–67). Boston, 
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Geertz, C. (1973). The interpretation of cultures. New 
York, NY: Basic Books.
Geertz, C. (1983). Local knowledge. New York, NY: Basic 
Books.
Gencarelli, T. F. (2006). Neil Postman and the rise of media 
ecology. In C. M. K. Lum (Ed.), Perspectives on cul­
ture, technology, and communication: The media ecol­
ogy tradition (pp. 201–25). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Gendrin, D. M. (2000). Homeless women’s inner voices: 
Friends or foes? In M. J. Hardman & A. Taylor (Eds.), 
Hearing many voices (pp. 203–219). Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press.
Gerbner, G. (1969). Toward “cultural indicators”: The anal­
ysis of mass media public message systems. AV Com­
munication Review, 17(2), 137–148.
Gerbner, G. (1998). Cultivation analysis: An overview. 
Mass Communication and Society, 3/4, 175–194.
Gerbner, G. (1999). What do we know? In J. Shanahan & 
M. Morgan (Eds.), Television and its viewers: Cultiva­
tion theory and research (pp. ix–xiii). Cambridge: Cam­
bridge University Press.
Gerbner, G., & Gross, L. (1972). Living with television: 
The violence profile. Journal of Communication, 26, 
173–199.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Jackson-Beeck, M., JeffriesFox, S., & 
Signorielli, N. (1978). Cultural indicators: Violence pro­
file No. 9. Journal of Communication, 28, 176–206.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. 
(1982). Charting the mainstream: Television’s contribu­
tions to political orientations. Journal of Communica­
tion, 32, 100–127.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. 
(1986). Living with television: The dynamics of the 
cultivation process. In J. Bryant & D. Zillman (Eds.), 
Perspectives on media effects (pp. 17–40). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., & Signorielli, N. 
(1980). The “mainstreaming” of America: Violence 
profile no. 11. Journal of Communication, 30(3), 10–29.
Gerbner, G., Gross, L., Morgan, M., Signorielli, & Sha­
nahan, J. (2002). Growing up with television: The 
cultivation perspective. In J. Bryant & D. Zillmann 
(Eds.), Media effects: Advances in theory and research 
(pp. 17–41). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
German, K. M. (2009). Dramatism and dramatistic pentad. 
In S. W. Littlejohn & K. A. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia 
of communication theory (Vol. 1, pp. 320–322). Los 
Angeles, CA: Sage.
Gibbs, J. L., Ellison, N. B., & Lai, C. H. (2011). First 
comes love, then comes Google: An investigation of 
uncertainty reduction. Communication Research, 38, 
70–100.

References     R-15
Giddens, A. (1979). Central problems in social theory: 
Action, structure, and contradiction in social analysis. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press.
Giddens, A. (1984). The constitution of society: Outline of 
the theory of structuration. Berkeley, CA: University of 
California Press.
Giddens, A. (1980). Classes, capitalism, and the state. The­
ory and Society, 9, 877–890.
Giddens, A. (1993). New rules of sociological method: A 
positive critique of interpretive sociologies, 2nd ed. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (1994). Beyond left and right: The future of 
radical politics. Cambridge, UK: Polity Press.
Giddens, A. (2003). Risk and responsibility. The Modern 
Law Review, 62, 1–10.
Giles, H. (1973). Accent mobility: A model and some data. 
Anthropological Linguistics, 15, 87–105.
Giles, H. (1980). Accommodation theory: Some new direc­
tions. York Papers in Linguistics, 9, 30.
Giles, H. (2008). Communication accommodation theory. 
In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging 
theories in interpersonal communication (pp. 161–174). 
Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Giles, H. (2012). Principles of intergroup communication. 
In H. Giles (Ed.), The handbook of intergroup commu­
nication (pp. 3–18). New York, NY: Routledge.
Giles, H., Coupland, N., & Coupland, J. (1991). Accom­
modation theory: Communication, context, and conse­
quence. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland (Eds.), 
Contexts of accommodation: Developments in applied 
sociolinguistics (pp. 1–68). Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Giles, H., Linz, D., Bonilla, D., & Gomez, M. L. (2012). 
Police stops and interactions with Latino and White 
(non-Latino) drivers: Extensive policing and commu­
nication accommodation. Communication Monographs, 
79, 407–427.
Giles, H., Mulac, A., Bradac, J. J., & Johnson, P. (1987). 
Speech accommodation theory: The first decade and be­
yond. In M. L. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication year­
book 10 (pp. 13–48). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Giles, H., & Smith, P. M. (1979). Accommodation theory: 
Optimal levels of convergence. In H. Giles & R. N. St. 
Clair (Eds.), Language and social psychology (pp. 231–
244). Oxford: Blackwell.
Giles, H., & Wiemann, J. (1987). Language, social com­
parison, and power. In S. Chaffee & C. R. Berger (Eds.), 
Handbook of communication science (pp. 350–384). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ginnett, R. (2005). What can leaders to do avoid group­
think? Leadership in Action, 25, 13.
Gitlin, T. (1980). The whole world is watching: Mass media 
in the making and unmaking of the New Left. Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press.
Givertz, M., & Segrin, C. (2012, May). The association be­
tween over involved parenting and young adults’ self-
efficacy, psychological entitlement, and family commu­
nication. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the 
International Communication Association, Phoenix, AZ.
Glascock, J., & Ruggerio, T. E. (2004). Representations of 
class and gender of primetime Spanish-language televi­
sion in the United States. Communication Quarterly, 52, 
390–402.
Glenn, C. L., & Johnson, D. L. (2012). “What they see as 
acceptable”: A co-cultural theoretical analysis of black 
male students at a predominantly white institution. 
Howard Journal of Communications, 23(4), 351–368.
Glynn, C. J., & McLeod, J. M. (1985). Implications of the 
spiral of silence for communication and public opinion 
research. In K. R. Sanders, L. L. Kaid, & D. Nimmo 
(Eds.), Political communication yearbook 1984 (pp. 43–
65). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Glynn, C. J., Hayes, A. F., & Shanahan, J. (1997). Perceived 
support for one’s opinions and willingness to speak out: 
A meta-analysis of survey studies on the spiral of si­
lence. Public Opinion Quarterly, 61, 452–463.
Goffman, E. (1967). Interaction rituals: Essays on face-to-
face interaction. Garden City, NY: Doubleday.
Goffman, E. (1974). Frame analysis: An essay on the orga­
nization of experience. New York, NY: Harper & Row.
Goins, M. N. (2011). Playing with dialectics: Black female 
friendship groups as a homeplace. Communication 
Studies, 62(5), 531–546.
Golden, J. L., Berquist, G., Coleman, W. E., & Sproule, 
J. M. (2011). The rhetoric of Western thought, 10th ed. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendall-Hunt.
Golish, T. D., & Powell, K. A. (2003). “Ambiguous loss”: 
Managing the dialectics of grief associated with pre­
mature birth. Journal of Social and Personal Relation­
ships, 20, 309–334.
Gong, G. (2011). When Mississippi Chinese talk. In A. 
Gonzalez, M. Houston, & V. Chen (Eds.), Our voices: 
Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communication 
(pp. 104–111). New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

R-16     References
Gonzalez, A., & Gonzalez, J. (2002). The color problem 
in sillyville: Negotiating white identity in one popular 
“kid-vid.” Communication Quarterly, 50, 410–422.
Gonzalez, A., Houston, M., & Chen, V. (Eds.). (2011). Our 
voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and communication. 
New York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Good, J. E. (2009). The cultivation, mainstreaming, and 
cognitive processing of environmentalists watching tele­
vision. Environmental Communication, 3(3), 279–297.
Goodboy, A. K., & Bolkan, S. (2011). Attachment and the 
use of negative relational maintenance behaviors in 
romantic relationships. Communication Research Re­
ports, 28, 327–336.
Gordon, G. (1982, January). An end to McLuhanacy. Edu­
cational Technology, 44, 39–45.
Gordon, T., & Willmarth, S. (2012). McLuhan for begin­
ners. Danbury, CT: For Beginners Press.
Gouran, D. S. (1998). The signs of cognitive, affilia­
tive, and egocentric constraints in patterns of interac­
tion in decision-making and problem-solving groups 
and their potential effects on outcomes. In J. Trent 
(Ed.), Communication: Views from the helm for the 
21st century (pp. 98–102). Needham Heights, MA: 
Allyn & Bacon.
Gouran, D. S., & Hirokawa, R. Y. (1996). Functional the­
ory and communication in decision-making and prob­
lem-solving groups. In R. Y. Hirokawa & M. S. Poole 
(Eds.), Communication and group decision making 
(pp. 55–80). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gouran, D. S., Hirokawa, R. Y., & Martz, A. E. (1986). 
A critical analysis of factors related to decisional pro­
cesses involved in the Challenger disaster. Central 
States Speech Journal, 37, 119–135.
Granberg, E. M. (2011). “Now my old self is thin”: Stigma 
exits after weight loss. Social Psychology Quarterly, 
74(1), 29–52.
Gray, H. (1989). Television, Black Americans, and the 
American dream. Critical Studies in Mass Communica­
tion, 6, 376–386.
Gray, J. B. (2009). The power of storytelling: Using narra­
tive in the healthcare context. Journal of Communica­
tion in Healthcare, 2(3), 258–273.
Green-Hamann, S., Eichhorn, K. C., & Sherblom, J. C. 
(2011). An exploration of why people participate in So­
cial Life support groups. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 16, 465–491.
Greene, A. (2012). Practical follow-up. Journal of 
Participatory Medicine, 4, 18.
Greene, K., & Kremar, M. (2005). Predicting exposure to 
and liking of media violence: A uses and gratifications 
approach. Communication Studies, 56, 71–93.
Gross, M., Guerrero, L. K., & Alberts, J. K. (2004). Per­
ceptions of conflict strategies and communication 
competence in task-oriented dyads. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 32, 249–271.
Grossberg, L. (1986). Is there rock after punk? Critical 
Studies in Mass Communication, 3, 50–74.
Grossberg, L (2010). Cultural studies in the future tense. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
Gu, R., Higa, K., & Moodie, D. R. (2012). A study on com­
munication media selection: Comparing the effective­
ness of the media richness, social influence, and media 
fitness. Journal of Service Science and Management, 4, 
291–299.
Gudykunst, W. B. (1995). Anxiety/uncertainty manage­
ment (AUM) theory. In R. Wiseman (Ed.), Intercultural 
communication theory (pp. 8–58). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Hammer, M. R. (1987). The influ­
ences of ethnicity, gender, and dyadic composition on 
uncertainty reduction in initial interactions. Journal of 
Black Studies, 18, 191–214.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Matsumoto, Y. (1996). Cross-cultural 
variability of communication in personal relationships. 
In W. B. Gudykunst, S. Ting-Toomey, & T. Nishida 
(Eds.), Communication in personal relationships across 
cultures (pp. 19–56). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1984). Individual and 
cultural influence on uncertainty reduction. Communi­
cation Monographs, 51, 23–36.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1986a). Attributional 
confidence in low- and high-context cultures. Human 
Communication Research, 12, 525–549.
Gudykunst, W. B., & Nishida, T. (1986b). Social pen­
etration in close relationships in Japan and the United 
States. In R. Bostrom (Ed.), Communication yearbook 7 
(pp. 592–610). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., Chua, E., & Gray, A. (1987). Cultural 
dissimilarity and uncertainty reduction processes. In 
M. McLaughlin (Ed.), Communication yearbook 10 
(pp. 456–469). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Gudykunst, W. B., Yang, S. M., & Nishida, T. (1985). A 
cross-cultural test of uncertainty reduction theory: Com­
parison of acquaintances, friends, and dating relation­
ships in Japan, Korea, and the United States. Human 
Communication Research, 11, 407–454.

References     R-17
Guerrero, L. K. (2008). Expectancy violation. Retrieved 
from http://www.communicationencyclopedia.com
Guerrero, L. K., & Bachman, G. F. (2010). Forgiveness and 
forgiving communication: An expectancy-investment 
explanation. Journal of Social and Personal Relation­
ships, 27, 801–823.
Gunaratne, S. A. (2010). De-westernizing communication/
social science research: Opportunities and limitations. 
Media, Culture & Society, 32(3), 473–500.
Gibbs, J. L., Ellison, N. B., & Lai, C. (2011). First comes 
love, then comes Google: An investigation of uncer­
tainty reduction strategies and self-disclosure in online 
dating. Communication Research, 38(1), 70–100.
Giles, H., Willemyns, M., Gallois, C., & Anderson, M. C. 
(2007). Accommodating a new frontier: The context of 
law enforcement. In K. Fiedler (Ed.), Social accommo­
dation (pp. 129–162). New York, NY: Psychology Press.
Gissel, A. L. (2012). The effects of email address on norm 
violations on evaluations of job applicants. Unpublished 
doctoral dissertation. North Carolina State University, 
Raleigh, NC.
Groupthink: A risk to a good leadership team. Retrieved 
from http://chinabusinessleadership.com/2012/09/11
/group-think-a-risk-to-a-good-leadership-team
Guerrero, L. K., & Bachman, G. F. (2008). Communica­
tion following relational transgressions in dating rela­
tionships: An investment-model explanation. Southern 
Communication Journal, 73, 4–23.
Guo, L., Chen, Y. N. K., Vu, H., Wang, Q., Aksamit, R., 
Guzek, D., . . . McCombs, M. (2015). Coverage of the 
Iraq War in the United States, Mainland China, Taiwan 
and Poland: A transnational network agenda-setting 
study. Journalism Studies, 16, 343–362.
Ha, L., & Fang, L. (2012). Internet experience and time 
displacement of traditional news media use: An applica­
tion of the theory of the niche. Telematics & Informat­
ics, 29(2), 177–186.
Hajek, C., Villagran, M., & Wittenberg-Lyles, E. (2007). 
The relationships among perceived physician accommo­
dation, perceived outgroup typicality, and patient incli­
nations toward compliance. Communication Research 
Reports, 24, 293–302.
Hall, E. T. (1966). The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: 
Anchor/Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1977). Beyond culture. Garden City, NY: 
Anchor/Doubleday.
Hall, E. T. (1992). An anthropology of everyday life. New 
York, NY: Doubleday/Anchor Books.
Hall, S. (1980a). Encoding/decoding. In S. Hall, D. Hobson, 
A. Lowe, & P. Willis (Eds.), Culture, media, language 
(pp. 128–138). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1980b). Cultural studies and the centre: Some 
problematic and problems. In S. Hall, D. Hobson, A. 
Lowe, & P. Willis (Eds.), Culture, media, language 
(pp. 15–47). London: Hutchinson.
Hall, S. (1981). The whites of their eyes: Racist ideologies 
and the media. In G. Bridges & R. Brunt (Eds.), Silver 
linings: Some strategies for the eighties (pp. 28–52). 
London: Lawrence and Wishart.
Hall, S. (1989). Ideology and communication theory. In 
B. Dervin, L. Grossberg, B. J. O’Keefe, & E. Wartella 
(Eds.), Rethinking communication: Paradigm issues 
(pp. 40–51). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Hall, S. (1992). Cultural studies and its theoretical lega­
cies. In L. Grossberg, C. Nelson, & P. Treichler (Eds.), 
Cultural studies (pp. 277–294). New York, NY: 
Routledge.
Hall, S. (1997). The problem of ideology: Marxism without 
guarantees. In S. Hall (Ed.), Representation: Cultural 
representations and signifying practices (pp. 30–46). 
London: Sage/The Open University.
Hall, S. (2013). The spectacle of the other. In S. Hall, S. 
Nixon, & J. Evans (Eds.), Representation: Cultural 
representations and signifying practices (pp. 112–144). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hamilton, H. E. (1991). Accommodation and mental dis­
ability. In H. Giles, J. Coupland, & N. Coupland (Eds.), 
Contexts of accommodation (pp. 157–186). New York, 
NY: Cambridge University Press.
Haraway, D. (1988). Situated knowledges: The science 
question in feminism and the privilege of partial per­
spective. Signs, 14, 575–599.
Harding, S. (1987). Introduction: Is there a feminist 
method? In Sandra Harding (Ed.), Feminism and meth­
odology (pp. 1–14). Bloomington, IN: University of 
Indiana Press.
Harding, S. (1991). Whose science, whose knowledge? 
Thinking from women’s lives. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni­
versity Press.
Hargie, O., Tourish, D., & Wilson, N. (2002). Communica­
tion audits and the effects of increased information: A 
follow-up study. The Journal of Business Communica­
tion, 39, 414–436.
Haridakis, P. M., & Rubin, A. M. (2005). Third-person ef­
fects in the aftermath of terrorism. Mass Communica­
tion and Society, 8, 39–59.

R-18     References
Haridakis, P., & Hanson, G. (2009). Social interaction and 
co-viewing with YouTube: Blending mass communica­
tion reception and social connection. Journal of Broad­
casting & Electronic Media, 53, 317–355.
Harmon-Jones, E. (2009). Cognitive dissonance theory. 
In S. W. Littlejohn & K. A. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia 
of communication theory (Vol. 1, pp. 109–111). Los 
Angeles, CA: Sage.
Harrigan, M. M. (2009). The contradictions of identity-
work for parents of visibly adopted children. Journal of 
Social & Personal Relationships, 26(5), 634–658.
Harrigan, M. M., & Braithwaite, D. O. (2010). Discursive 
struggles in families formed through visible adoption: 
An exploration of dialectical unity. Journal of Applied 
Communication Research, 38(2), 127–144.
Harris, M., & Cullen, R. (2008). Renovation as innovation: 
Transforming a campus symbol and a campus culture. 
Perspectives: Policy and Practice in Higher Education, 
12, 4–51.
Hart, R. P. (1997). Modern rhetorical criticism. Boston, 
MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Hartsock, N. (1981). Political change: Two perspectives in 
power. In C. Bunch (Ed.), Building feminist theory: Es­
says from Quest, a feminist quarterly (pp. 55–70). New 
York, NY: Longman.
Hartsock, N. (1983). The feminist standpoint: Developing 
the ground for a specifically feminist historical material­
ism. In S. Harding & M. B. Hintikka (Eds.), Discover­
ing reality (pp. 283–310). Boston, MA: Ridel.
Hartsock, N. C. M. (1997). Standpoint theories for the next 
century. Women and Politics, 18, 93–101.
Harwood, J. (2002). Comunicación intergeneracional entre 
extraños y entre miembros de la familia [Intergenera­
tional communication between strangers and family 
members]. Revista Latinoamericana de Psicologia, 34, 
75–82.
Harwood, J. (2000). Communicative predictors of solidar­
ity in the grandparent-grandchild relationship. Journal 
of Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 743–766.
Harwood, J. (2006). Communication as social identity. In 
G. Shepherd, J. St. John, & T. Striphas (Eds.), Com­
munication as . . . : Perspectives on theory (pp. 84–90). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Haase, C. E. (1909). Ideal education for girls. Registrar 
of Milwaukee Downer College. Records 1852–1964. 
Milwaukee Manuscript Collection L. University Ar­
chives. Golda Meir Library, Research Center, University 
of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI.
Hatch, M. J. (2006). Organizational theory: Modern, sym­
bolic, and postmodern perspective. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press.
Hayden, S. (1994). Interruptions and the construction of real­
ity. In L. H. Turner & H. M. Sterk (Eds.), Differences that 
make a difference: Examining the assumptions in gender 
research (pp. 99–106). Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey.
Hechter, M. (2004). From class to culture. The American 
Journal of Sociology, 110, 400–445.
Hehl, J., & McDonald, D. D. (2012). Older adults’ pain 
communication during ambulatory medical visits: An 
exploration of communication accommodation theory. 
Pain Management Nursing, 13, 186–210.
Heider, F. (1958). The psychology of interpersonal rela­
tions. New York, NY: Wiley.
Heiss, S. N., & Carmack, H. J. (2012). Knock, knock; 
who’s there? Making sense of organizational entrance 
through humor. Management Communication Quar­
terly, 25, 106–132.
Hensley, T. R., & Lewis, J. M., (2010) Kent state and May 
4th—A social science perspective. Kent, OH: Kent State 
University Press.
Herakova, L. (2009). Identity, communication, inclusion: 
The Roma and (new) Europe. Journal of International 
and Intercultural Communication, 2(4), 279–297.
Herek, G. M., Janis, I. L., & Huth, P. (1987). Decision mak­
ing during international crises: Is quality of process re­
lated to outcome? Journal of Conflict Resolution, 31, 
203–226.
Herrington, W. (2012). Homeless perceptions. Saar­
brücken, Germany: Lambert Academic Publishing.
Herrmann, A. (2007). Narrative and ethnography as exis­
tential phenomenological approaches to organizational 
sensemaking. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the International Communication Association, San 
Francisco, CA.
Herzog, H. (1944). Motivations and gratifications of daily 
serial listeners. In P. F. Lazarsfeld & F. N. Stanton 
(Eds.), Radio Research, 1942–1943. New York, NY: 
Duell, Sloan and Pearce.
Higgins, C., & Walker, R. (2012). Ethos, logos, pathos: 
Strategies of persuasion in social/environmental reports. 
Accounting Forum, 36, 194–208.
Hine, R. (2011). In the margins: The impact of sexualised 
images on the mental health of ageing women. Sex 
Roles, 65(7), 632–646.
Hirokawa, R. Y., Gouran, D. S., & Martz, A. E. (1988). 
Understanding the sources of faulty group decision 

References     R-19
making: A lesson from the Challenger disaster. Small 
Group Behavior, 19, 411–433.
Hirschmann, N. J. (1997). Feminist standpoint as postmod­
ern strategy. Women and Politics, 18, 73–92.
Hmielowski, J. D., Holbert, R. L., & Lee, J. (2011). Pre­
dicting the consumption of political TV satire: Af­
finity for political humor, The Daily Show and The 
Colbert Report. Communication Monographs, 78(1), 
96–114.
Ho, D. Y. (1976). On the concept of face. American Journal 
of Sociology, 81, 867–884.
Hochschild, A. R., Machung, A. (1989). The second shift: 
Working parents and the revolution at home. New York, 
NY: Viking Penguin.
Hodge, B. (2003). How the medium is the message in the 
unconscious of ‘America online.’ Visual Communica­
tion, 2, 341–353.
Hoelzl, E., Pollai, M., & Kastner, H. (2011). Hedonic 
evaluations of cars: Effects of payment mode on predic­
tion and experience. Psychology & Marketing, 28(11), 
1113–1127.
Hoffman, M. F., & Cowen, R. L. (2010). Be careful what 
you ask for: Structuration theory and work/life accom­
modation. Communication Studies, 61, 272–303.
Hofstede, G. (1980). Culture’s consequences: International 
differences in work-related values. Beverly Hills, CA: 
Sage.
Hofstede, G. (1991). Cultures and organizations: Software 
of the mind. London: McGraw-Hill.
Hofstede, G. (2001). Culture’s consequences: Compar­
ing values, behaviors, institutions, and organizations 
across nations. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hogg, M., & Giles, H. (2012). Norm talk and identity in 
intergroup communication. In H. Giles (Ed.), The hand­
book of intergroup communication (pp. 373–388). New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Holbert, R. L., LaMarre, H. L., & Landreville, K. D. 
(2009). Fanning the flames of a partisan divide: Debate 
viewing, vote choice, and perceptions of vote count ac­
curacy. Communication Research, 36(2), 155–177.
Holliday, A. (2013). Understanding intercultural commu­
nication: Negotiating a culture of grammar. New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Hollingshead, A. B., Wittenbaum, G. M., Paulus, P. B., Hi­
rokawa, R. Y., Ancona, D. G., Peterson, R. S., Jehn, K. 
A., & Yoon, K. (2005). A look at groups from the func­
tional perspective. In M. S. Poole & A. B. Hollingshead 
(Eds.), Theories of small groups: Interdisciplinary per­
spectives (pp. 21–62). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Holmgren, A. (2004). Saying, doing and making: Teaching 
CMM theory. Human Systems: The Journal of Systemic 
Consultation and Management, 15, 89–100.
Hoover, J. D., Hastings, S. O., & Musambira, G. W. (2009). 
“Opening a gap” in culture: Women’s uses of the com­
passionate friends website. Women & Language, 32(1), 
82–90.
Hoppe-Nagao, A., & Ting-Toomey, S. (2002). Relational 
dialectics and management strategies in marital couples. 
Southern Communication Journal, 67, 142–159.
Hopper, R., Knapp, M. L., & Scott, L. (1981). Couples’ 
personal idioms: Exploring intimate talk. Journal of 
Communication, 31, 23–33.
Horan, S. M. (2012). Affection exchange theory and per­
ceptions of relational transgressions. Western Journal of 
Communication, 76, 109–126.
Horowitz, D. (2012). Consuming pleasures: Intellectuals 
and popular culture in the post-war world. Philadel­
phia, PA: University of Pennsylvania Press.
Houle, K. (2009). Making strange. Frontiers: A Journal of 
Women Studies, 30(1), 172–193.
Houston, M. (1992). The politics of difference: Race, 
class, and women’s communication. In L. F. Rakow 
(Ed.), Women making meaning: New feminist direc­
tions in communication (pp. 45–59). New York, NY: 
Routledge.
Houston, M., & Kramarae, C. (1991). Speaking from si­
lence: Methods of silencing and of resistance. Discourse 
and Society, 2, 387–399.
How people learn about their local community. Retrieved 
from http://pewInternet.org/Reports/2011/Local-news
/Part-1.aspx 
Hsu, C. (2004). Sources of differences in communica­
tion apprehension between Chinese in Taiwan and 
Americans. Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the International Communication Association, New 
Orleans, LA.
Hsu, C. (2012). The influence of vocal qualities and con­
firmation of nonnative English-speaking teachers on 
student receiver apprehension, affective learning, 
and cognitive learning. Communication Education, 
61, 4–16.
Huber, J. L. (2010). Singing it out: Riot grrrls, Lilith Fair, 
and feminism. Kaleidoscope: A Graduate Journal of 
Qualitative Communication Research, 9, 65–85.

R-20     References
Huddy, L. (2012). From group cohesion to political co­
hesion and commitment. In P. A. Van Lange, A. W. 
Kruglanski, & T. E. Higgins (Eds.), Handbook of theo­
ries of social psychology (pp. 379–398). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hughes, P. C., & Dickson, F. C. (2006). Relational dynam­
ics in interfaith marriages. In L. H. Turner & R. West 
(Eds.), The family communication sourcebook (pp. 373–
388). Thousand, Oaks, CA: Sage.
Hunt, D., Atkin, D., & Krishnan, A. (2012). The influence 
of computer-mediated communication apprehension on 
motives for Facebook use. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 56(2), 187–202.
Hunt, S. B. (2003). An essay on publishing standards for rhe­
torical criticism. Communication Studies, 54, 378–384.
Hutcheson, J. (2012). Achieving a transcendent episode. In 
C. Creede, B. Fisher-Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), 
The reflective, facilitative, and interpretive practice of 
the Coordinated Management of Meaning (pp. 111–
123). Madison, NJ: Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Hyde, M. (2004). Introduction: Rhetorically we dwell. In 
M. Hyde (Ed.), The ethos of rhetoric (pp. xii–xxvii). 
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina Press.
Ifert-Johnson, D., Roloff, M. E., & Riffee, M. A. (2004). 
Politeness theory and refusals of requests: Face threat as 
a function of expressed obstacles. Communication Stud­
ies, 55, 227–238.
Ifert-Johnson, D. (2007). Politeness theory and conversa­
tional refusals: Associations between various types of 
face threat and perceived competence. Western Journal 
of Communication, 71, 196–215.
Ifert-Johnson, D., & Lewis, N. (2010). Perceptions of 
swearing in the work setting: An Expectancy Violations 
Theory perspective. Communication Reports, 23, 
106–118.
Ifert-Johnson, D. (2012). Swearing by peers in the work 
setting: Expectancy violation valence, perceptions of 
message, and perceptions of speaker. Communication 
Studies, 63, 136–151.
Ifert-Johnson, D. & Acquavella, G. (2012). Organization-
public relationship: Satisfaction and intention to retain a 
relationship with a cell phone service provider. Southern 
Communication Journal, 77, 163–179.
Ichiyama, M. A. (1993). The reflected appraisal process in 
small-group interaction. Social Psychology Quarterly, 
56, 87–99.
Imamura, M., Zhang, Y. B., & Harwood, J. (2011). Japanese 
sojourners’ attitudes toward Americans: Exploring the 
influences of communication accommodation, linguis­
tic competence, and relational solidarity in intergroup 
conflict. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication, 21, 
103–120.
Infinedo, P. (2016). Applying uses and gratifications theory 
and social influence processes to understand students’ 
pervasive adoption of social networking sites: Perspec­
tives from the Americas. International Journal of Infor­
mation Management, 36, 192–206.
Inglis, F. (1993). Cultural studies. Cambridge, MA: Basil 
Blackwell.
Innes, M. (2002). Organizational communication and the 
symbolic construction of police murder investigations. 
British Journal of Sociology, 53, 67–68.
Innis, H. (1951). The bias of communication. Toronto: 
University of Toronto Press.
Ivy, D. K. (2012). GenderSpeak: Personal effectiveness in 
gender communication. New York, NY: Pearson.
Iyengar, S., & Kinder, D. R. (1987). News that matters: Televi­
sion and American opinion. Chicago, IL: University Press.
James, D., & Drackich, J. (1993). Understanding gen­
der differences in amount of talk. In D. Tannen (Ed.), 
Gender and conversational interaction (pp. 281–312). 
Oxford: University Press.
Jameson, J. K. (2004). Negotiating autonomy and connec­
tion through politeness: A dialectical approach to or­
ganizational conflict management. Western Journal of 
Communication, 68, 257–277.
Jandt, F. E. (2012). An introduction to intercultural com­
munication: Identities in a global communication. Los 
Angeles, CA: Sage.
Janis, I. L. (1972). Victims of groupthink: A psychological 
study of foreign-policy decisions and fiascoes. Boston, 
MA: Houghton Mifflin.
Janis, I. L. (1982). Groupthink: Psychological studies of 
policy decisions and fiascoes. Boston, MA: Houghton 
Mifflin.
Janis, I. L. (1989). Crucial decisions: Leadership in poli­
cymaking and crisis management. New York, NY: Free 
Press.
Janis, I. L., & Gilmore, J. B. (1965). The influence of in­
centive conditions on the success of role-playing in 
modifying attitudes. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 1, 17–27.
Jaworski, A., & Coupland, J. (2005). Othering in gossip: 
“You go out you have a laugh and you can pull yeah 
okay but like . . .” Language in Society, 34, 667–694.

References     R-21
Jeffres, L. W., Atkin, D. J., & Neuendorf, K. A. (2001). 
Expanding the range of dependent measures in 
mainstreaming and cultivation analysis. Communica­
tion Research Reports, 18, 408–417.
Jenkins, J. J., & Dillon, P. J. (2012). “This is what we’re 
all about”: The (re)construction of an oppressive orga­
nizational structure. Southern Communication Journal, 
77, 287–306.
Jensen, K. (2011). A matter of concern: Kenneth Burke, 
phishing, and the rhetoric of national insecurity. 
Rhetoric Review, 30(2), 170–190.
Jiang, L. C., Bazarova, N. N., & Hancock, J. T. (2011). The 
disclosure-intimacy link in computer-mediated com­
munication: An attributional extension of the hyperper­
sonal model. Human Communication Research, 37(1), 
58–77.
Jin, B., Jin, Y. P., & Hye-Shin, Kim. (2010). What makes 
online community members commit? A social exchange 
perspective. Behaviour & Information Technology, 
29(6), 587–599.
Johnson, K. A. (2011). Citizen journalism, agenda-setting 
and the 2008 presidential election. Web Journal of Mass 
Communication Research, 28, 23–33.
Johnston, A., Friedman, B., & Peach, S. (2011). Standpoint 
in political blogs: Voice, authority, and issues. Women’s 
Studies, 40(3), 269–298.
Joseph, A. L., & Afifi, T. D. (2010). Military wives’ stress­
ful disclosures to their deployed husbands: The role of 
protective buffering. Journal of Applied Communica­
tion Research, 38(4), 412–434.
Jourard, S. M. (1971). The transparent self (rev. ed.). New 
York, NY: Van Nostrand.
Kahlor, L., & Eastin, M. S. (2011). Television’s role in the 
culture of violence toward women: A study of television 
viewing and the cultivation of rape myth acceptance in 
the United States. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 55(2), 215–231.
Kalman, Y. M., & Rafaeli, S. (2011). Online pauses and 
silence: Chronemic expectancy violations in written 
computer-mediated communication. Communication 
Research, 38(1), 54–69.
Kang, T., & Hoffman, L. H. (2011). Why would you de­
cide to use an online dating site? Factors that lead to 
online dating. Communication Research Reports, 28, 
205–213.
Katz, E., Blumler, J. G., & Gurevitch, M. (1974). 
Utilization of mass communication by the individual. 
In J. G. Blumler & E. Katz (Eds.), The uses of mass 
communication: Current perspectives on gratifications 
research (pp. 19–32). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Katz, E., Gurevitch, M., & Haas, H. (1973). On the use 
of the mass media for important things. American 
Sociological Review, 38, 164–181.
Kaufman, J. M., & Johnson, C. (2004). Stigmatized indi­
viduals and the process of identity. The Sociological 
Quarterly, 45, 807–833.
Kaye, B. K., & Johnson, T. J. (2004). A web for all rea­
sons: Uses and gratifications of Internet components for 
political information. Telematics and Informatics, 21, 
197–223.
Kellermann, K., & Reynolds, R. (1990). When ignorance 
is bliss: The role of motivation to reduce uncertainty in 
uncertainty reduction theory. Human Communication 
Research, 17, 5–35.
Kellner, D., & Hammer, R. (2004). Critical reflections on 
Mel Gibson’s The Passion of the Christ. Logos, 3, 3–4.
Kelly, C., & Zak, M. (1999). Narrativity and professional 
communication: Folktales and community meaning. 
Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 13, 
297–317.
Kennedy, G. A. (1991). Aristotle on Rhetoric: A theory 
of civil discourse. New York, NY: Oxford University 
Press.
Kephart, W. M. (1950). A quantitative analysis of intra­
group relations. American Journal of Sociology, 60, 
544–549.
Kerbrat-Orecchioni, C. (2012). From good manners to 
facework: Politeness variations and constants in France 
from the classic age to today. In M. Bax & D. Kadar 
(Eds.), Understanding relational (im)politeness: Re­
lational linguistic practices over time and across cul­
tures (pp. 131–153). Amsterdam, Netherlands: John 
Benjamins.
Kesebir, S. (2012). The superorganism account of human 
sociality: How and when human groups are like bee­
hives. Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16, 
233–261.
Keyton, J. (2005). Communication and organizational cul­
ture. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Keyton, J., Ferguson, P., & Rhodes, S. C. (2001). Cultural 
indicators of sexual harassment. Southern Communica­
tion Journal, 67, 33–50.
Kim, R. K., & Levine, T. R. (2011). The effect of suspicion 
on deception detection accuracy: Optimal level or op­
posing effects. Communication Reports, 24, 51–62.

R-22     References
Kim, K-H., & Yun, H. (2007). Crying for me, crying for 
us: Relational dialectics in a Korean social network site. 
Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 38(1), 
298–318.
Kim, Sei-Hill (2012). Testing fear of isolation as a causal 
mechanism: Spiral of silence and genetically modified 
(GM) foods in South Korea. International Journal of 
Public Opinion Research, 24, 306–324.
Kinefuchi, E., & Orbe, M. P. (2008). Situating oneself in 
a racialized world: Understanding student reactions to 
Crash through standpoint theory and context-position­
ality frames. Journal of International and Intercultural 
Communication, 1, 70–90.
Kiousis, S. (2011). Agenda-setting and attitudes. Journal­
ism Studies, 12(3), 359–374.
Kirkwood, W. (1992). Narrative and the rhetoric of possi­
bility. Communication Monographs, 59, 30–47.
Kirschbaum, K. (2012). Physician communication in the op­
erating room: Expanding application of face-negotiation 
theory to the health Communication context. Health 
Communication, 27, 292–301.
Kissack, H. (2010). Muted voices: A critical look at email 
in organizations. Journal of European Industrial Train­
ing, 34(6), 539–551.
Kissling, E. (1991). Street harassment: The language of 
sexual terrorism. Discourse and Society, 2, 121–135.
Knapp, M. L. (1978). Nonverbal communication in human 
interaction. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
Knapp, M. L., & Hall, J. A. (2010). Nonverbal commu­
nication in human interaction. Boston, MA: Cengage
/Wadsworth.
Knapp, M. L., Hall, J. A., & Horgan, T. G. (2014). Non­
verbal communication and human interaction. Boston, 
MA: Cengage/Wadsworth.
Knapp, M. L., & Vangelisti, A. L. (2009). Interpersonal 
communication and human relationships, 6th ed. 
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Knoble, N. B., & Linville, D. (2012). Outness and relation­
ship satisfaction in same-gender couples. Journal of 
Marital and Family Therapy, 38, 330–339.
Knobloch, L. K. (2008). Uncertainty reduction theory. In 
L. A. Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging 
theories in interpersonal communication: Multiple per­
spectives (pp. 133–144). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Knobloch, L. K., Miller, L. E., Bond, B. J., & Monnone, 
S. E. (2007). Relational uncertainty and message pro­
cessing in marriage. Communication Monographs, 74, 
154–180.
Knobloch, L. K., Satterlee, K. L., & DiDomenico, S. M. 
(2010). Relational uncertainty predicting apprais­
als of face threat in courtship: Integrating uncertainty 
reduction theory and politeness theory. Communication 
Research, 37(3), 303–334.
Knobloch, L. K., & Solomon, D. H. (2003). Responses 
to changes in relational uncertainty within dating 
relationships: Emotions and communication strategies. 
Communication Studies, 54, 282–305.
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., & Meng, J. (2009). Looking the 
other way: Selective exposure to attitude-consistent and 
counterattitudinal political information. Communication 
Research, 36(3), 426–448.
Knox, R. E., & Inkster, J. A. (1968). Postdecision disso­
nance at posttime. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 8, 310–323.
Koenig-Kellas, J. (2008). Narrative theories. In L. A. 
Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories 
in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives 
(pp. 241–254). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Koerber, C. P., & Neck, C. (2003). Groupthink and sports: 
An application of Whyte’s model. International Journal 
of Contemporary Hospitality Management, 15, 20–28.
Koerner, A. (2015). Family communication. In C. Berger 
(Ed.), Interpersonal communication (pp. 419–442). 
New York, NY: Walter de Gruyter.
Korsch, B. M., Gozzi, E. K., & Francis, V. (1968). Gaps in 
doctor-patient communication. Pediatrics, 42, 855–871.
Kosenko, K. A. (2010). Meanings and dilemmas of sexual 
safety and communication for transgender individuals. 
Health Communication, 25(2), 131–141.
Kosenko, K. A. (2011). The safer sex communication of 
transgender adults: Processes and problems. Journal of 
Communication, 61(3), 476–495.
Kramarae, C. (1981). Women and men speaking: Frame­
works for analysis. Rowley, MA: Newbury House.
Kramarae, C. (2005). Muted group theory and commu­
nication: Asking dangerous questions. Women and 
Language, 28(2), 55–61.
Kramarae, C. (2009). Muted group theory. In S. W. Littlejohn 
& K. A. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of communication 
theory (Vol. 2, pp. 667–669). Los Angeles, CA: Sage.
Kramarae, C., & Treichler, P. (1985). A feminist dictionary. 
Boston, MA: Pandora.
Kramer, M. W. (2004). Toward a communication theory of 
group dialectics: An ethnographic study of a community 
theater group. Communication Monographs, 71, 
311–332.

References     R-23
Kramer, M. W. (2005). Communication and social ex­
change processes in community theater groups. Journal 
of Applied Communication Research, 33, 159–182.
Kramer, M. W., & Berman, J. E. (2001). Making sense of 
a university’s culture: An examination of undergraduate 
students’ stories. Southern Communication Journal, 66, 
297–311.
Kubey, R., & Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1990). Television and 
the quality of life: How viewing shapes everyday experi­
ence. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Kurtz, H. (1998, August 13). Homicide rate down, except 
on the evening news. San Francisco Chronicle, p. A8.
Kwak, H. (2012). Self-disclosure in online media. Interna­
tional Journal of Advertising, 31(3), 485–510.
LaPoire, B. A., & Burgoon, J. K. (1992). A reply from the 
heart: Who are Sparks and Greene and why are they say­
ing all these horrible things? Human Communication 
Research, 18, 472–482.
Lamoureux, E. L. (1994). Rhetorical dilemmas in Catho­
lic discourse: The case of bishop John J. Meyers. 
Communication Studies, 45, 281–293.
Langellier, K. M., & Peterson, E. E. (2004). Storytelling in 
daily life. Philadelphia, PA: Temple University Press.
LaPoire, B. A., & Burgoon, J. K. (1996). Usefulness of dif­
ferentiating arousal responses within communication 
theories: Orienting response or defensive arousal within 
nonverbal theories of expectancy violation. Communi­
cation Monographs, 63, 208–230.
LaRose, R., & Eastin, M. S. (2004). A social cognitive 
theory of Internet uses and gratifications: Toward a new 
model of media attendance. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 48, 358–377.
LaRossa, R., & Reitzes, D. C. (1993). Symbolic interac­
tionism and family studies. In P. G. Boss, W. J. Doherty, 
R. LaRossa, W. R. Schumm, & S. K. Steinmetz (Eds.), 
Sourcebook of family theories and methods: A con­
textual approach (pp. 135–163). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Lash, S. (2007). Power after hegemony: Cultural studies in 
mutation. Theory, Culture, & Society, 24, 55–78.
Lasswell, H. D. (1948). The structure and function of com­
munication in society. In L. Bryson (Ed.), The commu­
nication of ideas: A series of addresses (pp. 215–228). 
New York, NY: Harper.
Lather, J., & Moyer-Guse, E. (2011). How do we react 
when our favorite characters are taken away? An ex­
amination of a temporary parasocial breakup. Mass 
Communication & Society, 14(2), 196–215.
Lavelle, J. J., Rupp, D. E., & Brockner, J. (2007). Taking 
a multifoci approach to the study of justice, social ex­
change, and citizenship behavior: The target similarity 
model. Journal of Management, 33, 841–866.
Lawrence, R. G., & Schafer, M. L. (2012). Debunking 
Sarah Palin: Mainstream news coverage of “death 
panels.” Journalism Quarterly, 13, 766–782.
Lea, M., & Spears R. (1992). Paralanguage and social per­
ception in computer-mediated communication. Journal 
of Organizational Computing, 2, 321–341.
LeBaron, M. (2003). Culture-based negotiation styles. 
Retrieved from http://www.beyondintractability.org
/essay/culture_negotiation 
Lee, C., & Niederdeppe, J. (2011). Genre-specific cultiva­
tion effects: Lagged associations between overall TV 
viewing, local TV news viewing, and fatalistic beliefs 
about cancer prevention. Communication Research, 
38(6), 731–753.
Lee, F., & DeMarco, D. (2016). Storytelling/narrative 
theory to address health communication with minority 
populations. Applied Nursing Research, 30, 58–60.
Lee, M. J., Bichard, S. L., Irey, M. S., Walt, H. M., & 
Carlson, A. J. (2009). Television viewing and ethnic 
stereotypes: Do college students form stereotypical per­
ceptions of ethnic groups as a result of heavy television 
consumption? Howard Journal of Communications, 
20(1), 95–110.
Leeds-Hurwitz, W. (1990). Notes on the history of intercul­
tural communication: The foreign service institute and 
the mandate for intercultural training. Quarterly Journal 
of Speech, 76, 262–281.
Leinaweaver, J. (2012). On becoming a global human: 
CMM, international adoption, and the global burden 
of self. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-Yoshida, & P. V. 
Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, facilitative, and in­
terpretive practice of the Coordinated Management 
of Meaning (pp. 173–190). Madison, NJ: Farleigh 
Dickinson University Press.
Lemin, D. (2010). Public opinion in the social media era: 
Toward a new understanding of the spiral of silence. 
Ann Arbor, MI: ProQuest Publishing.
Lester, J. (2008). Performing gender in the workplace: Gen­
der socialization, power, and identity among women 
faculty members. Community College Review, 35, 
277–305.
Leung, L., & Wei, R. (2000). More than just talk on the 
move: Uses and gratifications of the cellular phone. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 77, 
308–320.

R-24     References
Levine, T. R., Anders, L. N., Banas, J., Baum, K. L., Endo, 
K., Hu, A. D. S., & Wong, C. H. (2000). Norms, ex­
pectations, and deception: A norm violation model of 
veracity judgments. Communication Monographs, 67, 
123–137.
Levine, T. R., Sang-Yeon Kim, & Ferrara, M. (2010). So­
cial exchange, uncertainty, and communication content 
as factors impacting the relational outcomes of betrayal. 
Human Communication, 13(4), 303–318.
Levinson, P. (2000). McLuhan and media ecology. In Proceed­
ings of the Media Ecology Association, Vol. 1. Retrieved 
from http://www.media-ecology.org/publications/MEA
_proceedings/v1/McLuhan_and_media_ecology.html
Levinson, P. (2001). Digital McLuhan: A guide to the infor­
mation millennium. London: Routledge.
Lev-On, A. (2012). Communication, community, crisis: 
Mapping uses and gratifications in the contemporary 
media environment. New Media & Society, 14(1), 
98–116.
Levy, M., & Windahl, S. (1985). The concept of audi­
ence activity. In P. L. Palmgreen, L. A. Wenner, & K. 
E. Rosengren (Eds.), Media gratifications research: 
Current perspectives (pp. 109–122). Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage.
Lewis, J., & Morgan, M. (2001). He may not be a lib­
eral but he plays one on TV: Imagining the ideology 
of President Clinton. The Communication Review, 4, 
327–346.
Leysan Khakimova, L., Zhang, Y., & Hall, J. A. (2012). 
Conflict management styles: The role of ethnic iden­
tity and self-construal among young male Arabs and 
Americans. Journal of Intercultural Communication 
Research, 41, 37–57.
Lim, J. (2011). First-level and second-level intermedia 
agenda-setting among major news websites. Asian Jour­
nal of Communication, 21(2), 167–185.
Lim, S. S., Vadrevu, S., Chan, Y. H., & Basnyat, I. (2012). 
Facework on Facebook: The online publicness of juve­
nile delinquents and youths-at-risk. Journal of Broad­
casting & Electronic Media, 56, 346–361.
Lim, T., & Bowers, J. W. (1991). Facework, solidarity, ap­
probation, and tact. Human Communication Research, 
176, 415–450.
Lin, C. A., & Salwen, M. B. (1997). Predicting the spiral 
of silence on a controversial issue. Howard Journal of 
Communications, 8, 129–141.
Linder, E. W. (2012). Yearbook of Canadian and American 
churches. Nashville, TN: Abingdon Press.
Lingle, J. H., & Ostrom, T. M. (1981). Principles of memory 
and cognition in attitude formation. In R. E. Petty, T. M. 
Ostrom, & T. C. Brock (Eds.), Cognitive responses in 
persuasive communications (pp. 399–420). New York, 
NY: McGraw-Hill.
Lipp, D. (2013). Disney U: How Disney University devel­
ops the most engaged, loyal, and customer-centric em­
ployees. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Lippmann, W. (1922). Public opinion. New York, NY: 
Harcourt Brace.
Liska, C., Petrun, E. L., Sellnow, T. L., & Seeger, M. W. 
(2012). Chaos theory, self-organization, and industrial 
accidents: Crisis communication in the Kingston coal ash 
spill. Southern Communication Journal, 77(3), 180–197.
Littlejohn, S. W., & Foss, K. A. (2011). Theories of human 
communication, 10th ed. Long Grove, IL: Waveland 
Press.
Littlejohn, S., & Foss, K. (2008). Theories of human 
communication, 9th ed. Boston, MA: Cengage/
Wadsworth.
Liu, J. (2006). A cross-national and double-sided test of 
‘spiral of silence’ theory: Culture, governmental form 
and personality. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the International Communication Association, San 
Francisco, CA.
Loehwing, M., & Motter, J. (2012). Cultures of circulation: 
Utilizing co-cultures and counterpublics in intercul­
tural new media research. China Media Research, 8(4), 
29–38.
Logan, R. K. (2011). McLuhan misunderstood: Setting 
the record straight. International Journal of McLuhan 
Studies, 1, 27–47.
Long, E. (1989). Feminism and cultural studies. Critical 
Studies in Mass Communication, 6, 427–435.
Longley, J., & Pruitt, D. G. (1980). Groupthink: A critique 
of Janis’ theory. Review of Personality and Social Psy­
chology, 1, 74–93.
Lord, C. (1994). The intention of Aristotle’s Rhetoric. 
In E. Schiappa (Ed.), Landmark essays on clas­
sical Greek rhetoric (pp. 157–168). Davis, CA: 
Hermagoras Press.
Lovejoy, K., & Saxton, G. D. (2012). Information, commu­
nity, and action: How nonprofit organizations use social 
media. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communication, 
17, 337–353.
Loveland, M. T., & Popescu, D. (2011). Democracy on the 
web. Information, Communication & Society, 14(5), 
684–703.

References     R-25
Lucaites, J. L., & Condit, C. M. (1985). Reconstructing 
narrative theory: A functional perspective. Journal of 
Communication, 35, 9–108.
Lucas, K., & Sherry, J. L. (2004). Sex differences in video 
game play: A communication-based explanation. Com­
munication Research, 31, 499–523.
Lucas, K., & Steimel, S. J. (2009). Creating and responding 
to the gen(d)eralized other: Women miners’ commu­
nity-constructed identities. Women’s Studies in Com­
munication, 32(3), 320–347.
Lull, J. (1982). How families select television programs: A 
mass-observational study. Journal of Broadcasting, 26, 
801–811.
Lum, C. M. K. (2006). Notes toward an intellectual history 
of media ecology. In C. M. K. Lum (Ed.), Perspectives 
on culture, technology, and communication: The media 
ecology tradition (pp. 1–60). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.
Lusch, R. F., Brown, J. R., & O’Brien, M. (2011). Protect­
ing relational assets: A pre and post field study of a hori­
zontal business combination. Journal of the Academy of 
Marketing Science, 39(2), 175–197.
Lustig, M. & Koester, J. (2013). Intercultural competence. 
New York, NY: Pearson.
Lyman, S. M. (1990). Civilization: Contents, discontents, 
malcontents, and other essays in social theory. Fayette­
ville, AK: University of Arkansas.
MacCabe, C. (2008). An interview with Stuart Hall, 
December 2007. Critical Quarterly, 50, 12–42.
Macdonald, D. (1967). He has looted all culture. . . . In G. 
Stearn (Ed.), McLuhan: Hot and cool (pp. 56–77). New 
York, NY: Dial.
MacIntyre, A. (1981). After virtue: A study in moral theory. 
Notre Dame, IN: University of Notre Dame Press.
MacKinnon, B. (2012). Ethics: Theory and contemporary 
issues. Boston, MA: Cengage.
Maier, S. (2010). All the news fit to post? Comparing news 
content on the web to newspapers, television, and radio. 
Journalism & Mass Communication Quarterly, 87(3), 
548–562.
Maity, S. K., Gupta, A., Goyal, P., & Mukherjee, A. 
(2015). A stratified learning approach for predicting 
the popularity of Twitter idioms. In Proceedings of the 
International Conference on weblogs and social media 
(pp. 642–645). Palo Alto, CA: Association for the 
Advancement of Artificial Intelligence.
Mandziuk, R. M. (2003). Commemorating Sojourner Truth: 
Negotiating the politics of race and gender in the spaces 
of public memory. Western Journal of Communication, 
67, 271–291.
Manwell, L. A. (2010). In denial of democracy: Social psy­
chological implications for public discourse on state 
crimes against democracy post-9/11. American Behav­
ioral Scientist, 53(6), 848–884.
Marchand, M. (1989). Marshall McLuhan: The medium 
and the messenger. New York, NY: Ticknor & Fields.
Markey, P. M., & Markey, C. N. (2007). Romantic ideals, 
romantic obtainment, and relationship experiences: The 
complementarity of interpersonal traits among romantic 
partners. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
24, 517–533.
Marlow, M. L., & Giles, H. (2013). “I don’t know how 
to speak so I just stay silent”: Uncertainty manage­
ment among Chinese immigrant women seeking 
health care in the United States. In F. Sharifian & M. 
Jamarani (Eds.), Language and intercultural com­
munication in the new era (pp. 245–262). New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Marrs, P. (2012). Taming the lizard: Transforming con­
versations-gone-bad at work. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-
Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, fa­
cilitative, and interpretive practice of the Coordinated 
Management of Meaning (pp. 77–94). Madison, NJ: 
Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Marsh, C. (2006). Aristotelian ethos and the new morality: 
Implications for media literacy and media ethics. Jour­
nal of Mass Media Ethics, 21, 338–352.
Martin, J. (2012). “That’s how we do things around here”: 
Organizational culture (and change) in libraries. Re­
trieved from http://www.inthelibrarywiththeleadpipe
.org/2012/thats-how-we-do-things-around-here/
Martin, J. N., & Nakayama, T. K. (2011). Experiencing 
intercultural communication: An introduction, 4th ed. 
New York, NY: McGraw Hill.
Martins, L. L., & Shalley, C. E. (2011). Creativity in virtual 
work: Effects of demographic differences. Small Group 
Research, 42, 536–561.
Martins, N., & Harrison, K. (2012). Racial and gender dif­
ferences in the relationship between children’s televi­
sion use and self-esteem: A longitudinal panel study. 
Communication Research, 39(3), 338–357.
Marx, K. (1963). The communist manifesto of Karl Marx 
and Friedrich Engels. New York, NY: Russell & 
Russell.
Marx, K., & Engels, F. (1848). The Communist manifesto. 
New York, NY: Penguin Books.

R-26     References
Matheson, C. (2001). The Simpsons and philosophy: The 
d’oh! of Homer. Ottawa, IL: Open Court.
Matsumoto, D. R., Frank, M. G., & Hwang, H. S. (2013). 
Nonverbal communication: Science and applications. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Matz, D. C., & Wood, W. (2005). Cognitive dissonance in 
groups: The consequences of disagreement. Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 1–22.
May, A., & Tenzek, K. E. (2011). Seeking Mrs. Right: Un­
certainty reduction in online surrogacy ads. Qualitative 
Research Reports in Communication, 12(1), 27–33.
May, S. (2012). Case studies in organizational communi­
cation: Ethical perspectives and practices. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
McAulliff, B. D., & Kovera, M. B. (2012). Do jurors get 
what they expect? Traditional versus alternative forms 
of children’s testimony. Psychology, Crime & Law, 18, 
27–47.
McBride, C., & Toller, P. (2011). Negotiation of face 
between bereaved parents and their social networks. 
Southern Communication Journal, 76, 210–229.
McCartha, M., & Strauman, E. C. (2009). Fallen stars 
and strategic redemption: A narrative analysis of the 
National Enquirer. Florida Communication Journal, 
37(2), 71–82.
McClish, G. (2007). A man of feeling, a man of colour: 
James Forten and the rise of African American delibera­
tive rhetoric. Rhetorica, 25, 297–328.
McClure, K. (2009). Resurrecting the Narrative Paradigm: 
Identification and the case of Young Earth Creationism. 
Rhetoric Society Quarterly, 39(2), 189–211.
McCombs, M. E. (2004). Setting the agenda: The mass 
media and public opinion. Cambridge, UK: Polity.
McCombs, M. E., & Bell, T. (1996). The agenda-setting 
role of mass communication. In M. B. Salwen & D. W. 
Stacks (Eds.), An integrated approach to communica­
tion theory and research (pp. 93–110). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1972). The agenda-set­
ting function of mass media. Public Opinion Quarterly, 
36(2), 176–187.
McCombs, M. E., & Shaw, D. L. (1993). The evolution of 
agenda-setting research: Twenty-five years in the mar­
ketplace of ideas. Journal of Communication, 43(2), 
58–67.
McCombs, M., & Funk, M. (2011). Shaping the agenda of 
local daily newspapers: A methodology merging the 
agenda setting and community structure perspectives. 
Mass Communication & Society, 14(6), 905–919.
McDevitt, M., Kiousis, S., & Wahl-Jorgensen, K. (2003). 
Spiral of moderation: Opinion expression in computer-
mediated discussion. International Journal of Public 
Opinion Research, 15, 454–471.
McEwan, T., & Guerrero, L. K. (2012). Maintenance be­
havior and relationship quality as predictors of perceived 
availability of resources in newly formed college friend­
ship networks. Communication Studies, 63, 421–440.
McGloin, R., & Nowak, K. (2011). Using Expectancy 
Violations Theory to explain the effect of avatars on 
purchase intention and the uncanny valley. Paper pre­
sented at the annual meeting of the International Com­
munication Association, Boston, MA.
McGuire, T. (2010). From emotions to spirituality: 
“Spiritual labor” as the commodification, codification, 
and regulation of organizational members’ spirituality. 
Management 
Communication 
Quarterly, 
24(1), 
74–103.
McKinney, D. H., & Donaghy, W. C. (1993). Dyad gen­
der structure, uncertainty reduction, and self-disclosure 
during initial interaction. In P. Kalbfleish (Ed.), 
Interpersonal communication: Evolving interpersonal 
relationships (pp. 33–50). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
McLaughlin, H., Uggen, C., & Blackstone, A. (2012). Sex­
ual harassment, workplace authority, and the paradox of 
power. American Sociological Review, 77, 625–647.
McLaughlin, C., & Vitak, J. (2012). Norm evolution 
and violation on Facebook. New Media & Society, 14, 
299–315.
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy. New York, 
NY: Mentor.
McLuhan, M. (1964). Understanding media. New York, 
NY: Mentor.
McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1967). The medium is the mas­
sage: An inventory of effects. New York, NY: Bantam 
Books.
McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1968). War and peace in the 
global village. New York, NY: Bantam Books.
McLuhan, M., & Fiore, Q. (1996). The medium is the 
massage: An inventory of effects. San Francisco, CA: 
HardWired.
McLuhan, M., & McLuhan, E. (1988). Laws of media: The 
new science. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.
McLuhan, M., & Nevitt, B. (1972). Take today: The execu­
tive as dropout. New York, NY: Harper & Row.

References     R-27
McLuhan, M., & Parker, H. (1969). Counterblast. New 
York, NY: Harcourt, Brace & World.
McLuhan’s relevance in today’s media mess age. Saturday­
Post. Retrieved from http://www.siliconvalleywatcher
.com/mt/archives/2011/07/the_importance_2.php 
McMillan, K., & Albrecht, S. (2010). Measuring social 
exchange constructs in organizations. Communication 
Methods and Measures, 4(3), 201–220.
McPhee, R., Poole, M. S., & Iverson, J. (2014). Structura­
tion theory. In L. L. Putnam & D. Mumby (Eds.), The 
SAGE handbook of organizational communication: Ad­
vances in theory, research, and methods (pp. 75–100). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
McPherson, M. B., & Liang, Y. (2007). Students’ reactions 
to teachers’ management of compulsive communica­
tors. Communication Education, 56, 18–33.
McQuail, D. (1984). With the benefits of hindsight: Reflec­
tions on uses and gratifications research. Critical Stud­
ies in Mass Communication, 1, 177–193.
McQuail, D., Blumler, J. G., & Brown, J. (1972). The tele­
vision audience: A revised perspective. In D. McQuail 
(Ed.), Sociology of mass communication (pp. 135–165). 
Harmondsworth, UK: Penguin Books.
Mead, G. H. (1934). Mind, self and society: From the stand­
point of a social behaviorist. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Meisenbach, R. J., Remke, R. V., Buzzanell, P. M., & Liu, 
M. (2008). “They allowed”: Pentadic mapping of wom­
en’s maternity leave discourse as organizational rheto­
ric. Communication Monographs, 75, 1–24.
Meraz, S. (2011). Using time series analysis to measure in­
termedia agenda-setting influence in traditional media 
and political blog networks. Journalism & Mass Com­
munication Quarterly, 88(1), 176–194.
Merritt, B. D. (1991). Bill Cosby: TV auteur? Journal of 
Popular Culture, 24, 89–102.
Messersmith, A., Keyton, J., & Bisel, R. B. (2009). Teach­
ing organizational culture: Orientations on discourse 
and culture. Communication Teacher, 23, 81–86.
Metts, S., & Lamb, E. (2006). Methodological ap­
proaches to the study of family communication. In 
L. H. Turner & R. West (Eds.), The family commu­
nication sourcebook (pp. 83–108). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Metzger, M. J. (2004). Privacy, trust, and disclosure: Ex­
ploring barriers to electronic commerce. Journal of 
Computer-Mediated Communication, 9, 204–223.
Meyer, J. R. (2011). Regretted messages: Cognitive ante­
cedents and post hoc reflection. Journal of Language & 
Social Psychology, 30(4), 376–395.
Meyer, M. D. E. (2003). “It’s me. I’m it”: Defining adoles­
cent sexual identity through relational dialectics in Daw­
son’s Creek. Communication Quarterly, 51, 262–280.
Meyrowitz, J. (1985). No sense of place. New York, NY: 
Oxford University Press.
Miceli, M., Near, J., Rehg, M., and Van Scotter, J. (2012). 
Predicting employee reactions to perceived organiza­
tional wrongdoing: Demoralization, proactive personal­
ity, and whistle-blowing. Human Relations, 65, 923–954.
Miike, Y. (2007). An Asiacentric reflection on Eurocentric 
bias in communication theory. Communication Mono­
graphs, 74, 272–278.
Mikucki-Enyart, S. (2011). Parent-in-law privacy manage­
ment: An examination of the links among relational un­
certainty, topic avoidance, in-group status, and in-law 
satisfaction. Journal of Family Communication, 11(4), 
237–263.
Milkie, M. A. (1999). Social comparisons, reflected ap­
praisals, and mass media: The impact of pervasive 
beauty images on Black and White girls’ self-concepts. 
Social Psychology Quarterly, 62, 190–210.
Miller, A., & Roberts, S. (2010). Visual agenda-setting 
and proximity after Hurricane Katrina: A study of those 
closest to the event. Visual Communication Quarterly, 
17(1), 31–46.
Miller, G. R. (1981). Tis the season to be jolly: A yule-tide 
1980 assessment of communication research. Human 
Communication Research, 7, 371–377.
Miller, G. R., & Steinberg, M. (1975). Between people: A 
new analysis of interpersonal communication. Chicago, 
IL: Science Research Associates.
Miller, K. (2005). Communication theories: Perspectives, 
processes, and contexts. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Miller, K. (2009). Organizational communication. Boston, 
MA: Sage.
Millhous, L. M. (2004). Projected measures of motivation 
and media choice. Communication Research Reports, 
21, 154–163.
Min, S., & Kim, Y. M. (2012). Choosing the right media for 
mobilization: Issue advocacy groups’ media niches in 
the competitive media environment. Mass Communica­
tion and Society, 15(2), 225–244.
Minnebo, J., & Eggermont, S. (2007). Watching the 
young use illicit drugs: Direct experience, exposure 

R-28     References
to television and the stereotyping of adolescents’ sub­
stance use. Young, 15, 129–144.
Minnebo, J., & Van Acker, A. (2004). Does television in­
fluence adolescents’ perceptions of and attitudes toward 
people with mental illness? Journal of Community Psy­
chology, 32, 257–275.
Modaff, D. P., Butler, J. A., & DeWine, S. (2011). Orga­
nizational communication: Foundations, challenges 
and misunderstandings. Boston, MA: Pearson/Allyn & 
Bacon.
Molnar, G., & Kelly, J. (2012). Sport, exercise, and social 
theory: An introduction. New York, NY: Routledge.
Monge, P. R. (1973). Theory construction in the study of 
communication: The system paradigm. Journal of Com­
munication, 23, 5–16.
Monge, P. R., & Contractor, N. (2003). Theories of com­
munication networks. Oxford: University Press.
Mongeau, P. A., & Henningsen, M. L. (2008). Stage theo­
ries of relationship development. In L. A. Baxter & 
D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories in interpersonal 
communication (pp. 363–376). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mongeau, P. A., Jacobsen, J., & Donnerstein, C. (2007). 
Defining dates and first date goals: Generalizing 
from undergraduates to single adults. Communication 
Research, 34, 526–527. 
Moniz, R. J. (2011). Communicating who we are: The the­
ory of organizational culture in the workplace. NASSP 
Bulletin, 96, 228–242.
Montgomery, E. (2004). Tortured families: A Coordinated 
Management of Meaning analysis. Family Process, 43, 
349–372. 
Moody, M. (2011). A rhetorical analysis of the meaning 
of the “independent woman” in the lyrics and videos 
of male and female rappers. American Communication 
Journal, 13(1), 43–58.
Moon, D. (2008). Concepts of “culture”: Implications for in­
tercultural communication research. In M. K. Asante, Y. 
Miike, & J. Yin (Eds.), The global intercultural commu­
nication reader (pp. 11–26). New York, NY: Routledge.
Moon, H., Quigley, N., & Marr, J. C. (2012). How inter­
personal motives explain the influence of organizational 
culture on organizational productivity, creativity, and 
adaptation: The ambidextrous interpersonal motives 
(AIM) model of organizational culture. Organizational 
Psychology Review, 2, 109–128.
Moon, S., & Nelson, M. R. (2008). Exploring the influ­
ence of media exposure and cultural values on Korean 
immigrants’ advertising evaluations. International 
Journal of Advertising, 27, 299–330. 
Moore, J., & Mattson-Lauters, A. (2009). Coordinated 
management of meaning: Do established rules aid in 
chat room experiences? American Communication 
Journal, 11, 1–35.
Moran, R. (1996). Artifice and persuasion: The work of 
metaphor in the Rhetoric. In A. O. Rorty (Ed.), Essays 
on Aristotle’s Rhetoric (pp. 385–398). Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Morgan, M. (1986). Television and the erosion of regional 
diversity. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
30, 123–129.
Morgan, M., & Shanahan, J. (2010). The state of cultiva­
tion. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
54(2), 337–355.
Morris, M., & Ogan, C. (1996). The Internet as mass me­
dium. Journal of Communication, 46, 39–50.
Morrison, E. W. (2002). Information seeking within or­
ganizations. Human Communication Research, 28, 
229–242.
Morrison, J. C. (2006). Marshall McLuhan: The mod­
ern Janus. In C. M. K. Lum (Ed.), Perspectives 
on culture, technology, and communication: The 
media ecology tradition (pp. 163–200). Cresskill, 
NJ: Hampton.
Motley, M. T. (1990). On whether one can(not) not commu­
nicate: An examination via traditional communication 
postulates. Western Journal of Speech Communication, 
54, 1–20.
Mulrine, A. (2008, June 2). To battle groupthink, the Army 
trains a skeptics corps. U.S. News & World Report, 
30, 32.
Mumby, D. (2011). Reframing difference in organizational 
communication studies: Research, pedagogy, and 
practice. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Mumby, D. K., & May, S. (2005). Introduction: Thinking 
about engagement. In S. May & D. K. Mumby (Eds.), 
Engaging organizational theory & research (pp. 1–14). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Muraco, A., & Fredriksen-Goldsen, K. I. (2011). That’s 
what friends do: Informal caregiving for chronically ill 
lesbian, gay and bisexual elders. Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 28, 1073–1092.
Murdock, G. (1989). Cultural studies: Missing links. 
Critical 
Studies 
in 
Mass 
Communication, 
6, 
436–440.

References     R-29
Murray, J. (2003). An other-Burkean frame: Rhetorical 
criticism and the call of the other. Communication Stud­
ies, 54, 169–187.
Murray, D. S. (2012). Interactional logics: Moving CMM 
forward by looking back. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-
Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, fa­
cilitative, and interpretive practice of the Coordinated 
Management of Meaning (pp. 153–172). Madison, NJ: 
Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Muthusamy, S. K., & White, M. A. (2005). Learning and 
knowledge transfer in strategic alliances: A social ex­
change view. Organization Studies, 26, 415–441.
Mutz, D. C., & Nir, L. (2010). Not necessarily the news: 
Does fictional television influence real-world policy 
preferences? Mass Communication and Society, 13(2), 
196–217.
Myers, S. A., & Anderson, C. M. (2008). The fundamentals of 
small group communication. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Nakayama, T. K., & Krizek, R. L. (1995). Whiteness: A 
strategic rhetoric. Quarterly Journal of Speech, 81, 
291–309.
Neel, J. (1994). Aristotle’s voice: Rhetoric, theory and writ­
ing in America. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois Uni­
versity Press.
Neel, J. (2013). Aristotle’s voice: Rhetoric, theory, and 
writing in America. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois 
University.
Neff, G., Jordan, T., McVeigh-Schultz, T., & Gillespie, T. 
(2012). Affordances, technical agency, and the politics 
of technologies of cultural production. Journal of Elec­
tronic & Broadcasting Media, 56, 299–313.
Neill, S. (2009). The alternative channel: How social media 
is challenging the spiral of silence theory in GLBT com­
munities of color. Unpublished Master’s thesis. Ameri­
can University, Washington, DC.
Nelson, C. (1989). Writing as the accomplice of language: 
Kenneth Burke and poststructuralism. In H. W. Simons & 
T. Melia (Eds.), The legacy of Kenneth Burke (pp. 156–
173). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin Press.
Neuliep, J. W. (2012). The relationship among intercultural 
communication apprehension, ethnocentrism, uncer­
tainty reduction, and communication satisfaction during 
initial intercultural interaction: An extension of anxiety 
and uncertainty management (AUM) theory. Journal of 
Intercultural Communication Research, 41(1), 1–16.
Neuliep, J. W., & Grohskopf, E. L. (2000). Uncertainty re­
duction and communication satisfaction during initial 
interaction: An initial test and replication of a new 
axiom. Communication Reports, 13, 67–77.
Neuwirth, K., Frederick, E., & Mayo, C. (2007). The spiral 
of silence and fear of isolation. Journal of Communica­
tion, 57, 450–468.
Newcomb, H. (1978). Assessing the violence profile stud­
ies of Gerbner and Gross: A humanistic critique and 
suggestion. Communication Research, 5, 264–283.
Nichols, M. H. (1952). Kenneth Burke and the new rheto­
ric. The Quarterly Journal of Speech, 38, 133–134.
Nichols, W. L. (2012). Deception versus privacy manage­
ment in discussions of sexual history. Atlantic Journal 
of Communication, 20(2), 101–115.
Nicolini, D. (2013). Practice theory, work, and organiza­
tion: An introduction. New York, NY: Oxford Univer­
sity Press.
Niederdeppe, J., Fowler, E. F., Goldstein, K., & Pribble, 
J. (2010). Does local television news coverage cultivate 
fatalistic beliefs about cancer prevention? Journal of 
Communication, 60(2), 230–253.
Nkomo, S. M., & Cox, T. (1996). Diverse identities in 
organizations. In S. R. Clegg, C. Hardy, & W. R. 
Nord (Eds.), Handbook of organizational studies 
(pp. 338–356). London: Sage.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1983). The effect of media on media ef­
fects research. Journal of Communication, 33, 157–165.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1984). The spiral of silence: Public 
opinion—our social skin. Chicago, IL: University of 
Chicago Press.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1985). The spiral of silence—A re­
sponse. In K. R. Sanders, L. L. Kaid, & D. D. Nimmo 
(Eds.), Political communication year-book, 1984 (pp. 43–
65). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1991). The theory of public opinion: 
The concept of the spiral of silence. In J. A. Anderson 
(Ed.), Communication yearbook 14 (pp. 256–287). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Noelle-Neumann, E. (1993). The spiral of silence: Pub­
lic opinion—our social skin, 2nd ed. Chicago, IL: 
University of Chicago Press.
Noelle-Neumann, E., & Petersen, T. (2004). The spiral of 
silence and the social nature of man. In L. L. Kaid (Ed.), 
Handbook of political communication (pp. 339–356). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Nomai, A. J., & Dionisopoulos, G. N. (2002). Framing the 
Cubas narrative: The American Dream and the capitalist 
reality. Communication Studies, 53, 97–111.

R-30     References
Northup, T. (2010). Is everyone a little bit racist? Exploring 
cultivation using implicit and explicit measures. South­
western Mass Communication Journal, 26(1), 29–41.
Norwood, K. M., & Baxter, L. A. (2011). ‘Dear birth 
mother’: Addressivity and meaning-making in online 
adoption-seeking letters. Journal of Family Communi­
cation, 11(3), 198–217.
O’Brien Hallstein, D. L. (1999). A postmodern caring: 
Feminist standpoint theories, revisioned caring and 
communication ethics. Western Journal of Communica­
tion, 63, 32–56.
O’Brien Hallstein, D. L. (2000). Where standpoint stands 
now: An introduction and commentary. Women’s Stud­
ies in Communication, 23, 1–15.
O’Leary, C. M. (1997). Counteridentification or counter­
hegemony? Transforming feminist standpoint theory. 
Women and Politics, 18, 45–72.
O’Neill, B. S., & Arendt, L. A. (2008). Psychological cli­
mate and work attitudes: The importance of telling the 
right story. Journal of Leadership & Organizational 
Studies, 14, 353–370.
Oetzel, J. G., Ting-Toomey, S., Yokochi, Y., Masumoto, 
T., & Takai, J. (2000). A typology of facework behav­
iors in conflicts with best friends and relative strangers. 
Communication Quarterly, 48, 397–419.
Oetzel, J., Ting-Toomey, S., Chew-Sanchez, M. I., Harris, 
R., Wilcox, R., & Stumpf, S. (2003). Face and facework 
in conflicts with parents and siblings: A cross-cultural 
comparison of Germans, Japanese, Mexicans, and 
U.S. Americans. Journal of Family Communication, 3, 
67–93.
Olsen, T. (1978). Silences. New York, NY: Delacorte Press.
On the importance of public opinion. Retrieved from http://
www.motherjones.com/kevin-drum/2011/03/importance
-public-opinion 
Ono, K. A. (2011). Critical: A finer edge. Communication 
& Critical/Cultural Studies, 8(1), 93–96.
Orbe, M. P. (1998). Constructing co-cultural theory: An ex­
plication of culture, power, and communication. Thou­
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Orbe, M. P. (2005). Continuing the legacy of theorizing 
from the margins: Conceptualizations of co-cultural 
theory. Women and Language, 28(2), 65–66.
Ortiz, M., & Behm-Morawitz, E. (2015). Latinos’ percep­
tions of intergroup relations in the United States: The 
cultivation of group-based attitudes and beliefs from 
English- and Spanish-language television. Journal of 
Social Issues, 71, 90–105.
Ott, B. (2003). “I’m Bart Simpson, who the hell are you?” 
A study in postmodern identity (re)construction. Jour­
nal of Popular Culture, 37, 56–82.
Out at the New York Times: Gays, lesbians, AIDS, and 
homophobia inside America’s paper of record. Re­
trieved from http://www.huffingtonpost.com/2012
/11/28/new-york-times-gays-lesbians-aids-homophobia
_n_2200684.html
Owlett, J. S., Richards, K., Wilson, S. R., DeFreese, J. D., & 
Roberts, F. (2015). Privacy management in the military 
family during deployment: Adolescents’ perspectives. 
Journal of Family Communication, 15, 141–158.
Pacanowsky, M. E. (1983). A small town cop. In L. L. 
Putnam & M. E. Pacanowsky (Eds.), Communication 
and organizations: An interpretive approach (pp. 261–
282). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Pacanowsky, M. E. (1989). Creating and narrating orga­
nizational realities. In B. Dervin, L. Grossberg, B. J. 
O’Keefe, & E. Wartella (Eds.), Rethinking communica­
tion (pp. 250–257). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Pacanowsky, M. E., & O’Donnell-Trujillo, N. (1982). 
Communication and organizational cultures. Western 
Journal of Speech Communication, 46, 115–130.
Pacanowsky, M. E., & O’Donnell-Trujillo, N. (1983). Or­
ganizational communication as cultural performance. 
Communication Monographs, 50, 127–147.
Pacanowsky, M. E., & O’Donnell-Trujillo, N. (1990). 
Communication and organizational cultures. In S. R. 
Corman, S. P. Banks, C. R. Bantz, & M. E. Mayer 
(Eds.), Foundations of organizational communication: 
A reader (pp. 142–153). New York, NY: Longman.
Pachirat, T. (2013). Ethnography and interpretation. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Pais, S. (1997). Asian Indian families in America. In 
M. K. DeGenova (Ed.), Families in cultural context 
(pp. 173–190). Mountain View, CA: Mayfield.
Palmieri, C., Prestano, K., Gandley, R., Overton, E., & 
Zhang, Q. (2012). The Facebook phenomenon: Online 
self-disclosure and uncertainty reduction. China Media 
Research, 8(1), 48–53.
Papa, M. J., Daniels, T. D., & Spiker, B. K. (2008).Orga­
nizational communication: Perspectives and trends. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Papacharissi, Z., & Rubin, A. M. (2000). Predictors of In­
ternet use. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
44, 175–196.
Parker, B. J., & Plank, R. E. (2000). A uses and gratifica­
tions perspective on the Internet as a new information 
source. American Business Review, 18, 43.

References     R-31
Parkes, D. (2011) Making dialogic or relational conver­
sations in formal workplace mentoring relationships. 
Unpublished doctoral dissertation. Fielding Graduate 
University, Santa Barbara, CA.
Parks, M., & Adelman, M. (1983). Communication net­
works and the development of romantic relationships: 
An expansion of uncertainty reduction theory. Human 
Communication Research, 10, 55–80.
Patton, T. O. (2004). Reflections of a Black woman profes­
sor: Racism and sexism in academia. Howard Journal 
of Communications, 15, 185–200.
Pearce, K. (2012). Living into very bad news: The use of 
CMM as spiritual practice. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-
Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, fa­
cilitative, and interpretive practice of the Coordinated 
Management of Meaning (pp. 277–294). Madison, NJ: 
Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Pearce, W. B. (1989). Communication and the human condi­
tion. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.
Pearce, W. B. (1994). Interpersonal communication: Mak­
ing social worlds. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Pearce, W. B. (1995). A sailing guide for social construc­
tionists. In W. Leeds-Hurwitz (Ed.), Social approaches 
to communication (pp. 88–112). New York, NY: 
Guilford Press.
Pearce, W. B. (2005). The Coordinated Management of 
Meaning (CMM). In W. B. Gudykunst (Ed.), Theorizing 
about intercultural communication (pp. 35–54). Thou­
sand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications.
Pearce, W. B. (2012). Evolution and transformation: 
A brief history of CMM and a meditation on what 
using does to us. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-Yoshida, & 
P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, facilitative, and 
interpretive practice of the Coordinated Manage­
ment of Meaning (pp. 1–22). Madison, NJ: Farleigh 
Dickinson University Press.
Pearce, W. B. (2007). Making social worlds: A communica­
tion perspective. Malden, MA: Blackwell.
Pearce, W. B., & Conklin, F. (1979). A model of hierar­
chical meanings in coherent conversation and a study 
of indirect responses. Communication Monographs, 46, 
75–87.
Pearce, W. B., & Cronen, V. E. (1980). Communication, 
action, and meaning: The creation of social realities. 
New York, NY: Praeger.
Pearce, W. B., Cronen, V. E., & Conklin, F. (1979). On 
what to look at when analyzing communication: A 
hierarchical model of actors’ meanings. Communica­
tion, 4, 195–220. 
Pearson, J. C. (1985, October). Innovation in teaching 
gender and communication: Excluding and including 
women and men. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the Organization for the Study of Communication, 
Language, and Gender, Lincoln, NE.
Pearson, J. C., & VanHorn, S. B. (2004). Communication 
and gender identity: A retrospective analysis. Commu­
nication Quarterly, 52, 284–299.
Pearson, J. C., West, R., & Turner, L. H. (1995). Gender 
and communication, 3rd ed. Madison, WI: Brown & 
Benchmark.
Perloff, R. M. (1993). The dynamics of persuasion. 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Perse, E. M., & Courtright, J. A. (1993). Normative images 
of communication media: Mass and interpersonal chan­
nels in the new media environment. Human Communi­
cation Research, 19, 485–503.
Perse, E. M., & Greenberg-Dunn, D. (1998). The utility of 
home computers and media use: Implications of mul­
timedia and connectivity. Journal of Broadcasting & 
Electronic Media, 42, 435.
Petersen, T. (2012). The enduring appeal of an unwieldy 
theory. International Journal of Public Opinion Re­
search, 24, 263–268. 
Peterson, I. (2002, August 14). Questions about germ sci­
entist after Princeton anthrax finding. New York Times, 
p. A21.
Petronio, S. (1991). Communication boundary manage­
ment: A theoretical model of managing disclosure of 
private information between married couples. Commu­
nication Theory, 1, 311–335.
Petronio, S. (2000). The boundaries of privacy: Praxis of 
everyday life. In S. Petronio (Ed.), Balancing the se­
crets of private disclosures (pp. 37–49). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum.
Petronio, S. (2002). Boundaries of privacy: Dialectics of 
disclosure. Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Petronio, S. (2004). Road to developing communication 
privacy management theory: Narrative in progress, 
please stand by. Journal of Family Communication, 4, 
193–207.
Petronio, S. (2010). Communication privacy manage­
ment theory: What do we know about family privacy 
regulation? Journal of Family Theory & Review, 2, 
175–196.
Petronio, S., & Martin, J. N. (1986). Ramifications of re­
vealing private information: A gender gap. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 42, 499–506.

R-32     References
Petronio, S., & Sargent, J. (2011). Disclosure predica­
ments arising during the course of patient care: Nurses’ 
privacy management. Health Communication, 26(3), 
255–266.
Petronio, S., Martin, J. N., & Littlefield, R. (1984). Pre­
requisite conditions for self-disclosing: A gender issue. 
Communication Monographs, 51, 268–273.
Philipsen, G. (1995). The Coordinated Management of 
Meaning theory of Pearce, Cronen, and associates. In 
D. Cushman & B. Kovacic (Eds.), Watershed traditions 
in human communication theory (pp. 13–43). Albany, 
NY: SUNY Press.
Placone, R. A., & Tumolo, M. (2011). Interrupting the 
machine: Cynic comedy in the “Rally for Sanity and/
or Fear.” Journal of Contemporary Rhetoric, 1(1), 
10–21.
Planalp, S. (1987). Interplay between relational knowledge 
and events. In R. Burnett, P. McGhee, & D. Clarke 
(Eds.), Accounting for relationships: Social represen­
tations of interpersonal links (pp. 173–191). London: 
Methuen.
Planalp, S., & Honeycutt, J. M. (1985). Events that increase 
uncertainty reduction in personal relationships. Human 
Communication Research, 11, 593–604.
Planalp, S., & Rivers, M. (1988). Changes in knowledge 
of relationships. Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the International Communication Association, New 
Orleans, LA.
Planalp, S., Rutherford, D. K., & Honeycutt, J. M. (1988). 
Events that increase uncertainty in personal relationships 
II: Replication and extension. Human Communication 
Research, 14, 516–547.
Poe, P. Z. (2012). Direct-to-consumer drug advertising 
and “Health media filters”: A qualitative study of older 
adult women’s responses to DTC ads. Atlantic Journal 
of Communication, 20(3), 185–199.
Polkosky, M. D. (2008). Machines as mediators: The 
challenge of technology for interpersonal theory and 
research. In E. A. Konijin, S. Utz, M. Tanis, & S. B. 
Barnes (Eds.), Mediated interpersonal communication 
(pp. 34–57). New York, NY: Routledge.
Poole, M. S. (1983). Review of Communication, action 
and meaning: The creation of social realities. Quarterly 
Journal of Speech, 69, 223–224.
Poole, M. S. (1990). Do we have any theories of group 
communication? Communication Studies, 41, 237–
247.
Poole, M. S. (2007). Generalization in process theories of 
communication. Communication Methods and Mea­
sures, 1, 1–10.
Poole, M. S., & DeSanctis, G. (1990). Understanding the 
use of group decision support systems: The theory 
of adaptive structuration. In J. Fulk & C. Steinfield 
(Eds.), Organizations and communication technology 
(pp. 175–195). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Poole, M. S., & McPhee, R. D. (2005). Structuration the­
ory. In S. May & D. K. Mumby (Eds.), Engaging orga­
nizational theory & research (pp. 171–195). Norwood, 
NJ: Ablex.
Poole, M. S., Seibold, D. R., & McPhee, R. D. (1986). A 
structurational approach to theory-building in group 
decision-making research. In R. Y. Hirokawa & M. 
S. Poole (Eds.), Communication and group decision-
making (pp. 237–264). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Poole, M. S., Seibold, D. R., & McPhee, R. D. (1996). The 
structuration of group decisions. In R. Hirokawa & 
M. S. Poole (Eds.), Communication and group decision 
making (pp. 114–146). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Popper, K. (1976). The myth of the framework. Boston 
Studies in the Philosophy of Science, 245, 35–62.
Postman, N. (1971). Teaching as a subversive activity. New 
York, NY: Delta.
Postman, N. (1992). Technopoly: The surrender of culture 
to technology. New York, NY: Knopf.
Potter, W. J. (1991). The relationships between first and 
second order measures of cultivation. Human Commu­
nication Research, 18, 92–113.
Potter, W. J. (1993). Cultivation theory and research: A 
conceptual critique. Human Communication Research, 
19, 564–601.
Practical followup. Retrieved from http://www.jopm.org
/opinion/editorials/2012/08/29/practical-followup
Preston, E. H. (1990). Pornography and the construction of 
gender. In N. Signorielli & M. Morgan (Eds.), Cultiva­
tion analysis: New directions in media effects research 
(pp. 107–122). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Prichard, P. (1987). The making of McPaper: The in­
side story of USA Today. Washington, DC: Andrews 
McMeel Publishing.
Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N. (2012). Can you connect 
with me now? How the presence of mobile communica­
tion technology influences face-to-face conversation 
quality. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
29, 1–10.

References     R-33
Punyanunt-Carter, N. (2007). Using attachment theory to 
study communication motives in father-daughter re­
lationships. Communication Research Reports, 24, 
311–318.
Quick, B. L. (2009). The effects of viewing Grey’s Anat­
omy on perceptions of doctors and patient satisfaction. 
Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 53(1), 
38–55.
Quinlan, M. M., Bates, B. R., Webb, J. B. (2012). Michelle 
Obama “got back”: (Re)defining (Counter) stereo­
types of Black females. Women & Language, 35(1), 
119–126.
Radway, J. (1984). Reading the romance: Women, patriar­
chy, and popular literature. Chapel Hill, NC: University 
of North Carolina Press. 
Radway, J. (1986). Identifying ideological seams: Mass 
culture, analytical methods, and political practice. Com­
munication, 9, 93–123.
Ragas, M. W., & Kiousis, S. (2010). Intermedia agenda-
setting and political activism: MoveOn.org and the 2008 
presidential election. Mass Communication & Society, 
13(5), 560–583.
Ramirez, A., Jr., & Walther, J. B. (2009). Information 
seeking and interpersonal outcomes using the Inter­
net. In T. D. Afifi & W. A. Afifi (Eds.), Uncertainty, 
information management, and disclosure decisions: 
Theories and applications (pp. 67–84). New York, 
NY: Routledge.
Ramirez, A., Jr., Walther, J. B., Burgoon, J. K., & Sunnaf­
rank, M. (2002). Information seeking strategies, uncer­
tainty, and computer-mediated communication: Toward 
a conceptual model. Human Communication Research, 
28, 213–228.
Ramirez A., Jr., & Wang, Z. (2008). When online meets 
offline: An Expectancy Violations Theory perspective 
on modality switching. Journal of Communication, 58, 
20–39.
Ramsey, M. C., Venette, S. J., & Rabalais, N. (2011). 
The perceived paranormal and source credibility: 
The effects of narrative suggestions on paranormal 
belief. Atlantic Journal of Communication, 19(2), 
79–96.
Raschick, M., & Ingersoll-Dayton, B. (2004). The costs and 
rewards of caregiving among aging spouses and adult 
children. Family Relations, 53, 317–325.
Raven, B. H. (1993). The bases of power: Origins and recent 
developments. Journal of Social Issues, 49, 227–251.
Rawlins, W. K. (1992). Friendship matters: Communica­
tion, dialectics, and the life course. New York, NY: 
Aldine De Gruyter.
Rawlins, W. K. (2009). The compass of friendship: Nar­
ratives, identities, and dialogues. Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage. 
Ray, T. (2012). To de-westernize, yes, but with a criti­
cal edge: A response to Gunaratne and others. Media, 
Culture & Society, 34, 238–249.
Real, M. R. (1996). Exploring media culture. Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage.
Reimer, V., & Ahmed, R. (2012). “Feeling good never 
looked better”: Examining stereotypical representa­
tions of women in Special K advertisements. In T. 
Carilli & J. Campbell (Eds.), Challenging images of 
women in the media (pp. 3–16). Lanham, MD: Lexing­
ton Books.
Reimer, B., & Rosengren, K. E. (1990). Cultivated viewers 
and readers: A life-style perspective. In N. Signorielli & 
M. Morgan (Eds.), Cultivation analysis: New directions 
in media effects research (pp. 181–206). Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage.
Reitzes, D. C., DePadilla, L., Sterk, C. E., & Elifson, K. 
W. (2010). A symbolic interaction approach to ciga­
rette smoking: Smoking frequency and the desire to quit 
smoking. Sociological Focus, 43(3), 193–213.
Reuther, C., & Fairhurst, G. T. (2000). Chaos theory and 
the glass ceiling. In P. Buzzanell (Ed.), Rethinking 
organization and managerial communication from fem­
inist perspectives (pp. 236–253). Thousand Oaks, CA: 
Sage.
Reynolds, P. D. (2007). A primer in theory construc­
tion: An A&B classics edition. Boston, MA: Allyn & 
Bacon.
Reynolds, P. D. (2016). A primer in theory construction. 
New York, NY: Routledge.
Reynolds, T. (2002). Rethinking a Black feminist stand­
point. Ethnic and Racial Studies, 25, 591–606.
Rhys, W. R., & Bywater, I. (1954). Rhetoric. New York, 
NY: Modern Library. 
Richards, I. A. (1936). The philosophy of rhetoric. New 
York, NY: Oxford University Press.
Richardson, B. K., & Taylor, J. (2009). Sexual harassment 
at the intersection of race and gender: A theoretical 
model of the sexual harassment experiences of women 
of color. Western Journal of Communication, 73(3), 
248–272.

R-34     References
Richmond, V. P., McCroskey, J. C., & Hickson, M. L. 
(2008). Nonverbal behavior in interpersonal relations. 
Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.
Richmond, V. P., Smith, R. S., Heisel, A. D., & McCroskey, 
J. C. (2001). Nonverbal immediacy in the physician-
patient relationship. Communication Research Reports, 
18, 211–216.
Riddle, K. (2010). Always on my mind: Exploring how fre­
quent, recent, and vivid television portrayals are used in 
the formation of social reality judgments. Media Psy­
chology, 13(2), 155–179.
Riddle, K., Potter, W. J., Metzger, M. J., Nabi, R. L., & Linz, 
D. G. (2011). Beyond cultivation: Exploring the effects of 
frequency, recency, and vivid autobiographical memories 
for violent media. Media Psychology, 14(2), 168–191.
Roberts, K. C. (2004). Texturing the narrative paradigm: 
Folklore and communication. Communication Quar­
terly, 52, 129–142.
Robinson, L. (2007). The cyberself: The selfing project 
goes online, symbolic interaction in the digital age. New 
Media & Society, 9(1), 93–110.
Roethlisberger, F. L., & Dickson, W. (1939). Management 
and the worker. New York, NY: Wiley.
Roffers, M. (2002). Personal communication, Milwaukee, WI.
Rogelberg, S. G., Rhodes-Shanock, L. R., & Scott, C. W. 
(2012). Wasted time and money in meetings: Increas­
ing return on investment. Small Group Research, 43, 
236–245.
Rogers, E. M., & Dearing, J. W. (1988). Agenda-setting 
research: Where has it been? Where is it going? In 
J. A. Anderson (Ed.), Communication yearbook 11 
(pp. 555–594). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Rogers, L. E., & Escudero, V. (2004). Theoretical founda­
tions. In L. E. Rogers & V. Escudero (Eds.), Relational 
communication: An interactional perspective to the 
study of process and form. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rogerson, K., & Roselle, L. (Eds.). (2016). Routledge stud­
ies in global information, politics, and society. New 
York, NY: Routledge.
Rogerson-Revell, P. (2010). “Can you spell that for us non­
native speakers?” Accommodation strategies in interna­
tional business meetings. Journal of Business Commu­
nication, 47, 432–454.
Roloff, M. (2009). Social exchange theory. In S. W. 
Littlejohn & K. A. Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of 
communication theory (Vol. 2, pp. 894–896). Los 
Angeles, CA: Sage.
Roloff, M. E. (1981). Interpersonal communication: The 
social exchange approach. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Romo, L. K. (2011). Money talks: Revealing and conceal­
ing financial information in families. Journal of Family 
Communication, 11(4), 264–281.
Romo, L. K. (2012). “Above the influence”: How col­
lege students communicate about the healthy deviance 
of alcohol abstinence. Health Communication, 27(7), 
672–681.
Rorty, A. O. (1996). Structuring rhetoric. In A. O. Rorty 
(Ed.), Aristotle’s rhetoric (pp. 1–33). Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press.
Rose, J. (2011). Diverse perspectives on the groupthink the­
ory—A literary review. Emerging Leadership Journeys, 
4, 37–57.
Rose, R., Suppiah, W., Uli, J., & Othman, J. (2006). A 
face concern approach to conflict management—A 
Malaysian perspective. Journal of Social Sciences, 2, 
121–126.
Rosenberg, J., & Egbert, N. (2011). Online impression 
management: Personality traits and concerns for sec­
ondary goals as predictors of self-presentation tactics on 
Facebook. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communica­
tion, 17, 1–18.
Rosenthal, R., & Jacobson, L. (1968). Pygmalion in the 
classroom: Teacher expectation and pupils’ intellec­
tual development. New York, NY: Holt, Rinehart & 
Winston.
Rothwell, J. D. (2012). In mixed company: Communi­
cation in groups and teams. Boston, MA: Cengage/
Wadsworth. 
Rothwell, J. D. (2013). In mixed company: Communicating 
in small groups. Boston, MA: Cengage.
Rowland, R. C. (1987). Narrative: Mode of discourse 
or paradigm? Communication Monographs, 54, 264–
275.
Rowland, R. C. (1989). On limiting the narrative paradigm: 
Three case studies. Communication Monographs, 56, 
39–53.
Rubin, A. M. (1981). An examination of television viewing 
motives. Communication Research, 8, 141–165.
Rubin, A. M. (1994). Uses, gratification and media effects 
research. In J. Bryant & D. Zillman (Eds.), Media ef­
fects: Advances in theory and research (pp. 281–301). 
Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
Rubin, A. M., & Step, M. M. (2000). Impact of motiva­
tion, attraction, and parasocial interaction on talk radio 

References     R-35
listening. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 
44, 635–654.
Rubin, L. (1998, March). Friends and kin. Speech presented 
at the conference on Successful Relating in Couples, in 
Families, between Friends, and at Work, Tucson, AZ.
Ruddick, S. (1989). Maternal thinking: Towards a politics 
of peace. Boston, MA: Beacon Press.
Rudra, K., Chakraborty, A., Sethi, M., Das, S., Ganguly, 
N., & Ghosh, S. (2015). #FewThingsAboutIdioms: Un­
derstanding idioms and its users in the Twitter online 
social network. In T. Cao (Ed.), Advances in knowledge 
discovery and data mining (pp. 108–121). Rotterdam, 
Netherlands: Springer.
Ruggiero, T. E. (2000). Uses and gratifications theory in the 
21st century. Mass Communication & Society, 3, 3–37.
Russ, T. L. (2012). The relationship between communi­
cation apprehension and learning preferences in an 
organizational setting. Journal of Business Communica­
tion, 49, 312–331.
Rutenberg, J., & Zeleny, J. (2008, May 15). The politics of 
the lapel, when it comes to Obama. New York Times, 
p. A27.
Ryan, E. E. (1984). Aristotle’s theory of rhetorical argu­
mentation. Montreal: Les Editions Ballarmin.
Ryan, K. M. (2007). He’s a rebel: A discourse analysis 
of Nike’s Bode Miller Olympic advertising campaign. 
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Interna­
tional Communication Association, San Francisco, CA.
Ryan, E. B., MacLean, M., & Orange, J. B. (1994). In­
appropriate accommodation in communication to el­
ders: Inferences about nonverbal correlates. Interna­
tional Journal of Aging and Human Development, 39, 
273–291.
Rydell, R. J., Hugenberg, K., & McConnell, A. R. (2006). 
Resistance can be good or bad: How theories of resis­
tance and dissonance affect attitude certainty. Personal­
ity and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 740–750.
Rydell, R. J., McConnell, A. R., & Mackie, D. M. (2008). 
Consequences of discrepant explicit and implicit atti­
tudes: Cognitive dissonance and increased information 
processing. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
44, 1526–1532.
Sabatelli, R. M., & Shehan, C. L. (1993). Exchange 
and resource theories. In P. G. Boss, W. J. Doherty, 
R. LaRossa, W. R. Schumm, & S. K. Steinmetz 
(Eds.), Sourcebook of family theories and methods: 
A contextual approach (pp. 385–411). New York, 
NY: Plenum.
Sahlstein, E., Maguire, K. C., & Timmerman, L. (2009). Con­
tradictions and praxis contextualized by wartime deploy­
ment: Wives’ perspectives revealed through relational 
dialectics. Communication Monographs, 76(4), 421–442.
Salem, P. (2007). Making sense of knowledge manage­
ment. RCA Vestnik (Russian Communication Associa­
tion), 1, 47–68.
Salmon, C. T., & Kline, F. G. (1985). The spiral of silence 
ten years later: An examination and evaluation. In K. 
Sanders, L. L. Kaid, & D. Nimmo (Eds.), Political com­
munication yearbook 1984 (pp. 3–29). Carbondale, IL: 
Southern Illinois University Press.
Salmon, G., & Faris, J. (2006). Multi-agency collaboration, 
multiple levels of meaning: Social constructionism and 
the CMM model as tools to further our understanding. 
Journal of Family Therapy, 28, 272–292.
Samovar, L. A., & Porter, R. E. (1995). Communication be­
tween cultures, 3rd ed. Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Samovar, L. A., Porter, R. E., McDaniel, E. R., Roy, C. S. 
(2013). Communication between cultures. Boston, MA: 
Cengage/Wadsworth.
Sanker, D. (2012). Collaborate: The art of we. San Fran­
cisco, CA: Jossey-Bass.
Sapir, E. (1921). Language: An introduction to the study of 
speech. New York, NY: Harcourt, Brace & World.
Satir, V. (1988). The new peoplemaking. Mountain View, 
CA: Science and Behavior Books.
Sawyer, K. (2012). Extending sociocultural theory to group 
creativity. Vocations and Learning, 5, 59–75.
Schell, J. (1982). The fate of the earth. New York, NY: 
Avon Books.
Schoebi, D., Perrez, M., Bradbury, T. N. (2012). Expec­
tancy effects on marital interaction: Rejection sensitiv­
ity as a critical moderator. Journal of Family Psychol­
ogy, 26, 709–718.
Schramm, W. L. (1954). The process and effects of mass 
communication. Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
Schultz, B. G. (1996). Communicating in the small group, 
2nd ed. New York, NY: HarperCollins.
Schulz, A., & Roessler, P. (2012). The spiral of silence and 
the Internet: Selection of online content and the percep­
tion of the public opinion climate in computer-mediated 
communication environments. International Journal of 
Public Opinion Research, 24, 346–367.
Schwartz, J. (2005, April 4). Some at NASA say its culture 
is changing, but others say problems still run deep. New 
York Times, pp. 1–3.

R-36     References
Schwartz, J., & Wald, M. L. (2003, March 9). ‘Group-
think’ is 30 years old, and still going strong. New York 
Times, pp. 4–5.
Seibold, D. R., & Myers, K. K. (2005). Communication as 
structuring. In G. J. Shepherd, J. St. John, & T. Striphas 
(Eds.), Communication as . . . Perspectives on theory 
(pp. 143–152). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Seibold, D., & Myers, R. (2007). Group argument. Small 
Group Research Journal, 38, 312–336.
Selby, G. (2000). The limits of accommodation: Frederick 
Douglas and the Garrisonian abolitionists. Southern 
Communication Journal, 66, 52–66.
Semlak, J. L., & Pearson, J. C. (2011). Big Macs/Peanut 
butter and jelly: An exploration of dialectical contradic­
tions experienced by the sandwich generation. Commu­
nication Research Reports, 28(4), 296–307.
Sevenans, J., Walgrave, S., & Vos, D. (2015). Political 
elites’ media responsiveness and their individual po­
litical goals: A study of national politicians in Belgium. 
Research & Politics, 2, 1–7.
Shanahan, J., & Jones, V. (1999). Cultivation and social 
control. In D. Demers & K. Viswanath (Eds.), Mass 
media, social control and social change (pp. 35–61). 
Ames, IA: Iowa State Press.
Shanahan, J., & Morgan, M. (1999). Television and its 
viewers: Cultivation theory and research. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press.
Shannon, C., & Weaver, W. (1949). The mathematical 
theory of communication. Urbana, IL: University of Il­
linois Press.
Shaw, M. E. (1981). Group dynamics: The psychology of 
small group behavior. New York, NY: McGraw-Hill.
Sheckels, T. F. (2009). The rhetorical success of Thabo 
Mbeki’s 1996 “I am an African” address. Communica­
tion Quarterly, 57(3), 319–333.
Sheriff, R. E. (2000). Exposing silence as cultural censor­
ship: A Brazilian case. American Anthropologist, 102, 
114–132.
Sherry, J. L. (2010). The value of communication science. 
Journal of Applied Communication Research, 38(3), 
302–306.
Sherry, J. L., Lucas, K., Rechtsteiner, S., Brooks, C., & 
Wilson, B. (2001, May). Video game uses and gratifica­
tions as predictors of use and game preference. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the International 
Communication Association, Washington, DC.
Shimanoff, S. (1980). Communication rules: Theory and 
research. Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Shimanoff, S. (2009). Facework theories. In S. W. Little­
john & K. A Foss (Eds.), Encyclopedia of communica­
tion theory (pp. 374–377). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Shin, D. (2011). Understanding e-book users: Uses and 
gratification expectancy model. New Media & Society, 
13(2), 260–278.
Shinnar, R. S., Young, C. A., & Meana, M. (2004). The 
motivations for and outcomes of employee referrals. 
Journal of Business Psychology, 19, 271–283.
Short, J. A., Williams, E., & Christie, B. (1976). The social 
psychology of telecommunications. London: Wiley.
Shutiva, C. (2011). Native American culture and communi­
cation through humor. In A. Gonzalez, M. Huston, & V. 
Chen (Eds.), Our voices: Essays in culture, ethnicity, and 
communication (pp. 188–203). New York, NY: Oxford.
Sicafuse, L. L. & Miller, M. K. (2010). Social psychologi­
cal influences on the popularity of amber alerts. Crimi­
nal Justice and Behavior, 37(11), 1237.
Signorielli, N. (1990). Television’s mean and dangerous 
worlds: A continuation of the cultural indicators per­
spective. In N. Signorielli & M. Morgan (Eds.), Cultiva­
tion analysis: New directions in media effects research 
(pp. 85–106). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Simmons, V. N., Webb, M. S., & Brandon, T. H. (2004). 
College-student smoking: An initial test of an experi­
ential dissonance-enhancing intervention. Addictive 
Behaviors, 29, 1129–1141.
Simpson, C. (1996). Elisabeth Noelle-Neumann’s “spiral 
of silence” and the historical context of communication 
theory. Journal of Communication, 46, 149–173.
Small, T. A. (2011). What’s the hashtag? A content analysis 
of Canadian politics on Twitter. Information, Communi­
cation and Society, 14, 872–895.
Smith, P. (2011). The renewal of cultural studies. Philadel­
phia, PA: Temple University Press.
Smudde, P. M. (2004). Implications on the practice and 
study of Kenneth Burke’s idea of a “public relations 
counsel with a heart.” Communication Quarterly, 52, 
420–432.
Snyder, J. L., & Cistulli, M. D. (2011). The relationship 
between workplace e-mail privacy and psychological 
contract violation, and their influence on trust in top 
management and affective commitment. Communica­
tion Research Reports, 28(2), 121–129.
Snyder, M. (1979). Self-monitoring processes. In L. 
Berkowitz (Ed.), Advances in experimental social 
psychology (pp. 86–131). New York, NY: Academic 
Press.

References     R-37
Soar, M. (2000). Encoding advertisements: Ideology and 
meaning in advertising production. Mass Communica­
tion & Society, 3, 415–437.
Sonja Utz, Camiel J. Beukeboom, Walther, J. B., DeAndrea, 
D. C., & Tong, S. T. (2010). Computer-mediated com­
munication versus vocal communication in the attenua­
tion of pre-interaction impressions. Media Psychology, 
13, 364–386.
Sosulski, M. R. (2009). Developing a standpoint practice 
method with cases: Authority, subjectivity, reflec­
tion. Affilia: Journal of Women & Social Work, 24(3), 
226–243.
Sparks, G. G., & Greene, J. O. (1992). On the validity 
of nonverbal indicators as measures of physiological 
arousal: A response to Burgoon, Kelley, Newton, and 
Keeley-Dyreson. Human Communication Research, 18, 
445–471.
Sparks, G. G., & Ogles, R. M. (1990). The difference be­
tween fear of victimization and probability of being 
victimized: Implication for cultivation. Journal of 
Broadcasting & Electronic Media, 34, 351–358.
Speer, R. B., Giles, H., & Denes, A. (2013). Investigating 
stepparent-stepchild interactions: The role of communi­
cation accommodation. Journal of Family Communica­
tion, 13, 218–241.
Spencer, A. T., Croucher, S. M., & McKee, C. (2012). 
Barack Obama: Examining the climate of opinion of 
spiral of silence. Journal of Communication, Speech & 
Theater Association of North Dakota, 24, 27–34.
Stafford, L. (2008). Social exchange theories. In L. A. 
Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories 
in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives 
(pp. 377–389). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Stanley, J. (2011). The ways of silencing. The New York 
Times online. Retrieved from http://opinionator.blogs
.nytimes.com/2011/06/25/the-ways-of-silencing/. Accessed 
on November 3, 2011.
Stapleton, K., & Wilson, J. (2009). Discourse and dis­
sonance: Making sense of socio-political change 
in Northern Ireland. Journal of Pragmatics, 41(7), 
1358–1375.
Steele, C. M. (1988). The psychology of self-affirmation: 
Sustaining the integrity of the self. In L. Berkowitz 
(Ed.), Advances in experimental social psychology (Vol. 
21, pp. 261–302). San Diego, CA: Academic Press.
Steele, C. M., Spencer, S. J., & Lynch, M. (1993). Self-
image, resilience, and dissonance: The role of affir­
mational resources. Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 64, 885–896.
Stein, I. F. (2012). Levels of contact in professional 
coach-client communication. In C. Creede, B. Fisher-
Yoshida, & P. V. Gallegos (Eds.), The reflective, 
facilitative, and interpretive practice of the Coordi­
nated Management of Meaning (pp. 65–76). Madison, 
NJ: Farleigh Dickinson University Press.
Steiner, L. (1988, August). Oppositional decoding as an act 
of resistance. Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the Association for Education in Journalism and Mass 
Communication, Norman, OK.
Steiner, M. A. (2009). Reconceptualizing Christian pub­
lic engagement: “Faithful Witness” and the American 
evangelical tradition. Journal of Communication & 
Religion, 32(2), 289–318.
Sternberg, J. (2011). President’s address: Space, place, 
and the media ecology association. Proceedings of the 
Media Ecology Association, 11, 107–112.
Stewart, J. B. (2012). Tangled webs: How false statements 
are undermining America: From Martha Stewart to 
Bernie Madoff. New York, NY: Penguin.
Stockstill, C. J., & Roach, D. (2007). Communication ap­
prehension in high school athletes. Texas Speech Com­
munication Journal, 32, 53–64.
Stones, R. (2005). Structuration theory. New York, NY: 
Palgrave MacMillan.
Stoycheff, E. (2016). Under surveillance examining Face­
book’s Spiral of Silence effects in the wake of NSA in­
ternet monitoring. Journalism & Mass Communication 
Quarterly, 93, 296–311.
Strate, L. (2004). A media ecology review. Communication 
Research Trends, 23, 1–48.
Strate, L., & Wachtel, E. (2005). The legacy of McLuhan. 
Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.
Street, R. L. (1991). Information-giving in medical consul­
tations: The influence of patients’ communicative styles 
and personal characteristics. Social Science and Medi­
cine, 32, 541–548.
Street, R. L., & Giles, H. (1982). Speech accommodation 
theory: A social cognitive approach to language and 
speech behavior. In M. E. Roloff & C. R. Berger (Eds.), 
Social cognition and communication (pp. 193–226). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.
Strine, M. S. (1992). Understanding how things work: 
Sexual harassment and academic culture. Journal of 
Applied Communication Research, 20, 391–400.
Strömbäck, J., & Kiousis, S. (2010). A new look at agenda-
setting effects—Comparing the predictive power of 
overall political news consumption and specific news 

R-38     References
media consumption across different media channels 
and media types. Journal of Communication, 60(2), 
271–292.
Stroud, S. R. (2001). Technology and mythic narrative: The 
Matrix as technological hero-quest. Western Journal of 
Communication, 65, 416–441.
Such, J. M., Espinoza, A., Garcia-Fornes, A., & Sierra, 
C. (2012). Self-disclosure decision making based on in­
timacy and privacy. Information Sciences, 211, 93–111.
Sullivan, P. A., & Turner, L. H. (2009). Heaping hostil­
ity on Hillary: Isms in the 2008 presidential race. In 
E. L. Kirby & M. C. McBride (Eds.), Gender actual­
ized: Cases in communicatively constructing realities 
(pp. 25–32). Dubuque, IA: Kendall Hunt.
Sun, C. F., & Scharrer, E. (2004). Staying true to Disney: 
College students’ resistance to criticism of The Little 
Mermaid. The Communication Review, 7, 35–55.
Sunnafrank, M. (1986). Predicted outcome value during 
initial interactions: A reformulation of uncertainty re­
duction theory. Human Communication Research, 13, 
191–210.
Surber, J. P. (1998). Culture and critique: An introduction 
to the critical discourses of cultural studies. Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press.
Suter, E. A. (2008). Discursive negotiation of family iden­
tity: A study of U.S. families with adopted children from 
China. Journal of Family Communication, 8, 126–147.
’t Hart, P. (1990). Groupthink in government: A study of 
small groups and policy failure. Amsterdam: Swets and 
Zeitlinger.
’t Hart, P. (1998). Preventing groupthink revisited: Evalu­
ating and reforming groups in government. Organiza­
tional Behavior and Human Decision Processes, 73, 
306–313.
Tajeddin, G., Safayeni, F. Connelly, C. E., & Tasa, T. 
(2012). The influence of emergent expertise on group 
decision processes. Small Group Research, 43, 50–74.
Tajfel, H., & Turner, J. C. (1986). The social iden­
tity theory of intergroup behavior. In S. Worchel 
& W. Austin (Eds.), The psychology of intergroup 
relations (pp. 7–24). Chicago, IL: Nelson Hall.
Takeshita, T. (2006). Current critical problems in agenda-
setting research. International Journal of Public Opin­
ion Research, 18(3), 11–32.
Tan, A. S. (1982). Television use and social stereotypes. 
Journalism Quarterly, 59, 119–122.
Tan, Y., & Weaver, D. H. (2010). Media bias, public opinion, 
and policy liberalism from 1956 to 2004: A second
-level agenda-setting study. Mass Communication and 
Society, 13(4), 412–434.
Tang, J. H., & Wang, C. C. (2012). Self-disclosure among 
bloggers: Re-examination of social penetration theory. 
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 
15(5), 245–250.
Tanno, D. V., & Gonzalez, A. (1998). Sites of identity 
in communication and culture. In D. V. Tanno & A. 
Gonzalez (Eds.), Communication and identity across 
cultures (pp. 3–7). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Taylor, A., & Hardman, M. J. (2000). Introduction: The 
meaning of voice. In A. Taylor & M. J. Hardman 
(Eds.), Hearing many voices (pp. 1–27). Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press.
Taylor, D. A., & Altman, I. (1987). Communication in in­
terpersonal relationships: Social penetration processes. 
In M. E. Roloff & G. R. Miller (Eds.), Interpersonal 
processes: New directions in communication research 
(pp. 257–277). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Taylor, J. R., & Van Every, E. J. (2000). The emergent 
organization: Communication as its site and surface. 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.
Tell, D. (2010). Stanton’s “Solitude of Self” as public con­
fession. Communication Studies, 61(2), 172–183.
Templin, P. (2012). A failure of culture. Industrial 
Engineer, 44, 1.
Terrell, M. (2011, September 20). The bytes and the bees: 
Love can transcend anything (even Facebook). USA 
Today, p. 4A.
Thaler, P. (2006). The legacy of Neil Postman, and the 
coming of age of media ecology. Review of Communi­
cation, 6, 369–373.
Thatcher, M. S. (2011). Negotiating the tension between 
the discourses of Christianity and spiritual pluralism in 
Alcoholics Anonymous. Journal of Applied Communi­
cation Research, 39(4), 389–405.
The critical role of teams. Retrieved from http://www
.kenblanchard.com/img/pub/pdf_critical_role_teams.pdf
The Neil Postman Information Page. Retrieved from http://
neilpostman.org
Theiss, J. A., & Solomon, D. H. (2006). A relational tur­
bulence model of communication about irritations in 
romantic relationships. Communication Research, 33, 
391–418.
Theye, K. (2008). Shoot, I’m sorry: An examination of nar­
rative functions and effectiveness within Dick Cheney’s 
hunting accident apologia. Southern Communication 
Journal, 73, 160–177.

References     R-39
Thibaut, J., & Kelley, H. (1959). The social psychology of 
groups. New York, NY: Wiley.
Thompson, J., Petronio, S., & Braithwaite, D. O. (2012). 
An examination of privacy rules for academic advisors 
and college student-athletes: A communication privacy 
management perspective. Communication Studies, 
63(1), 54–76.
Tidwell, L. C., & Walther, J. B. (2002). Computer-medi­
ated communication effects on disclosure, impressions, 
and interpersonal evaluations: Getting to know one an­
other a bit at a time. Human Communication Research, 
28, 317–348.
Tilley, E. (2010). Ethics and gender at the point of decision 
making: An exploration of intervention and kinship. 
Prism, 7(4). Retrieved from http://www.prismjournal
.org/fileadmin/Praxis/Files/Gender/Tilley.pdf
Timmer, S. G., Sedlar, G., & Urquiza, A. J. (2004). Chal­
lenging children in kin versus nonkin foster care: Per­
ceived costs and benefits to caregivers. Child Maltreat­
ment, 9, 251–262.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1988). Intercultural conflict styles: 
A face negotiation theory. In Y. Y. Kim & W. B. 
Gudykunst (Eds.), Theories in intercultural communi­
cation (pp. 213–238). Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1991). Intimacy expression in three 
cultures: France, Japan, and the United States. Interna­
tional Journal of Intercultural Relations, 15, 29–46.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1993). Communicative resourcefulness: 
An identity negotiation perspective. In R. Wiseman & 
J. Koester (Eds.), Intercultural communication compe­
tence (pp. 72–111). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
Ting-Toomey, S. (1994a). Face and facework: An introduc­
tion. In S. Ting-Toomey (Ed.), The challenge of face­
work (pp. 1–14). Albany, NY: SUNY Press.
Ting-Toomey, S. (1994b). Managing intercultural conflicts 
effectively. In L. A. Samovar & R. E. Porter (Eds.), 
Intercultural communication: A reader (pp. 360–372). 
Belmont, CA: Wadsworth.
Ting-Toomey, S. (2004). Translating conflict face-negoti­
ation theory into practice. In D. Landis, J. Bennett, & 
M. Bennett (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural training 
(pp. 215–240). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S. (2007). Intercultural conflict training: 
Theory-practice approaches and research challenges. 
Journal of Intercultural Communication Research, 36, 
255–271.
Ting-Toomey, S. (2009). Intercultural conflict competence 
as a facet of intercultural competence development: 
Multiple conceptual approaches. In D. Deardoff (Ed.), 
Sage handbook of intercultural competence (pp. 100–
121). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S. (2010). Applying dimensional values in 
understanding intercultural communication. Communi­
cation Monographs, 77, 169–180.
Ting-Toomey, S., & Chung, L. C. (2005). Understand­
ing intercultural communication. Los Angeles, CA: 
Roxbury.
Ting-Toomey, S., & Cocroft, B. A. (1994). Face and face­
work: Theoretical and research interests. In S. Ting-
Toomey (Ed.), The challenge of facework (pp. 307–
340). Albany, NY: SUNY.
Ting-Toomey, S., & Cole, M. (1990). Intergroup diplo­
matic communication: A face-negotiation perspective. 
In F. Korzenny & S. Ting-Toomey (Eds.), Communica­
tion for peace: Diplomacy and negotiation (pp. 77–95). 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S., & Oetzel, J. (2001). Managing in­
tercultural conflict effectively. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage.
Ting-Toomey, S., Gao, G., Trubisky, P., Yang, Z., Kim, 
H. S., Lin, S., & Nishida, T. (1991). Culture, face main­
tenance, and styles of handling interpersonal conflict: 
A study in five cultures. The International Journal of 
Conflict Management, 2, 275–296.
Toller, P. W. (2005). Negotiation of dialectical contradic­
tions by parents who have experienced the death of a 
child. Journal of Applied Communication Research, 33, 
46–66.
Toller, P. W., & Braithwaite, D. O. (2009). Grieving to­
gether and apart: Bereaved parents’ contradictions of 
marital interaction. Journal of Applied Communication 
Research, 37(3), 257–277.
Toma, C., & Hancock, J. T. (2011). A new twist on love’s 
labor: Self-presentation in online dating profiles. In 
K. Wright & L. Webb (Eds.), Computer-mediated com­
munication in personal relationships (pp. 21–40). New 
York, NY: Peter Lang.
Tong, S. T., & Walther, J. B. (2011). Just say “No Thanks”: 
Romantic rejection in computer-mediated communica­
tion. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 28, 
488–506.
Turnage, A. K. (2007). Email flaming behaviors and or­
ganizational conflict. Journal of Computer-Mediated 
Communication, 13, 43–59.
Turow, J. (2013). Media today: Mass communication in a 
converging world. New York, NY: Routledge.

R-40     References
Underation, S. (2009). How to love the recession: Seven 
easy steps to find new customers in tough times and 
ethically steal the ones your competitors ignored. 
Minneapolis, MN: S2 Enterprises Press.
Waldron, V. R., & Lavitt, M. R. (2009). “Welfare-to-
work”: Assessing communication competencies and 
client outcomes in a job training program. Southern 
Communication Journal, 75, 1–15.
Walker, L. (1984). The battered woman syndrome. New 
York, NY: Springer.
Walther, J. B., Anderson, D. K., & Park, D. W. (1994). In­
terpersonal effects in computer-mediated communica­
tion: A meta-analysis of social and antisocial communi­
cation. Communication Research, 21, 460–487.
Walther, J. B., Van Der Heide, B., Kim, S., Wester­
man, D., & Tong, S. (2008). The role of friends’ ap­
pearance and behavior on evaluations of individuals on 
Facebook: Are we known by the company we keep? 
Human Communication Research, 34, 28–49.
Watzlawick, P., Beavin, J. B., & Jackson, D. D. (1967). 
Pragmatics of human communication: A study of in­
teractional patterns, pathologies, and paradoxes. New 
York, NY: W.W. Norton.
Weaver, D. H., Graber, D. A., McCombs, M. E., & Eyal, 
C. H. (1981). Media agenda-setting in a presidential 
campaign. Issues, images and interest. New York, NY: 
Praeger.
White, N., & Lauritsen, J. L. (2012). Violent crimes against 
youth—1994-2010. Washington, DC: U.S. Department 
of Justice.
Whorf, B. L. (1956). Language, thought, and reality. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Wiggins, B. E., & Bowers, G. B. (2014). Memes as genre: 
A structurational analysis of the memescape. New 
Media & Society, 17, 1886–1906.
Wilson, B. J., Martins, N., & Marske, A. L. (2007). Chil­
dren’s and parents’ fright reactions to kidnapping stories 
in the news. Communication Monographs, 74, 46–74.
Winzenburg, S. (2012). In the Facebook era, students tell 
you everything. Chronicle of Higher Education, 58, A26.
Wolf, M. A., Meyer, T. P., & White, C. (2009). A rules-
based study of television’s role in the construction of 
social reality. Journal of Broadcasting & Electronic 
Media, 43, 813–829.
Wood, J. T. (1992). Spinning the symbolic web: Human 
communication as symbolic interaction. Amsterdam, 
Netherlands: Ablex Publishing.
Wood, J. T. (2004). Monsters and victims: Male felons’ 
accounts of intimate partner violence. Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 21, 555–576.
Wood, J. T. (2008). Critical feminist theories. In L. A. 
Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.), Engaging theories 
in interpersonal communication (pp. 323–334). Thou­
sand Oaks, CA: Sage.
Worchel, S., Rothgerber, H., Day, E. A., Hart, D., & 
Butemeyer, J. (1998). Social identity and individual 
productivity within groups. British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 37, 389–413.
Zeng, L. (2011). More than audio on the go: Uses and grati­
fications of MP3 players. Communication Research Re­
ports, 28, 97–108.
Zhang, P., & McLuhan, E. (2016). The interological turn in 
media ecology. Canadian Journal of Communication, 
41, 207–225.
Zhou, S., Kim, Y., & Kim, Y. (2015). Theoretical and 
methodological trends of Agenda Setting Theory: A 
thematic meta-analysis of the last five decades. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the Association for 
Education in Journalism and Mass Communication, San 
Francisco, CA.

I-1
Abrams, J., 479
Abu-Shaqra, B., 303
Acevedo-Callejas, L., 36
Acquavella, G., 32
Acquisti, A., 175
Adams, K., 34, 240, 242
Adelman, M., 146
Afifi, T. D., 210
Agyeman-Budu, E. A., 216
Ahmed, R., 329, 432
Ahn, S., 463
Akella, D., 36
Al-Abdullah, H., 382
Alberts, J. K., 34
Alford, H., 26
Alkhazraji, K. M., 285
Allen, B., 486
Allen, J. A., 351
Althouse, M., 332
Altman, I., 123, 170, 171, 173, 174, 
177, 178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185
Alwood, E., 421
Andersen, K., 15
Andersen, K. K., 32
Andersen, M. L., 75
Anderson, D. K., 220
Anderson, C., 166
Anderson, C. M., 242
Anderson, F., 332
Anderson, I. K., 399
Anderson, R., 10, 20
Andrews, M., 522
Anguiano, C., 39, 48
Antheunis, M. L., 148
Anton, C., 454
Antunes, D., 329
Apker, J., 197
Ardener, E., 496
Ardener, S., 497
Arendt, L. A., 105
Arneson, P., 48, 49, 311
Arnett, R., 102
Arnhart, L., 319, 321
Aronson, E., 116
Arroyo, A., 32
Arterburn, E. N., 32
Asante, M. K., 39
Ashby, W. R., 28
Askamit, R., 367
Atkin, D., 417, 418
Atkins, D., 182
August, C., 454
Austin, J. L., 90
Aylor, B., 147
Bachman, G. F., 127, 132
Bakhtin, M., 187
Bakke, P. C., 336
Bandura, A., 408
Banks, S., 268
Bantz, C., 303
Baran, S. J., 405, 421, 453
Baratz, S., 462, 473
Bareiss, W., 336
Bareket-Bojmel, L., 174
Barge, J. K., 100, 101
Barker, C., 431, 512
Barnlund, D. C., 12, 14
Barrett, A., 81
Basnyat, I., 473
Baxter, L., 47, 187, 188, 189, 190, 
192, 193, 194, 196, 197, 198, 
199, 200, 201, 202, 215
Baym, N., 41
Bazarova, N., 233
Bean, C. J., 303
Beavin, J., 6, 55
Behm-Morowitz, E., 417
Belgrave, L. L., 69
Bell, K., 522
Bell, T., 356, 358, 365
Bem, D., 116
Bem, S., 50, 500
Bencherki, N., 267
Benning, J., 450
Berbary, L. A., 36
Berger, A. A., 447
Berger, C. R., 52, 135, 136, 137, 138, 
139, 140, 143, 144, 145, 146, 
147, 148, 150, 151, 167, 417
Berkowitz, D., 69
Berkowitz, S., 492
Bern-Klug, M., 79
Berquist, G., 310
Berscheid, E., 111
Beukeboom, C. J., 224, 225
Beullens, K., 418
Biden, J., 485
Bisel, R. B., 286
Bisel, R. S., 32
Bishop, J. W., 163
Bisimwa, N., 102
Blackwell, D., 513
Blackwell, D. M., 399, 511, 522
Blair-Loy, M., 500
Blakeslee, E., 375
Blalock, H. M., 140
Blau, P. M., 177
Bleakley, P. E., 404
Blumer, H., 70, 72, 73, 75
Blumler, J. G., 387, 388, 393, 394, 
396, 401
Bobbit, D., 447
Bochner, A., 339, 345
Bodie, G., 47
Bogaerts, S., 131
Bogan, S., 401
Bolen, D. M., 131
Bolkan, S., 4, 32
Bonilla, D., 492
Bonito, J. A., 132
Book, P., 70
Booth-Butterfield, M., 153, 
168, 483
Booth-Butterfield, S., 153
Bormann, E., 240
Borrowman, S., 328
Bostrom, R. N., 52
Bourhis, R., 482, 483, 487
Bowers, J., 259
Bowers, J. W., 463
Boyle, M., 149
Bracken, C. C., 60
Bradac, J. J., 137, 478
Bradbury, T. N., 132
Name Index

I-2     Name Index
Braithwaite, D., 47, 188, 194, 196, 
197, 216
Brandon, T., 114
Brann, M., 162, 504
Brasfield, R., 434
Brashers, D., 152
Brehm, J. W., 113, 116
Bremer, M., 275
Brenders, D. A., 100
Brennan, T. A., 33
Breuer, J., 417
Broadus, J., 322
Brockner, J., 161
Brody, H., 18
Broger, D., 269
Brown, B., 185
Brown, D., 393
Brown, J., 393
Brown, P., 461, 463, 473
Brown, R., 105, 105–106
Brown, S. C., 326, 327
Brownstein, A. L., 114
Brubaker, J., 367
Brummett, B., 326, 327, 333
Bryant, E., 225
Bryant, E. M., 33
Bryant, J., 416
Bryant, L. E., 197
Bryden, J., 492
Budd, M., 433
Buffington, D., 404
Bugeja, M., 441
Bullingham, L., 225
Burgess, E., 196
Burgoon, J., 119, 120, 121, 124, 
125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 131, 
132, 148, 232, 491
Burke, K., 311, 324, 325, 327, 328, 
329, 330, 331
Burkholder, T. A., 312
Burnett, A., 501
Burrell, N. A., 492
Busby, D. M., 33
Butemeyer, J., 479
Butler, J. A., 258, 276, 499
Buzzanell, P., 114, 116
Bywater, I., 310
Cahn, D. D., 53
Calabrese, R., 136, 137, 138, 139, 
140, 145, 146, 148
Callan, V., 482
Calzo, J., 410
Camara, S., 522
Campbell, D. T., 292
Campbell, K. K., 312
Campbell, M., 81
Canary, D., 145
Carey, J. W., 29, 406, 434, 452
Carlo, S., 339
Carlsmith, J., 112, 115, 116
Carlson, J. M., 240
Carmack, H. J., 303
Carpenter, A., 179, 180, 186
Carr, K., 190, 201
Carraway, J. H., 303
Carroll, C. E., 15, 33
Carter, M. J., 71
Catanese, D., 332
Catona, D., 186
Chafetz, J. S., 513, 514
Chakraborty, A., 184
Chan, Y. H., 473
Chang, T. Y., 105
Charmaz, K., 80
Chen, V., 38, 39
Chen, Y., 32, 39, 48
Chen, Y. N. K., 367
Chen, Y. W., 186
Cheney, G., 14
Chesebro, J. W., 333
Chia, S. C., 385
Child, J., 209, 216
Child, J. T., 473
Cho, M. K., 211, 473
Chopra, R., 498
Choudhry, N. K., 33
Christie, B., 222
Chung, L. C., 462, 469, 470
Cingel, D. P., 399
Cinnirella, M., 492
Cirksena, K., 524
Clair, R., 339
Clair, R. P., 350
Clark, G., 396
Clawson, R., 361, 372
Cocroft, B. A., 473
Coderre, S., 253
Cohen, E., 128
Cohen, E. L., 132
Cohen, L. J., 253
Coker, D., 129
Coker, R., 129
Cole, M., 465, 466
Coleman, R., 99, 361, 366
Coleman, W. E., 310
Collier, M. J., 464
Collins, P. H., 513, 520
Condit, C., 334–335, 339
Conklin, F., 90
Connelly, C. E., 34
Conquergood, D., 279
Conrad, C., 327
Constantine, L. L., 54
Contractor, N., 157
Conway, A., 399
Cook, K. S., 166
Cooley, C., 77
Coombs, W. T., 299
Coontz, S., 499, 500
Cooper, J., 115, 117, 321
Cooper, L., 308
Cottrell, N. B., 242
Couch, C., 71
Coughlin, J., 185
Coupland, D., 439, 489
Coupland, J., 34, 483
Coupland, N., 483, 489
Cox, E. M., 511
Cox, S. A., 163
Craig, R., 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 
43, 44
Craig, R. T., 24
Creede, C., 85, 94, 101, 102
Cronen, V. E., 84, 86, 89, 90, 91, 
92, 93, 98, 100, 101
Croom, C., 33
Cropanzano, R., 163
Croucher, S. M., 377, 471
Csikszentmihalyi, M., 383, 401
Cuddon, J. A., 310
Cuklanz, L., 524
Cullen, R., 285
Culnan, M. J., 221
Cupach, W., 464, 466, 491
Curzer, H. J., 320
Cushman, D., 52, 53, 87, 88, 97
Custers, K., 53
Daas, K. L., 197, 325
Daft, R. L., 222
Dahsti, A., 382
Dainton, M., 56, 147, 399
Dance, F., 6
D’Angelo, J., 220
Daniels, T. D., 302
Danielson, M. A., 303
Darwin, C., 292
Das, S., 184
Davey, M., 411
Davis, A. J., 434
Davis, D. K., 405, 421, 453

Name Index     I-3
Day, E. A., 479
De Larkin, I., 39, 48
De Schutter, B., 399
DeAndrea, D. C., 224, 226
Dearing, J., 357
DeBenedet, A. T., 253
DeFreese, J. D., 216
DeHart, P., 168
Delaney, T., 430
Delisay, F., 377
DeMarco, R., 351
Demo, D. H., 479
Denes, A., 488
Dennis, A. C., 512
DeSanctis, G., 258
deSousa, R., 47
Deutsch, M., 99
Dewey, J., 70
DeWine, S., 258, 276
DeWitt, D. M., 102
DeWitt, L. J., 102
Deyo, J., 139
Dhir, A., 401
Dickinson, B., 398
Dickson, F. C., 32
Dickson, W., 36
DiDomenico, S. M., 147
Dieter, S., 70
Dillman, L., 491
Dillon, P. J., 36
Dillow, M. R., 162
Dindia, K., 186
Dirikx, A., 417
Dixon, T. L., 50
Dobkin, B., 25
Doherty, W., 44
Donaghy, W., 152
Donnelly, J. H., 113
Donnerstein, C., 146
Donsbach, W., 370, 385, 386
Douai, A., 393
Dougherty, D., 516–517, 523
Drackich, J., 505
Dragojevich, M., 481, 
489, 491
Dray, W., 52
Dresner, F., 451
Driscoll, C., 434
Drouin, M., 153
Drummond, D., 522
Drury, J. P. M., 36
Du Gay, P., 425
Duck, S., 168
Dunleavy, K., 111
Durham, W. T., 197
Dwyer, M., 383
Eastin, M., 399
Ebbers, L. H., 511
Ebbesen, E. B., 109
Edgar, A. N., 336
Egbert, N., 220
Eichhorn, K. C., 224
Eilders, C., 375
Eisenberg, E., 285, 293–294, 299, 
302, 303
Elgin, S., 506
Elkin, R. A., 108
Elkins, J., 343
Ellemers, N., 479
Ellison, N. B., 148, 186, 220
Elmore, C., 511
Emmers, T., 145
Enck, S. M., 38
England, P., 167
Engleberg, I., 242
Englehardt, E., 15
Ent, M. R., 109
Entman, R., 433
Entman, R. M., 361
Erbert, L. A., 192
Escudero V., 171, 186
Espinoza, A., 176
Evangelopoulos, N., 367
Evjemo, T., 300
Eyal, K., 38, 364
Fairhurst, G., 501
Falk, E., 344
Fang, L., 399
Farber, B., 171
Faulkner, S. L., 201
Fawcett, L., 351
Fazio, R. H., 115
Feng, H., 462, 473
Fernback, J., 70
Ferrara, M. H., 147
Festinger, L., 104, 112, 114, 
115, 116
Festl, R., 417
Ficara, L. C., 147
Fink, E. L., 71
Finklehor, D., 408
Finn, A. N., 125
Finnerty, K., 38
Fiore, Q., 441–445
Fischer, C., 375
Fisher, C., 468
Fisher, R., 239
Fisher, W., 338, 339, 340–341, 343, 
345, 347
Fisher-Yoshida, B., 85, 93
Fiske, S., 105
Fitzpatrick, P., 497, 502
Fixmer-Oraiz, N., 511, 520
Flanagin, A. J., 36, 147
Flint, D., 70
Flood Grady, E., 201
Foa, U., 168
Ford, W. Z., 197
Forsythe, L., 102
Forte, J. A., 79, 81
Foss, K., 44, 118, 364, 506
Foss, S., 506
Foster, J. D., 108
Fox, C., 175
Fraley, T., 404
Francis, V., 4
Frank, M. G., 226
Frankenberg, R., 520
Fraser, K., 253
Fredricksen-Goldsen, K. T., 33
Freeth, R., 185
French, J. R., 264, 326, 327
Frewin, K., 285
Friedman, B., 511
Frisby, B. N., 168
Frymier, A. B., 12, 33
Fuller, C., 71
Funk, M., 365
Galanes, G., 34, 240, 242
Gallegos, P., 85
Gallois, C., 478, 482, 483, 491
Gandin, L. A., 434
Gandley, R., 147, 175
Ganguly, N., 184
Gao, G., 467
Garber, M., 438
Garcia-Fornes, A., 176
Garcia-Jimenez, L., 25
Garnett, J., 253
Gasiorek, J., 478, 481, 483
Gaskin, J., 132
Gaudine, A., 286
Gearhart, S., 385
Geertz, C., 273, 275, 276, 
279, 280
Gencarelli, T., 450, 451
Gendrin, D. M., 504
Gerbner, G., 377, 403, 404, 406, 407, 
408, 409, 410, 411, 412, 415

I-4     Name Index
Gerend, M., 109
Gharbi, J., 268
Ghosh, S., 184
Gibbs, J. L., 148, 186, 220
Giboney, J., 132
Giddens, A., 255, 256, 257, 260, 
261, 264, 269
Gilchrist-Petty, E., 491
Gilder, G., 397
Giles, H., 476, 477, 478, 479, 480, 
481, 482, 483, 484, 487, 488, 
489, 490, 491, 492
Gilman, P., 363
Gilmore, R., 115
Gilovich, T., 78
Gitlin, T., 361
Glynn, C., 384
Goffman, E., 80, 461
Goggin, G., 425
Goins, M., 197
Golden, J. L., 309
Goldsby, M. G., 163
Golish, T., 197
Golish, T. D., 197
Gomez, M. L., 492
Gonzalez, A., 39, 464
Gonzalez, J., 38
Gooall, H. L., 285
Good, J., 410
Goodall, H. L., 299
Goodboy, A. K., 4, 32
Goodrich, K. M., 185
Gordon, G., 452, 453
Gordon, H. S., 32
Gouran, D. S., 36, 240, 241, 244
Goyal, P., 184
Gozzi, E. K., 4
Graber, D., 364
Gramlich, K., 508
Gramsci, A., 426–427
Granberg, E. M., 74
Gray, H., 429
Gray, J., 351
Gray, J. B., 344
Greenberg, M., 185
Greene, J. O., 131
Greene, K., 179, 180, 186
Greener, S., 439
Green-Hamann, S., 224
Gregory, N., 166
Grob, C., 396
Grohskopf, E., 142, 146
Gross, B., 33
Gross, L., 404, 406, 407, 408, 
409, 412
Gross, M., 34
Grossberg, L., 434
Groves, J., 322
Gu, R., 222
Guba, E. G., 63
Gudykunst, W., 146, 148, 149
Guerrero, L. K., 32, 34, 120, 
127, 132
Gunaratne, S. A., 50
Guntzviller, L. M., 492
Guo, L., 361, 367
Gupta, A., 184
Gurevitch, M., 387, 388, 390, 
394, 401
Gutting, G., 348
Guzek, D., 367
Ha, L., 399
Haas, A., 390
Haavik, T., 300
Habibis, D., 80
Haferkamp, N., 225
Hale, J., 125, 126, 127, 128
Hall, E., 121, 122
Hall, E. T., 149
Hall, J. A., 120
Hall, S., 38, 48, 420, 422, 424, 425, 
427, 432, 433, 435, 471
Hamel, L., 233
Hamilton, H., 489
Hammer, M., 149
Hammer, R., 434
Hampton, K., 383
Hanasono, L. K., 399
Hancock, J. T., 225, 233
Hanson, R., 417
Haraway, D., 520
Harding, S., 50, 511, 517, 
520, 522
Hardman, M. J., 495, 496
Hargie, O., 150
Hargittai, E., 506
Harmon-Jones, E., 118
Harrigan, M. M., 70, 190
Harris, L. M., 84
Harris, M., 285
Harris, T., 514
Harrison, R., 322
Hart, D., 479
Hart, O., 250
Hart, R. P., 36
Hartman, H., 500
Hartsock, N., 510, 511, 512, 514, 
516, 519, 522, 524
Harwood, J., 38, 480, 492
Haslam, S. A., 479
Haslett, B. B., 262
Hasse, C. E., 500
Hastie, R., 238
Hastings, S. O., 506
Hatch, M. J., 277
Hayes, A., 384
Hechter, M., 498
Hegel, G.W. F., 512
Hehl, J., 492
Heider, F., 43
Heino, R., 220
Heiss, S. N., 303
Henningsen, M. L., 172, 184
Hensley, T. R., 253
Henwood, K., 489
Heradova, L., 498
Herek, G. M., 249
Heritage, J., 367
Herrick, J., 311
Herring, S., 62
Herrington, W., 488
Herrmann, A., 297, 299, 301
Herszenhorn, D., 378
Herzog, H., 392
Hesse, M., 503
Hesse-Biber, S., 522
Heusinkveld, S., 396
Higa, K., 222
Higgins, C., 322
Hine, R., 521
Hirokawa, R. W., 36, 240, 244
Hirschmann, N. J., 520, 
521, 522
Hmielowski, J. D., 38
Ho, D. Y., 461
Hochschild, A., 500
Hodge, B., 444
Hoelzl, E., 118
Hoffman, L. H., 38
Hofstede, G., 149, 466, 467
Hogg, M., 478, 482
Holbert, R. L., 38
Hollingshead, A., 245
Holmgren, A., 102
Homans, G., 156
Honeycutt, J. M., 146
Hoover, J. D., 506
Hoppe-Nagao, A., 194
Hopper, R., 182
Horan, S., 173
Horgan, T. G., 120
Horowitz, D., 422
Horstman, H. K., 339
Houle, K., 522

Name Index     I-5
Houser, M. A., 33
Houston, M., 485, 504, 506, 518
Hovland, C., 28
Hsu, C., 37
Huber, J. L., 506
Hugenberg, K., 105
Hughes, G., 102
Hughes, M., 479
Hughes, P. C., 32
Humphreys, S., 132
Hunt, S., 332
Hunt, S. B., 336
Huston, C. L., 49
Hutchins, B., 80
Huth, P., 249
Hwang, H. S., 226
Hyde, M., 311
Ifert-Johnson, D., 32
Ifinedo, P., 399
Ignatow, G., 367
Ingersoll-Dayton, B., 160
Inglis, F., 426–427
Inkster, J. A., 113
Innes, M., 73
Intemann, K., 522
Ishida, J., 78
Ivancevich, J. M., 113
Iverson, J., 258
Ivy, D. K., 507
Jachimowski, M., 367
Jackson, D. D., 55
Jackson, D., 6
Jackson-Beeck, M., 407
Jacobsen, J., 146
Jaggar, A. M., 511, 518
James, D., 505
James, W., 70
Jameson, J. K., 198
Jamieson, P. E., 404
Jandt, F. E., 469
Jane, E., 431, 512
Janes, L., 425
Jang, J., 224
Janis, I., 115, 237, 238, 239, 243, 
244, 245, 246, 247, 249, 
251, 252
Jansen, A., 131
Jansen, V. A., 492
Jaworski, A., 34
Jeffres, L., 417, 418
Jeffries-Fox, S., 407
Jenkins, J. J., 36
Jiang, L. C., 233
Johar, H., 382
John, L. K., 175
Johnson, C., 78, 351
Johnson, K. A., 365, 367
Johnson, M., 471
Johnson, P., 478
Johnston, A., 511, 517
Johnston, L. M., 285
Jones, A. C., 197
Jones, S., 47
Jones, V., 414
Jordan, F., 483
Jordan, G., 435
Joseph, A. L., 210
Jourard, S. M., 208
Jung, C. S., 35
Kaba, A., 253
Kalbfleisch, P. J., 224
Kalman, Y. M., 125
Kang, T., 38
Karasz, H. N., 401
Kass, J., 485
Kastner, H., 118
Katz, E., 387, 388, 389, 390, 394, 
395, 401
Kaufman, J., 78
Kearl, H., 505
Keenan, J., 210
Keith, V. M., 479
Kellerman, K., 139, 151, 152
Kelley, H., 155, 157, 164, 177
Kellner, D., 434
Kelly, C., 344
Kelly, J., 434
Kelly, L., 131
Keltner, D., 78
Kennedy, G. A., 313, 314
Keogh, B., 322
Kephart, W. M., 33
Kerbrat-Orecchioni, C., 462, 463
Kesebir, S., 33
Keyton, J., 275, 286
Khakimova, L., 471
Khan, S., 37
Kiecolt, K. J., 479
Kienzle, J., 201
Kim, H. S., 467
Kim, R. K., 147
Kim, S., 225
Kim, S.-H., 384, 385
Kim, Y., 358
Kim, Y. M., 32, 399
Kiousis, S., 365, 367
Kissack, H., 508
Klein, D. M., 46, 159
Kline, F. G., 384
Kmetz, M., 328
Knapp, M. L., 120, 123, 127, 
182, 185
Knobloch, L., 136, 147
Knobloch-Westerwick, S., 105
Knox, R. E., 113
Kobia, D., 166
Koenig Kellas, J., 339, 340, 344, 
345, 347, 351
Koerber, C. P., 253
Koerner, A., 32
Koester, J., 92, 153
Koestler, A., 348
Korn, J. U., 39
Korsch, B. M., 4
Kort, W., 268
Kosenko, K., 145, 495
Kouzim, A., 253
Kovalova, K., 513
Kowert, R., 417
Kramarae, C., 494, 495, 496, 497, 
498, 499, 501, 503, 504, 506
Kramer, M. W., 162, 163, 168, 197, 
225, 303
Krizek, R., 50
Krone, K., 523
Kubey, R., 401
Kuhn, M., 70, 70–71
Kurtz, H., 408
Kutto, V. C., 508
Kuypers, J. A., 336
Lahlah, E., 131
Lai, C. H., 148, 186
Lam, C., 339
Lan, H., 462
Lanming, C., 399
Lannamann, J., 102
LaPoire, B. A., 127, 131
Lariscy, R. A., 112
LaRose, R., 399
LaRossa, R., 69, 71, 72, 73
Lash, S., 426
Lasswell, H. D., 357
Latzoo, C., 303
Lauricella, S., 393, 399
Lauritesen, J. L., 408
Lavelle, J. J., 161
Lavitt, M. R., 36
Lavrakas, P. J., 163

I-6     Name Index
Lawrence, R. G., 36
Lea, M., 228
Leap, B., 70
LeBaron, M., 472
Lee, H., 351
Lee, J., 33, 38, 147
Lee, S. Y., 35
Lee, W., 385
Leeds-Hurwitz, W., 39
Leinaweaver, J., 102
Leinwohl, J., 70
Leippe, M. R., 108
Lengel, R. H., 222
Lens, K. M., 131
Leung, L., 399
Levine, T. R., 32, 124, 147
Levinson, P., 438, 444, 448
Levinson, S., 461, 463, 473
Levy, M., 396
Lewin, K., 42
Lewis, J. M., 253, 434
Lim, J., 364
Lim, S. S., 211, 473
Lim, T., 463
Lin, C. A., 385
Lin, S.-L., 467
Lin, Y., 175
Lincoln, Y.S., 63
Lindner, E. W., 381
Lingle, J. H., 111
Linz, D., 492
Linz, D. G., 408
Lipp, D., 278
Lippmann, W., 357, 404
Liska, C., 43
Littlefield, R., 206
Littlejohn, S., 44, 118, 364
Liu, J., 370
Liu, J. H., 454
Liu, Z., 168
Livingston, S., 389
Li-Vollmer, M., 401
Locke, H., 196
Loewenstein, G., 175
Logan, R. K., 453, 454
Long, E., 491
Longley, J., 252
Lord, C., 320
Lovejoy, K., 287
Loveland, M., 70
Lowry, P. B., 132
Lu, W., 383
Lucaites, J., 339
Lucas, K., 70
Lull, J., 53
Lundy, B. L., 153
Lunsford, B., 280
Luppicini, R., 303
Lustig, M., 92
Lyman, S. M., 123
Lynch, M., 116
MacCabe, C., 422
McCartha, M., 344
McClish, G., 322
McClure, K., 350
McCombs, M., 355, 356, 358, 
362–367
McConnell, A. R., 105, 108
McCroskey, J. C., 37, 58
McDaniel, E., 468
Macdonald, D., 453
McDonald, D. D., 492
McEwan, T., 32
McGloin, R., 132
McGuire, T., 117
MacIntyre, A., 342, 343
Mackay, H., 425
Mackay, R. R., 322
McKee, C., 377
McKenna-Buchanan, T., 185
Mackie, D. M., 108
McKinney, D., 152
MacKinnon, B., 14
McLaughlin, H., 253
Maclean, M., 486
McLeod, J., 384
McLuhan, E., 447, 448, 449
McLuhan, M., 398, 436–443, 
445–454
MacMannus, D., 193
MacMannus, D. M., 193
Macom, E., 327
McPhee, R., 258, 262, 264, 267, 
268, 269
McQuail, D., 13, 389, 393, 400
Magsamen-Conrad, K., 186
Maguire, K. C., 192
Maier, S., 365
Maity, S. K., 184
Malachowski, C. C., 162
Malik, A., 401
Malliet, S., 399
Mandziuk, R., 518
Marchand, P., 439, 454
Marcus, E. C., 99
Markus, M. L., 221
Marlow, M. I., 492
Marmo, J. M., 33, 225
Marr, J. C., 275
Marrin, L., 70
Marrs, P., 86
Marsh, C., 320
Marske, A. L., 408
Martin, G., 80
Martin, J., 7
Martin, J. N., 206
Martin, M., 111
Martin, T., 159
Martins, N., 408
Martins, L. L., 34
Martz, A., 36, 240
Marx, K., 29, 423, 512
Maslach, C., 109
Mastro, D., 417
Masumoto, T., 461
Matheson, C., 430
Matlin, O. S., 33
Maton, K., 80
Matsumoto, Y., 149, 226
Mattson, M., 504
Mattson-Lauters, A., 102
Matz, D. C., 110
May, A., 147
May, S., 14
Mazer, J. P., 4
Mead, G. H., 68–79
Mehta, S. K., 37
Meng, J., 105
Meraz, S., 365, 367
Mercuse, H., 424
Merrigan, G., 49
Messersmith, A., 286
Metts, S., 464, 466
Metzger, M. J., 408
Meyer, J., 108
Meyer, M., 197
Meyer, T. P., 53
Meyrowitz, J., 450, 451, 452
Miceli, M., 36
Miike, Y., 50
Mikucki-Enyart, S., 213
Miles, J. A., 268
Miller, A., 361
Miller, G. R., 138, 145
Miller, K., 5, 35, 260, 401
Miller, M. K., 81
Miller-Ott, A., 131
Millhous, L. M., 32
Milstein, T., 39, 48
Min, S., 168, 356, 399
Minnebo, J., 417

Name Index     I-7
Miron, D., 416
Misra, T. A., 108
Mitchell, W., 253
Miyata, K., 385
Modaff, D. P., 258, 259, 262, 264, 
276, 499
Molnar, G., 434
Monge, P. R., 51, 54, 157
Mongeau, P. A., 146, 147, 172, 184
Montgomery, B., 187–190, 192, 
193, 199–202, 215
Montgomery, E., 102
Moodie, D. R., 222
Moody, G. D., 132
Moody, M., 506
Moon, D., 425
Moon, H., 275
Moon, S., 492
Moore, J., 102, 201
Morgan, M., 398, 404, 406, 409, 
412, 413, 415, 416, 418, 434
Morreale, S. P., 286
Morrison, E. W., 150
Morrison, J., 445
Morrison, J. C., 438
Morrissey, M. E., 38
Mueller, A., 120
Mukherjee, A., 184
Mulac, A., 478
Mulkens, S., 131
Muller, H., 43
Muller, H. L., 25, 26
Mulrine, A., 251
Mulwo, A. K., 508
Mumby, D., 258
Munshi, D., 14
Munz, D. C., 185
Muraco, A., 33
Murdock, G., 425
Murray, D. S., 97, 99, 102
Murray, J., 334, 335
Musambira, G. W., 506
Muthusamy, S. K., 168
Mutz, D. C., 417
Myers, K. K., 256
Myers, R., 257, 258
Myers, S. A., 4, 242
Nabi, R. L., 408
Nagao, M., 473
Nakayama, T., 7, 50
Nakazawa, M., 32
Nangabo, D., 496, 498
Nayeem, N., 37
Near, J., 36
Neck, C., 253
Neel, J., 310, 321
Negus, K., 425
Neill, S., 370
Nelissen, S., 53
Nelson, C., 327
Nelson, M. R., 492
Neuendorf, K., 417, 418
Neuliep, J., 142, 146, 148, 471
Nevitt, B., 445
Newcomb, H., 413, 416, 417
Nichols, M. H., 3, 328, 333
Nichols, W. L., 216
Nicolini, D., 260
Nieminen, M., 401
Nir, L., 417
Nishida, T., 149, 467
Noelle-Neumann, E., 369–378, 380, 
384–385
Northrup, T., 404
Norwood, K., 196, 200
Norwood, K. M., 187
Nowak, K., 132
Nussman, J., 339
Oakley, J., 322
Obama, B., 39, 251, 348, 355, 367, 
373, 423, 485
O’Boyle, N., 201
O’Brien Hallstein, D. L., 513, 520
Obstfeld, D., 300
O’Connor, J., 479
Oda, T., 62
O’Dea, J., 454
O’Donnell, V., 431
O’Donnell-Trujillo, N., 272–281, 
280, 286
Oetzel, J., 461, 470, 473
Offenbecher, W., 401
Ogawa, Y., 385
Ogay, T., 491
O’Leary, C., 522
O’Leary, C. M., 524
Oles-Asevedo, D., 330
Oliver, C., 86
Olsen, T., 502
Olson, L. N., 197
O’Neill, B. S., 105
Ono, K., 47, 48
Oosthuizen, I., 286
Orange, J. B., 486
Orbe, M., 485, 498, 514, 522
Ormrod, R., 408
Ortiz, E., 14
Ortiz, M., 417
Orwell, G., 238
Ostrom, T. M., 111
Othman, J., 473
Ott, B., 430
Overton, E., 147, 175
Owlett, J. S., 216
Oxley, Z., 361, 372
Pacanowsky, M., 272–281, 286
Pace, R., 25
Pachirat, T., 279
Pais, S., 486
Palitza, K., 428
Palmieri, C., 147, 175
Papa, M. J., 302
Papadouka, M. E., 367
Park, D. W., 220
Park, R. E., 357
Parker, B. J. 401
Parker, H., 445
Parkes, D., 102
Parks, M., 146, 221, 230
Pascale, R., 159
Pask, E. B., 60
Peach, S., 511
Pearce, C., 53
Pearce, W. B., 52, 83–93, 95, 96, 
98–102
Pearson, J. C., 190, 209, 473, 500
Pederson, J. R., 197
Pemberton, A., 131
Pena, J., 232
Penney, J., 7
Perloff, R. M., 118
Perrault, E. K., 153
Perrez, M., 132
Perse, E., 399, 401
Peter, J., 148
Petersen, T., 372, 383
Peterson, I., 405
Petronio, S., 204–209, 211, 212, 
214–216
Petrun, E. L., 43
Pettey, G., 60
Philipsen, G., 85, 87, 95
Phillips, C., 339
Planalp, S., 146
Plank, R. E., 401
Poe, P., 70
Pollai, M., 118
Poole, M. S., 33, 100, 258, 262, 
264, 268, 269

I-8     Name Index
Popescu, D., 70
Popper, K. 50
Porten-Cheen, P., 375
Porter, R., 468
Postman, N., 438, 450, 
450–451, 452
Potter, W. J., 377, 408
Powell, K., 197
Prestano, K., 147, 175
Primavera, L. H., 159
Propp, K., 197
Pruitt, D., 252
Pugh, A. J., 500
Purcell, K., 383
Quigley, N., 275
Quinn, K., 399, 473
Rabalais, N., 339
Radway, J., 424, 434
Rafaeli, S., 125
Ragas, M. W., 365, 367
Rainie, L., 383
Ramirez, A., Jr., 147, 148, 225, 229, 
230, 232
Ramsey, M. C., 18, 339
Raschick, M., 160
Raven, B., 264
Rawlins, W. K., 161, 191, 195, 
197, 199
Ray, T., 21
Read, S. J., 114
Reagle, J., 62
Real, M., 425
Rehg, M., 36
Reierson, J. L., 207
Reimer, B., 432
Reitzes, D. C., 69, 71, 72, 73, 75
Remillard, V., 307
Reuther, C., 501
Reynolds, P. D., 47
Reynolds, P., 43
Reynolds, R., 151, 152
Reynolds, T., 521
Rhoades-Shanock, L. R., 34
Rhys, W. R., 310
Rice, E., 166
Richards, I. A., 27
Richards, K., 216
Richardson, B. K., 517
Richmond, V. P., 37, 58
Riddle, K., 407, 408
Riecken, H. W., 114
Riley, P., 268
Rittle, H., 242
Rivera-Sanchez, M., 211
Roach, D., 37
Roberts, F., 216
Roberts, S., 361
Robinson, J. D., 367
Rocci, A., 276
Roe, K., 418
Roefs, A., 131
Roethlisberger, F. L., 36
Roffers, M., 75
Rogelberg, S. G., 34
Rogers, E. M., 357, 362
Rogers, L. E., 171, 186
Rogerson, K., 360
Rogerson-Revell, P., 360, 492
Roloff, M. E., 131, 156, 157, 158, 
162, 164, 167, 168
Romer, D., 404
Romney, M., 485
Romo, L. K., 216
Rorty, A., 318
Rose, J., 253
Rose, R., 473
Roselle, L., 360
Rosen, B., 33
Rosen, L. D., 33
Rosenberg, J., 220
Rosness, R., 300, 303
Ross, V., 10, 20
Rostow, W., 248
Rothwell, J. D., 240, 479
Rountree, C., 332
Rowland, L., 336
Rowland, R., 348, 350
Roy, C., 468
Rubin, A., 393
Rubin, L., 195
Ruby, P. D., 201
Ruddick, S., 518
Rudnick, J., 185
Rudra, K., 184
Ruggiero, T. E., 401
Rupp, D. E., 161
Russ, T. L., 37
Russo, M., 120
Rutherford, D. K., 146
Ryan, E., 311, 321
Ryan, E. B., 486
Rydell, R. J., 105, 108
Ryder, A., 427
Sabatelli, R., 157, 167, 168
Sachdev, I., 482
Sackey, E., 175
Safayeni, F., 34
Sahlstein, E., 185, 192, 194
Salem, P., 300
Salmon, C. T., 370, 384, 386
Salwen, M., 44, 46, 385
Samovar, L., 468
Samp, J. A., 461
Sanchez, V., 339
Sanderson, J., 508
Sandoval, J., 39, 48
Sanker, D., 240
Sapir, E., 327
Sargent, J., 216
Satir, V., 32
Satterlee, K. L., 147
Saussure, L., 276
Sawyer, K., 292
Saxton, G. D., 287
Schachter, S., 114
Schafer, M. L., 36
Scharp, K. M., 188, 200, 201
Schein, E. H., 285
Schell, J., 347
Schnabel, E., 339
Schoebi, D., 132
Schramm, W., 10, 14, 392
Schrodt,P., 125
Schultz, B., 33
Schultz-Huxman, S., 312
Schwandt, T. A., 63
Schwartz, J., 240, 244, 253
Schyns, G., 131
Scolari, C., 438
Scott, C. W., 34
Scott, E., 99
Scott, K. D., 163
Scott, L., 182
Seate, A. A., 417
Sedlar, G., 168
Seeger, M., 43, 303
Seibold, D., 36, 256, 257, 258, 
262, 269
Sekerak, G. J., 242
Selby, G., 36
Sellnow, T. L., 43, 303
Semlak, J. L., 190
Sethi, M., 184
Sevenans, J., 362
Shahar, G., 174
Shalley, C. E., 34
Shanahan, J., 384, 398, 404, 414, 
415, 418
Shannon, C., 9, 10, 14, 28

Name Index     I-9
Shannon, C. E., 136
Shaw, A., 506
Shaw, D., 355, 358
Shaw, D. L., 356
Shaw, M., 242
Shaw, M. E., 33
Sheckels, T., 329
Sheehan, B., 382
Shehan, C., 157, 167, 168
Sherblom, J. C., 224
Sheriff, R., 503–504
Shimanoff, S., 52, 473
Shin, D., 383
Shockley-Zalabak, P. S., 286
Short, J. A., 222
Shrank, W. H., 33
Shulman, H., 233
Shutiva, C., 39, 486
Sicafuse, L. L., 81
Sidelinger, R. J., 131, 168
Sierra, C., 176
Signorielli, N., 406, 407, 409, 412
Silk, K. J., 153
Sillars, A., 473
Silverman, D., 60
Simmons, V., 114
Simon, D., 114
Simons, H., 334
Simpson, A., 355
Simpson, C., 385
Simpson, O. J., 318
Sioufi, R., 482
Skewes, E., 416
Sloan, W. D., 46
Small, T., 7
Smith, P., 80
Smith, P. B., 149
Smith, P. M., 480, 483
Smith, R. A., 185
Smyth, R., 168
Snack, J., 267
Snavely, L., 98
Snedaker, K., 508
Snyder, M., 168
Soar, M., 434
Sohn, Y., 112
Soliz, J., 478, 483
Solomon, D. H., 37, 105, 138, 147
Southwell, B., 367
Sparks, G. G., 131, 442
Sparrow, R., 322
Spears, R., 228
Speer, R. B., 488
Spencer, A. T., 377
Spencer, S. J., 116
Spitzberg, B. H., 491
Sproule, J. M., 310
Stacks, D., 44, 46
Stafford, L., 156, 157
Stafford, R. S., 492
Stanley, J., 519
Starcher, S., 216
Steele, C., 116
Steimel, S. J., 70
Stein, I., 90
Steinberg, M., 145
Steiner, L., 433
Steiner, M. A., 330
Steinman, C., 433
Step, M., 393
Stephens, N., 438–439
Stern, L., 491
Sternberg, J., 450
Stewart, J. B., 318
Stewart, M., 318
Stock, Y., 225
Stockstill, C. J., 37
Stokes, A., 389, 399
Stone, J., 117
Stones, R., 268
Stoycheff, E., 385
Strate, L., 451, 454
Strauman, E. C., 344
Street, R., 32, 484, 487–488
Strine, M., 505
Stroh, D. P., 54
Stroud, S. R., 38
Such, J. M., 176
Sunnafrank, M., 148, 151
Sunstein, C., 238
Suppiah, R. W., 473
Surber, J. P., 434
Sutcliffe, K. M., 299–300
Suter, E. A., 39, 351
‘t Hart, O., 250, 251
Tajeddin, G., 34
Tajfel, H., 479
Takai, J., 461
Takeshita, T., 366
Tamburrini, N., 492
Tang, J. H., 186
Tanno, D., 464
Tasa, T., 34
Tate, A., 367
Taylor, A., 302, 495, 496
Taylor, D. A., 170, 171, 173, 174, 177, 
178, 180, 182, 183, 184, 185
Taylor, J., 517
Taylor, M. F., 75
Taylor, S., 105
Templin, P., 285
Tenzek, K. E., 147
Thatcher, M. S., 201
Theiss, J. A., 37
Theye, K., 339, 350
Thibault, J., 155, 157, 164, 177
Thomas, L. J., 201
Thomas-Maddox, C., 58
Thompson, J., 216
Thorne, L., 286
Thorsten, Q., 417
Tidwell, L. C., 147, 232
Tilley, E., 508
Tilly, C., 156
Timmer, S. G., 168
Timmerman, L., 192
Tindale, C., 311
Ting-Toomey, S., 194, 459–463, 
465–471, 473
Titsworth, S., 4
Toller, P., 194, 197
Toma, C., 225
Tomasulo, D., 107
Tong, S. T., 223, 225, 226, 227, 230
Torcello, L., 19
Toulmin, S., 343
Tourish, D., 150
Tracy, K., 462, 465, 473
Tracy, S., 263
Trahan, D. P., 185
Treadwell, D. T., 46
Treichler, P., 506
Trenholm, S., 5
Tretheway, A., 285
Trevino, A. J., 156
Triandis, H., 466
Trimble, M., 517
Triolo, P. K., 289
Trubisky, P., 467
Trussell, N., 163
Tsfati, Y., 370, 386
Tuffin, K., 285
Turkle, S., 38, 444, 454
Turnage, A. K., 38
Turner, C., 265
Turner, J., 479
Turner, J. C., 479
Turner, J. H., 44, 114, 116, 146, 480
Turner, L. H., 32, 121, 171, 185, 
464, 500
Turow, J., 391
Uli, J., 473
Ulmer, R., 303

I-10     Name Index
Underation, S., 344
Urquiza, A. J., 168
Utz, S., 224, 225
Vadrevu, S., 473
Valdesolo, P., 152
Valkenburg, P. M., 148
Van Acker, A., 417
Van Aelst, P., 362
Van den Buick, J., 53, 417, 418
Van Der Heide, B., 220, 225, 
232, 233
Van der Westhuizen, P. C., 286
Van Doorn, J., 131
Van Epps, G., 303
Van Every, E. J., 302
Van Krieken, R., 80
Van Manen, M., 19
Van Scotter, J., 36
Vandekerckhove, W., 251
Vangelisti, A., 185
VanLear, C. A., 6, 185
Vasconcelos, A. C., 225
Vaughan, E., 486
Venetis, M. K., 205
Venette, S. J., 339
Vinsel, A., 185
von Bertalanffy, L., 55
Wachtel, E., 454
Wack, D. L., 242
Waero, I., 300
Wagner, A., 197
Wald, M., 240, 253
Waldeck, J., 36
Waldron, V. R., 36
Walgrave, S., 362
Walker, L., 162
Walker, R., 322
Wallace, R. A., 514
Wallace, W. L., 59
Walster, E. H., 111
Walther, J. B., 126, 147, 148, 
218–230, 232, 233
Walther-Martin, W., 131
Wamucii, P., 344
Wang, C. C., 186
Wang, Q., 367
Wang, T. R., 190, 201
Wang, Z., 230
Ward, M., 411
Waresh, M., 311
Wartella, E., 399
Wassermann, I., 89
Watson, B. M., 489
Watzlawick, P., 6, 55
Weathers, M., 508
Weaver, D. H., 364
Weaver, W., 9, 10, 14, 28
Weaver, W., 136
Webb, M., 114
Webb, S. K., 351
Weber, K. D., 162
Weedon, C., 423, 434
Weeks, B., 367
Wei, R., 399
Weick, K., 287, 289, 290, 292–295, 
297–303
Welton, K., 520
Wesley, M., 18
West, K., 355
West, R., 32, 121, 171, 185, 307, 
464, 480, 500
Westerfield, M. M., 105
Westerman, D., 225
Westermann, D. A., 216
Whitchurch, G. G., 54
White, N., 53, 322, 408
White, J., 159
White, J. M., 46
White, M. A., 168
Whiting, G., 87, 88, 97
Whorf, B. L., 327
Wicklund, R., 113, 116
Wiemann, J., 482
Wiggins, B. E., 259
Williams, E., 222
Williams, J. C., 500
Williams, K., 307
Willmarth, S., 453
Willoughby, B. J., 33
Wilmot, W., 12
Wilson, B. J., 216
Wilson, B., 408, 417
Wilson, N., 150
Windahl, S., 396
Windhal, S., 13
Winslow, L., 325
Winter, S., 225
Winzenburg, S., 185
Wishart, I., 253
Wolf, M. A., 514
Wolf, M. A., 53
Wolhuter, C. C., 286
Womack, D. F., 285
Wood, J. T., 199, 495, 500, 505, 
511, 512, 514, 516, 518, 520, 
521, 522
Wood, W., 110
Woodfin, R., 322
Woodward, G., 426
Worchel, S., 479
Wrench, J., 58
Wright, C. N., 32, 131
Wu, A., 33
Wu, H. D., 361
Wynn, D., 242
Yakova, L., 339
Yamamoto, H., 385
Yang, S., 467
Yerby, J., 46
Yokochi, Y., 461
Yoneoka, J., 487
Yoo, J., 151
Young, T., 303
Zafirovski, M., 167
Zaidi, A., 393
Zajone, R., 241, 242
Zak, M., 344
Zaytseva, O., 518
Zelley, E. D., 56
Zeng, L., 399
Zhai, Q., 168
Zhang, Q., 147, 175
Zhang, W., 385, 471, 473
Zhang, Y., 34
Zhao, S., 78
Zhao, Y., 520
Zhau, S., 46
Zhou, S., 358
Zhuang, P., 450
Zimbardo, P. G., 109
Zimmer, M., 454
Zuengler, J., 488, 
489, 490

I-11
abstract symbols, 7
accent mobility model, 478
accommodation
See also Communication 
Accommodation Theory 
(CAT); overaccommodation
defined, 478
norms and, 482–483
varying in social appropriateness, 
483
accountability, 250
accounting fraud, 15
accuracy, 520
acquired immunodeficiency 
syndrome (AIDS), 381, 
421–422
act, 331
the active audience, 396
active audience, 389, 391, 396
activeness, 397
active strategies, 144
activity, 397
actual self, 220
adaptability, 469
Adaptive Structuration Theory, 
258
Adelphia Communications, 
16
adjustment, 297
advertising, 391
affective exchange stage, 182–183
affective needs, 390
affiliative constraints, 241
African American women, 511, 
514, 518, 523
agency, 262–263, 327, 331–332
agenda, 360
media, 361, 363, 364
policy, 361–362
public, 361
agenda setting, 357
attribute, 360–361
levels of, 360–361
three-part process of, 361–364
Agenda Setting Theory, 355–368
assumptions of, 359–360
critique of, 366–367
establishing, 358–359
expansions and refinements to, 
364–365
at a glance, 359
heurism, 367
history of research on, 356–359
integration of, 365–366
levels of agenda setting, 
360–361
in popular press, 363
pretheoretical conceptualizing, 
357–358
three-part process of agenda 
setting, 361–364
utility of, 366–367
agent, 262, 331
AIDS, 381, 421–422
alienation, 423
allocative resources, 264
Altman, Irwin, 171
American Dream, 423
American Horror Story, 429
American Society of Law, 
Medicine, and Ethics, 18
Animal Liberation Front, 380
animal rights groups, 380
antecedent conditions, 143–144
anthrax scares, 405
anti-bullying laws, 360
antiwar coalition, 380
Anxiety-Uncertainty Management 
(AUM), 148–149
applied research, 59
approbation facework, 464
archetypes, 92
Aristotle
Golden Mean principle, 16
life of, 308–309
paradigm shift, 340
Rhetoric, 21, 36, 206, 
306–323
arousal
cognitive, 127
defined, 127
physical, 127
arousal value, 127
arrangement, 313, 314
asymmetric information, 148
asynchronous communication, 223, 
229
attitude, 105, 111, 332
attraction, 483–484
attribute agenda setting, 360–361
attributions, 228
audience, 432
active, 389, 391, 396
Aristotle’s views on, 307, 
309–310
counter-hegemony, 429
decoding, 431–433
effective persuasiveness and, 
314
needs and gratifications of, 
389–390
oppositional position, 432
rhetorical tradition and, 26–27
speaker-audience relationship, 
310
audience analysis, 310
authoritative resources, 264
autonomy and connection, 192–193, 
196
avoiding (AV) style, 470
axiology, 48, 49, 50
axioms
defined, 140
of Uncertainty Reduction Theory, 
140–142
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 188
balance, 216
beauty, preoccupation with, 426
behavior
changing, 112
constitutive rules, 97
expectations and, 78
influence of public opinion 
on, 376
Subject Index

I-12     Subject Index
behavior, (continued)
information-seeking, 141, 144
as loop between stimuli and 
responses, 72
meaning behind, 72
negative, 111
regulative rules, 98
self-concept as motivation for, 
74–75
social norms and, 75
unethical, 15
behavioral sequences, 163
behavioral uncertainty, 137
behavior control, 163
behavior cycles, 297–298
behaviorism, 327
beliefs
individual’s system of, 28
in inherent morality of the 
group, 247
bending, in television, 414
biased scanning, 115
biases, 50
confirmatory bias, 112
bias of communication, 439
Biden, Joe, 348, 485
birth, premature, 197
Black Feminist Theory, 513
Black Lives Matter, 63, 381, 382
blending, in television, 414
blogging, 216
Blumer, Herbert, 69, 70, 72
Blumler, Jay, 393–394
blurring, television, 451–452
body, 314
Boeing, 16
boredom, 145
boundaries
collective, 212
defined, 54
“fuzzy,” 214
personal, 212
private, 210–211
thick, 214
thin, 214
types, 212–214
boundary coordination, 212
boundary linkage, 212
boundary ownership, 213
boundary permeability, 214
boundary turbulence, 214
breadth, 176
breadth time, 176
Brown, Scott, 332
Buddhism, 16
Burgoon, Judee, 120–121, 124, 128, 
129, 131
Burke, Kenneth, 325, 326
business ethics, 15–16
buyer’s remorse, 113
calibration, 55
Calvin and Hobbes, 405
canons, of rhetoric, 312–317
capitalism, 511, 512
cartoons, 446
CAT. See Communication 
Accommodation Theory 
(CAT)
catalyst criteria, 211
causal argument, 404–405
cause, 51
CDT. See Cognitive Dissonance 
Theory (CDT)
celebrity culture, 362
cell phones, 397–399
Center for Contemporary Cultural 
Studies (CCCS), 422
Challenger space shuttle disaster, 
240, 249
change, 290
channel, 9
channel management, 229
characterological coherence, 346
charisma, 483
charmed loops, 93
Chicago School, 70
child labor, 428
Child Pornography Protection 
Act, 19
children
gifted, 78
in stepfamilies, 197
Christianity, 16–17
chronemic cues, 225–226
civic spaces, 313
Civil Rights Act, 39
class
cultural patterns, 92
struggles, 29
class structure, 515
Clinton, Bill, 330
Clinton, Hillary Rodham, 330, 508
closed-mindedness, 247–248
CMM. See Coordinated 
Management of Meaning 
(CMM)
co-creation, 29
Co-cultural Theory, 501
co-cultures, 39
code, 59
coercive power, 265
cognitions, 105
cognitive arousal, 127
cognitive dissonance
buyer’s remorse, 113
consistency and, 105–106
coping with, 110–111
defined, 105, 107
magnitude of, 109–110
perception and, 111–112
Cognitive Dissonance Theory 
(CDT), 104–118
assumptions of, 108–109
concepts and processes of, 
109–112
coping with dissonance, 110–111
critique of, 115–118
at a glance, 107
integration of, 115
magnitude of dissonance, 
109–110
minimal justification, 112
perception, 111–112
persuasion and, 113–115
in popular press, 107
testability of, 117–118
utility of, 115–117
cognitive needs, 390
cognitive uncertainty, 137
coherence
characterological, 346
defined, 345
material, 346
structural, 345–346
cohesiveness, 33, 45, 240–241, 243
collective boundary, 212
collective rationalization, 247–248
collectivism, 92–93, 466–469, 471
colleges and universities, ethics at, 
17–18
Columbia space shuttle disaster, 
240, 244–245, 249
comfortability, 182–183
commemorative campaigns, 518
commitment, 182–183
communication
asynchronous, 223, 229
bias of, 439
centrality of, 86
computer-mediated, 223–224
cultural, 31, 38–39
defining, 5–8
ethics and, 14–20
face-to-face, 219–220, 224

Subject Index     I-13
gang, 279
interactional model of, 10–12
interpersonal, 31, 32–33, 
223–224
intrapersonal, 30–32
linear model of, 9–10
mass, 31, 37–38
models of understanding, 8–14
nonverbal, 120, 126–127, 
225–226
organizational, 31, 34–36, 
288–289
public/rhetorical, 31, 36–37
small group, 31, 33–34
as social process, 5–7
stepfamilies, 197
synchronous, 223
team, 33–34
transactional model of, 12–13
value of, 4
written, 443
Communication Accommodation 
Theory (CAT), 58, 476–493
assumptions of, 480–483
convergence, 483–486
critique of, 490–492
divergence, 487–488
heurism of, 492
integration of, 490
logical consistency of, 491
overaccommodation, 488–490
in popular press, 485
scope of, 490–491
social psychology and social 
identity, 478–480
ways to adapt, 483–490
communication apprehension 
(CA), 37
Communication Boundary 
Management, 207
See also Communication Privacy 
Management (CPM) Theory
communication field
contexts in, 30–41
critical tradition in, 29
cybernetic tradition in, 28
Feminist Standpoint Theory 
and, 518
phenomenological tradition in, 
27–28
rhetorical tradition in, 26–27
semiotic tradition in, 27
socio-cultural tradition in, 29
socio-psychological tradition in, 
28
traditions in, 25–30
Communication Privacy 
Management (CPM) Theory, 
204–217
assumptions of, 207–208
critique of, 214–216
evolution of, 206–207
at a glance, 207, 479
heurism of, 216
integration of, 215
key terms and principles of, 
208–214
logical consistency, 215–216
in popular press, 210
private boundaries, 210–211
private disclosures, 208–209
private information, 208
private information boundary 
turbulence principle, 214
private information control 
principle, 209–210
private information co-ownership 
and guardianship principle, 
212–214
private information ownership 
principle, 209
private information rules 
principle, 211–212
utility of, 216
communication research
qualitative approach, 60–64
scientific method, 58–60
communication skills, 307
communication theory, 21–22, 25, 
29–30
communicator reward valence, 
129–130
The Communist Manifesto (Marx), 29
comparison level (CL), 161–163
comparison level for alternatives 
(CLalt), 161–163
compliments, 90
compromising (CO) style, 470
computer-mediated communication 
(CMC), 223–224
concepts, 45
nominal, 45
real, 45
conclusion, 314
concrete symbols, 7
concurrence seeking, 245–246
Condit, Celeste, 334–335
confidence, 230–231
confirmatory bias, 112
conflict, 465
family, 99
interpersonal, 470
managing across cultures, 
470–472
unwanted repetitive patterns, 
98–100
conscientious objectors, 251
consciousness, 427
discursive, 262–263
practical, 262–263
consistency theories, 105, 109
consonance, 105, 378
consonant relationship, 106
constitutive rules, 97
consubstantiation, 329
consumerism, 197
consumer product advertising, 391
content, 89–90
context factors, 125
contexts
of communication, 30–41
defined, 30
high-context cultures, 149
low-context cultures, 149
in Narrative Paradigm, 343
situational, 30
for Uncertainty Reduction 
Theory, 148–150
contextual dialectics, 195–196
contradiction, 191
control, 47, 505
convergence, 483–486
conversations
See also speech
coordination of, 95–97
flow of, 85
inner, 77
intrapersonal, 77
Cooley, Charles, 77
cool media, 445–447
Coordinated Management of 
Meaning (CMM)
assumptions of, 85–88
charmed loops, 93–94
content, 89–90
coordination, 95–96
criticism of, 100–102
cultural patterns, 92–93
episodes, 90–91
at a glance, 85
heurism of, 102
hierarchy of organized meaning, 
88–93
influences on, 96–97
integration of, 100

I-14     Subject Index
Coordinated Management of 
Meaning (CMM), (continued)
life scripts, 91–92
parsimony o, 101
in popular press, 99
relationship, 91
rules/unwanted repetitive 
patterns, 97–100
scope of, 100–101
speech act, 90
strange loops, 94
utility of, 101
coordination, 95–96
core criteria, 211
corporate culture, 427
Corporate Ethics Statements, 16
corporations, ethics and, 15–16
correlation, 357–358
The Cosby Show, 429
costs, 156
relational, 177–179
Couch, Carl, 71
counter-hegemony, 429–431
Counter Hegemony Project, 429
covering law approach, 51, 52
CPM. See Communication Privacy 
Management (CPM) Theory
credibility, 483
crime, on college campuses, 17
crime rates, 411
critical approach, 47–48
critical theory, 29, 50
Cultivation Theory as, 413–415
critical thinking skills, 21
critical tradition, 29
CT. See Cultivation Theory (CT)
cues filtered-out theories, 221–222, 
225
cultivation, 45
Cultivation Analysis, 406
cultivation differential, 410
Cultivation Theory (CT), 403–419
assumptions of, 407–409
as critical theory, 413–415
critique of, 416–418
development of, 406
four-step process, 409–410
at a glance, 407
heurism of, 417
integration of, 416
logical consistency of, 416–417
mainstreaming, 410–411, 412
Mean World Index, 412–413
in popular press, 411
in practice, 415
processes and products of, 
409–413
resonance, 411, 412
test of time of, 417–418
utility of, 417
cultural communication, 31, 38–39
Cultural Environment Movement, 
414–415
Cultural Indicators Project, 404
cultural patterns, 92–93
Cultural Studies, 420–435
assumptions of, 424–426
audience decoding, 431–433
counter-hegemony, 429–431
critique of, 433–435
at a glance, 422
hegemony, 426–429
heurism of, 434–435
integration of, 433
logical consistency of, 433–434
Marxist legacy, 423–424
in popular press, 428
utility of, 434
cultural values, 77
culture, 38, 274
activities of, 425
celebrity, 362
collectivistic, 466–469, 471
conflict management across, 
470–472
corporate, 427
expectations and, 125–126
face and, 460–461, 462
face management and, 469–470
high-context, 149
ideology, 424–425
individualistic, 466–469
low-context, 149
media and, 438
negotiation and, 472
organizational, 274–279
pervasiveness of, 425
private information rules and, 
211–212
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
and, 148–150
culture wars, 425
cumulativeness, 377–378
cybernetics, 28
cycles, 297–298
cyclic alternation, 198, 199
Darwin, Charles, 291–292
data, 59
date rape, 503
daytime television talk shows, 
429–430
debate, 307
decision-making procedures, lack 
of, 244–245
decoding, 431–433
deductive logic, 59
Defense of Marriage Act, 373
deliberation, 307
deliberative rhetoric, 317, 319
delivery, 313, 316–317
democracy, 307
dependency overaccommodation, 
489
depenetrate, 173
depth, 176
determinism, 327
Dewey, John, 70
dialectical unity, 190
dialectic approach, 188–189
dialectics
See also Relational Dialectics 
Theory (RDT)
autonomy and connection, 
192–193, 196
contextual, 195–196
core concepts, 191–192
interactional, 195, 196, 198
joy and grief, 197
novelty and predictability, 
194–195, 196, 197
openness and protection, 194, 196
presence and absence, 197
public and private, 195, 196
real and ideal, 195–196
responses to, 198–200
role, 197
direct exchange, 165
discourse, 340
discursive consciousness, 262–263
disinhibition searching, 145
dispositional matrix, 164
disqualifying, 198, 199
dissonance, 45, 105, 107
See also cognitive dissonance
dissonance ratio, 110
dissonant relationship, 106
distance
intimate, 122
personal, 122
public, 123
social, 122–123
divergence, 487–488
diversion, 389
division, 328

Subject Index     I-15
division of labor, 499–500, 521
domestic violence, 503
dominant group, 498, 501, 514
dominant-hegemonic position, 432
dominant position, 432
dominating (DO) style, 470
double agency, 195
double-interact loops, 297–298
drama, 325–326
Dramatism, 324–337
assumptions of, 326–328
critique of, 333–336
at a glance, 326
guilt/redemption, 329–331
heurism, 336
identification, 328–329
integration of, 333
as new rhetoric, 328–332
parsimony, 334
pentad, 331–332
in popular press, 332
scope of, 333–334
substance, 328–329
utility of, 334–336
dramatistic ratios, 332
drive reduction, 158
driverless automobiles, 450
dual climates of opinion, 379
dualisms, 524
dualistic approach, 188, 189
duality of structure, 263–266
duration, 295–296
dyadic uniqueness, 183
ecology, 438
effect, 51
effective matrix, 164
effort, 297
electronic era, 443–444
electronic interdependence, 441
electronic media, 441, 444
Emory University, 18
emotions, SI Theory and, 81
empirical approach, 47, 48
enactment, 299–300
enculturation performances, 281, 
283–284
enhancement, 448
enmeshment, 91
Enron, 15
entertainment, ethics, 16, 17
entry phase, 139
environment, 8
environmental advocates, 380
epideictic rhetoric, 317, 318–319
episode relationships, 92
episodes, 90–91
epistemology, 48, 49, 50, 516
epochs, 441
equifinality, 55–56
equilibrium, 216
equivocality, 293–294
enactment, 299–300
principles of, 298–299
reducing, 299–301
retention, 300–301
selection, 300
essentialism, 522
ethics
business and industry, 15–16
communication and, 14–20
defined, 14
entertainment, 16, 17
higher education, 16, 17–18
medicine, 16, 18
politics, 16, 19
religious, 16–17
technology, 16, 19
ethnography, 279–281
ethos, 310, 311
Eurocentrism, 44, 50
evaluation, 481
evolutionary theory, 291–292
EVT. See Expectancy Violations 
Theory (EVT)
exit phase, 139
expectancies, 124–125
Expectancy Violations Theory 
(EVT), 119–132
arousal, 127
assumptions of, 124–127
communicator reward valence, 
129–130
critique of, 130–132
at a glance, 124
heurism of, 131–132
integration of, 130
in practice, 121
proxemics, 121–123
scope of, 131
territoriality, 123–124
testability of, 131
threat threshold, 127–128
utility of, 131
violation valence, 128–129
expectations
culture and, 125–126
interactional, 125
pre-interactional, 125
expert power, 266
explanation, 136
exploratory affective exchange 
stage, 181
external noise, 10
external stress, 245
extractive strategy, 148
face, 461–462
negative, 462
politeness theory and, 462–463
positive, 462
Facebook, 40, 216, 225
Facebook Addiction Disorder 
(FAD), 40
face concern, 462
face management, 469–470
face need, 462
Face-Negotiation Theory (FNT), 
459–475
assumptions of, 464–466
conflict, 465
conflict management across 
cultures, 470–472
critique of, 472–474
face, 461–462
face management, 469–470
face-saving, 465–466
facework, 463–464
at a glance, 463
heurism of, 473
individualistic and collectivistic 
cultures, 466–469
integration of, 472
logical consistency of, 
472–473
politeness theory, 462–463
self-identity, 464–465
face restoration, 466
face-saving, 465–466
face-threatening acts (FTAs), 465
face-to-face (FtF) communication, 
219–220, 224
facework, 463–464
FAD, 40
faith, ethics and, 16–17
false consciousness, 427
family conflict, as unwanted 
repetitive pattern, 99
fate control, 163
The Fate of the Earth (Schell), 
347
Fate of the Earth (Schell), 347
feedback, 11, 12, 55, 229–230, 
297–298
feminism, 512

I-16     Subject Index
“The Feminist Standpoint: 
Developing the Ground 
for a Specifically Feminist 
Historical Materialism,” 512
Feminist Standpoint Theory (FST), 
510–525
assumptions of, 514–518
communication field and, 518
critique of, 521–524
critique of theory and research, 
513–514
at a glance, 513
historical foundations of, 512
integration of, 521
key concepts, 519–521
in popular press, 517
sexual division of labor, 521
situated knowledges, 520–521
standpoint, 519–520
utility of, 522–524
voice, 519
fidelity, 346
field journal, 280
field of experience, 11, 13
first order effects, 411
Flint, Michigan water crisis, 427
FNT. See Face-Negotiation Theory 
(FNT)
forensic rhetoric, 317, 318
fraction of selection, 392
framing, 361, 363
Frankfurt School theorists, 
424
fraud, 15
free speech, 19
fresh act, 259
FST. See Feminist Standpoint 
Theory (FST)
FTAs, 465
“fuzzy boundaries,” 214
games, 440
Game Theory, 159–160
gang communication, 279
gatekeeping, 357, 360
Geertz, Clifford, 275–276, 279
gender
defined, 499
differences in perception, 499
gender gap, on Wikipedia, 62
gender polarization lens, 500
generalized exchange, 165
generalized other, 79
General Systems Theory (GST), 
53–54, 290–291, 441
Giddens, Anthony, 256–261
gifted children, 78
given matrix, 163–164
glass ceiling, 501–502
global village, 441
glosses, 315
Goffman, Erving, 461
Golden Mean, 16
good reasons, 347
Government Accountability 
Project, 19
Gramsci, Antonio, 426–427
Greenpeace, 380
group dynamics, 242
group insulation, 244
groups
belief in the inherent morality 
of, 247
cohesiveness, 33, 240–241, 243
decision making in, 241–242
homogeneity, 242, 245
overestimation of, 246–247
problem-solving, 240
roles in, 34
stress, 245
task-oriented, 240
Groupthink, 237–254
affiliative constraints, 241
antecedent conditions of, 
243–245
assumptions of, 240–242
closed-mindedness, 247–248
cohesiveness, 240–241
concurrence seeking, 245–246
critique of, 252–253
defined, 238–239
examples of, 249
at a glance, 239
group cohesiveness and, 243
group stress, 245
heurism of, 253
integration of, 251–252
overestimation of the group, 
246–247
in practice, 246
pressures toward uniformity, 
248–249
scope of, 252
structural factors, 244–245
symptoms of, 245–249
testability of, 252–253
test of time, 253
ways to prevent, 249–251
GST. See General Systems Theory 
(GST)
guesses, 90
guilt, 329, 335
Gulf War, 249
Gutting, Gary, 348
habitual rules, 53
harassment, 505
hard core, 380–382
Harstock, Nancy, 512
Hawthorne experiments, 35–36
Hegel, Georg Wilhelm 
Friedrich, 512
hegemony, 426–429
Hertzog, Herta, 392
heurism, 57, 58
of Agenda Setting Theory, 367
of Communication 
Accommodation Theory, 492
of Communication Privacy 
Management Theory, 216
of Coordinated Management of 
Meaning, 102
of Cultivation Theory, 417, 
434–435
of Dramatism, 336
of Expectancy Violations Theory, 
131–132
of Face-Negotiation Theory, 473
of Groupthink, 253
of Media Ecology Theory, 
453–454
of Narrative Paradigm, 351
of Organizational Culture Theory, 
285–286
of Organizational Information 
Theory, 303
of Relational Dialectics Theory, 
201
of Rhetorical Theory, 321–322
of Social Exchange Theory, 
168–169
of Social Penetration Theory, 
185–186
of Spiral of Science Theory, 385
of Uncertainty Reduction Theory, 
153
of Uses and Gratification Theory, 
401
hierarchy, 35, 54, 329–330
high-context cultures, 149
higher education
ethics, 16, 17–18
hierarchy in, 35
Hollywood, 17
Homans, George, 156

Subject Index     I-17
homeostatic, 55
homogeneity, 242, 245
Homo narrans, 342
honesty, 183–184
hot media, 445–447
Hovland, Carl, 28
hubris, 244
Hudson, Rock, 21
human choice, 207
human nature, assumptions 
about, 158
Hurricane Katrina, 249, 361
hyperpersonal effect, 227
hyperpersonal model, 227
hyperpersonal perspective, 
227–231, 233
channel management, 229
feedback, 229–230
idealization of the sender, 228
selective self-representation, 
227–228
warranting, 230–231
hypotheses, 52
I, 78–79
ice age analogy, 409
ideal self, 220
identification, 328–329
ideology, 48, 424–425
idioms, 182
illusion of invulnerability, 246–247
illusion of unanimity, 248
imperviousness to influence, 396–397
implicit theorists, 43
importance, 109
impression management, 116, 
220–221, 224–225, 230–231
indirect stereotyping, 485–486
individual
in organizations, 277
in society, 79
society and, 75
individual communicator factors, 
125
Individual Differences Perspective, 
388
individualism, 92, 466–469, 468–469
inductive logic, 59
Industrial Revolution, 499
industry, ethics and, 15–16
information, organizing, 288–289
information environment, 294–295
information seeking, online, 148
information-seeking behavior, 
141, 144
in-groups, 479
Initial Interaction Theory. See 
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
(URT)
Innis, Harold Adams, 439
insults, 90
integrating (IN) style, 470
integration, 198, 199
intentionality, 396
interactional dialectics, 195, 
196, 198
interactional expectations, 125
interactional model of 
communication, 10–12
Interaction Theory. See Uncertainty 
Reduction Theory (URT)
interactive strategies, 144–145
interdependence, 54
intergroup overaccommodation, 489
intermedia influence, 364–365
internal stress, 245
Internet
as enhancement, 448
free speech and, 19
obsolescence and, 448
reversal by, 450
in Russia, 378
Uses and Gratification Theory 
and, 397–399
interpersonal communication, 
31–33, 223–224
interpersonal conflict, 470
interpersonal meaning, 88
interpretive approach, 47, 48
intimacy, 183–184
intimate distance, 122
intrapersonal communication, 30–32
introduction, 314
invention, 312–313
invulnerability, 246–247
Iowa School, 70–71
irrelevant relationship, 106
ISIS, 249
isolation, 374–375
James, William, 70
Jeanne Clery Act, 17
Jefferson, Thomas, 249
Johnson, Lyndon, 406
joy and grief dialectic, 197
Judeo-Christian ethics, 16–17
judicial rhetoric, 318
Kennedy, John F., 447
Kennedy, Ted, 335
knowledge, 516, 517
knowledge gathering, 516
Kopechne, Mary Jo, 335
Kuhn, Manford, 70–71
labels, 78
labor, sexual division of, 499–500, 
521
lack of decision-making procedures, 
244–245
lack of impartial leadership, 244
language, 27, 76, 327
effects of, 481–482
Lasswell, Harold D., 357
last-minute swing, 380
laws of media, 447–450
leadership, lack of impartial, 244
legitimate power, 266
Lewinsky, Monica, 330
lien, 461
life experiences, 22
life scripts, 91–92
liking, 483
Limbaugh, Rush, 446
limited effects, 388
linear model of communication, 
9–10
Lippmann, Walter, 357
listening, ethics of, 20
literate era, 443
“living system” metaphor, 289
logic
deductive, 59
of good reasons, 347
inductive, 59
logical consistency, 56, 58
of Communication 
Accommodation Theory, 491
of Communication Privacy 
Management Theory, 
215–216
of Cultivation Theory, 416–417
of Cultural Studies, 433–434
of Face-Negotiation Theory, 
472–473
of Narrative Paradigm, 349–350
of Organizational Culture Theory, 
285
of Organizational Information 
Theory, 302
of Rhetorical Theory, 320–321
of Spiral of Science Theory, 
384–385
of Uses and Gratification Theory, 
400–401

I-18     Subject Index
logos, 310–311, 340
long-distance relationships, 147
looking-glass self, 77–78
loop
charmed, 93–94
defined, 93
strange, 94
low-context cultures, 149
macrotheory, 206
Madoff, Bernie, 16
magnitude of dissonance, 
109–110
mainstreaming, 410–411, 412
majority viewpoint, 371
male dominance, 501–503
marijuana legalization, 372–373
marital rape, 503
market economy, 516
Marx, Karl, 29, 423–424, 427, 512
Marxism, 423–424, 517
mass communication, 31, 37–38
mass media, 37–38
Mass Society Theory, 388
master-narrative, 426
material coherence, 346
matrix
dispositional, 164
effective, 163–164
given, 163
McLuhan, Marshall, 437–450, 
452–454
Me, 79
Mead, George Herbert, 69–73, 
76–79
meaning, 7–8, 425–426
See also Coordinated 
Management of Meaning 
(CMM)
behind behavior, 72
construction of, 72–73
cultural patterns, 92
hierarchy of organized, 88–93
interpersonal, 88
life scripts, 91–92
personal, 87–88
Mean World Index, 412–413
media
agenda setting by, 259–260, 
364–365
Agenda Setting Theory. see 
Agenda Setting Theory
competition for, 391
cool, 445–447
credibility, 362
culture and, 425, 438
electronic, 441, 444
gatekeeping function of, 360
goal-oriented use of, 389
hot, 445–447
influence of, 370–371, 377–379, 
440–441
laws of, 447–450
mass, 37–38
needs gratified by, 389–390
new, 37
as news source, 421
pack journalism, 265
power and, 426
power relations, 364–365
role of, 421–422
Spiral of Silence Theory. see 
Spiral of Silence Theory
Uses and Gratification Theory. 
see Uses and Gratification 
Theory (UGT)
media agenda, 361, 363, 364
media ecology, 438–439
Media Ecology Theory
electronic era, 443–444
literate era, 443
print era, 443
tribal era, 442
Media Ecology Theory (MET), 
436–456
assumptions of, 439–441
critique of, 452–454
at a glance, 438
heurism of, 453–454
hot and cool media, 445–447
integration of, 452
media history, 442–444
the medium is the message, 
444–445
Meyrowitz’s contributions to, 
450, 451–452
Postman’s contributions to, 
450–451
in practice, 449
testability of, 453
tetrad, 447–450
media effects, 393–396, 406
media framing, 361, 363
media history, 442–444
Media Richness Theory, 222
mediated environments, 8
medical marijuana, 372–373
medicine, ethics and, 16, 18
the medium is the message, 
444–445
memory, 313, 316
men
as dominant group, 501–503
gender-based differences in 
perception, 499
gendered division of labor, 
499–500, 521
sexual harassment, 503
social locations of, 516–517
message, 9
MET. See Media Ecology Theory 
(MET)
metaphor, 315
Meyrowitz, Joshua, 450, 451–452
MGT. See Muted Group Theory 
(MGT)
microtheory, 206
mien-tzu, 461
Military Whistleblower Protection 
Act, 251
mind, 76–77
Mind, Self, and Society (Mead), 
69
minimal justification, 112
minority viewpoint, 371
models
communication, 8–14
defined, 8
money, 440
monologic approach, 188, 189
moral development, 15
morality, 96
morphogenic, 55
mortification, 330
motion, 191
motivation, 481
movements, 52
muted groups, 498–499
Muted Group Theory (MGT), 
494–509
assumptions of, 499–503
control, 505
critique of, 507–508
at a glance, 496
harassment, 505
integration of, 506–507
makeup of muted groups, 
498–499
origins of, 496–498
in practice, 502
process of silencing, 503–505
ridicule, 504
ritual, 504
strategies of resistance, 506
test of time of, 508

Subject Index     I-19
utility of, 507–508
women’s translation processes, 
502–503
mythos, 341
narration, 339, 344–345
narrative, 339
narrative malleability, 339
Narrative Paradigm, 338–352
assumptions of, 341–344
critique of, 349–351
at a glance, 341
heurism of, 351
integration of, 348–349
key concepts, 344–348
logical consistency of, 349–350
narration, 344–345
narrative rationality, 345–348
in popular press, 348
vs. rational world paradigm, 342
scope of, 349
utility of, 350–351
narrative rationality, 345–348
National Association of Colleges 
and Employers, 307
National Commission on the Causes 
and Prevention of Violence, 
406
National Safety Management 
Society, 4
the negative, 330
negative face, 462
negative self-talk, 78
negotiated position, 432
negotiation, culture and, 472
neo-Marxists, 424
networks, 34
neutralizing, 198, 199
New England Journal of 
Medicine, 18
new media, 37
newspapers, 421
news reporting, 421–422
New York Times, 21
Nichols, Marie Hochmuth, 334
Nixon, Richard, 447
Noelle-Neumann, Elisabeth, 370
See also Spiral of Silence Theory
noise, 9–10
nominal concepts, 45
nonaccomodation, 487–488
non-intimacy, 173
nonverbal communication, 120, 
126–127, 225–226
norms, 482–483
No Sense of Place (Meyrowitz), 451
novelty and predictability, 194–195, 
196, 197
numbers, 440
Obama, Barack, 39, 485
obliging (OB) style, 470
observations, 59
obsolescence, 448
Occupy Wall Street, 15, 381–382
OCT. See Organizational Culture 
Theory (OCT)
OIT. See Organizational 
Information Theory (OIT)
onion analogy, 175–176
online information, 210
online relationships, 219–220, 
223–225
ontology, 48–50, 516, 517
openness, 54
openness and protection, 194, 196
operationalize, 59
opinion, 372
oppositional position, 432
order, 329–330
organizational communication, 31, 
34–36, 288–289
organizational culture, 275–276
symbols, 277–278
variety of, 278–279
Organizational Culture Theory 
(OCT), 272–286
assumptions of, 276–279
communicative performance, 
281–284
critique of, 284–286
cultural metaphor, 275–276
ethnographic understanding, 
279–281
at a glance, 275
heurism of, 285–286
integration of, 284
logical consistency, 285
in practice, 282
symbols, 277–278
utility of, 285
Organizational Information Theory 
(OIT), 287–304
assumptions of, 292–294
critique of, 302–303
cycles, 297–298
General Systems Theory, 
290–291
at a glance, 290
heurism of, 303
information environment, 
294–295
integration of, 301–302
key concepts, 294–298
logical consistency of, 302
in popular press, 296
principles of equivocality, 
298–299
reducing equivocality, 299–301
rules, 295–297
theory of sociocultural evolution, 
291–292
utility of, 303
organizational rituals, 282
organizational rules, 296
organizations, self-governing, 296
orientation stage, 180–181
Other-Burkean frame, 335–336
ought self, 220
outcome, 157, 162
out-groups, 479
out-group stereotypes, 247
outsider within, 520
overaccommodation, 488–490
overattribution, 228
overestimation of the group, 
246–247
pack journalism, 365
paradigm, 340
paradigm shift, 340
parametric rules, 53
parasocial interaction, 393
Park, Robert E., 357
parsimony, 56, 58
of Coordinated Management of 
Meaning, 101
of Dramatism, 334
of Relational Dialectics Theory, 
201
of Structuration Theory, 269–270
partial, 520
particular others, 79
passion performances, 281, 282–283
passive strategies, 144
pathos, 311
Paux Christi, 380
Penn State University sexual abuse 
scandal, 249
pentad, 331–332
pentadic ratios, 332
People for the Ethical Treatment of 
Animals (PETA), 380
perception, 481
gender-based differences in, 499

I-20     Subject Index
performance
communicative, 281–284
defined, 281
enculturation, 281, 283–284
passion, 281, 282–283
political, 281, 283
ritual, 281, 282
social, 281, 283
personal boundary, 212
personal distance, 122
personal identity, 389
personal idioms, 182
personal information, online, 210, 
224
personal integrative needs, 390
personal meaning, 87–88
personal phase, 139
personal relationships, 389
personal rituals, 282
personal space, 121
personnel, 296
persuasion, 36
See also Rhetorical Theory
Cognitive Dissonance Theory 
and, 113–115
political, 332
PETA. See People for the Ethical 
Treatment of Animals (PETA)
phenomenology, 27–28
physical (external) noise, 10
physical arousal, 127
physician-assisted suicide, 18
physiological noise, 10
Plato, 340
pluralistic ignorance, 376
policy agenda, 361–362
politeness theory, 462–463
political performances, 281, 283
political persuasion, 332
political rhetoric. See deliberative 
rhetoric
politics
ethics, 16, 19
Mean World Index and, 413
positive face, 462
positivistic (empirical) approach, 
47, 48
post-decision dissonance, 113–114
Postman, Neil, 450–451
power, 163, 261
coercive, 265
expert, 266
legitimate, 266
media and, 426
opposition to those in, 511
referent, 266
reward, 264–265
struggle for, 426
types, 264
women and, 265
power differences, 487–488
power relations, 425–426
practical consciousness, 262–263
praxis, 192
predicted outcome value (POV), 
151, 152
prediction, 136
pre-interactional expectations, 125
premature birth, 197
presence and absence dialectic, 197
pressures on dissenters, 248–249
pressure toward uniformity, 248–249
primary territories, 123
priming, 361
print era, 443
Prisoner’s Dilemma, 159–160
privacy rule attributes, 212
private boundaries, 210–211
private disclosures, 208–209
private information, 208
boundary turbulence principle, 
214
control principle, 209–210
co-ownership and guardianship 
principle, 212–214
online, 210
ownership principle, 209
rules principle, 211–212
private life, 499
privilege, 61
problem-solving groups, 240
process, 5
productive exchange, 165
promises, 90
Proportional Representation of 
Diversity (PROD) index, 415
proxemics, 121–123
proxemic zones, 121–123
psychological noise, 10
public, 372
public agenda, 361
public and private dialectic, 195, 196
public communication, 31, 36–37
public distance, 123
public image, 175
Public Interest Research Group 
(PIRG), 19
public life, 499
public opinion, 372–373, 376–378
See also Spiral of Silence Theory
Public Opinion (Lippmann), 357
public speaking, 307
public territories, 123
punctuation, 90
punishment, 158
pure research, 59
purpose, 332
Pygmalion effect, 78
qualitative research, 60–64
quantitative research, 59–60, 62–63
quasi-statistical sense, 375–376
race, 92
race card, 485
radio, 449
rationale, 110
rationality, 159
narrative, 345–348
rationalization, 159
collective, 247–248
rational world paradigm, 340, 342, 
343
ratio of the senses, 444
RDT. See Relational Dialectics 
Theory (RDT)
reactivity searching, 145
real and ideal dialectic, 195–196
real concepts, 45
receiver, 9, 228
reciprocity, 175
Reclaiming Conversation: The 
Power of Talk in the Digital 
Age (Turkle), 454
redemption, 330–331
referent power, 266
reflected appraisals, 78
reflexivity, 262–263
reframing, 198, 199
regulative rules, 98
relational costs/rewards, 177–179
Relational Dialectics Theory (RDT), 
187–203
assumptions of, 190–191
autonomy and connection, 
192–193
beyond basic dialectics, 196–198
contextual dialectics, 195–196
core concepts, 191–192
CPM Theory and, 208
critique of, 200–201
at a glance, 189
heurism of, 201
integration of, 200
novelty and predictability, 194–195

Subject Index     I-21
openness and protection, 194
parsimony, 201
in popular press, 193
responses to, 198–200
utility of, 201
relational factors, 125
relational uncertainty, 147
relationships, 45–46
consonant, 106
defined, 91
developed, 145–147
development of, 219, 225
dissonant, 106
episode, 92
evaluating a, 161–163
irrelevant, 106
long-distance, 147
nature of, 158
online, 219–220, 223–225
personal, 389
relevance, 363
reliability, 62–63
religion, 381
ethics and, 16–17
research, 21
agenda setting, 356–359
applied, 59
pure, 59
qualitative, 60–64
quantitative, 59–60, 62–63
reliability, 62–63
scientific method, 58–60
theory and, 43
validity, 63
research process, 49–50, 58–64
resonance, 411, 412
resources, 96–97, 264
allocative, 264
authoritative, 264
retention, 300–301
retrieval, 448–449
reversal, 448, 449–450
reward-cost ratio, 177–178
reward power, 264–265
rewards, 156, 158
relational, 177–179
rhetoric, 36–37
defined, 309
deliberative, 317, 319
epideictic, 317, 318–319
forensic, 317, 318
judicial, 318
types of, 317–320
Rhetoric (Aristotle), 206, 306–323
assumptions of, 309–311
canons of, 312–317
Rhetorical Theory, 306–323
arrangement, 313, 314
assumptions of, 309–311
canons, 312–317
critique of, 320–322
delivery, 313, 316–317
at a glance, 308
heurism of, 321–322
integration of, 320
invention, 312–313
logical consistency of, 
320–321
memory, 313, 316
in practice, 316
rhetorical tradition, 308–309
style, 313, 315
syllogism, 311–312
test of time of, 322
types of rhetoric, 317–320
rhetorical tradition, 26–27
Rhetoric of Motives (Burke), 
328–332
ridicule, 504
ritual, 504
ritual performances, 281, 282
ritual perspective, 405–406
role dialectics, 197
roles, 34
role taking, 77
Romney, Mitt, 485
Rubin, Alan, 393
rule development, 211
rules
constitutive, 97
defined, 295
habitual, 53
organizational, 35, 296
in Organizational Information 
Theory, 295–297
parametric, 53
private information, 211–212
regulative, 98
role of, 207–208
in Structuration Theory, 260–261, 
263–264
tactical, 53
rules approach, 51, 52–53
ruling class, 515–516
Russian Internet usage, 378
Ryan, Paul, 348
salience, 362
salwar kameez, 486
same-sex marriages, 26–27
Sandberg, Sheryl, 508
Sanders, Bernie, 15
Sandy Hook Elementary/Newtown 
shooting, 363, 421
Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, 327
scapegoating, 330
scene, 331
Schramm, Wilbur, 392
scientific method, 58–60
scope, 56, 58
of Communication 
Accommodation Theory, 
490–491
of Coordinated Management of 
Meaning, 100–101
of Dramatism, 333–334
of Expectancy Violations 
Theory, 131
of Groupthink, 252
of Narrative Paradigm, 349
of Social Exchange Theory, 167
of Social Information Processing 
Theory, 232
of Social Penetration Theory, 
184–185
of Structuration Theory, 269
of Symbolic Interaction 
Theory, 80
secondary territories, 123
second order effects, 411–412
second shift, 500
segmentation, 198, 199
selection, 198, 199, 300
selective attention, 111
selective exposure, 111
selective interpretation, 111
selective retention, 111
selective self-representation, 
227–228
selectivity, 396
self, 77–79
looking-glass self, 77–78
self-appointed mindguards, 248
self-awareness, 23
self-censorship, 248
self-concept, 81
defined, 73
development of, 73–74
as motivation for behavior, 74–75
self-disclosure, 137, 164–165, 174, 
176, 208
guidelines for, 177
on social media, 147–148
self-esteem, 32
self-fulfilling prophecy, 74–75, 78

I-22     Subject Index
self-governing organizations, 296
self-identity, 464–465
self-image, 220
self-representation, selective, 
227–228
semantic noise, 9–10
semiotics, 27
sender
idealization of, 228
selective self-representation, 
227–228
sensemaking, 299–300
sensory overaccommodation, 489
SET. See Social Exchange Theory 
(SET)
sex, 92, 499
sexual division of labor, 499–500, 
521
sexual harassment, 503
SI. See Symbolic Interaction (SI) 
Theory
Sierra Club, 380
significant symbols, 76
Silences (Olsen), 502
silencing, process of, 503–505
The Simpsons, 430–431
SIP. See Social Information 
Processing (SIP) Theory
situated knowledges, 520–521
situational contexts, 30
small group communication, 31, 
33–34
smoker identity, 75
smokers’ rights, 375
Snapchat, 13
social, 5
Social Categories Model, 388
social conformity, 374–375
social constructionism, 86–87
social distance, 122–123
Social Exchange Theory (SET), 
155–169
assumptions of, 158–161
critique of, 166–169
exchange patterns, 163–165
exchange structure, 165
at a glance, 158
integration of, 166
in popular press, 166
relationship evaluation, 161–163
scope of, 167
testability of, 168
utility of, 167–168
social groups, 511, 512, 513–514
social hierarchy, 425–426, 514
social identity, 478–480
Social Identity Theory, 479
Social Information Processing (SIP) 
Theory, 218–234, 437
assumptions of, 223–226
chronemic cues, 225–226
computer-mediated 
communication, 223–224
critique of, 231–233
cues filtered-out theories, 
221–222, 225
at a glance, 220
hyperpersonal perspective, 227–
231, 233
impression management, 220–
221, 224–225, 230–231
integration of, 231
in practice, 231
scope of, 232
testability of, 233
utility of, 232
warranting, 230–231, 233
social integration, 267
social integrative needs, 390
Social Learning Theory, 408
social life, 515
social media
costs and rewards of, 166
CPM Theory and, 216
Spiral of Silence Theory and, 
382–383
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
and, 147–148
use of, 398
Uses and Gratification Theory 
and, 397–399
social networking, 4
social networking sites (SNS), 
13–14, 40, 225, 399
social norms, 75, 77
social penetration, 171
Social Penetration Theory (SPT), 
170–186, 192
affective exchange stage, 
182–183
assumptions of, 172–174
exploratory affective exchange 
stage, 181
at a glance, 172
heurism of, 185–186
integration of, 184
onion analogy, 175–176
orientation stage, 180–181
in practice, 174
relational costs/rewards, 177–179
scope of, 184–185
social penetration stages, 
179–184
stable exchange stage, 183–184
social performances, 281, 283
Social Presence Theory, 222
social psychology, 478–480
social reality, 87, 405
social relations, 515
social rituals, 504
social structure, 75–76
social worlds, 84
society, 79
individuals and, 75
sociocultural evolution, 291–292
socio-cultural tradition, 29
socio-psychological tradition, 28
solidarity facework, 463–464
Sophists, 309
source, 9
space, in organizations, 267–268
speaker-audience relationship, 310
speculations, 90
speech
See also public speaking; 
Rhetorical Theory
anxiety, 37
arrangement, 313, 314
body, 314
conclusion, 314
defined, 316–317
delivery, 313
introduction, 314
invention, 312–313
memory, 313, 316
style, 313, 315
topics, 313
Speech Accommodation Theory, 
477
See also Communication 
Accommodation Theory 
(CAT)
speech act, 90
Spiral of Silence Theory, 369–386, 
414
assumptions of, 374–377
court of public opinion, 372–373
critique of, 384–385
at a glance, 371
hard core, 380–382
integration of, 383–384
logical consistency of, 384–385
media’s influence, 377–379
in popular press, 378
social media and, 382–383

Subject Index     I-23
train test, 379–380, 383
spirituality, 92
stable exchange stage, 183–184
stalking, 503
standpoint, 519–520
Standpoint Theory, 514
See also Feminist Standpoint 
Theory (FST)
status quo, 511
stepfamilies, 197
stereotypes
indirect, 485–486
out-group, 247
stereotypical convergence, 485
strange loop, 94
stranger-on-the-train, 174
strategies
active, 144
interactive, 144–145
passive, 144
stress, 245
structural coherence, 345–346
structuration, 258–259
Structuration Theory, 255–271
agency, 262–263
application of time and space, 
267–268
assumptions of, 259–261
central concepts of, 262–267
critique of, 268–270
duality of structure, 263–266
at a glance, 259
integration of, 268
parsimony o, 269–270
in popular press, 265
power, 261, 264–265
reflexivity, 262–263
rules, 260–261, 263–264
scope, 269
social integration, 267
structure, 257, 263–264
style, 313, 315
subculture, 39
substance, 328–329
subsystems, 54, 55
success, 296
Super Storm Sandy, 394–395
suprasystems, 54, 55
surveillance, 357, 389–390
survival of the fittest, 291–292
syllogism, 311–312
Symbolic Interaction (SI) Theory, 
68–82
Chicago School of, 70
at a glance, 71
history of, 70–71
integration of, 80
introduction to, 69–70
Iowa School of, 70–71
key concepts, 76–79
mind, 76–77
in practice, 78
scope of, 80
self, 77–79
self-concept, 73–75, 81
society, 79
testability of, 81
themes and assumptions of, 
71–76
utility of, 80–81
symbols, 7, 69
abstract, 7
concrete, 7
of organizational culture, 277–
278
significant, 76
use of, 326
synchronous communication, 223
synergy, 34
system, 257
systems approach, 51, 53–56
systems thinking, 291
tact facework, 463
tactical rules, 53
talk radio, 446
Taoism, 16
task-oriented groups, 240
task rituals, 282
team communication, 33–34
Tea Party, 381
technology
ethics, 16, 19
impact of, 40–41
McLuhan’s views on, 437–438
relationship development and, 
219–220
role of, 447
social networking, 13–14
technopoly, 451
Technopoly: The Surrender 
of Culture to Technology 
(Postman), 451
television
bending, 414
blending, 414
blurring, 414, 451–452
changes in, 397–398
as cool medium, 446
effects, 406, 409
influence of, 377, 404–405, 407–
408, 413–415, 440–441
uniqueness of, 407
violence on, 408
tension release needs, 390
territoriality, 123–124
testability, 57, 58
of Cognitive Dissonance Theory, 
117–118
of Expectancy Violations Theory, 
131
of Groupthink, 252–253
of Media Ecology Theory, 453
of Social Exchange Theory, 168
of Social Information Processing 
Theory, 233
of Symbolic Interaction Theory, 81
test of time, 57, 58, 253
of Cultivation Theory, 417–418
of Muted Group Theory, 508
of Rhetorical Theory, 322
tetrad, 447–450
theatre of struggle, 428
theatrical metaphor, 84–85
theorems, 142–143
theory, 42–43
approaches to knowing, 46–58
building, 50–56
components of, 45–46
covering law approach, 51, 52
critical approach, 47–48
defining, 44
evaluating, 56–58
goals of, 46
interpretive approach, 47, 48
in popular press, 62
positivistic (empirical) approach, 
47, 48
research and, 43
rules approach, 51, 52–53
systems approach, 51, 53–56
Theory of Interdependence, 157
See also Social Exchange Theory 
(SET)
theory of sociocultural evolution, 
291–292
thick boundaries, 214
thick description, 280
thin boundaries, 214
thought, 77
threat-of-isolation test, 374–375
threats, 90
threat threshold, 127–128
time, in organizations, 267–268
tobacco companies, 428

I-24     Subject Index
topics, 313
totality, 191
train test, 379–380, 383
trajectory, 171
transgressions, 173–174
transactional model of 
communication, 12–13
transmissional perspective, 405
tribal era, 442
trickster, 335
trump, Donald, 516
Twitter, 382–383, 421
ubiquity, 377
UGT. See Uses and Gratification 
Theory (UGT)
uncertainty, 136–137, 256, 363–364
behavioral, 137
cognitive, 137
relational, 147
uncertainty avoidance, 149, 150
uncertainty reduction, 136–137
Uncertainty Reduction Theory 
(URT), 109, 135–154, 192, 333
antecedent conditions, 143–144
assumptions of, 138–140
axioms of, 140–142
context, 148–150
critique of, 150–153
developed relationships, 145–147
expansions of, 143–150
at a glance, 137
heurism of, 153
integration of, 150–151
key concepts, 140–143
in popular press, 152
social media, 147–148
strategies, 144–145
theorems, 142–143
utility of, 151–152
Understanding Media (McLuhan), 
437
undirected theater metaphor, 84–85
unethical behavior, 15
uniformity, pressures toward, 
248–249
unwanted repetitive patterns 
(URPs), 98–100
URT. See Uncertainty Reduction 
Theory (URT)
Uses and Gratification Theory 
(UGT), 364, 387–402, 405
assumptions of, 389–391
critique of, 400–401
at a glance, 392
heurism of, 401
integration of, 399–400
Internet, social media, and cell 
phones, 397–399
key concepts, 396–397
logical consistency of, 400–401
media effects, 393–396
in popular press, 398
stages of, 392–393
utility of, 401
U.S. Office of Government Ethics, 19
utility, 56–57, 58
of Agenda Setting Theory, 
366–367
of Cognitive Dissonance Theory, 
115–117
of Communication Privacy 
Management Theory, 216
of Coordinated Management of 
Meaning, 101
of Cultivation Theory, 417, 434
defined, 396
of Dramatism, 334–336
of Expectancy Violations Theory, 
131
of Feminist Standpoint Theory, 
522–524
of Muted Group Theory, 507–508
of Narrative Paradigm, 350–351
of Organizational Culture 
Theory, 285
of Organizational Information 
Theory, 303
of Relational Dialectics Theory, 
201
of Social Exchange Theory, 
167–168
of Social Information Processing 
Theory, 232
of Symbolic Interaction Theory, 
80–81
of Uncertainty Reduction Theory, 
151–152
of Uses and Gratification Theory, 
401
valence
communicator reward, 129–130
violation, 128–129
validity, 63
values
cultural, 77
in research process, 49–50
victimage, 330, 335
Viewers’ Declaration of 
Independence, 414–415
violation valence, 128–129
violence, on television, 408
Violence Index, 406
voice, 519
Volkswagen, 15
von Bertalanffy, Ludwig, 
290–291
vulgar gratificationism, 394, 395
warranting, 226, 230–231, 233
Warren, Elizabeth, 332
Watergate, 249
Weick, Karl, 289
whistle-blowing, 19–20, 
250–251
wholeness, 54
Wikipedia, 62
Win Without War, 380
women
See also Feminist Standpoint 
Theory (FST)
African American, 511, 514, 
518, 523
gender-based differences in 
perception, 499
gendered division of labor, 
499–500, 521
harassment, 503
male dominance and, 501–503
power and, 265
resistance strategies, 506
second shift and, 500
social locations of, 516–517
translation processes, 
502–503
in U.S. society, 428–429
Wikipedia gender gap, 62
Women and Men Speaking: 
Frameworks for Analysis 
(Kramarae), 497
Wood, Julia, 512
words, meanings of, 27
World Bank, 15
WorldCom, 15
written communication, 443

