
Introduction to Antenna Analysis
Using EM Simulators

For a complete listing of titles in the 
Artech House Antennas and Propagation Series
turn to the back of this book.
DISCLAIMER OF WARRANTY
The technical descriptions, procedures, and computer programs in this 
book have been developed with the greatest of care and they have been use-
ful to the author in a broad range of applications; however, they are pro-
vided as is, without warranty of any kind. Artech House, Inc. and the 
author and editors of the book titled Introduction to Antenna Analysis
Using EM Simulators make no warranties, expressed or implied, that the equa-
tions, programs, and procedures in this book or its associated software are free 
of error, or are consistent with any particular standard of merchantability, or 
will meet your requirements for any particular application. They should not be 
relied upon for solving a problem whose incorrect solution could result in injury 
to a person or loss of property. Any use of the programs or procedures in such a 
manner is at the user’s own risk. The editors, author, and publisher disclaim all 
liability for direct, incidental, or consequent damages resulting from use of the 
programs or procedures in this book or the associated software.

Introduction to Antenna Analysis
Using EM Simulators
Hiroaki Kogure
Yoshie Kogure
James C. Rautio

Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
A catalog record for this book is available from the U.S. Library of Congress.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Cover design by Adam Renvoize
ISBN 13: 978-1-60807-157-9
Original Japanese edition
Denjikai Simulator de Manabu Antenna Nyuumon
By Hiroaki KOGURE and Yoshie KOGURE
Copyright © 2010 by Hiroaki KOGURE and Yoshie KOGURE
Published by Ohmsha, Ltd.
3-1 Kanda Nishikicho, Chiyodaku, Tokyo, Japan
English language editon 
Copyright © 2011 by Artech House
Translation rights arranged with Ohmsha, Ltd. 
All rights reserved. Printed and bound in the United States of America. No part of this book 
may be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, includ-
ing photocopying, recording, or by any information storage and retrieval system, without 
permission in writing from the publisher.
 All terms mentioned in this book that are known to be trademarks or service marks have 
been appropriately capitalized. Artech House cannot attest to the accuracy of this information. 
Use of a term in this book should not be regarded as affecting the validity of any trademark 
or service mark.
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

v
Contents
 
Preface 
xiii
1 
The Antennas Around Us 
1
1.1 
What Is an Electrical Circuit? 
1
1.1.1 
Circuit with Two Parallel Lines 
1
1.1.2 
Role of the Ground Conductor 
2
1.1.3 
Antennas at the Edge of a Substrate 
2
1.2 
Just Exactly What Is the Antenna? 
3
1.2.1 
Television Antennas 
4
1.2.2 
Antenna in a Radio-Synchronized Clock 
5
1.2.3 
Is the Coil of a Radio-Synchronized Clock an Antenna? 6
1.3 
Fundamental Form of Antennas  
7
1.3.1 
The Yagi Antenna 
7
1.3.2 
Electromagnetic Simulation for Antennas 
9
1.3.3 
Fundamental Forms of Antennas 
25
1.4 
What Are Near and Far Fields? 
29
1.4.1 
Boundary Between Near Field and Far Field 
29
2 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
31
2.1 
Great Inventions 
31
2.1.1 
The Experiments of Hertz 
31

vi 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
2.1.2 
Hertz’s Receiving Equipment 
31
2.1.3 
Simulation of Hertz’s Transmitting Equipment 
33
2.1.4 
Transforming Parallel Plate Capacitors into Antennas 
36
2.1.5 
Simulation of Hertz’s Receiving Equipment 
37
2.1.6 
Experiments by Dr. Nagaoka 
40
2.2 
The Development of Various Antennas 
41
2.2.1 
Appearance of Marconi 
42
2.2.2 
History of Ungrounded Antennas 
43
2.2.3 
Aperture Antennas 
44
2.2.4 
The Role of Ground 
46
2.2.5 
Current on an Artificial Ground 
50
2.3 
Electric Field, Magnetic Field, Electromagnetic 
 
Field, and the Electromagnetic Wave 
50
2.3.1 
Electric Field Near Hertz’s Dipole 
50
2.3.2 
Radiation from a Dipole Antenna 
50
2.3.3 
Magnetic Field Near the Dipole Antenna 
52
2.3.4 
Electromagnetic Field and the Electromagnetic Wave 
53
2.3.5 
Difficulty of Near-Field Problems 
54
2.4 
Antenna Design by Using EM Simulators 
55
2.4.1 
Antennas on PCB 
55
2.4.2 
Antennas Created by Using EM Simulators 
56
2.4.3 
Design of Electric Field Detection Type Antennas 
57
2.4.4 
Simulation of a Small Loop for an Integrated 
 
Circuit Tag Antenna 
58
3 
Wire Antennas 
63
3.1 
Fundamentals of a Dipole Antenna 
63
3.1.1 
Standing Wave on a Linear Dipole Antenna 
63
3.1.2 
Designing the Element Length 
65
3.1.3 
A Dipole Antenna on a Substrate 
65
3.1.4 
Parameterization 
66
3.1.5 
Examining the Impedance 
69
3.2 
Fundamentals of a Loop Antenna 
71
3.2.1 
Simulation for a Quad Antenna 
71
3.2.2 
What Is a Magnetic Loop Antenna? 
72

 
Contents 
vii
3.2.3 
Simulation of the Small Loop Antenna 
75
3.2.4 
Matching the Small Loop to 50Ω 
77
3.3 
Fundamentals of the Yagi-Uda Antenna 
79
3.3.1 
Fundamentals of a Reflector 
79
3.3.2 
Fundamentals of a Director 
81
3.3.3 
Simulation of the Yagi-Uda Antenna 
82
3.4 
Importance of Antenna Input Impedance 
88
3.4.1 
A 50-Ohm Dipole Antenna 
88
3.4.2 
What is a BALUN? 
90
3.4.3 
What is the Matched Load? 
92
3.4.4 
Need for a Matching Circuit 
93
3.5 
Instruments for Measurement of Input Impedance 
93
4 
Antennas on Substrates 
97
4.1 
Substrate Dielectrics and Wavelength Shortening 
97
4.1.1 
Dipole Antenna on a Substrate 
97
4.1.2 
Wavelength Shortening Effect of Dielectrics 
97
4.1.3 
Investigating Wavelength Shortening Effect in 
 
an MSL 
100
4.2 
Fundamentals of an Inverted L Antenna 
102
4.2.1 
What Is an Inverted L Antenna? 
103
4.3 
Fundamentals of a Patch Antenna 
109
4.3.1 
A Patch Antenna for Global Positioning Systems 
110
4.3.2 
Electromagnetic Field Around a Patch Antenna 
111
4.3.3 
Determining Dimensions of a Patch Antenna 
114
4.3.4 
A Patch Antenna on a Substrate 
117
4.3.5 
Matching Method 1 
119
4.3.6 
Fine Adjustment of a Feed Point 
122
4.3.7 
Matching Method 2 
124
4.4 
Effects of Dielectric Materials 
127
4.4.1 
Effective Permittivity of Microstrip Lines 
129
4.4.2 
Loss Tangent of Dielectrics 
131

viii 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
4.5 
Effect of Magnetic Materials 
131
4.5.1 
Characteristics of Magnetic Materials 
132
5 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
133
5.1 
Turning Transmission Lines into Antennas 
133
5.1.1 
Two Parallel Lines Turn into Antennas 
133
5.1.2 
The Point of Transition Between Transmission Lines 
 
and Antennas 
136
5.1.3 
Conditions for a Pure Traveling Wave 
136
5.2 
Antennas That Do Not Resonate 
139
5.2.1 
The Tapered Slot Antenna 
139
5.2.2 
Matching the TSA 
143
5.3 
Fundamentals of a Bow Tie Antenna 
143
5.3.1 
The Biconical Antenna 
144
5.3.2 
Finite Length Biconical Antenna 
144
5.3.3 
The Impact of Truncating a Traveling Wave Antenna 146
5.3.4 
Simulation of a Bow Tie Antenna 
147
5.3.5 
Skeleton-Type Bow Tie Antenna 
148
5.3.6 
A Thinner Element Frame 
151
5.3.7 
Miniaturization Using Triangular Antennas 
154
5.3.8 
Flare Angle and Bandwidth 
158
5.3.9 
A Thin Element Triangular Antenna 
159
6 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
163
6.1 
RFID Systems Based on Electromagnetic Induction 
163
6.1.1 
Faraday’s Law of Electromagnetic Induction 
163
6.1.2 
Self-Inductance of a Coil 
164
6.1.3 
What Is a Mutual Inductance? 
166
6.1.4 
Coupling Coefficient Between Reader–Writer’s 
 
Coil and the Tag Coil 
166
6.1.5 
Finding the Coupling Coefficient κ Using 
 
Sonnet Lite 
168
6.1.6 
13.56-MHz Antenna (Coil) 
169
6.2 
UHF RFID Tag Antennas 
173

 
Contents 
ix
6.2.1 
Application of an RFID Tag 
173
6.2.2 
Half-Wavelength Dipole Antenna for the UHF Band 174
6.2.3 
Broadband Techniques 
175
6.2.4 
Changing the Element Location 
178
6.3 
Polarization of Reader and Tag 
182
6.3.1 
UHF RFID Tags 
182
6.3.2 
Buddhist Cross-Shaped RFID Tag 
184
6.4 
Radiation of Circular Polarization from Patch 
 
Antenna 
185
6.4.1 
Simulation Model of a Circularly Polarized Patch 
 
Antenna 
186
6.4.2 
Right-Handed and Left-Handed Polarization 
186
6.5 
Prediction of Communication Distance 
187
6.5.1 
Communication Distance of UHF RFID Tags 
188
7 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using 
 
EM Simulators 
191
7.1 
Radiation Efficiency of Antennas 
191
7.1.1 
Definition of Radiation Efficiency 
191
7.1.2 
Measuring Radiation Efficiency 
192
7.1.3 
A Method for Calculating Efficiency Using EM 
 
Simulators 
194
7.1.4 
Radiation Efficiency of Patch Antennas 
196
7.2 
Antenna Gain 
199
7.2.1 
Definition of Antenna Gain 
200
7.2.2 
What Is the Actual Gain? 
202
7.2.3 
Measuring the Antenna Gain 
203
7.2.4 
Does Higher Gain Mean Higher Performance? 
204
7.2.5 
How a Reflector Influences Directivity 
206
7.2.6 
Standing Waves Between Two Metal Walls 
208
7.2.7 
Magnetic Current Antennas 
209
7.3 
Bandwidth of Antennas 
209
7.3.1 
Definition of the Bandwidth 
209
7.3.2 
Design of a Wideband Dipole Antenna 
211

x 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
7.3.3 
A Wideband Patch Antenna 
213
7.3.4 
Wideband Double Patch 
215
7.3.5 
Parallel Configuration of Patch Antennas 
218
7.3.6 
Wideband Short-Circuit Patch Antenna 
222
7.4 
Interrelation of Three Parameters 
226
7.4.1 
Small Antennas and Three Parameters 
226
8 
Practical Antennas 
227
8.1 
Ultrawideband Antennas 
227
8.1.1 
What Is a Pulse Excitation? 
227
8.1.2 
Log-Periodic Antennas 
229
8.1.3 
Design Example of a Log-Periodic Antenna 
230
8.1.4 
Self-Complementary Antennas 
231
8.1.5 
Unbalanced Half-Trapezoid Dipole Antenna 
234
8.2 
Receiving Antennas for Digital Terrestrial Television 
239
8.2.1 
Dipole Antenna with Mesh Elements 
239
8.2.2 
An Embedded Antenna for Receiving Digital 
 
Terrestrial Television 
241
8.3 
Antennas for Cellular Phones 
244
8.3.1 
Meander Line Monopole Antenna 
244
8.3.2 
Meander Line Monopole Antenna with Ground 
 
Conductor 
245
8.3.3 
Influence of Surrounding Metal Objects 
250
8.3.4 
Influence of Surrounding Dielectric Objects 
250
8.3.5 
Design of Matching Circuits 
252
8.4 
Small Antennas for Integrated Circuit Cards 
256
8.4.1 
Input Impedance of Integrated Circuits 
256
8.4.2 
Matching Method for IC Including Reactance  
257
8.4.3 
Changing the Shape of Dipole Elements to Achieve 
 
a Match 
258
8.5 
The Wireless World Is Expanding 
261
8.5.1 
Small Embedded Antennas Have a Bright Future  
261

 
Contents 
xi
 
Appendix 
265
 
About the Authors 
267
 
Index 
269


xiii
Preface
It is 1984. Orwell’s predictions appear to be at least several decades premature. 
Gas costs $1.10 per gallon. The first Apple Macintosh goes on sale. The space 
shuttle Discovery flies its maiden voyage. And I write a series of articles for the 
amateur radio magazine QST about antenna analysis using computers.
The most sophisticated personal computer (the term had just come into 
use) of the day had just been introduced, the IBM-PC, with an incredible 640 
kB of RAM and a clock speed exceeding 4 MHz. That is higher in frequency 
than the carrier frequency of my first ham radio contact. It is an absolutely 
amazing time!
The program I wrote for those QST articles, called “Annie,” is what got 
my company started. We sold some 250 copies worldwide. Shortly after the first 
article appeared, I received a letter from Aki Kogure, first author of this book. 
He wanted to try publicizing and selling Annie in Japan. Why not? I decided to 
take a chance and sent the software off to him. It was amazing. He sold another 
250 copies in Japan alone!
Aki, and his wonderful wife, Yoshie, have been diligently working ever 
since introducing numerous electromagnetic tools to their Japanese audience 
through their books, publications, consulting, and many, many training classes. 
I was honored to have our software included in their efforts.
This is one of their books. Aki and Yoshie found an insatiable thirst for in-
formation on antennas. The need and desire to learn was overwhelming, but the 
strengths of their students often lay well outside this field. Antenna knowledge 
was minimal. Aki and Yoshie have over the decades encountered literally thou-
sands of these bright, eager students in Japan and they have quickly brought 
them up to speed on this often highly technical and critically important topic.

xiv 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
This book is the culminating product of all those decades of training and 
research. The typical engineering antenna book is highly technical, requires a 
reasonable knowledge of electromagnetics, and absolutely no fear of equations. 
That kind of book is excellent for a good engineering graduate student. It is 
completely unsuitable for most of Aki and Yoshie’s audience.
In response to this need, Aki and Yoshie have developed a curriculum 
that teaches most of the important basic antenna concepts. There are a few 
equations, but all topics are introduced from a physical, understanding point 
of view. The goal is to understand what is going on. If our reader then wishes 
to pursue the intense mathematical treatments in the usual textbooks, she will 
now find a much deeper understanding. Equations are always easier to under-
stand if you understand the concepts and their physical meaning first, some-
thing Clerk Maxwell himself encouraged. If, instead of becoming an antenna 
expert, our reader is working with antenna experts; he can now communicate 
with them, on their own terms, in their own language, and actually understand 
what they are talking about.
Aki and Yoshie are the authors of the original Japanese version of this 
book. I have contributed some ideas here and there, but it is otherwise entirely 
their own work. For this edition, Aki and Yoshie performed an initial transla-
tion into English. My efforts were only to put some final polish on the transla-
tion, adding just a little bit as I felt appropriate.
Previous introductory books by the Kogures have sold tens of thousands 
of copies in Japan. With the English edition of this new book, you will now see 
how much of the Japanese technical community is gaining their initial knowl-
edge of antenna design. You can now enjoy this same introduction. As a special 
treat, you can see antennas from the Japanese point of view. Note the subtle 
pride and imagine how a Japanese reader would feel reading about, for example, 
the developments of Prof. Uda and Yagi.
If you are so kind as to enjoy this book, I speak for Aki and Yoshie Kogure 
as well as for myself by saying, “Arigatou gozaimashita,” or “Thank you very 
much.”
James C. Rautio
March 2011

1
1
The Antennas Around Us
1.1 What Is an Electrical Circuit?
Electric current always and forever flows in complete loops. This basic bit of 
information is sometimes lost in the details of advanced antenna design, result-
ing in surprises when an antenna or circuit is turned on. Let’s review this basic 
concept.
1.1.1 
Circuit with Two Parallel Lines
Back in elementary school, we used two wires to connect a battery to a light 
bulb. The electrical appliances we use also have two wires (and possibly a third, 
but that is for safety). Thus, electricity requires a complete loop, going out one 
wire, and coming back the other. This is true for both direct current (DC) as 
with a battery, and for alternating current (AC) as in our electrical appliances. 
Both DC and AC systems are divided into three parts: the power supply (the 
battery, or wall outlet), the transmission line (the two parallel wires), and the 
load (lamp, or electrical appliance); see Figure 1.1. The devices that are sent 
electricity are typically called  loads and include, for example, lamps, resistors, 
and integrated circuits (ICs).
The two parallel wires might be called a transmission line. They conduct 
the electricity from the power supply to the load and back, forming a complete 
loop. These three elements together are called the electric circuit, or simply the 
circuit.

2 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
1.1.2 
Role of the Ground Conductor
In Figure 1.2, aluminum foil is used instead of the second wire. We call the 
entire sheet of foil a ground, sometimes abbreviated GND in diagrams. The 
term “ground” is similar to “earth,” and in fact sometimes circuits are grounded 
by connection to the earth. However, the earth is usually a very poor conductor 
and cannot function as the second, electric current returning wire of a circuit. 
We must always include our own ground formed from a good conductor, either 
in the form of a wire (Figure 1.1), or in the form of a ground plane (Figure 1.2).
Every electrical system has multiple complete circuits. If we always actu-
ally wire up both wires of every circuit, it gets complicated. There is no reason 
we can’t use the same return wire for all the circuits. This cuts the total number 
of wires in half. If this single return wire is a sheet of metal (Figure 1.2), then 
we call it a ground plane.
1.1.3 
Antennas at the Edge of a Substrate
Figure 1.3 shows the inside of a WiMAX transmit and receive module. There 
are many circuits formed by the thin copper foils (called lines or traces) on the 
surface of a thin insulating substrate.
The antenna consists of a pair of meander lines in the upper corners with 
some small surface mount technology (SMT) or surface mount devices (SMDs) 
chips near the bottom of the antenna. This board is called a printed wiring 
board (PWB) or a printed circuit board (PCB). Note that the part called an 
antenna is on the edge of the board, and to the untrained eye, it looks just like 
the rest of the circuitry.
The two antennas are separated by a ground conductor in the shape of 
Mt. Fuji. There is a ground conductor on the reverse as well, and it is also called 
a ground where it electrically extends to the rest of the PCB.
Power 
supply
(DC) 
battery 
symbol
Transmission 
line
Load
(AC) voltage 
source symbol
Transmission 
line
Load
Power 
supply
Figure 1.1 Three elements of an electrically powered circuit: power supply, transmission 
line, and load (lamp).

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       3                 
There is no ground conductor directly underneath the antenna traces. For 
good radiation, it is important to put as few extraneous conductors as possible 
in the vicinity of the antenna. The many small dots on the Mt. Fuji shaped 
ground plane are vias. They connect the front surface to the back to make one 
solid ground plane.
1.2 Just Exactly What Is the Antenna?
The antenna performs the function of transmitting and receiving electromag-
netic waves. An antenna is usually made from metal pipe, conducting wire, or, 
Figure 1.2 Ground conductor made with aluminum foil.
＋
－
Negative 
battery  
terminal
Aluminum foil 
ground plane
Connects to alumininum foil
Figure 1.3 Transmit and receive module of a WiMAX system.

4 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
as in this case, metal traces on a PCB. It is usually composed of good conduc-
tor so that it can convert a received electromagnetic wave into electric current, 
which is then delivered to an electric circuit. For transmit, the antenna converts 
an electric current into an electromagnetic wave.
1.2.1 
Television Antennas
When looking at the front or back window of a car, you might see thin lines 
embedded in the glass. These are the antennas for your radio, television, and 
other wireless services. They are formed with a film of conductor on or in the 
glass.
Figure 1.4 is an example of a common amateur radio antenna, a Yagi an-
tenna. This type of antenna is also used for TV and FM. The elements of a Yagi 
antenna (the “ribs” in Figure 1.4) convert an electromagnetic wave to electric 
current most efficiently if they are of the correct size for the frequency being 
received (or transmitted). The same is true for the antenna in your car window, 
even though the shape and appearance is completely different. In both cases, 
the antennas are made from conductors that are shaped and sized to efficiently 
receive and transmit the desired frequencies. 
The wiring at the far end of the Yagi antenna is a coaxial cable connecting 
to one element. All the rods, or ribs, are called elements and the special charac-
teristic of the Yagi antenna is that there is an electrical connection to only one 
element. The full proper name of the antenna is a Yagi-Uda antenna, but it is 
frequently just called a Yagi. It is named after its inventors, Dr. Yagi and Dr. 
Uda, and is well-known worldwide.
The backmost set of metal rods form a special element called a reflector, 
which catches a portion of the electromagnetic wave that gets past the front part 
of the antenna and reflects it back to the antenna so it can receive the signal 
even better. The purpose of all the elements in this antenna is to receive a signal 
Figure 1.4 Example of a Yagi antenna for FM broadcast reception.
Feedline
Directors
Reflector

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       5                 
strongly in one direction, but to also reject any interfering signals in other direc-
tions. This is a directional antenna and it must be pointed at the station that is 
to be received.
1.2.2 
Antenna in a Radio-Synchronized Clock
Figure 1.5 shows the inside of the radio-synchronized wristwatch (made by 
Casio Computer Co., Ltd.). The thin stick in the lower side is a coil of very fine 
enameled wire wound on a ferrite core.
Looking carefully near the ends of the winding, you might see the tiny 
chip capacitors soldered into the circuit. These parts form an electric circuit 
called an LC resonator. It is designed to resonate at a specific frequency. “L” 
stands for an inductor (the coil of wire) and “C” stands for the capacitor (the 
chip capacitors soldered onto the inductor). The LC circuit can resonate electri-
cally just like a tuning fork can resonate mechanically.
The radio-synchronized clock displays the correct time by receiving an 
accurate time signal. In Japan, the time signal comes from either of two stan-
dard frequency broadcasts. One is transmitted at a power of 50 kW and on a 
frequency of 40 kHz on a 250 meter tall antenna on Mt. Ohtakadoya-yama 
in Fukushima Prefecture. The other signal is on a frequency of 60 kHz using 
a 200 meter high antenna at the border between Saga Prefecture and Fukuoka 
Prefecture, which belongs to the National Institute of Information and Com-
munications Technology (NICT).
Each side of the WiMAX antenna in Figure 1.3 has a length of about one-
quarter of a wavelength. The size of the element of the Yagi antenna in Figure 
1.4 is about one-half of a wavelength. If we know the frequency of the electro-
magnetic wave, we can calculate the wavelength. Then we just make the an-
tenna the appropriate fraction of a wavelength long and it works well. However 
Figure 1.5 Antenna for a radio-synchronized wristwatch.

6 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
the wavelength of a 40-kHz electromagnetic wave is about 7.5 km and we can-
not put an antenna several kilometers long inside a wristwatch. Perhaps if we 
unwrap the coil of the inductor in Figure 1.5, could it possibly be that long?
1.2.3 
Is the Coil of a Radio-Synchronized Clock an Antenna?
Figure 1.6 shows an experiment first conducted by the physicist Hans Christian 
Oersted of Denmark (1777–1851). We see that the magnetic needle moves 
when the current flows in the electric wire. Thus, he discovered that electric 
current generates the magnetism. He did not understand why, but his results 
triggered the subsequent development of electromagnetics.
Based on Oersted’s work, the physicist André-Marie Ampere of France 
(1775–1836) discovered that the direction that the magnetic needle moves de-
pends on the direction that the current flows. Ampere’s right-hand screw rule 
(right-hand rule), shown in Figure 1.7, is that if you point the thumb of your 
right hand in the direction of the current, the resulting magnetic force is in the 
direction that your fingers curl.
The miniature antenna of the radio-synchronized wristwatch in Figure 
1.5 is a dedicated receiving antenna. It can receive the time signal because the 
Figure 1.6 Oersted’s experiment.
Magnetic lines 
of force
Compass needle
Current
N
S
Figure 1.7 Ampere’s right-handed screw rule.
Current
Magnetic lines 
of force

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       7                 
magnetic field of the electromagnetic radiation transmitted in free space con-
centrates in the coil with the help of the ferrite bar (magnetic material), the core 
around which the fine wire is wound.
The ferrite core helps to generate electricity from the magnetic portion 
of the received electromagnetic wave using the principle of Faraday’s law of 
magnetic induction. Michael Faraday (1791–1867) discovered that a changing 
amount of magnetism generates electricity in a coil of wire. To improve recep-
tion, designers added capacitors to the coil of wire in the wrist watch to make it 
resonant at precisely the desired frequency.
Because the coil used for this purpose might be called an antenna in the 
industry, it is also included as an antenna in this book.
1.3 Fundamental Form of Antennas 
Antennas come in a very wide range of physical realizations. However, most 
antennas of interest for this work can be grouped into one of the following 
categories.
1.3.1 
The Yagi Antenna
The Yagi antenna is sometimes used for optimal reception of specific television 
channels, with the feed line connected only to one element. (This is differ-
ent from a broadband log-periodic antenna, which can receive a large number 
of channels.) A Yagi can also be used to receive FM broadcasting. Because the 
frequency is lower (and thus the wavelength is longer), the FM antenna is larger 
than the television antenna. A two-element Yagi for 7 MHz is shown in Fig-
ure 1.8. There are several other smaller Yagi antennas (for higher frequencies) 
above it. 
Figure 1.9 shows an antenna that uses four metallic rods. Each of the rods 
is one-quarter of a wavelength long. There are two one-quarter wavelength rods 
for each of two elements, A and B. Thus, each element is one-half of a wave-
length long. The centers of each element are both connected to the transmitter 
by the parallel feed lines. As the parallel line spacing is narrow, they do not 
radiate. Only the two elements, A and B, radiate. However, this is not a Yagi 
antenna. Let’s see how it works.
To understand how an antenna works better in some directions and worse 
in others, we must visualize electromagnetic waves propagating through space. 
If you have not done this before, just imagine sound waves or water waves. 
When you have two waves, depending on their timing and direction, they can 
add in phase, or they can cancel.
The element spacing for this antenna is ¼ λ (λ  wavelength). One-quar-
ter wavelength is 90° of a sine wave. Thus, element A starts radiating first, then, 

8 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
element B starts radiating later. Pretend that we are a receiver, standing far to 
the right. We will receive two electromagnetic waves (Figure 1.9(b)), one from 
element A, and the second from element B. Element A radiates first, but it 
must travel an extra ¼ λ to get to you. The wave from B starts out later, but it 
is ¼ λ closer to us. Thus we receive both waves at the same time and they add 
constructively. We get a strong signal.
Now pretend we are a receiver standing far to the left. The signal from ele-
ment A is radiated first and gets to us first. The signal from element B radiates 
later (delayed by the ¼ λ transmission line) and must travel an extra ¼ λ to get 
to us. Thus it is delayed by ½ λ. It is perfectly out of phase with the wave from 
element A and the two waves cancel. We receive nothing.
When we mathematically perform the above analysis for all possible di-
rections, the radiation pattern of the entire antenna is a heart-shaped (cardioid 
pattern); see Figure 1.9(c).
Figure 1.9 Antenna of two elements (cardioid pattern).
A
B
λ/4
Figure 1.8 A two-element Yagi for 7 MHz. (Courtesy of Ron McClain, W2VO.)

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       9                 
Figure 1.10 shows the radiation pattern when the phase difference be-
tween A and B is adjusted to 120°. Comparing with the cardioid pattern in 
Figure 1.9(c), we still have strong radiation to the right, but the directivity is 
higher. In other words, signals off to the side will be weaker. Because the elec-
tromagnetic field simulator used in this book can analyze antennas for a variety 
of spacing and the phase differences, we can use it to design an antenna for the 
desired characteristics.
Dr. Yagi and Dr. Uda discovered that directivity is obtained even when 
the feeder wire between A and B is removed, as shown in Figure 1.11. This is 
because whenever current flows in element A, some electric current is then also 
induced in element B (by Faraday’s law, mentioned above).
In fact, Profs. Uda and Yagi also discovered that directivities increase even 
more when they use more elements, but only if they changed each element 
length slightly (Figure 1.12).
1.3.2 
Electromagnetic Simulation for Antennas
The Yagi antenna is designed to obtain a maximum value of gain by adjust-
ing the size and the position of elements carefully. Now let’s investigate the 
two-element Yagi antenna with electromagnetic field simulator Sonnet Lite™. 
Sonnet Lite is available online at www.sonnetsoftware.com, or can be installed 
Figure 1.10 Antenna of two elements with a phase difference between A and B of 120°.
B
A
120°
Antenna
Antenna pattern
Figure 1.11 Feeder wire between A and B is removed.
A
B

10 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
from the DVD provided with this book (see the Appendix for details). First, we 
draw a simple antenna, shown in Figure 1.13.
Input the Element
To start Sonnet Lite, click the Edit Project button of Task Bar and select New 
Geometry; an initial screen similar to that in Figure 1.14 is displayed. This rect-
angle represents the surface of the substrate viewed from above. This is where 
we will draw our antenna.
The EM analysis will mesh our circuit. The fine grid of points on the 
substrate surface shows the minimum mesh size (user definable). This can be 
Figure 1.12 Directive gain of a two-element Yagi antenna. Maximum gain is obtained spac-
ing at 0.11 λ.
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4
Wavelength (d/λ) separation
Two element Yagi 
Uda antenna
A
d
B
Gain (dB)
Figure 1.13 The antenna element we will draw and analyze, ﬁ le name: dp.son.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       11                 
viewed as a snap-grid. The rectangle formed by four closely spaced points is the 
minimum mesh size and is called a cell.
After selecting Circuit->Units…, the dialog box in Figure 1.15 is dis-
played. Set mm as length units and MHz as frequency units.
Next, select Circuit->Box… and the dialog box in Figure 1.16 appears. 
Set the size of both the x and y direction minimum mesh to 1 mm. Then set 
the size of the substrate, and when you input 1,024 mm in x and y, respectively, 
number of cells (Num. Cells) is automatically updated.
Next, set both the Top Metal and Bottom Metal, upper right corner of the 
dialog box, to Free Space.
These settings allow the analysis to include electromagnetic wave radiation.
To draw the antenna element, first click the button in the lower right of 
Toolbox shown in Figure 1.17. Next, put the mouse cursor on the corner of a 
cell, drag while holding down the left button, and release the button when your 
rectangle is the correct size, which is 4 mm (four cells) wide and 126 mm long, 
about at the center of the substrate. The actual size is displayed as you are draw-
ing it, in the lower right corner of the Sonnet display. We now see a rectangle 
with red hatched lines (lossless conductor).
Figure 1.14 The initial screen looking down at the top surface of the substrate.

12 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Because this only one-half of the element, draw another element in the 
same way, and arrange it so that the edges of two elements touch at the center, 
as shown in Figure 1.18.
Another method of drawing a rectangle is to input the size directly and 
click the OK button in the dialog box shown in Figure 1.19, which appears 
after selecting Tools->Add Metalization->Rectangle.
If you don’t get the rectangles in quite the right place at first, just left-click 
on one and drag it to where you want. To exactly center the entire antenna in 
the substrate, select the entire antenna and then choose Modify->Center->Both.
Figure 1.15 After selecting Circuit->Units…, this dialog box is displayed.
Figure 1.16 Dialog box displayed after selecting Circuit->Box… to set the cell size and the 
box size.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       13                 
Other Settings
Next, click the button on the second row on the left of Toolbox, as shown in 
Figure 1.20. Then click where the two rectangles of Figure 1.18 meet to cre-
ate a port. A port is where we would connect, say, a coax connector, to attach 
Figure 1.17 The Toolbox.
Figure 1.18 Draw two rectangles so that they meet at the center of the box.

14 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
a transmission line to feed the antenna. Imagine that there is a very tiny gap 
between the two rectangles, right where we placed the port. The port allows the 
EM analysis to put a voltage across that tiny gap and see what happens. When 
we connect a coax cable, the center conductor is connected to one side of the 
gap, and the shield conductor is connected to the other side.
The default metal for the antenna element is lossless. For a more realistic 
situation, we now change the metal to copper. Select Circuit->Metal Types... 
and then click the Add... button on the dialog box that appears. Next click Se-
lect metal from library... in Figure 1.21 and click Global Library. A list similar 
to that in Figure 1.22 is displayed. Here select Copper and click the OK button. 
Next, input, 0.03 mm in the Thickness box, shown in Figure 1.23, and set the 
name to Copper.
After double-clicking on the antenna element, the dialog box shown in 
Figure 1.24 displays. Change Lossless to Copper in the Metal item. Be sure 
Figure 1.19 Dialog box to draw rectangle that is 125 mm wide and 4 mm long.
Figure 1.20 The Add Port button.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       15                 
to change both rectangles. If you select them both at the same time, you can 
change both at the same time.
Next, we set the height of the space above and below the substrate (z di-
rection). The sizes of the x and y directions are already set in the box of Figure 
1.16. Figure 1.25 is an input screen of the thickness of the layer in which the 
space being analyzed is viewed from the side. It is set in the dialog box displayed 
after selecting Circuit->Dielectric Layers.....
We have been drawing the wiring pattern on the surface of a dielectric 
substrate layer. In Sonnet, these surfaces are called Levels and each level has a 
Figure 1.21 Click the Select metal from library... button.
Figure 1.22 Select Copper and click the OK button.

16 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
number. The antenna element in Figure 1.18 is on Level 0. Because the layers 
above and below Level 0 are set to 200 mm as shown in Figure 1.25, the height 
of space being analyzed is 400 mm.
Here, we set only the thickness of dielectric layers. The parameter Erel 
means relative permittivity (εrel); the default of 1.0 represents air. Since there are 
only two dielectric layers, and they are both air, this antenna is floating in air. 
A real antenna will be fabricated on an actual physical substrate. In this case, 
Figure 1.23 Input Thickness as 0.03 mm.
Figure 1.24 Change Lossless to Copper in Metal item.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       17                 
the designer obtains the dielectric constant of the substrate from the substrate 
vendor, and then adds a third dielectric layer with that dielectric constant and 
an appropriate thickness. We are not doing this in order to simplify this first 
example.
This model represents an antenna appropriate for a single digital terres-
trial television. The size we have selected means that it resonates at around 600 
MHz, where the wavelength is 50 cm long. It is calculated when dividing 3108 
m/s by 600106 Hz where the numerator is a velocity of electromagnetic wave 
(velocity of light), so the height of our analyzed space is about one wavelength. 
A guideline for Sonnet suggests that all edges (top, bottom, and sides) of the 
space being analyzed should be around one-quarter to one-half a wavelength 
from the antenna element.
A 3-D view is displayed by selecting View->View 3D (see Figure 1.26).
Run a Simulation
After inputting all the data, save the model by selecting File->Save (users of the 
Asian versions of Windows should input the name “dp” in single-byte charac-
ters, not double-byte.) Sonnet then makes the file dp.son with the extension 
.son and a folder named sondata.
In the dialog box (Figure 1.27) displayed after selecting Analysis->Setup..., 
input 500 MHz for the Start frequency and 700 MHz for the Stop frequency. 
The default Adaptive Band Sweep (ABS) needs only the range of frequency 
for analysis and we trust Sonnet to decide the frequency step and to correctly 
and accurately interpolate results from EM analysis at just a few frequencies. 
Figure 1.25 Set the height of space above and below the substrate (z direction) by the setting 
the thicknesses of the dielectric layers.

18 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Alternatively, we can also set a Linear Frequency Sweep that runs a simulation 
using user-specified start, stop, and step frequencies.
Furthermore, if you check Compute Current Density in Options on the 
left top, you can view the current density distribution on the surface of the 
metal element at a later time.
Figure 1.26 A 3-D view of this antenna model.
Figure 1.27 Set the range of frequencies for simulation.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       19                 
Figure 1.28 shows the window that appears after selecting Project-
>Analyze, which scrolls up during the simulation. When the progress bar reach-
es 100%, selecting Project->View Response->New Graph displays a plot similar 
to that in Figure 1.29.
This is a plot of the expected reflection coefficient, or magnitude (dB) of 
S11.
S-parameters, an abbreviation of scattering parameters, are often used 
with high-frequency circuits. When there is only one port, as with this antenna, 
there is only one S-parameter, S11. The plot in Figure 1.29 shows the voltage 
of the wave reflected from port 1 (converted to dB), when a 1-volt amplitude 
wave is incident on port 1. Or, more generally, if the incident wave has a volt-
age magnitude of a1, and the reflected wave has a magnitude of b1, then S11 is 
the magnitude of the ratio of b1 over a1. The value on the graph is obtained by 
converting that ratio to dB. We call it return loss.
 
[
]
1
10
10
11
1
return loss
20log
20log
dB
b
S
a
=
=
 
Now, for some examples. If the entire incident wave is completely re-
flected, then the S11 magnitude is 1.0. When we convert to dB, the return loss 
is 0 dB. Of course, no power is radiated by the antenna because all of the input 
power is reflected.
Let’s say that the voltage of the input wave is 1 volt and the reflected wave 
is only 0.1 volt. Now, the S11 magnitude is 0.1, which is the same as 20 dB. 
Figure 1.28 The process monitor window is displayed during simulation. The results scroll 
up the screen.

20 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
With a return loss of 20 dB, very little power is reflected from the antenna. 
That means that most of the incident power is either radiated or absorbed in 
antenna losses.
Sharp-eyed readers will note a sign problem in the above example. Strictly 
speaking the return loss is 20 dB, but the equation produces 20 dB. You will 
find that this sign mistake is common in practice. Just keep in mind that all 
passive antennas must reflect less power than what is incident.
If you are not comfortable with dB, change Data Format from Magnitude 
(dB) to Magnitude in the dialog box (Figure 1.30), which will appear after 
double-clicking DB[S11] shown inside the frame on the left. The vertical axis 
changes to that of Figure 1.31.
What Is the Input Impedance of the Antenna?
The characteristic impedance of a transmission line, like coaxial cable, is the ra-
tio of voltage to current for a wave traveling down the cable. It is determined by 
the dimensions of the cable and the electrical properties of the material between 
the conductors. It is important because a traveling wave does not like the im-
pedance to change. If the impedance changes, then a second, reflected, wave is 
launched. Reflected waves go back to the transmitter, they do not get radiated.
Figure 1.29 Simulation result: a plot of S11 (reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient).

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       21                 
The antenna also has an impedance. The antenna input impedance is the 
ratio of voltage to current as measured at the antenna input terminals. Ideally, 
Figure 1.30 Change Data Format from Magnitude (dB) to Magnitude.
Figure 1.31 The vertical axis is now straight magnitude, not converted to dB. This is the re-
ﬂ ected wave voltage when the incident wave has an amplitude of 1V at the input port.

22 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
we want to have all the power traveling along the transmission line to go into 
the antenna. We do not want any power reflected. To do this, we typically need 
to have the antenna impedance and the transmission line characteristic imped-
ance to be as close to the same as possible.
The characteristic impedance (Z0) of coaxial cable used for TV anten-
nas is usually 75 ohms (). Electromagnetic field simulators in general output 
S-parameters assuming that a 50 transmission line is connected to the port. 
This is described as S-parameters normalized to 50, as in Figures 1.29 and 
1.31. If we are actually going to connect a 75 transmission line, we need to 
view S-parameters normalized to 75 (Figure 1.32).
To renormalize, select Graph->Terminations... and enter 75 in the resis-
tance box. After clicking OK, the plot shown in Figure 1.33 is displayed. This 
now corresponds to the amplitude of the reflected wave when you connect the 
transmitter to the antenna using 75 cable.
In order to get zero reflected wave as mentioned above, the antenna input 
impedance must be equal to the transmission line characteristic impedance. 
So, just what is the antenna input impedance? In the dialog box displayed after 
double-clicking DB[S11] in the frame to the left of the plot, set Data Type to 
Zin and Data Format to Real and click OK. The graph for the real part of im-
pedance (R: resistance) appears.
Next, in the frame on the left, double click on the Right Axis label. Set 
the Data Type to Zin and Data Format to Imaginary and click OK. Now, the 
imaginary part of impedance (X: reactance) is also displayed. The final plot is 
shown in Figure 1.34.
In Figure 1.33, the least reflection is at 560 MHz. With minimum reflec-
tion at that frequency, we are likely close to maximum radiated power (with 
some power being absorbed by losses in the antenna). Next, looking at the 
Figure 1.32 Changing the normalizing resistance to 75.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       23                 
impedance in Figure 1.34, the real part is 78 and the imaginary part is 1.9 
This is usually written as 78–j1.9. The imaginary part, the reactance, X, is 
almost zero and the resistance, R, is almost equal to the transmission line char-
acteristic impedance of 75. Thus, the reflected wave is minimized when the 
input impedance of the antenna is equal to the characteristic impedance of the 
feedline and the antenna is said to be “matched,” an important goal in antenna 
design.
Electric Current on the Antenna
Because we checked the Compute Current Density box in the dialog box of 
Figure 1.27, we can now view the current density distribution on the surface of 
the metal antenna element. When clicking Project->View Current in the Son-
net Lite window, the window shown in Figure 1.35 is displayed.
When we view the display at 560 MHz, where we have the best matching, 
we see the current is strongest in the center and at both ends goes to zero, and 
the antenna element is one-half a wavelength long.
Simulation of a Yagi Antenna
We provided a detailed description above because this is our first simulation. 
We next simulate a Yagi antenna. Figure 1.36 shows Sonnet with an antenna 
Figure 1.33 The reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient plot normalized to 75.

24 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
after drawing another element. In Figure 1.12, the directivity is strongest with 
a spacing of 0.11 times wavelength, and the maximum gain is obtained. So we 
draw the second element with a spacing of 5.5 cm that is 0.11 times wavelength 
of 50 cm at 600 MHz. The second element is also called a parasitic element. 
Ideally, it should be slightly shorter than the driven element, in which case it is 
also called a director, because it tends to direct power from the driven element.
Figure 1.37 is the result of simulation after selecting Project->Analyze, 
which shows the S11 and the reflection increased. Then, after switching to the 
graph to view input impedance, you can see that R is now down to about 10 
around 560 MHz (not shown here). The circuitry required to match a 10 an-
tenna input impedance to a transmission line is called a matching network and 
is a topic of more advanced antenna design. For an example, see Section 8.3.5.
Surface Current of Elements
Display the surface current distribution by selecting Project->View Current and 
set Animation Type to Time by selecting Animation->Settings... Next, set it to 
sweep time by selecting Animation->Animate View, then view when the cur-
rent on the parasitic element is strong, as shown in Figure 1.38.
Figure 1.34 Real and imaginary parts of the input impedance of the antenna.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       25                 
Was a Strong Directivity Obtained?
Figure 1.39 is the radiation pattern at 541MHz, which shows the feature of the 
Yagi antenna (the professional version of Sonnet is required to view this).
We do not obtain such a nice directivity at other frequencies. In fact at 
some frequencies it actually radiates in the opposite direction (for details, refer 
to Section 3.3).
1.3.3 
Fundamental Forms of Antennas
The one-element antenna in the previous section is called a dipole antenna. It is 
about ½ λ long at its operating frequency of 560 MHz. However, if we calculate 
the frequency for which the antenna is exactly ½ λ long, it should be resonant 
at 600 MHz. All EM analyses have EM analysis errors. Is this difference due to 
an EM analysis error? It turns out that this is a real problem and is not due to 
an EM analysis error. Instead, it is necessary to make the dipole slightly shorter 
than one-half a wavelength, as we explain in detail in Chapter 3.
The other type of antenna we have looked at is a loop of wire (many 
loops in the case of Figure 1.5). Another loop antenna is the radio frequency 
Figure 1.35 Current density distribution on the surface of the metal element. Current at the 
center is strongest and at both ends go to zero.

26 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 1.36 Draw the second element and we have a complete Yagi antenna. The spacing 
is 55 mm.
Figure 1.37 S11 of the Yagi antenna.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       27                 
Figure 1.38 Current density distribution in the Yagi antenna.
Figure 1.39 Radiation pattern of the Yagi antenna.

28 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
identification (RFID) tag, where a silicon integrated circuit (IC) chip is con-
nected to a tiny multiloop antenna inside a credit-card-sized tag. It now sees 
widespread use in employee ID cards, railway tickets, and in credit cards (Figure 
1.40). The cards often use 13.56 MHz. It is impossible to use a ½ λ dipole on 
a credit card because it would be about 10m long. Thus, a tiny loop antenna 
is used.
All antennas we have described above are classified loosely into two 
groups, dipole and microloop (Figure 1.41). Because we usually view the dipole 
antenna as being sensitive to the electric field, we conveniently call it an elec-
tric field detection antenna. Strictly speaking, the microloop is not an antenna 
because it is typically much smaller than a wavelength, and thus cannot radiate 
very well at all due to its very low input resistance and high input reactance, 
which forces a matching network to be very narrow band and very lossy. How-
ever, over shorter ranges, it can behave like an antenna and is often referred to 
as such. It is included here because it is so important in today’s applications. 
Because a microloop responds to changes in the magnetic field, it is also called 
a magnetic field detection antenna (magnetic field antenna).
Figure 1.41 Two groups of antennas, the dipole antenna and the microloop antenna.
      3 × 108
f =-
          2L
f = Resonant 
frequency (Hz)
Electric field detection type (dipole)
Magnetic field 
detection type (small 
loop, < 0.1λ)
L (m)
Figure 1.40 An example of RFID tag, with a 5 turn coil.

 
The Antennas Around Us 
       29                 
1.4 What Are Near and Far Fields?
The antenna radiates an electromagnetic field. Near the antenna, the fields are 
very complicated with energy surging in many different directions. Far from 
the antenna, the fields are simple, a single traveling wave originating from the 
antenna. It is important to understand the difference when designing antennas.
1.4.1 
Boundary Between Near Field and Far Field
Figure 1.42 shows the electric field strength around a dipole antenna and it also 
displays the distribution of electric energy at a certain time. This figure is the 
result of the calculation using the electromagnetic field simulator XFdtd7™ by 
Remcom (USA) that solves Maxwell’s equations (see Chapter 2) and displays 
the electric field and the magnetic field.
Up to about one wavelength around an antenna is called the near field. 
Electromagnetic energy is very concentrated in this area, and we see the espe-
cially intense electric field surrounding the ½ λ long resonant antenna.
On the other hand, more than about 1λ from the antenna, circular peaks 
and valleys appear. Electromagnetic radiation is a wave, and we can see the peri-
odic electric field nulls, and they appear every ½ λ. Because this electromagnetic 
wave extends from here on out into the surrounding space (getting weaker as 
it goes further out), we call it the far field. The far field is a radiation field, and 
Figure 1.42 Transition between the near and far ﬁ elds of an antenna. This plot shows only the 
electric ﬁ eld strength. There is also an accompanying magnetic ﬁ eld. In addition, both electric 
and magnetic ﬁ elds have a direction, also called a polarization.

30 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
that is what we use to communicate over long distances. In Figure 1.42, you 
can see that there is no clear boundary between the two. However, it is clear that 
there is incredible beauty hidden in the universe of Maxwell’s equations, as we 
describe in Chapter 2.

31
2
Antennas and Radio Waves
2.1 Great Inventions
The field of radio communication started in the 19th century based on a series 
of amazing inventions. In this section, we briefly go over how we came to be 
where we are today.
2.1.1 
The Experiments of Hertz
The physicist Heinrich Hertz of Germany (1857–1894) (Figure 2.1), using the 
apparatus of Figure 2.2, demonstrated the existence of the electromagnetic ra-
diation that Maxwell had predicted. He connected a wire from both ends of the 
induction coil and tied it to small metallic balls separated by a small gap. Then 
he put large metal plates or spheres on rods extending outward.
2.1.2 
Hertz’s Receiving Equipment
Figure 2.2 is an apparatus that corresponds to the transmitter and transmis-
sion antenna. But how did he observe the electromagnetic wave that had been 
predicted to exist?
Hertz confirmed the existence of an electromagnetic wave by observing 
the electric current induced by this equipment in a receiving loop (Figure 2.3). 
Here, there are also two small metallic balls separated by a small gap in the loop. 
When current is induced in the loop, a spark is generated in the gap.

32 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
One day, almost by accident, he discovered that he could observe a spark 
when this device was at some distance from the induction coil shown in Figure 
2.2. The loop and spark gap shown in Figure 2.3 corresponds to what is now 
called a receiver.
Figure 2.1 Hertz (left) and Maxwell (right).
Figure 2.2 Hertz’s equipment: an induction coil and two small metallic balls forming a spark 
gap. The large balls lower the resonant frequency. For an illustrative model, we use square 
plates (on the right).
60 cm
40 cm
40 cm
Induction coil
or
Figure 2.3 Hertz’s receiving equipment.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       33                 
2.1.3 
Simulation of Hertz’s Transmitting Equipment
When we calculate the resonance frequency from the size of the apparatus in 
Figure 2.2, just like we did for the dipole antenna in Chapter 1, we get 3 108
(1.4 2) 107 MHz. Figure 2.4 is a rough model of Hertz’s transmitting 
equipment based on the dipole antenna we created in Chapter 1. This model is 
composed of two 40-cm square rectangles and two 30 2-cm thin rectangles. 
Using this model we can see the nature of Hertz’s experiments, which is our 
present objective. A precise model would require much more complexity and is 
not considered here.
In the dialog box displayed by selecting Circuit->Units..., set Length 
Units to cm and Frequency Units to MHz. Next, in the dialog box (Figure 2.5) 
displayed by selecting Circuit->Box..., set both the x (horizontal, as displayed 
on your computer screen) and y (vertical, as displayed on your computer screen) 
Cell Size to 1 cm. Then set the Box Size to 512 by 512 cm as shown. Finally, set 
Top Metal and Bottom Metal to Free Space, upper right.
Distance from the antenna to the edge of the analysis space is best set to 
about one wavelength, where the far field is becoming established. However, we 
set a little less than that in order to stay within the Sonnet Lite memory limit.
The top-to-bottom size of the simulation space is set in the dialog box 
displayed by selecting Circuit->Dielectric Layers... (Figure 2.6).
Figure 2.4 Rough model of Hertz’s transmitting equipment, similar to the dipole antenna 
model in Chapter 1.

34 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
As for the transmitter, we draw rectangles as we did in Chapter 1, and 
place a port in the center.
Using small metallic balls as a spark gap, Hertz generated high-voltage 
sparks by interrupting the current flowing through the induction coil. The 
sparks generate wideband power at high frequency just like the noise from an 
electric shaver. At that time, there were no transistors, vacuum tubes, oscillators, 
or amplifiers. Spark gaps were widely used in this manner until the invention 
of the vacuum tube.
Next, select Analysis->Setup..., set Start to 50 MHz and Stop to 150 
MHz. Select Project->Analyze and you will quickly have results.
Figure 2.5 Set x (horizontal) and the y (vertical) Cell Size to 1 cm.
Figure 2.6 The top-to-bottom size of the simulation space is set in this dialog box.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       35                 
Figure 2.7 is the simulation result for S11, and we see that it appears to 
resonate at around 60 MHz, which is nearly half the 107 MHz calculated above 
from the size of the antenna. (A definitive test for resonance requires the input 
impedance to be purely resistive, as discussed later.) This is due to the large 
patches on the end of the dipole. This technique of lowering the resonant fre-
quency of a dipole antenna is called capacitive end loading.
Why did Hertz use spheres connected by rods and wires for his antennas? 
Figure 2.8 shows a Leiden jar used in the 18th century at Leiden University 
in the Netherlands. Tin foil coats the inside and outside of the glass bottles. A 
chain drops down from a metallic ball near the top and touches the foil on the 
inside of each bottle at the bottom, forming one terminal of a capacitor. The 
foil on the outside of the jar forms the other terminal. Perhaps Hertz’s antennas 
were inspired by this form of the Leiden jar.
Figure 2.9 is the surface charge distribution displayed after selecting Proj-
ect->View Charge. Selecting Plot->Response->Current changes the display to 
charge distribution. We can confirm that a strong current has been stored on 
the metallic squares at both ends of the antenna at the resonant frequency of 
60 MHz.
Figure 2.7 Simulation result for S11. The antenna resonates at around 60 MHz, contrary to 
expectation.

36 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
2.1.4 
Transforming Parallel Plate Capacitors into Antennas
James Clerk Maxwell (1831–1879) (Figure 2.1, right) predicted the existence of 
electromagnetic waves. We can imagine how Hertz’s apparatus generates Max-
Figure 2.8 The Leiden jar, this one on display at Leiden University, might have been an inspi-
ration for the form of Hertz’s antennas.
Figure 2.9 Surface charge distribution on the surface of square elements.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       37                 
well’s waves from a thought experiment starting with a parallel plate capacitor. 
When passing an alternating current through the parallel capacitor of Figure 
2.10(a), the voltage across the two plates cause an electric field in the dielectric, 
as indicated with the dotted lines. There is no radiation. All of the electromag-
netic energy stays inside the capacitor.
The capacitor plates become rectangular solids in Figure 2.10(b) with a 
wider separation. We see that the electric field is distributed over a wider vol-
ume. The rectangular solids become spheres in Figure 2.10(c) that are now even 
farther apart.
In Figure 2.10(a) and (b) where the electric field (electric lines of force) 
concentrate between the electrodes, there is hardly any radiation. However, we 
can imagine that when the electric field has extended into space, as seen in 
Figure 2.8(c), we start to have some radiation, just as with Hertz’s transmitter 
(Figure 2.2). Not shown here is the magnetic field, which also plays an impor-
tant role, as described below.
2.1.5 
Simulation of Hertz’s Receiving Equipment
Hertz discovered that the sparks were strongest when the receiving loop was 
tuned to a specific length (Figure 2.11). Confirming an electromagnetic reso-
nance, with the resonant frequency determined by the electrical dimensions 
of the receiving loop and the transmitting antenna, was a monumental event. 
Resonance had only been seen in mechanical systems before.
In a mechanical system, resonance happens when energy oscillates be-
tween two different forms. Imagine a pendulum. When the pendulum has 
swung out as far as it is going to go, it is momentarily stationary. Potential en-
ergy is maximum. As the pendulum swings past its central position one-quarter 
of a cycle later, its velocity, and thus kinetic energy, is maximum. Thus, in reso-
Figure 2.10 (a–c) Electric ﬁ eld (electric lines of force) around the capacitors.
(a)
(b)
(c)
Symbol for AC power source

38 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
nance, energy flows back and forth from one form to another every one-quarter 
of a cycle.
In an LC (inductor/capacitor) resonant circuit, energy flows back and 
forth between the capacitor (electric energy) and inductor (magnetic energy). 
Just like the pendulum, this happens naturally at the resonant frequency.
In Hertz’s experimental apparatus (Figure 2.2), the large metallic balls 
and metallic plates at both sides of the transmitting device are like a large-scale 
capacitor. The rod that connects them is like an inductor. As for the receiver 
(Figure 2.3), electric energy (capacitance) is stored between the small balls and 
magnetic energy is stored around the loop. Electromagnetic resonance happens 
when energy flows back and forth between electric and magnetic energy. The 
frequency with which the energy flows back and forth is the resonant frequency.
Figure 2.12 is a simple model of Hertz’s receiver in Sonnet Lite. The line 
width is 2 cm and entire loop length is 500 cm. All other parameters are the 
same as the transmitter model we analyzed above.
Hertz’s receiver also has a gap made with small balls, just like the transmit-
ting equipment. In contrast, the simplified Sonnet model has a port. In Hertz’s 
experiments, an electromagnetic wave generates an output (sparks) in the small 
receiving loop gap. However, in Sonnet, we must treat the receiving loop as 
though it were a transmitter. We will input power into the port and, by viewing 
the S-parameters, see how much is absorbed. Power will be absorbed only when 
the frequency of the input power is near the resonant frequency.
Figure 2.13 is a plot of S11. We can see that the resonance is near 66 
MHz, which is near the 63-MHz resonant frequency of the transmitter. The 
entire length of the loop of the receiver model is 5m, which corresponds to a 
frequency of around 60 MHz. So we can see that this loop is about one wave-
length long. We see that it looks like there is another resonant frequency on the 
Figure 2.11 Representation of Hertz’s 1888 experiment.
Metal plate
Metal plate
Induction coil
Measure spark 
length
Receiving 
antenna
Loop length (cm)
Spark length (mm)
500
0
3
2
1

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       39                 
Figure 2.12 Model of Hertz’s receiving equipment. Entire loop length is 500 cm.
Figure 2.13 S11 plot of our model of Hertz’s receiving equipment. It resonates at around 66 
MHz.

40 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
plot at almost double the frequency. The loop is two wavelengths long at the 
higher resonance.
We see the surface current distribution at 63 MHz in Figure 2.14. One 
wavelength (two nulls and two maximums) is seen around the entire loop.
With the professional version of Sonnet, we can put both the transmitter 
and receiver in the same Sonnet analysis. We would leave the transmitter port as 
port number 1. We would change the receiving loop to port number 2. Then, if 
we did a plot of S21, we would see how much voltage is present at port 2 given 
power is being input to port 1.
2.1.6 
Experiments by Dr. Nagaoka
In Hertz’s time, high-frequency signal generators and frequency counters did 
not exist. It would have been difficult to correctly anticipate and observe a reso-
nant frequency in the structure in Figure 2.2.
In Japan, the physicist Hantaro Nagaoka did his own experiments just 
one year after Hertz (Figure 2.15). The results were published in the Journal of 
the Science Academy, No. 7, in 1889.
On page 229 of Nagaoka’s work, he wrote, “…when we assume T as the 
oscillation period, P as the self-inductance, C as the capacitance and V as the 
ratio of CGS electrostatic units to CGS electromagnetic units, the equation to 
get T is…”
Figure 2.14 Surface current distribution at 63 MHz.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       41                 
Dr. Nagaoka’s expression (which was written in an old style of Japanese) 
corresponds to the resonant frequency f, that is T  1f  2
LC
π
(using mod-
ern notation). Subsequently, he obtained the value of P (L in the equation 
above) from the length and radius of the transmitting antenna and the value of 
C from the radius of the metallic ball, to calculate the resonant frequency.
This thesis was based directly on Hertz’s publications, and we can read 
his description “…Hertz also explored how he could get the longest spark dis-
charge with the help of resonance; he finally discovered a convenient way to 
study electromagnetic waves.”
According to this description, Hertz determined the resonant frequency 
of his transmitter by calculation. Hertz also checked several lengths of receiving 
loop to verify a resonance condition. 
2.2 The Development of Various Antennas
Hertz was convinced that his discoveries were of absolutely no practical use. But 
the foundation that he laid was now in place for others to use.
Figure 2.15 “Hertz’s Experiments” by Nagaoka is a vertically written thesis in Japanese.

42 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
2.2.1 
Appearance of Marconi
In the history of cable communication, Samuel Morse, who is famous for the 
Morse code, laid the very first submarine cable in 1842. During his experi-
ments, the anchor of a ship happened to cut the wire right in the middle of 
his first public demonstration. Because of this embarrassing episode, he started 
experimenting with a “wireless” telegraph, using earth and bodies of water as 
electrical conductors. His experiments were successful in communicating over a 
mile or so across several rivers.
Guglielmo Marconi (1874–1937) in Italy had learned about Hertz’s ex-
periments. He reproduced some of Hertz’s experiments and then he started us-
ing the transmitters and receivers for communication. He established Marconi 
Corporation to commercialize his work.
Figure 2.16 is a chronological table that shows the evolution of grounded 
antennas. Marconi’s antennas and communication equipment are listed first. 
He successfully carried out communication over a distance of 2,400m with 
an antenna 8m high. Its main feature was use of a wire to earth to ground the 
globe. The end of the antenna was grounded to the earth and the transmitter 
was connected between ground and the antenna.
The transmitter (Figure 2.17, left, on the desk) is composed of four globes 
and Hertz’s inductive coil (right).
A copper plate is suspended near the top, which corresponds to the metal-
lic ball on one side of Hertz’s antenna. Under the desk, we can see a horizontally 
oriented copper plate of the same size.
This metallic plate is much larger than Hertz’s spheres. Marconi was in-
tensely focused on extending the communication distance and had experimen-
tally determined that he could transmit farther with a larger metallic plate.
Figure 2.16 Evolution of grounded antennas.
Marconi’s 
antenna and 
earth (1896)
Harp antenna 
(1902)
T antenna 
(1900s)
Marconi’s 
inverted L flat 
top (1905)
Franklin array 
antenna (1922)

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       43                 
According to Dr. Nagaoka, the metallic plate is capacitive. So if the plate 
is larger, the resonant frequency is lowered. Marconi would have noticed that a 
longer wavelength would transmit further. As he made his antenna capacitance 
larger and larger, he hit on the idea to use a globe as the opposite capacitance.
The harp antenna in Figure 2.16 is also one of the antennas that Marconi 
built. When his 60m tall antenna was blown down in a gale, he rebuilt it in the 
shape of a harp with the height of 45m to carry out the experiments, success-
fully communicating over a of 360-km path.
2.2.2 
History of Ungrounded Antennas
Figure 2.18 shows the evolution of ungrounded antennas. The ancestor of these 
antennas is Hertz’s oscillator. Next came the resonant antenna that physicist 
Oliver Lodge in Britain (1851–1940) invented. He changed the metallic plate 
(metallic ball) of Hertz’s oscillator to a cone shape, which is connected to the 
coil at the center. As Hertz had determined, the size of the capacitor and the 
number of turns of the coil can be changed, and resonant frequency adjusted 
to desired values.
Figure 2.17 Marconi’s transmitter.

44 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Both grounded and ungrounded antennas were complex structures in the 
early days. However, the dipole antenna was simplified to a metallic rod in the 
1900s. This simple structure has the capacitive body at both ends of Hertz’s 
dipole removed because it was discovered that electromagnetic waves could be 
transmitted and received just as well. Today, electronic systems are becoming 
more and more complicated. However, for antennas, at least in the past, the 
reverse has sometimes happened.
The Yagi-Uda antenna in the middle of Figure 2.18 is the world-famous 
Yagi antenna invented in Japan. In spite of its simple structure with dipole an-
tennas of slightly different length mounted on a central boom, it can transmit 
and receive electromagnetic waves very well in a desired direction, while also 
attenuating waves from other directions. As such, it can be used as a narrow 
band (i.e., highly optimized, single channel) receiving antenna for television. It 
is typically not used as a broadcast TV or FM antenna, as broadcasters like to 
transmit their signals in all directions.
2.2.3 
Aperture Antennas
Figure 2.19 shows the evolution of aperture antennas. They have an area, or ap-
erture, opening towards the desired transmit/receive direction. For example, the 
horn antenna in the middle looks exactly like a horn. It functions very much 
like a megaphone, focusing the transmitted signal in the desired direction. The 
horn is made of metal.
The ancestor of this antenna type is also due to Hertz. To confirm that the 
electromagnetic waves he had generated have the behavior of light, he placed 
a dipole antenna at the focus of a parabolic reflector formed from wires (Fig-
ure 2.20). This is analogous to the parabolic mirror in a reflecting telescope 
Figure 2.18 Evolution of ungrounded antennas.
Hertz’s 
resonator 
(1888)
Lodge’s 
resonant
antenna 
(1898)
Brown’s 
slope
antenna 
(1902)
Yagi Uda
antenna 
(1926)
Chireix-
Mesny array 
(1929)
Herical
antenna 
(1947)
Turnstile
antenna 
(1936)
Shielded 
loop
(1921)
Rhombic
antenna 
(1931)
Dipole
antenna 
(1900’s)

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       45                 
focusing and concentrating light. After all, it was thought, light must also be an 
electromagnetic wave.
Figure 2.19 Evolution of aperture antennas.
Hertz’s 
parabolic mirror 
(1888)
Marconi’s 
parabolic 
antenna 
(1933)
Horn (1935)
Parabolic 
refelctor 
(1935)
Horn 
relector 
antenna 
(1948)
Figure 2.20 Hertz’s transmitting equipment with a parabolic reﬂ ector.
50 cm

46 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Hertz confirmed that he could receive waves even if he put the receiver 
20m away, at a wavelength of 66 cm. He also discovered that no sparks were ob-
served when the transmitter antenna and receiver antenna were at right angles 
(say, one horizontal and the other vertical). Electromagnetic waves were polar-
ized, exactly as predicted by Clerk Maxwell.
Once it had been discovered that light is polarized, they knew that light 
could not be a longitudinal wave, like sound. Sound is a pressure wave. It has 
only one direction of vibration: along the direction it is traveling. If light is 
polarized, then it must be vibrating side-to-side, perpendicular to the direction 
it is traveling. This is called a transverse wave.
The direction of polarization for an electromagnetic wave refers to the 
direction of vibration of the electric field. When placing a dipole antenna verti-
cally above ground, the electric field vector is also vertical, and we call it a verti-
cal polarization. Marconi’s antennas were vertically polarized.
When we place an antenna horizontally above ground, it generates hori-
zontally polarized waves. Hertz’s transmitter shown in Figure 2.2 is horizontally 
polarized.
The horn antenna in Figure 2.19 includes a small antenna inside and at 
the left end of the horn, which is fed by coax. The small antenna launches an 
electromagnetic wave that is guided down the length of the horn. As the horn 
gradually widens, it gradually transitions the wave to free space. The longer and 
more gradual the widening of the horn, the more directive the antenna, just like 
a megaphone.
As we can see in the evolution charts (Figures 2.16, 2.18, and 2.19), there 
are many types of antennas. Some of these, including built-in cell phone anten-
nas, are becoming more widespread and often need to be miniaturized as much 
as possible.
2.2.4 
The Role of Ground
The pair of antennas for WiMAX described in Chapter 1 has a ground conduc-
tor located between them that is an integral part of the antenna. The ground 
that we learn about in textbooks is an ideal conductor, and is also called an 
electric wall in electromagnetic field theory. When we have an ideal conductor 
extending over a large area, it acts just like a mirror, so such an antenna can be 
viewed as a ground-image antenna (Figure 2.21). One half of a dipole mounted 
above a large ground acts almost exactly like a complete dipole antenna that has 
no ground at all.
The current distribution that is drawn for the half-dipole that is above the 
ground is the current that actually exists on the half-dipole. Notice that current 
is also drawn below ground. This current does not really exist. However, electri-

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       47                 
cally, the half-dipole plus ground plane acts almost exactly like a full dipole with 
no ground plane.
To illustrate this, we now modify Hertz’s dipole and run a simulation for 
Marconi’s antenna. First, load the previous dipole model and delete the entire 
right side. To do this, click your mouse on the desired element and press the 
Delete key. If Port 1 disappears, just add it back in.
Next, left-click and drag a rectangle around the entire remaining anten-
na, then select Modify->Rotate... and rotate it clockwise by 90 degrees (Figure 
2.22). Instead of left-clicking and dragging to select the entire circuit, you can 
also type CTRL-A.
As for the Sonnet simulation space, the four substrate edges each mark 
one of four perfectly conducting side walls. To create a ground-image antenna, 
select and drag the entire antenna and place it so that Port 1 just touches the 
Figure 2.21 An image antenna.
Ground
Figure 2.22 Dialog box to rotate the antenna.

48 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
lower edge of the substrate (Figure 2.23). The edge of the substrate marks a 
perfectly conducting sidewall, making this a ground-image antenna.
Previously, port 1 excited a voltage between the two halves of the dipole. 
Now, that same port is exciting a voltage between the half dipole and the ground 
plane. An antenna like this is called a monopole.
Figure 2.24 is a plot of S11 showing results of both the monopole and the 
dipole. Even though the antennas are different, the resonant frequencies are 
almost the same. However, the plots are different. The monopole has higher 
reflection, more power is reflected and less is radiated. Perhaps the input imped-
ance has changed?
Figure 2.25 shows the resistance, R, of the input impedance. You can see 
the value of the monopole antenna is approximately half of that of the dipole.
The textbook input impedance of a dipole antenna is about 73 pure 
real (no reactance). In contrast a monopole is 36, which is just half. Why is 
this? Figure 2.26 shows a monopole antenna and the equivalent dipole antenna.
Both antennas have the same current. However, the voltage at the feed 
point is V for monopole antenna and 2V for dipole antenna. Impedance is the 
ratio of voltage to current, so the input impedance of a monopole antenna is 
half that of a dipole antenna.
Keep in mind that we are assuming the ground is an ideal conductor and 
it is infinite. As for a finite ground (remember the WiMAX antenna of Figure 
Figure 2.23 Move the entire antenna so that port 1 just touches the lower substrate edge 
(side wall).

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       49                 
Figure 2.24 S11 of Marconi’s monopole and Hertz’s dipole.
Figure 2.25 Input resistance of Marconi’s monopole and Hertz’s dipole.

50 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
1.3), the input impedance of an antenna depends on the size of the antenna and 
on the size of the ground.
2.2.5 
Current on an Artificial Ground
Figure 2.27 shows the result when feeding Marconi’s antenna with an artificial 
ground of large metallic plate (Sonnet Lite cannot run this example because of 
memory limits).
2.3 Electric Field, Magnetic Field, Electromagnetic Field, and the 
Electromagnetic Wave
Fields and waves; let’s make sure we know how they are all related.
2.3.1 
Electric Field Near Hertz’s Dipole
Figure 2.28 (left) shows the charge distribution of Hertz’s dipole at a fixed point 
in time. It called a dipole because electric field lines go between two (di) poles, 
one plus pole and the other minus. In later years, it was discovered that it still 
works as a antenna even if Hertz’s metallic balls are taken away and ordinary 
wire is used (Figure 2.25, right).
2.3.2 
Radiation from a Dipole Antenna
Figure 2.28 shows the near field around Hertz’s dipole. Now let’s think about 
the electric field in the far field extending beyond it. When applying a high-
frequency voltage to Hertz’s dipole, the electric lines of force vary as shown in 
Figure 2.29. Here, the fields of one cycle are drawn, and we can see how the 
Figure 2.26 A monopole antenna is the equivalent of a dipole antenna.
Monopole
Dipole
1V
I
2V
I

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       51                 
Figure 2.27 Simulated current on Marconi’s monopole and an artiﬁ cial ground.
Figure 2.28 Near ﬁ eld around Hertz’s dipole and a dipole made of metallic wire. All quantities 
are varying sinusoidally with time; they are illustrated for a single instant.
Electric Field Lines
-
--
-
-
++ ++
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
Around two oppositely 
charged spheres
Around two oppositely 
charged wires

52 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
electric lines of force between the positive and negative charges are radiated into 
space like puffs of smoke. The loops of these electric lines of force stretch out 
over larger and larger distances as time goes on and expand into space. We can 
imagine that the electric energy is propagating into the distance.
2.3.3 
Magnetic Field Near the Dipole Antenna
Figure 2.30 shows the magnetic field generated around Hertz’s dipole. In the 
near field, we can observe magnetic lines of force according to Ampere’s law 
(one of Maxwell’s equations), which propagate into the far field.
Figure 2.30 Magnetic ﬁ eld generated around Hertz’s dipole.
Figure 2.29 Electric lines of force around Hertz’s dipole propagate into the distance.
Time
−V
0
+V
Voltage
+
−
−
−
−
-
−
+
+
+
+
+
Electric Field Around Two Oppositely Charged Spheres

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       53                 
Magnetic lines of force are directed alternately clockwise and counter-
clockwise. In the transition region, where the direction changes, the magnetic 
fields are zero (black in Figure 2.30). Realizing that we are dealing with an 
electromagnetic wave, we see that the point where magnetic field is zero appears 
every half-wavelength (XFdtd7 was used for these results).
2.3.4 
Electromagnetic Field and the Electromagnetic Wave
Faraday’s law of induction, described in Chapter 1, states that “a time-varying 
magnetic field generates an electric field.” Combining this rule with the rule 
that “the time-varying electric field generates a magnetic field” that Maxwell 
discovered, the time-varying electric field generated by Hertz’s dipole makes a 
time-varying magnetic field, which in turn also makes a time-varying electric 
field. So the electric field and the magnetic field travel in space as a wave, each 
regenerating the other as they both vary with time. The mutually time-varying 
electric and magnetic fields propagate with the speed of light, and we have an 
electromagnetic wave.
In Japan, an electromagnetic wave is sometimes simply called an electric 
wave. In Japanese radio law, a radio wave is an electromagnetic wave below 
3 THz.
Clerk Maxwell predicted the existence of an electromagnetic wave and he 
then calculated the velocity of an electromagnetic wave traveling in the space. 
Its value is approximately 3108 m/s, which he knew seemed to be the same as 
that of light. He then proposed in his electromagnetic theory of light (1864) 
that in fact light is an electromagnetic wave. He did not consider the possibility 
of lower frequency electromagnetic waves.
There are two kinds of electric charge, plus and minus. When we have 
a charge of any sign, the direction of force on another nearby positive charge 
is defined as the direction of electric field. The intensity of the electric field is 
stronger where the force is stronger. Thus, the electric field is a vector, which has 
an intensity (i.e., magnitude) and direction.
The electric and magnetic fields vary with time. For example, when no 
one is talking, the electric and magnetic fields close to an AM or FM radio 
station antenna are a perfect sine wave at a given frequency. However, the sine 
wave for the electric field is slightly different from the sine wave for the mag-
netic field. Specifically, the phase between the electric field and magnetic fields 
differ by 90 degrees. If the electric field is a sine wave, this means that the 
magnetic field is actually a cosine wave, a sine wave delayed by 90 degrees. This 
is the nature of electromagnetic resonance, it can be imagined that in the near 
field, the electric energy and the magnetic energy are sloshing back and forth. 
First all the energy is in one, then, one-quarter of a cycle later, all the energy has 

54 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
surged into the other. So if all the electromagnetic energy is just sloshing back 
and forth, how does it ever travel to the distant receiver?
Maxwell’s equations also give us a traveling wave, shown in Figure 2.31. 
For this figure, we are showing the electric and magnetic field only along a 
single line along the direction of travel. The complete electric and magnetic 
fields are everywhere the same on a transverse (i.e., perpendicular to the direc-
tion of travel) plane. Note that the electric field Ex and magnetic field Hy are 
perpendicular to each other and are in phase. We call this a plane wave.
If you are familiar with the vector cross product, E×H is interesting. It 
has units of W/m2 because it is the product of the electric field (V/m) and mag-
netic field (A/m). We call it the Poynting vector. It is named after the professor 
who first discovered it. We can think of it as the direction and amount of power 
flowing through a unit area. It is just an accident of history that the name of this 
vector makes it easy to remember that it “points” to where the power is flowing.
In the near field of an antenna, the electric and magnetic energy surge 
back and forth, going nowhere. In the traveling wave, the electric and magnetic 
fields are in phase, traveling at the speed of light. Radiation happens as the elec-
tric and magnetic fields gradually start to oscillate in phase in the transition be-
tween the near and far fields. All of this is found, mathematically, in Maxwell’s 
equations. Perhaps you can start to see why engineers who have worked with 
Maxwell’s equations all their lives can consider them to be the most beautiful 
poetry ever written.
Electric field (electric lines of force) and magnetic field (magnetic lines 
of force) cannot be seen or experienced directly, but we can see how Maxwell, 
Hertz, and Marconi might have imagined electromagnetic waves back in those 
days.
2.3.5 
Difficulty of Near-Field Problems
Figure 2.32 shows an antenna field distribution (from XFdtd7). At resonance, 
electric energy and magnetic energy alternate every one-quarter cycle, going 
Figure 2.31 Plane wave traveling in space. The electric ﬁ eld vector and magnetic ﬁ eld vec-
tor are orthogonal (i.e., perpendicular).
E
H
z
x
y

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       55                 
nowhere. In the far field, the electric and magnetic energy are in phase, and are 
mathematically simple. The electromagnetic field distribution in the near field 
is complicated. For that reason, in the past, engineers sometimes try to avoid 
working with the near field.
2.4 Antenna Design by Using EM Simulators
EM simulators now allow engineers to deal with the near-field complexity in 
detail. In this section, we demonstrate how that is done.
2.4.1 
Antennas on PCB
It has been said that the antenna is the ultimate electromagnetic field problem. 
We need to solve Maxwell’s equations (Figure 2.33) precisely. Circuit designs 
using Ohm’s law can be calculated with a handheld calculator. In contrast, the 
vector calculus operations for antenna designs are difficult to do by hand, and 
then, only for a few simple antennas. So a computer is usually needed. Fortu-
nately, we can use a free electromagnetic simulator to master antenna design 
techniques as we travel the path to success.
Once you have learned the techniques, there are a wide variety of EM 
computer tools you can use to design antennas. However, we use Sonnet Lite 
because it is both easy to use and free. Sonnet Lite does EM analysis of anten-
nas on a planar substrates. This software is a free version of the full professional 
Figure 2.32 Electric ﬁ eld near Hertz’s dipole. A loop of the E ﬁ eld can be seen at the border 
between near ﬁ eld and far ﬁ eld.

56 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
version of Sonnet Suites and is based on the method of moments, originally 
written by one of our authors, Dr. James C. Rautio. Thanks to amateur radio, 
the three authors of this book have been friends for a very long time. Instal-
lation instructions for Sonnet Lite are in the appendix. The software is in the 
attached DVD and can also be downloaded from www.sonnetsoftware.com.
Sonnet is an electromagnetic simulator of planar 3-D structures. Basically, 
we draw the antenna in Sonnet, specify one or more layered substrates, and 
then we analyze.
2.4.2 
Antennas Created by Using EM Simulators
Modern antennas differ vastly from classic types like the dipole and Yagi anten-
nas. Today, they are very compact and often embedded in the product. Older 
cell phones had an external wirelike antenna. Now it is standard practice to 
embed the antenna inside the housing.
Here, we learn new design procedures that are necessary to develop com-
pact antennas on a substrate. First, we summarize the antenna types that we 
have simulated up to now.
1. Linear dipole antennas (Chapter 1, Section 1.3);
2. Yagi antenna with two elements (Chapter 1, Section 1.3);
3. Hertz’s transmitter (dipole antenna) (Chapter 2, Section 2.1);
4. Hertz’s receiver (loop antenna) (Chapter 2, Section 2.1);
5. Marconi’s transmitter (monopole antenna) (Chapter 2, Section 2.2).
Figure 2.33 Maxwell’s equations.
rotE = − ∂B
∂t
rotH =  J + ∂D
∂t
divB = 0
divD = ρ
Maxwell’s equations
or
∇ • D  = ρ
∇ • B  = 0
∇ × E  = − ∂B
∂t
∇ × H  = J + ∂D
∂t
Coulomb’s law
No magnetic
charge
Ampere’s law and
Maxwell’s displacement
current
Faraday’s law

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       57                 
These fundamental types are all electric field detection antennas and 1 
through 4 are antennas for which the ground is not an integral part; antenna 5 
is a ground-image antenna. You might think 4 is the magnetic field detection 
type because it is a loop antenna. However the entire length is one wavelength 
and it is just like two half-wavelength dipoles connected end-to-end, so we de-
scribe it as an electric field detection type.
As described in Chapter 1, the magnetic field detection antenna is small, 
one-tenth of a wavelength or less, and its design procedure is different from the 
electric field detection antenna. We simulate a small loop antenna at the end of 
this chapter to demonstrate.
2.4.3 
Design of Electric Field Detection Type Antennas
The design procedure of a dipole antenna is:
1. Determine the length of one-half wavelength at the operating fre-
quency. For a straight dipole in air, assign an initial length of about 
97% of one-half wavelength. End capacitance requires that the physi-
cal length of a dipole be slightly shorter than a one-half wavelength. 
Any substrate material requires the dipole to be even shorter.
2. In Sonnet, draw the dipole in two equal pieces. Place a port in the 
center where the two pieces meet.
3. Set the simulation volume so that the antenna is one wavelength (or 
more) away from all sidewalls (substrate edges).
4. Put the antenna about one-half a wavelength away from the Top and 
Bottom covers of the Sonnet simulation space by setting the appropri-
ate layer thicknesses.
5. Set the Top and Bottom covers to Free Space.
6. Set the desired frequency range in an ABS sweep. Alternatively, you 
can also set Linear Frequency Sweep if you do not want interpolated 
results (this will take longer to analyze).
7. Analyze and conﬁ rm the resonant frequency by viewing S11.
8. Conﬁ rm the input impedance. For a straight dipole in air, it must be 
close to 73 pure real.
Detailed descriptions of how to do the above steps are illustrated in the 
examples of Chapter 1. Meander antenna elements like a WiMAX antenna 
(Figure 1.3) do not have the same length as straight dipole antenna, so it is 
necessary to repeat the above procedure to find the suitable size and shape. For 

58 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
example, if the apparent analyzed resonant frequency is too high, you must 
make the antenna longer.
Refer to Chapter 8 for more simulation examples that you can try for 
yourself.
2.4.4 
Simulation of a Small Loop for an Integrated Circuit Tag Antenna
Figure 2.34 shows a one-turn coil that is about the size of a credit card. This 
antenna (or, more accurately, coil or inductor, because it is a tiny fraction of a 
wavelength in size) is different from most of the antennas we have worked with 
so far. There is no coax or feed line. Instead, it is connected to an integrated 
circuit (IC) that feeds the antenna directly. Coils of a few turns are used for the 
cards like this, for example, FeliCa™, developed by SONY.
Here we simulate a one-turn coil using Sonnet Lite. To stay within Sonnet 
Lite’s memory constraint of 16 Mb, set the cell size in both the x and y direc-
tions to 2 mm. The width of the metal line forming the coil is also 2 mm, so 
the coil line will be meshed one cell across. With the full Sonnet professional 
version, you can choose a smaller cell width and get more accurate results. This 
would be important, for example, if you need high accuracy for calculation of 
loss.
We assume the coil is made of aluminum. After selecting Circuit->Metal 
Types... in the displayed dialog box, click the Add... button and then click 
Figure 2.34 A one-turn coil of credit card size. Model ﬁ le: loop.son.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       59                 
Select metal from library..., and then, in the Global Library, select Aluminum 
(Figure 2.35).
The value of Conductivity is entered automatically. Assign 0.01 mm (10 
μm) to Thickness. Next, set the Current Ratio to 1, which means we are assum-
ing equal current on the top and bottom surfaces of the metal foil.
As for Circuit->Box, set both the x and y dimensions of the substrate 
surface to 512 mm. Then, in Circuit->Dielectric Layers, set the top-to-bottom 
distance to 70 mm (two layers of air, each 35 mm thick). This tag’s operat-
ing frequency is 13.56 MHz, so the wavelength is about 22m. However, this 
antenna uses only the magnetic field generated near the coil, so we simply set 
the Sonnet simulation space large enough so it does not interfere with the coil’s 
magnetic field.
Drawing the coil is similar to drawing Hertz’s receiving loop antenna, so 
we set Port 1 as we did with Hertz’s antenna. This IC card has aluminum foil 
on the surface of polyethylene terephthalate (PET, a kind of polyester) film, so 
add another dielectric layer. After selecting Circuit->Dielectric Layers..., Add 
Layer, set the Thickness to 0.05 mm (50 micron), relative permittivity to 2.2, 
and Dielectric Loss Tan to 0.001 (Figure 2.36).
After selecting Analysis->Setup..., select Frequency Sweep Combinations. 
Then select Single Frequency from the drop-down menu and click the Add... 
button to input 13.56 MHz. Next, select Adaptive Sweep (ABS) from the drop-
down menu and then click the Add... button, input 13 MHz and 14 MHz. 
Select Project->Analyze to run the simulation.
After displaying S11, select Equation->Add Equation Curve. Select 
Inductance1(nH) and click the OK button. Sonnet now displays a plot of in-
ductance. According to this plot, L is 167.2 nH (nanohenry). Resonant fre-
Figure 2.35 Making aluminum available for selection.

60 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
quency is f  
.
1/2
LC
π
 A little algebra gives us the C to resonate at 13.56 
MHz: 823.9 pF.
To confirm that that value of capacitance creates the desired resonance, 
we connect a capacitor across the coil to make an LC resonant circuit. To do 
this, we create a Sonnet netlist. Select File->New Netlist in the main Sonnet 
window and the window shown in Figure 2.37 appears. In our initial display 
of this window, it is set for wiring up a 2-port. We want to analyze a 1-port. So 
double click on that one line in the net list and change # of ports from 2 to 1 
and click OK.
Next, selecting Tools->Add Project Element..., and assign the file name 
loop.son. This is the project we just finished simulating. Now select Tools-
>Add Modeled Element..., and add the capacitor. Select Analysis->Setup... 
and assign the same frequency sweep as in the previous project. Then select 
Project->Analyze.
Figure 2.37 Final window for the Sonnet Netlist Project.
Figure 2.36 Add another dielectric layer to model the PET ﬁ lm upon which the coil will be 
placed.

 
Antennas and Radio Waves 
       61                 
The plot in Figure 2.38 shows input impedance, and reactance is zero at 
13.56 MHz. It is a parallel LC resonant circuit and R is more than 700. Typi-
cal ICs for this kind of tag are designed for high impedance, so just adding the 
capacitor finishes this design.
Figure 2.38 Input impedance of this coil is more than 700 pure real at 13.56 MHz.


63
3
Wire Antennas
3.1 Fundamentals of a Dipole Antenna
We have already seen several examples of the dipole antenna. This antenna is 
such an important building block that we will look at it in even more detail.
3.1.1 
Standing Wave on a Linear Dipole Antenna
The dipole antenna (Figure 3.1) realizes desirable performance when its length 
is about one half-wavelength at the desired frequency of operation. The electric 
current fed to the center of the dipole launches two traveling waves, one go-
ing each way, out toward each end of the dipole. When they reach the end of 
the wire, they each totally reflect and travel back to the center. If we work the 
mathematics, a traveling wave going in each direction (out and back) results in 
a standing wave. Look at the current distribution of Figure 3.1. It is one half-
wavelength of a wave that is just standing there. Thus, the dipole is described as 
a standing wave antenna.
This is illustrated in Figure 3.2. We see two traveling waves (on the left, 
dashed lines) adding together as they travel along the wire in opposite direc-
tions. In 1 through 12, each traveling wave moves an additional 1/12 wave-
length, each moving in opposite directions. The solid line shows the sum of 
both traveling waves. The sum is also shown all by itself on the right side. At 
1, the traveling waves are exactly opposite of each other and they sum to zero 
when combined. As for 2, the two traveling waves no longer cancel perfectly, 
and the standing wave increases slightly. From this, we can see that a dipole is 

64 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
just like a vibrating guitar string. Both ends of the string are fixed in position 
and the rest of the string is vibrating.
Because both ends of the dipole antenna are open circuits (i.e., zero cur-
rent), a standing wave is generated as a sum of the initial traveling wave and the 
traveling wave reflected from the ends of the wire. This gives us a standing wave, 
just like on a guitar string.
Figure 3.1 Current distribution on a dipole antenna.
Figure 3.2 Combining two traveling waves that are traveling in opposite directions gener-
ates a standing wave.
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)
(10)
(11)
(12)
(13)
Time 
instant
Traveling 
wave
Reflected 
wave
Sum of 
waves

 
Wire Antennas 
       65                 
3.1.2 
Designing the Element Length
In textbooks, the input impedance R jX of a one-half wavelength dipole an-
tenna in free space is 73  j43. The 43 reactance means that some of the 
power that is sent to the antenna is reflected back towards the transmitter, after 
spending a short time in the complicated fields near the antenna (like energy 
in the spring of a shock absorber). Reflected power is not radiated. A positive 
X is inductive reactance and corresponds to an inductor (a coil of wire), which 
means that extra magnetic field energy is generated. As we have seen in previ-
ous chapters, inductance does not need an actual coil of wire. Just a straight 
wire will do the trick. It turns out that if we cut off about 3% of the dipole wire 
length, the magnetic field decreases by just enough to remove +j43, and all 
that remains is the pure resistance of 73. For a thin half-wave dipole in free 
space, a length of about 97% of one-half wavelength removes the reactance.
The textbook value of 73  j43 is calculated for an infinitely thin, round 
wire. However we usually build antennas using thick wires and tubes that have 
a real diameter. Planar antennas use flat “wire” and are placed on a substrate. 
How do we design such antennas?
3.1.3 
A Dipole Antenna on a Substrate
Figure 3.3 shows a linear (straight) dipole antenna. To set up this antenna, select 
Circuit->Units..., and set cm and MHz. Under Circuit->Box, set the cell size 
to 0.2 by 0.2 cm and the Box size to 80 by 80 cm. Because this is an antenna 
simulation, set the Top and Bottom covers to Free Space.
Set Dielectric Layers as shown in Figure 3.4, and draw an element on the 
dielectric whose thickness is 0.05 cm and relative permittivity is 3. Draw the 
Figure 3.3 A linear (straight) dipole antenna. File: dipole.son

66 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
dipole element in two identical pieces, 6.8 by 0.2 cm. Put port 1 at the junction 
in the center, as we have done for previous dipoles.
3.1.4 
Parameterization
Sonnet Lite allows variable parameters and can change them automatically for 
a simulation. Here we assign the length of the dipole antenna as parameter 
and so we can design an antenna that resonates at 953 MHz, the operating 
frequency of UHF RFID (ultrahigh-frequency radio frequency identification) 
tags in Japan.
After selecting Tools->Add Dimension Parameter->Add Symmetric, click 
on the upper left corner vertex of the dipole with left button of mouse and that 
point is highlighted (Figure 3.5). This point is the first anchor point. To set a 
parameter, follow the next steps. Notice that hints for what to do also appear in 
the lower left corner of the Sonnet window.
1. We want to select all the points that will also be moved when the an-
chor point is moved. In this case, there is only one more point. Click 
on the other vertex for that end of the dipole and press Enter.
2. Now we set the second anchor point. Left-click on the upper far right 
corner vertex of the dipole and it is selected.
3. Finally, we select all other points that we want to move when this 
second anchor point is moved. As before, there is only one additional 
point to be moved. Left-click on the other vertex at this end of the 
dipole and press Enter.
Figure 3.4 Dielectric Layers setup for the dipole on a substrate.

 
Wire Antennas 
       67                 
Now the dialog box in Figure 3.6 is displayed. Enter an appropriate vari-
able name, like “length.”
Click the OK button, then a dimensioning arrow is displayed for the pa-
rameterized line length (Figure 3.7). Move it to a convenient location. Double-
click on the label for full details. With the full details displayed, you can change 
the parameterized dipole length just by typing in a new length. Try it!
We added a symmetric parameter above. When changing a symmetric pa-
rameter, both anchor points are moved an equal distance in opposite directions. 
Sonnet Lite also has Anchored Parameters (one anchor point moves, the other 
remains stationary) and Radial Parameters (to parameterize curves).
Figure 3.5 Setting an anchor point for the parameterization.
Figure 3.6 Parameter name and other settings.

68 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
To set up a parametric analysis, select Analysis->Setup... and set the Anal-
ysis Control dropdown menu to Parameter Sweep. Click Add… and the dialog 
box shown in Figure 3.8 is displayed.
Select an ABS sweep from 800 to 1,100 MHz. Check the length param-
eter and set it to vary from 12 to 15 cm with a step of 0.2 cm and click the OK 
button. Then select Project->Analyze.
Figure 3.7 A dimensioning arrow labels the parameterized line length.
Figure 3.8 Settings for the Parameter Sweep.

 
Wire Antennas 
       69                 
When the analysis is complete, select Project->View Response. In the 
graphing program, double click the “dipole” curve label in the frame on the 
left-hand side. The dialog box in Figure 3.9 is displayed. Check the Graph All 
Iterations box and click OK. Figure 3.10 shows the S11 magnitude (reflection 
coefficient) results for all element lengths.
We want the resonant frequency of this dipole to be 953 MHz, and we 
can check that length  13.6 cm. To see the length, move your cursor over the 
desired curve and the value of the length parameter is displayed.
3.1.5 
Examining the Impedance
With the plot of Figure 3.10 displayed, select Curve->Add Curves... and change 
the plotted quantity to the Real Part of Zin. Figure 3.11 shows the result.
In textbooks, the real part of the input impedance of a one-half wave-
length dipole is 73. However this planar dipole, which uses flat “wire” and 
is on a substrate, has an input impedance of 54 at resonance, with a dipole 
length of 13.6 cm (Figure 3.12).
Figure 3.9 Select Display All Iterations.

70 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 3.10 Graph of all S11 for all the dipoles analyzed.
Figure 3.11 Resistance (real part of input impedance) for all element lengths.

 
Wire Antennas 
       71                 
3.2 Fundamentals of a Loop Antenna
A dipole antenna is typically one-half a wavelength long. A loop antenna is 
typically one wavelength long. Let’s explore the design of a square planar loop 
antenna.
3.2.1 
Simulation for a Quad Antenna
At DC, the loop antenna is a short circuit across the antenna input terminals. 
At low frequency, in other words, where the length of the antenna is a tiny 
portion of a wavelength, it is an inductor. It is not really an antenna. Here, we 
consider a loop antenna whose length is about one wavelength at the desired 
frequency of operation. 
An antenna that is designed so that its loop length is one wavelength and 
is square is called a quad antenna, which is a familiar term to radio amateurs. 
Building on the loop antenna of Hertz’s receiver from Chapter 2, Figure 3.13 
shows maximum current at the feed point (port 1), and there is also a current 
maximum on the exact opposite side.
When drawing the direction of current with an arrow, the upper half and 
lower half of the quad are each just like two bent dipole antennas. What is im-
portant is the direction of the current. The top and the bottom currents flow in 
the same direction. Each half radiates. Since the currents of the two halves are 
in phase, their radiated waves add in phase in the direction perpendicular to the 
plane of the loop, the direction from which you are viewing the loop. Thus, the 
antenna pattern of the loop is maximum in this direction.
Figure 3.12 Input resistance and reactance for a planar dipole is 54 and it is resonant (zero 
reactance) at about 950 MHz with a length of 13.6 cm.

72 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
In contrast, in the vertical legs of the loop, the current in opposite legs is 
oppositely directed. Thus, the radiation from each vertical leg cancels the radia-
tion from the other vertical leg, at least in the direction perpendicular to the 
plane of the loop.
The input impedance of a quad antenna is shown in Figure 3.14.
At the resonant frequency of 67 MHz, R is 157, about double the dipole 
antenna. At 125 MHz, where the quad loop is about two wavelengths long, R 
is 270.
In Figure 3.14, there is another frequency, 89 MHz, where X (reactance) 
becomes zero. R is as much as 1360, high impedance. This is an antireso-
nance, or a parallel resonance where the loop is 1.5 wavelengths long (Figure 
3.15). The feed point has high resistance because it is at a current minimum, 
which automatically corresponds to a voltage maximum. Be sure to use a good 
high-voltage connector at this point!
3.2.2 
What Is a Magnetic Loop Antenna?
The antenna for a 13.56 MHz RFID card, like the SONY FeliCa, is a small 
loop antenna because it is much smaller than the wavelength of 22m. It is a 
magnetic field type antenna, and the magnetic intensity in the near field is 
strong. Might it be possible to generate some far-field radiation, even though 
it is so small?
Figure 3.13 Current directions on a quad antenna.

 
Wire Antennas 
       73                 
In fact, if the loop length is at least one-tenth of wavelength, we can actu-
ally build an antenna whose radiation efficiency is more than 50%. This has 
been a lifelong amateur radio project of one of the authors. We call this type of 
antenna a magnetic loop antenna (MLA).
Figure 3.14 Input impedance of a quad antenna.
Figure 3.15 The loop is 1.5 wavelengths long at 89 MHz.

74 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Since around 1957 this type of small loop antenna has been studied, and 
it is based on an antenna called the Army Loop. It was used in the army in the 
Vietnam War (1960–1975).
Figure 3.16 shows the loop by Patterson (Electronics, Aug. 21, 1967, pp. 
111–114); this kind of antenna has been investigated for some time. It is im-
portant to decrease both the resistive loss of loop conductor and the connector 
feed point loss. Chris Käferlein (amateur radio call sign DK5CZ) developed 
such an antenna (Figure 3.17) and has had it in production since 1983. His 
design was analyzed by Hans Würtz (amateur radio station DL2FA). He has 
produced many types of this antenna that cover the 160m to 10m bands, which 
have become popular in Europe. The small coupling loop near the feed is de-
signed for broadband operation with a coaxial feed line.
Figure 3.16 Small loop by Patterson (1967).
1.5-inch 
diameter 
pipe
6 inches
Loading
Coax feed
Tuning
Figure 3.17 Schematic of an MLA by Chris Käferlein.
D2
CA
D1
D2
D1
5
1
 =
50Ω
Tuning
Coupling 
Loop

 
Wire Antennas 
       75                 
Figure 3.18 shows one of Käferlein’s products, AMA-10D™. The main 
loop is 1.3m in diameter with a small one-turn loop for matching the coax to 
the antenna at the bottom. A large variable capacitor is inside the cylindrical 
case at the top. A remotely controlled motor adjusts the capacitance to change 
the antenna’s resonant frequency.
3.2.3 
Simulation of the Small Loop Antenna
Figure 3.19 shows a 100-mm square loop model based on the loop antenna 
loop.son that we simulated in Chapter 2.
The port is located slightly above the center line; this actually makes little 
difference. Running a simulation the same way we did for the small loop in Sec-
tion 2.4.4, the value of L at 13.56 MHz is found to be 371 nH.
Knowing the value of L for this coil, we find that the value C to resonate 
at 13.56 MHz is 371 pF.
In the example in Section 2.4.4, we designed a parallel resonant circuit 
by creating a circuit simulator Netlist Project. In this case, we assume that this 
is a reader/writer antenna for an RFID tag that was designed to operate with a 
series LC resonant circuit.
We see a small capacitor near port 1 in Figure 3.20. This is an ideal capaci-
tor inserted as a “component.” To add a component, cut out a small section of 
the loop. Do this by selecting Edit->Divide Polygons. Use the little razor knife 
that appears to cut the loop just below port 1. Select the razor tool again and 
make a second cut just below the first one. Select the little piece of the loop by 
left-clicking in it and press the Delete key. This opens up a space for the ideal 
capacitor.
Figure 3.18 MLA™ product by Chris Käferlein.

76 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 3.19 Square loop model. File: loopRW.son.
Figure 3.20 Loop with a lumped capacitor included. File: LoopRW_C.son.

 
Wire Antennas 
       77                 
Next, select Tools->Add Component->Ideal. The dialog box shown in 
Figure 3.21 is displayed. Set the Ideal Type drop-down menu to Capacitor. 
Type in a value of 371 pF. Then, on the right side, set the Terminal Width drop-
down menu to Feedline Width.
Click OK and then, following the hints that Sonnet Lite provides, place 
the two capacitor terminals. After the capacitor is in place, you might want to 
move the label to a convenient location. Just zoom enough on it to see it clearly, 
then click on it and drag it to a convenient location. Analyze the circuit and plot 
the real and imaginary input impedance (Figure 3.22).
Figure 3.22 is the resulting input impedance, showing that R at 13.56 
MHz is 0.54 and X is nearly zero. The resonant frequency is slightly higher.
Next, in the dialog box displayed after selecting Graph->Terminations..., 
change the value of Resistance to 0.54 and plot S11 magnitude dB. Figure 3.23 
suggests that it resonates at around 13.645 MHz
Components in Sonnet use internal cocalibrated ports. These are per-
fectly calibrated internal ports. As such they remove all the inductance associ-
ated with the small piece of the loop that was removed. Decreased inductance 
increases the resonant frequency.
3.2.4 
Matching the Small Loop to 50
Figure 3.17 shows the technique used by Hans Würtz to make the antenna feed 
point impedance 50, using 50 coaxial cable. We can imagine that the two 
coils are the primary and secondary of a transformer. The transformer on the 
electric power poles outside our homes transforms the very high voltage outside 
Figure 3.21 The Add Component dialog box.

78 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
down to household voltage levels. It turns out that they also transform imped-
ance. In this way, we can match the small loop to 50.
Figure 3.22 The complex input impedance of the loop including the capacitor used to tune 
the resonant frequency.
Figure 3.23 The series LC resonance of the RFID loop and tuning capacitor.

 
Wire Antennas 
       79                 
Figure 3.24 is a model using this idea. Is it possible to adjust the size of the 
loop to match the loop to 50?
With the outer coil remaining as in Figure 3.20, delete the port. Next 
add a loop on the inside that is 60 mm on a side and insert port 1 as shown in 
Figure 3.24. (Ports can only be added on polygon edges.) Try analyzing a few 
different sizes. If you like, parameterize the inner loop and run a range of dif-
ferent sizes. Using a loop 60 mm on a side, the input resistance is very close to 
50 (Figure 3.25).
3.3 Fundamentals of the Yagi-Uda Antenna
From dipoles and loops, we now go to the well known directional antenna, the 
Yagi-Uda, or as it is more commonly known, the Yagi antenna.
3.3.1 
Fundamentals of a Reflector
In Chapter 1, we described a Yagi-Uda antenna with two elements. Here we 
examine fundamentals of the Yagi-Uda antenna based on the book by Dr. Shin-
ichiro Uda, one of the inventors. 
Figure 3.24 Impedance matching using a small inner loop. File: loopRW50.son.

80 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The element A in Figure 3.26 is a side view of a horizontal λ/2 dipole an-
tenna. R is also a dipole antenna, whose length is slightly longer than λ/2. The 
distance between the two elements is λ/4. 
For a Yagi antenna, the feed line is connected only to what is called the 
“driven element,” element A. When feeding element A, current on element 
A induces current on the nearby element R even though the feed line is not 
connected to element R. It does not matter whether the current on an element 
comes from a direct feed line connection, or from being induced by current 
flowing on a nearby element. All current on all elements, both A and R, radi-
ate. Radiation from the director, A, is shown with a solid line. Radiation from 
the reflector, R, is shown with a dashed line. In both cases, traveling waves are 
launched by the elements, and the traveling waves travel, of course, away from 
Figure 3.25 The small impedance matching loop almost perfectly matches the loop to 50 at 
13.645 MHz, S11 in a 50 system is plotted.
Figure 3.26 Conceptual side view of a Yagi antenna. Waves to the right are in phase and to 
the left are reversed phase.
R
A

 
Wire Antennas 
       81                 
the radiating element. The waves traveling to the right are in phase and rein-
force. At the same time the waves to the left are reversed in phase and cancel 
each other.
Because the distance between A and R is λ/4, the excitation of R by cur-
rent on A is delayed by approximately 90 degrees. R is made a bit longer than 
λ/2 so that the current in R is delayed by about 180 degrees. Because of this, 
the wave reradiated from R is now delayed a total of 270 degrees with respect 
to the radiation from A.
Next, the wave radiated from R must travel the 90 degree delay from R 
back to A again, adding another 90 degrees of delay, the total delay is now 360 
degrees, which is electrically the same as 0 degrees, and the waves from both 
A and R are in phase going to the right. Consequently, the solid line traveling 
from A and the dotted line reinforce each other to the right, Figure 3.26.
And as for the waves radiated to the rear (to the left), the solid line and 
the dotted line are of opposite phase, and they cancel. This is called the reverse 
direction, or “off the back of the antenna.” However as described in Chapter 
2, the near field of a dipole antenna is not simple. So we need to view Figure 
3.26 a conceptual explanation. In actual design there is a complicated trade-off 
between making the reflector longer and where it is positioned in back of the di-
rector. A lot of time can be spent optimizing a Yagi for maximum performance.
3.3.2 
Fundamentals of a Director
If making an element a little longer than λ/2 makes it into a reflector, perhaps 
making it a little shorter changes it into a director. A director, D, is placed λ/4 
in front of A, and its length is made shorter so that the current in the director 
is advanced by 90 degrees. This means that the induced current in the direc-
tor generates a traveling wave that reinforces with the traveling wave from the 
driven element, and we get even stronger radiation in the forward direction. 
Of course, this also means, by conservation of energy, that the total radiation 
elsewhere (in this case, to the rear and sides of the antenna) is decreased. Thus, 
the Yagi can be a highly directional antenna.
The impedance of D is influenced by A, and A is also influenced by D. 
The same is true for the reflector, R. Because the interactions are so complicat-
ed, an actual Yagi-Uda antenna must be optimized by trying different element 
lengths and spacings.  While there is typically only one reflector (at least when 
all the elements are on a single boom), there can be many directors. Additional 
directors increase the forward gain…if they are of the right length and spacing. 
Finding an optimal Yagi for a given number of directors on a given boom length 
is a difficult problem. In the past it has been done by physically building dif-
ferent Yagi antennas and measuring them. The best one is selected. Now this is 
done using computers.

82 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The Yagi-Uda antenna was invented in the end of Taisho Era, and it was 
in 1928 that their work was presented in English. The next year a UHF (at 
670 MHz) Yagi-Uda antenna successfully established communication over a 
path of 20 km in Sendai. It is on display in the Research Institute of Electrical 
Communication, Tohoku University (Figure 3.27 is offered by Mr . Hironobu 
Hongou, Fujitsu Limited).
3.3.3 
Simulation of the Yagi-Uda Antenna
Sonnet Lite provides for two dimensional drawing, so it is most suitable for 
planar antennas on substrates, Chapter 4. Wire antennas can be designed with 
another free software package.  This is an antenna analysis named MMANA 
written by radio amateur JE3HHT, Mr. Makoto Mori, based on the method 
of moments. The method of moments is a technique that divides the metal of 
a circuit (as with Sonnet) or antenna (as with MMANA) into a fine mesh of 
tiny subsections and transforms the problem into matrix equations (simultane-
ous linear equations) for numerical solution. It can analyze antennas composed 
of wires and pipes. MMANA, can be downloaded from http://www33.ocn.
ne.jp/~je3hht/ for the Japanese version and the multilingual version, MMA-
NA-GAL, form http://mmhamsoft.amateur-radio.ca/.
The effect of ground on radiated waves is determined by the combining 
direct wave (which goes from the antenna directly up and out into space) and 
the reflected wave (which is radiated from the antenna down towards the earth, 
then reflects from the earth back up into space), the radiation patterns differ ac-
cording to the height and location. For the mathematics, the ground is defined 
Figure 3.27 Original Yagi-Uda antenna for UHF (670 MHz) at Tohoku University.

 
Wire Antennas 
       83                 
as a conductive dielectric. Different kinds of ground have different effects on 
the radiation characteristics of antennas.
When starting up MMANA or MMANA-GAL, after selecting File-
>Open, you can use many example files included in ANT folder in MMANA 
folder. Figure 3.28 shows the screen displayed after opening 8EL6M.MAA and 
loading antenna data in memory.
Under the Geometry tab for antenna definition, a coordinate system for 
the end points of wire elements is displayed in the upper half of the screen. 
After clicking the View tab for the antenna structure, the Yagi-Uda anten-
na with eight elements for 50 MHz is drawn in Figure 3.29. Here, the centrally 
located  mark is a feed point.
The origin of the coordinate system is located at the feed point. This dis-
plays the three dimensional coordinate system as described for the Geometry tab.
Figure 3.30 shows the Calculate tab where frequencies and environments 
are set. The height of the antenna and conductor properties are also defined 
here.
The antenna environment choices are free space, perfectly conducting 
ground, and real ground. After selecting real ground, in the dialog box dis-
played after clicking the Ground setup button to the right, specify the specific 
relative permittivity, εr, and conductivity, σ, (milliSiemens/meter). Approxi-
mate numbers are: 
Figure 3.28 MMANA-GAL opens an example ﬁ le, 8EL6M.MAA.

84 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 3.29 50 MHz 8 element Yagi-Uda antenna.
Figure 3.30 Calculation tab where frequencies and environments are set.

 
Wire Antennas 
       85                 
Ocean water: εr  80, σ 10005000 mS/m
Damp ground: εr 515, σ 110 mS/m
Dry land: εr 26, σ 0.1 mS/m
After clicking the Start button, lower left in the Calculate tab screen, the 
result will be displayed as shown in Figure 3.31. In the large frame at the up-
per right, antenna input impedance and SWR are displayed. It shows No Fatal 
Error(s), so we see that it finished without any errors.
Next, click the far field plots tab and the radiation pattern is shown in 
Figure 3.32 appears. The half circle to the right is the radiation pattern on a 
vertical cross section (x-z plane) seen from the horizontal direction. The infor-
mation below that is:
First line: Ga: 17.09 dBi  0 dB (Horizontal polarization) means that the 
absolute gain compared to a theoretical isotropic antenna is 17.09 dB.  It 
is not possible to build a real isotropic antenna, but is easy to calculate 
and is often used for comparison. It has the amazing property that it radi-
ates equally well (a gain of 0 dB) in all directions. The plot of horizontal 
polarization has the outer edge of the plot labeled 0 dB. That means when 
Figure 3.31 Result is displayed in the Calculate tab screen.

86 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
you read the gain from the plot, you should add 17.09 dB to get dBi. The 
center of the plot is  dB. 
Second line: F/B is the front-to-back ratio. This how much stronger ra-
diation is in the forward direction as compared to the reverse direction 
(off the back of the antenna). The direction of the strongest radiation is 
deﬁ ned to be the forward direction. 
Fourth line:  Z is the antenna input impedance. 
Fifth line: SWR is a standing wave ratio.
Sixth line: The strongest radiation is at an angle 11.3 degrees above the 
horizon, in this case, above a real ground with resistive losses.
First a quick word about SWR. When you have a perfectly matched an-
tenna, the traveling wave launched by the transmitter goes out to the antenna 
and is completely absorbed either by radiation or by losses in the antenna and 
matching network (if any). The voltage along the feed line changes in phase, 
but is always the same magnitude (ignoring loss). If the antenna is not perfectly 
matched, then a portion of the wave is reflected by the antenna back towards 
the transmitter. When you have two waves on a feed line, each traveling in 
Figure 3.32 Radiation pattern in the Pattern tab screen.

 
Wire Antennas 
       87                 
opposite directions, you get a standing wave. When there is more reflected wave 
you get larger standing waves. The standing wave ratio (SWR) is the ratio of the 
voltage at the peak of a standing wave to the voltage at the minimum of a stand-
ing wave. A perfect match is an SWR of 1.0. If everything is reflected, the SWR 
is infinity. In practice, an SWR of 2 or less is often considered reasonably good.
The radio buttons displayed in the lower right edge of the window speci-
fies the component of polarized wave that you want displayed. Selections are 
just vertical, just horizontal, both horizontal and vertical, and the sum of verti-
cal and horizontal.
When clicking the View tab after calculation, the current distribution is 
displayed, Figure 3.33. This is useful for understanding conceptually what is 
happening in your antenna.
Electrical current cannot flow beyond the ends of an element, so the cur-
rent goes to zero at the end, and strongest current typically flows mostly in the 
center of an element. 
When you accustom yourself to using MMANA, you might want to 
change the settings for meshing (how finely the wire is divided for analysis) 
and adjust the analysis accuracy. When you check Segments (bottom left), the 
meshing is displayed on the wire elements with small  marks.  
Figure 3.33 Current distribution can be displayed.

88 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
3.4 Importance of Antenna Input Impedance
We have touched briefly on antenna input impedance in previous sections. 
Now it is time to deal with the topic in more detail.
3.4.1 
A 50-Ohm Dipole Antenna
Resistance in coaxial cable conductors causes resistive transmission line loss. It 
turns out that there is a characteristic impedance for coaxial cable that mini-
mizes resistive transmission loss. For example, when coax uses an air dielectric, 
we see minimum loss in the cable when we choose its dimensions so that the 
characteristic impedance (Z0) is about 75 ohms. When the coax is filled with a 
dielectric of relative permittivity of 2.55 (say, polyethylene), the minimum loss 
dimensions give a Z0 of about 50 ohms. And in fact, coax with a Z0 of 50 ohms 
is often used. 
A dipole has a free space input impedance of 73 ohms. Typically, we want 
to feed it with 50 ohm coax. At low frequency, dipoles are often relatively close 
to a real ground, and this can lower the input impedance of a dipole to close to 
50 ohms. However, at higher frequencies, dipoles might be many wavelengths 
from ground. Is there any way we can change a dipole so that it has a convenient 
input impedance of 50 ohms? Yes, there is. Figure 3.34 shows a dipole with 
both ends of the antenna bent at 90 degrees.
When bending a dipole as shown, the electric field and magnetic field dis-
tributions around the antenna change and the input impedance decreases from 
73 ohms. With the right amount of bending, we can realize a free space dipole 
with 50 ohm input impedance. 
The plot in Figure 3.35 shows the antenna impedance with zero reactance 
(imaginary) and 50 ohm resistance (real) at 953 MHz.
Figure 3.36 shows a plot of the S11 magnitude, or reflection coefficient in 
dB. When we connect a 50 ohm coaxial cable to this antenna, we might think 
Figure 3.34 Bent dipole model (unit: cm). File: bentdp.son
0.2
5.2 
2.7

 
Wire Antennas 
       89                 
Figure 3.35 Input impedance of a bent dipole.
Figure 3.36 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of a bent dipole.

90 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
that there would be no reflection because it is well matched. However directly 
connecting a coaxial cable might cause another problem.
3.4.2 
What is a BALUN?
The dipole antenna is a balanced circuit, in that it is perfectly symmetric about 
the feed point, right and left. Coax however, is not balanced. It has a center 
conductor and an outer conductor and they are not symmetric in that you can-
not swap one with the other and still have the same thing. When connecting 
unbalanced coaxial cable directly to a balanced antenna, like Figure 3.37, it is 
possible for current to flow on the outside of the outer conductor. This current 
radiates just like any other current and this can adversely affect your radiation 
pattern. In extreme cases, the current can get all the way back to your transmit-
ter and cause problems there. (Amateur radio operators refer to this as “RF in 
the shack.”) When receiving, the outside of the coaxial cable acts as a receive 
antenna, receiving environmental noise. Keep in mind that problems are not 
guaranteed. Depending on the sensitivity of your systems and the specific ori-
entation between the coax and the antenna, there might be no problem at all.
When directly connecting a balanced line like a ribbon feed line or “twin 
line” to an unbalanced coaxial cable, Figure 3.38, unwanted radiation from 
both lines occurs, and the shielding effects of the coax can be lost. In addition, 
the Z0 of coax and twin line are usually substantially different, so there can be 
substantial reflections at the junction.
The direct connection of unbalanced lines and balanced lines (or dipole 
feed points) can cause problems. The solution is to make the connection using 
a BALUN, for example, the Sperrtopf BALUN, Figure 3.39, which eliminates 
current on the outside of the coax.
A well known characteristic of standing waves on transmission lines is that 
at the high voltage peak of a standing wave, the current is zero. It looks just like 
Figure 3.37 Connecting a coaxial cable directly to a dipole antenna might cause problems.
IL
IR
I L
I R
I L + I' = IR
I I
I'
I'
Unbalanced current
Comon mode current (I ’) 
can cause radiation

 
Wire Antennas 
       91                 
an open circuit. One quarter wavelength away, we have a low voltage null and 
high current. It looks just like a short circuit. The Sperrtopf takes advantage of 
this. We want an open circuit for the outer coax conductor where it joins with 
the twin line. So, we take a tube that is larger in diameter than the outer diam-
eter of the coax and slip it over the end of the coax. We make the tube precisely 
¼ wavelength long at the operating frequency. Then we short circuit the left 
end of the sleeve to the outside of the outer shield of the coax. This is a short 
circuit and creates a standing wave inside the sleeve with the high current (short 
circuit) point where the sleeve connects to the coax shield. One quarter wave-
length to the right, we have an open circuit on the outside of the coax shield, 
just what we want! Now no current can get onto the outside of the coax shield.
When you calculate the length of a ¼ wavelength, be sure to take into 
account the dielectric constant of the insulation on the outside of your coax. 
Typically it will be around 2.5 or so. This means that ¼ wavelength is about 
2/3 of what you would calculate in free space (one over the square root of 2.55). 
A circuit that connects an unbalanced circuit to a balanced circuit is called 
a BALUN (Balanced to Unbalanced Transducer). There are many forms for 
a BALUN. The BALUN described above is made for a specific frequency. If 
you want it to work at a different frequency, you have to change the length. 
Another form for a BALUN is a transformer wound on a toroidal (i.e., circular) 
magnetic ferrite core. Like the above balun, it presents an open circuit for any 
Figure 3.38 A ribbon feed line connected to a coaxial cable.
l 1
l 1
l 1
l 2
(l 1 - l 2)
Ribbon feed 
line
Coaxial cable
Figure 3.39 Schematic of the Sperrtopf. The large sleeve is shorted to the coax outer con-
ductor at the far left end of the sleeve.
l 2
l1
l 1
l 1
l 1
λ/4
Sperrtopf
Coax

92 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
current trying to flow on the outside of the coax shield. However, this kind 
of balun tends to be broad band, working over several orders of magnitude of 
frequencies. In addition, just like with a transformer, you can design the balun 
to transform between different impedances. For maximum bandwidth, integer 
ratios of impedance transformation are desirable, like 1:2, or 1:3, etc.
3.4.3 
What is the Matched Load?
As we have learned in Chapter 1, an electric circuit is composed of three ele-
ments, a power supply, a transmission line, and a load, Figure 3.40. For trans-
mitting an electromagnetic wave, the three elements are a transmitter, a trans-
mission line (like coax), and an antenna.
Under perfect circumstances, an antenna radiates 100% of the electrical 
power from a transmitter. However, to do that (in typical cases) the transmit-
ter is matched to the characteristic impedance of the transmission line, which 
should equal the input impedance of the antenna. 
In typical high frequency circuits, we usually choose this impedance to 
be 50 ohms. In some cases (for example, cable TV systems), this impedance 
is chosen to be 75 ohms. The reason all the impedances in a system should be 
equal is seen in Figure 3.41.
When the internal resistance of a power supply is Ri and the load resis-
tance is RL, the condition for maximum power supplied to the load is Ri = RL, 
shown Figure 3.40. From the viewpoint of the transmitter, Ri is the impedance 
that the transmitter is designed to drive and RL is the characteristic impedance 
of the transmission line. From the viewpoint of the transmission line, Ri is the 
characteristic impedance of the transmission line and RL is the input impedance 
of the antenna. (It is a little more complicated if any of the impedances are 
complex, we skip that topic to keep things a bit easier.)
When this condition is met, we say that “the transmitter is matched to the 
load”. When we are using 50 ohm coaxial cable, it is best to design the antenna 
so that the input impedance is also 50 ohms.
Figure 3.40 The three elements of an electric circuit: the source, the load, and the connec-
tion between them.
R i
V
R L

 
Wire Antennas 
       93                 
3.4.4 
Need for a Matching Circuit
When miniaturizing a dipole antenna, R might drop to below 73 ohms and 
capacitive reactance (–jX) increases. Modifying the shape of the antenna, like 
the bent dipole above has its limits. So, in some situations, a matching circuit 
is needed. 
One way this can be done is by using a network of capacitors and induc-
tors. We discuss this in detail in Section 8.5.3.
3.5 Instruments for Measurement of Input Impedance
The complex input impedance of an antenna is critical for proper design and 
operation. Computer simulation can only go so far. At some point we must 
build and measure our antennas. This is done with network analyzers. Figure 
3.42 shows an example of a vector impedance analyzer and Figure 3.43 shows 
an example of a vector network analyzer (VNA). The name vector comes from 
the fact that they can measure the complex impedance of circuits connected to 
them. A complex impedance has a real and an imaginary part. It can also math-
ematically be converted to a magnitude and an angle (which is where “vector” 
Figure 3.41 Maximum power is transferred from the source to the load when their imped-
ances are all equal.
P
                  V 2              V 2
Pmax =-=-
                4RL      4Ri
RL /Ri
0
1.0
Pmax 
Figure 3.42 Vector impedance analyzer.
Test fixture

94 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
in the name comes from). Often, we just call them by the general term network 
analyzer.
In order to get the impedance of a high frequency device, we often use 
these instruments with special test fixtures (Figure 3.44). When using a VNA, 
the impedance can be measured after connecting to the feed point of a proto-
type antenna. For accurate measurements, it is important to calibrate the net-
work analyzer. For example, we typically want the impedance of the antenna. 
We are not interested in the impedance of the antenna combined with the coax 
used to connect the antenna to the network analyzer
There are many different VNA calibration techniques. One is the OSL 
method which uses three standard, well characterized terminations: open, short 
and load (matched load: 50).  The calibration procedure for a given network 
analyzer is typically contained in a computer program that comes with the net-
work analyzer and runs on a computer inside the network analyzer. You should 
carefully follow the instructions provided with the network analyzer.
Figure 3.43 Vector network analyzer (VNA).
Figure 3.44 Test ﬁ xture for a balanced ﬁ lm type antennas (Courtesy Candox Systems, Inc.). 

 
Wire Antennas 
       95                 
Sometimes, special situations require special calibration procedures. For 
example, RFID tag elements for UHF (ultra high frequency, which includes 
anything from 300 to 3,000 MHz) are printed on a PET film or on a paper 
with a special conductive ink. In order to measure their impedance, we can 
use a fixture specialized for balanced film type antennas (Figure 3.42: Candox 
Systems, Inc.).


97
4 
Antennas on Substrates
4.1 Substrate Dielectrics and Wavelength Shortening
Whenever we bring any dielectric near an antenna, the resonant frequency of 
the antenna is lowered. Let’s explore this phenomenon quantitatively.
4.1.1 
Dipole Antenna on a Substrate
Figure 4.1 is a model based on the dipole antenna in Chapter 1 (file name: 
dp.son). We changed the line width to 2 mm and the element length to 240 
mm, which is about 96% of one-half a wavelength at 600 MHz. The reflection 
coefficient is shown in Figure 4.2.
Next, we run a simulation of a model where this antenna is placed on a 
substrate. In the dialog box displayed after selecting Circuit->Dielectric Lay-
ers..., add a substrate as shown in Figure 4.3.
Figure 4.4 shows a plot of the reflection coefficient of this antenna. After 
selecting File->Add File(s)..., add a plot of an antenna in free space (small rect-
angle markers) to compare, and we can see the influence of the 1.6-mm thick 
dielectric. We know that the resonant frequency is now near 514 MHz. When 
building a planar antenna on the surface of a dielectric, the resonant frequency 
shifts to a lower frequency.
4.1.2 
Wavelength Shortening Effect of Dielectrics
When building an electric field detection type dipole antenna on the surface of 
a dielectric substrate, the velocity of the traveling electromagnetic waves slows 

98 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
down as compared to free space. It could be thought of as being due to the extra 
time it takes for the electric field of the wave to push and pull on the electrons 
in the material of the dielectric (displacement current). Magnetic materials sim-
ilarly lower the resonant frequency.
Figure 4.5 shows an antenna in free space and one embedded in a dielec-
tric. If the traveling waves race from the feed point, the wave on the left wins 
Figure 4.1 The dipole antenna model from Chapter 1 has been modiﬁ ed for this example. 
File: dp_er1.son.
Figure 4.2 The reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient magnitude of the dipole antenna suggests that it reso-
nates at around 600 MHz.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       99                 
because it does not have to force its way through the giant cloud of electrons 
that are held in place by the atoms of the dielectric on the right.
In order that both antennas resonate at the same frequency, the traveling 
waves on each antenna must reflect back from the ends of the dipole at the 
same time. Thus the antenna on the right must be shortened as indicated by 
the dashed lines.
As just described, it is possible to miniaturize antennas by using this wave-
length shortening effect. When most of the energy of the antenna’s electric field 
is within a dielectric, the coefficient of wavelength shortening is represented as 
Figure 4.3 Add a substrate in the Dielectric Layers dialog box. File: dp_er3.son.
Figure 4.4 A plot of the reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the dipole antenna on a substrate suggests 
that the resonant frequency shifts down.

100 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
1/
,
rε  where εr is the relative permittivity of the dielectric. More typically, we 
build the antenna on one side of a thin substrate. In this case, some of the elec-
tric field energy must push through the substrate dielectric, and some is in free 
space. The wavelength shortening effect is not as strong. The situation is similar 
for a microstrip line, the same wavelength shortening/velocity slowing occurs. 
The coefficient of wavelength shortening is represented as 1/
,
eff
ε
 where εeff is 
the effective relative permittivity of the dielectric.
For a given length of microstrip line, the effective relative permittivity is 
εeff  CC0, where C is the capacitance between the line and ground with dielec-
tric in place, and C0 is the capacitance with air as dielectric everywhere.
4.1.3 
Investigating Wavelength Shortening Effect in an MSL
In this section, we simulate a straight microstrip line (MSL). A microstrip line 
is a printed circuit line on a substrate. The bottom side of the substrate is the 
ground (return current flows on the ground; see Figure 1.2.) There is no sub-
strate above, only air. For our MSL, the size of the substrate is 30 30 mm, and 
the wire width is 1 mm, the thickness of dielectric is 300 μm and the permittiv-
ity is 4.8. The characteristic impedance of this line is not 50
The MSL has been studied in detail over the years. Accurate and detailed 
equations have been developed to calculate its characteristic impedance. Figure 
4.6 shows the AppCAD™ (available at http://www.hp.woodshot.com/) appli-
cation by Agilent Technologies, Inc., which calculates the characteristic imped-
ance using these equations. We input the line width, the dielectric substrate 
thickness, and the relative permittivity.
Figure 4.5 A dielectric substrate shortens wavelength, lowering the resonant frequency.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       101                 
Using a model of an MSL in Sonnet Lite (Figure 4.7), we see the charac-
teristic impedance at 1 GHz is 34.5 as shown in Figure 4.8.
Figure 4.6 AppCAD calculates the characteristic impedance of an MSL based on closed 
form approximations that are calculated quickly.
Figure 4.7 Sonnet Lite model of an MSL. File: simpleMSL.son.

102 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The broadband simulation result is shown in Figure 4.9. Most electro-
magnetic field simulators calculate S-parameters assuming that the transmis-
sion lines connected to all ports have a 50 characteristic impedance. Because 
this MSL has a characteristic impedance of 35, it looks like its reflection 
coefficient (S11) is large over the whole range due to the impedance mismatch. 
However there are some specific frequencies with no reflection and it seems to 
be well matched!
As is well known, at these zero reflection frequencies the line lengths are 
an integral multiple of a half-wavelength. The physical length of the line is 30 
mm. We see that the first zero reflection frequency is 2.55 GHz. In free space, 
one wavelength at 2.55 GHz is 3×108 m/s divided by 2.55109 Hz, which is 
just under 120 mm. One half-wavelength is 60 mm. But the line is only 30 mm 
long! Thus, the wavelength on the MSL is shorter by half as compared to free 
space. This means that εeff  for this MSL is about 4 (1 over the square root of 4 
is one-half).
4.2 Fundamentals of an Inverted L Antenna
Let’s start working with a more complicated antenna. If we don’t have room to 
put a nice straight vertical monopole, let’s just bend it over.
Figure 4.8 Characteristic impedance at 1 GHz is 34.5.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       103                 
4.2.1 
What Is an Inverted L Antenna?
An inverted L antenna is like a monopole antenna that has been bent near 
the ground so that it looks something like the letter L on its side. As shown in 
Figure 4.10, the directions of the currents on the antenna and on the ground 
are opposite each other. The more that the horizontal element approaches the 
ground, the more strongly it couples to the ground. As it gets very close to the 
ground, it is just like the MSL (see the above section), except that for the MSL, 
the ground current flows in a good conductor. Usually the ground for the in-
verted L is earth, and that is usually a resistive ground. It can be viewed in terms 
Figure 4.9 S-parameters for the MSL from 0.1 to 10 GHz. File: simpleMSL_wideband.son.
Induced ground current
Ground
Antenna current
Antenna current
Figure 4.10 The inverted L antenna. Electromagnetic coupling between the antenna and a 
ground is strong.

104 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
of an equivalent capacitor to ground that is distributed along the length of the 
horizontal part of the antenna.
So, when the antenna is close to the ground, this structure closely resem-
bles the MSL and this makes it difficult to radiate the electromagnetic waves. 
The MSL is designed to avoid unwanted radiation by being close to the ground 
return current. Remember the aluminum foil in Figure 1.2. If the distance be-
tween the line and the ground return path is small, then we have a transmission 
line that does not radiate. If the distance is large, then we have a loop antenna, 
which radiates well. So the question is, does the inverted L antenna radiate well 
or not?
To answer that question, we simulate an inverted L antenna and compare 
it to a monopole antenna. Our model of a monopole antenna (Figure 4.11) uses 
one side of the dipole antenna in Figure 4.1. Then we use the Sonnet side walls 
as a ground, just like Marconi’s antenna in Chapter 2.
As we compare the modified antennas, we build models in free space with 
no dielectric substrates. The theoretical input impedance for a dipole in free 
space is 73, pure real. Thus, a monopole above perfect ground should be just 
over 36. Sonnet Lite gives us 38, which is more than close enough (Figure 
4.12).
Next we build a model with half of the element bent by modifying the 
monopole in Figure 4.11. Select Edit->Divide Polygons, and your cursor be-
comes a small razor knife. We left-click and drag the mouse across the center of 
the length of the monopole. Release the mouse button after you have crossed 
over the monopole. The monopole is still the same shape and size; it is just split 
into two polygons.
Figure 4.11 Model of the monopole antenna. File: mp_er1.son.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       105                 
Next select the upper polygon by clicking inside of it. Then select Modify-
>Rotate... to rotate it by 90° (either direction is OK). Sometimes, the rotated 
polygon will not be precisely on a cell boundary. If this is the case, select the 
polygon again. Then select Modify->Snap To... and snap the polygon to the cell 
boundaries. Finally, move the rotated polygon into place. Figure 4.13 shows the 
Figure 4.12 Input impedance of the monopole antenna. R is 38 at 600 MHz.
Figure 4.13 The inverted L antenna. File: il_er1.son.

106 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
inverted L antenna that we will analyze. Then select File->Save As and save it 
under another name.
The reactance of the monopole antenna (Figure 4.14) is 0 at resonance, 
at around 600 MHz. However the inverted L reactance is –20 at that fre-
quency, which means it is capacitive.
An inverted L antenna that is designed by lengthening and lowering the 
horizontal element (Figure 4.15) is also based on the monopole and its total 
length is the same. However, because it is closer to the ground, the impedance 
is changed.
By changing the plotted quantity to Zin (Figure 4.16) and reading the 
impedance, R is 7, which is much too small to feed using a 50 coaxial cable. 
Note that the inverted L antenna is unbalanced, so if the impedance were 50, 
it would be possible to connect coax directly to it. That would certainly be 
convenient!
Next we design a circuit that converts the impedance of this antenna (7 
– j20) to 50. The classical approach to impedance matching uses a Smith 
chart. However, here we use a feature included in a circuit simulator.
Figure 4.17 is a screen of S-NAP Design (MEL Inc.; this software is avail-
able only in Japanese), where we assign 50 to the input impedance and 7 – 
j20 to the load impedance. Then it creates a matching circuit.
Figure 4.14 Reactance of the L antenna (small circle marker) and the monopole (small 
square). File: il_er1.son.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       107                 
From the S-NAP results, connecting a 10-nH coil in series between the 
coax center conductor and the antenna input, and then also connecting a 13-pF 
capacitor from the coax center conductor to the coax ground, the input imped-
ance of the antenna should appear to be 50 from the coax’s point of view. 
Figure 4.15 Inverted L antenna bent closer to the ground. File: il2_er1.son.
Figure 4.16 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the inverted L antenna (small circle marker).

108 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
To verify this, we use Netlist Project in Sonnet Lite that we previously used in 
Chapter 2.
Figure 4.18 is the circuit as designed. In the result of S11 (Figure 4.19), 
we see a good, if narrowband, match to 600 MHz as designed. Note that when 
matching widely different impedances, that bandwidth of a lossless (no resis-
tance) matching network tends to be very small. If there is loss, the network 
Figure 4.17 Using S-NAP Design to create a matching circuit.
Figure 4.18 Sonnet Netlist Project verifying the matching circuit.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       109                 
becomes more inefficient as the change in impedance levels becomes large. This 
is all related to something you might hear referred to as Fano’s limit.
In an actual antenna matching network, stray inductances and capaci-
tances (as in short wires used to connect the components together) makes it dif-
ficult to realize exact values. In addition, fabrication tolerances for the antenna 
mean that the calculated input impedance is different in the actual antenna. A 
side effect of being narrowband is that the component values are critical. The 
net result is that matching networks are usually built using variable capacitors 
and inductors (with as low loss as possible). The components are then tuned 
(manually or automatically) to match the actual antenna for the selected operat-
ing frequency.
Viewing the current distribution on the element (Figure 4.20), we can 
imagine that the area around feed point, where strong current flows, and the 
electrons (that form the current) are rapidly accelerated back and forth at radio 
frequencies, is what causes the antenna to radiate.
4.3 Fundamentals of a Patch Antenna
Perhaps the most common planar antenna is the patch antenna. You will note 
similarities to the common dipole, and you can apply many of the same prin-
ciples you have already learned.
Figure 4.19 Result of S11 for the antenna plus matching network. It is matched at 600 MHz.

110 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
4.3.1 
A Patch Antenna for Global Positioning Systems
 A Global Positioning System (GPS), often used for car navigation, typically 
does not use dipole antennas. This is because the antenna is usually placed on 
the metallic surface of a vehicle. A patch antenna works here because the sub-
strate on which the patch is fabricated separates it from the car body. So this 
antenna is widely used not only for car navigation systems but also for compact 
antennas inside electronic products.
Figure 4.21 is a simulation model with a rectangular metallic patch over 
a wide metallic surface (the ground plane), and the electromagnetic waves from 
the GPS satellites enter into the gap between the patch and its ground plane. 
The electromagnetic energy flows between the plate and ground like a capaci-
tor. The receiver is excited by the voltage induced between the plate and the 
ground plane.
The size of the patch is designed so that one side is a half-wavelength. 
When there is a substrate with a high dielectric constant between the patch 
and its ground plane, the wavelength (and thus the antenna) is shortened, as 
described in Section 4.1.
Figure 4.22 is a small patch antenna for GPS by Yokowo Co., Ltd. The 
outside dimensions are 25  25  4 mm, 20  20  4 mm, and 18  18  4 
mm from the left.
Figure 4.20 Current distribution on the inverted L antenna.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       111                 
4.3.2 
Electromagnetic Field Around a Patch Antenna
A patch antenna is also called a microstrip antenna (MSA). When building it 
on a substrate, it can be fed through an MSL. The patch can also be viewed as a 
microstrip line where the width of the MSL is enlarged at the end.
Figure 4.23 is a model of a patch antenna. For simplicity, we model this 
patch antenna with an air substrate, with a relative dielectric constant of 1.0. 
Then we look at a patch antenna with a real substrate. The thickness of the 
substrate is 1 mm, the cell size is 1  1 mm and the substrate is set to 200  
200 mm (x and y Box Size). The dotted line can be set in the Box by checking 
Symmetry (Circuit->Box). When this option is selected, only the top half of the 
circuit requires analysis time. A mirror image of the top half is automatically 
included in the analysis at no extra cost. This can make an analysis go consider-
ably faster and it cuts the required memory to up to one quarter.
The current on the patch antenna at 4 GHz, where S11 is minimized, is 
shown in Figure 4.24. It shows that electromagnetic waves travel along the MSL 
and a symmetrical pattern of surface current is generated on the symmetrical 
patch.
Figure 4.21 Sonnet model of a patch antenna.
Figure 4.22 Small-size patch antennas for GPS by Yokowo Co., Ltd.

112 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
At high frequencies, the current on a line flows most strongly on the edg-
es. This is called the edge singularity. You can also view the sinusoidal standing 
Figure 4.23 Model of a patch antenna. The patch is 36  36 mm.
Figure 4.24 Surface current on the patch antenna at 4 GHz. File: patch.son

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       113                 
waves on the line. The patch itself is a standing wave antenna, just like the 
dipole (Figure 3.2). You can see the standing half-wavelength sinusoidal distri-
bution on the patch.
Normally, we would see no standing waves on the feed line. This is in-
deed the case when the antenna is well-matched to the feed line. In this case, 
however, because we see strong standing waves on the feed line, we know that 
this antenna is not well-matched to the feed line. The input impedance of the 
antenna is significantly different from the characteristic impedance of the feed 
line.
Returning to the patch, remember the half-wavelength dipole antenna; 
we know that the current on the patch in Figure 4.24 seen from the side forms 
a sine wave, a shown in Figure 4.25. And when it resonates like this and a stand-
ing wave is generated, the voltage distribution is shown with the dotted line, 
and we have high voltage/low current at the edges of the patch.
We can imagine certain aspects of electromagnetic field around the patch 
from this diagram. Figure 4.26 shows the electric field distribution between the 
patch and the ground plane.
Figure 4.25 Current and voltage distribution on a patch.
   λ/4
Current distribution
Voltage 
distribution
Figure 4.26 Electric ﬁ eld distribution between the patch and the ground plane.

114 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
We see that the electric field vectors distribute vertically on the patch and 
the ground surface. Each small cone represents the electric field vector in 3-D. 
Here the direction of the vectors are reversed on opposite sides of the patch. The 
voltages at the edges of left side and right side are opposite, just as shown in 
Figure 4.25. Patch antenna radiation can be understood as a result of the strong 
electric fields, which bulge out from both high voltage edges into free space.
In textbooks on antennas, this bulging electric field is modeled as a dis-
continuity in the electric field which can, in turn, be modeled as a flow of ficti-
tious magnetic current. Magnetic current is the flow of magnetic monopoles, 
the magnetic counterpart of electrons. Magnetic monopoles and magnetic cur-
rent have never been observed in nature, but replacing the antenna with a mag-
netic current in the mathematics used in the textbooks gives first-rate results.
4.3.3 
Determining Dimensions of a Patch Antenna
Figure 4.27 is a graph of the reflection coefficient of the patch antenna in Figure 
4.22. It resonates at around 4 GHz; however it is about –4 dB, so the reflection, 
and thus the impedance mismatch, is a bit large.
For this illustrative example, we set the relative dielectric constant of the 
substrate to 1.0 and we are going to try to make a patch antenna that resonates 
at 4 GHz. At that frequency, a half-wavelength is 3 108/(4 109  2)  37.5 
mm. However, when we use that dimension, the patch resonates at around 
Figure 4.27 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the 36-mm square patch antenna in Figure 4.23, includ-
ing the MSL feed line.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       115                 
3.8 GHz. After trying several adjustments of the patch size, we obtained the 
reflection coefficient shown in Figure 4.27, with the patch 36 mm on a side.
Note that Figure 4.27 shows S11 normalized to 50. Even if the character-
istic impedance of the feed line is 50, the impedance seen from the feed point 
of the patch is significantly different from 50. The characteristic impedance 
of the fairly long MSL feed is actually just under 60, making the situation 
very complicated indeed. It would be nice if we could remove the complexities 
of the feed line.
Sonnet can exactly remove the effect of the MSL feed line and determine 
the impedance seen right at the feed point of a patch. First, get the dialog box 
shown in Figure 4.28 by selecting Circuit->Ref. Planes/Cal. Length..., and then 
selecting Fixed and clicking on the mouse icon. The cursor changes to +. Then 
click exactly on the patch feed point and click OK. Figure 4.29 shows that the 
reference plane is assigned. Sonnet now calculates and plots S-parameters as 
seen from the location of the sharp end of the arrow. The effect of the MSL feed 
line is perfectly removed.
Figure 4.30 shows the impedance of the patch antenna seen from the ref-
erence plane (the end of the arrow). We see the peak value of R is 288 at 3.93 
GHz. In addition, as we see in the plot, X is 0 at the same frequency, indicat-
ing resonance. Thus, with the effect of the feed line removed, the resonance has 
moved down slightly. The 288 input impedance shows why we see a poor R 
in Figure 4.27. The input impedance is too far from 50. If we were to use an 
MSL with a characteristic impedance of 288, and design our transmitter and 
receiver to properly drive that impedance, we would have no problem. Well, at 
least until we actually tried to design such a high impedance MSL. The width 
Figure 4.28 Dialog box to set the reference plane.

116 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
of the line would be so tiny, it would be very resistive and lossy, if it could even 
be fabricated.
Our initial, very simple calculation of the required dimension for a 4-GHz 
resonant frequency of 37.5 mm did not include the electromagnetic “fringing” 
fields bulging from the edges of the patch. The resulting resonant frequency 
was too low. So we shrunk the antenna and found resonance at about 4 GHz 
with a size of 36 mm. Then, we removed the effect of the MSL feed line and we 
Figure 4.29 The reference plane is located at the sharp end of an arrow. File: patch_ref-
plane.son.
4
36
36
Figure 4.30 Impedance of the 36-mm square patch antenna seen from the reference plane. 
The real part uses circle markers, while the square markers indicate the imaginary part.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       117                 
found that the antenna was really resonating at 3.93 GHz. We need to shrink 
the patch even more, but just a little bit. For this example, we change the cell 
size to 0.5 mm and shrink the patch only in the x direction to 35.5 mm.
Figure 4.31 shows the impedance of the patch antenna seen from this 
reference plane. The peak value of R is 285, and X is almost zero at 3.98 GHz. 
Close enough.
4.3.4 
A Patch Antenna on a Substrate
A patch antenna is typically built on a substrate with dielectric materials. So, to 
make our example more realistic, we change the bottom dielectric layer from 
air to FR-4 in Sonnet Lite.
Select Circuit->Dielectric Layers... and in the displayed dialog box dou-
ble-click the lower layer. In the new dialog box (Figure 4.32) click [Select dielec-
tric from library...] in the upper left and select FR-4. The relative permittivity 
is set to 4.9 and the loss tangent is 0.025; these values are already registered in 
the library. (Note that in practice, the dielectric constant of FR4 is not well 
controlled due to manufacturing variablity.)
A simple first guess for the resonant frequency of a patch antenna is
 
8
3 10
2
r
f
d
ε
×
=
 
Figure 4.31 Impedance of the patch antenna with one side shortened to 35.5 mm.

118 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
where d is the size of the patch along the direction that the sinusoidal standing 
wave will form, and εr is the relative permittivity of dielectric. This equation 
assumes no fringing fields, and that most of the electric field is in the substrate. 
The error of both of these assumptions tends to cancel out. So this simple ex-
pression can actually give a pretty good answer.
When we solve the equation for d, given a resonant frequency of 4 GHz, 
we find that the patch should be 16.9 mm on a side.
 
8
8
9
3 10
3 10
0.0169
2
2
4
10
4.9
r
d
f
ε
×
×
=
=
=
×
×
 
Figure 4.33 shows the impedance when we change the x dimension of the 
patch in Figure 4.29 to 17 mm. The y dimension was set to 18 mm, but since 
the length of the current distribution half sine wave is along the x dimension, 
the y dimension is not critical. With the reference plane (tip of the arrow) at the 
feed point, R is 152 and X is almost zero at 3.91 GHz.
Because the resonant frequency is a little low, the patch is a little too long 
in the x dimension. Let’s see what happens when we make the x dimension of 
the patch 1 mm shorter, or 16 mm. After EM analysis, the resonant frequency 
goes up to 4.14 GHz (patch2_FR4.son).
We see from these two analyses that a change in 1 mm of the critical patch 
dimension results in a resonant frequency change of 0.23 GHz ( 4.14  3.91). 
We want the dimension required for a resonant frequency of exactly 4 GHz. In 
other words, we want the resonant frequency to be 0.14 GHz less than what we 
get with a 16-mm patch. So the patch dimension should be 16.0  0.14 / 0.23 
= 16.6 mm. Of course, when we fabricate the antenna in production, there are 
fabrication tolerances. If we know the fabrication tolerances, we can calculate 
how much the resonant frequency will vary due to fabrication tolerances.
Figure 4.32 Dialog box to set values for the dielectric substrate. File: dp_er3.son.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       119                 
At this point, a common reaction is that if we want a really tiny antenna 
for a really low frequency, why not just use a really high dielectric constant 
substrate? The problem is that a high dielectric constant substrate keeps all of 
the electric field inside the substrate. There is nothing left over to radiate. So, 
the radiation efficiency is very low. Yes, indeed, we would see a nice, tiny, well-
matched patch antenna, but all it does is heat up the substrate instead of radiate 
energy. For a patch antenna, radiation efficiency is increased by having thicker 
substrates with lower dielectric constants. There is no free ride.
4.3.5 
Matching Method 1
Connecting the feed line right at the edge of the patch gives a really high in-
put impedance. The impedance is so high that it cannot in practice be fed by 
an MSL. Fortunately, there are other ways to feed the patch with a MSL that 
matches nicely to 50Ω.
Notice that Figure 4.34 is similar to Figure 4.25. At the center of the 
patch, the voltage is zero. This means that the impedance is zero.
At the edge of a patch, we have high voltage and high input impedance. 
It would seem that there is a place somewhere between the edge and the center 
where we can connect a 50 MSL and get a good match, something like in 
Figure 4.35. To demonstrate, we return to our first example, which has an air 
substrate.
Now draw the patch with three separate rectangles as shown in Figure 
4.35. The slot width inside the patch is 1 mm and a strong current flows along 
Figure 4.33 Impedance of the patch antenna on a FR-4 substrate. File: patch_FR4.son.

120 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
these edges. This modifies the current distribution of patch but the overall 
standing wave on the patch does not change significantly.
When we change the position of the feed point (by changing the 11-mm 
dimension shown in Figure 4.35), we will set the position of the reference plane 
to follow along. We will do multiple simulations, changing the depth of the feed 
point until we realize the desired match to 50. Normally, we would want to 
leave the reference plane at the exact location where we will eventually connect 
the 50 feed line. In this case, for demonstration purposes, when we change 
the depth of the feed point inside the patch, we will also change the reference 
plane to the new feed point location. To do this, we change the reference plane 
to “Linked” (Figure 4.36). Click on the mouse icon, then click on the vertex in 
the patch polygon to which you want the reference plane tied. Now, when you 
move that point, the reference plane moves right along with it.
Figure 4.34 Current and voltage distribution on a patch.
   λ/4
152Ω
?Ω
0Ω
Current distribution
Voltage 
distribution
Figure 4.35 Feed position inserted into the patch. File: patch_refplane2.son

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       121                 
When the depth of the feed point is 11 mm, the input impedance. R is 
almost 50 (Figure 4.37). This plot shows the impedance of feed point of a 
patch seen from selected the reference plane.
Figure 4.36 Linking the reference plane to move whenever a given vertex in the patch an-
tenna moves.
Figure 4.37 Input impedance of the patch antenna when the slot length inside the patch is 
11 mm.

122 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
4.3.6 
Fine Adjustment of a Feed Point
Figure 4.38 shows the patch antenna we investigated above, on FR-4, modified 
for a 50. feed. We changed the Cell Size to 0.5  0.5 mm and the Box to 80  
80 mm. The slot affects the resonant frequency too, and it resonates at around 
4 GHz when the longitudinal length of the patch is 17.5 mm.
Figure 4.39 is a plot of the reflection coefficient suggesting resonance at 
3.95 GHz. The input impedance is 49  j0. The apparent resonant frequency 
is not quite 4 GHz. We reduce longitudinal length of the patch by 0.5 mm and 
the resonance shifts up by 0.12 GHz to 4.07 GHz. Knowing that changing the 
patch side gives 0.12 GHz of change in resonant frequency for every 0.5 mm 
of change in dimension, we can quickly tune the patch to the exact desired 
resonant frequency. Recall that a pure real input impedance is required for de-
termination of resonance.
Figure 4.40 shows a portion of the MSL that is used as a feed line for 
the above patch antenna. To create this model, after saving the above patch 
antenna, patch_FR4_50ohm.son, in Figure 4.38 under another name (we used 
msl.son), we delete the patch polygons and then shorten the line.
This is an open end and all electromagnetic waves are all reflected, so the 
circuit itself is of little use. However, Sonnet Lite still calculates the character-
istic impedance. Figure 4.41 shows the results by selecting Data Type as Port 
Figure 4.38 Matched feed point for the patch antenna on FR-4.
0.5
17.5
4
5.5
18

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       123                 
Z0 for the plot. The characteristic impedance of this line is 29.6, so we must 
adjust the line width. Narrowing the line increases the impedance.
To double-check the calculated characteristic impedance (always good 
engineering practice), we use AppCAD, which was shown in Figure 4.6. Ac-
cording to AppCAD, the characteristic impedance of the MSL in Figure 4.40 is 
Figure 4.39 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the matched antenna on FR-4.
Figure 4.40 A short portion the feed line MSL on FR-4.

124 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
29.1, in good agreement with the Sonnet result. AppCAD calculates the 50 
line width to be 1.76 mm.
In the model shown in Figure 4.40, we change the line width to 2 mm and 
the characteristic impedance becomes 47.8. This is more than close enough. 
So next we change the line width shown in Figure 4.38 to 2 mm, then delete 
the reference plane (Circuit->Ref. Planes/Cal. Length..., select “None” for the 
Left reference plane) and find the impedance seen from the feed point of the left 
edge of the substrate. Figure 4.42 shows the modified layout and Figure 4.43 
shows its impedance.
4.3.7 
Matching Method 2
As we have seen above, moving the feed point of a patch allows us to match the 
antenna to 50. Another method to move the feed point is to feed the antenna 
from below rather than from the side. To build this kind of patch antenna, 
make a hole from under the bottom of ground plane and connect a coaxial (e.g., 
SMA) connector. The center conductor goes up through the substrate and con-
nects directly to the patch.
Figure 4.44 shows an antenna model that uses this method. The patch size 
is the same as the antenna in Figure 4.42. We remove the MSL feed line, fill in 
the notch left from the old MSL feed line, and then place a Sonnet via port at 
the same position.
Figure 4.41 Characteristic impedance of the line as calculated by Sonnet Lite.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       125                 
17
18
0.5
2
6
Figure 4.42 Feed line width is changed to 2 mm. File: patch_FR4_msl50ohm.son.
Figure 4.43 Impedance of the antenna with a line width of 2 mm. Input resistance is now 
matched to 50.

126 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
To place a via port, first press the Ctrl key and D key at the same time, 
or press the down arrow key, and go down to the GND level. Next, as shown 
in Figure 4.45, draw a small metal rectangle symmetrically placed on the axis 
of symmetry (the horizontal dashed line). Then change the material to Copper.
Next, select Tools->Add Via->Up One Level and click on the left side of 
the 2-cell metal rectangle. A small triangle marker appears, which means that 
a via from GND to the next layer up is created. A via between GND and the 
patch contacts both GND and the patch. Select Tools->Add Port and click on 
the left side of the 2 cells, Port 1 is set up and is fed as shown in Figure 4.44. We 
call this a via port. The height of the via is same as the dielectric thickness of 1 
mm. The port is in series with the via.
The position of port is as shown in Figure 4.44 and the size of x direction 
of patch is 16.5 mm. Figure 4.46 shows the reflection coefficient for switching 
to this a via port feed line, It is a comfortable –20 dB at 3.97 GHz and the input 
impedance is 44 resistive.
The far field radiation pattern of the patch antenna is shown in Figure 
4.47 (Sonnet Lite does not have this feature).
Figure 4.44 Patch antenna fed by via port, viewed on the GND level. File: patch_FR4_viaport.
son.
16.5
5.5
18

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       127                 
The ground plane covers the entire bottom side of the substrate, so there 
is no radiation downward. The strongest radiation is towards the zenith and its 
gain is 6.2 dBi (see Chapter 7 for more details).
This plot is based on the coordinate system in Figure 4.48. θ (theta) in-
creases by the angle starting from zenith (z) on the vertical plane and φ (phi), 
or azimuth angle,  increases starting from x on the horizontal plane. Accord-
ingly in Figure 4.47, 0° (degree) Phi means x–z plane and 90° Phi means y–z 
plane.
4.4 Effects of Dielectric Materials
The dielectric properties of a material refer to how a material changes the elec-
tric field passing through it. It can counter the electric field, like a spring, slow-
ing any wave trying to travel through it. It can also transform the electric field 
into heat, adding loss to any nearby circuitry.
Figure 4.45 Via port as viewed from above the patch antenna level.

128 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 4.46 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient after switching to a via port feed line, –20 dB at 3.97 GHz.
Figure 4.47 Far-ﬁ eld radiation pattern of the patch antenna.

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       129                 
4.4.1 
Effective Permittivity of Microstrip Lines
Figure 4.49 shows the distribution of electric and magnetic lines of force on a 
cross section of an MSL. Notice that most of the electromagnetic energy travels 
in the dielectric and some travels in the air above the substrate. The velocity of 
a wave in a material is determined by the dielectric constant, or the permittivity 
of the medium. The effective permittivity, or epsilon effective, εeff, is a weighted 
average of the dielectric constant of air, 1.0, and that of the substrate. The 
weighting of the average depends directly on the ratio of the electric field energy 
in the air to the electric field energy in the substrate.
We should also keep in mind that we usually quote “relative” dielectric 
constants. That is the dielectric constant is relative to the dielectric constant of 
free space. So free space is exactly 1.0. Air is actually a tiny bit higher, but it is 
so close to that of free space, for most applications, they are considered to be 
the same.
The effective permittivity of the model in Figure 4.40 is shown in Figure 
4.50. To get this plot, right-click on DB[S11] in the left frame of display and 
Figure 4.48 Coordinate system used for the radiation pattern shown in Figure 4.47.
Z
Y
X
EΦ
Eθ
θ
Φ
Figure 4.49 Distribution of electric lines of force and magnetic lines of force on a cross sec-
tion of the MSL.
Magnetic lines of force
Electric lines of 
force

130 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
select Edit Curve Group, and select Port Eeff from the Data Type drop-down 
menu. A plot of effective permittivity is then displayed.
The small circle marker is for an MSL 4 mm wide, and its effective per-
mittivity is around 4. The small square marker is for an MSL 2 mm wide and its 
effective permittivity is slightly less, around 3.7. The narrower line allows more 
electric field in the air, so the effective dielectric constant is less.
Figure 4.51 shows two parallel plates of area S, separation d. A smaller 
area, qS, is filled with a dielectric of permittivity εr. The capacitance C is given 
in the following expression.
 
{
}
0
0
0
0
(1
)
1
(
1)
eff
r
r
S
qS
S
q
S
C
q
d
d
d
d
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
−
=
+
=
+
−
=
 
where q is the filling factor. This means that the following expression gives the 
effective permittivity.
 
1
(
1)
eff
r
q
ε
ε
= +
−
 
For the MSL shown in Figure 4.49, given that the capacitance between a 
line and its ground is C and when we make the permittivity εr  1 everywhere, 
the capacitance is now C0, then the following expression gives us the effective 
permittivity.
Figure 4.50 Effective permittivity derived from the simulation of the MSL model in Figure 4.40. 
The line width 4 mm (small circles) and 2 mm (small squares).

 
Antennas on Substrates 
       131                 
 
0
eff
C
C
ε
=
 
In the case where most of the electric fields are in the substrate, like a patch 
antenna, the effective dielectric constant is the same as the relative permittivity 
(i.e., relative dielectric constant) of the substrate material. On the other hand, 
in the case where only a portion of the electric field energy is in the substrate, 
the precise effective permittivity is not easily calculated. In this case, we need 
electromagnetic field simulation. Sometimes we can use carefully developed 
closed form equations (like in AppCAD), but these equations, in turn, usually 
come from detailed EM analysis.
4.4.2 
Loss Tangent of Dielectrics
Dielectric material can be represented as an equivalent parallel RC circuit. The 
capacitor represents a lossless dielectric and the resistor represents dielectric loss. 
When current flows in this circuit, the relation of current flowing in the capaci-
tor, IC, and current flowing in the resistor, IR, is shown in Figure 4.52.
We call δ the dielectric loss angle and tan(δ) is called the loss tangent, 
which we set in Sonnet. The loss tangent is listed on the specification sheets for 
most substrate materials. Most substrate materials are insulating. However, if 
a substrate is also a conductor (like silicon), loss increases as well. Conducting 
substrates are not considered here.
4.5 Effect of Magnetic Materials
In direct analogy with dielectric materials, magnetic materials change the mag-
netic field passing through them. While everything seems to affect electric 
fields, only a few special materials affect magnetic fields. Still, it is important 
to explore.
ε
S
d
qS
r
Figure 4.51 Parallel plates ﬁ lled with a dielectric.

132 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
4.5.1 
Characteristics of Magnetic Materials
Insulating materials such as a glass and plastic PET bottles are dielectrics. Hu-
man bodies can be modeled as conducting dielectrics. In contrast, ferrites and 
other magnetic materials can be formed from various mixtures of “soft” mag-
netic materials. A soft magnetic material does not retain any permanent magne-
tization. Many different shapes, such as sheets or toroidal cores, can be formed.
The special characteristic for magnetic material is the magnetic perme-
ability, μ. Again, we generally assume that relative numbers are used, so that 
free space or any nonmagnetic material is 1.0. The more that a material affects 
magnetic field, the higher μ becomes. Sometimes it is easiest to imagine mag-
netic field lines more easily “flow” through high μ magnetic material.
The loss in magnetic material is represented by tan(δμ), similar to di-
electrics, and values are likewise available from manufacturers. The higher that 
tan(δμ) is, the more that magnetic field energy is absorbed. Sometimes a large 
tan(δμ) is desired, in which case the material can be used as a sheet to suppress 
noise caused by electromagnetic waves.
If you encounter a structure with layers of magnetic materials, you can 
enter both μ and tan(δμ) in the Sonnet Lite dielectric layers menu.
Figure 4.52 Dielectric loss tangent δ and dielectric phase angle .
Ic
I
Ir
V
δ
Φ

133
5
Traveling Wave Antennas
5.1 Turning Transmission Lines into Antennas
So far, we have been investigating standing wave antennas, like the dipole. But 
there are also traveling wave antennas. A traveling wave can travel in free space, 
or it can travel on a transmission line. In this chapter, we explore how to tran-
sition a traveling wave directly from a transmission line to free space without 
going through a standing wave antenna. 
5.1.1 
Two Parallel Lines Turn into Antennas
Figure 5.1 shows a Sonnet model of parallel lines 120 mm long, 1 mm wide, 
and with 10-mm separation in free space. There is a port at the far right and it 
has an open end at the far left where the electromagnetic wave totally reflects. 
The simulation space (inside the Box) is 512 mm in both the x and y directions. 
We have set Free Space for both Box Covers (Top and Bottom), 20 mm above 
and below the line. Figure 5.2 shows the reflection coefficient of the parallel 
lines and there are three specific frequencies with near zero reflection. What 
does it mean?
For example, at 3 GHz the reflection coefficient is under –10 dB. Perhaps 
power is being lost to radiation. If true, then this transmission line has become 
an antenna. Figure 5.3 shows the surface current distribution at 3 GHz, and 
we count three standing wave peaks (including one at the port) and three nulls 
(including one at the end) along the length of the line.

134 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 5.4 shows the electric field distribution around the parallel lines 
simulated by XFdtd. The current on the parallel lines creates high voltage at 
the ends of the lines, which in turn creates radiating waves. When we view an 
animation (not included here), the outer loops of electric field travel into the 
distance. Thus the transmission line is acting like an antenna.
Figure 5.1 Sonnet model of parallel lines. File: lecher.son
Figure 5.2 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of parallel lines. There is no reﬂ ection at three speciﬁ c 
frequencies.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       135                 
Recalling Chapter 2 where we discussed the electric field (electric lines 
of force) spreading out from Hertz’s dipole, we can imagine that the radiation 
comes from the ends of lines. One might think that there is no radiation from 
the middle of the lines. However, the loops of electric field waves in Figure 
5.4 depend on the entire line. In this manner, the feed line actually acts as a 
part of the antenna. We can see this easily when the lines connected to various 
electronic devices sometime radiate electromagnetic noise (electromagnetic in-
terference or EMI).
Figure 5.3 Surface current distribution on parallel lines.
Figure 5.4 Electric ﬁ eld distribution of parallel lines (simulated by XFdtd).

136 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
5.1.2 
The Point of Transition Between Transmission Lines and Antennas
Figure 5.5 is a model of a V-shaped dipole antenna with legs formed by spread-
ing the ends of the parallel lines of the previous example. The loops of the 
electric field waves do not spread isotropically (equally well in all directions). 
There is a favored direction, in the same direction as the direction of the travel-
ing wave on the feed line. In addition, they seem to radiate more from a portion 
of the V.
We see that the radiating electric field depends more on the middle of 
lines. The main part of the antenna is the V-shaped element. In Figure 5.5, 
the V angle is set to 90°. If we increase the angle to 180°, it becomes a dipole 
antenna.
5.1.3 
Conditions for a Pure Traveling Wave
The traveling wave launched by the port bounces off the open end of the trans-
mission line/V antenna/dipole. This reflection makes a standing wave antenna, 
with the loops and nulls in the electric field and current that we have seen above 
and in many other antennas. 
If we were to terminate the ends with a resistance equal to the characteris-
tic impedance of the line, and there is now no reflection, then only a single trav-
eling wave remains. With only one traveling wave, standing waves cannot exist.
Figure 5.5 Model of V-shaped dipole antenna with legs astride of parallel lines.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       137                 
Figure 5.6 shows the graph of the characteristic impedance of the parallel 
lines, when changing Data Type to Port Z0 on the graph shown in Figure 5.2. 
It covers a range from 260 to 310. So, let’s simulate with a termination of 
280.
You can input the value of resistance in the dialog box that appears after 
selecting Circuit->Metal Types…, by clicking the Add… button and setting 
Type to Resistor, and 280/sq for Rdc (Figure 5.7). Figure 5.8 shows the re-
sulting reflection coefficient with the termination resistor in place. We still see 
some reflection zeros, which indicate that there is still some reflection at the 
end of the parallel lines. However, the reflection is much lower than with the 
original, unterminated, pair of lines (Figure 5.2).
One special form of this antenna uses an earth ground for the second 
conductor. Because of the earth ground, the antenna is extremely inefficient 
and thus it is not used for transmitting. However, it is highly directional in the 
direction that the traveling wave travels. It can be most effective for receiving. 
If you have sufficient space, it is easily built and works well for receiving signals 
Figure 5.6 Characteristic impedance of the parallel lines.
Figure 5.7 Parallel lines with a 280 termination resistor at the end.

138 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
below about 7 MHz. At these low frequencies, there is plenty of signal…and 
plenty of noise (static crashes). The lack of efficiency suppresses both the signal 
and the static. The directionality suppresses only the static, leaving an improved 
signal to noise ratio. In this form, it is called a Beverage antenna, named after 
its inventor.
It seems we get the best radiation when we spread out the two conductors 
in a transmission line. Figure 5.9 is a rhombic antenna that is created by spread-
ing out the parallel lines halfway between the load and the termination. As 
Figure 5.8 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient with the 280 termination resistor at the end.
Figure 5.9 Rhombic antenna model.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       139                 
before, the feed point is at the far right, and the opposite end is terminated with 
a resistor with the same value as the characteristic impedance of the lines. Be-
cause of the termination, this is a traveling wave antenna, which can be thought 
of as radiating from the midpart of spread-out lines, as suggested in Figure 5.5.
While the radiation pattern does depend on the frequency, it radiates 
more strongly in the direction of the traveling wave (Figure 5.10). Standing 
wave antennas tend to be narrowband, and because there is no standing wave in 
this antenna, it is naturally a broadband antenna. Unlike the Beverage antenna, 
which uses an earth ground for the second conductor, this antenna is often used 
for both transmit and receive, as long as the legs are several wavelengths long.
5.2 Antennas That Do Not Resonate
With the antennas that we have discussed above, we are starting to see that they 
have little if any standing wave patterns in their current distributions. We also 
see that when the standing wave goes away, we start to get broadband antennas. 
This could be useful. Let’s explore this in more detail.
5.2.1 
The Tapered Slot Antenna
Figure 5.11(a) shows how we might radiate right from the edge of a substrate. 
In the examples above, we gradually spread the two conductors of a transmis-
Figure 5.10 Typical radiation pattern of the rhombic antenna.

140 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
sion line. Here, we gradually spread the width of a slot line. A slot line is just 
like the previously described pair of lines, except that the line width is very 
large. In fact, it is so large that the actual width no longer matters. All the cur-
rent flows on the inner edges of the slot. By gradually expanding the slot of 
a slot line, the traveling wave along the slot line can radiate. This is called a 
tapered slot antenna (TSA).
For this example, the substrate is FR4 with a relative permittivity of 4.9. 
This is stored in Sonnet Lite libraries, as we found in the previous chapter. The 
substrate thickness is 1.6 mm, and the feed is located at the far left on the slot 
line shown in detail in Figure 5.11(b).
Ultra-wideband (UWB), which is used for wireless universal serial bus 
(USB), needs an ultrawideband antenna that covers 3 to 10 GHz. As for wire 
Figure 5.11 (a) The tapered slot antenna. File: TSA.son. (b) Detail of the region near the port.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       141                 
antennas, the rhombic antenna might work, but it is not on a substrate. Many 
antenna designs have been proposed based on the TSA.
Figure 5.12 shows the reflection coefficient of the TSA in Figure 5.11. As 
the slot line is fed across a thin slot formed by two metal plates, the characteris-
tic impedance is determined by the width of the slot.
For the model shown in Figure 5.11, the width of the slot is 2 mm, and 
the characteristic impedance is between 100 and 170 over the 3- to 10-GHz 
band. Figure 5.12 shows the reflection coefficient normalized to 130.
The reflection coefficient could be a bit better; however the antenna does 
realize an ultra-wideband for 3 to 10 GHz. (Sonnet Professional was used be-
cause this problem exceeds the 16-MB memory limit of Sonnet Lite.) Figure 
5.13 shows the surface current distribution at (a) 3 GHz, (b) 6 GHz, and (c) 
10 GHz. At the higher frequencies, many wavelengths are seen along the slot 
line and tapered region. Even though this is a traveling wave antenna, the low 
amplitude standing waves are still seen because the antenna is not perfectly 
matched.
The wavelength at 10 GHz is 30 mm in free space. However, the wave-
length we see in Figure 5.13(c) is shorter than that. This is because the relative 
permittivity of FR4 is 4.9 and, as discussed in the last chapter, this shortens the 
actual wavelength. With a wave traveling along the tapered slot line, the electric 
fields fan out in the tapered region, and the loops of electric lines of force spread 
out and an electromagnetic wave is radiated.
Figure 5.12 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient normalized to 130.

142 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 5.13 (a) Surface current distribution on the TSA at 3 GHz. (b) Surface current distribu-
tion on the TSA at 6 GHz. (c) Surface current distribution on the TSA at 10 GHz.
(c)
(b)
(a)

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       143                 
5.2.2 
Matching the TSA
The characteristic impedance of this slot is between 100 and 170, depend-
ing on frequency. We would like to use some kind of matching circuit to match 
to a 50 system. The idea shown in Figure 5.14 is a way to feed the slot line 
using a microstrip line (MSL) orthogonal to the slot. This method is also used 
for other slot antennas.
Not all slot antennas are traveling wave antennas. Figure 5.15 is another 
slot antenna; this one is for 2.4 GHz. The substrate is made of FR4 with a 
thickness of 1.6 mm, same as above. The current distribution (Figure 5.16) 
hows two current maximums at either end. There is one current minimum in 
the center. A current minimum is a voltage maximum. This slot antenna is like 
a mirror image of a dipole antenna. A dipole antenna has voltage maximums 
at the ends and a current maximum in the center. Both the dipole and this slot 
antenna are standing wave antennas.
Because this slot antenna has very high impedance at the center (mini-
mum current, maximum voltage), the feed point is set to be 8 mm to the left 
of center (Figure 5.15). This should remind you of what we did for the via port 
of a patch antenna in the previous chapter. This location is where the input 
impedance is 50. (Sonnet Professional was used for this analysis.)
5.3 Fundamentals of a Bow Tie Antenna
Remember the old bow tie antenna that would come with every TV set? This is 
just one of a wide class of broadband antennas.
Figure 5.14 Feeding a slot line antenna using an MSL.

144 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
5.3.1 
The Biconical Antenna
Figure 5.17 shows a biconical antenna element growing into infinity and its two 
dimensional equivalent circuit of parallel lines going to semi-infinity. When 
feeding between the apexes of the two conical conductors, the electric lines of 
force created between the opposite cones form spherical surfaces. As they move 
to infinity, a biconical antenna radiates a spherical wave.
The right side of Figure 5.17 shows a parallel transmission line going to 
semi-infinity; electric fields and magnetic fields travel to the right. This is a two-
dimensional version of a biconical antenna. Because there exist only traveling 
waves for both cases, they have minimal dependence on the frequency.
5.3.2 
Finite Length Biconical Antenna
As we cannot build antennas of infinite size, we must truncate the antenna at 
a reasonable length (Figure 5.18). A finite biconical antenna reflects the travel-
ing wave at the end. The amplitude of the standing wave is smaller if we can 
minimize the reflected wave.
The right side of Figure 5.18 shows an equivalent transmission line model 
of the finite biconical antenna. The impedance, determined by the electric and 
Figure 5.15 Feed system for a slot antenna.
2
36
50
50

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       145                 
Figure 5.16 Surface current distribution on the slot antenna. File: SlotAnt.son.
Figure 5.17 The biconical antenna (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biconical_antenna), and its 
two-dimensional equivalent circuit.
∞
∞
Spherical 
wave
∞
Plane 
wave

146 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
magnetic fields at the end, is ZL. To minimize reflections, we connect a termi-
nating resistance ZL at the end. Determining the value of ZL is a standard elec-
tromagnetic problem that we do not detail here. It is sufficient to know that it is 
easily calculated. It is also interesting to know that the characteristic impedance 
is not a constant, it is a function of distance from the feed point. Given that the 
characteristic impedance of a transmission line is Zk, and the input impedance 
is Zi, the condition of ZL  Zk  Zi produces a perfect match.
As the end of element has a transmission line open end discontinuity, 
there is a reflection. The same goes for the TSA in Section 5.2. In both cases, if 
you make the antenna longer, say, a few wavelengths, the reflection decreases. 
The reflection decreases because more power is radiated along the length of the 
antenna and never gets to the end to be reflected. The same thing happens with 
the rhombic antenna when the antenna length is a few wavelengths long. If the 
antenna is long enough and enough power gets radiated before it gets to the 
end, a termination is not needed.
In any case, longer traveling wave antennas have wider bandwidth and 
better match. They are not small antennas. 
5.3.3 
The Impact of Truncating a Traveling Wave Antenna
The engineering trade-off is to reduce the size of the antenna as much as pos-
sible, while still meeting the bandwidth requirement. We typically see a critical 
limit for the element length at around one-quarter of a wavelength long at the 
lowest desired operating frequency.
The left side of Figure 5.19 shows a planar, two-dimensional finite biconi-
cal antenna. The length along the edge of a triangle element is approximately 
one-half of a wavelength. It looks very much like a half-wavelength dipole with 
a very wide element.
The left-side antenna in Figure 5.19 is called a bow tie antenna because 
it resembles a bow tie in shape. The right-side antenna in Figure 5.19 is fed 
Figure 5.18 Finite biconical antenna and its equivalent transmission line model.
ZL
Zk
Zi
Zi
ZL
Zk

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       147                 
between right-side element and ground. It corresponds to a monopole antenna 
(Chapter 3).
If our traveling wave is mostly reflected at the end of the element, we 
would have a standing wave (dipole) antenna rather than a traveling wave an-
tenna. Is it possible that the wide, triangular elements will somehow give us 
extra bandwidth?
5.3.4 
Simulation of a Bow Tie Antenna
Figure 5.20 shows a model of an RFID tag antenna for 950 MHz. The dielec-
tric material is 50-μm thick PET (a kind of plastic) film, and the conductor is 
10-μm thick aluminum foil. Figure 5.21 is a graph of its reflection coefficient 
compared to the dipole antenna in Chapter 3. We do indeed gain significant 
bandwidth.
Figure 5.19 Bow tie antenna (left) and triangular antenna (right).
GND
GND
Figure 5.20 Sonnet model of a bow tie antenna.
68
4
68
68
46

148 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
5.3.5 
Skeleton-Type Bow Tie Antenna
RFID tag antennas are often printed on a PET (plastic) film or on paper with 
a special conductive ink. Because these RFID tags must be inexpensive, they 
should be designed to minimize the amount of expensive conductive ink or 
metal. Figure 5.22 shows the surface current distribution on the bow tie an-
tenna. RF current flows strongest along the edge of each conductor. The narrow 
neck of each triangle carries the greatest current density.
Try drawing and simulating the antenna in Figure 5.23. By now you 
should be fairly skilled using Sonnet, so let’s introduce an expert level short-cut. 
With a blank substrate displayed, press CTRL and P at the same time. The cur-
sor will switch into a mode that allows you to draw a polygon. Just click on each 
point. When finished, click on the last point. Your polygon appears!
The reflection coefficient of the full triangle antenna and the triangle 
frame antenna described above (Figure 5.24) have nearly the same shape and 
bandwidth. However, the resonant frequency of the triangle frame antenna is 
higher, so we need to make it a little longer to resonate at the desired 950 MHz.
Rather than making the antenna arms longer, Figure 5.25 shows how we 
can connect the ends of the arms together to form a loop element. The apparent 
resonant frequencies are now almost the same as the full triangle (Figure 5.26).
Figure 5.21 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the bow tie antenna (circle marker) compared with the 
dipole antenna (diamonds) of Chapter 3.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       149                 
Figure 5.22 Surface current distribution of the bow tie antenna at 954 MHz.
46
68
Figure 5.23 Leaving the conductor only where the surface current ﬂ ows more strongly re-
duces conductor area. File: bowtie_frame.son.

150 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 5.24 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the full triangle antenna (square markers) and the tri-
angle frame antenna (circles).
68
46
68
Figure 5.25 Loop element version shorting both ends with straight bars. File: bowtie_frame2.
son.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       151                 
5.3.6 
A Thinner Element Frame
The conducting area can be further reduced by means of thinner elements (Fig-
ure 5.27). This time, the apparent resonant frequencies shift a little lower (Fig-
ure 5.28). For RFID at 950 MHz, miniaturization can be useful. So we will 
check the input impedance for confirmation. 
Figure 5.29 shows the input impedance for the bow tie antenna R (dia-
monds), X (triangles), the thinner frame elements R (circle), and X (square). 
For a bow tie antenna, R is 36 and X is zero at 920 MHz. For thinner frame 
elements, R is also 36 and X is zero at 874 MHz.
Reading out the input impedance at the target frequency of 953 MHz 
(RFID in Japan), R  40 and X  12 for bow tie elements, and R = 45 
and X = 38 for thinner frame elements. Therefore in both cases the inductive 
reactance is a bit inductive and the resistance is a little smaller than 50 at 953 
MHz.
Thinking that the inductive reactance of an antenna is related to the mag-
netic field component because of extra element length, we can shorten the ele-
ment length and shape to get zero X at 953 MHz.
This model assumes the RFID tag is for the UHF band (which includes 
950 MHz). In fact, the desired input impedance of an RFID IC (integrated cir-
cuit) for a tag is typically not 50. Its optimum R and X are different depending 
Figure 5.26 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the full triangle antenna (diamond markers) and the loop 
frame (circles) shows almost identical responses.

152 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
on the specific IC. In most products the IC is designed with a negative, ca-
pacitive, output reactance. We can realize what is called a conjugate match by 
Figure 5.27 Reduced conductor area version with thinner elements. File: bowtie_frame3.son.
46
68
46
68
Figure 5.28 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient compared between frame elements (squares) and thinner 
frame elements (circles).

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       153                 
designing the antenna with the same amount of positive, inductive reactance. 
For details see Chapter 8.
Figure 5.30 shows the dimensions for zero reactance. R becomes 34 at 
950 MHz. This is smaller than the bow tie antenna (Figure 5.31).
The reflection coefficient of the full bow tie antenna and the bow tie with 
thinner frame elements is compared in Figure 5.32. The final version of the 
thinner frame element antenna has a little narrower band width than the bow 
tie antenna. 
The center frequencies for RFID tag systems are 868 MHz in Europe, 
915 MHz in the United States, and 953 MHz in Japan. As we see in the graph 
in Figure 5.32, the antennas are designed using a little higher frequency. How-
ever, if you place these antennas on, for example, a corrugated cardboard box, 
the dielectric constant of the box shifts the antenna resonance a little lower in 
frequency because of the wavelength shortening effect of paper (a dielectric ma-
terial). Depending on the specific situation, it might or might not be a problem 
in practice. 
Figure 5.33 shows the reflection coefficient for a model with 0.5 mm 
thick paper (relative permittivity is 3.0) just under the antenna. It has shifted a 
little lower in frequency, covering the three worldwide bands.
Figure 5.29 Input impedance for the bowtie antenna R (diamonds), X (triangles) and for the 
thinner frame elements R (circles), and X (squares).

154 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
5.3.7 
Miniaturization Using Triangular Antennas
As shown in Figure 5.19, by feeding between one side element of the bow tie 
antenna and ground, the antenna corresponds to a monopole antenna and the 
current on the ground acts like a mirror, simulating the missing element.
Figure 5.34 shows a model of the triangular monopole antenna; the Son-
net box wall is used as a ground plane. After saving the model shown in Figure 
Figure 5.30 Dimensions for zero reactance at 950 MHz. File: bowtie_frame4.son.
68
68
68
40
68
68
Figure 5.31 R for the thinnest frame bow tie is 34 at 953 MHz, just under that of the full bow 
tie antenna.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       155                 
5.20 under another name, click on the left element structure, and delete it by 
pressing the Delete key.
Thinest Frame
Bow Tie
Figure 5.32 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the bow tie antenna (triangles) compared with the thin-
ner frame elements (circles).
Figure 5.33 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient with 0.5 mm thick paper (εr = 3.0) just under the antenna.

156 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Next, drag the right element next to the left sidewall as shown and set the 
port.
The horizontal dotted line at the center of the Sonnet box (Sonnet’s simu-
lation space) is a an axis of symmetry. It is invoked by checking Symmetry in 
the Circuit->Box… dialog box. When invoked, only the top half of the an-
tenna (above the dashed line) is analyzed with the bottom half automatically 
included with no extra analysis time. This gives us a faster analysis that uses less 
memory. To further save memory usage, we increase the cell size to 1×1 mm 
(Circuit->Box…).
As we learned in Chapter 2, the input impedance of monopole antenna 
is half the value of a dipole antenna. So the triangular antenna is expected to 
have an impedance of about 20, which is just half of the 40 of the bow tie 
antenna at 953 MHz.
Figure 5.35 shows the reflection coefficient for this triangular antenna. 
Normalized to 50, the reflection coefficient at the target frequency of 953 
MHz is 7 dB, which is not acceptable. It also seems to be shifting higher in 
frequency. What is the frequency at which it resonates and X goes to zero?
Figure 5.34 Model of the triangular monopole antenna. File: tri.son.
2
68
68
46

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       157                 
The input impedance of the triangular antenna is shown in Figure 5.36. 
The reactance, X, is almost zero at 953 MHz, and R goes to 20, just one-half 
of the 40 of the bow tie dipole.
Figure 5.35 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the triangular antenna normalized to 50.
Figure 5.36 Input impedance of the triangular antenna, R (circles), and X (triangles).

158 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
As the triangular antenna is shorter than a full element, it can be suitable 
for miniaturized and built-in antennas. However, the input impedance is lower 
than a regular dipole. If used in a 50 system, it will suffer some mismatch. A 
matching circuit to transform between 20 and 50 may be designed using 
circuit simulators. As we did in Chapter 4, we use S-NAP Design by MEL Inc. 
The result of this design is shown in Figure 5.37. As it is realized by a 
coil of 4 nH in series and a 4 pF capacitor in shunt, we can check it by using a 
Sonnet Lite Netlist Project. Figure 5.38 shows the input window for the Netlist 
Project to analyze this matching circuit.
As seen in Figure 5.39, the graph normalized to 50 shows the smallest 
reflection coefficient at 953 MHz, so it will be fine to connect a 50 cable di-
rectly to the feed point of this matching circuit. Notice that, at least in this case, 
adding a matching network does decrease the bandwidth.
5.3.8 
Flare Angle and Bandwidth
By changing the apex angle (flare angle) at the feedpoint of the triangle ele-
ment, the electric and magnetic field distribution also changes. In turn, this also 
changes the input impedance and the bandwidth.
Figure 5.40 shows a triangular antenna with a flare angle of 103°. Figure 
5.41 shows one with a 13° flare. The element length (and resonant frequency) 
can be varied while leaving the flare angle constant.
Figure 5.37 Matching circuit created using S-NAP Design.

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       159                 
We are covering an extreme range of flare angles. The antenna of Figure 
5.41 looks more like a rod rather than triangle. Figure 5.42 shows the reflection 
coefficient over a range of different flare angles. The antenna with a flare angle 
of 73° is the best wideband antenna.
5.3.9 
A Thin Element Triangular Antenna
Now we will confirm that it is possible to realize a triangular monopole antenna 
with a thin frame element, just as we did for the bow tie antenna. Figure 5.43 
shows a triangular antenna with a thin frame element.
Figure 5.38 Sonnet’s Netlist Project window.
Figure 5.39 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the triangular antenna with a matching circuit.

160 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The calculated input impedance is 18.6  j 5 shown in Figure 5.44. 
It shows a slight inductive reactance. Setting the resistance to 18.6 and re-
actance to –5 by selecting Graph -> Terminations…, the graph shown in 
2
96
38
Figure 5.40 A triangular antenna with a ﬂ are angle of 103°.
Figure 5.41 A triangular antenna with a ﬂ are angle of 13°.
14
62
2

 
Traveling Wave Antennas 
       161                 
Figure 5.42 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient with ﬂ are angle of 73° (squares), 13° (triangles), and 103° 
(diamonds).
68
40
Figure 5.43 A triangular antenna with a thin frame element.

162 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 5.45 appears. This is the reflection coefficient for a conjugate match, 
mentioned above.
Figure 5.45 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the thin element triangular antenna with conjugate 
matching.
Figure 5.44 Input impedance of the thin frame triangular monopole antenna.

163
6
Antennas for RFID Systems
6.1 RFID Systems Based on Electromagnetic Induction
One of the big reasons a lot of people are getting into antenna design for the 
first time is radio frequency identification (RFID). With RFID proliferating 
everywhere, in the entire supply chain, in price tags, in credit cards, in sub-
way passes, in automobile toll collection, and so on, someone has to design 
the RFID tag antennas. It might as well be us. Most of what we have already 
learned is directly applicable. Let’s start with antennas that are really inductors. 
6.1.1 
Faraday’s Law of Electromagnetic Induction
Michael Faraday (1791–1867) was a physicist and chemist in England. He dis-
covered the law of electromagnetic induction in 1831, the same year as Clerk 
Maxwell’s birth. He also made many discoveries in the field of chemistry. The 
unit F (Farad) of capacitance is named after him.
Faraday knew Oersted and Ampere had discovered that magnetism is 
generated by electrical current. He wondered if it might be possible to do the 
reverse, to generate electrical current from magnetism.
If the magnetic flux, , (think of the iron filings we saw in grade school 
science class) increases as shown in Figure 6.1, electromotive force (think volt-
age), E, is generated. If there is a conductor appropriately placed, then the elec-
tromotive force can cause current flow. This changing current flow can in turn 
modify the magnetic flux. Figure 6.2 is a simplified schematic diagram of the 
experimental apparatus that Faraday used when he discovered electromagnetic 
induction. 

164 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
When closing switch S and applying current to A, galvanometer G (am-
meter) swings a little at that same instant. But after a short period of time, 
G returns to zero and no longer moves. Next we open switch S, and G again 
swings at that same instant, but, Faraday found, the current now flows in the 
opposite direction.
The electric current source back then was the Galvanic piles that Volta 
had developed, which is the ancestor of the battery as we know it today. Gal-
vanic piles generate direct current. What is important here is his discovery that a 
changing current in coil A creates a changing magnetic flux that passes through 
both coil A and then into B. The changing flux in B then generates an electric 
current in B. The important point is that changing currents and fluxes are re-
quired. Steady, DC, currents, and magnetic fluxes generate no induction.
6.1.2 
Self-Inductance of a Coil
We can see that when we apply current to a loop of wire, magnetic flux appears 
in the space around it. The total amount of magnetic flux that intersects the 
Figure 6.1 Faraday’s law of electromagnetic induction. 
Φ
Φ´
E
Figure 6.2 Simpliﬁ ed schematic of Faraday’s experiment.
G
B
A
S

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       165                 
loop of wire is represented as . However, the total amount of flux depends on 
the shape and size of the loop, among other things. In addition, for any given 
loop of wire, if we double the current, we also double the flux. Given this, we 
can infer that there is a relationship between the electric current, I, and the total 
flux, , as in the following expression.
 
  LI 
The proportionality constant L is called self-inductance of this coil. We 
can also write the following.
 
L  I 
Self-inductance is defined as the total magnetic flux generated by a unit 
current. When measuring magnetic flux by Wb (Weber) and electric current by 
A (Ampere), the unit of inductance is Wb/A, which is called H (Henry), named 
after Joseph Henry (1797–1878), a physicist in the United States who discov-
ered the law of electromagnetic induction independently of Faraday.
Figure 6.3 shows models with an increasing number of turns as analyzed 
by Sonnet Lite. These models use a SPICE lumped model extraction feature to 
find the self-inductance, L, of each coil. Notice that there is no such thing as a 
perfect inductor. Elements such as stray fringing fields make things a bit more 
complicated by adding some resistance and capacitance, too.
The port for multiturn coils is attached in a short line that passes over the 
multiple turns and is connected between the vias (the small triangles). This is 
an application of an “internal” port.
The SPICE equivalent circuit of the one-turn coil has only one L and 
one R. Multiturn coils generates slight parasitic capacitances between lines. The 
Figure 6.3 Relationship between number of turns and self-inductance L.

166 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
resistance of the conductor used for the coil, like copper, determines the value 
of R, which varies with the number of turns and the size of the conductor.
6.1.3 
What Is a Mutual Inductance?
RFID at 13.56 MHz includes the antenna of the reader-writer coil (to be held 
near the tag) and the tag coil. The two interact via magnetic energy. Thus, 
strictly speaking, they are not antennas because antennas interact via electro-
magnetic energy. However, they are frequently referred to as antennas anyway.
With multiple tags, and defining the current in each coil as I1, I2, I3,... and 
the mutual inductance (i.e., current in one coil causing flux in another coil, 
which induces voltage in the second coil) is as follows.
First, the magnetic flux coupled into coil 1:
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I1 in coil 1 causing ﬂ ux in coil 1: 11  L I1
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I2 in coil 2 causing ﬂ ux in coil 1:   M12 I2
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I3 in coil 3 causing ﬂ ux in coil 1: 13  M13 I3
and so forth.
Similarly, the magnetic flux that couples into coil 2, 
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I1 in coil 1 causing ﬂ ux in coil 2:  M21I1
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I2 in coil 2 causing ﬂ ux in coil 2:  L2I2 
Magnetic ﬂ ux by I3 in coil 3 causing ﬂ ux in coil 2:  M23I3
and so forth.
Current in any coil generating magnetic flux in any coil is similarly pos-
sible. Here the coefficients such as L1, L2, M12, and so forth are the ratio of the 
magnetic flux to the current causing that flux. They are determined by the 
specific coil shapes, locations, orientations, and other factors.
For instance, M12 is called the mutual inductance between coil 1 and coil 
2. Thus mutual inductance is the total flux generated in one coil by current in 
another coil.
6.1.4 
Coupling Coefficient Between Reader–Writer’s Coil and the Tag Coil
As shown in Figure 6.4, we have a tag coil and a reader coil in free space. Given 
that the self-inductance is L1 and L2, and mutual inductance is M12, when elec-
trical current I1 and I2 flow in these coils, the magnetic energy W is represented 
by the following expression summed over all possible pairs of coils:
 
W  ½ (current in one coil)  (magnetic ﬂ ux coupling to another coil) 

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       167                 
From the above expression, we have for two coils:
 
(
)
2
2
2
2
2
12
12
1 1
2
2
12 1
2
1
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
 ½ 
2
2
M
M
W
L I
L I
M I I
L
I
I
L
I
L
L
⎧
⎫
⎛
⎞
⎛
⎞
⎪
⎪
=
+
+
=
+
+
−
⎨
⎬
⎜
⎟
⎜
⎟
⎝
⎠
⎝
⎠
⎪
⎪
⎩
⎭ 
 
Because we cannot have negative energy, this expression is not allowed to 
be negative. This means L1  0 and 
2
12
2
1
0
M
L
L
−
≥
, which means 
2
1
2
12
0
L L
M
−
≥
is required for a physical, passive inductor given that L1 and L2 also must be 
positive.
Notice that mutual inductance M12 can be negative as long as it is less 
than the product of L1 and L2. If we have two coils that have a positive mutual 
inductance, we can easily create a negative mutual inductance by reversing the 
leads on one of the inductors. Alternatively, we can just wind one of the coils in 
the opposite direction.
In Figure 6.4, some of the magnetic flux generated by I2 couples through 
loop 1 and induces I1 in the same (positive) direction, so M12 is positive. We 
get to arbitrarily decide which direction is positive. If we change definition of 
positive I1 or I2 (not both), M12 is negative. We see that when we define the di-
rection of positive current in both coils to be the same, the mutual inductance 
is positive. When opposite, it is negative.
All magnetic flux generated by current on coil 1 passes through coil 1. All 
magnetic flux generated by current on coil 2 passes through coil 2. In Figure 
6.4, all the magnetic flux generated by coil 1 also passes through coil 2. All the 
magnetic flux generated by coil 2 also passes through coil 1. In other words, the 
two coils are perfectly coupled, without flux leakage.
Any magnetic flux generated by a coil that does not pass through another 
coil is called leakage flux. In this case: 
Figure 6.4 Two coils in free space.
Φ2
I1
I2

168 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
 
2
1
2
12
L L
M
>
 
Here, the smaller 
2
12
M
 is, the more leakage flux exists between the two 
inductors. This prompts us to define the coupling factor, k. 
 
2
2
12
1
2
M
k
L L
=
 
In other words, there is no leakage flux when the coupling coefficient k is 
1, and we call it tight coupling when k is close to 1.
6.1.5 
Finding the Coupling Coefficient k Using Sonnet Lite
Figure 6.5 is a model with two coils separated by 10 mm. The cell size is 1 1 
mm, and the 70 40 mm rectangle loop whose line width is 1 mm is fed by two 
parallel lines. In this case, when modeling two floating coils, a common ground 
does not exist. A common ground is needed to generate a correct SPICE RLC 
model, so the Box wall ports are needed. In order to exclude the effects from 
port connecting lines, we set a reference plane at the end of each coil.
To obtain an equivalent circuit (subcircuit) SPICE model at 13.56 MHz 
as shown in Figure 6.6, we set two analysis frequencies, 13 MHz and 14 MHz, 
set in Linear Frequency Sweep.
Next, in the dialog box displayed after selecting Analysis->Output Files, 
click in the upper right on PI Model and change the value of Lmax in middle 
column to 1,000, and click OK (Figure 6.7). The default (initial) value of Lmax 
Figure 6.5 Sonnet model, two coils separated by 10 mm.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       169                 
is 100 nH. If unchanged and the coil model requires more than 100 nH, model 
synthesis will be unsuccessful. 
By selecting Project->Analyze and running a simulation, a text file with 
extension “.lib” is generated. Figure 6.8 shows the resulting subcircuit in 
PSPICE format, a model for the two coils. L is 197 nH, and the coupling coef-
ficient, k, is 0.22.
6.1.6 
13.56-MHz Antenna (Coil)
Figure 6.9 shows a 6-turn coil modeled by Sonnet Lite. The cell size is 0.5 mm 
square and the simulation space (Box) x and y are set to 256 mm. Figure 6.10 is 
Figure 6.6 Two frequencies, 13 MHz and 14 MHz, are set in Linear Frequency Sweep.
Figure 6.7 The default value of Lmax should be changed to 1,000.

170 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
an enlarged view around the start and end of the winding, including the nearby 
right angle bend. The line width and spacing are both 0.5 mm. The coil is 77 
mm wide and 41 mm long. Vias are at both the start and end (small triangles). 
An internal port is set (Figure 6.11) in the lower layer (Level 1). And, as before, 
we change the PI Model Lmax, but this time to 10,000.
We want to put a via on the edge of a cell upward from Level 1 to Level 
0. To make sure it goes up (instead of down), select Tools->Add Via->Up One 
Level. Next, select Tools->Add Via->Edge Via, then click on the edge of the 
short line drawn in Level 1.
Figure 6.8 Subcircuit in PSPICE format.
Figure 6.9 A 6-turn coil modeled by Sonnet Lite. File: rw_tag10mm.son.
41
77

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       171                 
As for an antenna simulation in Sonnet Lite, it is important to pay at-
tention to the size of the Box. In the case of the one-half wavelength dipole 
antenna in Chapter 3, we put the antenna about one wavelength away from 
Figure 6.10 Enlarged view around the port.
Figure 6.11 Internal port on Level 1.

172 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
all Box sidewalls. As for the top and bottom of the simulation space, we set 
free space by setting Top Metal and Bottom Metal to Free Space; however the 
models in Figures 6.5 and 6.9 do not follow these guidelines. One wavelength 
is way too long.
In addition, the memory usage of Sonnet Lite cannot exceed 16 MB. 
Fortunately, it is possible to use a small simulation space for coils, because we 
only need to analyze the magnetic field in and around the coil. The coil is about 
1/1,000 of a wavelength in size. For practical purposes, there is no far field. So, 
we find that setting the Sonnet Lite box size larger than one or two coil diam-
eters allows good results.
We use aluminum of 10 μm thick for the coil conductor (Figure 6.12). 
This is set by selecting Circuit->Metal Types, by clicking the Add button, and 
selecting Aluminum from the Global Library in Select metal from library. Fig-
ure 6.13 shows the contents of the file obtained by setting SPICE subcircuit 
output after selecting Analysis->Output Files. The result is an equivalent circuit 
Figure 6.12 Coil metal is set to aluminum 10 μm thick.
Figure 6.13 Synthesized SPICE subcircuit model.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       173                 
for the vicinity of 13.56 MHz. We can see that this 6-turn loop at around 13.56 
MHz is represented as a circuit that has values of L, C, and R as shown in Figure 
6.14. 
The value of self-inductance L between node 1 and node 2 shows the L of 
the 6-turn coil in the tag. C, between node 1 and node 0 (GND) is the slight 
amount of capacitance caused by the capacitive coupling between lines. And 
because we are using a real metal, aluminum, with nonzero resistance, the value 
R also appears. This model is then used to design RFID tags using this coil. The 
details of such a design depend on the chip selected, and are typically provided 
by the chip manufacturer.
6.2 UHF RFID Tag Antennas
Different frequencies have different characteristics. Above, we have explored one 
of the lower frequencies used for RFID. Next, we explore a higher frequency.
6.2.1 
Application of an RFID Tag
In experiments involving attaching RFID tags on various items at the super-
market, the advantages and disadvantages of RFID tags at 13.56 and 2.45 GHz 
became clear.
It was found that 13.56 MHz RFID tags could be read on all items except 
things like metallic cans used for beer and soda. Meanwhile, 2.45-GHz RFID 
tags could be read less than one-third of the time as compared to 13.56 MHz 
tags. When attaching tags directly on items with high water content, such as a 
full plastic bottle or a Japanese radish, most tags could not be read at all.
The 900-MHz band is an intermediate band. RFID tags for this frequen-
cy can be read over a much longer distance than 13.56 MHz and are not af-
fected as much by water as compared to 2.45 GHz.
Industry is developing a system which controls and monitors the entire 
supply chain, for shipment, delivery, and sale by attaching RFID tags on prod-
ucts during manufacturing.
Figure 6.14 Schematic diagram of the SPICE subcircuit.
1.2 pF
4466 nH
6.9Ω 

174 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
6.2.2 
Half-Wavelength Dipole Antenna for the UHF Band
A half-wavelength dipole antenna for 950 MHz is about 16 cm long. This 
might be an entirely acceptable size to place on some product boxes. However, 
it must be miniaturized if it is to be used on small products.
Figure 6.15 is an RFID tag with a linear dipole antenna; the size is 1 inch 
(2.54 cm)  6 inches (15.24 cm). The element structure in the center to which 
the IC chip is attached functions as an impedance-matching network.
As we learned in Chapter 4, when increasing the permittivity of a sub-
strate, we can reduce the size of an electric field detection type antenna. How-
ever, we typically produce RFID tags by printing antennas on PET films or thin 
paper and then affixing foils. Once the substrate material is set, we must use 
other miniaturization methods.
For example, what happens if we bend the dipole as shown in Figure 6.16? 
Leaving the downturned leg length fixed at 2.6 cm, we parameterize the hori-
zontal length, just as we did for the linear dipole in Chapter 3.
We assume that the dielectric is a thin sheet of PET plastic 1 mm thick 
with a relative permittivity of 2.2 and tanδ  0.002. After running a param-
eter sweep, we obtain the reflection coefficient shown in Figure 6.17. When 
the horizontal element is 9 cm long it resonates at about 950 MHz. The total 
length of the complete dipole is similar to that of the linear dipole in Chapter 3; 
Figure 6.16 Parameterized bent dipole. File: bentdp_param.son.
Figure 6.15 Example of an UHF RFID tag, a simple dipole antenna.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       175                 
however, the horizontal dimension needed for mounting is reduced by 60%. As 
we have seen, we can change the shape of an antenna, and still make it resonate 
at the desired frequency. There is a trade-off, however. The bandwidth is slightly 
narrower (Figure 6.18).
6.2.3 
Broadband Techniques
Ideally, RFID tags use broadband antennas to support three bands, for Europe 
(868 MHz), the United States (915 MHz), and Japan (953 MHz). Tags are 
affixed on various dielectrics such as a carton box, a wooden box, glass, and 
so on. It would be highly desirable to use one antenna design worldwide, even 
when affixed to any material. We approach this by designing broadband so that 
resonant frequency shifts caused by the wavelength shortening effect do not 
disable the tag.
As for amateur radio, multiple narrow operating frequency bands are 
available, so multiband operation with one antenna is highly desirable. For ex-
ample, as shown in Figure 6.19, when you feed different length dipoles all con-
nected to one feed point with one cable, we have a multiband dipole antenna. 
This type of antenna has been popular for decades.
Figure 6.20 is a dipole antenna with different length elements using this 
same idea. It was hoped to realize a broadband response because the two dipoles 
are resonant at two frequencies. Figure 6.21 shows the reflection coefficient. We 
Figure 6.17 Result of the parameter sweep. With the horizontal portion of the dipole at 9 cm 
long, we can realize operation at 950 MHz.

176 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 6.19 Multiband dipole antenna for amateur radio.
Figure 6.20 Dual-band dipole antenna with different length elements. File: wide_dp.son.
0.2
1
0.2
7.6
6.2
Figure 6.18 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the bent dipole (small circle marker) and the simple 
dipole antenna.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       177                 
see that this antenna does indeed have low reflection at two frequencies, 856 
and 968 MHz as expected. Unfortunately, in between, at around 945 MHz, we 
see large reflection, and it is not so good at 915 MHz either. When the tag’s res-
onant frequency is shifted by the surrounding environment, the entire response 
moves around, very possibly putting high reflection right at the frequency we 
might need for operation.
What is happening at 945 MHz to generate this large reflection? To find 
out, we examine the surface current of this antenna at that frequency (Figure 
6.22). We see that the current through the feed point is low (look very close to 
the small port 1 box), but the current on both wires at the center near the feed 
point is high. The reason is we have an entire half-wavelength U-shaped reso-
nant dipole on one side of the feed point, and a second one on the other side. 
Both sides are completely happy all by themselves. Neither side needs to send 
any current at all through the feed point, making the feed point a low current 
(and high voltage), high impedance, and high reflection point. Figure 6.23 is a 
plot of input impedance and it has a peak in the real part R at around 945 MHz 
where it is over 450.
It is nice that at around 856 MHz and 968 MHz, where the reflection 
coefficient is low, the real part, R, is near 50 with imaginary part X at zero, 
indicating resonance. At around 945 MHz, X is almost zero as well, indicating 
a resonance. But R is very high, which indicates an antiresonance (parallel reso-
nance) mode. This would also make an effective antenna, but it would need a 
high impedance feed. A feed designed for the other two, low impedance, reso-
Figure 6.21 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the dual band dipole. Large reﬂ ection is seen at around 
945 MHz.

178 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
nances does not work. Thus, this antenna cannot realize a broadband response 
when being fed directly by low impedance cable.
6.2.4 
Changing the Element Location
Total input reactance, X, is zero at the antenna resonant frequency. This is the 
same as in LC resonant circuits. With excitation by a sine wave, the electrical 
energy accumulating in C and the magnetic energy accumulating in L alternate 
by 90° phase, and we have the state of resonance.
In a dipole antenna, the electric charges of two poles (as in di-pole) at 
both ends form C and the magnetic field generated around the current along 
the wire forms L. Now we review Figure 6.23, we can see that the frequencies 
where X is zero at 856, 945, and 968 MHz, and that resonance in the middle 
is an antiresonance (parallel LC) mode between the first and last resonances, 
which are series LC resonances.
The central antiresonance is caused by one-half wavelength of wire on 
each side being resonant, with absolutely no need to send current to the other 
side. We will try to eliminate this problem by rearraigning the elements so that 
these antiresonances are forced to send current through the feed point.
Figure 6.24 is a model whose short element that was at the lower left in 
Figure 6.22 has been flipped up and over the main dipole into the upper left 
position. To do this, click on the L-shaped short element, select Modify->Flip, 
and click the up-down arrow button.
If we were to analyze this dipole as it is, we would see that it is slightly 
improved but that parallel resonance mode still remains. This makes sense, be-
cause the half-wavelength of wire on either side of the feed point still has no 
Figure 6.22 Surface current distribution at 945 MHz. Current passing into port is low.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       179                 
need for its resonant current to flow through the feed point to the half-wave 
resonant length of wire on the other side of the feed point.
To force the half-wave resonant current, say, on the left, to flow through 
the feed line terminals, we just move the short L-shaped elements over to the 
other side of the feed point (Figure 6.25). Figure 6.26 is the surface current dis-
tribution at 919 MHz. We see that the resonant currents on the short elements 
pass through the feed line port terminals.
Figure 6.27 shows the reflection coefficient of this antenna. We are not 
finished yet. There is no antiresonance mode so it does seem to be broad-
band, but the best return loss is 3.5 dB. The input impedance must have been 
substantially modified. If we check the input impedance, R is indeed 10 at 
most.
Figure 6.24 The left short dipole element is now ﬂ ipped up over the main dipole. File: wide_
dp2.son.
0.2
1
0.2
7.6
6.2
Figure 6.23 Input impedance. R is over 450 at 945 MHz.

180 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 6.26 Surface current distribution at 919 MHz.
Figure 6.27 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the modiﬁ ed model.
Figure 6.25 Moving the short element’s attachment point to the other side of the feed line 
terminals forces the antiresonant current to ﬂ ow through the feed terminals.
1
0.2
7.6
6.2
0.4

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       181                 
Let’s not give up yet. Perhaps there is something we can do to match the 
dipole to 50. Perhaps we should try many dipoles with this same general lay-
out, but many slightly different lengths and separations. Figure 6.28 is a model 
with the length of the y directed portion of the short element set as a parameter.
The setup procedure is same as we learned in Chapter 3. Select Tools-
>Add Dimension Parameter->Add Symmetric, click the left button of mouse 
on the upper right corner of the upper L-shaped element to display a small 
white square. This sets the first reference point. Then:
1. Click and drag the mouse to select all the points in the upper part of 
the L-shaped element. This selects all the points that will be moved 
when the reference point is moved. All of the points are now indicated 
by small black squares.
2. Press the Enter key. This means you are ﬁ nished selecting the upper 
group of points.
3. Click the left button of mouse on the lower left corner of lower L-
shaped element, and again, a small white square appears. This is your 
second reference point.
4. As we did with the upper L element, click and drag to select all the 
points of the lower part of the element. All the selected points are in-
dicated by small black squares. All of these points will be moved when 
the second reference point is moved.
5. Press the Enter key.
6. A dialog box is displayed. Type in a convenient variable name.
Set up the simulation just like we did in Chapter 3. Under Analysis
->Setup, add a Parameter Sweep. Select an ABS Sweep from 800 to 1,100 MHz. 
Then check the check box for varying the parameter and specify the parameter 
to sweep from 2 to 5 cm in steps of 0.2 cm. Select Project->Analyze to run the 
analysis.
Figure 6.28 Model with the length of the y directed portion of the short element set as a 
parameter. File: wide_dp3.son.
0.2
7.8
Length=3.8
1.6
4.8
0.4

182 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
When the simulation finishes, display a plot of the reflection coefficient. 
Then, double-click on S11[DB] in the upper left frame and check the Graph 
All Iterations check box in the lower left and click OK. All reflection coefficients 
are displayed for all calculated values of our parameter as shown in Figure 6.29.
If you see a response that you want, just move your cursor to point at 
the desired curve. The value of the reflection coefficient, the frequency, and 
the value of the parameter are displayed. For example, the curve for length 3.8 
cm shows a usable band from 850 to 1,000 MHz with return loss better than 
10 dB. This antenna will work in all UHF RFID bands worldwide and even 
has lots of room for the tag bandwidth to be moved down by nearby dielectric 
objects. Further optimization of the x directed dipole lengths yields even bet-
ter performance. This antenna was first described in, “Novel Planar Wideband 
Omni-directional Quasi Log Periodic Antenna,” presented at the 2005 Asia 
Pacific Microwave Conference.
6.3 Polarization of Reader and Tag
It would be nice if a tag could be read no matter in what orientation it is held. 
Polarization is characteristic of electromagnetic waves and refers to the waves, 
and their antennas, being sensitive to orientation. Do we have a problem here?
6.3.1 
UHF RFID Tags
UHF RFID tags are based on the dipole antenna, and communicate by using 
the far field electromagnetic waves over distances up to about 10m. This is far 
Figure 6.29 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient is displayed for all the values of our parameter.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       183                 
field because one wavelength at UHF is about 33 mm. So we can imagine at-
taching tags on the cartons moving along on conveyor belts being read from 
a long distance. Or we could attach them to pallets of goods, to trucks and 
fork lifts, and read all the tags as they pass gates, and so forth. It is possible to 
track goods in the supply chain by attaching tags (in many possible places and 
orientations) on a carton (Figure 6.30) and in parts management and product 
management by attaching them on assembled parts at factories.
A horizontal dipole antenna can receive a signal transmitted by another 
horizontal dipole. The signal transmitted by the horizontal dipole is called hori-
zontally polarized. If we turn one of the dipoles by 90°, then it is vertically po-
larized, and little if any signal is received.
When we work out the mathematics, it turns out that a horizontally po-
larized signal has a horizontal electric field. Of course, a vertical dipole transmits 
a vertically polarized signal. For good reception, the transmitting and receiving 
antenna should be the same, or almost the same, polarization.
It is also possible to combine a horizontally plus a vertically polarized 
wave so that the electric field vector spins around at the same frequency as 
the electromagnetic wave. This is called a circularly polarized wave. In fact, 
depending on how the two waves are combined, the electric field vector can 
spin clockwise or counterclockwise. An important note: what clockwise and 
counterclockwise mean depends on whether you are viewing the wave from 
the transmitter or from the receiver. Both points of view are used in practice. 
The terms “right-hand circular” and “left-hand circular” are also used. A patch 
antenna can be easily set up to transmit and receive circularly polarized waves.
In Figure 6.30, when a horizontally polarized wave comes from front left, 
tag (1) receives best. Also (3) and (7) can receive, but (2) and (4), which are 
vertically polarized, can hardly receive anything. Note that we are simplifying a 
Figure 6.30 RFID tags scattered over a cardboard box.
1
8
7
6
5
4
3
2

184 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
little bit here, assuming that the box and the tags do not influence the polariza-
tion of the wave being received.
If the reader is circularly polarized, then the transmitted wave is half verti-
cal and half horizontal. A vertical antenna receives the vertical half. A horizontal 
receives the horizontal half. In this case, only tags (6) and (8) no longer receive 
the circularly polarized wave. This is because the ends of their dipole are point-
ed right at the reader. Again, in practice, the box interacts with and modifies the 
transmitted wave. We can imagine, for example, that tag (5), on the back of the 
box, receives no signal of any kind, and thus cannot be read.
Figure 6.31 shows an example of an antenna formed from two dipoles in 
the form of a Buddhist cross manufactured by Matrics™ (presently Motorola 
Symbol). The elements are folded to minimize area. The current near the IC 
is strong and is available for both vertically and horizontally polarized waves.
With orthogonal dipole elements, we have a crossed dipole. The tag in 
Figure 6.31 can receive both horizontal and vertical waves coming from a reader 
in any direction, even when attached on a carton as shown in Figure 6.32. Well, 
at least as long as some signal, of any polarization, can get to the tag.
6.3.2 
Buddhist Cross-Shaped RFID Tag
Figure 6.33 shows an antenna model in the approximate shape of a Buddhist 
cross. It is a rough drawing, and analysis shows that it can cover the worldwide 
UHF RFID bands.
RFID tags for UHF are attached on a carton box and their resonant fre-
quencies shift to lower frequencies under the influence of nearby dielectric ob-
jects. Thus, in general, we should design RFID tag antennas to resonate at 
slightly higher frequencies when they are in free space.
Figure 6.31 Modiﬁ ed crossed dipole antenna, from Matrics.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       185                 
6.4 Radiation of Circular Polarization from Patch Antenna
It looks like circular polarization can be helpful. Let’s see if we can get circular 
polarization from a patch antenna.
Figure 6.33 Buddhist cross dipole RFID tag, ﬁ le: cross_dp.son.
0.2
0.4
3.6
4.2
3.4
3.6
Figure 6.32 Crossed dipole tags on a cardboard box.

186 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
6.4.1 
Simulation Model of a Circularly Polarized Patch Antenna
Figure 6.34 shows a feeding method for a patch antenna that can generate a cir-
cularly polarized wave. The left feed line is longer by a one-quarter wavelength 
and the patch is fed by two microstrip lines (MSLs) connecting on adjacent 
sides of the patch. One patch plays a dual role as two antenna elements, and 
antenna elements are excited simultaneously, but they are orthogonal to each 
other, so both a horizontally and a vertically polarized wave is generated. When 
the delay between the two waves is 90° (remember the one-quartyer wavelength 
longer feed line on the left), the sum of the two waves form a circularly polar-
ized wave.
Figure 6.35 is an example of a circularly polarized wave patch antenna 
that is included in Sonnet Lite. Select Help->Examples, and you can find the 
RHP example in the Antennas section in the Application Examples. You can 
load the example into Sonnet Lite directly from the help page, or from file 
cross_dp.con on the disc.
6.4.2 
Right-Handed and Left-Handed Polarization
In actual wireless communications, electromagnetic waves pass through various 
dielectrics such as buildings and ground to be reflected, refracted, diffracted, 
and so forth, and arrive as a mixture of different polarizations from different 
directions, and even with different delays. So in the real, physical world, we 
rarely see a simple, clean, monopolarized wave.
A circularly polarized wave can be obtained by time-shifting a vertically 
polarized wave and a horizontally polarized wave by 90° with respect to each 
other, and letting them propagate simultaneously as shown in Figure 6.36. The 
electric field is composed of both field vectors, as shown by the arrows drawn 
Figure 6.34 Circularly polarized patch antenna.

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       187                 
on a transverse plane surface in Figure 6.36, which shows that the electric field 
vector is circling around as we go through one cycle of the wave.
In Figure 6.36, only the electric field is drawn, and the electromagnetic 
wave is traveling in z direction. As viewed from the transmitter (indicated by 
the eye), at time instant 1, the electric field vector is horizontal, pointed along 
the x axis at the transverse plane indicated in the figure. One-quarter cycle later, 
at time instant 2, the wave has traveled one-quarter wavelength further along 
the z axis to give us an electric field vector that is vertical, along the y axis. And 
so it goes. From the viewpoint of the transmitter, the electric field vector is ro-
tating clockwise, and we call it right-handed polarization.
6.5 Prediction of Communication Distance
It would be nice to at least take an educated guess as to how far a transmitter/
receiver pair can function before we build it. There is indeed a lot of random-
ness that cannot be controlled, but we can do better than just hope it will work.
Figure 6.35 Sonnet example model of a circularly polarized patch antenna.

188 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
6.5.1 
Communication Distance of UHF RFID Tags
Figure 6.37 shows a transmitting antenna and a receiving antenna in free space 
separated from each other by distance r. The power Pt. is applied to the trans-
mitting antenna. The antenna gain (discussed in Chapter 7) is Gt. The power 
density Pd of the wave arriving at the receiving antenna assuming a spherical 
wave is then
 
2
4
t
t
d
PG
P
r
π
=
 
Figure 6.37 A transmitting antenna and a receiving antenna in free space.
Pt
Pd
Pr
Ae
Gr
Gt
r
Transmitting antenna
Receiving antenna
Figure 6.36 A circularly polarized wave can be obtained by adding two orthogonal linearly 
polarized waves with phase difference of 90°.
y
x
+z
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(2)
(3)
(4)

 
Antennas for RFID Systems 
       189                 
For those who are comfortable with mathematics, you will realize that the 
above equation just says that the power from the transmitting antenna is simply 
spread out on the surface of a sphere.
When the minimum power receivable by a receiver (sometimes called 
minimum discernable signal or minimum detectable signal) is Pr and the gain 
of a receiving antenna is Gr, the expression for the maximum distance r is
 
(
)
λ
π
=
2
4
t
t
r
r
PG G
r
P  
The expression to approximate the communication distance between a 
UHF RFID tag and its reader, stated in words, is:
 
[ ]
[
]
(
)
[
]
λ
π
×
×
=
×
2
Transmission EIRP W
Gain of tag
Polarized waveloss
Distance m
4
Minimum power of tag W
 
EIRP stands for effective isotropic radiated power. An isotropic antenna is 
an antenna that radiates equally well in all directions. It does not, in fact it can-
not, physically exist. It is useful however, as a theoretical standard to rate other 
antennas. So, EIRP means the amount of power you would have to pump into 
this fictitious antenna to get the same power density at our receiver as we get 
with the real antenna. Thus, if our real antenna has a gain of 3 dBi (dB over 
isotropic), then 1W into our actual antenna gives the same signal as 2W into an 
isotropic antenna, and we have 2W EIRP.
Polarization loss is 1.0 if there is no loss, and it is 0.0 if there is complete 
and total loss of signal due to polarization mismatch. If you know the difference 
in the angle between the transmitted polarization angle, and the polarization 
angle that the receiver expects, just square the cosine of that angle to get the 
polarization loss. For dipoles in free space, the mismatch angle is just the angle 
between the dipoles as viewed along a line connecting the dipoles.
If there are some metal objects around, RFID systems can sometimes 
communicate over longer distances than expected because of reflection, refrac-
tion, and so forth. Unfortunately, it can also be a lot shorter. Thus, as we men-
tioned above, there is a lot of randomness. This is where the field of statistics 
can be applied. The mathematics are far too involved to go into here, but for 
those who are so inclined, this can be an extremely rewarding application of an 
advanced field of mathematics.


191
7
Determination of Antenna 
Characteristics by Using EM Simulators
7.1 Radiation Efficiency of Antennas
Nothing is perfect, including antennas. To do engineering, we must put a num-
ber on whatever we are interested in, and then try to design our systems so that 
that number is better. Here we consider a number that is especially critical for 
small antennas; the number we call radiation efficiency.
7.1.1 
Definition of Radiation Efficiency
Radiation efficiency, η (eta), refers to the percentage of power actually radiated 
by an antenna. It is a ratio, usually expressed in percent, defined by the follow-
ing equations:
 
100[%]
(
)
rad
rad
rad
loss
in
in
rad
P
R
R
P
R
R
R
η =
=
=
×
+
 
Here Prad is radiated power, Pin is input power, Rrad is radiation resistance, 
Rin is input resistance, and Rloss is loss resistance.
The unit of radiation resistance (Rrad) is the ohm; however it does not refer 
to the ohmic loss caused by the metal of an antenna. Radiation resistance Rrad is 
defined by the following equation:

192 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
 
2
rad
rad
P
R
I
=
 
Here, I is the current at the feed point. In an electromagnetic simulation, 
the radiation resistance Rrad corresponds to the real part of the input impedance, 
R, of an antenna built using perfectly lossless materials. The input resistance of 
such a lossless antenna is due entirely to power loss due to radiation.
Then, when we build the antenna from real, lossy, resistive materials, the 
input resistance R is now the sum of the radiation resistance Rrad (lossless) and 
loss resistance of the antenna Rloss.
This loss resistance comes from conductor resistance, loss in any ground 
or earth near the antenna, dielectric loss, and so on. Using better materials is 
only one (usually expensive) way of improving the radiation efficiency of an 
antenna. Notice the above equation for efficiency. We can also work to increase 
the radiation resistance, too. Well, anyway, as long as whatever we do does not 
also increase the loss resistance.
The Rrad of a one-half wavelength dipole in free space is 73. This is typi-
cally much larger than the loss resistance, so we can realize very high-efficiency 
antennas with ordinary metal wire.
Figure 7.1 shows an example of a simulation result for a dipole antenna 
that includes evaluation of the radiation efficiency. Keep in mind, not all com-
mercial simulators evaluate radiation efficiency. If this is the case, you can calcu-
late η by the following equation that includes the actual antenna gain, Ga, and 
the directive gain Gd, both in dB. We give an example and explain more about 
this equation in Section 7.1.4.
 
[ ]
(
)/10
%
100 10
a
d
G
G
η
−
=
×
 
7.1.2 
Measuring Radiation Efficiency
As the input power is easily measured, we could calculate efficiency most eas-
ily using the first equation above, if only we could measure the total radiated 
power. Unfortunately, it is virtually impossible to gather and measure all the 
power radiated out into space.
Consequently, the Wheeler cap was invented (http://www.rfcafe.com/
references/articles/Antenna-Efficiency-Wheeler-Cap/Efficiency-Measurement-
Antenna-Wheeler-Cap.htm). Figure 7.2 shows a Wheeler cap developed at 
Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC) and Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale 
de Lausanne (EPFL) by José M. González, Jordi Romeu, Eugenia Cabot, and 
Juan R. Mosig. It is a hollow metallic sphere. When an antenna is small enough 
to be placed inside, radiated power can be measured over a wide range.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       193                 
The Wheeler method, using the Wheeler cap, is one technique to measure 
radiation efficiency. With the antenna inside the Wheeler cap, the real part of 
the input impedance is just Rloss. The metal cap prohibits radiation, so the only 
loss is loss due to the antenna materials.
Figure 7.1 Simulation result for a dipole antenna including calculation of the radiation ef-
ﬁ ciency.
Figure 7.2 The Wheeler cap allows measurement of total radiated power. (From: “Task 4.3 
Final Report” available at http://www.tsc.upc.edu/fractalcoms/).

194 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
To complete the radiation efficiency measurement, we measure the real 
part of the antenna input impedance in free space. Now, the real part is the 
radiation resistance plus the loss resistance. In practice, the reflection coefficient 
of the antenna input is measured. The radiation efficiency η is then 
 
2
2
1
1
1
w
f
η
−Γ
= −
−Γ
 
where w is the antenna reflection coefficient measured with the antenna inside 
the Wheeler cap and f is that measured in free space. In this method, electro-
magnetic waves are radiated inside a sealed metal sphere, so this method cannot 
be used at any resonant frequencies of the cavity. If the shielding is imperfect 
in anyway, say, if it radiates electromagnetic waves from a slit, then the value of 
Rloss is inaccurate.
In addition, if the radiation efficiency of our antenna exceeds 80%, the 
value of Rrad  Rloss becomes nearly equal to Rrad  all by itself and measurement er-
ror can become large. Since it is almost impossible to realize over 80% radiation 
efficiency for miniaturized antennas, the Wheeler method seems well suited to 
their measurement.
7.1.3 
A Method for Calculating Efficiency Using EM Simulators
Measuring the Q (quality) of a resonator is a well-known method of measuring 
the loss. An antenna is a resonator, too. In fact, unlike the low loss, narrowband 
resonators in a typical filter, antenna Q is usually fairly low. This actually makes 
it fairly easy to measure antenna loss. When we use EM analysis, we can easily 
compare the Q of an antenna built with lossless materials to that of the same 
antenna built with real, lossy materials. We can figure out the antenna efficiency 
by comparing the two results. Of course, we cannot build an antenna with ideal 
lossless materials, so this method does not work for actual measurements. How-
ever, it works just fine when we use EM simulators.
In Figure 7.3, we see a bent dipole antenna modeled in Sonnet Lite. 
First, by simulating with all lossless metals, we get the reflection coefficient, S11 
( Figure 7.4).
The Q is obtained by first finding the frequency of the minimum reflec-
tion coefficient. At this frequency, the reflection coefficient 0 is 0.045. Com-
pete reflection is a reflection coefficient of 1.0. The average of these two values 
is 0.52. The bandwidth is determined at this frequency, as indicated in Fig-
ure 7.4. This bandwidth represents the sharpness of the resonance. It is related 
closely to the Q of the resonant antenna. It is

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       195                 
 
0
1
f
f
Q
Δ
=
 
where f  is the half-power bandwidth, and f0 is the center frequency. The radia-
tion efficiency is determined by the ratio of Q with loss to the Q of the lossless 
Figure 7.3 Model of a bent dipole antenna. File: bent_dp_lossless.son.
Figure 7.4 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of S11 for a bent dipole antenna with all lossless metals.

196 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
antenna. Referring to the equation above, it is also the ratio of the bandwidth 
without loss to the bandwidth with loss.
Figure 7.5 shows the calculated reflection coefficients for both an alumi-
num dipole and a lossless dipole. Figure 7.6 shows the graph magnified.
Reading out the bandwidths, we have 112.05 and 112.38 MHz. Their 
ratio is the radiation efficiency of the dipole antenna in free space, which is 
pretty good.
 
112.05
100
99.7%
112.38
η =
×
=
 
7.1.4 
Radiation Efficiency of Patch Antennas
Figure 7.7 is the patch antenna model fed by a via port, which we simulated 
in Chapter 4. The dielectric is FR4 with a relative permittivity of 4.9 and loss 
tangent of 0.025, and 1 mm thick. As patch antennas radiate by means of the 
strong electric fields from two edges, we might worry that with only 1-mm 
thickness, the radiation efficiency might not be so good. Let’s check this pos-
sibility quantitatively.
We discuss antenna gain more in the next section, but a quick introduc-
tion will help in understanding what we are doing next. When the transmit-
ting antenna is pointed directly at the receiver, the actual gain determines how 
Figure 7.5 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cients for an aluminum dipole and a lossless dipole.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       197                 
strong the transmitted signal will be at the receiver. There is no need to know 
anything else about the antenna pattern.
Figure 7.6 Magniﬁ ed portion of the graph shown in Figure 7.5.
Figure 7.7 Patch antenna model fed by a via port. File: patch_FR4_viaport.son.

198 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
In contrast, the directive gain requires knowledge of the entire antenna 
pattern. It gives an indication about how directive the antenna is. Remember 
the Beverage antenna in Section 5.1.3? It is a highly directive, narrowbeam, 
antenna. It can strongly reject signals off the side or off the back. But because 
it uses the earth for a ground return, it is a very lossy antenna. Thus, the actual 
gain is very low, but the directive gain is very high. This means that the Bever-
age has a very low efficiency. If an antenna is lossless, the actual gain equals the 
directive gain.
In this example, we determine the radiation efficiency of our patch an-
tenna by determining the actual and the directive gain. This requires a detailed 
evaluation of the far field. Note, however, that the far-field module is not avail-
able in Sonnet Lite. Figure 7.8 is the far-field radiation pattern of this patch 
antenna.
In Figure 7.8, the plot is set up to display the actual gain, see the upper 
left-hand corner. We see Ga  1.7 dB. By selecting Graph->Normalization... 
->Directive Gain(dB), then we can read out the Directive Gain. The directive 
gain is Gd  6.9 dBi. Now we calculate the radiation efficiency as follows. 
Figure 7.8 Far-ﬁ eld radiation pattern of this patch antenna.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       199                 
 
[ ]
(
)/10
(1.7 6.9)/10
%
100 10
100 10
30%
d
d
G
G
η
−
−
=
×
=
×
=
 
This value means that if we feed 1W into the antenna, it radiates only 
0.3W. This is because of resistive loss from current flowing through the metal 
of the patch, and dielectric loss as the high electric field at the patch edges shake 
the electron clouds around atoms of the dielectric back and forth. To improve 
the radiation efficiency, standard practice is to increase the thickness of the sub-
strate. Let’s double it to 2 mm and see what happens (Figure 7.9).
With a dielectric substrate now 2 mm thick, the length of this patch, 
shown in Figure 7.7, should now be made 1 mm shorter (Figure 7.9), so as to 
keep about the same resonant frequency. Figure 7.10 shows the far field radia-
tion pattern of this patch antenna. The efficiency calculated from the actual and 
the directive gain is now 46%. Making the substrate thicker did indeed increase 
the antenna efficiency.
7.2 Antenna Gain
We have already started using antenna gain to determine antenna efficiency. 
Gain is an important concept. Let’s make sure we have a solid understanding.
Figure 7.9 Patch antenna with the dielectric substrate increased to 2 mm thick.
5
15.5
18

200 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
7.2.1 
Definition of Antenna Gain
Maxwell’s equations can be used to precisely calculate that a one-half wave-
length dipole has 2.15 dBi gain. As we have mentioned, what this means is that 
1W into a dipole generates a signal in a distant receiver that is 2.15 dB stronger 
than that same 1W into a theoretical isotropic antenna. This assumes that the 
dipole is oriented (broadside) for maximum received signal.
To more firmly understand gain, we can think of the gain of an opera-
tional amplifier (op-amp). In this case, the total signal power coming out is 
stronger than that which went in. The extra signal power comes from a DC 
power supply being used to enhance the input signal. However, an antenna has 
no extra DC power supply. So how can it have gain? Even though a dipole has 
2.15 dBi of gain, it does not output 1.64W of electromagnetic waves when we 
feed it with just one watt. Rather, an antenna with gain outputs more power in 
one direction and less power in another. If we look at the total power radiated 
in all directions, no extra power is created.
To further illustrate that dBi is the gain with respect to an ideal isotropic 
antenna, which radiates power equally well in all directions, see Figure 7.11. 
Figure 7.10 Radiation pattern of patch antenna on a 2-mm substrate at 4 GHz. Radiation ef-
ﬁ ciency is 46%.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       201                 
When Pd is the radiated power of a half wave dipole, and Pi is the radiated 
power of an isotropic antenna, the gain is the ratio of Pd to Pi in dB. When the 
gain is relative to an isotropic antenna, as it is here, then we use the units of dBi. 
Notice that the gain depends on direction. When the direction is not specified, 
then it is usually the direction of maximum radiation. Just keep in mind that 
this is not always the case.
The radiation pattern of a three-element Yagi antenna (Figure 7.12) has 
a higher maximum gain than a dipole. As compared to a dipole antenna, it has 
maximum radiation in one direction (this is called the forward direction). In a 
plot like this, the gain might not be scaled with respect to an isotropic antenna. 
It could instead be scaled with respect to the maximum gain of a dipole an-
tenna. To indicate this, we list the units as dBd.
Figure 7.11 Radiation pattern of an isotropic antenna and a dipole antenna.
Pi
Pd
Z
Isotropic
Dipole
Figure 7.12 Radiation pattern of a three element Yagi antenna.

202 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
A dipole has a maximum gain of 2.15 dB relative to an isotropic antenna. 
Thus, if gain is specified in dBi, just subtract 2.15 to get dBd. If gain is listed 
in dBd, just add 2.15 to get dBi. Note that the gain in dBi is always larger. If 
you see an advertisement for the gain of an antenna and it just says dB, then it 
is probably dBi, because dBi is the bigger number.
In Japan, gain is defined as “the ratio of the electric power fed at the input 
of a given antenna to electric power required at the input of a reference antenna 
to generate the same strength of electric field at the same distance in the given 
direction,” according to Japanese Radiation Law regulation 74, Article 2.
In the case of a simulation, the calculated gain is called the directive 
gain (Gd ) when it is the ratio of the electric power density in the specific direc-
tion to the radiated power averaged over all directions. As for a lossless antenna, 
Gd  Ga. When loss is added to an antenna, Ga decreases, but Gd stays about 
the same.
7.2.2 
What Is the Actual Gain?
Figure 7.13 is a simulated result of a one-half wavelength dipole. When the 
surface resistance of the thin rod forming the dipole is 0.05 (read, “ohms 
Figure 7.13 Simulated result of the one-half wavelength dipole.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       203                 
per square”) Prad is 27.8 mW, and Ploss is 0.5 mW at 460 MHz, the radiation ef-
ficiency η is calculated as follows.
 
100  Prad Prad  Ploss  97.9% 
Here, the actual gain is reduced by the less than perfect radiation effi-
ciency that is caused by antenna loss. For this example, a dipole, the directive 
gain Gd is 2.12 dBi:
 
(
)
(
)
10
Actual gain in dB 
 Directive gain in dB
10log
2.12
0.09
2.03 dB
rad
rad
loss
P
P
P
=
+
+
=
−
=
 
The actual gain is the gain we use to calculate the actual signal strength 
at the receiver.
7.2.3 
Measuring the Antenna Gain
When we actually manufacture the antenna and we would like to measure the 
gain, something resembling the method shown in Figure 7.14 is often used. 
For this test setup, a signal generator on the left plays the role of a transmitter 
and the electric field strength meter stands in for the receiver. A high-quality at-
tenuator is important to minimize any mismatch between the antenna and the 
receiver. The attenuator is also used to adjust received signal strength.
The antenna on the right, connected to the field strength meter, is the 
antenna under test. It should be located at least a few wavelengths from the 
transmitter so that the antennas are each in the far field of the other. Higher 
gain antennas must be positioned farther apart.
We must also make sure there are not any extraneous objects in the way. 
For example, Hertz initially measured a wildly incorrect value for the speed 
Figure 7.14 Measuring antenna gain using a signal generator, attenuator, and ﬁ eld-strength 
meter.
Signal 
generator
Transmitting 
dipole
Polystyrene 
box
Antenna under test 
or reference 
antenna
Precision 
attenuator
Field-
strength
meter
Few 
wavelengths 
separation

204 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
of light in one of his early experiments. It turns out that the problem was a 
large cast iron stove located nearby in his laboratory. Effects of objects of any 
kind, including walls, earth, concrete, people, and so forth, can seriously dis-
rupt measurements. Use of an anechoic chamber is expensive, but it does allow 
very high-quality measurements. An anechoic chamber has its walls completely 
covered with RF-absorbing material.
To proceed with a measurement:
1. Connect a half-wave dipole to the receiver and measure the signal 
strength. This dipole is the reference dipole. Our measurements will 
be referenced to this dipole, thus we will generate measurements in 
dBd. Since isotropic antennas exist only on computers; most physical 
measurements are relative to a reference dipole.
2. Set the attenuator so the receiver indicates a comfortable value of sig-
nal. Too little signal and we have increased the noise. Too much signal 
and we risk pushing the receiver into a nonlinear response and our 
measurements will be useless.
3. Take out the reference dipole and connect the antenna under test. 
Measure the received signal strength. Rotate the antenna for maxi-
mum received strength. If the direction seems odd, look for extrane-
ous objects that are confusing the antenna radiation pattern.
4. Adjust the attenuator so that the received signal strength is the same 
as it was for the reference dipole. The change in the attenuator value is 
the value of the actual gain, dBd.
7.2.4 
Does Higher Gain Mean Higher Performance?
The actual gain indicates the strength of the signal that is received. A higher 
actual gain means a larger signal. So, a higher gain is always better, right? Many 
times, the answer is yes. But not always. For example, if both the transmitter 
and receiver are not moving, and we can take the time to point their anten-
nas for best signal strength, then higher gain can certainly help. It not only 
gives our desired receiver a better signal, but other, undesired receivers receive 
a weaker signal. On top of that, we attenuate the signals from other undesired 
transmitters.
In another situation, a large number of PCs might want to communicate 
with a central access point such as a wireless LAN. A wireless LAN antenna 
with a highly directive antenna will have many dead zones where PCs cannot 

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       205                 
connect. In these applications, it is good for the gain to be close to the 0 dBi 
of an isotropic antenna. Fortunately, for this application, most PCs will not be 
above or below the wireless LAN, so the wireless LAN can concentrate its signal 
equally in all horizontal directions, all the while reducing signal upwards and 
downwards. This kind of antenna is referred to as omnidirectional or an omni, 
for short, even though power is mostly radiated only in horizontal directions.
Thus, it is hard to say that the higher the gain, the better the performance. 
We should evaluate and try to achieve directive gain and actual gain depending 
on the application.
To see what a lossy environment can do to an antenna, Figure 7.15 shows 
the gain of the patch antenna with tanδ  0.05, double the amount we used 
for the same model as shown in Figure 7.7. The gain, listed in the upper left, 
is negative, –0.56 dBi. With the lower loss substrate (Figure 7.7), we had posi-
tive 1.7 dBi gain. Thus, typically in the case of small antennas in a complex, 
lossy environment such as a PC, higher gain indeed usually indicates a better 
antenna.
Figure 7.15 Gain of a patch antenna with dielectric loss doubled to tanδ  0.05.

206 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
7.2.5 
How a Reflector Influences Directivity
Figure 7.16 is the result of a dipole antenna for 2.45 GHz that is one-quarter 
wavelength (3.1 cm) in front of a metallic wall. The electric field strength dis-
tribution is represented.
The left wall is made of an ideal conductor (a so-called electric wall). The 
other five surfaces of the solution space are defined to be absorbing boundaries. 
We are viewing a vertical dipole antenna from above. The displayed plane cuts 
the center of the vertical element and displays the electric field distribution. 
The actual EM wave oscillates sinusoidally with time. The plot shows the root 
mean square (RMS) value. We see that the dipole has strong radiation in most 
directions.
Next, Figure 7.17 shows the result of dipole one-half wavelength in front 
of the wall. Comparing with Figure 7.16, it is clear this dipole does not radiate 
any power at all in the direction perpendicular to the wall. That power did not 
disappear, it is now radiating more strongly in several other directions, which 
means we now have some directivity. The change in distance from the wall is 
only one-quarter of a wavelength. What is happening?
The difference between these two field distributions may be understood 
by considering the waves shown in Figure 7.18. The dipole, A, launches two 
waves, one to the right and one to the left. When the distance between A and R 
is λ/4, the leftward launched wave is delayed by 90° on its way to reflection at R. 
Upon reflection, the wave is flipped 180°. Notice that this means that the total 
Figure 7.16 Electric ﬁ eld strength distribution for a dipole antenna one-quarter wavelength 
(3.1 cm) in front of a metallic wall.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       207                 
electric field (summing up both incident and reflected waves) is zero. Zero total 
electric field on a conductor is called a boundary condition. Then, on the way 
back to the dipole, it is delayed another 90°. The grand total is 360°. As far as 
phase is considered, that is just like it is not delayed at all! So, the reflected wave 
is exactly in phase with the wave that the dipole launches to the right. They add 
constructively to give maximum radiation to the right.
When the dipole is λ/2 from the wall, we can use the same line of reason-
ing. Now, the reflected wave is delayed 180°  180°  180°  540° before it gets 
back to the dipole. This is the same as 180°. Now the reflected wave is exactly 
out of phase with the transmitted wave and they cancel. There is no radiation 
to the right.
Figure 7.17 Electric ﬁ eld strength distribution with a dipole antenna in front of a metallic wall 
by a distance of one-half of a wavelength.
Figure 7.18 Fields around a dipole, A, positioned ¼ λ from a reﬂ ecting wall, R.
A
Conducting Wall
Z
R

208 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Access point equipment such as wireless LANs often use dipole antennas. 
If we set up such an antenna near a large, flat metal wall, we should take care 
that the distance is not λ/2 as it is in Figure 7.17. Keep in mind that this can be 
a problem whenever the distance is an integral multiple of a half wavelength, as 
this gives us a similar situation. Fortunately, an object that is farther away must 
also be much larger in order to reflect the same amount of power. When the 
distance becomes large enough, there are plenty of small random factors that 
come into play.
7.2.6 
Standing Waves Between Two Metal Walls
Figure 7.19 shows the electric field for a dipole between two conducting walls. 
The dipole is ¼ λ from the left wall. Another electric wall is located far to the 
right. The waves radiated from the dipole in both directions bounce off of both 
walls, back and forth. It is actually a large echo chamber.
Recall that when we have two waves traveling in opposite directions, we 
have standing waves. We can see these stationary standing waves in many plac-
es. If we position a receiving antenna at one of the standing wave peaks, we 
get a strong signal. If, on the other hand, our receiver is at one of the nulls, we 
receive no signal at all. To counter this problem, you might notice that some 
PCs and some wireless LAN routers have two antennas. If one antenna is in a 
null and receiving no signal, they just switch to the other antenna. This is called 
space diversity.
Figure 7.19 Electric ﬁ eld from a dipole ¼ λ from the conducting wall to the left, and a similar 
conducting wall far to the right.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       209                 
Another problem with multiple signals bouncing around is called mul-
tipath. You might remember this from “ghosting” on the old style televisions. 
In the case of wireless LANs, if the reflected signal is delayed by, say, the time 
required to send one data bit, the receiver is slapped with two different data 
bits at the same time. This problem can be addressed with various coding and 
modulation schemes, but that is outside of our topic.
7.2.7 
Magnetic Current Antennas
The nulls in Figures 7.17 and 7.19 are nulls in the electric field. Since we are 
using an electric field detection type of antenna (a dipole), the received signal 
goes to zero whenever the electric field goes to zero. What would work in this 
situation would be a dipole that uses magnetic current instead of electric cur-
rent. Magnetic current is the flow of the magnetic equivalent of the electron—a 
magnetic monopole. Unfortunately, while magnetic current is allowed in Max-
well’s equations on equal status with electric current, we do not see magnetic 
current anywhere in nature. So much for that idea.
Actually, it turns out that we can make something that uses electric cur-
rent but behaves just as if it were a magnetic dipole. Remember the magnetic 
field detection type of antenna from Chapter 1? Just a small coil of wire, per-
haps wrapped on a ferrite rod to increase the magnetic sensitivity. It makes 
sense. In a standing wave when we have minimum electric field, we have maxi-
mum magnetic field. So if the electric field antenna fails, simply switch to a 
magnetic field antenna.
7.3 Bandwidth of Antennas
Here is a great idea: Let’s get a substrate with a really high dielectric constant (or 
magnetic permeability) and build a really tiny antenna on it. In principle, no 
problem. In practice, a couple things get in the way. One of them is bandwidth.
7.3.1 
 Definition of the Bandwidth
As we have seen in previous chapters, we like the reflection coefficient, S11, seen 
at the feed point of an antenna (port 1 for electromagnetic field simulators) to 
be as small (i.e., large negative dB) as possible. This gives us a good match to the 
transmitter and receiver and allows a strong signal to be formed.
Figure 7.20 shows the reflection coefficient for several half-wave dipoles. 
So, what is the bandwidth? The precise definition is up to the designer. For 
example, we could say that the bandwidth is the frequency range for which 
the reflection coefficient is under –10 dB. Someone else might say –6 dB. The 

210 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
important thing is that everyone who needs to communicate on a given project 
agrees on the same definition.
In this simulation, we compare two antennas, one uses a thinner wire 10 
μm in radius and the other uses a thicker wire 100 μm in radius. Both are 60 
mm long. We notice that the antenna with thicker wire has wider bandwidth. 
This should sound familiar. The broadband bow tie antenna of Section 5.3 can 
be thought of as using thicker wire.
The voltage standing wave ratio is the ratio of the peak standing wave 
voltage on a transmission line to the minimum standing wave voltage. If the 
line is perfectly matched, then the magnitude of the reflection coefficient is zero 
and the VSWR is 1. This means the voltage on the transmission line is the same 
everywhere. There is no standing wave.
If the transmission line is terminated in an open or short circuit, every-
thing is reflected, the magnitude of the reflection coefficient is 1, and the VSWR 
is infinite. This is because the minimum transmission line voltage is zero, and 
we must divide by zero to calculate VSWR. This means the VSWR is infinity.
In general, the VSWR is given by the formula shown below.
 
11
11
(1
)/(1
)
VSWR
S
S
=
+
−
 
Figure 7.20 Bandwidth is the frequency range over which the reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient is under 
–10 dB … or maybe –6 dB. It is our choice.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       211                 
Figure 7.21 indicates where the VSWR is 2, or as is also commonly writ-
ten, 2:1, and stated as two to one. This level corresponds to a reflection coef-
ficient of about –10 dB. This is a frequently used definition of bandwidth.
Resonant antennas like the dipole have narrow bandwidth and thus rela-
tively high Q. The relationship between the bandwidth, B, and Q is given below.
 
0 /
B
f
Q
=
 
The bandwidth, B, divided by f0, is called the fractional bandwidth, is just 
one over Q.
7.3.2 
Design of a Wideband Dipole Antenna
Figure 7.22 shows a dipole 240 mm long that we simulated in Chapter 4. It 
resonates at around 600 MHz (Figure 7.23).
Figure 7.21 VSWR = 2 corresponds to return loss of 10 dB.
Figure 7.22 Dipole antenna element, 240 mm long, resonates at around 600 MHz.
2
240

212 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Japanese digital terrestrial television channels are allocated between 470 
and 700 MHz. If you use this antenna for receiving digital terrestrial television, 
is works well at the center frequency; however it has a poor return loss (high 
VSWR) at the band edges, so we need a wider bandwidth antenna.
The typical TV coaxial cable has a characteristic impedance of 75, so we 
need to evaluate the reflection coefficient normalized to 75. As the R of the 
input impedance of a one-half λ dipole antenna is almost 75, it is suitable for 
a 75 coaxial cable.
Just to see what will happen, we will work this problem differently from 
what we did previously. Let’s increase the line width. Figure 7.24 shows the di-
pole element increased to 12 mm wide, with the length unchanged at 240 mm.
As for the ultrawide band antennas, we can back off our bandwidth defi-
nition to a return loss of better than 6 dB (this is a VSWR of 3:1). In this case, 
this antenna almost achieves the required bandwidth (Figure 2.25).
Maybe wider is better. However, it might be nice to reduce the amount of 
metal. So, we can make the dipole into a kind of net. We put more conductor 
Figure 7.23 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the dipole antenna normalized to 75.
Figure 7.24 Dipole line width increased to 12 mm. 
12
240

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       213                 
where there is more current, which is always near the edge of planar lines (Fig-
ure 7.26).
The reflection coefficient of the antenna (Figure 7.27) now shows an even 
wider bandwidth.
7.3.3 
A Wideband Patch Antenna
We have learned about the patch antenna in Chapter 4. The bandwidth of an 
antenna is determined by the structure, dimensions, materials, and any adjust-
able parameters such as the thickness and the dielectric constant of the substrate. 
For example, by simulating various thicknesses, we can see that the bandwidth 
changes slightly. However, we can only make a substrate just so thick before we 
try to find easier ways to expand the bandwidth.
A triple-patch antenna (Figure 7.28) included in the Sonnet examples 
(Help->Examples->Antennas, File: tripat.son) and developed by Matra Defense, 
Figure 7.25 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient when the dipole line width is increased to 12 mm.
Figure 7.26 A netted structure gives us the broadband effect of a wide-width dipole without 
using a lot of metal.
10
4
4
112
26

214 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Antennas & Stealthiness Dept. in France, is one way to make a broadband 
antenna.
The dimensions of each patch are 36  28 mm, 41.9  28 mm, and 39.9 
 28 mm from the left, the relative permittivity of the substrate is 2.94, and it 
is 3.04 mm thick. Figure 7.29 is the VSWR of this antenna, the thin line shows 
the result of Sonnet, and the thick line is the result of measurement. The dif-
ference between the measured and calculated resonant frequencies is about 1%. 
This is typically considered very good agreement for this type of problem.
Figure 7.27 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the wide line width, netted dipole (triangles) compared 
to the 12-mm-wide line width dipole (rectangles).
Figure 7.28 Triple-patch antenna developed by Matra Defense, Antennas & Stealthiness 
Dept. in France, included in Sonnet examples (File: tripat.son).

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       215                 
As this antenna gives a fairly high VSWR, this specific design might be 
best used for three different bands. However, with careful tuning of the indi-
vidual patch resonant frequencies, it should be possible to obtain a good broad 
band response.
7.3.4 
Wideband Double Patch
The triple-patch antenna connects all three patches with feed lines. All three 
patches being next to each other makes the complete antenna longer and re-
quires more space to mount. So, we will try a double-patch antenna, with one 
patch above the other.
Figure 7.30 shows a model using this idea; both patches are 15.5 ×18 mm 
each, and the upper one is not fed directly. The thickness of dielectrics are 2 
mm each, with a relative permittivity of 4.9, and tanδ is set to 0.025.
We want to tune the location of the port for best return loss. Therefore we 
need to set the location of the port as a parameter (Figure 7.31). First, click on 
Add Points button (shown in the figure) in the upper right corner of the Tool-
Box. Then click on the edge of the patch to add a point that will become the 
anchor point for our parameter (indicated by the white square in the figure).
Next, select Tools->Add Dimension Parameter->Anchored, and click on 
the point we just added, and press Enter. Then, follow the next instructions. 
We assume you have already added parameters to previous Sonnet projects. If 
not, you might want to review the previous chapters where we did so, or check 
Figure 7.29 VSWR of the triple-patch antenna.

216 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
the Sonnet documentation under Help. Note that we are adding an “Anchored” 
parameter, rather than the “Symmetric” parameter that we did earlier.
Figure 7.31 Parameter used to adjust the port position. File: patch_FR4_agport_2mm_2.son.
Figure 7.30 Both patches are 15.5  18 mm each, and the upper one is not fed directly.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       217                 
1. Click on the top right corner of the two-cell rectangle to which the 
autogrounded port is attached to display small white squares.
2. Drag to select the area including all four corners of the two-cell rect-
angle used for the port.
3. The four corners are now displayed as small black squares. Press Enter 
and then input a name for the parameter on the displayed dialog box.
4. Check to make sure you have speciﬁ ed the parameter correctly by 
double-clicking on the parameter name and typing in a new value for 
the parameter.
To set up our analysis, select Analysis->Setup and chose Parameter Sweep 
under Analysis Control and press the Add button. The dialog box shown in Fig-
ure 7.32 is displayed. Then check the Length parameter check box and specify a 
sweep from 1 to 5 with a step of 2 mm. Then select Project->Analyze.
As we have done for the other parameterization examples, double-click on 
DB[S11] in the plot, check Graph All Iterations in the bottom left of Parameter 
Combinations, and click OK. All reflection coefficient curves for all values of 
the parameter are now displayed (Figure 7.33).
Two frequencies where the reflection coefficient is small are found, with a 
somewhat higher reflection in between. In these results, the case of length  1.0 
mm (highlighted) seems like a good wideband compromise.
Figure 7.32 Set 3 GHz for Start and 5 GHz for Stop by Adaptive Sweep (ABS).

218 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Two resonating objects (in this case, two patches), which are close enough 
to strongly couple and whose resonant frequencies are very close (or even iden-
tical) to each other, tend to show two resonances that have been pulled to lower 
and higher frequencies. This gives the characteristic W-shaped graph we see 
here.
This “bimodal characteristic” can be adjusted by changing the distance 
(i.e., coupling) between the resonators. This tuning can be very sensitive in 
some cases. Electromagnetic simulators are especially useful for optimizing the 
distance and any other dimensions. If we were to tune by repeatedly prototyp-
ing the antenna, the job can become most time- and budget-consuming.
7.3.5 
Parallel Configuration of Patch Antennas
Is it possible to get wider bandwidth by placing two patches side-by-side on the 
same plane? In this case, we cannot use the Symmetry feature of Sonnet, so we 
model a pair of rectangular patches without symmetry turned on (Figure 7.34). 
The second patch, the one without a feed, is shorter.
The port location is fixed at 4 mm from the edge of the patch, and the 
length of the patch without a feed is set to be a parameter. Symmetrical change 
of the patch length is set by selecting Tools->Add Dimension Parameters->Add 
Symmetric, just like the dipole antenna in Chapter 3.
Figure 7.33 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient for all values of the parameter.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       219                 
The reflection coefficient (Figure 7.35) is shown for all analyzed values of 
the parameter. The highlighted curve is for a separation of 17 mm and is a nice 
compromise for wideband operation. Notice that we have the same character-
istic W curve. The surface current distribution for this case is shown in Figure 
7.36.
Animations of current distributions of multipatch antennas can be quite 
beautiful. Select Project->View Current. Then select Animation->Settings and 
check the Time radio button (Figure 7.37). Click OK, and next select Ani-
mation->Animate View to see the time animation. Use the VCR controls that 
appear. We see how the current at 4.06 GHz changes as we progress through an 
RF sine wave excitation applied to port 1. Note when the current on the lower 
patch flows most strongly.
At some frequencies, both patches radiate power. However, the radiated 
power might not be in phase, so the radiation pattern and radiation efficiency 
should be carefully checked. Figure 7.38 shows the far field radiation pattern at 
4.06 GHz. Because both patches are radiating, the radiation pattern is slightly 
Figure 7.34 Dual, side-by-side rectangular patches; the length of the lower patch is set to be 
the parameter. File: patch_FR4_agport_2mm_para.son.
17
10.5
8
4
Length=16

220 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 7.35 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient for all analyzed values of the parameter.
Figure 7.36 Surface current distribution on the patch for length = 17 mm at 4.06 GHz.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       221                 
skewed. The directive gain is 6.6 dBi at 4 GHz; however the actual gain is 
–0.45d Bi, so the radiation efficiency dropped to 20%.
Figure 7.37 Current distribution animation settings.
Figure 7.38 Far ﬁ eld radiation pattern is slightly skewed. Directive gain is 6.6 dBi at 4.06 GHz, 
and the actual gain is –0.45 dBi.

222 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
This patch antenna has a dielectric thickness of only 2 mm. A tanδ of 
0.025 means the loss is a bit high. One way to improve the radiation efficiency 
is to reduce the dielectric loss. Also, the substrate thickness should be kept as 
large as possible, as it is difficult to radiate from thin substrates.
Therefore, we must get our patch antenna as far as possible from its 
ground. Given that the patch antenna is fed by a via, we must be careful when 
the substrate thickness approaches a one-quarter wavelength. Our via feed 
might start to behave like a monopole antenna and its radiation pattern will 
start to interfere with our patch radiation pattern. In addition, substrate thick-
ness affects wavelength shortening.
Instead of thin dielectric substrates, a patch can be formed from a self-
supporting metal plate mounted on a wall or conducting surface with spacers. 
Now there exists only low-loss air between the patch and its ground, so there 
is no dielectric loss and radiation efficiency is improved. Keep in mind that 
we still have the resistive loss in the conducting plate that reduces radiation 
efficiency.
7.3.6 
Wideband Short-Circuit Patch Antenna
It would be really nice to miniaturize a single-patch patch antenna and to make 
it wideband at the same time. Figure 7.39 shows one such possible antenna with 
two vias on both sides shorted to ground.
For the fundamental (one-half wavelength) mode, the center line along 
the width of a rectangular patch has zero electric field between the patch and 
ground. So, it should not affect anything to place vias anywhere along this line. 
Figure 7.39 Model with two vias on both sides to be shorted to ground. File: patch_FR4_
agport_2mm_short.son.
10.5
16

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       223                 
Figure 7.40 shows the reflection coefficient, and it is found to be matched to 
50 at 4 GHz.
The surface current distribution on the patch is observed to be the ex-
pected one-half sine wave along the edge, even with the shorts in place (Figure 
7.41). However, if a shorting via moves from the center line, it causes a change 
in the current distribution. The affected half-wavelength current distribution 
loses its sine wave symmetry.
To use this idea, we can modify the effective length of current flowing 
along either edge in order to achieve our design goals. Figure 7.42 the param-
eterized model in Sonnet that allows moving the upper via along the edge by 
means of a parameter. Select Tools->Add Dimension Parameter->Anchored to 
define the length from the edge of the patch to the via. Draw a one-cell square 
rectangle just outside the top left corner (Figure 7.42) to which we can anchor 
the anchored parameter. When we analyze, we will get a warning message about 
polygons outside of the box. Just ignore that message. Use a similar rectangle on 
the ground as a base for the via.
Figure 7.43 is the reflection coefficient for all values of the parameter. Just 
as we found for the two double-patch antennas, the reflection coefficient has 
the characteristic W shape.
The input impedance is well matched to 50 and the resonant frequency 
shifted slightly higher. In Figure 7.42, the shorting position is at length = 4 mm, 
and the now asymmetric surface current distribution on the patch is shown in 
Figure 7.44.
Figure 7.40 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of a shorted patch antenna, matched to 50 at 4 GHz.

224 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 7.41 Surface current distribution on the shorted patch.
Figure 7.42 Changing the position of one via along the edge by using a parameter. File: 
patch_FR4_agport_2mm_short.son.

 
Determination of Antenna Characteristics by Using EM Simulators 
       225                 
Figure 7.43 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient for all values of the parameter.
Figure 7.44 Surface current distribution on the shorted patch.

226 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
7.4 Interrelation of Three Parameters
In all of engineering, it seems that if we push in on one aspect of a problem, 
some other aspect pops out. The same is true with antenna design.
7.4.1 
Small Antennas and Three Parameters
In the world of small antennas, an empirical rule-of thumb is as follows.
 
Gain  BandwidthVolume  Constant 
For example, if we want higher gain, no problem. But we will likely need 
extra volume or less bandwidth. A similar empirical rule-of-thumb is as follows.
 
Antenna VolumeGain  Efﬁ ciency  Bandwidth Constant 
For example, if we want higher efficiency, we will likely need larger 
volume.
By these rules, when we start with a reasonable antenna design, we can 
see that it might be difficult to improve all of the parameters, or even to im-
prove one of the parameters without compromising on another parameter. So 
we should set priorities depending on the application, and decide just how 
important each parameter really is to the overall success of a project.

227
8 
Practical Antennas
8.1 Ultrawideband Antennas
We have explored lots of different areas in antenna design (and if you are inter-
ested, there is a lot more to explore, enough for a lifetime or two!). Let’s see how 
we can put some of this knowledge to work.
8.1.1 
What Is a Pulse Excitation?
An electrical pulse is an electric current and voltage of short duration. For ex-
ample, radio transmission of wireless USB uses ultrawide band (UWB) tech-
nology, a method that excites a pulse wave directly on the transmit antenna. 
A pulse of very short duration can be viewed as being a sum of sine waves of 
various frequencies and phases from low to high frequency, just like the spark 
discharge that Hertz used in his experiments.
Because short pulses can cover a very wide bandwidth, a UWB signal 
generates electromagnetic waves from 3 to 10 GHz. Imagine placing a sensitive 
narrowband receiver close to a transmitting UWB antenna. Turn it on and we 
hear that the UWB signal sounds like noise. Tune the receiver from 3 to 10 
GHz and note how the average signal strength changes. A plot of the signal 
strength across the entire bandwidth of the UWB signal is called the spectrum 
of the signal.
The narrower the pulse width is, the wider the spectrum. The especially 
narrow pulse shown in Figure 8.1(e) has an extremely short interval between 
rising and falling edges. This means the spectrum is very wide. If we mathemat-
ically take the width to zero, but increase the voltage so that the total power is 
the same, we have the delta function that the physicist Dirac invented. This 

228 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
function has the ultimate wideband spectrum, because it is a continuous, flat 
spectrum of constant amplitude at all frequencies. This is so extreme, however, 
that it can never be realized. For practical purposes, a narrow UWB pulse can 
be imagined having the spectrum of a Dirac delta function over a large band. 
Actual signals are not of infinite height and zero width like a delta function, so 
a real spectrum always tapers off at some point.
A Gaussian monocycle (Figure 8.2) is one common USB pulse waveform. 
Figure 8.3 shows the spectrum of pulses with two different pulse widths. The 
spectrum spreads out to higher frequencies when the width of the monocycle is 
cut in half from 600 to 300 ps. However, it is not a flat spectrum like the Dirac 
delta function.
Figure 8.1 (a–e) Pulse waveforms.
(a) Rectangular
(b) Trapezoidal
(c) Pulse Train
(d) Triangular
(e) Impulse
t
t
t
t
t
Figure 8.2 Pulse signal waves utilized in UWB.

 
Practical Antennas 
       229                 
Digressing for just a moment, a picosecond (ps) is 1×10-12 seconds. To 
give a physical idea of how small a picosecond is, imagine taking a signal that is 
1 second long and stretching it out between New York City and Los Angles. A 
300-ps pulse is then 1.2 mm long.
Returning to our pulse, the center frequency is obtained from the pulse 
width, τ, by following expression, which we calculate for a 600-ps pulse.
 
f = 1/τ = 1/600 × 10−12 = 1.7 GHz 
8.1.2 
Log-Periodic Antennas
We start this section with a description of the log-periodic antenna because it is 
so well known and is easily designed. However, keep in mind that this antenna 
can also be quite large. In fact, if it is large enough that the pulse being transmit-
ted takes more than a small fraction of a pulse width to travel the length of the 
antenna, then the antenna is not suitable for such a pulse transmission.
Figure 8.4 shows the structure of a log-periodic antenna. It has differ-
ent length dipoles whose spacings and lengths are determined by means of the 
logarithmic function. Each element length and element spacing are set by the 
following expression.
 
Ln+1/Ln = Sn+1/Sn = k 
Here, Ln is the length of the nth element, Sn is the spacing between nth 
and (n  1)th element and k is a scaling constant selected by the designer. The 
longest element is set to be one-half wavelength long at the lowest frequency 
and the shortest element is set to be one-half wavelength long at the highest 
Figure 8.3 The spectrum of pulses of two different widths.
0
2
4
6
8
600 ps Pulse
Frequency (GHz)
300 ps Pulse
Power (W/Hz)

230 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
frequency. There are published design curves for selecting k, and the apex angle, 
α, according to the desired gain and bandwidth. The apex angle is the angle 
between the two lines formed by the ends of the dipoles as they taper down to 
shorter lengths.
8.1.3 
Design Example of a Log-Periodic Antenna
Here we provide a brief summary of a log-periodic design. Nearly all antenna 
text books already have good descriptions of this straightforward process. In 
addition, there are many free software tools available that automate the process. 
In this illustration, we wish to show typical numbers that can result from the 
process, so we describe a log-periodic dipole antenna design for UWB, which 
covers 3 to 10 GHz. 
Given a desired gain of around 6.5 dBi, we look up the design curves 
(available in any of the popular antenna design books) and select the apex angle, 
α, to be 20° and k to be 1.27. We will include some design error margin and 
target a frequency ratio (bandwidth) of 4:1. The equation for taking a good 
guess at the number of required elements is next.
 
n = ln(F )/ln(k) = ln(4)/ln(1.27) = 1.386/0.239 = 5.8 
Figure 8.4 A log-periodic antenna model in the free MMANA software for 14–28 MHz.

 
Practical Antennas 
       231                 
Just to be safe, we round up and add two more. Our example uses nine el-
ements. We design the first element to resonate at 15 GHz (λ = 20 mm). Thus, 
L1 = 10 mm and the other elements are determined as follows: 
L 2 = 10.0 × 1.27 = 12.7 mm (15 GHz)
L 3 = 12.7 × 1.27 = 16.1 mm
L 4 = 16.1× 1.27 = 20.5 mm
L 5 = 20.5× 1.27 = 26.0 mm
L 6 = 26.0× 1.27 = 33.0 mm
L 7 = 33.0× 1.27 = 42.0 mm
L 8 = 42.0× 1.27 = 53.3 mm
L9 = 53.3× 1.27 = 67.7 mm (2.2 GHz)
Thus, a log-periodic antenna in free space is assumed and its maximum 
element length is as long as approximately 70 mm. In a similar manner, the 
initial spacing is read from the design curves to be 0.14 λ, or 2.8 mm, and the 
other spacings are determined in the same manner as we determined the ele-
ment lengths above.
When building the array, connect all the dipoles in parallel, one after an-
other. Connect the feed line to the shortest element. Then cross the feed lines 
over to connect the first element to the second. Why is this? That is so there 
won’t be a parallel resonant mode in between the resonant frequencies of the 
first and second dipole, just like the quasi-log-periodic broadband dipole in 
Section 6.2.4. As you consider a log-periodic antenna for your application, keep 
in mind that at any given frequency, only a small portion of the total number 
of dipoles are actually radiating power. Only dipoles that are near resonance are 
radiating.
The above design is for a log-periodic antenna in free space. To design a 
practical UWB antenna, we must additionally take into account things like a 
housing or case. If we are building it on a substrate, the dipole elements must be 
planar and include the wavelength shortening effect of the substrate.
8.1.4 
Self-Complementary Antennas
A log-periodic dipole antenna on a substrate that might be better for a given ap-
plication is the self-complementary structure discovered by honorary professor 
Yasuto Mushiake at Tohoku University (Figure 8.5).
Notice that the pattern of conductor in the upper half is the same as the 
pattern of slots in lower half. This is what is meant by self-complimentary. The 
feed point is located at the left end, and the size of the ground (bottom plate) 
of substrate is 90 × 40 mm.

232 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
For the purposes of simple illustration, the dimensions are taken from the 
design example above. There is no dielectric substrate so the size in free space is 
determined without the wavelength-shortening effect.
Figure 8.6 is a plot of the reflection coefficient of this antenna. It has a 
good low reflection response in the range of 3 to 10 GHz, with a little room for 
improvement at around 9 GHz. As the plot ripples along, you can imagine the 
resonating region moving within the antenna as we increase frequency.
The log-periodic dipole antenna covers a very wide band and is also used 
for receiving noise for EMC, electromagnetic compatibility, and testing. EMC 
testing involves listening for noise from electrical equipment as well as check-
ing equipment for problems caused by electromagnetic radiation from other 
equipment.
Keep in mind that the log-periodic can have strong directivity, like the 
Yagi antenna. It is not suited for communication with a number of devices scat-
tered in unknown locations, as is typical in wireless USB applications.
Figures 8.7 and 8.8 show the radiation patterns at 3 and 6 GHz. Directiv-
ity patterns differ slightly according to the frequencies but both patterns show 
strong directivity.
Figure 8.5 A self-complementary log-periodic dipole antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       233                 
Figure 8.6 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the log-periodic dipole antenna shows low reﬂ ection 
from 3 to 10 GHz.
Figure 8.7 Log-periodic radiation pattern at 3 GHz.

234 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The surface current distributions at 3 and 6 GHz are shown in Figures 
8.9 and 8.10. We can see which elements are contributing to radiation at each 
frequency.
Considering the antenna operation for the entire band of a UWB sys-
tem, the electromagnetic wave at 10 GHz is radiated from the short end of 
the antenna almost instantaneously when it arrives via the feed line. However, 
the electromagnetic wave at 3 GHz is radiated from the longer elements in the 
back. The signal from the feed line must travel all the way down the length of 
the antenna, then the radiated wave must travel all the way back to the front of 
the antenna. If the antenna size becomes large compared to the data signal pulse 
length, the shape of the transmitted pulse might be deformed.
8.1.5 
Unbalanced Half-Trapezoid Dipole Antenna
A dipole antenna is a resonant antenna that uses standing waves, so without 
special consideration it is usable only for narrowband applications. Among 
nonresonant-type antennas, there are traveling wave antennas such as the three 
dimensional biconical antenna we saw in Chapter 5, and the bow tie antenna is 
a planar two-dimensional version.
Figure 8.8 Log-periodic radiation pattern at 6 GHz.

 
Practical Antennas 
       235                 
Figure 8.11 is a Sonnet model that shows the surface current distribution 
on a bow tie antenna. In order to radiate a traveling wave smoothly, the antenna 
must be a few wavelengths long. However, this can make it too large for typical 
Figure 8.9 Log-periodic surface current distribution at 3 GHz.
Figure 8.10 Log-periodic surface current distribution at 6 GHz.

236 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
home wireless appliances. Let’s consider how we can reduce the size of the bow 
tie antenna as much as possible.
At the low frequency limit, the diagonal edges of the bow tie antenna are 
about one-half wavelength (Figure 8.11). At this frequency, the bow tie is simi-
lar to an ordinary one-half wavelength dipole antenna.
In Chapter 5, we used the Box sidewall as a ground for the triangle an-
tenna in Sonnet simulation. However, in practical antennas, we use a finite 
area ground conductor, and when changing the size and shape of the ground 
conductor, the characteristics of a triangle antenna also change.
As we change the size and shape of the ground, if it becomes the same 
as the triangle element we return to the original bow tie antenna. So, why not 
intentionally design the elements asymmetrically? Figure 8.12 is an unbalanced 
half-trapezoid dipole antenna using this idea for wideband performance.
As we discussed at the end of Chapter 7, it is difficult to optimize multiple 
factors, simultaneously minimizing size and maximizing bandwidth. In an at-
tempt to push those limits as far as possible, the built-in UWB antennas shown 
in Figure 8.12 were developed.
Figure 8.12(b) is an improved version of the antenna in Figure 8.12(a). 
Both are characterized in size and shape. The upper element and the lower ele-
ment are different with the intent to realize broadband performance.
When looking at the VSWR plot in Figure 8.13, we see that the half-
trapezoid dipole has improved performance around 9 GHz as compared with 
the trapezoid dipole. Figure 8.14(a) shows the surface current distribution at 
3.2 GHz. We see strong current on both the edge of the semicircle and the edge 
Figure 8.11 Surface current distribution on the bow tie antenna

 
Practical Antennas 
       237                 
of the trapezoid as indicated by the arrows. Figure 8.14(b) at 6.6 GHz shows 
that the trapezoid is the main contributor to radiation. Figure 8.14(c) shows 
that at 10 GHz, the semicircle is most important.
When observing these three typical frequencies, we can see how it is pos-
sible to realize an ultra-broadband antenna with different portions of the an-
tenna contributing to radiation at different frequencies.
For more information on the first antenna, see Horita Atsushi and Iwa-
saki Hisao, “Planar Trapezoid Dipole Antenna with Wideband Characteristics 
for UWB,” IEICE Technical Report, March 2005. For the second antenna, see 
Figure 8.12 (a, b) Built-in UWB antennas; the upper and lower elements are different in size 
and shape.
(a) Unbalanced trapazoid dipole
(b) Unbalanced half trapazoid dipole
24.88
15.0
10.0
15.0
24.88
12.45
12.44
l 2
l 1
l 1
0.5
0.2
35.55
35.55
17.79
17.79
Upper radiator
Upper  radiator
Lower radiator
Lower radiator
Figure 8.13 VSWR plot of the unbalanced half-trapezoid dipole antenna.

238 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Koshiji Fukuro, Eguchi Toshiya, and Sato Koichi, “Investigation of Radiators 
on Small Planar Antennas with Wideband Characteristics for UWB,” Japan 
Institute of Electronics Packaging, November 2005.
(c)
(b)
(a)
0 [dB]
Figure 8.14 Surface current distribution on elements. (a) 3.2 GHz, (b) 6.6 GHz, and (c) 10 GHz.

 
Practical Antennas 
       239                 
8.2 Receiving Antennas for Digital Terrestrial Television
We now turn from broadband antennas to television antennas.
8.2.1 
Dipole Antenna with Mesh Elements
The Japanese digital terrestrial television channels are assigned from 470 to 700 
MHz. The dipole antenna with meshed elements that we designed in Chapter 7 
(Figure 8.15) almost covers this band. If we adopt the idea of a dipole antenna 
with different length elements that we used in Chapter 6, perhaps we can cover 
a wider band still.
Figure 8.16 is a model that the first author improved in simulation based, 
with permission, on a receiving antenna for digital terrestrial television (which 
is covered by a registered Japanese design patent) that Mr. Shigekazu Shibuya, 
an authority on microwave propagation, has produced.
These are both broadband dipole antennas for receiving. Mr. Shibuya’s 
antenna system has a metallic plate reflector in back. The separation between 
the plate and the antenna is optimally one-quarter of a wavelength at the center 
frequency, so it is designed with a metallic bent plate or metallic bent mesh (the 
dipole antenna is the original shape designed by Mr. Shibuya); see Figure 8.17. 
This results in a gain of more than 7.5 dBi at 600 MHz with a front-to-back 
ratio (F/B) of 10 dB.
Figure 8.15 Dipole antenna with meshed elements.
10
4
4
112
26
Figure 8.16 Improved version of a receiving antenna for digital terrestrial television.

240 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 8.18 shows the VSWR of the antenna in Figure 8.16 (circles) and 
the VSWR of a model that has a reflector 140 mm to the rear (triangles). The 
Figure 8.17 Antenna system design by Mr. Shibuya with a metallic plate as a reﬂ ector.
Figure 8.18 VSWR of the element in Figure 8.16 (circles) and the VSWR of a model with a 
reﬂ ector (triangles).

 
Practical Antennas 
       241                 
metallic plate increases the VSWR at lower frequencies. Fortunately, VSWR is 
not as important for receiving antennas as compared to transmitting antennas.
8.2.2 
An Embedded Antenna for Receiving Digital Terrestrial Television
Cellular telephones that receive digital terrestrial television broadcasting used 
dipole and monopole antennas at first. However, having part of the antenna 
extending out of the body is undesirable. Thus, small embedded antennas were 
developed.
The first author, Hiroski Kogure, made a presentation about the pos-
sibilities of small and embedded antennas, such as shown in Figure 8.19, at a 
seminar in 2003 (FPD International 2003), that covered early digital terrestrial 
television broadcasting.
Figure 8.20 shows the dimensions of this antenna, which has a substrate 
2 mm thick with a relative permittivity of 9.8. The monopole antenna is bent 
several times, like an inverted L.
At the lowest digital terrestrial television frequency of 470 MHz, the wave-
length is approximately 64 cm and a full size ¼ λ monopole 16 cm long. Be-
cause it is an element bent at three positions, the electromagnetic coupling with 
the ground conductor becomes strong and the antenna impedance decreases.
Figure 8.21 shows the impedance of this antenna. Looking at some typi-
cal frequencies, 400 MHz: Z = 1.8 − j 37Ω, 493MHz: Z = 3.6  j 0Ω, and 
600 MHz: Z = 29 + j 163. When directly connecting a 50Ω feed line, the 
mismatch reflection is large, so we need to design a matching network. After 
finding it by using a circuit simulator, as in Chapter 4, we can see that we use 
Figure 8.19 Small and embedded antenna for receiving digital terrestrial television.

242 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 8.21 Impedance of the miniaturized digital terrestrial television antenna.
Figure 8.20 Dimensions of the miniaturized digital terrestrial television antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       243                 
one L and one C together for any single frequency. However, this tends to be 
very narrowband. In order to tune the antenna over a broadband, variable in-
ductors and capacitors are needed.
Because an ultramicrovariable inductor is not practical, we have found a 
method that varies capacitors only. An example of this method that was pro-
posed at a seminar in 2003 uses variable capacitive diodes (varicaps) (Figure 
8.22).
Figure 8.23 shows typical values for the variable capacitive diodes for 
three frequencies. The capacitance of each one is controlled by an applied DC 
voltage. It is ideal for matching because it can vary continuously, but the DC 
voltage must be maintained on the varicaps while in use.
Figure 8.22 Matching network using variable capacitive diodes.
L＝12.4 nH
Varicap
diode
Antenna
VC2
VC1
Figure 8.23 Values of VC1 and VC2, at three typical frequencies.

244 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
We could use an energy-saving method to switch various predetermined 
combinations of Ls and Cs for multiple bands in steps, without continuous 
adjustment. In receiving digital terrestrial television, the receiver might be ran-
domly moved and reoriented so a nearly omnidirectional antenna pattern is 
desirable. Figure 8.24 shows the radiation pattern of this antenna. It is close to 
omnindirectional.
8.3 Antennas for Cellular Phones
Now we turn to one of the most important areas for compact antennas, cell 
phones.
8.3.1 
Meander Line Monopole Antenna
The transmit/receive (transceive, or T/R) module for WiMAX introduced in 
Chapter 1 has an antenna at the end of a mass of printed wiring. A meander 
line is also sometimes used for cell phone antennas.
Figure 8.25 is a monopole antenna with a meander line element. It uses 
the Box sidewall of Sonnet as a ground, so it is a grounded monopole antenna. 
In an actual cell phone, a portion of the antenna might extend upwards from 
Figure 8.24 Radiation pattern of the miniaturized digital terrestrial television antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       245                 
the housing. In this case, we need to include a ground plate of some sort to 
represent the body of the cell phone (see the next section). The box size is set to 
1,024 mm for the x-direction and 512 mm for y-direction.
Figure 8.26 is a plot of the reflection coefficient and it indicates 3 dB at 
the resonant frequency of 800 MHz, suggesting that the value of R is not par-
ticularly close to 50. The graph in Figure 8.27 is the input impedance. We 
see that at the resonant frequency, where X is zero, R takes on the small value of 
8.4. If this antenna is fed with 50 coaxial cable, the reflection is large and 
we need a matching circuit.
8.3.2 
Meander Line Monopole Antenna with Ground Conductor
Figure 8.28 is a model with a 40  42 mm ground patch (representing the cell 
phone body) on a substrate. We will see if the monopole antenna still works. 
Figure 8.29 is a plot of the reflection coefficient of this antenna. It suggests that 
the resonance is at around 870 MHz. As the element length in monopole sec-
Figure 8.25 Model of a monopole antenna with a meander line element.

246 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 8.26 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the meandered monopole; the resonant frequency is 
around 800 MHz.
Figure 8.27 Input impedance of the meander line monopole antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       247                 
Figure 8.28 Monopole model with a ground patch on a substrate, roughly estimating what 
might happen in a real cell phone.
2
40
42
32
18
Figure 8.29 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of monopole plus ground patch antenna.

248 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
tion is still the same, why does the resonance now shift to higher a frequency? 
Perhaps if we look at the current on the ground conductor we can see what is 
happening.
Figure 8.30 shows the surface current distribution at the resonant fre-
quency and the strong current flow along the edge of the ground. Note that 
there is little current inside the ground patch. We know that the total amount of 
current flowing into (or out of) the ground patch must equal the total amount 
of current flowing out of (or into) the monopole antenna.
However, as shown in Figure 8.31, the areas of high-charge density are at 
the four corners of the ground patch and it looks just like the charge distribu-
tion on a capacitor plate. When the dimensions of ground patch are close to 
resonant dimensions, as we have here, it is no longer a ground, but rather a 
portion of a dipole antenna. It is just that one-half of the dipole has a wildly 
different shape from the other half. In this case we can see that this shape tends 
to accumulate charges, as shown in Figure 8.31.
Figure 8.32 shows the input impedance, which indicates that the reac-
tance at the desired resonant frequency of 800 MHz (vertical axis to the right) 
is a negative 39. Thus the input impedance is capacitive. Consequently, to 
add 39 of reactance, we make the meander element longer. This brings the 
resonance down to the desired frequency.
Figure 8.30 Surface current distribution for the monopole plus ground patch antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       249                 
Figure 8.31 Charge distribution for the monopole plus ground patch antenna.
Figure 8.32 Input impedance of the monopole plus ground patch antenna.

250 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
8.3.3 
Influence of Surrounding Metal Objects
Wireless portable terminals induce electromagnetic waves and energy directly 
by radiation from antennas. This radiation sometimes interferes with high-fre-
quency circuits or high-speed circuits in its own housing. In Japan, this prob-
lem is called autotoxication. This is important in the field of signal integrity.
In order to prevent this problem, a metallic shield can be strategically 
placed near the small embedded antenna. However, such a metallic chassis itself 
induces electromagnetic energy and it can sometimes compromise antenna per-
formance. To illustrate, we now simulate the effects of some shielding metal in 
the near field by means of a Sonnet box wall.
Figure 8.33 shows the dielectric layer settings for the model of a meander 
monopole antenna that has its own ground as simulated in previous section. The 
height of space under the substrate is changed to 5 mm. We also change the Box 
Bottom to metal to simulate a metallic shield or a chassis close to the antenna.
Figure 8.34 is the reflection coefficient, which indicates that the reso-
nance has now shifted to around 740 MHz, and its reflection is as large as –0.43 
dB. For the impedance, R is now approximately 1.2, which is an extremely 
low value (Figure 8.35).
Sonnet does not display the current on the box bottom so we cannot view 
the current distribution there. However, this antenna is separated by only 5 mm 
and it seems reasonable that the current in the ground flowing around the feed 
point is strong. It is this coupling from the antenna to the ground plane that 
causes the input resistance to be so low.
8.3.4 
Influence of Surrounding Dielectric Objects
In general, a portable wireless terminal is mounted in a plastic case. The prox-
imity of the case to a small embedded antenna means that the resonant frequen-
Figure 8.33 New dielectric layer settings for the meander monopole antenna.

 
Practical Antennas 
       251                 
cy is shifted lower. Figure 8.36 shows a structure that includes an acrylonitrile 
butadiene styrene (ABS) resinous case 1 mm thick next to the substrate. Figure 
8.37 shows the electrical attributes for ABS resin, with a relative permittivity of 
3 and a tanδ of 0.006.
Figure 8.34 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient at 740 MHz is large.
Figure 8.35 Impedance is very low; R = 1.2Ω at 740 MHz.

252 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 8.38 is the reflection coefficient. We see that the resonance ap-
pears to shift from around 740 MHz down to around 700 MHz. The reflection 
coefficient is still around 0.4 dB. This is a large reflection. The impedance is 
shown in Figure 8.39, R is approximately 1.1, still an extremely low value, so 
a matching circuit is needed when feeding with, say, a 50 source. The main 
effect of dielectrics near the antenna is to lower the resonant frequency.
8.3.5 
Design of Matching Circuits
When the antenna input impedance is small, for example, 1, a 50 source 
should not be connected as is. In the meander line monopole antenna, R was 
Figure 8.36 Setting the dielectric layers for an ABS resinous case 1 mm thick next to the 
antenna substrate.
Figure 8.37 Electrical attributes for ABS resin.

 
Practical Antennas 
       253                 
8.4 at the resonant frequency of 800 MHz. Now we design a matching circuit 
and verify its performance using Sonnet Lite. In previous examples, we have 
found a matching network by using software made for that purpose. Micro-
wave engineers can also find matching networks using a graphical aid called the 
Figure 8.38 Reﬂ ection coefﬁ cient of the antenna including the ABS resin case.
Figure 8.39 Input impedance of the antenna including the ABS case; R is 1.1 at 700 MHz.

254 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Smith chart, named after its inventor. Here, we show another method to find a 
matching network (Figure 8.40).
As shown in Figure 8.40(a), for illustration we assume that the real part, 
RS, of the impedance at the resonant frequency of a miniaturized antenna is 
8.4. If the circuit connecting the reactance XS in series as Figure 8.40(b) and 
the circuit connecting the reactance XP in parallel as Figure 8.40(c) are equiva-
lent, we can write the impedance Z of a parallel circuit by separating the real 
part and the imaginary part as shown in Figure 8.40 on the right.
The real part of this expression is equal to the real part RS of Figure 
8.40(b), 8.4, then XP is calculated to be 22.5. Similarly, the imaginary part 
is equal to XS of Figure 8.40(b). Then, by substituting XP = 22.5, XS is calcu-
lated to be 18.7 and the circuit of Figure 8.40(e) has the input impedance of 
50. Finally, we calculate the values L and C in Figure 8.41(e) for the resonant 
frequency of 800 MHz. 
Figure 8.40 (a –e) Procedure to ﬁ nd a matching circuit.
Real part = Rs of b (22.5Ω), then Xp is calculated to be 22.5Ω.
Rs
8.4Ω
Rs
8.4Ω
50Ω
Xs
Rp
Xp
(a)
Antenna
Antenna
−Xp
Rs
Xs 
50Ω
Rp
Xp
−Xp
−22.5Ω
22.5Ω
Z =
 =
+
jRpXp
—
Rp + jXp
RpXp2
—
Rp2 + Xp2
Rp2Xp
j —
Rp2 + Xp2
50Xp2
—
502 + Xp2
502Xp
 —
502 + Xp2
(b)
(c)
50Ω
−22.5Ω
8.4Ω
18.7Ω
(d)
(e)
Imag part = Xs of (b), then using Xp = 22.5Ω, Xs = 18.7Ω.

 
Practical Antennas 
       255                 
 
6
18.7
18.7
3.7 nH
2
2
800 10
L
f
π
π
=
=
=
×
×
 
 
6
1
1
8.8 pF
22.5
2
22.5
2
800 10
C
f
π
π
=
=
=
×
×
×
×
 
Let’s validate this calculation using a Netlist in Sonnet Lite. In the Son-
net Task Bar select Project->New Netlist, or in Sonnet xgeom select File->New 
Netlist. Then select Tools->Add Project Element, and assign the project file of 
the meander monopole antenna already simulated. Then, set Port Assignment 
so port 1 is connected to node 2 and the project file’s ground is connected to 
GND.
Then select Tools->Add Modeled Element, and connect C and L to the 
appropriate nodes. The Port Assignment should end up as shown in Figure 
8.41, with C connected between node 1 and GND, and L connected between 
nodes 1 and 2. The default is to create a 2-port, so, double-click on DEF2P and 
change it to a 1-port with port 1 connected to node 1. Node numbers, 1 and 
2 in this example, are used as points to which we connect components when 
building a circuit as shown in Figure 8.42. Node 0 is the same as GND.
Figure 8.41 Netlist Project in Sonnet Lite.
Figure 8.42 Matching circuit and node numbers.
Antenna
Rs
GND
1
2

256 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Select Analysis->Setup and set Start to 600 MHz and Stop to 1,000 MHz 
in the Adaptive band sweep (ABS), and select Project->Analyze to start a simu-
lation. Looking at the reflection coefficient seen from the matching network, 
the 50 normalized reflection is extremely low, but of course, narrowband, 
around 800 MHz (plot is omitted). Thus we can see that it is possible to con-
nect a 50 coaxial cable directly.
The simple matching networks shown in our examples result from well-
known techniques and are relatively easy to synthesize. However, as we have 
noted, the resulting match tends to be narrow band. One might think that we 
can get wider bandwidth if we were to use more lumped elements and a more 
complicated network. This is true up to a point; however, there is a limit to this 
approach. The limit is expressed formally and mathematically as Fano’s limit. 
In practice, a lumped element broadband matching network for a resonant 
antenna, like the dipole, is not possible.
8.4 Small Antennas for Integrated Circuit Cards
Radio frequency identification (RFID) cards have seen tremendous growth 
over the last decade. Let’s explore some practicalities of these credit-card-sized 
antennas.
8.4.1 
Input Impedance of Integrated Circuits
The input impedance of integrated circuits (ICs) for RFID tags as seen by the 
antenna is not 50, and it typically also includes reactance. Table 8.1 lists IC 
specs from the Web site of Impinj, Inc.
Table 8.1
IC Specs of MOMZA2™ from Impinj, Inc.
Conﬁ guration
Single-Ended
Differential
Shunt
Typical read power sensitivity
11.5 dBM
10.2 dBm
10.5 dBm
Voltage sensitivity
190 mVRMS
320 mVRMS
180 mVRMS
Linearized model of tag and 
mounting capacitance
530 980 fF
1050 680 fF
380 1.87 pF
Recommended 
antenna 
impedance 
at minimum 
sensitivity
866 MHz
(Europe)
58  j166
66 + j254W
24 + j92W 
915 MHz 
(North America)
52  j158
59 + j242W
21 + j88W
956 MHz
(Japan)
48  j153
55 + j233W
20 + j84W

 
Practical Antennas 
       257                 
The impedance at 956 MHz (in the RFID band for Japan) is 48  j153; 
however when connecting a dipole antenna to this chip, we have to design 
the antenna’s input impedance to be 48  j153. As just described, a dipole 
antenna is represented by an equivalent series resonant circuit, which has small 
impedance near resonance.
If you connect this antenna to the IC, the total reactance becomes zero 
and resistance R is matched at 48 for both. This is called conjugate matching 
and this method is typically used for RFID tags at UHF.
There is an entry of 530 980 fF in the IC data shown in the third row 
of the second column headed “Single-ended” of Table 8.1. This is the equiva-
lent parallel resistance and capacitance of the mounted tag before attaching the 
antenna. In UHF tags, there is an “antenna” type that uses magnetic coupling 
just like the microloops we use at 13.56 MHz. Impinj’s button tag is one of 
these. In this case the button tag is represented by an equivalent parallel reso-
nant circuit that resonates with a C of 980 fF. If the product sheet specifies 
only the series input impedance instead, 48 + j153 ohms for example, simply 
perform a series to parallel conversion to get the parallel impedance with the 
expression shown in Figure 8.43.
8.4.2 
Matching Method for IC Including Reactance 
Let’s assume the input impedance obtained after simulating an antenna is 20 
 j225Ω, and the impedance of the IC is, for example, 80  j100. We will 
design a circuit using a circuit simulator (any of many available circuit simula-
tors will do) to find a matching circuit. In Figure 8.44, these impedances are 
converted into values for the R and L circuit elements (when the reactance is 
negative, calculate the value of C). After drawing the circuit in a circuit simu-
lator as in Figure 8.45, the circuit shown in Figure 8.46 is derived by using a 
typically available option to synthesize a matching circuit.
Figure 8.43 Series to parallel conversion equations.
Rs
Xs
Rp
Xp
Rs2
Xs2 
Xp = Xs (1 +　　)
Rp = Rs (1 +　   )
Xs2
Rs2 

258 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
We obtain a matching circuit with a 0.4-pF capacitor in series and a 1.34-
pF capacitor in shunt. In other cases, when the impedance at the resonant fre-
quency is not 50, this method improves the match significantly.
8.4.3 
Changing the Shape of Dipole Elements to Achieve a Match
Next we describe a method for realizing a match by just modifying the shape of 
a dipole antenna for UHF tags. We illustrate the technique for the case when 
the IC impedance is 20–j150.
First, the input resistance is small, 20, so we can use the fact that the 
input R of a dipole decreases when folding the elements. Then we adjust the 
shape and the dimensions of the antenna so that R drops to 20 as determined 
by using an electromagnetic field simulator.
Figure 8.45 Drawing the circuit in a circuit simulator.
IND
ID=L1
L=6.5 nH
PORT
P=1
Z=80 ohm 
LOAD
ID=Z1
Z=20 ohm
IND
ID=L2
L=14.6 nH
Figure 8.44 Impedances are converted into values of R and L of circuit elements.
Zs
ZL
IC
Zs = 80 + j100
Zs = Rs + jXs
L = Xs /(2πf)
Antenna
ZL = 20 + j225
 Design Example for 2.45 GHz
Rs = 80
Xs = 100
Ls = 100/(2π · 2.45 · 109) = 6.5 nH
RL = 20
Xs = 225
LL = 225/(2π · 2.45 · 109) = 14.6 nH

 
Practical Antennas 
       259                 
The reactance X at the IC output is capacitive (negative). This allows us to 
build an inductive antenna (positive reactance). Because L of a dipole antenna 
increases when lengthening the elements, it would be nice to fold the elements 
as we lengthen them.
Figure 8.47 is the antenna designed using this procedure. Figure 8.48 is 
the input impedance and it is close to 20  j150. When the available increase 
in L is insufficient in this method, we can put a loop of wire in the vicinity of 
the IC as shown in Figure 8.49 to increase L.
Figure 8.47 Bent dipole antenna.
Bent element
decreases R
Bent element creates
creates inductance
20 + j150Ω
Figure 8.46 Derived circuit by using the feature to design a matching circuit.
IND
ID=L1
L=6.5 nH
PORT
P=1
Z=80 ohm 
LOAD
ID=Z1
Z=20 ohm
IND
ID=L2
L=14.6 nH
CAP
ID=C2
C=1.34 pF
CAP
ID=C1
C=0.4 pF

260 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Figure 8.48 Input impedance of this antenna.
Figure 8.49 A loop in the vicinity of the IC increases L.

 
Practical Antennas 
       261                 
8.5 The Wireless World Is Expanding
Few areas have seen the growth in revenue and in technology that we have seen 
in all the various forms of wireless over the last decade. Let’s go over where we 
are and where we might go.
8.5.1 
Small Embedded Antennas Have a Bright Future 
In this book, we have learned the fundamentals of antennas using various exam-
ples. As the wireless world blossomed, development of small antennas advanced 
rapidly. When we investigate small antennas, we learn about their performance 
under harsh design constraints, achieving specifications which cannot be real-
ized by conventional and full-sized antennas.
The three semicylindrical objects shown in Figure 8.50 are antennas made 
of ceramics developed by Antenova Ltd. These are fabricated from high di-
electric material to pull in nearby electric fields, and they resonate at a spe-
cific frequency. When placed on top of and in the vicinity of a microstrip line, 
strong electromagnetic fields couple electromagnetic energy into these dielec-
tric antennas.
Figure 8.50 Three semicylindrical antennas made of ceramics.

262 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
The electric field vectors distribute along the curved surface of each an-
tenna, and they are radiate efficiently into the space around the curved surface. 
As there are no conductors inside this antenna, its means of operation is entirely 
different from Hertz’s original dipole antenna. 
Like these antennas, more and more exotic antennas, which are typically 
not in the textbooks, are proliferating. Requirements for miniaturizing anten-
nas that have never before existed inevitably leads to increasing use of electro-
magnetic field simulators for design and development.
In early days of Hertz, Nagaoka, and Marconi, they could experiment on 
any wavelength at will. However, today’s wireless systems come into use at every 
frequency, with modern day frequency allocations nearly full. Despite the fact 
that those wavelengths can cover extremely wide ranges, like 7.5 km (40 kHz) 
for radio controlled clocks, 5 cm (5.8 GHz) for electronic toll collection sys-
tems (ETCs), and so forth, and they must all be palm-sized. This is the wireless 
world’s great constraint. We, as antenna engineers, must accept this challenge.
Figure 8.51 is a microtag design that the first author, Hiroaki Kogure, 
helped improve. He redesigned this tag based on the method in Chapter 6. 
This is a tag for ready-mixed concrete to control the production record. It was 
produced by Sobu Ready-mixed Concrete, Co. The major diameter is 17 mm 
and the minor diameter is 12 mm. It has an embedded microantenna (coil), in 
spite of a 22m wavelength at 13.56 MHz.
As the tags are to be thrown in by the handful when mixing the materi-
als of ready-mixed concrete, they are covered with a special plastic to maintain 
their integrity in high-moisture alkaline environments. They are designed so 
that the production district of the cement, composition of materials, and the 
name of the manufacturer are written into the tag using a reader-writer. In this 
case, once it is written, it is impossible to tamper with the information.
Figure 8.51 Microtags produced by Sobu Ready-mixed Concrete, Co.

 
Practical Antennas 
       263                 
In the systems involved in public infrastructures, reliability is a top prior-
ity. The wireless world extends more and more, and small antennas as typified 
by IC tags are a cutting edge technology that plays a role in the developing field 
of information and communication technology (ICT).
The future of small antennas and the wireless world is bright.


265
Appendix
Sonnet Lite™ Installation
You can install Sonnet Lite from the DVD that accompanies this book, or 
you can go to http://sonnetsoftware.com/products/lite/ and download the lat-
est version.
Before installing Sonnet Lite, please read the License Agreement. An im-
portant term in the license agreement is that Sonnet Lite cannot be used for 
publishing competitive comparisons; doing so violates the License Agreement.
Follow these steps to install Sonnet Lite:
1. To Install Sonnet Lite:
• Download or copy from the DVD the following file to any directory: 
sl1253.exe (50 Mbytes)
2. Download Abobe Acrobat® Reader® if you don’t already have it.
 
You need Adobe Acrobat Reader 7.0.8 or above to read the manuals 
and tutorials. You will need the manuals to get the most out of Son-
net Lite. If you already have Adobe Acrobat Reader installed on your 
machine, you may skip this step. To download Adobe Acrobat Reader, 
go to http://get.adobe.com/reader/.
3. Sonnet Lite can be run by selecting Start->Programs->Sonnet 
12.53->Sonnet. We highly recommend that you go through the tuto-
rials, which can be found by selecting Getting Started from the Help 
menu. A little effort spent in the tutorials will save you time and make 

266 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
you productive with Sonnet Lite in the quickest way possible. There 
are also numerous tutorials and videos on the Sonnet Web site.
4. Register 
Sonnet 
Lite 
by 
selecting 
Start->Programs->Sonnet 
12.53->Register. You may use Sonnet Lite without the requirement to 
register the software, and solve problems that require up to 1 MB of 
RAM to analyze. However, if you register your copy of Sonnet Lite, 
we’ll send you a license that will enable you to solve problems requir-
ing up to 16 MB of RAM to solve. It only takes a few minutes to 
register your software.
If you experience any trouble installing or registering, please check the 
Sonnet Lite Troubleshooting Guide.

267
About the Authors
Hiroaki Kogure received a BSEE from Tokyo University of Science in 1977. In 
1977, he joined Hitachi Engineering Co. Ltd., and was engaged in the develop-
ment of electric power control systems and in the test production of a pioneer 
object oriented precompiler language “objC” in 1985. Since 1992, he has been 
a representative of Kogure Consulting Engineers.
Dr. Kogure completed his doctorate (Dr. Eng.) in 1998 in electromag-
netic field analyses at Tokyo University of Science. He is also a part-time lec-
turer at the Tokyo University of Science since 2004 and Tokyo City University 
(Ex-Musashi Institute of Technology) since 2006.
He primarily works as a registered professional engineer of information 
technologies to support research and development for leading companies in 
Japan. Dr. Kogure has written many technical books in the fields of electromag-
netics, high frequencies, EMC problems, and antennas.
Yoshie Kogure received a B.A. in Chinese literature from Waseda Universi-
ty in 1983. Since 1992, she has been supporting Kogure Consulting Engineers 
as a technical writer and a translator. She has written many technical books in 
collaboration with Dr. Kogure.
James C. Rautio received a BSEE from Cornell in 1978, an MS in Systems 
Engineering from University of Pennsylvania in 1982, and a Ph. D. in electrical 
engineering from Syracuse University in 1986. From 1978 to 1986, he worked 
for General Electric, first at the Valley Forge Space Division, then at the Syra-
cuse Electronics Laboratory. At this time he developed microwave design and 
measurement software, and designed microwave circuits on Alumina and on 
GaAs. From 1986 to 1988, he was a visiting professor at Syracuse University 
and at Cornell. In 1988 he went full time with Sonnet Software, a company 

268 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
he had founded in 1983. In 1995, Sonnet was listed on the Inc. 500 list of the 
fastest growing privately held US companies, the first microwave software com-
pany ever to be so listed. Dr. Rautio was elected a fellow of the IEEE in 2000 
and received the IEEE MTT Microwave Application Award in 2001. He has 
lectured on the life of James Clerk Maxwell over 100 times.

269
13.56-MHz antenna (coil), 169–73
 
illustrated, 170
 
mental thickness, 172
 
port illustration, 171
 
self-inductance, 173
 
SPICE subcircuit model, 172
Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) 
resinous case, 251, 252
 
antenna input impedance, 253
 
antenna reflection coefficient, 253
 
electrical attributes, 252
Actual gain, 202–3
Alternating current (AC), 1
Ampere’s law, 52
Ampere’s right-handed screw rule, 6
Antenna design
 
dipole, 57–58
 
electric field detection type, 57–58
 
with EM simulators, 55–61
Antennas
 
aperture, 44–46
 
bandwidth, 209–25
 
Beverage, 138
 
biconical, 144–46
 
for cellular phones, 244–56
 
ceramic, 261
 
characteristics determination, 191–226
 
created using EM simulators, 56–57
 
defined, 3–4
 
development of, 41–50
 
dipole, 25, 28
 
at edge of substrate, 2–3
 
fundamental forms of, 25–28
 
gain, 199–209
 
grounded, 42–43
 
horn, 46
 
for integrated circuits (ICs), 256–60
 
interrelation of three parameters, 226
 
inverted L, 102–9
 
log-periodic, 229–31
 
loop, 71–79
 
magnetic current, 209
 
meander line monopole, 244–49
 
microloop, 25, 28
 
monopole, 48
 
nonresonating, 139–43
 
patch, 109–27
 
on PCB, 55–56
 
practical, 227–63
 
quad, 71–72
 
radiation efficiency, 191–99
 
in radio-synchronized clock, 5–6
 
for receiving digital terrestrial television, 
239–44
 
rhombic, 138, 139
 
self-complementary, 231–34
 
tapered slot, 139–43
 
television, 4–5
 
transforming parallel plate antennas 
into, 36–37
 
traveling waves, 133–62
 
triangular, 147
 
ultrawideband (UWB), 227–38
 
ungrounded, 43–44
 
wire, 63–95
 
Yagi, 4, 7–9
Index 

270 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Antennas on substrates, 97–132
 
dielectric material effects, 127–31
 
dielectrics and wavelength shortening, 
97–102
 
dipole, 65–66, 97
 
inverted L, 102–9
 
magnetic material effects, 131–32
 
patch, 109–27
Aperture antennas
 
defined, 44
 
evolution of, 45
 
horn, 46
AppCAD, 100–101
Autotoxication, 250
BALUN (Balanced to Unbalanced 
Transducer), 90–92
 
connections using, 90
 
defined, 91
 
transformer, 91–92
Bandwidth, 209–25
 
defined, 209–11
 
frequency range, 210
 
parallel patch antennas and, 218–22
 
parameter interrelationship, 226
 
triangular antennas, 158–59
 
wideband dipole antenna and, 211–13
 
wideband double patch antenna and,  
215–18
 
wideband patch antenna and, 213–15
 
wideband short-circuit patch antennas 
and, 222–25
Bent dipoles
 
electric/magnetic field distributions, 88
 
illustrated, 88
 
input impedance, 89
 
integrated (ICs), 259
 
model, 195
 
parameterized, 174
 
reflection coefficient, 89, 176, 195
Beverage antenna, 138
Biconical antennas
 
defined, 144
 
finite length, 144–46
 
illustrated, 145
Bow tie antennas
 
biconical, 144–46
 
dimensions for zero reactance, 153
 
fundamentals, 143–62
 
illustrated, 147
 
input impedance, 153
 
loop element version, 150
 
miniaturization with triangular anten-
nas, 154–58
 
reduced conductor area, 152
 
reflection coefficient, 148, 152, 155
 
simulation, 147–48
 
skeleton-type, 148–51
 
Sonnet model, 147
 
surface current distribution, 149, 236
 
thinner element frame, 151–54
 
triangular antenna, 147
 
truncation impact of, 146–47
Buddhist cross-shaped RFID tags, 184–85
Cellular phone antennas, 244–56
 
acrylonitrile butadiene styrene (ABS) 
resinous case, 251, 252
 
dielectric object influence on, 250–52
 
matching circuit design, 252–56
 
meander line monopole, 244–45
 
meander line monopole with ground 
connector, 245–49
 
metal object influence on, 250
Characteristic impedance
 
defined, 20, 22
 
parallel lines, 137
 
patch antennas, 124
Charge distribution, meander line monopole 
antennas with ground conductor, 
249
Circuits
 
defined, 1
 
integrated (ICs), 1, 256–60
 
power elements, 2
 
with two parallel lines, 1–2
Circular polarization
 
left-handed, 186–87
 
from patch antennas, 185–87
 
right-handed, 186–87
Coils
 
13.56-MHz, 169–73
 
coupling coefficient, 166–68
 
in free space, 167
 
mutual inductance, 166
 
self-inductance, 164–66
Communication distance
 
prediction, 187–89
 
UHF RFID tags, 188–89

 
Index 
271
Coupling coefficient
 
finding with Sonnet Lite, 168–69
 
reader-writer coil and tag coil, 166–68
Crossed dipole tags, 184–85
Current density distribution
 
half-dipole, 46–47
 
Yagi antenna, 25, 27
Current distribution
 
dipole antennas, 64
 
inverted L antennas, 110
 
patch antennas, 113, 120
 
Yagi antennas, 87
Dielectric field vectors, 262
Dielectric layer thickness, 16
Dielectrics
 
effects of, 127–31
 
loss tangent of, 131
 
MSL effective permittivity, 129–31
 
paral lel plates filled with, 131
 
wavelength shortening effect on, 97
Dipole antennas
 
aluminum, 196–99
 
BALUN connection, 90–92
 
bent, 88–90
 
current distribution, 64
 
defined, 25
 
design procedure, 57–58
 
dual-band, 176
 
electric charges of poles, 178
 
electric field near, 50
 
electric field strength distribution, 206, 
207
 
electric lines of force, 52
 
element length design, 65
 
fundamentals, 63–71
 
half-wavelength, 174–75
 
Hertz, 49
 
illustrated, 28
 
input impedance, 69–71, 88–90
 
magnetic field near, 52–53
 
with mesh elements, 239–41
 
modified crossed, 184
 
monopole equivalent, 50
 
multiband, 176
 
parameterization, 66–69
 
performance realization, 63
 
radiation from, 50–52
 
for receiving digital terrestrial television, 
239–41
 
reflection coefficient, 98, 99
 
standing wave on, 63–64
 
on substrate, 65–66, 97
 
unbalanced half-trapezoid, 234–38
 
V-shaped, 136
 
wideband, 211–13
 
See also Antennas
Direct current (DC), 1
Directive gain, Yagi antenna, 10
Directivity, reflectors and, 206–8
Directors
 
fundamentals, 81–82
 
number of, 81
 
placement, 81
See also Yagi antennas
Edge singularity, 112–13
Effective isotropic radiated power (EIRP), 
189
Effective permittivity, of microstrip lines, 
129–31
Electrical circuits. See Circuits
Electric field detection type antennas, 57–58
Electric field distribution
 
parallel lines, 135
 
patch antennas, 113
Electric fields
 
near Hertz’s dipole, 50, 55
 
strength distribution, 206, 207
 
variance with time, 53
Electromagnetic fields
 
around patch antenna, 111–14
 
distribution in near field, 55
Electromagnetic induction
 
Faraday’s law, 163–64
 
RFID systems based on, 163–73
Electromagnetic simulation, Yagi antennas, 
9–25
Electromagnetic waves, 53–54
Electronic toll collection systems (ETCs), 
262
Element length, dipole antennas, 65
Embedded antennas, for receiving digital 
terrestrial television, 241–44
 
dimensions, 242
 
illustrated, 241
 
impedance, 242
 
matching network with variable capaci-
tor diodes, 243
 
radiation pattern, 244

272 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
EM simulators
 
antenna characteristics with, 191–226
 
antenna design using, 55–61
 
antennas created using, 56–57
Fano’s limit, 109, 256
Faraday, Michael, 163
Faraday’s law of induction, 53, 163–64
Far fields
 
boundary between near fields and, 
29–30
 
defined, 29
Finite length biconical antennas, 144–46
Flare angles
 
defined, 160
 
triangular antennas, 158–59
Gain, antenna, 199–209
 
actual, 202–3
 
defined, 200–202
 
measurement, 203–4
 
parameter interrelationship, 226
 
patch antenna, 205
 
performance and, 204–5
Global positioning systems (GPS), patch 
antennas for, 110–11
Ground
 
artificial, current on, 50
 
role of, 46–50
Ground conductors, 2, 3
Grounded antennas, 42–43
Half-wavelength dipole antennas, 174–75
Hertz
 
1888 experiment representation, 38
 
experiments, 31
 
model illustration, 39
 
receiving equipment, 31–32
 
receiving equipment simulation, 37–40
 
transmitting equipment, 33–36
Hertz, Heinrich, 36, 37
Horn antennas, 46
Impedance
 
characteristic, 20, 22
 
input, Yagi antenna simulation, 20–23
Impedance matching, small inner loop, 79
Information and communication technology 
(ICT), 263
Input impedance
 
ABS resin case and, 253
 
bent dipoles, 89
 
bow tie antennas, 153
 
defined, 21
 
dipole antennas, 69–71, 88–90
 
importance, 88–93
 
integrated circuits (ICs), 256–57, 260
 
meander line monopole antennas, 246
 
meander line monopole antennas with 
ground conductor, 249
 
measurement instruments, 93–95
 
monopole antennas, 105
 
one-turn coil, 61
 
patch antennas, 121
 
quad antennas, 72, 73
 
radio frequency identification (RFID) 
tags, 179
 
small loop antennas, 78
 
thin element triangular antennas, 162
 
triangular antennas, 157
 
wire antennas, 88–93
 
Yagi antenna simulation, 20–23
Installation, Sonnet Lite, 265–66
Integrated circuits (ICs), 1
 
antennas for, 256–60
 
bent dipole antenna, 259
 
dipole elements, changing shape of, 
258–60
 
drawing in circuit simulator, 258
 
input impedance, 256–57, 260
 
matching method for, 257–58
Inventions, 31–41
Inverted L antennas, 102–9
 
bent closer to ground, 107
 
current distribution, 110
 
defined, 103
 
reactance of, 106
 
reflection coefficient, 107
 
schematic, 103
Käferlein, Carl, 74, 75
Kogure, Hiroaki, 262
Leakage flux, 167
Left-handed polarization, 186–87
Leiden jar, 35, 36
License Agreement, Sonnet Lite, 265
Lodge, Oliver, 43–44
Log-periodic antennas, 229–31
 
defined, 229
 
design example, 230–31
 
in free space, 231

 
Index 
273
 
model, 230
 
radiation pattern, 233, 234
 
reflection coefficient, 233
 
surface current distribution, 235
 
See also Antennas
Loop antennas
 
fundamentals, 71–79
 
magnetic, 72–75
 
quad, 71–72
 
small, 75–79
 
See also Antennas
Magnetic current antennas, 209
Magnetic fields
 
near Hertz’s dipole, 52–53
 
variance with time, 53
Magnetic flux, 167
Magnetic loop antennas (MLAs), 72–75
 
defined, 73
 
illustrated, 75
 
Patterson, 74
 
schematic, 74
 
See also Loop antennas
Magnetic materials
 
characteristics of, 132
 
effect of, 131–32
Marconi, Guglielmo, 42–43
Matched load, 92–93
Matching circuits, 93
Maxwell, James Clerk, 36–37, 53
Maxwell’s equations, 53, 54, 56
Meander line monopole antennas, 244–45
 
defined, 244
 
input impedance, 246
 
model, 245
 
reflection coefficient, 246
 
See also Monopole antennas
Meander line monopole antennas with 
ground conductor, 245–49
 
charge distribution, 249
 
defined, 245
 
input impedance, 249
 
model, 247
 
reflection coefficient, 247
 
surface current distribution, 248
Microloop antennas, 25
 
illustrated, 28
 
as magnetic field detection antennas, 28
Microstrip antennas (MSAs). See Patch 
antennas
Microstrip lines (MSL)
 
effective permittivity, 129–31
 
slot line antenna with, 143
 
S-parameters, 103
 
wavelength shortening effect in, 
100–102
Microtags, 262
MMANA (MMANA-GAL), 82–87
 
defined, 82
 
mesh settings, 87
 
starting up, 83
Monopole antennas
 
defined, 48
 
dipole equivalent, 50
 
input impedance, 105
Marconi, 49
 
meander line, 244–49
 
model, 104
 
triangular, 154, 156
 
See also Antennas
Morse, Samuel, 42
Multipath, 209
Mutual inductance, 166
Nagaoka, Hantaro, 40–41
Near fields
 
boundary between far fields and, 29–30
 
defined, 29
 
electric/magnetic energy surge, 54
 
electromagnetic field distribution, 55
 
Hertz’s dipole, 51
 
problem difficulty, 54–55
 
See also Far fields
Nonresonating antennas, 139–43
Oersted’s experiment, 6
One-turn coil simulation, 58–61
Parallel lines
 
characteristic impedance, 137
 
electric field distribution, 135
 
reflection coefficient, 134
 
surface current distribution, 135
 
with termination resistor, 137, 138
 
turning into antennas, 133–35
Parallel patch antennas
 
defined, 218
 
reflection coefficient, 219, 220
 
surface current distribution, 220
Parallel plate capacitors, 36–37

274 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Parameterization
 
anchor point for, 67
 
dipole antennas, 66–69
Patch antennas, 109–27
 
characteristic impedance, 124
 
circular polarization radiation from, 
185–87
 
coordinate system for radiation pattern, 
129
 
current distribution, 113, 120
 
dimensions determination, 114–17
 
edge singularity, 112–13
 
electric field distribution, 113
 
electromagnetic fields around, 111–14
 
far-field radiation pattern, 128, 198
 
fed by via port, 126, 197
 
feed line width, 124
 
feed position inserted into, 120
 
fine adjustment of feed point, 122–24
 
fundamentals, 109–27
 
gain, 205
 
in global positioning systems, 110–11
 
impedance, 116, 117
 
input impedance, 121
 
matched feed point, 122
 
matching method 1, 119–21
 
matching method 2, 124–27
 
as microstrip antennas (MSAs), 111
 
model, 112
 
parallel, 218–22
 
radiation efficiency, 196–99
 
radiation pattern, 198, 200
 
reference plane, 116
 
reflection coefficient, 114
 
reflection coefficient with via port, 128
 
resonant frequency, 118
 
on substrate, 117–19
 
surface current, 112
 
voltage distribution, 113, 120
 
wideband, 213–15
 
wideband double patch, 215–18
 
wideband short-circuit, 222–25
Practical antennas, 227–63
Printed circuit board (PCB), 2
Printed wiring board (PWB), 2
PSPICE format, 169, 170
Pulse excitation, 227–29
Pulse waveforms, 228
Quad antennas
 
current directions, 72
 
input impedance, 72, 73
 
simulation, 71–72
 
See also Antennas
Quality measurement, 194
Radiation
 
of circular polarization from patch 
antennas, 185–87
 
from dipole antenna, 50–52
Radiation efficiency
 
defined, 191–92
 
measurement, 192–94
 
parameter interrelationship, 226
 
patch antennas, 196–99
 
simulation result, 193
 
with Wheeler cap, 192, 193, 194
Radiation patterns
 
far-field, 128, 198
 
isotropic antenna, 201
 
log-periodic antennas, 233, 234
 
miniaturized digital terrestrial television 
antenna, 244
 
patch antennas, 128, 129, 200
 
rhombic antenna, 139
 
self-complementary antennas, 233, 234
 
Yagi antenna, 9, 27, 86, 201
Radiation resistance, 191, 192
Radio frequency identification (RFID) tags
 
antennas for, 163
 
application of, 173
 
broadband techniques, 175–78
 
Buddhist cross-shaped, 184–85
 
center frequencies, 153
 
communication distance, 188–89
 
defined, 25–28
 
electromagnetic induction, 163–73
 
element location, changing, 178–82
 
illustrated, 28
 
input impedance, 179
 
polarization of reader and tag, 182–85
 
reflection coefficient, 179, 180
 
scattered over cardboard box, 183
 
surface current distribution, 180
 
UHF, 151, 173–84
Radio-synchronized clocks
 
antennas for, 5–6
 
coil, 5–6

 
Index 
275
Reactance
 
bow tie antennas, 153
 
inverted L antennas, 106
Receiving digital terrestrial television anten-
nas, 239–44
 
dipole with mesh elements, 239–41
 
embedded, 241–44
 
improved version, 239
Receiving equipment (Hertz), 31–32
 
illustrated, 32
 
simulation, 37–40
Reflection coefficient
 
ABS resin case and, 253
 
bent dipoles, 89, 176, 195
 
bow tie antennas, 148, 152, 155
 
dipole antennas, 98, 99
 
inverted L antennas, 107
 
log-periodic antennas, 233
 
meander line monopole antennas, 246
 
meander line monopole antennas with 
ground conductor, 247
 
parallel lines, 134
 
parallel patch antennas, 219, 220
 
patch antennas, 114
 
radio frequency identification (RFID) 
tags, 179, 180
 
self-complementary antennas, 233
 
tapered slot antennas (TSAs), 141
 
thin element triangular antennas, 162
 
triangle antennas, 150, 151
 
triangular antennas, 157
 
wideband dipole antennas, 212, 213
 
wideband double patch antennas, 218
 
wideband short-circuit patch antennas, 
223, 225
 
Yagi antenna simulation, 23
Reflectors
defined, 4
 
directivity and, 206–8
 
fundamentals, 79–81
Registration, Sonnet Lite, 266
Resonators, quality measurement, 194
RFID tags. See Radio frequency identifica-
tion tags
Rhombic antenna
 
model, 138
 
radiation pattern, 139
Right-handed polarization, 186–87
Self-complementary antennas, 231–34
 
defined, 231
 
illustrated, 232
 
radiation pattern, 233, 234
 
reflection coefficient, 233
 
surface current distribution, 235
 
uses, 232
Self-inductance, 164–66
 
13.56-MHz antenna (coil), 173
 
defined, 165
 
number of turns and, 165
Signal diversity, 208
Simulation
 
bow tie antennas, 147–48
 
circularly polarized patch antennas, 186
 
Hertz receiving equipment, 37–40
 
one-turn coil simulation, 58–61
 
quad antennas, 71–72
 
small loop antennas, 75–77
 
small loop for integrated circuit tag 
antennas, 58–61
 
Yagi antennas, 17–23, 82–87
Skeleton-type bow tie antennas, 148–51
Small loop antennas
 
impedance matching, 79
 
input impedance, 78
 
lumped capacitor, 76
 
matching, 77–79
 
series LC resonance, 78
 
simulation of, 75–77
 
square model, 76
 
See also Loop antennas
Smith charts, 254
S-NAP, 107–8, 158
Sonnet Lite
 
Adaptive Band Sweep (ABS), 17
 
antenna simulation, 23–24
 
availability, 9–10
 
bow tie antenna, 147
 
default metal, 14
 
drawing rectangles, 12, 13
 
electric current, 23
 
element input, 10–13
 
finding coupling coefficient with,  
168–69
 
input impedance, 20–23
 
installation, 265–66
 
Levels, 15–16
 
License Agreement, 265
 
model, 17, 18

276 
Introduction to Antenna Analysis Using EM Simulators 
Sonnet Lite (continued)
 
Netlist Project, 108, 159, 255
 
one-turn coil simulation, 58–61
 
other settings, 13–17
 
process monitor window, 19
 
registration, 266
 
running simulation, 17–20
 
simulation frequencies, 18–20
 
surface current of elements, 24–25
 
Toolbox, 13
 
Troubleshooting Guide, 266
Sonnet Lite mode, 101
S-parameters
 
MSL, 103
 
ports and, 19
 
use of, 19
SPICE equivalent circuit, 165–66
SPICE subcircuit
 
schematic diagram, 173
 
synthesized model, 172
Standing waves, between two metal walls, 
208–9
Surface current distribution, 36, 40
 
bow tie antennas, 149, 236
 
log-periodic antennas, 235
 
meander line monopole antennas with 
ground conductor, 248
 
parallel lines, 135
 
parallel patch antennas, 220
 
patch antennas, 112
 
radio frequency identification (RFID) 
tags, 180
 
self-complementary antennas, 235
 
tapered slot antennas (TSAs), 142
 
unbalanced half-trapezoid dipole anten-
nas, 237
 
wideband short-circuit patch antennas, 
222, 223, 225
Surface mount devices (SMDs), 2
Surface mount technology (SMT), 2
Tapered slot antennas (TSAs), 140–43
 
antenna designs based on, 141
 
defined, 140
 
feeding with MSL, 143
 
feed system, 144
 
illustrated, 140
 
matching, 143
 
reflection coefficient, 141
 
surface current distribution, 142
 
See also Antennas
Television antennas, 4–5
Thin element triangular antennas, 159–62
 
illustrated, 161
 
input impedance, 162
 
reflection coefficient, 162
Tight coupling, 168
Transmission lines
 
parallel, 133–35
 
point of transition, 136
 
turning into antennas, 133–39
Transmitting equipment (Hertz), 33–36
 
illustrated, 33
 
spheres, 35
Traveling wave antennas, 133–62
 
bow tie, 143–62
 
nonresonating, 139–43
 
tapered slot, 139–43
 
transmission lines, 133–39
 
truncation impact of, 146–47
Traveling waves
 
conditions for, 136–39
 
dipole antennas, 63–64
Triangular antennas
 
bandwidth, 158–59
 
for built-in antennas, 158
 
flare angles, 158–59, 160
 
illustrated, 147
 
input impedance, 157
 
loop element version, 151
 
miniaturization with, 154–58
 
monopole, 154, 156
 
reflection coefficient, 150, 157
 
thin element, 159–62
Troubleshooting Guide, Sonnet Lite, 266
Uda, Shin-ichiro, 79
UHF RFID tags, 151, 173–84
Ultrawideband (UWB), 140
Ultrawideband (UWB) antennas, 227–38
 
log-periodic, 229–31
 
pulse excitation, 227–29
 
pulse signal waves utilized in, 228
 
self-complementary, 231–34
 
unbalanced half-trapezoid dipole, 
234–38
Unbalanced half-trapezoid dipole antennas, 
234–38
 
surface current distribution, 237
 
upper/lower elements illustration, 237

 
Index 
277
 
VSWR plot, 237
Ungrounded antennas, 43–44
Vector impedance analyzers, 93
Vector network analyzers (VNAs)
 
calibration techniques, 94–95
 
defined, 93
 
illustrated, 94
 
impedance measurement, 94
Via ports, 126, 127, 197
Voltage distribution, patch antennas, 113, 
120
Voltage standing wave ratio (VSWR), 
210–11
 
unbalanced half-trapezoid dipole anten-
nas, 237
 
wideband patch antenna and, 215
Wavelength shortening
 
effect in MSL, 100–102
 
effect on dielectrics, 97–100
Wheeler cap, 192, 193, 194
Wideband dipole antennas, 211–13
 
reflection coefficient, 212, 213
 
use of, 212
Wideband double patch antennas
 
bimodal characteristic, 218
 
defined, 215
 
port adjustment parameter, 216
 
reflection coefficient, 218
Wideband patch antennas, 213–15
 
defined, 213
 
patch dimensions, 214
 
VSWR, 215
Wideband short-circuit patch antennas
 
defined, 222–23
 
reflection coefficient, 223, 225
 
surface current distribution, 222, 223, 
225
 
via positio n changing, 224
WiMAX systems
 
radio-synchronized clock, 5
 
transmit and receive module, 2, 3
Wire antennas, 63–95
 
dipole, 63–71
 
input impedance, 88–93
 
input impedance measurement, 93–95
 
loop, 71–79
 
Yagi-Uda, 79–87
 
See also Antennas
Yagi antennas, 7–9
 
conceptual side view, 80
 
current distribution, 87
 
defined, 7
 
directive gain, 10
 
directors, 81–82
 
with electromagnetic simulation, 9–25
 
element spacing, 7–8
 
feed line, 80
 
fundamentals, 79–87
 
illustrated, 4, 44, 82
 
radiation pattern, 9, 86, 201
 
reflectors, 79–81
 
simulation of, 82–87
 
two-element, 8
 
wave radiation, 81
 
See also Antennas
Yagi antenna simulation
 
current density distribution, 25, 27
 
electric current, 23
 
frequencies, 18–20
 
input impedance, 20–23
 
model, 17, 18
 
radiation pattern, 27
 
reflection coefficient, 23
 
result, 20
 
S-parameters, 19
 
surface current of elements, 24–25


