
Introduction to
Management Science
Bernard W. Taylor III
Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University
E D I T I O N
11
Boston Columbus Indianapolis New York San Francisco Upper Saddle River
Amsterdam Cape Town Dubai London Madrid Milan Munich Paris Montréal Toronto
Delhi Mexico City São Paulo Sydney Hong Kong Seoul Singapore Taipei Tokyo

Editorial Director: Sally Yagan
Editor in Chief: Donna Battista
Senior Acquisitions Editor: Chuck Synovec
Editorial Project Manager: Mary Kate Murray
Editorial Assistant: Ashlee Bradbury 
Director of Marketing: Maggie Moylan
Executive Marketing Manager: Anne Fahlgren 
Senior Managing Editor: Judy Leale
Production Project Manager: Jane Bonnell
Senior Operations Supervisor: Arnold Vila
Operations Specialist: Cathleen Petersen
Creative Director: Blair Brown
Senior Art Director/Supervisor: Janet Slowik
Art Director: Steve Frim
Cover Design and Interior Design: Mike Fruhbeis
Cover Image: Fotolia/George Bailey 
Associate Media Project Manager: Sarah Peterson
Media Project Manager: John Cassar
Composition/Full-Service Project Management:
PreMediaGlobal
Printer/Binder: Edwards Brothers
Cover Printer: Lehigh-Phoenix Color/Hagerstown
Text Font: 10/12 Times Roman
Credits and acknowledgments borrowed from other sources and reproduced, with permission, in this textbook appear
on the appropriate page within text.
Microsoft® and Windows® are registered trademarks of the Microsoft Corporation in the U.S.A. and other countries.
Screen shots and icons reprinted with permission from the Microsoft Corporation. This book is not sponsored or
endorsed by or affiliated with the Microsoft Corporation.
Copyright © 2013, 2010, 2007, 2004, 2002 by Pearson Education, Inc., publishing as Prentice Hall. All rights
reserved. Manufactured in the United States of America. This publication is protected by Copyright, and permission
should be obtained from the publisher prior to any prohibited reproduction, storage in a retrieval system, or
transmission in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or likewise. To obtain
permission(s) to use material from this work, please submit a written request to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions
Department, One Lake Street, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey 07458, or you may fax your request to 201-236-3290.
Many of the designations by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their products are claimed as trademarks. Where
those designations appear in this book, and the publisher was aware of a trademark claim, the designations have been
printed in initial caps or all caps.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Taylor, Bernard W.
Introduction to management science / Bernard W. Taylor III.—Ed. 11.
p. cm.
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-275191-9
ISBN-10: 0-13-275191-7
1. Management science.
I. Title. 
T56.T38 2011
658.5—dc23
2011031153
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
ISBN-10: 0-13-275191-7
ISBN-13: 978-0-13-275191-9

To Diane, Kathleen, and Lindsey
To the memory of my grandfather,
Bernard W. Taylor, Sr.

This page intentionally left blank 

Brief Contents
Preface
xi
1 Management Science
1
2 Linear Programming:
Model Formulation and
Graphical Solution
30
3 Linear Programming:
Computer Solution and
Sensitivity Analysis
72
4 Linear Programming:
Modeling Examples
111
5 Integer Programming
184
6 Transportation,
Transshipment, and
Assignment Problems
233
7 Network Flow Models
289
8 Project Management
339
9 Multicriteria Decision
Making
407
10 Nonlinear Programming
477
11 Probability and Statistics
502
12 Decision Analysis
537
13 Queuing Analysis
597
14 Simulation
637
15 Forecasting
689
16 Inventory Management
752
Appendix A
Normal and Chi-Square Tables
794
Appendix B
Setting Up and Editing a Spreadsheet
796
Appendix C
The Poisson and Exponential Distributions
800
Solutions to Selected Odd-Numbered Problems
802
Glossary
810
Index
815
The following items can be found on the Companion Web
site that accompanies this text:
Web Site Modules
Module A: The Simplex Solution 
Method
A-1
Module B: Transportation and Assignment Solution
Methods
B-1
Module C: Integer Programming: The Branch and
Bound Method
C-1
Module D: Nonlinear Programming Solution
Techniques
D-1
Module E: Game Theory
E-1
Module F: Markov Analysis
F-1
v

Contents
Preface
xi
1 Management Science
1
The Management Science Approach to Problem
Solving
2
Time Out: for Pioneers in Management
Science
5
Management Science Application:
Room Pricing with Management Science 
at Marriott
6
Model Building: Break-Even Analysis
7
Computer Solution
12
Management Science Application:
The Application of Management Science 
with Spreadsheets
14
Management Science Modeling Techniques
15
Business Usage of Management Science
Techniques
18
Management Science Application:
Management Science in Health Care
19
Management Science Models in Decision Support
Systems
20
Summary
21 • Problems
22 • Case Problems
28
2 Linear Programming:
Model Formulation and
Graphical Solution
30
Model Formulation
31
A Maximization Model Example
31
Time Out: for George B. Dantzig
32
Management Science Application:
Allocating Seat Capacity on Indian Railways
Using Linear Programming
35
Graphical Solutions of Linear Programming
Models
35
Management Science Application:
Improving Customer Service at
Amazon.com
47
A Minimization Model Example
47
Management Science Application:
Determining Optimal Fertilizer Mixes 
at Soquimich (South America)
51
Irregular Types of Linear Programming
Problems
53
Characteristics of Linear Programming
Problems
56
Summary
57 • Example Problem Solution
57 •
Problems
61 • Case Problems
70
3 Linear Programming:
Computer Solution and
Sensitivity Analysis
72
Computer Solution
73
Management Science Application:
Optimizing Production Quantities at GE
Plastics
77
Management Science Application:
Improving Profitability at Norske Skog 
with Linear Programming
79
Sensitivity Analysis
80
Summary
91 • Example Problem Solution
91 •
Problems
94 • Case Problems
108
vi

CONTENTS
vii
4 Linear Programming:
Modeling Examples
111
A Product Mix Example
112
Time Out: for George B. Dantzig
117
A Diet Example
117
An Investment Example
120
Management Science Application: A Linear
Programming Model for Optimal Portfolio
Selection at GE Asset Management
125
A Marketing Example
126
A Transportation Example
130
A Blend Example
133
A Multiperiod Scheduling Example
137
Management Science Application:
Linear Programming Blending Applications 
in the Petroleum Industry
138
Management Science Application:
Employee Scheduling with Management
Science
140
A Data Envelopment Analysis Example
142
Management Science Application:
Evaluating American Red Cross Chapters Using
DEA
144
Summary
146 • Example Problem Solution
147 •
Problems
149 • Case Problems
179
5 Integer Programming
184
Integer Programming Models
185
Management Science Application: Allocating
Operating Room Time at Toronto’s Mount Sinai
Hospital
188
Integer Programming Graphical Solution
188
Computer Solution of Integer Programming
Problems with Excel and QM for Windows
190
Time Out: for Ralph E. Gomory
191
Management Science Application:
College of Business Class Scheduling at 
Ohio University
194
Management Science Application: Forming
Business Case Student Teams at Indiana
University
199
0–1 Integer Programming Modeling 
Examples
199
Management Science Application: Planning
Next-Day Air Shipments at UPS
208
Summary
208 • Example Problem Solution
209 •
Problems
209 • Case Problems
225
6 Transportation,
Transshipment, and
Assignment Problems
233
The Transportation Model
234
Time Out: for Frank L. Hitchcock and Tjalling
C. Koopmans
236
Management Science Application:
Transportation Models at Nu-kote
International
237
Computer Solution of a Transportation
Problem
237
Management Science Application: Matching
Wineries with Distributors
242
The Transshipment Model
243
Management Science Application:
Transporting Mail at the U.S. Postal
Service
246
The Assignment Model
247
Computer Solution of an Assignment Problem
247
Management Science Application: Supplying
Empty Freight Cars at Union Pacific
Railroad
250
Management Science Application: Assigning
Umpire Crews at Professional Tennis
Tournaments
251
Summary
252 • Example Problem Solution
252 •
Problems
253 • Case Problems
281
7 Network Flow 
Models
289
Network Components
290
The Shortest Route Problem
291
The Minimal Spanning Tree Problem
298
Management Science Application:
Determining Optimal Milk Collection Routes 
in Italy
302

viii
CONTENTS
The Maximal Flow Problem
303
Time Out: for E. W. Dijkstra, L. R. Ford, Jr.,
and D. R. Fulkerson
304
Management Science Application:
Distributing Railway Cars to Customers 
at CSX
306
Summary
310 • Example Problem Solution
310 •
Problems
312 • Case Problems
332
8 Project Management
339
The Elements of Project Management
340
Management Science Application:
Managing Projects in China
342
Time Out: for Henry Gantt
346
Management Science Application:
An Interstate Highway Construction Project 
in Virginia
348
CPM/PERT
349
Time Out: for Morgan R. Walker, James E.
Kelley, Jr., and D. G. Malcolm
350
Probabilistic Activity Times
357
Management Science Application: The T5
Project at Heathrow Airport
364
Microsoft Project
365
Project Crashing and Time–Cost Trade-Off
369
Management Science Application:
Reconstructing the Pentagon After 9/11
373
Formulating the CPM/PERT Network as a Linear
Programming Model
374
Summary
381 • Example Problem Solution
382 •
Problems
384 • Case Problems
404
9 Multicriteria Decision
Making
407
Goal Programming
408
Graphical Interpretation of Goal
Programming
412
Computer Solution of Goal Programming Problems
with QM for Windows and Excel
415
Management Science Application:
Developing Television Advertising Sales Plans 
at NBC
415
Time Out: for Abraham Charnes and William
W. Cooper
419
The Analytical Hierarchy Process
422
Management Science Application: Selecting
Students for Graduate Studies Abroad at Dar
Al-Hekma Women’s College
422
Management Science Application: Analyzing
Advanced-Technology Projects at NASA
428
Management Science Application: Ranking
Twentieth-Century Army Generals
430
Scoring Models
433
Management Science Application: A Scoring
Model for Determining U.S. Army Installation
Regions
435
Summary
435 • Example Problem Solutions
436 •
Problems
439 • Case Problems
472
10 Nonlinear
Programming
477
Nonlinear Profit Analysis
478
Constrained Optimization
481
Solution of Nonlinear Programming Problems with
Excel
483
Management Science Application: Making
Supplier Decisions at Ford with Nonlinear
Programming
487
A Nonlinear Programming Model with Multiple
Constraints
488
Nonlinear Model Examples
490
Summary
494 • Example Problem Solution
495 •
Problems
495 • Case Problems
500
11 Probability and
Statistics
502
Types of Probability
503
Fundamentals of Probability
505
Management Science Application: Treasure
Hunting with Probability and Statistics
507
Statistical Independence and Dependence
508
Expected Value
515
Management Science Application:
A Probability Model for Analyzing Coast Guard
Patrol Effectiveness
516

CONTENTS
ix
The Normal Distribution
517
Summary
527 • Example Problem Solution
527 •
Problems
529 • Case Problem
535
12 Decision Analysis
537
Components of Decision Making
538
Decision Making Without Probabilities
539
Management Science Application:
Planning for Terrorist Attacks and Epidemics 
in Los Angeles County with Decision
Analysis
546
Decision Making with Probabilities
546
Management Science Application:
Evaluating Electric Generator Maintenance
Schedules Using Decision Tree Analysis
557
Decision Analysis with Additional Information
560
Management Science Application:
Scheduling Refueling at the Indian Point 3
Nuclear Power Plant
566
Utility
567
Summary
568 • Example Problem Solution
569 •
Problems
572 • Case Problems
592
13 Queuing Analysis
597
Elements of Waiting Line Analysis
598
The Single-Server Waiting Line System
599
Time Out: for Agner Krarup Erlang
600
Management Science Application: Reducing
Perceived Waiting Time at Bank of
America
607
Undefined and Constant Service Times
608
Finite Queue Length
611
Management Science Application: Providing
Telephone Order Service in the Retail Catalog
Business
613
Finite Calling Population
614
The Multiple-Server Waiting Line
617
Management Science Application: Making
Sure 911 Calls Get Through at AT&T
620
Additional Types of Queuing Systems
622
Summary
623 • Example Problem Solution
623 •
Problems
625 • Case Problems
633
14 Simulation
637
The Monte Carlo Process
638
Time Out: for John Von Neumann
643
Computer Simulation with Excel 
Spreadsheets
643
Simulation of a Queuing System
648
Management Science Application: Planning
for Health Emergencies Created by Terrorist 
Attacks
651
Continuous Probability Distributions
652
Statistical Analysis of Simulation Results
657
Management Science Application:
A Monte Carlo Simulation Model 
for Managing Liquidity Risk at Merrill 
Lynch Bank USA
658
Crystal Ball
659
Verification of the Simulation Model
666
Areas of Simulation Application
666
Summary
667 • Example Problem Solution
668 •
Problems
671 • Case Problems
685
15 Forecasting
689
Forecasting Components
690
Management Science Application:
Forecasting Advertising Demand 
at NBC
692
Time Series Methods
693
Management Science Application:
Forecasting at Goodyear Tire and Rubber
Company
697
Management Science Application:
Forecasting at Heineken USA
702
Forecast Accuracy
705
Management Science Application:
Forecasting at Bayer Consumer Care
709
Time Series Forecasting Using Excel
709
Time Series Forecasting Using QM for
Windows
712
Regression Methods
713
Management Science Application:
An Airline Passenger Forecasting Model
717 
Summary
722 • Example Problem Solutions
722 •
Problems
725 • Case Problems
748

x
CONTENTS
16 Inventory Management
752
Elements of Inventory Management
753
Management Science Application:
Evaluating Inventory Costs at Hewlett-
Packard
755
Inventory Control Systems
756
Time Out: for Ford Harris
757
Economic Order Quantity Models
757
The Basic EOQ Model
758
The EOQ Model with Noninstantaneous
Receipt
763
The EOQ Model with Shortages
766
Management Science Application:
Determining Inventory Ordering Policy 
at Dell
769
EOQ Analysis with QM for Windows
769
EOQ Analysis with Excel and Excel QM
770
Quantity Discounts
771
Management Science Application:
Quantity Discount Orders at Mars
774
Reorder Point
775
Determining Safety Stock by Using Service
Levels
777
Management Science Application:
Establishing Inventory Safety Stocks 
at Kellogg’s
779
Order Quantity for a Periodic Inventory 
System
780
Summary
781 • Example Problem Solutions
782 •
Problems
783 • Case Problems
791
Appendix A
Normal and Chi-Square Tables
794
Appendix B
Setting Up and Editing a Spreadsheet
796
Appendix C
The Poisson and Exponential Distributions
800
Solutions to Selected Odd-Numbered Problems
802
Glossary
810
Index
815
The following items can be found on the Companion Web
site that accompanies this text:
Web Site Modules
Module A: The Simplex Solution Method
A-1
Module B: Transportation and Assignment Solution 
Methods
B-1
Module C: Integer Programming: The Branch and
Bound Method
C-1
Module D: Nonlinear Programming Solution
Techniques
D-1
Module E: Game Theory
E-1
Module F: Markov Analysis
F-1

Preface
The objective of management science is to solve the
decision-making problems that confront and confound man-
agers in both the public and the private sector by developing
mathematical models of those problems. These models have
traditionally been solved with various mathematical tech-
niques, all of which lend themselves to specific types of
problems. Thus, management science as a field of study has
always been inherently mathematical in nature, and as a
result sometimes complex and rigorous. When I began writ-
ing the first edition of this book in 1979, my main goal was
to make these mathematical topics seem less complex and
thus more palatable to undergraduate business students. To
achieve this goal I started out by trying to provide simple,
straightforward explanations of often difficult mathematical
topics. I tried to use lots of examples that demonstrated in
detail the fundamental mathematical steps of the modeling
and solution techniques. Although in the past three decades
the emphasis in management science has shifted away from
strictly mathematical to mostly computer solutions, my
objective has not changed. I have provided clear, concise
explanations of the techniques used in management science
to model problems, and provided many examples of how to
solve these models on the computer while still including
some of the fundamental mathematics of the techniques.
The stuff of management science can seem abstract, and
students sometimes have trouble perceiving the usefulness of
quantitative courses in general. I remember that when I was a
student, I could not foresee how I would use such mathemat-
ical topics (in addition to a lot of the other things I learned in
college) in any job after graduation. Part of the problem is
that the examples used in books often do not seem realistic.
Unfortunately, examples must be made simple to facilitate
the learning process. Larger, more complex examples reflect-
ing actual applications would be too complex to help the stu-
dent learn the modeling technique. The modeling techniques
presented in this text are, in fact, used extensively in the
business world, and their use is increasing rapidly because of
computer and information technology. Therefore, the
chances that students will use the modeling techniques that
they learn from this text in a future job are very great indeed.
Even if these techniques are not used on the job, the
logical approach to problem solving embodied in manage-
ment science is valuable for all types of jobs in all types of
organizations. Management science consists of more than
just a collection of mathematical modeling techniques; it
embodies a philosophy of approaching a problem in a
logical manner, as does any science. Thus, this text not
only teaches specific techniques but also provides a very
useful method for approaching problems.
My primary objective throughout all revisions of this
text is readability. The modeling techniques presented in
each chapter are explained with straightforward examples
that avoid lengthy written explanations. These examples
are organized in a logical step-by-step fashion that the stu-
dent can subsequently apply to the problems at the end of
each chapter. I have tried to avoid complex mathematical
notation and formulas wherever possible. These various
factors will, I hope, help make the material more interest-
ing and less intimidating to students.
New to This Edition
Management science is the application of mathematical
models and computing technology to help decision makers
solve problems. Therefore, new text revisions like this one
tend to focus on the latest technological advances used by
businesses and organizations for solving problems, as well
as new features that students and instructors have indicated
would be helpful to them in learning about management sci-
ence. Following is a list of the substantial new changes made
for this 11th edition of the text:
 This revision incorporates the latest version of 
Excel 2010, and includes more than 175 new 
spreadsheet screenshots.
 More than 50 new exhibit screenshots have been
added to show the latest versions of Microsoft
Project 2010, QM for Windows, Excel QM,
TreePlan, and Crystal Ball.
 This edition includes 55 new end-of-chapter home-
work problems and 2 new cases, so it now contains
more than 800 homework problems and 64 cases. 
 All 800-plus Excel homework files on the
Instructor’s Web site have been replaced with new
Excel 2010 files.
 A new feature for this revision is “Chapter Web
links” for every chapter. More than 550 Web links are
provided to access tutorials, summaries, and notes
available on the Internet for the various topics in the
chapters. Also included are links to YouTube videos
that provide additional learning resources. These Web
links also replace the end-of chapter references.
xi

xii
PREFACE
 Over 30% of the “Management Science Application”
boxes are new for this edition. All of these new boxes
provide current, updated applications of management
science techniques by companies and organizations.
 New “Sensitivity Analysis” sections have been
added throughout Chapter 4 to complement the
presentation of the different types of linear program-
ming models, and in Chapter 6.
Learning Features
This 11th edition of Introduction to Management Science
includes many features that are designed to help sustain
and accelerate a student’s learning of the material. Several
of the strictly mathematical topics—such as the simplex
and transportation solution methods—are included 
as chapter modules on the Companion Web site, at 
www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor. This frees up text
space for additional modeling examples in several of the
chapters, allowing more emphasis on computer solutions
such as Excel spreadsheets, and added additional home-
work problems. In the following sections, we will summa-
rize these and other learning features that appear in the text.
Text Organization
An important objective is to have a well-organized text
that flows smoothly and follows a logical progression of
topics, placing the different management science model-
ing techniques in their proper perspective. The first 10
chapters group together chapters related to mathematical
programming that can be solved using Excel spread-
sheets, including linear, integer, nonlinear, and goal pro-
gramming, as well as network techniques.
Within these mathematical programming chapters, the
traditional simplex procedure for solving linear pro-
gramming problems mathematically is located on the
Companion Web site, at www.pearsonhighered.com/
taylor, that accompanies this text. It can still be covered by
the student on the computer as part of linear programming,
or it can be excluded, without leaving a “hole” in the pres-
entation of this topic. The integer programming mathemati-
cal branch and bound solution method is also on the
Companion Web site. In Chapter 6, on the transportation
and assignment problems, the strictly mathematical
solution approaches, including the northwest corner, VAM,
and stepping-stone methods, are also on the accompanying
Companion Web site. Because transportation and assign-
ment problems are specific types of network problems, the
two chapters that cover network flow models and project
networks that can be solved with linear programming, as
well as traditional model-specific solution techniques and
software, follow Chapter 6 on transportation and assign-
ment problems. In addition, in Chapter 10, on nonlinear
programming, the traditional mathematical solution tech-
niques, including the substitution method and the method
of Lagrange multipliers, are on the Companion Web site.
Chapters 11 through 14 include topics generally thought
of as being probabilistic, including probability and statis-
tics, decision analysis, queuing, and simulation. A module
on Markov analysis is on the Companion Web site. Also, a
module on game theory is on the Companion Web site.
Forecasting in Chapter 15 and inventory management in
Chapter 16 are both unique topics related to operations
management.
Excel Spreadsheets
This new edition continues to emphasize Excel spread-
sheet solutions of problems. Spreadsheet solutions are
demonstrated in all the chapters in the text (except for
Chapter 2, on linear programming modeling and graphical
solution), for virtually every management science model-
ing technique presented. These spreadsheet solutions are
presented in optional subsections, allowing the instructor
to decide whether to cover them. The text includes more
than 175 new Excel spreadsheet screenshots for Excel
2010. Most of these screenshots include reference callout
boxes that describe the solution steps within the spread-
sheet. Files that include all the Excel spreadsheet model
solutions for the examples in the text are included on the
Companion Web site and can be easily downloaded by the
student to determine how the spreadsheet was set up and
the solution derived, and to use as templates to work
homework problems. In addition, Appendix B at the end
of the text provides a tutorial on how to set up and edit
spreadsheets for problem solution. Following is an exam-
ple of one of the Excel spreadsheet files (from Chapter 3)
that is available on the Companion Web site accompany-
ing the text.

PREFACE
xiii
Spreadsheet Add-Ins
Several spreadsheet add-in packages are available with
this book, often in trial and premium versions. For com-
plete information on options for downloading each pack-
age, please visit www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor.
Excel QM
For some management science topics, the Excel formu-
las that are required for solution are lengthy and com-
plex and thus are very tedious and time-consuming to
type into a spreadsheet. In several of these instances in
the book, including Chapter 6 on transportation and
assignment problems, Chapter 12 on decision analysis,
Chapter 13 on queuing, Chapter 15 on forecasting, and
Chapter 16 on inventory control, a spreadsheet “add-in”
called Excel QM is demonstrated. These add-ins provide
a generic spreadsheet setup with easy-to-use dialog
boxes and all of the formulas already typed in for spe-
cific problem types. Unlike other “black box” software,
these add-ins allow users to see the formulas used in
each cell. The input, results, and the graphics are easily
seen and can be easily changed, making this software
ideal for classroom demonstrations and student explo-
rations. Following below is an example of an Excel QM
file (from Chapter 13) that is on the Companion Web site
that accompanies the text.
Risk Solver Platform for Education
This program is a tool for risk analysis, simulation, and
optimization in Excel. Using the access code, found on
the inside front cover of this book, you can download this
software for free.
TreePlan
Another spreadsheet add-in program that is demonstrated
in the text is TreePlan, a program that will set up a generic
spreadsheet for the solution of decision-tree problems in
Chapter 12 on decision analysis. This is also available on
the Companion Web site. Following is an example of one
of the TreePlan files (from Chapter 12) that is on the text
Companion Web site.

xiv
PREFACE
QM for Windows Software Package
QM for Windows is a computer package that is included
on the text Companion Web site, and many students and
instructors will prefer to use it with this text. This soft-
ware is very user friendly, requiring virtually no prelim-
inary instruction except for the “help” screens that can
be accessed directly from the program. It is demon-
strated throughout the text in conjunction with virtually
every management science modeling technique, except
simulation. The text includes 50 QM for Windows
screens used to demonstrate example problems. Thus,
for most topics problem solution is demonstrated via
both Excel spreadsheets and QM for Windows. Files
that include all the QM for Windows solutions for
examples in the text are included on the accompanying
Companion Web site. Following is an example of one of
the QM for Windows files (from Chapter 4) that is on
the Companion Web site.
Microsoft Project
As we indicated previously, when talking about the new
features in this edition, Chapter 8 on project management
includes the popular software package Microsoft Project.
Following on the next page is an example of one of the
Microsoft Project files (from Chapter 8) that is available
on the text Companion Web site.
Crystal Ball
Still another spreadsheet add-in program is Crystal Ball
by Oracle. Crystal Ball is demonstrated in Chapter 14 on
simulation and shows how to perform simulation analysis
for certain types of risk analysis and forecasting prob-
lems. Following is an example of one of the Crystal Ball
files (from Chapter 14) that is on the Companion Web site.
Using the access code, found on the inside front cover of
this book, you can download a 140-day trial version of
this software for free.

PREFACE
xv
New Problems and Cases
Previous editions of the text always provided a substan-
tial number of homework questions, problems, and cases
to offer students practice. This edition includes more
than 800 homework problems, 55 of which are new, and
64 end-of-chapter cases, 2 of which are new. In addition,
4 additional spreadsheet modeling cases are provided on
the Companion Web site.
“Management Science Application” Boxes
These boxes are located in every chapter in the text. They
describe how a company, an organization, or an agency
uses the particular management science technique being
presented and demonstrated in the chapter to compete in a
global environment. There are 52 of these boxes, 16 of
which are new, throughout the text. They encompass a
broad range of business and public-sector applications,
both foreign and domestic.
Marginal Notes
Notes in the margins of this text serve the same basic
function as notes that students themselves might write in
the margin. They highlight certain topics to make it easier
for students to locate them, summarize topics and impor-
tant points, and provide brief definitions of key terms and
concepts.
Examples
The primary means of teaching the various quantitative
modeling techniques presented in this text is through exam-
ples. Thus, examples are liberally inserted throughout the
text, primarily to demonstrate how problems are solved
with the different quantitative techniques and to make them
easier to understand. These examples are organized in a
logical step-by-step solution approach that the student can
subsequently apply to the homework problems.
Solved Example Problems
At the end of each chapter, just prior to the homework
questions and problems, is a section that provides solved
examples to serve as a guide for doing the homework
problems. These examples are solved in a detailed, step-
by-step fashion.
New Chapter Web Links
A new feature in this edition is a file on the Companion Web
site that contains Chapter Web links for every chapter in the
text. These Web links access tutorials, summaries, and notes
available on the Internet for the various techniques and top-
ics in every chapter in the text. Also included are YouTube
videos that provide additional learning resources and tutori-
als about many of the topics and techniques, links to the
development and developers of the techniques in the text,
and links to the Web sites for the companies and organiza-
tions that are featured in the “Management Science
Application” boxes in every chapter. The “Chapter Web
links” file includes more than 550 Web links.
Instructor Resources
Instructor’s Resource Center
Reached through a link at www.pearsonhighered.com/
taylor, the Instructor’s Resource Center contains the elec-
tronic files for the complete Instructor’s Solutions
Manual, the Test Item File, and Lecture PowerPoint 
presentations.
 Register, Redeem, Log In
At www.
pearsonhighered.com/irc, instructors can 
access a variety of print, media, and presentation
resources that are available with this book in
downloadable digital format. Resources are also
available for course management platforms such
as Blackboard, WebCT, and CourseCompass.
 Need Help?
Pearson Education’s dedicated techni-
cal support team is ready to assist instructors with
questions about the media supplements that accom-
pany this text. Visit http://247pearsoned.com for
answers to frequently asked questions and toll-free
user support phone numbers. The supplements are
available to adopting instructors. Detailed descriptions
are provided on the Instructor’s Resource Center.

xvi
PREFACE
 Excel Homework Solutions
Almost every end-
of-chapter homework and case problem in this text
has a corresponding Excel solution file for the 
instructor. This new edition includes 800 end-of-
chapter homework problems, and Excel solutions 
are provided for all but a few of them. Excel 
solutions are also provided for most of the 
64 end-of-chapter case problems. These solution files
can be accessed from the Instructor’s Resource Center,
at www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor, as shown in
the illustration below. These Excel files also include
those homework and case problem solutions using
TreePlan (from Chapter 12) and those using Crystal
Ball (from Chapter 14). In addition, Microsoft Project
solution files are available for homework problems in
Chapter 8.
 Instructor’s Solutions Manual
The Instructor’s
Solutions Manual contains detailed solutions for 
all end-of-chapter exercises and cases. Each 
solution has been reviewed for accuracy. 
The Instructor’s Solutions Manual is available 
for download by visiting www.pearsonhighered.
com/taylor.
 Test Item File
The Test Item File contains more
than 2,000 questions, including a variety of
true/false, multiple-choice, and problem-solving
questions for each chapter. Each question is fol-
lowed by the correct answer, the page references,
the main headings, difficulty rating, and key
words. It has been reviewed for accuracy. The test
item file is available for download by visiting
www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor.
 TestGen
Pearson Education’s test-generating soft-
ware is available from www.pearsonhighered.com/
irc. The software is PC and Mac compatible and
preloaded with all of the Test Item File questions.
You can manually or randomly view test 
questions and drag and drop to create a test. 
You can add or modify test bank questions as
needed.
 Learning Managment Systems
Our TestGens 
are converted for use in BlackBoard and WebCT.
These conversions can be found on the Instructor’s
Resource Center. Conversions to Moodle, D2L,

or Angel can be requested through your local Pearson
Sales Representative. 
 PowerPoint Presentations
PowerPoint presenta-
tions are available for every chapter to enhance lec-
tures. They feature figures, tables, Excel, and main
points from the text. They are available for down-
load by visiting www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor.
Student Resources
Companion Web Site
The Companion Web site for this text (www.
pearsonhighered.com/taylor) contains the following:
 Chapter Web Links—provide access to tutorials,
summaries, notes, and YouTube videos.
 Exhibit Files—are found throughout the text; these
exhibits demonstrate example problems, using
Crystal Ball, Excel, Excel QM, Microsoft Project,
QM for Windows, and TreePlan.
 Online Modules—PDF files of the online modules
listed in the table of contents.
 TreePlan—link to a free version
 Excel QM & QM for Windows—link to a free 
version
 Risk Solver Platform— link to a free trial version
 Crystal Ball— link to a free trial version
 Microsoft Project— link to a free trial version
 Subscription Content—Using the access code,
found on the inside front cover of this book, you can
download the following software for free:
 Risk Solver Platform for Education (RSPE)—This
is a special version of Frontline Systems’ Risk
Solver Platform software for Microsoft Excel. 
 Crystal Ball—free 140-day trial of Crystal Ball
software compliments of the Crystal Ball
Education Alliance.
For complete information on these items and how to access
them, please also visit www.pearsonhighered.com/taylor.
CourseSmart
CourseSmart eText books were developed for students
looking to save money on required or recommended
textbooks. Students simply select their eText by title or
author and purchase immediate access to the content for
PREFACE
xvii
the duration of the course using any major credit card.
With a CourseSmart eText, students can search for spe-
cific keywords or page numbers, take notes online, print
out reading assignments that incorporate lecture notes,
and bookmark important passages for later review. For
more information or to purchase a CourseSmart eText
book, visit www.coursesmart.com.
Acknowledgments
As with any other large project, the revision of a textbook is
not accomplished without the help of many people. The
11th edition of this book is no exception, and I would like to
take this opportunity to thank those who have contributed to
its preparation.
I thank the reviewers of this edition: Russell McGee
(Texas A&M University), Kefeng Xu (University of
Texas at San Antonio), Anthony Narsing (Macon State
College), Jaya Singhal (University of Baltimore), Daniel
Solow (Case Western Reserve University), Edward
Williams (University of Michigan–Dearborn), Zuopeng
Zhang (State University of New York at Plattsburgh), and
Michael E. Salassi (Louisiana State University).
I also remain indebted to the reviewers of the previous
editions: Dr. B. S. Bal, Nagraj Balakrishnan, Edward M.
Barrow, Ali Behnezhad, Weldon J. Bowling, Rod Carlson,
Petros Christofi,Yar M. Ebadi, Richard Ehrhardt, Warren W.
Fisher, James Flynn, Wade Furgeson, Soumen Ghosh,
James C. Goodwin, Jr., Richard Gunther, Dewey Hemphill,
Ann Hughes, Shivaji Khade, David A. Larson, Sr., Shao-ju
Lee, Robert L. Ludke, Peter A. Lyew, Robert D. Lynch,
Dinesh Manocha, Mildred Massey, Abdel-Aziz Mohamed,
Thomas J. Nolan, Susan W. Palocsay, David W. Pentico,
Cindy Randall, Christopher M. Rump, Roger Schoenfeldt,
Charles H. Smith, Lisa Sokol, Dothang Truong, John Wang,
Barry Wray, Hulya Julie Yazici, and Ding Zhang.
I am also very grateful to Tracy McCoy at Virginia Tech
for her valued assistance. I would like to thank my pro-
duction editor, Jane Bonnell, at Pearson, for her valuable
assistance and patience. I very much appreciate the help
and hard work of Andrea Stefanowicz and all the folks at
PreMediaGlobal, Inc., who produced this edition, and the
text’s accuracy checker, Annie Puciloski. Finally, I would
like to thank my editor, Chuck Synovec, and project man-
ager, Mary Kate Murray, at Pearson, for their continued
help and patience.

This page intentionally left blank 

Management Science
1
CHAPTER
1

Management science is the application of a scientific approach to solving management prob-
lems in order to help managers make better decisions. As implied by this definition, manage-
ment science encompasses a number of mathematically oriented techniques that have either
been developed within the field of management science or been adapted from other disciplines,
such as the natural sciences, mathematics, statistics, and engineering. This text provides an in-
troduction to the techniques that make up management science and demonstrates their applica-
tions to management problems.
Management science is a recognized and established discipline in business. The applica-
tions of management science techniques are widespread, and they have been frequently credited
with increasing the efficiency and productivity of business firms. In various surveys of busi-
nesses, many indicate that they use management science techniques, and most rate the results to
be very good. Management science (also referred to as operations research, quantitative meth-
ods, quantitative analysis, and decision sciences) is part of the fundamental curriculum of most
programs in business.
As you proceed through the various management science models and techniques contained
in this text, you should remember several things. First, most of the examples presented in this
text are for business organizations because businesses represent the main users of management
science. However, management science techniques can be applied to solve problems in different
types of organizations, including services, government, military, business and industry, and
health care.
Second, in this text all of the modeling techniques and solution methods are mathematically
based. In some instances the manual, mathematical solution approach is shown because it helps
one understand how the modeling techniques are applied to different problems. However, a com-
puter solution is possible for each of the modeling techniques in this text, and in many cases the
computer solution is emphasized. The more detailed mathematical solution procedures for many
of the modeling techniques are included as supplemental modules on the companion Web site
for this text.
Finally, as the various management science techniques are presented, keep in mind 
that management science is more than just a collection of techniques. Management science
also involves the philosophy of approaching a problem in a logical manner (i.e., a scien-
tific approach). The logical, consistent, and systematic approach to problem solving can be
as useful (and valuable) as the knowledge of the mechanics of the mathematical techniques
themselves. This understanding is especially important for those readers who do not always
see the immediate benefit of studying mathematically oriented disciplines such as manage-
ment science.
The Management Science Approach to Problem Solving
As indicated in the previous section, management science encompasses a logical, systematic ap-
proach to problem solving, which closely parallels what is known as the scientific method for
attacking problems. This approach, as shown in Figure 1.1, follows a generally recognized and
ordered series of steps: (1) observation, (2) definition of the problem, (3) model construction,
(4) model solution, and (5) implementation of solution results. We will analyze each of these
steps individually.
Observation
The first step in the management science process is the identification of a problem that exists in
the system (organization). The system must be continuously and closely observed so that prob-
lems can be identified as soon as they occur or are anticipated. Problems are not always the re-
sult of a crisis that must be reacted to but, instead, frequently involve an anticipatory or planning
situation. The person who normally identifies a problem is the manager because managers
work in places where problems might occur. However, problems can often be identified by a
2
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Management science
is a scientific
approach to solving
management
problems.
Management science
can be used in a
variety of
organizations to solve
many different types
of problems.
Management science
encompasses a logical
approach to problem
solving.
The steps of the
scientific method are
(1) observation,
(2) problem
definition, (3) model
construction,
(4) model 
solution, and 
(5) implementation.

management scientist, a person skilled in the techniques of management science and trained to
identify problems, who has been hired specifically to solve problems using management science
techniques.
Definition of the Problem
Once it has been determined that a problem exists, the problem must be clearly and concisely
defined. Improperly defining a problem can easily result in no solution or an inappropriate solu-
tion. Therefore, the limits of the problem and the degree to which it pervades other units of the
organization must be included in the problem definition. Because the existence of a problem im-
plies that the objectives of the firm are not being met in some way, the goals (or objectives) of
the organization must also be clearly defined. A stated objective helps to focus attention on what
the problem actually is.
Model Construction
A management science model is an abstract representation of an existing problem situation. It
can be in the form of a graph or chart, but most frequently a management science model con-
sists of a set of mathematical relationships. These mathematical relationships are made up of
numbers and symbols.
As an example, consider a business firm that sells a product. The product costs $5 to pro-
duce and sells for $20. A model that computes the total profit that will accrue from the items
sold is
In this equation, x represents the number of units of the product that are sold, and Z represents
the total profit that results from the sale of the product. The symbols x and Z are variables. The
term variable is used because no set numeric value has been specified for these items. The number
of units sold, x, and the profit, Z, can be any amount (within limits); they can vary. These two vari-
ables can be further distinguished. Z is a dependent variable because its value is dependent on the
number of units sold; x is an independent variable because the number of units sold is not depend-
ent on anything else (in this equation).
The numbers $20 and $5 in the equation are referred to as parameters. Parameters are con-
stant values that are generally coefficients of the variables (symbols) in an equation. Parameters
Z = +20x - 5x
THE MANAGEMENT SCIENCE APPROACH TO PROBLEM SOLVING
3
Management
science
techniques
Observation
Problem
definition
Model
construction
Solution
Feedback
Information
Implementation
FIGURE 1.1
The management
science process
A management
scientist is a person
skilled in the
application of
management science
techniques.
A variable is a symbol
used to represent an
item that can take on
any value.
A model is an
abstract mathematical
representation of a
problem situation.
Parameters are known,
constant values that
are often coefficients of
variables in equations.

usually remain constant during the process of solving a specific problem. The parameter values
are derived from data (i.e., pieces of information) from the problem environment. Sometimes
the data are readily available and quite accurate. For example, presumably the selling price 
of $20 and product cost of $5 could be obtained from the firm’s accounting department and
would be very accurate. However, sometimes data are not as readily available to the manager or
firm, and the parameters must be either estimated or based on a combination of the available
data and estimates. In such cases, the model is only as accurate as the data used in constructing
the model.
The equation as a whole is known as a functional relationship (also called function and re-
lationship). The term is derived from the fact that profit, Z, is a function of the number of units
sold, x, and the equation relates profit to units sold.
Because only one functional relationship exists in this example, it is also the model. In this
case the relationship is a model of the determination of profit for the firm. However, this model
does not really replicate a problem. Therefore, we will expand our example to create a problem
situation.
Let us assume that the product is made from steel and that the business firm has 100 pounds
of steel available. If it takes 4 pounds of steel to make each unit of the product, we can develop
an additional mathematical relationship to represent steel usage:
This equation indicates that for every unit produced, 4 of the available 100 pounds of steel
will be used. Now our model consists of two relationships:
We say that the profit equation in this new model is an objective function, and the resource
equation is a constraint. In other words, the objective of the firm is to achieve as much profit, Z,
as possible, but the firm is constrained from achieving an infinite profit by the limited amount of
steel available. To signify this distinction between the two relationships in this model, we will
add the following notations:
subject to
This model now represents the manager’s problem of determining the number of units
to produce. You will recall that we defined the number of units to be produced as x. Thus,
when we determine the value of x, it represents a potential (or recommended) decision for
the manager. Therefore, x is also known as a decision variable. The next step in the
management science process is to solve the model to determine the value of the decision
variable.
Model Solution
Once models have been constructed in management science, they are solved using the man-
agement science techniques presented in this text. A management science solution technique
usually applies to a specific type of model. Thus, the model type and solution method are both
part of the management science technique. We are able to say that a model is solved because
the model represents a problem. When we refer to model solution, we also mean problem
solution.
4x = 100
 maximize Z = +20x - 5x
 4x = 100
Z = +20x - 5x
4x = 100 lb. of steel
4
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Data are pieces of
information from the
problem environment.
A model is a
functional
relationship that
includes variables,
parameters,
and equations.
A management science
technique usually
applies to a specific 
model type.

For the example model developed in the previous section,
subject to
the solution technique is simple algebra. Solving the constraint equation for x, we have
Substituting the value of 25 for x into the profit function results in the total profit:
Thus, if the manager decides to produce 25 units of the product and all 25 units sell, the
business firm will receive $375 in profit. Note, however, that the value of the decision variable
does not constitute an actual decision; rather, it is information that serves as a recommendation
or guideline, helping the manager make a decision.
Some management science techniques do not generate an answer or a recommended decision.
Instead, they provide descriptive results: results that describe the system being modeled. 
= +375
= 20(25) - 5(25)
Z = +20x - 5x
x = 25 units
x = 100>4
 4x = 100
4x = 100
 maximize Z = +20x - 5x
THE MANAGEMENT SCIENCE APPROACH TO PROBLEM SOLVING
5
A management science
solution can be either a
recommended decision
or information that
helps a manager make
a decision.
Throughout this text TIME OUT boxes introduce you to the
individuals who developed the various techniques that are de-
scribed in the chapters. This will provide a historical perspec-
tive on the development of the field of management science.
In this first instance we will briefly outline the development of
management science.
Although a number of the mathematical techniques that
make up management science date to the turn of the twentieth
century or before, the field of management science itself can
trace its beginnings to military operations research (OR) groups
formed during World War II in Great Britain circa 1939. These
OR groups typically consisted of a team of about a dozen indi-
viduals from different fields of science, mathematics, and the
military, brought together to find solutions to military-related
problems. One of the most famous of these groups—called
“Blackett’s circus” after its leader, Nobel Laureate P. M. S. Blackett
of the University of Manchester and a former naval officer—
included three physiologists, two mathematical physicists, one
astrophysicist, one general physicist, two mathematicians, an
Army officer, and a surveyor. Blackett’s group and the other OR
teams made significant contributions in improving Britain’s early-
warning radar system (which was instrumental in their victory in
the Battle of Britain), aircraft gunnery, antisubmarine warfare,
civilian defense, convoy size determination, and bombing raids
over Germany.
The successes achieved by the British OR groups were ob-
served by two Americans working for the U.S. military, Dr. James
B. Conant and Dr. Vannevar Bush, who recommended that OR
teams be established in the U.S. branches of the military. Subse-
quently, both the Air Force and Navy created OR groups.
After World War II the contributions of the OR groups
were considered so valuable that the Army, Air Force, and
Navy set up various agencies to continue research of military
problems. Two of the more famous agencies were the Navy’s
Operations Evaluation Group at MIT and Project RAND, estab-
lished by the Air Force to study aerial warfare. Many of the 
individuals who developed operations research and manage-
ment science techniques did so while working at one of these
agencies after World War II or as a result of their work there.
As the war ended and the mathematical models and tech-
niques that were kept secret during the war began to be re-
leased, there was a natural inclination to test their applicability
to business problems. At the same time, various consulting
firms were established to apply these techniques to industrial
and business problems, and courses in the use of quantitative
techniques for business management began to surface in
American universities. In the early 1950s the use of these
quantitative techniques to solve management problems be-
came known as management science, and it was popularized
by a book of that name by Stafford Beer of Great Britain.
Time Out
for Pioneers in Management Science

For example, suppose the business firm in our example desires to know the average number of
units sold each month during a year. The monthly data (i.e., sales) for the past year are as follows:
6
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Month
Sales
Month
Sales
January
30
July
35
February
40
August
50
March
25
September
60
April
60
October
40
May
30
November
35
June
25
December
50
Total
480 units
Monthly sales average 40 units 
. This result is not a decision; it is information
that describes what is happening in the system. The results of the management science
(480  12)
Management Science Application
Room Pricing with Management Science 
at Marriott
Marriott International, Inc., headquartered in Bethesda,
Maryland, has more than 140,000 employees working at
more than 3,300 hotels in 70 countries. Its hotel franchises in-
clude Marriott, JW Marriott, The Ritz-Carlton, Renaissance,
Residence Inn, Courtyard, TownePlace Suites, Fairfield Inn, and
Springhill Suites. Fortune magazine ranks Marriott as the lodg-
ing industry’s most admired company and one of the best
companies to work for. 
Marriott uses a revenue management system for individ-
ual hotel bookings. This system provides forecasts of customer
demand and pricing controls, makes optimal inventory alloca-
tions, and interfaces with a reservation system that handles
more than 75 million transactions each year. The system
makes a demand forecast for each rate category and length of
stay for each arrival day up to 90 days in advance, and it pro-
vides inventory allocations to the reservation system. This in-
ventory of hotel rooms is then sold to individual customers
through channels such as Marriott.com, the company’s toll-
free reservation number, the hotels directly, and global distri-
bution systems. 
One of the most significant revenue streams for Marriott is
for group sales, which can contribute more than half of a full-
service hotel’s revenue. However, group business has challeng-
ing characteristics that introduce uncertainty and make
modeling it difficult, including longer booking windows (as
compared to those for individuals), price negotiation as part of
the booking process, demand for blocks of rooms, and lack of
demand data. For a group request, a hotel must know if it has
sufficient rooms and determine a recommended rate. A key
challenge is estimating the value of the business the hotel is
turning away if the room inventory is given to a group rather
than being held for individual bookings. 
To address the group booking process, Marriott developed
a decision support system, Group Pricing Optimizer (GPO),
that provides guidance to Marriott personnel on pricing hotel
rooms for group customers. GPO uses various management
science modeling techniques and tools, including simulation,
forecasting, and optimization techniques, to recommend an
optimal price rate. Marriott estimates that GPO provided an
improvement in profit of over $120 million derived from $1.3
billion in group business in its first 2 years of use. 
Source: Based on S. Hormby, J. Morrison, P. Dave, M. Myers, and T.
Tenca, “Marriott International Increases Revenue by Implementing a
Group Pricing Optimizer,” Interfaces 40, no. 1 (January–February
2010): 47–57.
© David Zanzinger/Alamy

techniques in this text are examples of the two types shown in this section: (1) solutions/
decisions and (2) descriptive results.
Implementation
The final step in the management science process for problem solving described in Figure 1.1 is
implementation. Implementation is the actual use of the model once it has been developed or
the solution to the problem the model was developed to solve. This is a critical but often over-
looked step in the process. It is not always a given that once a model is developed or a solution
found, it is automatically used. Frequently the person responsible for putting the model or solu-
tion to use is not the same person who developed the model, and thus the user may not fully un-
derstand how the model works or exactly what it is supposed to do. Individuals are also
sometimes hesitant to change the normal way they do things or to try new things. In this situa-
tion the model and solution may get pushed to the side or ignored altogether if they are not 
carefully explained and their benefit fully demonstrated. If the management science model 
and solution are not implemented, then the effort and resources used in their development have
been wasted.
Model Building: Break-Even Analysis
In the previous section we gave a brief, general description of how management science models
are formulated and solved, using a simple algebraic example. In this section we will continue to
explore the process of building and solving management science models, using break-even
analysis, also called profit analysis. Break-even analysis is a good topic to expand our discus-
sion of model building and solution because it is straightforward, relatively familiar to most
people, and not overly complex. In addition, it provides a convenient means to demonstrate the
different ways management science models can be solved—mathematically (by hand), graphi-
cally, and with a computer.
The purpose of break-even analysis is to determine the number of units of a product (i.e.,
the volume) to sell or produce that will equate total revenue with total cost. The point where
total revenue equals total cost is called the break-even point, and at this point profit is zero. The
break-even point gives a manager a point of reference in determining how many units will
be needed to ensure a profit.
Components of Break-Even Analysis
The three components of break-even analysis are volume, cost, and profit. Volume is the level of
sales or production by a company. It can be expressed as the number of units (i.e., quantity) pro-
duced and sold, as the dollar volume of sales, or as a percentage of total capacity available.
Two type of costs are typically incurred in the production of a product: fixed costs and vari-
able costs. Fixed costs are generally independent of the volume of units produced and sold. That
is, fixed costs remain constant, regardless of how many units of product are produced within a
given range. Fixed costs can include such items as rent on plant and equipment, taxes, staff and
management salaries, insurance, advertising, depreciation, heat and light, and plant mainte-
nance. Taken together, these items result in total fixed costs.
Variable costs are determined on a per-unit basis. Thus, total variable costs depend on the
number of units produced. Variable costs include such items as raw materials and resources, di-
rect labor, packaging, material handling, and freight.
Total variable costs are a function of the volume and the variable cost per unit. This
relationship can be expressed mathematically as
where 
and 
(number of units) sold.
v = volume
cv = variable cost per unit 
total variable cost = vcv
MODEL BUILDING: BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS
7
Fixed costs are
independent of volume
and remain constant.
Variable costs depend
on the number of
items produced.
Implementation is the
actual use of a model
once it has been
developed.
Break-even analysis is
a modeling technique
to determine the num-
ber of units to sell or
produce that will
result in zero profit.

The total cost of an operation is computed by summing total fixed cost and total variable
cost, as follows:
or
where 
.
As an example, consider Western Clothing Company, which produces denim jeans. The
company incurs the following monthly costs to produce denim jeans:
If we arbitrarily let the monthly sales volume, v, equal 400 pairs of denim jeans, the total cost is
The third component in our break-even model is profit. Profit is the difference between
total revenue and total cost. Total revenue is the volume multiplied by the price per unit,
where 
.
For our clothing company example, if denim jeans sell for $23 per pair and we sell 400 pairs
per month, then the total monthly revenue is
Now that we have developed relationships for total revenue and total cost, profit (Z) can be
computed as follows:
Computing the Break-Even Point
For our clothing company example, we have determined total revenue and total cost to be $9,200
and $13,200, respectively. With these values, there is no profit but, instead, a loss of $4,000:
We can verify this result by using our total profit formula,
and the values 
,
,
, and 
:
Obviously, the clothing company does not want to operate with a monthly loss of $4,000
because doing so might eventually result in bankruptcy. If we assume that price is static because
of market conditions and that fixed costs and the variable cost per unit are not subject to change,
then the only part of our model that can be varied is volume. Using the modeling terms we de-
veloped earlier in this chapter, price, fixed costs, and variable costs are parameters, whereas the
= -+4,000
= +9,200 - 10,000 - 3,200
= +(400)(23) - 10,000 - (400)(8)
Z = vp - cf - vcv
cv = +8
cf = +10,000
p = +23
v = 400
Z = vp - cf - vcv
total profit = total revenue - total cost = +9,200 - 13,200 = -+4,000
= vp - cf - vcv
Z = vp - (cf + vcv)
 total profit = total revenue - total cost
total revenue = vp = (400)(23) = +9,200
p = price per unit
total revenue = vp
TC = cf + vcv = +10,000 + (400)(8) = +13,200
 variable cost = cv = +8 per pair
 fixed cost = cf = +10,000
cf = fixed cost
TC = cf + vcv
total cost = total fixed cost + total variable cost
8
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Total cost (TC) equals
the fixed cost 
plus
the variable cost
per unit 
multiplied
by volume (v).
(cv)
(cf)
Profit is the difference
between total revenue
(volume multiplied by
price) and total cost.

volume, v, is a decision variable. In break-even analysis we want to compute the value of v that
will result in zero profit.
At the break-even point, where total revenue equals total cost, the profit, Z, equals zero.
Thus, if we let profit, Z, equal zero in our total profit equation and solve for v, we can determine
the break-even volume:
In other words, if the company produces and sells 666.7 pairs of jeans, the profit (and loss)
will be zero and the company will break even. This gives the company a point of reference from
which to determine how many pairs of jeans it needs to produce and sell in order to gain a profit
(subject to any capacity limitations). For example, a sales volume of 800 pairs of denim jeans
will result in the following monthly profit:
In general, the break-even volume can be determined using the following formula:
For our example,
Graphical Solution
It is possible to represent many of the management science models in this text graphically and
use these graphical models to solve problems. Graphical models also have the advantage of
providing a “picture” of the model that can sometimes help us understand the modeling process
better than mathematics alone can. We can easily graph the break-even model for our Western
Clothing Company example because the functions for total cost and total revenue are linear.
That means we can graph each relationship as a straight line on a set of coordinates, as shown in
Figure 1.2.
In Figure 1.2, the fixed cost,
, has a constant value of $10,000, regardless of the volume.
The total cost line, TC, represents the sum of variable cost and fixed cost. The total cost line
increases because variable cost increases as the volume increases. The total revenue line also
increases as volume increases, but at a faster rate than total cost. The point where these two
lines intersect indicates that total revenue equals total cost. The volume, v, that corresponds
to this point is the break-even volume. The break-even volume in Figure 1.2 is 666.7 pairs of
denim jeans.
cf
= 666.7 pairs of jeans
= 10,000
23 - 8
v =
cf
p - cv
v =
cf
p - cv
v(p - cv) = cf
 0 = v(p - cv) - cf
Z = vp - cf - vcv
= +(800)(23) - 10,000 - (800)(8) = +2,000
Z = vp - cf - vcv
v = 666.7 pairs of jeans
 15v = 10,000
 0 = 23v - 10,000 - 8v
 0 = v(23) - 10,000 - v(8)
Z = vp - cf - vcv
MODEL BUILDING: BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS
9
The break-even point
is the volume (v) that
equates total revenue
with total cost where
profit is zero.

Sensitivity Analysis
We have now developed a general relationship for determining the break-even volume, which
was the objective of our modeling process. This relationship enables us to see how the level of
profit (and loss) is directly affected by changes in volume. However, when we developed this
model, we assumed that our parameters, fixed and variable costs and price, were constant. In re-
ality such parameters are frequently uncertain and can rarely be assumed to be constant, and
changes in any of the parameters can affect the model solution. The study of changes on a man-
agement science model is called sensitivity analysis—that is, seeing how sensitive the model is
to changes.
Sensitivity analysis can be performed on all management science models in one form or an-
other. In fact, sometimes companies develop models for the primary purpose of experimentation
to see how the model will react to different changes the company is contemplating or that man-
agement might expect to occur in the future. As a demonstration of how sensitivity analysis
works, we will look at the effects of some changes on our break-even model.
The first thing we will analyze is price. As an example, we will increase the price for denim
jeans from $23 to $30. As expected, this increases the total revenue, and it therefore reduces the
break-even point from 666.7 pairs of jeans to 454.5 pairs of jeans:
The effect of the price change on break-even volume is illustrated in Figure 1.3.
= 10,000
30 - 8 = 454.5 pairs of denim jeans
v =
cf
p - cv
10
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
10
20
30
40
50
200
0
400
600
800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600
Volume, v
Total cost
Revenue, cost, 
and profit ($1,000s)
Variable cost
Fixed cost
Total revenue
Loss
Profit
Break-even
point
FIGURE 1.2
Break-even model
In general, an
increase in price
lowers the break-even
point, all other things
held constant.
10
20
30
40
50
200
0
400
600
800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600
Volume, v
Total cost
Revenue, cost, 
and profit ($1,000s)
New total 
revenue
Fixed cost
Old total 
revenue
Old B-E point
New B-E point
FIGURE 1.3
Break-even model
with an increase in
price
Sensitivity analysis
sees how sensitive a
management model is
to changes.

Although a decision to increase price looks inviting from a strictly analytical point of view,
it must be remembered that the lower break-even volume and higher profit are possible but not
guaranteed. A higher price can make it more difficult to sell the product. Thus, a change in price
often must be accompanied by corresponding increases in costs, such as those for advertising,
packaging, and possibly production (to enhance quality). However, even such direct changes as
these may have little effect on product demand because price is often sensitive to numerous fac-
tors, such as the type of market, monopolistic elements, and product differentiation.
When we increased price, we mentioned the possibility of raising the quality of the product
to offset a potential loss of sales due to the price increase. For example, suppose the stitching on
the denim jeans is changed to make the jeans more attractive and stronger. This change results
in an increase in variable costs of $4 per pair of jeans, thus raising the variable cost per unit,
,
to $12 per pair. This change (in conjunction with our previous price change to $30) results in a
new break-even volume:
This new break-even volume and the change in the total cost line that occurs as a result of the
variable cost change are shown in Figure 1.4.
=
10,000
30 - 12 = 555.5 pairs of denim jeans
v =
cf
p - cv
cv
MODEL BUILDING: BREAK-EVEN ANALYSIS
11
In general, an
increase in variable
costs will increase the
break-even point, all
other things held
constant.
10
20
30
40
50
200
0
400
600
800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600
Volume, v
Old total cost
Revenue, cost, 
and profit ($1,000s)
Total revenue
Fixed cost
New total cost
New B-E point
Old B-E point
FIGURE 1.4
Break-even model
with an increase in
variable cost
Next let’s consider an increase in advertising expenditures to offset the potential loss in
sales resulting from a price increase. An increase in advertising expenditures is an addition to
fixed costs. For example, if the clothing company increases its monthly advertising budget by
$3,000, then the total fixed cost,
, becomes $13,000. Using this fixed cost, as well as the in-
creased variable cost per unit of $12 and the increased price of $30, we compute the break-even
volume as follows:
This new break-even volume, representing changes in price, fixed costs, and variable costs, is
illustrated in Figure 1.5. Notice that the break-even volume is now higher than the original volume
of 666.7 pairs of jeans, as a result of the increased costs necessary to offset the potential loss in
sales. This indicates the necessity to analyze the effect of a change in one of the break-even
= 722.2 pairs of denim jeans
=
13,000
30 - 12
v =
cf
p - cv
cf
In general, an
increase in fixed costs
will increase the
break-even point, all
other things held
constant.

components on the whole break-even model. In other words, generally it is not sufficient to con-
sider a change in one model component without considering the overall effect.
Computer Solution
Throughout the text we will demonstrate how to solve management science models on the
computer by using Excel spreadsheets and QM for Windows, a general-purpose quantitative meth-
ods software package by Howard Weiss. QM for Windows has program modules to solve almost
every type of management science problem you will encounter in this book. There are a number of
similar quantitative methods software packages available on the market, with characteristics and
capabilities similar to those of QM for Windows. In most cases you simply input problem data
(i.e., model parameters) into a model template, click on a solve button, and the solution appears in
a Windows format. QM for Windows is included on the companion Web site for this text.
Spreadsheets are not always easy to use, and you cannot conveniently solve every type of
management science model by using a spreadsheet. Most of the time you must not only input
the model parameters but also set up the model mathematics, including formulas, as well as your
own model template with headings to display your solution output. However, spreadsheets pro-
vide a powerful reporting tool in which you can present your model and results in any format
you choose. Spreadsheets such as Excel have become almost universally available to anyone
who owns a computer. In addition, spreadsheets have become very popular as a teaching tool
because they tend to guide the student through a modeling procedure, and they can be interest-
ing and fun to use. However, because spreadsheets are somewhat more difficult to set up and
apply than is QM for Windows, we will spend more time explaining their use to solve various
types of problems in this text.
One of the difficult aspects of using spreadsheets to solve management science problems is
setting up a spreadsheet with some of the more complex models and formulas. For the most
complex models in the text we will show how to use Excel QM, a supplemental spreadsheet
macro that is included on the companion Web site for this text. A macro is a template or an over-
lay that already has the model format with the necessary formulas set up on the spreadsheet so
that the user only has to input the model parameters. We will demonstrate Excel QM in six chap-
ters, including this chapter, Chapter 6 (“Transportation, Transshipment, and Assignment Prob-
lems”), Chapter 12 (“Decision Analysis”), Chapter 13 (“Queuing Analysis”), Chapter 15
(“Forecasting”), and Chapter 16 (“Inventory Management”).
Later in this text we will also demonstrate two spreadsheet add-ins, TreePlan and Crystal Ball,
which are also included on the companion Web site for this text. TreePlan is a program for setting
up and solving decision trees that we use in Chapter 12 (“Decision Analysis”), whereas Crystal
Ball is a simulation package that we use in Chapter 14 (“Simulation”). Also, in Chapter 8 (“Project
Management”) we will demonstrate Microsoft Project.
12
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
10
20
30
40
50
200
0
400
600
800 1,000 1,200 1,400 1,600
Volume, v
Old total cost
Revenue, cost, 
and profit ($1,000s)
Total revenue
Old fixed cost
New total cost
New fixed cost
New B-E point
Old B-E point
FIGURE 1.5
Break-even model
with a change in
fixed cost

In this section, we will demonstrate how to use Excel, Excel QM, and QM for Windows,
using our break-even model example for Western Clothing Company.
Excel Spreadsheets
To solve the break-even model using Excel, you must set up a spreadsheet with headings to iden-
tify your model parameters and variables and then input the appropriate mathematical formulas
into the cells where you want to display your solution. Exhibit 1.1 shows the spreadsheet for the
Western Clothing Company example. Setting up the different headings to describe the parame-
ters and the solution is not difficult, but it does require that you know your way around Excel a
little. Appendix B provides a brief tutorial titled “Setting Up and Editing a Spreadsheet” for
solving management science problems.
COMPUTER SOLUTION
13
Formula for v, break-even
point, =D4/(D8–D6)
EXHIBIT 1.1
Notice that cell D10 contains the break-even formula, which is displayed on the toolbar near
the top of the screen. The fixed cost of $10,000 is typed in cell D4, the variable cost of $8 is in
cell D6, and the price of $23 is in cell D8.
As we present more complex models and problems in the chapters to come, the spread-
sheets we will develop to solve these problems will become more involved and will enable us to
demonstrate different features of Excel and spreadsheet modeling.
The Excel QM Macro for Spreadsheets
Excel QM is included on the companion Web site for this text. You can install Excel QM onto
your computer by following a brief series of steps displayed when the program is first accessed.
After Excel is started, Excel QM is normally accessed from the computer’s program files,
where it is usually loaded. When Excel QM is activated, “Add-Ins” will appear at the top of the
spreadsheet (as indicated in Exhibit 1.2). Clicking on “Excel QM” or “Taylor” will pull down a
Enter model parameters
in cells B10:B13.
Click on “Add-Ins”, then the menu
of Excel QM modules
EXHIBIT 1.2

menu of the topics in Excel QM, one of which is break-even analysis. Clicking on “Break-Even
Analysis” will result in the window for spreadsheet initialization. Every Excel QM macro listed
on the menu will start with a Spreadsheet Initialization window.
In this window, you can enter a spreadsheet title and choose under “Options” whether you also
want volume analysis and a graph. Clicking on “OK” will result in the spreadsheet shown in
Exhibit 1.2. The first step is to input the values for the Western Clothing Company example in cells
B10 to B13, as shown in Exhibit 1.2. The spreadsheet shows the break-even volume in cell B17.
However, notice that we have also chosen to perform some volume analysis by entering a hypo-
thetical volume of 800 units in cell B13, which results in the volume analysis in cells B20 to B23.
QM for Windows
You begin using QM for Windows by clicking on the “Module” button on the toolbar at the top
of the main window that appears when you start the program. This will pull down a window
with a list of all the model solution modules available in QM for Windows. Clicking on the
14
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Management Science Application
The Application of Management Science 
with Spreadsheets
Excel spreadsheets have become an increasingly important
management science tool because of their ability to support
numerous software add-ins for various management science
techniques, their ability to effectively convey complex models
to clients, their general availability on virtually every computer,
their flexibility and ease of use, and the fact that they are in-
expensive. As a result, spreadsheets are used for the applica-
tion of management science techniques to a wide variety of
different problems across many diverse organizations; follow-
ing are just a few examples of these applications. 
• Hewlett-Packard uses spreadsheets for a wide range of
management science applications, including modeling sup-
ply-chain networks, forecasting, planning, procurement,
inventory control, and product management. 
• Procter & Gamble also uses spreadsheets for supply-chain
management and specifically inventory control, to which it
has attributed over $350 million in inventory reductions. 
• Lockheed Martin Space Systems Company uses spread-
sheets to apply mathematical programming techniques for
project selection. 
• The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), use
Excel spreadsheets to provide people at county health
departments in the United States (who have minimal man-
agement science skills) with tools  using queuing techniques
to plan for dispensing medications and vaccines during
emergencies, such as epidemics and terrorist attacks. 
• A spreadsheet application for the Canadian Army allowed it
to reduce annual over-budget expenditures for ammunition
for its training programs from over $24 million to $1.3 million
in a 2-year period. 
• Hypo Real Estate Bank International in Stuttgart, Germany,
uses an Excel-based simulation model to assess the potential
impact of economic events on the default risk of its portfolio
of over €40 billion in real estate loans around the world. 
• Business students at the University of Toronto created an
Excel spreadsheet model for assigning medical residents in
radiology to on-call and emergency rotations at the Univer-
sity of Vermont’s College of Medicine. 
• The American Red Cross uses Excel spreadsheets to apply
data envelopment analysis (DEA) and linear programming
techniques for allocating resources and evaluating the per-
formance of its 1,000 chapters. 
These are just a few of the many applications of manage-
ment science techniques worldwide using Excel spreadsheets.
Source: Based on L. LeBlanc and T. Grossman, “Introduction: The Use
of Spreadsheet Software in the Application of Management Science and
Operations Research,” Interfaces 38, no. 4 (July–August 2008): 225–27. 
Used with permission from Microsoft

MANAGEMENT SCIENCE MODELING TECHNIQUES
15
Management Science Modeling Techniques
This text focuses primarily on two of the five steps of the management science process described
in Figure 1.1—model construction and solution. These are the two steps that use the manage-
ment science techniques. In a textbook, it is difficult to show how an unstructured real-world
problem is identified and defined because the problem must be written out. However, once a
problem statement has been given, we can show how a model is constructed and a solution is
derived. The techniques presented in this text can be loosely classified into four categories, as
shown in Figure 1.6.
“Break-even Analysis” module will access a new screen for typing in the problem title. Click-
ing again will access a screen with input cells for the model parameters—that is, fixed cost,
variable cost, and price (or revenue). Next, clicking on the “Solve” button at the top of the
screen will provide the solution to the Western Clothing Company example, as shown in
Exhibit 1.3.
EXHIBIT 1.3
EXHIBIT 1.4
You can also get the graphical model and solution for this problem by clicking on “Window”
at the top of the solution screen and selecting the menu item for a graph of the problem. The
break-even graph for the Western Clothing example is shown in Exhibit 1.4.

16
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
Management science techniques
Probabilistic
techniques
Linear mathematical
programming
Linear programming
  models
Graphical analysis
Sensitivity analysis
Transportation, 
  transshipment, 
  and assignment
Integer linear
  programming
Goal programming
Decision analysis
Probability and
statistics
Queuing
Network
Text
techniques
Network flow
Project
management
(CPM/PERT)
Other techniques
Forecasting
Simulation
Inventory
Analytical hierarchy
  process (AHP)
Nonlinear
  programming
Companion Web site
Branch and bound
Markov analysis
Game theory
method
Simplex method
Transportation
and assignment
methods
Nonlinear programming
FIGURE 1.6
Classification
of management
science
techniques
Linear Mathematical Programming Techniques
Chapters 2 through 6 and 9 present techniques that together make up linear mathematical
programming. (The first example used to demonstrate model construction earlier in this chapter
is a very rudimentary linear programming model.) The term programming used to identify this
technique does not refer to computer programming but rather to a predetermined set of mathe-
matical steps used to solve a problem. This particular class of techniques holds a predominant
position in this text because it includes some of the more frequently used and popular techniques
in management science.
In general, linear programming models help managers determine solutions (i.e., make deci-
sions) for problems that will achieve some objective in which there are restrictions, such as limited
resources or a recipe or perhaps production guidelines. For example, you could actually develop a
linear programming model to help determine a breakfast menu for yourself that would meet di-
etary guidelines you may have set, such as number of calories, fat content, and vitamin level, while
minimizing the cost of the breakfast. Manufacturing companies develop linear programming mod-
els to help decide how many units of different products they should produce to maximize their
profit (or minimize their cost), given scarce resources such as capital, labor, and facilities.
Six chapters in this text are devoted to this topic because there are several variations of lin-
ear programming models that can be applied to specific types of problems. Chapter 4 is devoted
entirely to describing example linear programming models for several different types of prob-
lem scenarios. Chapter 6, for example, focuses on one particular type of linear programming ap-
plication for transportation, transshipment, and assignment problems. An example of a
transportation problem is a manager trying to determine the lowest-cost routes to use to ship
goods from several sources (such as plants or warehouses) to several destinations (such as retail
stores), given that each source may have limited goods available and each destination may have
limited demand for the goods. Also, Chapter 9 includes the topic of goal programming, which is
a form of linear programming that addresses problems with more than one objective or goal.
As mentioned previously in this chapter, some of the more mathematical topics in the text
are included as supplementary modules on the companion Web site for the text. Among the linear
programming topics included on the companion Web site are modules on the simplex method;
the transportation and assignment solution methods; and the branch and bound solution method
for integer programming models. Also included on the companion Web site are modules on non-
linear programming, game theory, and Markov analysis.
Probabilistic Techniques
Probabilistic techniques are presented in Chapters 11 through 13. These techniques are distin-
guished from mathematical programming techniques in that the results are probabilistic.
Mathematical programming techniques assume that all parameters in the models are known

MANAGEMENT SCIENCE MODELING TECHNIQUES
17
with certainty. Therefore, the solution results are assumed to be known with certainty, with no
probability that other solutions might exist. A technique that assumes certainty in its solution
is referred to as deterministic. In contrast, the results from a probabilistic technique do con-
tain uncertainty, with some possibility that alternative solutions might exist. In the model so-
lution presented earlier in this chapter, the result of the first example (
units to
produce) is deterministic, whereas the result of the second example (estimating an average of
40 units sold each month) is probabilistic.
An example of a probabilistic technique is decision analysis, the subject of Chapter 12. In
decision analysis, it is shown how to select among several different decision alternatives, given
uncertain (i.e., probabilistic) future conditions. For example, a developer may want to decide
whether to build a shopping mall, build an office complex, build condominiums, or not build
anything at all, given future economic conditions that might be good, fair, or poor, each with a
probability of occurrence. Chapter 13, on queuing analysis, presents probabilistic techniques for
analyzing waiting lines that might occur, for example, at the grocery store, at a bank, or at a
movie. The results of waiting line analysis are statistical averages showing, among other things,
the average number of customers in line waiting to be served or the average time a customer
might have to wait for service.
Network Techniques
Networks, the topic of Chapters 7 and 8, consist of models that are represented as diagrams
rather than as strictly mathematical relationships. As such, these models offer a pictorial repre-
sentation of the system under analysis. These models represent either probabilistic or determin-
istic systems.
For example, in shortest-route problems, one of the topics in Chapter 7 (“Network Flow
Models”), a network diagram can be drawn to help a manager determine the shortest route
among a number of different routes from a source to a destination. For example, you could use
this technique to determine the shortest or quickest car route from St. Louis to Daytona Beach
for a spring break vacation. In Chapter 8 (“Project Management”), a network is drawn that
shows the relationships of all the tasks and activities for a project, such as building a house or
developing a new computer system. This type of network can help a manager plan the best way
to accomplish each of the tasks in the project so that it will take the shortest amount of time pos-
sible. You could use this type of technique to plan for a concert or an intramural volleyball tour-
nament on your campus.
Other Techniques
Some topics in the text are not easily categorized; they may overlap several categories, or they
may be unique. The analytical hierarchy process (AHP) in Chapter 9 is such a topic that is not
easily classified. It is a mathematical technique for helping the decision maker choose between
several alternative decisions, given more than one objective; however, it is not a form of linear
programming, as is goal programming, the shared topic in Chapter 9, on multicriteria decision
making. The structure of the mathematical models for nonlinear programming problems in
Chapter 10 is similar to the linear programming problems in Chapters 2 through 6; however, the
mathematical equations and functions in nonlinear programming can be nonlinear instead of lin-
ear, thus requiring the use of calculus to solve them. Simulation, the subject of Chapter 14, is
probably the single most unique topic in the text. It has the capability to solve probabilistic and
deterministic problems and is often the technique of last resort when no other management sci-
ence technique will work. In simulation, a mathematical model is constructed (typically using a
computer) that replicates a real-world system under analysis, and then that simulation model is
used to solve problems in the “simulated” real-world system. For example, with simulation you
could build a model to simulate the traffic patterns of vehicles at a busy intersection to deter-
mine how to set the traffic light signals.
x = 25
A deterministic
technique assumes
certainty in the 
solution.

Forecasting, the subject of Chapter 15, and inventory management, in Chapter 16, are top-
ics traditionally considered to be part of the field of operations management. However, because
they are both important business functions that also rely heavily on quantitative models for their
analysis, they are typically considered important topics in the study of management science as
well. Both topics also include probabilistic as well as deterministic aspects. In Chapter 15, we
will look at several different quantitative models that help managers predict what the future de-
mand for products and services will look like. In general, historical sales and demand data are
used to build a mathematical function or formula that can be used to estimate product demand in
the future. In Chapter 16, we will look at several different quantitative models that help organiza-
tions determine how much inventory to keep on hand in order to minimize inventory costs, which
can be significant.
Business Usage of Management Science Techniques
Not all management science techniques are equally useful or equally used by business firms
and other organizations. Some techniques are used quite frequently by business practitioners
and managers; others are used less often. The most frequently used techniques are linear and
integer programming, simulation, network analysis (including critical path method/project
evaluation and review technique [CPM/PERT]), inventory control, decision analysis, and
queuing theory, as well as probability and statistics. An attempt has been made in this text to
provide a comprehensive treatment of all the topics generally considered within the field of
management science, regardless of how frequently they are used. Although some topics may
have limited direct applicability, their study can reveal informative and unique means of ap-
proaching a problem and can often enhance one’s understanding of the decision-making
process.
The variety and breadth of management science applications and of the potential for apply-
ing management science, not only in business and industry but also in government, health care,
and service organizations, are extensive. Areas of application include project planning, capital
budgeting, production planning, inventory analysis, scheduling, marketing planning, quality
control, plant location, maintenance policy, personnel management, and product demand fore-
casting, among others. In this text the applicability of management science to a variety of prob-
lem areas is demonstrated via individual chapter examples and the problems that accompany
each chapter.
A small portion of the thousands of applications of management science that occur each
year are recorded in various academic and professional journals. Frequently, these journal
articles are as complex as the applications themselves and are very difficult to read.
However, one particular journal, Interfaces, is devoted specifically to the application of man-
agement science and is written not just for college professors but for businesspeople, practi-
tioners, and students as well. Interfaces is published by INFORMS (Institute for Operations
Research and Management Sciences), an international professional organization whose
members include college professors, businesspeople, scientists, students, and a variety of
professional people interested in the practice and application of management science and
operations research.
Interfaces regularly publishes articles that report on the application of management science
to a wide variety of problems. The chapters that follow present examples of applications of man-
agement science from Interfaces and other professional journals. These applications are from a
variety of U.S. and overseas companies and organizations in business, industry, services, and
government. These examples, as presented here, do not detail the actual models and the model
components. Instead, they briefly indicate the type of problem the company or organization
faced, the objective of the solution approach developed to solve the problem, and the benefits
derived from the model or technique (i.e., what was accomplished). The interested reader who
desires more detailed information about these and other management science applications is
18
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE

BUSINESS USAGE OF MANAGEMENT SCIENCE TECHNIQUES
19
Management Science Application
Management Science in Health Care
More than 16% of the U.S. GDP is spent on health care
each year (i.e., more than $2 trillion in 2006), making it the
single largest industry in the United States. However, it is esti-
mated that as much as 30% of health care costs result from
waste through inefficient processes. Management science is
really good at making inefficient processes more efficient.
Thus, it is not surprising that one of the most frequent recent
areas of application of management science techniques is in
health care. Following are three brief examples of its many
successful applications. 
Each year, approximately 2 million patients contract health-
care-associated infections in hospitals in the United States.
Each year, more than 100,000 of these patients die, and more
than $30 billion is spent on treating these infections. This
problem is complicated by the emergence of pathogens
(i.e., germs) that are resistant to antibiotics. Researchers at
John H. Stroger, Jr. Hospital of Cook County in Chicago used
management science, specifically simulation (Chapter 14), to
address this problem. The simulation modeled the process of
pathogens, patients, and visitors entering an intensive care
unit; interacting with health care workers and each other; in-
fecting; becoming infected; being cured; being discharged;
and being assigned costs. Besides identifying critical issues and
interrelationships in hospital and health care procedures, the
results specifically indicated that both isolation wards for
infected patients and hand hygiene are critical policies in re-
ducing infections.
East Carolina University (ECU) Student Health Service is
a health care clinic that serves the 23,000 students at this
public university located in Greenville, South Carolina. The
Student Health Service facility encompasses 16,000 square
feet of space and includes 25 exam rooms, 3 observation
beds, a pharmacy, a lab, and radiology resources. On any
given day, it is staffed by 5 to 10 doctors and physician as-
sistants to diagnose and treat campus patients. Almost all
patients schedule appointments in advance. In a recent year,
slightly more than 35,000 appointments were scheduled,
but approximately 3,800 were no-shows. The problem of
no-shows at health care clinics is not unique, but it is a
significant problem, with estimated costs at the ECU clinic
of over $400,000 per year resulting from reduced patient
access.
Researchers at ECU used a combination of several
management science techniques, including forecasting
(Chapter 15), decision analysis (Chapter 12), and simulation
(Chapter 14), to develop a solution approach employing an
overbooking policy (similar to what airlines do for flights). In
the first semester, the clinic implemented the policy,
appointment times were overbooked by 7.3%, with few
patients overscheduled and an estimated cost savings of
about $95,000.
In the United States, prostate cancer is the second most
prevalent cancer killer of men, with more than 220,000 new
cases each year and a 12% mortality rate. At Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center in New York, researchers for-
mulated sophisticated models using management science
techniques—and specifically linear integer programming
(Chapter 5)—for the treatment of prostate cancer using
brachytherapy, the placement of radioactive “seeds” inside a
tumor. The procedure results in significantly safer and more
reliable treatment outcomes, has the potential for saving
hundreds of millions of dollars through the elimination of
various related procedures, and improves post-treatment
quality of life by reducing complications up to 45% to 60%. 
Sources: Based on M. Carter, B. Golden, and E. Wasil, “Introduction:
Applications of Management Science and Operations Research Mod-
els and Methods to Problems in Health Care,” Interfaces 39, no. 3
(May–June 2009): 183–85; R. Hagtvedt, P. Griffin, P. Keskinocak,
and R. Roberts, “A Simulation Model to Compare Strategies for the 
Reduction of Health-Care-Associated Infections,” Interfaces 39,
no. 3 (May–June 2009): 256–70; J. Kros, S. Dellana, and D. West,
“Overbooking Increases Patient Access at East Carolina University’s
Student Health Services Clinic,” Interfaces no. 3 (May–June 2009):
271–87; and E. Lee and M. Zaider,
“Operations Research
Advances Cancer Therapeutics,” Interfaces 38, no. 1 (January–
February 2008): 5–25. 
Photo courtesy of Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center

20
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
encouraged to go to the library and peruse Interfaces and the many other journals that contain
articles on the application of management science.
Management Science Models in Decision Support Systems
Historically, management science models have been applied to the solution of specific types of
problems; for example, a waiting line model is used to analyze a specific waiting line system at
a store or bank. However, the evolution of computer and information technology has enabled the
development of expansive computer systems that combine several management science models
and solution techniques in order to address more complex, interrelated organizational problems.
A decision support system (DSS) is a computer-based system that helps decision makers
address complex problems that cut across different parts of an organization and operations.
A DSS is normally interactive, combining various databases and different management sci-
ence models and solution techniques with a user interface that enables the decision maker to ask
questions and receive answers. In its simplest form any computer-based software program that
helps a decision maker make a decision can be referred to as a DSS. For example, an Excel
spreadsheet like the one shown for break-even analysis in Exhibit 1.1 or the QM for Windows
model shown in Exhibit 1.3 can realistically be called a DSS. Alternatively, enterprise-wide DSSs
can encompass many different types of models and large data warehouses, and they can serve
many decision makers in an organization. They can provide decision makers with interrelated in-
formation and analyses about almost anything in a company.
Figure 1.7 illustrates the basic structure of a DSS with a database component, a modeling
component, and a user interface with the decision maker. As noted earlier, a DSS can be small
and singular, with one analytical model linked to a database, or it can be very large and com-
plex, linking many models and large databases. A DSS can be primarily a data-oriented system,
or it can be a model-oriented system. A new type of DSS, called an online analytical processing
system, or OLAP, focuses on the use of analytical techniques such as management science mod-
els and statistics for decision making. A desktop DSS for a single user can be a spreadsheet pro-
gram such as Excel to develop specific solutions to individual problems. Exhibit 1.1 includes all
the components of a DSS—cost, volume, and price data, a break-even model, and the opportu-
nity for the user to manipulate the data and see the results (i.e., a user interface). Expert Choice
is another example of a desktop DSS that uses the analytical hierarchy process (AHP) described
in Chapter 9 to structure complex problems by establishing decision criteria, developing priori-
ties, and ranking decision alternatives.
Decision maker
User interface
Internet/e-business
Databases
Management
science models
FIGURE 1.7
A decision support
system
On the other end of the DSS spectrum, an enterprise resource planning (ERP) system is
software that can connect the components and functions of an entire company. It can transform

data, such as individual daily sales, directly into information that supports immediate decisions
in other parts of the company, such as ordering, manufacturing, inventory, and distribution. A
large-scale DSS such as an ERP system in a company might include a forecasting model
(Chapter 15) to analyze sales data and help determine future product demand; an inventory
model (Chapter 16) to determine how much inventory to keep on hand; a linear programming
model (Chapters 2–5) to determine how much material to order and product to produce, and
when to produce it; a transportation model (Chapter 6) to determine the most cost-effective
method of distributing a product to customers; and a network flow model (Chapter 7) to deter-
mine the best delivery routes. All these different management science models and the data nec-
essary to support them can be linked in a single enterprisewide DSS that can provide many
decisions to many different decision makers.
In addition to helping managers answer specific questions and make decisions, a DSS may
be most useful in answering What if? questions and performing sensitivity analysis. In other
words, a DSS provides a computer-based laboratory to perform experiments. By linking various
management science models together with different databases, a user can change a parameter in
one model related to one company function and see what the effect will be in a model related to
a different operation in the company. For example, by changing the data in a forecasting model,
a manager could see the impact of a hypothetical change in product demand on the production
schedule, as determined by a linear programming model.
Advances in information and computer technology have provided the opportunity to apply
management science models to a broad array of complex organizational problems by linking
different models to databases in a DSS. These advances have also made the application of man-
agement science models more readily available to individual users in the form of desktop DSSs
that can help managers make better decisions relative to their day-to-day operations. In the fu-
ture it will undoubtedly become even easier to apply management science to the solution of
problems with the development of newer software, and management science will become even
more important and pervasive as an aid to decision makers as managers are linked within com-
panies with sophisticated computer systems and to other companies via the Internet.
Many companies now interface with new types of DSS over the Internet. In e-business ap-
plications, companies can link to other business units around the world through computer sys-
tems called intranets, with other companies through systems called extranets, and over the
Internet. For example, electronic data interchange (EDI) and point-of-sale data (through bar
codes) can provide companies with instantaneous records of business transactions and sales at
retail stores that are immediately entered into a company’s DSS to update inventory and produc-
tion scheduling, using management science models. Internet transportation exchanges enable
companies to arrange cost-effective transportation of their products at Web sites that match ship-
ping loads with available trucks at the lowest cost and fastest delivery speed, using sophisticated
management science models.
Summary
In the chapters that follow, the model construction and solutions that constitute each management
science technique are presented in detail and illustrated with examples. In fact, the primary
method of presenting the techniques is through examples. Thus, the text offers you a broad spec-
trum of knowledge of the mechanics of management science techniques and the types of prob-
lems to which these techniques are applied. However, the ultimate test of a management scientist
or a manager who uses management science techniques is the ability to transfer textbook knowl-
edge to the business world. In such instances there is an art to the application of management sci-
ence, but it is an art predicated on practical experience and sound textbook knowledge. Providing
the first of these necessities is beyond the scope of textbooks; providing the second is the objec-
tive of this text.
SUMMARY
21
Management science
is an art.

Problems
1. The Willow Furniture Company produces tables. The fixed monthly cost of production is
$8,000, and the variable cost per table is $65. The tables sell for $180 apiece.
a. For a monthly volume of 300 tables, determine the total cost, total revenue, and profit.
b. Determine the monthly break-even volume for the Willow Furniture Company.
2. The Retread Tire Company recaps tires. The fixed annual cost of the recapping operation is
$60,000. The variable cost of recapping a tire is $9. The company charges $25 to recap a tire.
a. For an annual volume of 12,000 tires, determine the total cost, total revenue, and profit.
b. Determine the annual break-even volume for the Retread Tire Company operation.
3. The Rolling Creek Textile Mill produces denim. The fixed monthly cost is $21,000, and the vari-
able cost per yard of denim is $0.45. The mill sells a yard of denim for $1.30.
a. For a monthly volume of 18,000 yards of denim, determine the total cost, total revenue, and
profit.
b. Determine the annual break-even volume for the Rolling Creek Textile Mill.
4. Evergreen Fertilizer Company produces fertilizer. The company’s fixed monthly cost is $25,000,
and its variable cost per pound of fertilizer is $0.15. Evergreen sells the fertilizer for $0.40 per
pound. Determine the monthly break-even volume for the company.
5. Graphically illustrate the break-even volume for the Retread Tire Company determined in
Problem 2.
6. Graphically illustrate the break-even volume for the Evergreen Fertilizer Company determined
in Problem 4.
7. Andy Mendoza makes handcrafted dolls, which he sells at craft fairs. He is considering mass-
producing the dolls to sell in stores. He estimates that the initial investment for plant and equip-
ment will be $25,000, whereas labor, material, packaging, and shipping will be about $10 per
doll. If the dolls are sold for $30 each, what sales volume is necessary for Andy to break even?
8. If the maximum operating capacity of the Retread Tire Company, as described in Problem 2, is
8,000 tires annually, determine the break-even volume as a percentage of that capacity.
9. If the maximum operating capacity of the Rolling Creek Textile Mill described in Problem 3 is
25,000 yards of denim per month, determine the break-even volume as a percentage of capacity.
10. If the maximum operating capacity of Evergreen Fertilizer Company described in Problem 4 is
120,000 pounds of fertilizer per month, determine the break-even volume as a percentage of capacity.
11. If the Retread Tire Company in Problem 2 changes its pricing for recapping a tire from $25 to
$31, what effect will the change have on the break-even volume?
12. If Evergreen Fertilizer Company in Problem 4 changes the price of its fertilizer from $0.40 per
pound to $0.60 per pound, what effect will the change have on the break-even volume?
13. If Evergreen Fertilizer Company changes its production process to add a weed killer to the fer-
tilizer in order to increase sales, the variable cost per pound will increase from $0.15 to $0.22.
What effect will this change have on the break-even volume computed in Problem 12?
14. If Evergreen Fertilizer Company increases its advertising expenditures by $14,000 per year,
what effect will the increase have on the break-even volume computed in Problem 13?
15. Pastureland Dairy makes cheese, which it sells at local supermarkets. The fixed monthly cost of
production is $4,000, and the variable cost per pound of cheese is $0.21. The cheese sells for
$0.75 per pound; however, the dairy is considering raising the price to $0.95 per pound. The
22
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE

dairy currently produces and sells 9,000 pounds of cheese per month, but if it raises its price per
pound, sales will decrease to 5,700 pounds per month. Should the dairy raise the price?
16. For the doll-manufacturing enterprise described in Problem 7, Andy Mendoza has determined
that $10,000 worth of advertising will increase sales volume by 400 dolls. Should he spend the
extra amount for advertising?
17. Andy Mendoza in Problem 7 is concerned that the demand for his dolls will not exceed the 
break-even point. He believes he can reduce his initial investment by purchasing used sewing
machines and fewer machines. This will reduce his initial investment from $25,000 to $17,000.
However, it will also require his employees to work more slowly and perform more operations
by hand, thus increasing variable cost from $10 to $14 per doll. Will these changes reduce his
break-even point?
18. The General Store at State University is an auxiliary bookstore located near the dormitories that
sells academic supplies, toiletries, sweatshirts and T-shirts, magazines, packaged food items, and
canned soft drinks and fruit drinks. The manager of the store has noticed that several pizza de-
livery services near campus make frequent deliveries. The manager is therefore considering sell-
ing pizza at the store. She could buy premade frozen pizzas and heat them in an oven. The cost
of the oven and freezer would be $27,000. The frozen pizzas cost $3.75 each to buy from a dis-
tributor and to prepare (including labor and a box). To be competitive with the local delivery
services, the manager believes she should sell the pizzas for $8.95 apiece. The manager needs to
write up a proposal for the university’s director of auxiliary services.
a. Determine how many pizzas would have to be sold to break even.
b. If The General Store sells 20 pizzas per day, how many days would it take to break even?
c. The manager of the store anticipates that once the local pizza delivery services start
losing business, they will react by cutting prices. If after a month (30 days) the manager
has to lower the price of a pizza to $7.95 to keep demand at 20 pizzas per day, as she expects,
what will the new break-even point be, and how long will it take the store to break even?
19. Kim Davis has decided to purchase a cellular phone, but she is unsure about which rate plan to
select. The “regular” plan charges a fixed fee of $55 per month for 1,000 minutes of airtime plus
$0.33 per minute for any time over 1,000 minutes. The “executive” plan charges a fixed fee of
$100 per month for 1,200 minutes of airtime plus $0.25 per minute over 1,200 minutes.
a. If Kim expects to use the phone for 21 hours per month, which plan should she select?
b. At what level of use would Kim be indifferent between the two plans?
20. Annie Russell, a student at Tech, plans to open a hot dog stand inside Tech’s football stadium
during home games. There are seven home games scheduled for the upcoming season. She must
pay the Tech athletic department a vendor’s fee of $3,000 for the season. Her stand and other
equipment will cost her $4,500 for the season. She estimates that each hot dog she sells will cost
her $0.35. She has talked to friends at other universities who sell hot dogs at games. Based on
their information and the athletic department’s forecast that each game will sell out, she antici-
pates that she will sell approximately 2,000 hot dogs during each game.
a. What price should she charge for a hot dog in order to break even?
b. What factors might occur during the season that would alter the volume sold and thus the
break-even price Annie might charge?
c. What price would you suggest that Annie charge for a hot dog to provide her with a reason-
able profit while remaining competitive with other food vendors?
21. Hannah Byers and Kathleen Taylor are considering the possibility of teaching swimming to kids
during the summer. A local swim club opens its pool at noon each day, so it is available to rent
during the morning. The cost of renting the pool during the 10-week period for which Hannah
and Kathleen would need it is $1,700. The pool would also charge Hannah and Kathleen an ad-
mission, towel service, and life guarding fee of $7 per pupil, and Hannah and Kathleen estimate
PROBLEMS
23

an additional $5 cost per student to hire several assistants. Hannah and Kathleen plan to charge
$75 per student for the 10-week swimming class.
a. How many pupils do Hannah and Kathleen need to enroll in their class to break even?
b. If Hannah and Kathleen want to make a profit of $5,000 for the summer, how many pupils
do they need to enroll?
c. Hannah and Kathleen estimate that they might not be able to enroll more than 60 pupils. If
they enroll this many pupils, how much would they need to charge per pupil in order to real-
ize their profit goal of $5,000?
22. The College of Business at Tech is planning to begin an online MBA program. The initial start-
up cost for computing equipment, facilities, course development, and staff recruitment and
development is $350,000. The college plans to charge tuition of $18,000 per student per year.
However, the university administration will charge the college $12,000 per student for the first
100 students enrolled each year for administrative costs and its share of the tuition payments.
a. How many students does the college need to enroll in the first year to break even?
b. If the college can enroll 75 students the first year, how much profit will it make?
c. The college believes it can increase tuition to $24,000, but doing so would reduce enrollment
to 35. Should the college consider doing this?
23. The Star Youth Soccer Club helps to support its 20 boys’ and girls’ teams financially, primarily
through the payment of coaches. The club puts on a tournament each fall to help pay its ex-
penses. The cost of putting on the tournament is $8,000, mainly for development, printing, and
mailing of the tournament brochures. The tournament entry fee is $400 per team. For every team
that enters, it costs the club about $75 to pay referees for the three-game minimum each team is
guaranteed. If the club needs to clear $60,000 from the tournament, how many teams should it
invite?
24. A group of developers is opening a health club near a new housing development. The health
club—which will have exercise and workout equipment, basketball courts, swimming pools, an
indoor walking/running track, and tennis courts—is one of the amenities the developers are
building to attract new homebuyers. However, they want the health club to at least break even
the first year or two. The annual fixed cost for the building, equipment, utilities, staff, and so on
is $875,000, and annual variable costs are $200 per member for things like water, towels, laun-
dry, soap, shampoo, and other member services. The membership fee is $225 per month. How
many members will the club need to break even? If the club doubles its break-even membership
after a year, what will its profit be?
25. The Tech Student Government Association (SGA) has several campus projects it undertakes each
year and its primary source of funding to support these projects is a T-shirt sale in the fall for what
is known as the “orange effect” football game (with orange being one of Tech’s colors). The
club’s publicized (media) objective is for everyone in the stadium to wear orange. The club’s fi-
nancial goal is to make a profit of $150,000, but in order to have a significant number of fans buy
the shirts and wear them to the game, it doesn’t want to price the T-shirts much more than $6. The
stadium seats 62,000 fans, and the SGA would like to sell approximately 45,000 orange T-shirts
to achieve the desired orange effect, which it’s relatively confident it can do. It will cost $100,000
to purchase, silk-screen print, and ship this many T-shirts. The SGA sells the shirts through three
sources: online, the two Tech bookstores, and a local independent bookstore. While the book-
stores don’t expect to share in the profits from the sale of the shirts, they do expect for their direct
costs to be covered, including labor, space, and other costs. The two Tech bookstores charge the
SGA $0.35 per shirt, and the local independent store charges $0.50 per shirt. The cost per sale
online (including handling, packaging, and shipping) is $2.30 per shirt. The SGA estimates that it
will sell 50% of the shirts at the two Tech bookstores, 35% at the local bookstore, and 15% on-
line. If the SGA sells the T-shirts for $6 and if it sells all the shirts it orders, will it make enough
profit to achieve its financial goal? If not, at what price would the SGA need to sell the T-shirts,
or how many would the SGA have to sell to achieve its financial goal? 
24
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE

26. The owners of Backstreets Italian Restaurant are considering starting a delivery service for
pizza and their other Italian dishes in the small college town where they are located. They
can purchase a used delivery van and have it painted with their name and logo for $21,500.
They can hire part-time drivers who will work in the evenings from 5 P.M. to 10 P.M. for
$8 per hour. The drivers are mostly college students who study at the restaurant when they
are not making deliveries. During the day, there are so few deliveries that the regular employ-
ees can handle them. The owners estimate that the van will last 5 years (365 days per year)
before it has to be replaced and that each delivery will cost about $1.35 in gas and other
maintenance costs (including tires, oil, scheduled service, etc.). They also estimate that on
average each delivery order will cost $15 for direct labor and ingredients to prepare and
package, and will generate $34 in revenue. 
a. How many delivery orders must Backstreets make each month in order for the service to
break even?
b. The owners believe that if they have approximately the break-even number of deliveries dur-
ing the week, they will at least double that number on Fridays, Saturdays, and Sundays. If
that’s the case, how much profit will they make, at a minimum, from their delivery service
each month (4 weeks per month)? 
27. Kathleen Taylor is a high school student who has been investigating the possibility of mowing
lawns for a summer job. She has a couple of friends she thinks she could hire on an hourly basis
per job. The equipment, including two new lawnmowers and weed-eaters, would cost her $500,
and she estimates her cost per lawn, based on the time required to pay her friends to mow an av-
erage residential lawn (and not including her own labor) and gas for driving to the jobs and
mowing, would be about $14. 
a. If she charges customers $30 per lawn, how many lawns would she need to mow to break
even? 
b. Kathleen has 8 weeks available to mow lawns before school starts again, and she estimates
that she can get enough customers to mow at least three lawns per day, 6 days per week. How
much money can she expect to make over the summer?
c. Kathleen believes she can get more business if she lowers her price per lawn. If she lowers
her price to $25 per lawn and increases her number of jobs to four per day (which is about
all she can handle anyway), should she make this decision?
28. The Weemow Lawn Service mows its customers’ lawns and provides lawn maintenance starting
in the spring, through the summer, and into the early fall. During the winter, the service doesn’t
operate, and Weemow’s owners, Jeff and Julie Weems, find part-time jobs. They are considering
the possibility of doing snow removal during the winter. A snowblower and a shovel would cost
them $700. Since Jeff would do all the work, with occasional help from Julie, their cost per job
would be about $3. 
a. If they charge $35 to clear a normal-size home driveway, how many jobs would they need to
break even? 
b. Based on past winters, Jeff and Julie believe they can expect about six major snowfalls in the
winter and would be able to work all day for the two days immediately following the snows,
when people want their driveways cleared. If they are able to do about 10 snow removal jobs
per day (and they believe they will have that much demand because of their existing cus-
tomer base), how much money can they expect to make?
c. Another possibility for Weemow is to remove snow from business parking lots. Weemow
would need a small tractor with a snow plow, which costs $1,800, and would have to hire
someone on an hourly basis to help, which with gas would cost about $28 per job. Jeff and
Julie estimate that they could do four of these large jobs per day. If they charged $150 per
job, would this be a better alternative than clearing individuals’ driveways?
d. If Weemow wanted to do both (b) and (c), Jeff and Julie would need to hire one more person
to do the driveways, while Jeff worked with the other person on the parking lots. This would
add $15 in cost per driveway job. Should they do this? 
PROBLEMS
25

26
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
29. In the example used to demonstrate model construction in this chapter (p. 4), a firm sells a prod-
uct, x, for $20 that costs $5 to make, it has 100 pounds of steel to make the product, and it takes
4 pounds of steel to make each unit. The model that was constructed is
subject to
Now suppose that there is a second product, y, that has a profit of $10 and requires 2 pounds of
steel to make, such that the model becomes
subject to
Can you determine a solution to this new model that will achieve the objective? Explain your answer.
30. Consider a model in which two products, x and y, are produced. There are 100 pounds of mate-
rial and 80 hours of labor available. It requires 2 pounds of material and 1 hour of labor to pro-
duce a unit of x, and 4 pounds of material and 5 hours of labor to produce a unit of y. The profit
for x is $30 per unit, and the profit for y is $50 per unit. If we want to know how many units of x
and y to produce to maximize profit, the model is
subject to
Determine the solution to this problem and explain your answer.
31. Maria Eagle is a Native American artisan. She works part time making bowls and mugs by hand
from special pottery clay and then sells her items to the Beaver Creek Pottery Company, a Native
American crafts guild. She has 60 hours available each month to make bowls and mugs, and it
takes her 12 hours to make a bowl and 15 hours to make a mug. She uses 9 pounds of special clay
to make a bowl, and she needs 5 pounds to make a mug; Maria has 30 pounds of clay available
each month. She makes a profit of $300 for each bowl she delivers, and she makes $250 for each
mug. Determine all the possible combinations of bowls and mugs Maria can make each month,
given her limited resources, and select the most profitable combination of bowls and mugs Maria
should make each month. Develop an Excel spreadsheet and a graph to help solve this problem. 
32. The Easy Drive Car Rental Agency needs 500 new cars in its Nashville operation and 300 new
cars in Jacksonville, and it currently has 400 new cars in both Atlanta and Birmingham. It costs
$30 to move a car from Atlanta to Nashville, $70 to move a car from Atlanta to Jacksonville, $40
to move a car from Birmingham to Nashville, and $60 to move a car from Birmingham to Jack-
sonville. The agency wants to determine how many cars should be transported from the agencies
in Atlanta and Birmingham to the agencies in Nashville and Jacksonville in order to meet de-
mand while minimizing the transport costs. Develop a mathematical model for this problem and
use logic to determine a solution.
33. Ed Norris has developed a Web site for his used textbook business at State University. To sell
advertising he needs to forecast the number of site visits he expects in the future. For the past
6 months he has had the following number of site visits:
x + 5y = 80
 2x + 4y = 100
 maximize Z = 30x + 50y
4x + 2y = 100
 maximize Z = 15x + 10y
4x = 100
 maximize Z = 20x - 5x
Month
1
2
3
4
5
6
Site Visits
6,300
10,200
14,700
18,500
25,100
30,500
Determine a forecast for Ed to use for month 7 and explain the logic used to develop your forecast.

PROBLEMS
27
34. When Tracy McCoy wakes up on Saturday morning, she remembers that she promised the PTA
she would make some cakes and/or homemade bread for its bake sale that afternoon. However,
she does not have time to go to the store and get ingredients, and she has only a short time to
bake things in her oven. Because cakes and breads require different baking temperatures, she
cannot bake them simultaneously, and she has only 3 hours available to bake. A cake requires 3
cups of flour, and a loaf of bread requires 8 cups; Tracy has 20 cups of flour. A cake requires 45
minutes to bake, and a loaf of bread requires 30 minutes. The PTA will sell a cake for $10 and a
loaf of bread for $6. Tracy wants to decide how many cakes and loaves of bread she should
make. Identify all the possible solutions to this problem (i.e., combinations of cakes and loaves
of bread Tracy has the time and flour to bake) and select the best one.
35. The local Food King grocery store has eight possible checkout stations with registers. On Sat-
urday mornings customer traffic is relatively steady from 8 A.M. to noon. The store manager
would like to determine how many checkout stations to staff during this time period. The man-
ager knows from information provided by the store’s national office that each minute past 3
minutes a customer must wait in line costs the store on average $50 in ill will and lost sales.
Alternatively, each additional checkout station the store operates on Saturday morning costs
the store $60 in salary and benefits. The following table shows the waiting time for the differ-
ent staff levels.
How many registers should the store staff and why?
36. A furniture manufacturer in Roanoke, Virginia, must deliver a tractor trailer load of furniture to
a retail store in Washington, DC. There are a number of different routes the truck can take from
Roanoke to DC, as shown in the following road network, with the distance for each segment
shown in miles.
Registers Staffed
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Waiting Time (min.)
20.0
14.0
9.0
4.0
1.7
1.0
0.5
0.1
Staunton
Charlottesville
Front Royal
Roanoke
Danville
4
3
2
5
7
8
9
6
1
Washington, DC
Richmond
Lynchburg
76
85
53
88
65
137
117
24
61
72
31
97
106
67
Petersburg
Determine the shortest route the truck can take from Roanoke to Washington, DC.

28
CHAPTER 1
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE
The Clean Clothes Corner Laundry
When Molly Lai purchased the Clean Clothes Corner
Laundry, she thought that because it was in a good location
near several high-income neighborhoods, she would auto-
matically generate good business if she improved the laun-
dry’s physical appearance. Thus, she initially invested a lot
of her cash reserves in remodeling the exterior and interior
of the laundry. However, she just about broke even in the
year following her acquisition of the laundry, which she
didn’t feel was a sufficient return, given how hard she had
worked. Molly didn’t realize that the dry-cleaning business
is very competitive and that success is based more on price
and quality service, including quickness of service, than on
the laundry’s appearance.
In order to improve her service, Molly is considering
purchasing new dry-cleaning equipment, including a press-
ing machine that could substantially increase the speed at
which she can dry-clean clothes and improve their appear-
ance. The new machinery costs $16,200 installed and can
clean 40 clothes items per hour (or 320 items per day).
Molly estimates her variable costs to be $0.25 per item 
dry-cleaned, which will not change if she purchases the
new equipment. Her current fixed costs are $1,700 per
month. She charges customers $1.10 per clothing item.
A. What is Molly’s current monthly volume?
B. If Molly purchases the new equipment, how many ad-
ditional items will she have to dry-clean each month to
break even?
C. Molly estimates that with the new equipment she can
increase her volume to 4,300 items per month. What
monthly profit would she realize with that level of
business during the next 3 years? After 3 years?
D. Molly believes that if she doesn’t buy the new equip-
ment but lowers her price to $0.99 per item, she will
increase her business volume. If she lowers her price,
what will her new break-even volume be? If her price
reduction results in a monthly volume of 3,800 items,
what will her monthly profit be?
E. Molly estimates that if she purchases the new equip-
ment and lowers her price to $0.99 per item, her vol-
ume will increase to about 4,700 units per month.
Based on the local market, that is the largest volume
she can realistically expect. What should Molly do?
Case Problem
Case Problem
The Ocobee River Rafting Company
Vicki Smith, Penny Miller, and Darryl Davis are students
at State University. In the summer they often go rafting with
other students down the Ocobee River in the nearby Blue
Ridge Mountain foothills. The river has a number of minor
rapids but is not generally dangerous. The students’ rafts ba-
sically consist of large rubber tubes, sometimes joined to-
gether with ski rope. They have noticed that a number of
students who come to the river don’t have rubber rafts and
often ask to borrow theirs, which can be very annoying. In
discussing this nuisance, it occurred to Vicki, Penny, and
Darryl that the problem might provide an opportunity to
make some extra money. They considered starting a new en-
terprise, the Ocobee River Rafting Company, to sell rubber
rafts at the river. They determined that their initial investment
would be about $3,000 to rent a small parcel of land next to
the river on which to make and sell the rafts; to purchase a
tent to operate out of; and to buy some small equipment such
as air pumps and a rope cutter. They estimated that the labor
and material cost per raft will be about $12, including the
purchase and shipping costs for the rubber tubes and rope.
They plan to sell the rafts for $20 apiece, which they think is
about the maximum price students will pay for a preassem-
bled raft.
Soon after they determined these cost estimates, the
newly formed company learned about another rafting com-
pany in North Carolina that was doing essentially what they
planned to do. Vicki got in touch with one of the operators
of that company, and he told her the company would be
willing to supply rafts to the Ocobee River Rafting Com-
pany for an initial fixed fee of $9,000 plus $8 per raft, in-
cluding shipping. (The Ocobee River Rafting Company
would still have to rent the parcel of riverside land and tent
for $1,000.) The rafts would already be inflated and assem-
bled. This alternative appealed to Vicki, Penny, and Darryl
because it would reduce the amount of time they would
have to work pumping up the tubes and putting the rafts to-
gether, and it would increase time for their schoolwork.

CASE PROBLEM
29
Although the students prefer the alternative of pur-
chasing the rafts from the North Carolina company, they
are concerned about the large initial cost and worried
about whether they will lose money. Of course, Vicki,
Penny, and Darryl realize that their profit, if any, will be
determined by how many rafts they sell. As such, they be-
lieve that they first need to determine how many rafts
they must sell with each alternative in order to make a
profit and which alternative would be best given different
levels of demand. Furthermore, Penny has conducted a
brief sample survey of people at the river and estimates
that demand for rafts for the summer will be around
1,000 rafts.
Perform an analysis for the Ocobee River Rafting
Company to determine which alternative would be best for
different levels of demand. Indicate which alternative
should be selected if demand is approximately 1,000 rafts
and how much profit the company would make.
Case Problem
Constructing a Downtown Parking 
Lot in Draper
The town of Draper, with a population of 20,000, sits ad-
jacent to State University, which has an enrollment of
27,000 students. Downtown Draper merchants have long
complained about the lack of parking available to their cus-
tomers. This is one primary reason for the steady migration
of downtown businesses to a mall several miles outside
town. The local chamber of commerce has finally con-
vinced the town council to consider the construction of a
new multilevel indoor parking facility downtown. Kelly
Mattingly, the town’s public works director, has developed
plans for a facility that would cost $4.5 million to construct.
To pay for the project, the town would sell municipal bonds
with a duration of 30 years at 8% interest. Kelly also esti-
mates that five employees would be required to operate the
lot on a daily basis, at a total annual cost of $140,000. It is
estimated that each car that enters the lot would park for an
average of 2.5 hours and pay an average fee of $3.20. Fur-
ther, it is estimated that each car that parks in the lot would
(on average) cost the town $0.60 in annual maintenance for
cleaning and repairs to the facility. Most of the downtown
businesses (which include a number of restaurants) are
open 7 days per week.
A. Using break-even analysis, determine the number of
cars that would have to park in the lot on an annual
basis to pay off the project in the 30-year time
frame.
B. From the results in (A), determine the approximate
number of cars that would have to park in the lot on a
daily basis. Does this seem to be a reasonable num-
ber to achieve, given the size of the town and college
population?

Linear Programming: 
Model Formulation 
and Graphical Solution
30
CHAPTER
2

A MAXIMIZATION MODEL EXAMPLE
31
Many major decisions faced by a manager of a business focus on the best way to achieve the
objectives of the firm, subject to the restrictions placed on the manager by the operating environ-
ment. These restrictions can take the form of limited resources, such as time, labor, energy, mate-
rial, or money; or they can be in the form of restrictive guidelines, such as a recipe for making
cereal or engineering specifications. One of the most frequent objectives of business firms is to
gain the most profit possible or, in other words, to maximize profit. The objective of individual
organizational units within a firm (such as a production or packaging department) is often to
minimize cost. When a manager attempts to solve a general type of problem by seeking an objec-
tive that is subject to restrictions, the management science technique called linear programming
is frequently used.
There are three steps in applying the linear programming technique. First, the problem must
be identified as being solvable by linear programming. Second, the unstructured problem must
be formulated as a mathematical model. Third, the model must be solved by using established
mathematical techniques. The linear programming technique derives its name from the fact that
the functional relationships in the mathematical model are linear, and the solution technique
consists of predetermined mathematical steps—that is, a program. In this chapter we will con-
cern ourselves with the formulation of the mathematical model that represents the problem and
then with solving this model by using a graph.
Model Formulation
A linear programming model consists of certain common components and characteristics. The
model components include decision variables, an objective function, and model constraints,
which consist of decision variables and parameters. Decision variables are mathematical sym-
bols that represent levels of activity by the firm. For example, an electrical manufacturing firm
desires to produce 
radios,
toasters, and 
clocks, where 
, and 
are symbols repre-
senting unknown variable quantities of each item. The final values of 
, and 
, as deter-
mined by the firm, constitute a decision (e.g., the equation 
radios is a decision by the
firm to produce 100 radios).
The objective function is a linear mathematical relationship that describes the objective of
the firm in terms of the decision variables. The objective function always consists of either
maximizing or minimizing some value (e.g., maximize the profit or minimize the cost of produc-
ing radios).
The model constraints are also linear relationships of the decision variables; they represent the
restrictions placed on the firm by the operating environment. The restrictions can be in the form of
limited resources or restrictive guidelines. For example, only 40 hours of labor may be available to
produce radios during production. The actual numeric values in the objective function and the con-
straints, such as the 40 hours of available labor, are parameters.
The next section presents an example of how a linear programming model is formulated. Al-
though this example is simplified, it is realistic and represents the type of problem to which linear
programming can be applied. In the example, the model components are distinctly identified and
described. By carefully studying this example, you can become familiar with the process of for-
mulating linear programming models.
A Maximization Model Example
Beaver Creek Pottery Company is a small crafts operation run by a Native American tribal council.
The company employs skilled artisans to produce clay bowls and mugs with authentic Native
American designs and colors. The two primary resources used by the company are special pottery
clay and skilled labor. Given these limited resources, the company desires to know how many bowls
and mugs to produce each day in order to maximize profit. This is generally referred to as a product
mix problem type. This scenario is illustrated in Figure 2.1.
x1 = 100
x3
x1, x2
x3
x1, x2
x3
x2
x1
Linear programming
is a model that consists
of linear relationships
representing a firm’s
decision(s), given an
objective and resource
constraints.
Objectives of a 
business frequently
are to maximize profit
or minimize cost.
A model constraint is
a linear relationship
that represents a
restriction on decision
making.
Parameters are
numerical values that
are included in the
objective functions
and constraints.
Decision variables
are mathematical
symbols that represent
levels of activity.
The objective
function is a linear
relationship that
reflects the objective
of an operation.

The two products have the following resource requirements for production and profit per
item produced (i.e., the model parameters):
32
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Labor
40 hours per day
Profit
Clay
120 lb. per day
Clay
Clay
Mug
$50
Bowl
$40
FIGURE 2.1
Beaver Creek 
Pottery Company
Resource Requirements
Product
Labor
(hr./unit)
Clay
(lb./unit)
Profit
($/unit)
Bowl
1
4
40
Mug
2
3
50
Linear programming, as it is known today, was conceived in
1947 by George B. Dantzig while he was the head of the Air
Force Statistical Control’s Combat Analysis Branch at the Penta-
gon. The military referred to its plans for training, supplying,
and deploying combat units as “programs.” When Dantzig
analyzed Air Force planning problems, he realized that they
could be formulated as a system of linear inequalities—
hence his original name for the technique, “programming in
a linear structure,” which was later shortened to “linear
programming.”
Time Out
for George B. Dantzig
There are 40 hours of labor and 120 pounds of clay available each day for production. We
will formulate this problem as a linear programming model by defining each component of the

A MAXIMIZATION MODEL EXAMPLE
33
model separately and then combining the components into a single model. The steps in this
formulation process are summarized as follows:
A linear programming
model consists of
decision variables, an
objective function,
and constraints.
Summary of LP Model Formulation Steps
Step 1: Define the decision variables
How many bowls and mugs to produce
Step 2: Define the objective function
Maximize profit
Step 3: Define the constraints
The resources (clay and labor) available
Decision Variables
The decision confronting management in this problem is how many bowls and mugs to produce.
The two decision variables represent the number of bowls and mugs to be produced on a daily
basis. The quantities to be produced can be represented symbolically as
The Objective Function
The objective of the company is to maximize total profit. The company’s profit is the sum of the
individual profits gained from each bowl and mug. Profit derived from bowls is determined by mul-
tiplying the unit profit of each bowl, $40, by the number of bowls produced,
. Likewise, profit
derived from mugs is derived from the unit profit of a mug, $50, multiplied by the number of mugs
produced,
. Thus, total profit, which we will define symbolically as Z, can be expressed mathe-
matically as 
. By placing the term maximize in front of the profit function, we
express the objective of the firm—to maximize total profit:
where
total profit per day
profit from bowls
profit from mugs
Model Constraints
In this problem, two resources are used for production—labor and clay—both of which are limited.
Production of bowls and mugs requires both labor and clay. For each bowl produced, 1 hour of la-
bor is required. Therefore, the labor used for the production of bowls is 
hours. Similarly, each
mug requires 2 hours of labor; thus, the labor used to produce mugs every day is 
hours. The to-
tal labor used by the company is the sum of the individual amounts of labor used for each product:
However, the amount of labor represented by 
is limited to 40 hours per day; thus,
the complete labor constraint is
1x1 + 2x2 … 40 hr.
1x1 + 2x2
1x1 + 2x2
2x2
1x1
+50x2 =
+40x1 =
Z =
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2
+40x1 + +50x2
x2
x1
x2 = number of mugs to produce
x1 = number of bowls to produce

The “less than or equal to”
inequality is employed instead of an equality 
because
the 40 hours of labor is a maximum limitation that can be used, not an amount that must be used.
This constraint allows the company some flexibility; the company is not restricted to using
exactly 40 hours but can use whatever amount is necessary to maximize profit, up to and includ-
ing 40 hours. This means that it is possible to have idle, or excess, capacity (i.e., some of the
40 hours may not be used).
The constraint for clay is formulated in the same way as the labor constraint. Because each
bowl requires 4 pounds of clay, the amount of clay used daily for the production of bowls is 
pounds; and because each mug requires 3 pounds of clay, the amount of clay used daily for mugs
is 
. Given that the amount of clay available for production each day is 120 pounds, the mate-
rial constraint can be formulated as
A final restriction is that the number of bowls and mugs produced must be either zero or a
positive value because it is impossible to produce negative items. These restrictions are referred
to as nonnegativity constraints and are expressed mathematically as
The complete linear programming model for this problem can now be summarized as follows:
subject to
The solution of this model will result in numeric values for 
and 
that will maximize to-
tal profit, Z. As one possible solution, consider 
bowls and 
mugs. First, we will
substitute this hypothetical solution into each of the constraints in order to make sure that the
solution does not require more resources than the constraints show are available:
and
Because neither of the constraints is violated by this hypothetical solution, we say the solu-
tion is feasible (i.e., possible). Substituting these solution values in the objective function gives
. However, for the time being, we do not have any way of knowing
whether $700 is the maximum profit.
Now consider a solution of 
bowls and 
mugs. This solution results in a
profit of
Although this is certainly a better solution in terms of profit, it is infeasible (i.e., not possi-
ble) because it violates the resource constraint for labor:
 50 …/  40
 1(10) + 2(20) … 40
= +1,400
= 400 + 1,000
Z = +40(10) + 50(20)
x2 = 20
x1 = 10
Z = 40(5) + 50(10) = +700
 50 … 120
 4(5) + 3(10) … 120
 25 … 40
 1(5) + 2(10) … 40
x2 = 10
x1 = 5
x2
x1
x1, x2  0
 4x1 + 3x2 … 120
 1x1 + 2x2 … 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2
x1  0, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2 … 120 lb.
3x2
4x1
(=)
(…)
34
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Nonnegativity
constraints restrict
the decision variables
to zero or positive
values.
A feasible solution
does not violate any
of the constraints.
An infeasible problem
violates at least one of
the constraints.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
35
The solution to this problem must maximize profit without violating the constraints. The solu-
tion that achieves this objective is 
bowls and 
mugs, with a corresponding profit of
$1,360. The determination of this solution is shown using the graphical solution approach in the
following section.
Graphical Solutions of Linear Programming Models
Following the formulation of a mathematical model, the next stage in the application of linear
programming to a decision-making problem is to find the solution of the model. A common so-
lution approach is to solve algebraically the set of mathematical relationships that form the
model either manually or using a computer program, thus determining the values for the deci-
sion variables. However, because the relationships are linear, some models and solutions can be
illustrated graphically.
The graphical method is realistically limited to models with only two decision variables,
which can be represented on a graph of two dimensions. Models with three decision variables
can be graphed in three dimensions, but the process is quite cumbersome, and models of four or
more decision variables cannot be graphed at all.
x2 = 8
x1 = 24
Graphical solutions
are limited to linear
programming
problems with only
two decision
variables.
Management Science Application
Allocating Seat Capacity on Indian Railways 
Using Linear Programming
Indian Railways, with more than 1,600 trains, serves more
than 7 million passengers each day. Its reservation system books
passengers in three coach classes: reserved air-conditioned, 
reserved non-air conditioned, and unreserved non-air-
conditioned. A train can make multiple stops from its origin to
its destination, and thus passengers can book many combina-
tions of tickets from a train’s origin to its destination or to
and/or from intermediate stations. Because passengers can 
depart the train or board en route, multiple passengers can 
occupy a single seat during a train’s journey from origin to 
destination. This also means that a seat might be vacant for
some segments of the trip and thus will not earn any revenue.
If there are an abnormally high number of reservations for inter-
mediate trips, then there might be a high number of partially
vacant seats, which might deny subsequent passengers the abil-
ity to book complete origin-to-destination trips. This results in
suboptimal utilization of a train’s capacity. However, in many
cases, passenger demand is not high at the train’s origin station,
and the highest passenger demand occurs en route, at interme-
diate stations. As a result, the railway has traditionally allocated
various seat quotas to intermediate stations and limited the
seats allocated for end-to-end trips, in order to maximize capac-
ity utilization and the number of confirmed seat reservations
and reduce the number of passengers wait-listed at intermedi-
ate stations. 
In this application, a linear programming model was
formulated, with an objective of minimizing the total seats
required to fill all possible seat demand (in a specific coach
class) between any two major stations, subject to constraints
for station-to-station quotas based on historical seat demand.
In a test case of 17 trains in the Western Railway zone (based
in Mumbai) of Indian Railways, revenue was increased
between 2.6% and 29.3%, and the number of passengers
carried increased from 8.4% to 29%.
Source: Based on R. Gopalakrishnan and N. Rangaraj, “Capacity
Management on Long-Distance Passenger Trains of Indian Railways,”
Interfaces 40, no. 4 (July–August 2010): 291–302.
© Neil McAllister/Alamy

36
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
FIGURE 2.2
Coordinates for
graphical analysis
The graphical method
provides a picture of
how a solution is ob-
tained for a linear
programming
problem.
Although the graphical method is limited as a solution approach, it is very useful at this point
in our presentation of linear programming in that it gives a picture of how a solution is derived.
Graphs can provide a clearer understanding of how the computer and mathematical solution ap-
proaches presented in subsequent chapters work and, thus, a better understanding of the solutions.
Graphical Solution of a Maximization Model
The product mix model will be used to demonstrate the graphical interpretation of a linear pro-
gramming problem. Recall that the problem describes Beaver Creek Pottery Company’s attempt
to decide how many bowls and mugs to produce daily, given limited amounts of labor and clay.
The complete linear programming model was formulated as
subject to
hr. of labor
lb. of clay
where
number of bowls produced
number of mugs produced
Figure 2.2 is a set of coordinates for the decision variables 
and 
, on which the graph of
our model will be drawn. Note that only the positive quadrant is drawn (i.e., the quadrant where
and 
will always be positive) because of the nonnegativity constraints,
and 
.
x2  0
x1  0
x2
x1
x2
x1
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2 … 120
x1 + 2x2 … 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2
The first step in drawing the graph of the model is to plot the constraints on the graph. This
is done by treating both constraints as equations (or straight lines) and plotting each line on the
graph. Let’s consider the labor constraint line first:
A simple procedure for plotting this line is to determine two points that are on the line and
then draw a straight line through the points. One point can be found by letting 
and
solving for 
:
x2 = 20
(0) + 2x2 = 40
x2
x1 = 0
x1 + 2x2 = 40
Constraint lines are
plotted as equations.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
37
Thus, one point is at the coordinates 
and 
. A second point can be found by let-
ting 
and solving for 
:
Now we have a second point,
. The line on the graph representing this equation
is drawn by connecting these two points, as shown in Figure 2.3. However, this is only the graph
of the constraint line and does not reflect the entire constraint, which also includes the values
that are less than or equal to 
this line. The area representing the entire constraint is shown
in Figure 2.4.
(…)
x1 = 40, x2 = 0
x1 = 40
x1 + 2(0) = 40
x1
x2 = 0
x2 = 20
x1 = 0
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
x1 + 2x2 = 40
FIGURE 2.3
Graph of the labor
constraint line
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
A
B
x1 + 2x2  40
FIGURE 2.4
The labor
constraint area
To test the correctness of the constraint area, we check any two points—one inside the con-
straint area and one outside. For example, check point A in Figure 2.4, which is at the intersection of
and 
. Substituting these values into the following labor constraint,
 30 … 40 hr.
 10 + 2(10) … 40
x2 = 10
x1 = 10

Combining the two individual graphs for both labor and clay (Figures 2.4 and 2.5) produces
a graph of the model constraints, as shown in Figure 2.6. The shaded area in Figure 2.6 is the
area that is common to both model constraints. Therefore, this is the only area on the graph that
contains points (i.e., values for 
and 
) that will satisfy both constraints simultaneously. For
example, consider the points R, S, and T in Figure 2.7. Point R satisfies both constraints; thus,
we say it is a feasible solution point. Point S satisfies the clay constraint 
but
exceeds the labor constraint; thus, it is infeasible. Point T satisfies neither constraint; thus, it is
also infeasible.
The shaded area in Figure 2.7 is referred to as the feasible solution area because all the points
in this area satisfy both constraints. Some point within this feasible solution area will result in
maximum profit for Beaver Creek Pottery Company. The next step in the graphical solution ap-
proach is to locate this point.
(4x1 + 3x2 … 120)
x2
x1
shows that point A is indeed within the constraint area, as these values for 
and 
yield a quan-
tity that does not exceed the limit of 40 hours. Next, we check point B at 
and 
:
Point B is obviously outside the constraint area because the values for 
and 
yield a
quantity (100) that exceeds the limit of 40 hours.
We draw the line for the clay constraint the same way as the one for the labor constraint— by
finding two points on the constraint line and connecting them with a straight line. First, let
and solve for 
:
Performing this operation results in a point,
,
. Next, we let 
and then solve
for 
:
This operation yields a second point,
. Plotting these points on the graph and
connecting them with a line gives the constraint line and area for clay, as shown in Figure 2.5.
x1 = 30, x2 = 0
x1 = 30
 4x1 + 3(0) = 120
x1
x2 = 0
x2 = 40
x1 = 0
x2 = 40
 4(0) + 3x2 = 120
x2
x1 = 0
x2
x1
100 …/ 40 hr.
 40 + 2(30) … 40
x2 = 30
x1 = 40
x2
x1
38
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
4x1 + 3x2  120
FIGURE 2.5
The constraint
area for clay
The feasible solution
area is an area on the
graph that is bounded
by the constraint
equations.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
39
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
Area common to
both constraints
FIGURE 2.6
Graph of both
model constraints
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
R
S
T
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 = 40
FIGURE 2.7
The feasible 
solution area 
constraints
The Optimal Solution Point
The second step in the graphical solution method is to locate the point in the feasible solution
area that will result in the greatest total profit. To begin the solution analysis, we first plot the
objective function line for an arbitrarily selected level of profit. For example, if we say profit, Z,
is $800, the objective function is
Plotting this line just as we plotted the constraint lines results in the graph shown in
Figure 2.8. Every point on this line is in the feasible solution area and will result in a profit of
$800 (i.e., every combination of 
and 
on this line will give a Z value of $800). However,
let us see whether an even greater profit will still provide a feasible solution. For example,
consider profits of $1,200 and $1,600, as shown in Figure 2.9.
A portion of the objective function line for a profit of $1,200 is outside the feasible solution
area, but part of the line remains within the feasible area. Therefore, this profit line indicates that
there are feasible solution points that give a profit greater than $800. Now let us increase profit again,
to $1,600. This profit line, also shown in Figure 2.9, is completely outside the feasible solution area.
The fact that no points on this line are feasible indicates that a profit of $1,600 is not possible.
x2
x1
+800 = 40x1 + 50x2

Because a profit of $1,600 is too great for the constraint limitations, as shown in Figure 2.9,
the question of the maximum profit value remains. We can see from Figure 2.9 that profit increases
as the objective function line moves away from the origin (i.e., the point 
). Given
this characteristic, the maximum profit will be attained at the point where the objective function
line is farthest from the origin and is still touching a point in the feasible solution area. This point
is shown as point B in Figure 2.10.
To find point B, we place a straightedge parallel to the objective function line
in Figure 2.10 and move it outward from the origin as far as we can with-
out losing contact with the feasible solution area. Point B is referred to as the optimal (i.e., best)
solution.
The Solution Values
The third step in the graphical solution approach is to solve for the values of 
and 
once the opti-
mal solution point has been found. It is possible to determine the 
and 
coordinates of point B in
Figure 2.10 directly from the graph, as shown in Figure 2.11. The graphical coordinates correspon-
ding to point B in Figure 2.11 are 
and 
. This is the optimal solution for the decision
x2 = 8
x1 = 24
x2
x1
x2
x1
+800 = 40x1 + 50x2
x1 = 0, x2 = 0
40
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
10
20
30
40
50
60
10
0
20
30
40
50
60
x1
x2
800 = 40x1 + 50x2
FIGURE 2.8
Objective
function line 
for Z  $800
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
800 = 40x1 + 50x2
1,200 = 40x1 + 50x2
1,600 = 40x1 + 50x2
FIGURE 2.9
Alternative objec-
tive function lines
for profits, Z, of
$800, $1,200, and
$1,600
The optimal solution
is the best feasible
solution.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
41
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
Optimal
point
800 = 40x1 + 50x2
B
FIGURE 2.10
Identification of
optimal solution
point
B
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
8
A
C
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 = 40
24
FIGURE 2.11
Optimal solution
coordinates
variables in the problem. However, unless an absolutely accurate graph is drawn, it is frequently
difficult to determine the correct solution directly from the graph. A more exact approach is to
determine the solution values mathematically once the optimal point on the graph has been deter-
mined. The mathematical approach for determining the solution is described in the following pages.
First, however, we will consider a few characteristics of the solution.
In Figure 2.10, as the objective function was increased, the last point it touched in the feasi-
ble solution area was on the boundary of the feasible solution area. The solution point is always
on this boundary because the boundary contains the points farthest from the origin (i.e., the
points corresponding to the greatest profit). This characteristic of linear programming problems
reduces the number of possible solution points considerably, from all points in the solution area
to just those points on the boundary. However, the number of possible solution points is reduced
even more by another characteristic of linear programming problems.
The solution point will be on the boundary of the feasible solution area and at one of the
corners of the boundary where two constraint lines intersect. (The graphical axes, you will re-
call, are also constraints because 
and 
.) These corners (points A, B, and C in
Figure 2.11) are protrusions, or extremes, in the feasible solution area; they are called extreme
points. It has been proven mathematically that the optimal solution in a linear programming
x2  0
x1  0
The optimal solution
point is the last point
the objective function
touches as it leaves
the feasible solution
area.
Extreme points are
corner points on the
boundary of the
feasible solution area.

model will always occur at an extreme point. Therefore, in our sample problem the possible so-
lution points are limited to the three extreme points, A, B, and C. The optimal extreme point is
the extreme point the objective function touches last as it leaves the feasible solution area, as
shown in Figure 2.10.
From the graph shown in Figure 2.10, we know that the optimal solution point is B. Because
point B is formed by the intersection of two constraint lines, as shown in Figure 2.11, these two
lines are equal at point B. Thus, the values of 
and 
at that intersection can be found by solving
the two equations simultaneously.
First, we convert both equations to functions of 
:
and
Now, we let 
in the first equation equal 
in the second equation,
and solve for 
:
Substituting 
into either one of the original equations gives a value for 
:
Thus, the optimal solution at point B in Figure 2.11 is 
and 
. Substituting
these values into the objective function gives the maximum profit,
In terms of the original problem, the solution indicates that if the pottery company produces
24 bowls and 8 mugs, it will receive $1,360, the maximum daily profit possible (given the re-
source constraints).
Given that the optimal solution will be at one of the extreme corner points, A, B, or C, we
can also find the solution by testing each of the three points to see which results in the greatest
profit, rather than by graphing the objective function and seeing which point it last touches as it
moves out of the feasible solution area. Figure 2.12 shows the solution values for all three
points, A, B, and C, and the amount of profit, Z, at each point.
As indicated in the discussion of Figure 2.10, point B is the optimal solution point because
it is the last point the objective function touches before it leaves the solution area. In other
words, the objective function determines which extreme point is optimal. This is because the ob-
jective function designates the profit that will accrue from each combination of 
and 
values
at the extreme points. If the objective function had had different coefficients (i.e., different 
and 
profit values), one of the extreme points other than B might have been optimal.
x2
x1
x2
x1
= +1,360
Z = +40(24) + 50(8)
Z = +40x1 + 50x2
x2 = 8
x1 = 24
= 24
x1 = 40 - 2(8)
x1 = 40 - 2x2
x1
x2 = 8
x2 = 8
 5x2>4 = 10
x2
40 - 2x2 = 30 - (3x2>4)
x1
x1
x1 = 30 - (3x2>4)
 4x1 = 120 - 3x2
 4x1 + 3x2 = 120
x1 = 40 - 2x2
x1 + 2x2 = 40
x1
x2
x1
42
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Constraint equations
are solved
simultaneously
at the optimal extreme
point to determine the
variable solution
values.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
43
Let’s assume for a moment that the profit for a bowl is $70 instead of $40, and the profit for a
mug is $20 instead of $50. These values result in a new objective function,
. If the
model constraints for labor or clay are not changed, the feasible solution area remains the same, as
shown in Figure 2.13. However, the location of the objective function in Figure 2.13 is different from
that of the original objective function in Figure 2.10. The reason for this change is that the new profit
coefficients give the linear objective function a new slope.
Z = +70x1 + 20x2
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
x1
A
B
C
x1 = 0 bowls
x2 = 20 mugs
Z = $1,000
x1 = 24 bowls
x2 = 8 mugs
Z = $1,360
x1 = 30 bowls
x2 = 0 mugs
Z = $1,200
FIGURE 2.12
Solutions at all
corner points
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
Z = 70x1 + 20x2
x1 + 2x2 = 40
A
B
C
Optimal point:
x1 = 30 bowls
x2 = 0 mugs
Z = $2,100
FIGURE 2.13
The optimal 
solution with
Z  70x1  20x2
The slope can be determined by transforming the objective function into the general equa-
tion for a straight line,
, where y is the dependent variable, a is the y intercept, b is
the slope, and x is the independent variable. For our sample objective function,
is the depend-
ent variable corresponding to y (i.e., it is on the vertical axis), and 
is the independent variable.
Thus, the objective function can be transformed into the general equation of a line as follows:
y
a
b
c
c
c
x2 = Z
20 - 7
2 x1
 20x2 = Z - 70x1
Z = 70x1 + 20x2
x1
x2
y = a + bx
The slope is computed
as the “rise” over the
“run.”

This transformation identifies the slope of the new objective function as 
(the minus sign
indicates that the line slopes downward). In contrast, the slope of the original objective function
was 
.
If we move this new objective function out through the feasible solution area, the last
extreme point it touches is point C. Simultaneously solving the constraint lines at point C results
in the following solution:
and
Thus, the optimal solution at point C in Figure 2.13 is 
bowls,
mugs, and
profit. Altering the objective function coefficients results in a new solution.
This brief example of the effects of altering the objective function highlights two useful
points. First, the optimal extreme point is determined by the objective function, and an ex-
treme point on one axis of the graph is as likely to be the optimal solution as is an extreme
point on a different axis. Second, the solution is sensitive to the values of the coefficients in
the objective function. If the objective function coefficients are changed, as in our example,
the solution may change. Likewise, if the constraint coefficients are changed, the solution
space and solution points may change also. This information can be of consequence to the de-
cision maker trying to determine how much of a product to produce. Sensitivity analysis—
the use of linear programming to evaluate the effects of changes in model parameters—is
discussed in Chapter 3.
It should be noted that some problems do not have a single extreme point solution. For ex-
ample, when the objective function line parallels one of the constraint lines, an entire line seg-
ment is bounded by two adjacent corner points that are optimal; there is no single extreme point
on the objective function line. In this situation there are multiple optimal solutions. This and
other irregular types of solution outcomes in linear programming are discussed at the end of this
chapter.
Slack Variables
Once the optimal solution was found at point B in Figure 2.12, simultaneous equations were
solved to determine the values of 
and 
. Recall that the solution occurs at an extreme point
where constraint equation lines intersect with each other or with the axis. Thus, the model con-
straints are considered as equations
rather than 
or 
inequalities.
There is a standard procedure for transforming 
inequality constraints into equations. This
transformation is achieved by adding a new variable, called a slack variable, to each constraint.
For the pottery company example, the model constraints are
The addition of a unique slack variable,
, to the labor constraint and 
to the constraint for
clay results in the following equations:
 4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120 lb. of  clay
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40 hr. of  labor
s2
s1
 4x1 + 3x2 … 120 lb. of  clay
x1 + 2x2 … 40 hr. of  labor
…

…
(=)
x2
x1
Z = +2,100
x2 = 0
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
x2 = 40 - 4(30)>3
x2 = 40 - (4x1>3)
 4x1 + 3x2 = 120
x1 = 30
-4>5
-7>2
44
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Sensitivity analysis is
used to analyze
changes in model
parameters.
Multiple optimal
solutions can occur
when the objective
function is parallel to
a constraint line.
A slack variable is
added to a 
constraint to
convert it to an
equation 
.
(=)
…
A slack variable
represents unused
resources.

GRAPHICAL SOLUTIONS OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODELS
45
The slack variables in these equations,
and 
, will take on any value necessary to
make the left-hand side of the equation equal to the right-hand side. For example, consider a
hypothetical solution of 
and 
. Substituting these values into the foregoing
equations yields
and
In this example,
bowls and 
mugs represent a solution that does not make
use of the total available amount of labor and clay. In the labor constraint, 5 bowls and 10 mugs
require only 25 hours of labor. This leaves 15 hours that are not used. Thus,
represents the
amount of unused labor, or slack.
In the clay constraint, 5 bowls and 10 mugs require only 50 pounds of clay. This leaves
70 pounds of clay unused. Thus,
represents the amount of unused clay. In general, slack vari-
ables represent the amount of unused resources.
The ultimate instance of unused resources occurs at the origin, where 
and 
.
Substituting these values into the equations yields
and
Because no production takes place at the origin, all the resources are unused; thus, the slack vari-
ables equal the total available amounts of each resource:
hours of labor and 
pounds of clay.
What is the effect of these new slack variables on the objective function? The objec-
tive function for our example represents the profit gained from the production of bowls
and mugs,
The coefficient $40 is the contribution to profit of each bowl; $50 is the contribution to
profit of each mug. What, then, do the slack variables 
and 
contribute? They contribute
nothing to profit because they represent unused resources. Profit is made only after the resources
are put to use in making bowls and mugs. Using slack variables, we can write the objective
function as
As in the case of decision variables (
and 
), slack variables can have only nonnegative
values because negative resources are not possible. Therefore, for this model formulation,
, and 
.
s2  0
x1, x2, s1
x2
x1
maximize Z = +40x1 + +50x2 + 0s1 + 0s2
s2
s1
Z = +40x1 + +50x2
s2 = 120
s1 = 40
s2 = 120 lb. of  clay
 4(0) + 3(0) + s2 = 120
 4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120
s1 = 40 hr. of  labor
 0 + 2(0) + s1 = 40
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40
x2 = 0
x1 = 0
s2
s1
x2 = 10
x1 = 5
s2 = 70 lb. of  clay
 4(5) + 3(10) + s2 = 120 lb. of  clay
 4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120 lb. of  clay
s1 = 15 hr. of labor
 5 + 2(10) + s1 = 40 hr. of  labor
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40 hr. of  labor
x2 = 10
x1 = 5
s2
s1
A slack variable
contributes nothing to
the objective
function value.

The complete linear programming model can be written in what is referred to as standard
form with slack variables as follows:
subject to
The solution values, including the slack at each solution point, are summarized as follows:
x1, x2, s1, s2  0
 4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + +50x2 + 0s1 + 0s2
46
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
A
B
C
4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40
x1 = 0
x2 = 20
s1 = 0
s2 = 60
x1 = 24
x2 = 8
s1 = 0
s2 = 0
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
s1 = 10
s2 = 0
FIGURE 2.14
Solutions at points
A, B, and C with
slack
Solution Summary with Slack
Point
Solution Values
Z
Slack
A
bowls,
mugs
x2 = 20
x1 = 0
$1,000
hr.; 
lb.
s2 = 60
s1 = 0
B
bowls,
mugs
x2 = 8
x1 = 24
$1,360
hr.; 
lb.
s2 = 0
s1 = 0
C
bowls,
mugs
x2 = 0
x1 = 30
$1,200
hr.; 
lb.
s2 = 0
s1 = 10
Figure 2.14 shows the graphical solution of this example, with slack variables included at
each solution point.
Summary of the Graphical Solution Steps
The steps for solving a graphical linear programming model are summarized here:
1. Plot the model constraints as equations on the graph; then, considering the inequalities of
the constraints, indicate the feasible solution area.
2. Plot the objective function; then, move this line out from the origin to locate the optimal
solution point.
3. Solve simultaneous equations at the solution point to find the optimal solution values.
Or
2. Solve simultaneous equations at each corner point to find the solution values at each point.
3. Substitute these values into the objective function to find the set of values that results in the
maximum Z value.

A MINIMIZATION MODEL EXAMPLE
47
Chemical Contribution
Brand
Nitrogen
(lb./bag)
Phosphate
(lb./bag)
Super-gro
2
4
Crop-quick
4
3
Management Science Application
Improving Customer Service at Amazon.com
Amazon.com started as an Internet book retailer in 1995
and 10 years later was a Fortune 500 company with annual
sales of more than $7 billion. Amazon.com is now an Internet
retailer that offers new and used products in a variety of cate-
gories including music and video, consumer electronics, food,
clothing, furniture, and appliances. From 2001 through 2003
Amazon.com achieved the highest score ever recorded in any
service industry by the American Customer Satisfaction Index.
The company’s success is partly a result of its strong customer
service operations. Customer service is provided through
features on the Web site or via telephone or e-mail. Customer
service representatives are available at internally or externally
managed contact centers 24 hours a day. Because of its sales
growth and the seasonality of its sales (which generally decline
in the summer), Amazon must make accurate decisions about
the capacity of its contact centers, including the number of
customer service representatives to hire and train at its inter-
nally managed centers, and the volume of voice calls and
e-mails to allocate to external service providers (referred to as
cosourcers). The service times for calls and e-mails are cate-
gorized depending on the product type, the customer type,
and the purchase type. Amazon’s objective is to process calls
and e-mails at target service levels for different categories; for
voice calls the target is that a specific percentage of callers wait
no more than a specific time, and for e-mails the target is that
a percentage of them receive a response within some time pe-
riod. Amazon uses a linear programming model to optimize its
capacity decisions at its customer service contact centers. The
approach provides a minimum-cost capacity plan that provides
the number of representatives to hire and train at Amazon’s
own centers and the volume of contacts to allocate to each
cosourcer each week for a given planning horizon. Objective
function costs include the number of normal and overtime
hours, the number of new representatives hired and trans-
ferred, and the cost of contracting with cosourcers. There are
several categories of constraints related to the number of
voice calls and e-mails and for normal and overtime hours at
both the internally managed contact centers and at
cosourcers. For a 1-year (52-week) planning horizon the linear
programming model consists of approximately 134,000 con-
straints and almost 16,000 variables.
Source: Based on M. Keblis and M. Chen, “Improving Customer 
Service Operations at Amazon.com,” Interfaces 36, no. 5 (September–
October 2006): 433–45.
A Minimization Model Example
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, there are two types of linear programming prob-
lems: maximization problems (like the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example) and minimiza-
tion problems. A minimization problem is formulated the same basic way as a maximization
problem, except for a few minor differences. The following sample problem will demonstrate
the formulation of a minimization model.
A farmer is preparing to plant a crop in the spring and needs to fertilize a field. There are
two brands of fertilizer to choose from, Super-gro and Crop-quick. Each brand yields a specific
amount of nitrogen and phosphate per bag, as follows:
DYLAN MARTINEZ/Reuters/Landov

48
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Nitrogen
2 lb.
Phosphate
4 lb.
Super-gro
$6
Nitrogen
4 lb.
Phosphate
3 lb.
Crop-quick
$3
Requirements
16 lb. nitrogen
24 lb. phosphate
FIGURE 2.15
Fertilizing farmer’s
field
The farmer’s field requires at least 16 pounds of nitrogen and at least 24 pounds of phosphate.
Super-gro costs $6 per bag, and Crop-quick costs $3. The farmer wants to know how many bags of
each brand to purchase in order to minimize the total cost of fertilizing. This scenario is illustrated
in Figure 2.15.
The steps in the linear programming model formulation process are summarized as follows:
Summary of LP Model Formulation Steps
Step 1: Define the decision variables
How many bags of Super-gro and Crop-quick to buy
Step 2: Define the objective function
Minimize cost
Step 3: Define the constraints
The field requirements for nitrogen and phosphate
Decision Variables
This problem contains two decision variables, representing the number of bags of each brand of
fertilizer to purchase:
x2 = bags of Crop@quick
x1 = bags of Super@gro

A MINIMIZATION MODEL EXAMPLE
49
The Objective Function
The farmer’s objective is to minimize the total cost of fertilizing. The total cost is the sum of the
individual costs of each type of fertilizer purchased. The objective function that represents total
cost is expressed as
where
cost of bags of Super-gro
cost of bags of Crop-quick
Model Constraints
The requirements for nitrogen and phosphate represent the constraints of the model. Each bag of
fertilizer contributes a number of pounds of nitrogen and phosphate to the field. The constraint
for nitrogen is
where
the nitrogen contribution (lb.) per bag of Super-gro
the nitrogen contribution (lb.) per bag of Crop-quick
Rather than a 
(less than or equal to) inequality, as used in the Beaver Creek Pottery Company
model, this constraint requires a 
(greater than or equal to) inequality. This is because the
nitrogen content for the field is a minimum requirement specifying that at least 16 pounds of
nitrogen be deposited on the farmer’s field. If a minimum cost solution results in more than
16 pounds of nitrogen on the field, that is acceptable; however, the amount cannot be less than
16 pounds.
The constraint for phosphate is constructed like the constraint for nitrogen:
With this example, we have shown two of the three types of linear programming model con-
straints,
and 
. The third type is an exact equality,
. This type specifies that a constraint re-
quirement must be exact. For example, if the farmer had said that the phosphate requirement for
the field was exactly 24 pounds, the constraint would have been
As in our maximization model, there are also nonnegativity constraints in this problem to
indicate that negative bags of fertilizer cannot be purchased:
The complete model formulation for this minimization problem is
subject to
lb. of nitrogen
lb. of phosphate
Graphical Solution of a Minimization Model
We follow the same basic steps in the graphical solution of a minimization model as in a maxi-
mization model. The fertilizer example will be used to demonstrate the graphical solution of a min-
imization model.
x1, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2  24
2x1 + 4x2  16
minimize Z = +6x1 + 3x2
x1, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2 = 24 lb.
=

…
4x1 + 3x2  24 lb.

…
4x2 =
2x1 =
2x1 + 4x2  16 lb.
+3x2 =
+6x1 =
minimize Z = +6x1 + 3x2
The three types of
linear programming
constraints are ,
, and 
.

=
…

The first step is to graph the equations of the two model constraints, as shown in 
Figure 2.16. Next, the feasible solution area is chosen, to reflect the 
inequalities in the con-
straints, as shown in Figure 2.17.

50
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
2
2
0
x1
x2
4
6
8
10
12
14
4
6
8
10
12
14
4x1 + 3x2 = 24
2x1 + 4x2 = 16
FIGURE 2.16
Constraint lines for
fertilizer model
2
2
0
x1
x2
4
6
8
10
12
14
4
6
8
10
12
14
Feasible
solution
area
FIGURE 2.17
Feasible solution
area
After the feasible solution area has been determined, the second step in the graphical solu-
tion approach is to locate the optimal point. Recall that in a maximization problem, the optimal
solution is on the boundary of the feasible solution area that contains the point(s) farthest from
the origin. The optimal solution point in a minimization problem is also on the boundary of the
feasible solution area; however, the boundary contains the point(s) closest to the origin (zero 
being the lowest cost possible).
As in a maximization problem, the optimal solution is located at one of the extreme points
of the boundary. In this case, the corner points represent extremities in the boundary of the feasible
solution area that are closest to the origin. Figure 2.18 shows the three corner points—A, B, and
C—and the objective function line.
As the objective function edges toward the origin, the last point it touches in the feasible
solution area is A. In other words, point A is the closest the objective function can get to the ori-
gin without encompassing infeasible points. Thus, it corresponds to the lowest cost that can be
attained.
The optimal solution
of a minimization
problem is at the ex-
treme point closest to
the origin.

A MINIMIZATION MODEL EXAMPLE
51
The final step in the graphical solution approach is to solve for the values of 
and 
at
point A. Because point A is on the 
axis,
; thus,
x2 = 8
 4(0) + 3x2 = 24
x1 = 0
x2
x2
x1
2
2
0
x1
x2
4
6
8
10
12
14
4
6
8
10
12
14
Z = 6x1 + 3x2
x1 = 0 bags of Super-gro
x2 = 8 bags of Crop-quick
Z = $24
A
B
C
FIGURE 2.18
The optimal 
solution point
Management Science Application
Determining Optimal Fertilizer Mixes 
at Soquimich (South America)
Soquimich, a Chilean fertilizer manufacturer, is the leading
producer and distributor of specialty fertilizers in the world,
with revenues of almost US$0.5 billion in more than 80 coun-
tries. Soquimich produces four main specialty fertilizers and
more than 200 fertilizer blends, depending on the needs of its
customers. Farmers want the company to quickly recommend
optimal fertilizer blends that will provide the appropriate quan-
tity of ingredients for their particular crop at the lowest possi-
ble cost. A farmer will provide a company sales representative
with information about previous crop yields and his or her tar-
get yields and then company representatives will visit the farm
to obtain soil samples, which are analyzed in the company labs.
A report is generated, which indicates the soil requirements for
nutrients, including nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, boron,
magnesium, sulfur, and zinc. Given these soil requirements,
company experts determine an optimal fertilizer blend, using a
linear programming model that includes constraints for the nu-
trient quantities required by the soil (for a particular crop) and
an objective function that minimizes production costs. Previously
the company determined fertilizer blend recommendations 
by using a time-consuming manual procedure conducted by
experts. The linear programming model enables the company
to provide accurate, quick, low-cost (discounted) estimates to
its customers, which has helped the company gain new cus-
tomers and increase its market share.
Source: Based on A. M. Angel, L. A. Taladriz, and R. Weber, “Soquimich
Uses a System Based on Mixed-Integer Linear Programming and 
Expert Systems to Improve Customer Service,” Interfaces 33, no. 4
(July–August 2003): 41–52.
Alex Havret/Dorling Kindersley

Given that the optimal solution is 
, the minimum cost, Z, is
This means the farmer should not purchase any Super-gro but, instead, should purchase eight
bags of Crop-quick, at a total cost of $24.
Surplus Variables
Greater-than or equal-to constraints cannot be converted to equations by adding slack variables,
as with 
constraints. Recall our fertilizer model, formulated as
subject to
lb. of nitrogen
lb. of phosphate
where
bags of Super-gro fertilizer
bags of Crop-quick fertilizer
farmer’s total cost ($) of purchasing fertilizer
Because this problem has 
constraints as opposed to the 
constraints of the Beaver
Creek Pottery Company maximization example, the constraints are converted to equations a lit-
tle differently.
Instead of adding a slack variable as we did with a 
constraint, we subtract a surplus
variable. Whereas a slack variable is added and reflects unused resources, a surplus variable is
subtracted and reflects the excess above a minimum resource requirement level. Like a slack
variable, a surplus variable is represented symbolically by 
and must be nonnegative.
For the nitrogen constraint, the subtraction of a surplus variable gives
The surplus variable 
transforms the nitrogen constraint into an equation.
As an example, consider the hypothetical solution
Substituting these values into the previous equation yields
In this equation,
can be interpreted as the extra amount of nitrogen above the minimum
requirement of 16 pounds that would be obtained by purchasing 10 bags of Crop-quick fertilizer.
In a similar manner, the constraint for phosphate is converted to an equation by subtracting
a surplus variable,
:
As is the case with slack variables, surplus variables contribute nothing to the overall cost
of a model. For example, putting additional nitrogen or phosphate on the field will not affect the
4x1 + 3x2 - s2 = 24
s2
s1
s1 = 24 lb. of nitrogen
- s1 = 16 - 40
 2(0) + 4(10) - s1 = 16
x2 = 10
x1 = 0
s1
2x1 + 4x2 - s1 = 16
s1

…

Z =
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2
 24
2x1 + 4x2  16
minimize Z = +6x1 + +3x2
…
= +24
Z = 6(0) + 3(8)
Z = +6x1 + +3x2
x1 = 0, x2 = 8
52
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
A surplus variable is
subtracted from a 
constraint to convert
it to an equation 
.
(=)

A surplus variable
represents an excess
above a constraint
requirement level.

IRREGULAR TYPES OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS
53
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
x1
x2
A
B
C
x1 = 0
x2 = 8
s1 = 16
s2 = 0
Z = 24
x1 = 4.8
x2 = 1.6
s1 = 0
s2 = 0
Z = 33.6
x1 = 8
x2 = 0
s1 = 0
s2 = 8
Z = 48
FIGURE 2.19
Graph of the 
fertilizer example
For some linear
programming models,
the general rules do
not always apply.
farmer’s cost; the only thing affecting cost is the number of bags of fertilizer purchased. As such,
the standard form of this linear programming model is summarized as
subject to
Figure 2.19 shows the graphical solutions for our example, with surplus variables included
at each solution point.
x1, x2, s1, s2  0
4x1 + 3x2 - s2 = 24
2x1 + 4x2 - s1 = 16
minimize Z = +6x1 + 3x2 + 0s1 + 0s2
Irregular Types of Linear Programming Problems
The basic forms of typical maximization and minimization problems have been shown in this
chapter. However, there are several special types of atypical linear programming problems.
Although these special cases do not occur frequently, they will be described so that you can
recognize them when they arise. These special types include problems with more than one opti-
mal solution, infeasible problems, and problems with unbounded solutions.
Multiple Optimal Solutions
Consider the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example, with the objective function changed from
to 
:
subject to
hr. of labor
lb. of clay
where
bowls produced
mugs produced
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2  0
4x1 + 3x2 … 120
x1 + 2x2 … 40
maximize Z = 40x1 + 30x2
Z = 40x1 + 30x2
Z = 40x1 + 50x2

54
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
The graph of this model is shown in Figure 2.20. The slight change in the objective func-
tion makes it now parallel to the constraint line,
. Both lines now have the
same slope of 
. Therefore, as the objective function edge moves outward from the origin,
it touches the whole line segment BC rather than a single extreme corner point before it leaves
the feasible solution area. This means that every point along this line segment is optimal (i.e.,
each point results in the same profit of 
). The endpoints of this line segment, B and
C, are typically referred to as the alternate optimal solutions. It is understood that these points
represent the endpoints of a range of optimal solutions.
Z = +1,200
-4>3
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
C
B
A
Point B
x1 = 24
x2 = 8
Z = 1,200
Point C
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
Z = 1,200
10
10
0
x1
x2
20
30
40
20
30
40
FIGURE 2.20
Graph of the
Beaver Creek 
Pottery Company
example with 
multiple optimal
solutions
Alternate optimal
solutions are at the
endpoints of the
constraint line segment
that the objective 
function parallels.
Multiple optimal
solutions provide
greater flexibility to
the decision maker.
The pottery company, therefore, has several options in deciding on the number of bowls and
mugs to produce. Multiple optimal solutions can benefit the decision maker because the number
of decision options is enlarged. The multiple optimal solutions (along the line segment BC in
Figure 2.20) allow the decision maker greater flexibility. For example, in the case of Beaver
Creek Pottery Company, it may be easier to sell bowls than mugs; thus, the solution at point C,
where only bowls are produced, would be more desirable than the solution at point B, where a
mix of bowls and mugs is produced.
An Infeasible Problem
In some cases, a linear programming problem has no feasible solution area; thus, there is no so-
lution to the problem. An example of an infeasible problem is formulated next and depicted
graphically in Figure 2.21:
subject to
Point A in Figure 2.21 satisfies only the constraint 
, whereas point C satis-
fies only the constraints 
and 
. Point B satisfies none of the constraints. The three
constraints do not overlap to form a feasible solution area. Because no point satisfies all three
constraints simultaneously, there is no solution to the problem. Infeasible problems do not typi-
cally occur, but when they do, they are usually a result of errors in defining the problem or in
formulating the linear programming model.
x2  6
x1  4
4x1 + 2x2 … 8
x1, x2  0
x2  6
x1  4
4x1 + 2x2 … 8
maximize Z = 5x1 + 3x2
An infeasible problem
has no feasible solu-
tion area; every possi-
ble solution point
violates one or more
constraints.

IRREGULAR TYPES OF LINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS
55
An Unbounded Problem
In some problems, the feasible solution area formed by the model constraints is not closed. In these
cases it is possible for the objective function to increase indefinitely without ever reaching a maxi-
mum value because it never reaches the boundary of the feasible solution area.
An example of this type of problem is formulated next and shown graphically in
Figure 2.22:
subject to
x1, x2  0
x2 … 2
x1  4
maximize Z = 4x1 + 2x2
In an unbounded
problem the objective
function can increase
indefinitely without
reaching a maximum
value.
The solution space 
is not completely
closed in.
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
x1
x2
B
C
A
x1 = 4
x2 = 6
4x1 + 2x2 = 8
FIGURE 2.21
Graph of an 
infeasible problem
2
4
6
8
10
12
2
0
4
6
8
10
12
x1
x2
Z = 4x1 + 2x2
FIGURE 2.22
An unbounded
problem
In Figure 2.22, the objective function is shown to increase without bound; thus, a solution is never
reached.
Unlimited profits are not possible in the real world; an unbounded solution, like an infeasible
solution, typically reflects an error in defining the problem or in formulating the model.

Characteristics of Linear Programming Problems
Now that we have had the opportunity to construct several linear programming models, let’s
review the characteristics that identify a linear programming problem.
A linear programming problem requires a choice between alternative courses of action
(i.e., a decision). The decision is represented in the model by decision variables. A typical
choice task for a business firm is deciding how much of several different products to produce,
as in the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example presented earlier in this chapter. Identifying
the choice task and defining the decision variables is usually the first step in the formulation
process because it is quite difficult to construct the objective function and constraints without
first identifying the decision variables.
The problem encompasses an objective that the decision maker wants to achieve. The
two most frequently encountered objectives for a business are maximizing profit and mini-
mizing cost.
A third characteristic of a linear programming problem is that restrictions exist, mak-
ing unlimited achievement of the objective function impossible. In a business firm these re-
strictions often take the form of limited resources, such as labor or material; however, the
sample models in this chapter exhibit a variety of problem restrictions. These restrictions,
as well as the objective, must be definable by mathematical functional relationships that are
linear. Defining these relationships is typically the most difficult part of the formulation
process.
Properties of Linear Programming Models
In addition to encompassing only linear relationships, a linear programming model also has
several other implicit properties, which have been exhibited consistently throughout the exam-
ples in this chapter. The term linear not only means that the functions in the models are
graphed as a straight line; it also means that the relationships exhibit proportionality. In other
words, the rate of change, or slope, of the function is constant; therefore, changes of a given
size in the value of a decision variable will result in exactly the same relative changes in the
functional value.
Linear programming also requires that the objective function terms and the constraint
terms be additive. For example, in the Beaver Creek Pottery Company model, the total profit
(Z) must equal the sum of profits earned from making bowls 
and mugs 
. Also,
the total resources used must equal the sum of the resources used for each activity in a con-
straint (e.g., labor).
Another property of linear programming models is that the solution values (of the decision vari-
ables) cannot be restricted to integer values; the decision variables can take on any fractional value.
Thus, the variables are said to be continuous or divisible, as opposed to integer or discrete. For ex-
ample, although decision variables representing bowls or mugs or airplanes or automobiles should
realistically have integer (whole number) solutions, the solution methods for linear programming
will not necessarily provide such solutions. This is a property that will be discussed further as solu-
tion methods are presented in subsequent chapters.
The final property of linear programming models is that the values of all the model parame-
ters are assumed to be constant and known with certainty. In real situations, however, model
parameters are frequently uncertain because they reflect the future as well as the present, and
future conditions are rarely known with certainty.
To summarize, a linear programming model has the following general properties: linearity,
proportionality, additivity, divisibility, and certainty. As various linear programming solution
methods are presented throughout this book, these properties will become more obvious, and
their impact on problem solution will be discussed in greater detail.
(+50x2)
(+40x1)
56
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
The values of decision
variables are
continuous or
divisible.
All model parameters
are assumed to be
known with certainty.
The components of a
linear programming
model are an
objective function,
decision variables,
and constraints.
Proportionality
means the slope of a
constraint or
objective function line
is constant.
The terms in the
objective function or
constraints are
additive.

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTIONS
57
Summary
The two example problems in this chapter were formulated as linear programming models in 
order to demonstrate the modeling process. These problems were similar in that they concerned
achieving some objective subject to a set of restrictions or requirements. Linear programming
models exhibit certain common characteristics:
 An objective function to be maximized or minimized
 A set of constraints
 Decision variables for measuring the level of activity
 Linearity among all constraint relationships and the objective function
The graphical approach to the solution of linear programming problems is not a very effi-
cient means of solving problems. For one thing, drawing accurate graphs is tedious. Moreover,
the graphical approach is limited to models with only two decision variables. However, the
analysis of the graphical approach provides valuable insight into linear programming problems
and their solutions.
In the graphical approach, once the feasible solution area and the optimal solution point
have been determined from the graph, simultaneous equations are solved to determine the val-
ues of 
and 
at the solution point. In Chapter 3 we will show how linear programming solu-
tions can be obtained using computer programs.
x2
x1
Example Problem
Solutions
As a prelude to the problems, this section presents example solutions to two linear programming
problems.
Problem Statement
Moore’s Meatpacking Company produces a hot dog mixture in 1,000-pound batches. The mix-
ture contains two ingredients—chicken and beef. The cost per pound of each of these ingredi-
ents is as follows:
Each batch has the following recipe requirements:
a. At least 500 pounds of chicken
b. At least 200 pounds of beef
The ratio of chicken to beef must be at least 2 to 1. The company wants to know the optimal mix-
ture of ingredients that will minimize cost. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
Solution
Step 1: Identify Decision Variables
Recall that the problem should not be “swallowed whole.” Identify each part of the model sepa-
rately, starting with the decision variables:
x2 = lb. of  beef
x1 = lb. of chicken
Ingredient
Cost/lb.
Chicken
$3
Beef
$5

58
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Step 2: Formulate the Objective Function
where
cost per 1,000-lb batch
cost of chicken
cost of beef
Step 3: Establish Model Constraints
The constraints of this problem are embodied in the recipe restrictions and (not to be over-
looked) the fact that each batch must consist of 1,000 pounds of mixture:
and
The Model
subject to
Problem Statement
Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
x1, x2  0
x1 … 4
6x1 + 6x2 … 36
x1 + 2x2 … 10
maximize Z = 4x1 + 5x2
x1, x2  0
x1 - 2x2  0
x2  200
x1  500
x1 + x2 = 1,000
minimize Z = +3x1 + +5x2
x1, x2  0
x1>x2  2>1 or x1 - 2x2  0
x2  200 lb. of  beef
x1  500 lb. of chicken
x1 + x2 = 1,000 lb.
+5x2 =
+3x1 =
Z =
minimize Z = +3x1 + +5x2

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTIONS
59
Step 2: Determine the Feasible Solution Area
The feasible solution area is determined by identifying the space that jointly satisfies the 
conditions of all three constraints, as shown in the following figure:
…
x1
10
2
2
0
x2
4
6
8
10
4
6
8
x1 = 4
6x1 + 6x2 = 36
x1 + 2x2 = 10
The constraint
equations
x1
10
2
2
0
x2
4
6
8
10
4
6
8
A
B
C
D
The feasible 
solution space 
and extreme
points
Solution
Step 1: Plot the Constraint Lines as Equations
A simple method for plotting constraint lines is to set one of the constraint variables equal to
zero and solve for the other variable to establish a point on one of the axes. The three constraint
lines are graphed in the following figure:

Step 3: Determine the Solution Points
The solution at point A can be determined by noting that the constraint line intersects the 
axis
at 5; thus,
, and 
. The solution at point D on the other axis can be deter-
mined similarly; the constraint intersects the axis at 
, and 
.
The values at points B and C must be found by solving simultaneous equations. Note that point B
is formed by the intersection of the lines 
and 
. First, convert both of
these equations to functions of :
and
Now, set the equations equal and solve for 
:
Substituting 
into either of the two equations gives a value for 
:
Thus, at point 
, and 
.
At point 
. Substituting 
into the equation 
gives a value for 
:
Thus,
, and 
.
Step 4: Determine the Optimal Solution
The optimal solution is at point B, where 
, and 
. The optimal solution and
solutions at the other extreme points are summarized in the following figure:
Z = 28
x1 = 2, x2 = 4
Z = 26
x1 = 4, x2 = 2
x2 = 2
 4 = 6 - x2
x2
x1 = 6 - x2
x1 = 4
C, x1 = 4
Z = 28
B, x1 = 2, x2 = 4
x1 = 2
x1 = 6 - (4)
x1 = 6 - x2
x1
x2 = 4
x2 = 4
-x2 = -4
 10 - 2x2 = 6 - x2
x2
x1 = 6 - x2
 6x1 = 36 - 6x2
 6x1 + 6x2 = 36
x1 = 10 - 2x2
x1 + 2x2 = 10
x1
6x1 + 6x2 = 36
x1 + 2x2 = 10
Z = 16
x1 = 4, x2 = 0
Z = 25
x2 = 5, x1 = 0
x2
60
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
x1
10
2
2
0
x2
4
6
8
10
4
6
8
A
B
C
D
x1 = 0
x2 = 5
Z = 25
Optimal
x1 = 2
x2 = 4
Z = 28 x1 = 4
x2 = 2
Z = 26
x1 = 4
x2 = 0
Z = 16
Optimal solution
point

PROBLEMS
61
Problems
1. In Problem 34 in Chapter 1, when Tracy McCoy wakes up Saturday morning, she remembers
that she promised the PTA she would make some cakes and/or homemade bread for its bake sale
that afternoon. However, she does not have time to go to the store to get ingredients, and she has
only a short time to bake things in her oven. Because cakes and breads require different baking
temperatures, she cannot bake them simultaneously, and she has only 3 hours available to bake.
A cake requires 3 cups of flour, and a loaf of bread requires 8 cups; Tracy has 20 cups of flour.
A cake requires 45 minutes to bake, and a loaf of bread requires 30 minutes. The PTA will sell a
cake for $10 and a loaf of bread for $6. Tracy wants to decide how many cakes and loaves of
bread she should make.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
2. A company produces two products that are processed on two assembly lines. Assembly line 1
has 100 available hours, and assembly line 2 has 42 available hours. Each product requires 
10 hours of processing time on line 1, while on line 2 product 1 requires 7 hours and product 
2 requires 3 hours. The profit for product 1 is $6 per unit, and the profit for product 2 is $4 per unit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
3. The Munchies Cereal Company makes a cereal from several ingredients. Two of the ingredients,
oats and rice, provide vitamins A and B. The company wants to know how many ounces of oats
and rice it should include in each box of cereal to meet the minimum requirements of 48 mil-
ligrams of vitamin A and 12 milligrams of vitamin B while minimizing cost. An ounce of oats
contributes 8 milligrams of vitamin A and 1 milligram of vitamin B, whereas an ounce of rice
contributes 6 milligrams of A and 2 milligrams of B. An ounce of oats costs $0.05, and an ounce
of rice costs $0.03.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
4. What would be the effect on the optimal solution in Problem 3 if the cost of rice increased from
$0.03 per ounce to $0.06 per ounce?
5. The Kalo Fertilizer Company makes a fertilizer using two chemicals that provide nitrogen, phos-
phate, and potassium. A pound of ingredient 1 contributes 10 ounces of nitrogen and 6 ounces
of phosphate, while a pound of ingredient 2 contributes 2 ounces of nitrogen, 6 ounces of phos-
phate, and 1 ounce of potassium. Ingredient 1 costs $3 per pound, and ingredient 2 costs $5 per
pound. The company wants to know how many pounds of each chemical ingredient to put into a
bag of fertilizer to meet the minimum requirements of 20 ounces of nitrogen, 36 ounces of phos-
phate, and 2 ounces of potassium while minimizing cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
6. The Pinewood Furniture Company produces chairs and tables from two resources—labor and
wood. The company has 80 hours of labor and 36 board-ft. of wood available each day. Demand
for chairs is limited to 6 per day. Each chair requires 8 hours of labor and 2 board-ft. of wood,
whereas a table requires 10 hours of labor and 6 board-ft. of wood. The profit derived from each
chair is $400 and from each table, $100. The company wants to determine the number of chairs
and tables to produce each day in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
7. In Problem 6, how much labor and wood will be unused if the optimal numbers of chairs and ta-
bles are produced?

8. In Problem 6, explain the effect on the optimal solution of changing the profit on a table from
$100 to $500.
9. The Crumb and Custard Bakery makes coffee cakes and Danish pastries in large pans. The main
ingredients are flour and sugar. There are 25 pounds of flour and 16 pounds of sugar available, and
the demand for coffee cakes is 5. Five pounds of flour and 2 pounds of sugar are required to make
a pan of coffee cakes, and 5 pounds of flour and 4 pounds of sugar are required to make a pan of
Danish. A pan of coffee cakes has a profit of $1, and a pan of Danish has a profit of $5. Determine
the number of pans of cakes and Danish to produce each day so that profit will be maximized.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
10. In Problem 9, how much flour and sugar will be left unused if the optimal numbers of cakes and
Danish are baked?
11. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
maximize
subject to
12. The Elixer Drug Company produces a drug from two ingredients. Each ingredient contains the
same three antibiotics, in different proportions. One gram of ingredient 1 contributes 3 units,
and 1 gram of ingredient 2 contributes 1 unit of antibiotic 1; the drug requires 6 units. At least 
4 units of antibiotic 2 are required, and the ingredients contribute 1 unit each per gram.
At least 12 units of antibiotic 3 are required; a gram of ingredient 1 contributes 2 units, and a
gram of ingredient 2 contributes 6 units. The cost for a gram of ingredient 1 is $80, and the cost
for a gram of ingredient 2 is $50. The company wants to formulate a linear programming model
to determine the number of grams of each ingredient that must go into the drug in order to meet
the antibiotic requirements at the minimum cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
13. A jewelry store makes necklaces and bracelets from gold and platinum. The store has 18 ounces
of gold and 20 ounces of platinum. Each necklace requires 3 ounces of gold and 2 ounces of plat-
inum, whereas each bracelet requires 2 ounces of gold and 4 ounces of platinum. The demand for
bracelets is no more than four. A necklace earns $300 in profit and a bracelet, $400. The store
wants to determine the number of necklaces and bracelets to make in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
14. In Problem 13, explain the effect on the optimal solution of increasing the profit on a bracelet
from $400 to $600. What will be the effect of changing the platinum requirement for a necklace
from 2 ounces to 3 ounces?
15. In Problem 13:
a. The maximum demand for bracelets is four. If the store produces the optimal number of
bracelets and necklaces, will the maximum demand for bracelets be met? If not, by how
much will it be missed?
b. What profit for a necklace would result in no bracelets being produced, and what would be
the optimal solution for this profit?
16. A clothier makes coats and slacks. The two resources required are wool cloth and labor. The
clothier has 150 square yards of wool and 200 hours of labor available. Each coat requires 
x1, x2  0
x1 … 4
x1 + x2  5
3x1 + 2x2 … 18
Z = 3x1 + 6x2
62
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION

PROBLEMS
63
3 square yards of wool and 10 hours of labor, whereas each pair of slacks requires 5 square yards
of wool and 4 hours of labor. The profit for a coat is $50, and the profit for slacks is $40. The
clothier wants to determine the number of coats and pairs of slacks to make so that profit will be
maximized.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
17. In Problem 16, what would be the effect on the optimal solution if the available labor were 
increased from 200 to 240 hours?
18. The Weemow Lawn Service wants to start doing snow removal in the winter when there are no
lawns to maintain. Jeff and Julie Weems, who own the service, are trying to determine how much
equipment they need to purchase, based on the various job types they have. They plan to work
themselves and hire some local college students on a per-job basis. Based on historical weather
data, they estimate that there will be six major snowfalls next winter. Virtually all customers
want their snow removed no more than 2 days after the snow stops falling. Working 10 hours
per day (into the night), Jeff and Julie can remove the snow from a normal driveway in about 
1 hour, and it takes about 4 hours to remove the snow from a business parking lot and sidewalk.
The variable cost (mainly for labor and gas) per job is $12 for a driveway and $47 for a parking
lot. Using their lawn service customer base as a guideline, they believe they will have demand
of no more than 40 homeowners and 25 businesses. They plan to charge $35 for a home drive-
way and $120 for a business parking lot, which is slightly less than the going rate. They want to
know how many jobs of each type will maximize their profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model graphically. 
19. In Problem 18:
a. If Jeff and Julie pay $3,700 for snow removal equipment, will they make any money?
b. If Jeff and Julie reduce their prices to $30 for a driveway and $100 for a parking lot, they will in-
crease demand to 55 for driveways and 32 for businesses. Will this affect their possible profit?
c. Alternatively, hiring additional people on a per-job basis will increase Jeff and Julie’s vari-
able cost to $16 for a driveway and $53 for a parking lot, but it will lower the time it takes to
clear a driveway to 40 minutes and a parking lot to 3 hours. Will this affect their profit?
d. If Jeff and Julie combine the two alternatives suggested in (b) and (c), will this affect their profit?
20. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
21. Transform the model in Problem 20 into standard form and indicate the value of the slack vari-
ables at each corner point solution.
22. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
x1, x2  0
x2 … 10
x1 … 8
2x1 + 4x2 … 40
3x1 + 5x2 … 50
maximize Z = 5x1 + 8x2
x1, x2  0
x1 + x2 … 5
x2 … 6
x1 … 4
maximize Z = 1.5x1 + x2

23. Transform the model in Problem 22 into standard form and indicate the value of the slack vari-
ables at each corner point solution.
24. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
25. In Problem 24, if the constraint 
is changed to 
, what effect does this have on the
feasible solution space and the optimal solution?
26. Universal Claims Processors processes insurance claims for large national insurance companies.
Most claim processing is done by a large pool of computer operators, some of whom are perma-
nent and some of whom are temporary. A permanent operator can process 16 claims per day,
whereas a temporary operator can process 12 per day, and on average the company processes
at least 450 claims each day. The company has 40 computer workstations. A permanent operator
generates about 0.5 claim with errors each day, whereas a temporary operator averages about
1.4 defective claims per day. The company wants to limit claims with errors to 25 per day. A per-
manent operator is paid $64 per day, and a temporary operator is paid $42 per day. The company
wants to determine the number of permanent and temporary operators to hire in order to
minimize costs.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
27. In Problem 26, explain the effect on the optimal solution of changing the daily pay for a perma-
nent claims processor from $64 to $54. Explain the effect of changing the daily pay for a tempo-
rary claims processor from $42 to $36.
28. In Problem 26, what would be the effect on the optimal solution if Universal Claims Processors
decided not to try to limit the number of defective claims each day?
29. In Problem 26, explain the effect on the optimal solution if the minimum number of claims the
firm processes each day increased from 450 to at least 650.
30. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
31. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
x1, x2  0
x2>x1 … 7>8
x2 … 7
x1 … 4
x1 + x2  5
3x1 + 2x2 … 18
minimize Z = 3x1 + 6x2
x1, x2  0
x1 + x2  6
-6x1 + 4x2 … 12
4x1 + 2x2  20
minimize Z = 8x1 + 6x2
x1 … 8
x1  8
x1, x2  0
x1  8
x1 + x2 … 15
2x1 + 4x2 … 40
maximize Z = 6.5x1 + 10x2
64
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION

PROBLEMS
65
32. In Problem 31, what would be the effect on the solution if the constraint 
were changed
to 
?
33. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
34. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
35. Solve the following linear programming model graphically:
subject to
36. Gillian’s Restaurant has an ice-cream counter where it sells two main products, ice cream and
frozen yogurt, each in a variety of flavors. The restaurant makes one order for ice cream and yo-
gurt each week, and the store has enough freezer space for 115 gallons total of both products. A
gallon of frozen yogurt costs $0.75 and a gallon of ice cream costs $0.93, and the restaurant
budgets $90 each week for these products. The manager estimates that each week the restaurant
sells at least twice as much ice cream as frozen yogurt. Profit per gallon of ice cream is $4.15,
and profit per gallon of yogurt is $3.60.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
37. In Problem 36, how much additional profit would the restaurant realize each week if it increased
its freezer capacity to accommodate 20 extra gallons total of ice cream and yogurt?
38. Copperfield Mining Company owns two mines, each of which produces three grades of ore—
high, medium, and low. The company has a contract to supply a smelting company with at
least 12 tons of high-grade ore, 8 tons of medium-grade ore, and 24 tons of low-grade ore.
Each mine produces a certain amount of each type of ore during each hour that it operates.
Mine 1 produces 6 tons of high-grade ore, 2 tons of medium-grade ore, and 4 tons of low-
grade ore per hour. Mine 2 produces 2, 2, and 12 tons, respectively, of high-, medium-, and
low-grade ore per hour. It costs Copperfield $200 per hour to mine each ton of ore from
mine 1, and it costs $160 per hour to mine each ton of ore from mine 2. The company wants
to determine the number of hours it needs to operate each mine so that its contractual obliga-
tions can be met at the lowest cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
x1, x2  0
x2 … 6
x1 + 2x2  12
5x1 + 4x2  40
2x1 - 6x2 … 12
minimize Z = 8x1 + 2x2
x1, x2  0
x1 - 3x2 … 1
4x1 - 2x2 … 14
-x1 + 4x2 … 10
2x1 + 4x2 … 22
maximize Z = 3x1 + 2x2
x1, x2  0
x1 + 3x2 … 12
x1 … 6
3x1 + 4x2 = 24
minimize Z = 5x1 + x2
x2  7
x2 … 7

39. A canning company produces two sizes of cans—regular and large. The cans are produced in
10,000-can lots. The cans are processed through a stamping operation and a coating operation.
The company has 30 days available for both stamping and coating. A lot of regular-size cans re-
quires 2 days to stamp and 4 days to coat, whereas a lot of large cans requires 4 days to stamp
and 2 days to coat. A lot of regular-size cans earns $800 profit, and a lot of large-size cans earns
$900 profit. In order to fulfill its obligations under a shipping contract, the company must pro-
duce at least nine lots. The company wants to determine the number of lots to produce of each
size can (
and 
) in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
40. A manufacturing firm produces two products. Each product must undergo an assembly process
and a finishing process. It is then transferred to the warehouse, which has space for only a lim-
ited number of items. The firm has 80 hours available for assembly and 112 hours for finishing,
and it can store a maximum of 10 units in the warehouse. Each unit of product 1 has a profit of
$30 and requires 4 hours to assemble and 14 hours to finish. Each unit of product 2 has a profit
of $70 and requires 10 hours to assemble and 8 hours to finish. The firm wants to determine the
quantity of each product to produce in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
41. Assume that the objective function in Problem 40 has been changed from 
to
. Determine the slope of each objective function and discuss what effect these
slopes have on the optimal solution.
42. The Valley Wine Company produces two kinds of wine—Valley Nectar and Valley Red. The wines
are produced from 64 tons of grapes the company has acquired this season. A 1,000-gallon batch
of Nectar requires 4 tons of grapes, and a batch of Red requires 8 tons. However, production is lim-
ited by the availability of only 50 cubic yards of storage space for aging and 120 hours of process-
ing time. A batch of each type of wine requires 5 cubic yards of storage space. The processing time
for a batch of Nectar is 15 hours, and the processing time for a batch of Red is 8 hours.
Demand for each type of wine is limited to seven batches. The profit for a batch of Nectar
is $9,000, and the profit for a batch of Red is $12,000. The company wants to determine the number
of 1,000-gallon batches of Nectar 
and Red 
to produce in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
43. In Problem 42:
a. How much processing time will be left unused at the optimal solution?
b. What would be the effect on the optimal solution of increasing the available storage space
from 50 to 60 cubic yards?
44. Kroeger supermarket sells its own brand of canned peas as well as several national brands. The
store makes a profit of $0.28 per can for its own peas and a profit of $0.19 for any of the national
brands. The store has 6 square feet of shelf space available for canned peas, and each can of peas
takes up 9 square inches of that space. Point-of-sale records show that each week the store never
sells more than half as many cans of its own brand as it does of the national brands. The store
wants to know how many cans of its own brand of peas and how many cans of the national
brands to stock each week on the allocated shelf space in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
45. In Problem 44, if Kroeger discounts the price of its own brand of peas, the store will sell at least
1.5 times as much of the national brands as its own brand, but its profit margin on its own brand
will be reduced to $0.23 per can. What effect will the discount have on the optimal solution?
(x2)
(x1)
Z = 90x1 + 70x2
Z = 30x1 + 70x2
x2
x1
66
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION

PROBLEMS
67
46. Shirtstop makes T-shirts with logos and sells them in its chain of retail stores. It contracts with
two different plants—one in Puerto Rico and one in The Bahamas. The shirts from the plant in
Puerto Rico cost $0.46 apiece, and 9% of them are defective and can’t be sold. The shirts from
The Bahamas cost only $0.35 each, but they have an 18% defective rate. Shirtstop needs 3,500
shirts. To retain its relationship with the two plants, it wants to order at least 1,000 shirts from
each. It would also like at least 88% of the shirts it receives to be salable.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
47. In Problem 46:
a. Suppose Shirtstop decided it wanted to minimize the defective shirts while keeping costs be-
low $2,000. Reformulate the problem with these changes and solve graphically.
b. How many fewer defective items were achieved with the model in (a) than with the model in
Problem 46?
48. Angela and Bob Ray keep a large garden in which they grow cabbage, tomatoes, and onions to
make two kinds of relish—chow-chow and tomato. The chow-chow is made primarily of cab-
bage, whereas the tomato relish has more tomatoes than does the chow-chow. Both relishes 
include onions, and negligible amounts of bell peppers and spices. A jar of chow-chow contains
8 ounces of cabbage, 3 ounces of tomatoes, and 3 ounces of onions, whereas a jar of tomato relish
contains 6 ounces of tomatoes, 6 ounces of cabbage, and 2 ounces of onions. The Rays grow 
120 pounds of cabbage, 90 pounds of tomatoes, and 45 pounds of onions each summer. 
The Rays can produce no more than 24 dozen jars of relish. They make $2.25 in profit from a
jar of chow-chow and $1.95 in profit from a jar of tomato relish. The Rays want to know how
many jars of each kind of relish to produce to generate the most profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model graphically.
49. In Problem 48, the Rays have checked their sales records for the past 5 years and have found
that they sell at least 50% more chow-chow than tomato relish. How will this additional infor-
mation affect their model and solution?
50. A California grower has a 50-acre farm on which to plant strawberries and tomatoes. The grower
has available 300 hours of labor per week and 800 tons of fertilizer, and he has contracted for
shipping space for a maximum of 26 acres’ worth of strawberries and 37 acres’ worth of toma-
toes. An acre of strawberries requires 10 hours of labor and 8 tons of fertilizer, whereas an acre
of tomatoes requires 3 hours of labor and 20 tons of fertilizer. The profit from an acre of straw-
berries is $400, and the profit from an acre of tomatoes is $300. The farmer wants to know the
number of acres of strawberries and tomatoes to plant to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
51. In Problem 50, if the amount of fertilizer required for each acre of strawberries were determined
to be 20 tons instead of 8 tons, what would be the effect on the optimal solution?
52. The admissions office at Tech wants to determine how many in-state and how many out-of-state
students to accept for next fall’s entering freshman class. Tuition for an in-state student is $7,600
per year, whereas out-of-state tuition is $22,500 per year. A total of 12,800 in-state and 8,100
out-of-state freshmen have applied for next fall, and Tech does not want to accept more than
3,500 students. However, because Tech is a state institution, the state mandates that it can accept
no more than 40% out-of-state students. From past experience the admissions office knows that
12% of in-state students and 24% of out-of-state students will drop out during their first year.
Tech wants to maximize total tuition while limiting the total attrition to 600 first-year students.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.

53. The Robinsons are planning a wedding and reception for their daughter, Rachel. Some of the
most expensive items served at the reception and dinner are wine and beer. The Robinsons are
planning on 200 guests at the reception, and they estimate that they need at least four servings
(i.e., a glass of wine or bottle of beer) for each guest in order to be sure they won’t run out. 
A bottle of wine contains five glasses. They also estimate that 50% more guests will prefer wine
to beer. A bottle of wine costs $8, and a bottle of beer costs $0.75. The Robinsons have budgeted
$1,200 for wine and beer. Finally, the Robinsons want to minimize their waste (i.e., unused wine
and beer). The caterer has advised them that typically 5% of the wine and 10% of the beer will
be left over. How many bottles of wine and beer should the Robinsons order?
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model graphically.
54. Suppose that in Problem 53, it turns out that twice as many guests prefer wine as beer. Will the
Robinsons have enough wine with the amount they ordered in the Problem 53 solution? How
much waste will there be with the solution in Problem 53? 
55. Xara Stores in the United States imports the designer-inspired clothes it sells from suppliers in
China and Brazil. Xara estimates that it will have 45 orders in a year, and it must arrange to
transport orders (in less-than-full containers) by container ship with shippers in Hong Kong 
and Buenos Aires. The shippers Xara uses have a travel time of 32 days from Buenos Aires and
14 days from Hong Kong, and Xara wants its orders to have an average travel time of no more
than 21 days. About 10% of the annual orders from the shipper in Hong Kong are damaged, and
the shipper in Buenos Aires damages about 4% of all orders annually. Xara wants to receive no
more than 6 damaged orders each year. Xara does not want to be dependent on suppliers from
just one country, so it wants to receive at least 25% of its orders from each country. It costs
$3,700 per order from China and $5,100 per order to ship from Brazil. Xara wants to know how
many orders it should ship from each port in order to minimize shipping costs.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
56. In Problem 55, the Chinese shipper would like to gain more shipping orders from Xara because
it’s a prestigious company and would enhance the shipper’s reputation. It has therefore made the
following proposals to Xara:
a. Would Xara give the Chinese shipper more orders if it reduced its shipping costs to $2,500
per shipment?
b. Would Xara give the Chinese shipper more orders if it reduced its damaged orders to 5%.
c. Would Xara give the shipper more of its orders if it reduced its travel time to 28 days?
57. Janet Lopez is establishing an investment portfolio that will include stock and bond funds. She
has $720,000 to invest, and she does not want the portfolio to include more than 65% stocks.
The average annual return for the stock fund she plans to invest in is 18%, whereas the average
annual return for the bond fund is 6%. She further estimates that the most she could lose in the
next year in the stock fund is 22%, whereas the most she could lose in the bond fund is 5%. To
reduce her risk, she wants to limit her potential maximum losses to $100,000.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
58. Professor Smith teaches two sections of business statistics, which combined will result in 120 fi-
nal exams to be graded. Professor Smith has two graduate assistants, Brad and Sarah, who will
grade the final exams. There is a 3-day period between the time the exam is administered and
when final grades must be posted. During this period Brad has 12 hours available and Sarah has
10 hours available to grade the exams. It takes Brad an average of 7.2 minutes to grade an exam,
and it takes Sarah 12 minutes to grade an exam; however, Brad’s exams will have errors that will
68
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION

PROBLEMS
69
require Professor Smith to ultimately regrade 10% of the exams, while only 6% of Sarah’s 
exams will require regrading. Professor Smith wants to know how many exams to assign to each
graduate assistant to grade in order to minimize the number of exams to regrade.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
59. In Problem 58, if Professor Smith could hire Brad or Sarah to work 1 additional hour, which
should she choose? What would be the effect of hiring the selected graduate assistant for 1 addi-
tional hour?
60. Starbright Coffee Shop at the Galleria Mall serves two coffee blends it brews on a daily basis,
Pomona and Coastal. Each is a blend of three high-quality coffees from Colombia, Kenya, and
Indonesia. The coffee shop has 6 pounds of each of these coffees available each day. Each pound
of coffee will produce sixteen 16-ounce cups of coffee. The shop has enough brewing capacity
to brew 30 gallons of these two coffee blends each day. Pomona is a blend of 20% Colombian,
35% Kenyan, and 45% Indonesian, while Coastal is a blend of 60% Colombian, 10% Kenyan,
and 30% Indonesian. The shop sells 1.5 times more Pomona than Coastal each day. Pomona
sells for $2.05 per cup, and Coastal sells for $1.85 per cup. The manager wants to know how
many cups of each blend to sell each day in order to maximize sales.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using graphical analysis.
61. In Problem 60:
a. If Starbright Coffee Shop could get 1 more pound of coffee, which one should it be? What
would be the effect on sales of getting 1 more pound of this coffee? Would it benefit the shop
to increase its brewing capacity from 30 gallons to 40 gallons?
b. If the shop spent $20 per day on advertising that would increase the relative demand for
Pomona to twice that of Coastal, should it be done?
62. Solve the following linear programming model graphically and explain the solution result:
subject to
63. Solve the following linear programming model graphically and explain the solution result:
subject to
64. Solve the following linear programming model graphically and explain the solution result:
subject to
x1, x2  0
70x1 + 105x2  2,100
-6x1 + 8x2 … 120
2x1 + x2  40
maximize Z = 110x1 + 75x2
x1, x2  0
x2  30
100x1 + 100x2  6,000
60x1 + 30x2 … 1,500
maximize Z = 60x1 + 90x2
x1, x2  0
40x1 + 160x2  2,400
10x1 + 10x2  400
60x1 + 20x2  1,200
minimize Z = +3,000x1 + 1,000x2

70
CHAPTER 2
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODEL FORMULATION AND GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
Case Problem
Metropolitan Police Patrol
The Metropolitan Police Department was recently criti-
cized in the local media for not responding to police calls
in the downtown area rapidly enough. In several recent
cases, alarms had sounded for break-ins, but by the time
the police car arrived, the perpetrators had left, and in one
instance a store owner had been shot. Sergeant Joe Davis
was assigned by the chief as head of a task force to find a
way to determine the optimal patrol area (dimensions) for
their cars that would minimize the average time it took to
respond to a call in the downtown area.
Sergeant Davis solicited help from Angela Maris, an
analyst in the operations area for the police department.
Together they began to work through the problem.
Joe noted to Angela that normal patrol sectors are laid
out in rectangles, with each rectangle including a number
of city blocks. For illustrative purposes he defined the di-
mensions of the sector as x in the horizontal direction and
as y in the vertical direction. He explained to Angela that
cars traveled in straight lines either horizontally or verti-
cally and turned at right angles. Travel in a horizontal di-
rection must be accompanied by travel in a vertical
direction, and the total distance traveled is the sum of the
horizontal and vertical segments. He further noted that past
research on police patrolling in urban areas had shown that
the average distance traveled by a patrol car responding to
a call in either direction was one-third of the dimensions of
the sector, or 
and 
. He also explained that the travel
y>3
x>3
time it took to respond to a call (assuming that a car left
immediately upon receiving the call) is simply the average
distance traveled divided by the average travel speed.
Angela told Joe that now that she understood how aver-
age travel time to a call was determined, she could see that
it was closely related to the size of the patrol area. She
asked Joe if there were any restrictions on the size of the
area sectors that cars patrolled. He responded that for their
city, the department believed that the perimeter of a patrol
sector should not be less than 5 miles or exceed 12 miles.
He noted several policy issues and staffing constraints that
required these specifications. Angela wanted to know if any
additional restrictions existed, and Joe indicated that the
distance in the vertical direction must be at least 50% more
than the horizontal distance for the sector. He explained
that laying out sectors in that manner meant that the patrol
areas would have a greater tendency to overlap different
residential, income, and retail areas than if they ran the
other way. He said that these areas were layered from north
to south in the city, so if a sector area was laid out east to
west, all of it would tend to be in one demographic layer.
Angela indicated that she had almost enough informa-
tion to develop a model, except that she also needed to
know the average travel speed the patrol cars could travel.
Joe told her that cars moving vertically traveled an average
of 15 miles per hour, whereas cars traveled horizontally an
average of 20 miles per hour. He said that the difference
was due to different traffic flows.
Develop a linear programming model for this problem
and solve it by using the graphical method.
Case Problem
“The Possibility” Restaurant
Angela Fox and Zooey Caulfield were food and nutrition
majors at State University, as well as close friends and room-
mates. Upon graduation Angela and Zooey decided to open a
French restaurant in Draperton, the small town where the
university was located. There were no other French restau-
rants in Draperton, and the possibility of doing something
new and somewhat risky intrigued the two friends. They pur-
chased an old Victorian home just off Main Street for their
new restaurant, which they named “The Possibility.”
Angela and Zooey knew in advance that at least initially
they could not offer a full, varied menu of dishes. They had
no idea what their local customers’ tastes in French cuisine
would be, so they decided to serve only two full-course
meals each night, one with beef and the other with fish. Their
chef, Pierre, was confident he could make each dish so excit-
ing and unique that two meals would be sufficient, at least
until they could assess which menu items were most popular.
Pierre indicated that with each meal he could experiment
with different appetizers, soups, salads, vegetable dishes, and
desserts until they were able to identify a full selection of
menu items.
The next problem for Angela and Zooey was to deter-
mine how many meals to prepare for each night so they
could shop for ingredients and set up the work schedule.
They could not afford too much waste. They estimated that

CASE PROBLEM
71
they would sell a maximum of 60 meals each night. Each
fish dinner, including all accompaniments, requires 15
minutes to prepare, and each beef dinner takes twice as
long. There is a total of 20 hours of kitchen staff labor
available each day. Angela and Zooey believe that because
of the health consciousness of their potential clientele, they
will sell at least three fish dinners for every two beef din-
ners. However, they also believe that at least 10% of their
customers will order beef dinners. The profit from each
fish dinner will be approximately $12, and the profit from
a beef dinner will be about $16.
Formulate a linear programming model for Angela 
and Zooey that will help them estimate the number of
meals they should prepare each night and solve this model
graphically.
If Angela and Zooey increased the menu price on the
fish dinner so that the profit for both dinners was the same,
what effect would that have on their solution? Suppose An-
gela and Zooey reconsidered the demand for beef dinners
and decided that at least 20% of their customers would
purchase beef dinners. What effect would this have on their
meal preparation plan?
Case Problem
Annabelle Invests in the Market
Annabelle Sizemore has cashed in some treasury bonds
and a life insurance policy that her parents had accumu-
lated over the years for her. She has also saved some
money in certificates of deposit and savings bonds during
the 10 years since she graduated from college. As a result,
she has $120,000 available to invest. Given the recent rise
in the stock market, she feels that she should invest all of
this amount there. She has researched the market and has
decided that she wants to invest in an index fund tied to
S&P stocks and in an Internet stock fund. However, she is
very concerned about the volatility of Internet stocks.
Therefore, she wants to balance her risk to some degree.
She has decided to select an index fund from Shield Se-
curities and an Internet stock fund from Madison Funds, Inc.
She has also decided that the proportion of the dollar amount
she invests in the index fund relative to the Internet fund
should be at least one-third but that she should not invest
more than twice the amount in the Internet fund that she in-
vests in the index fund. The price per share of the index fund
is $175, whereas the price per share of the Internet fund is
$208. The average annual return during the last 3 years for
the index fund has been 17%, and for the Internet stock fund
it has been 28%. She anticipates that both mutual funds will
realize the same average returns for the coming year that they
have in the recent past; however, at the end of the year she is
likely to reevaluate her investment strategy anyway. Thus,
she wants to develop an investment strategy that will maxi-
mize her return for the coming year.
Formulate a linear programming model for Annabelle
that will indicate how much money she should invest in
each fund and solve this model by using the graphical
method.
Suppose Annabelle decides to change her risk-balancing
formula by eliminating the restriction that the proportion
of the amount she invests in the index fund to the amount
that she invests in the Internet fund must be at least one-
third. What will the effect be on her solution? Suppose in-
stead that she eliminates the restriction that the proportion
of money she invests in the Internet fund relative to the
stock fund not exceed a ratio of 2 to 1. How will this affect
her solution?
If Annabelle can get $1 more to invest, how will that
affect her solution? $2 more? $3 more? What can you say
about her return on her investment strategy, given these
successive changes?

Linear Programming:
Computer Solution 
and Sensitivity Analysis
72
CHAPTER
3

COMPUTER SOLUTION
73
Chapter 2 demonstrated how a linear programming model is formulated and how a solution can
be derived from a graph of the model. Graphing can provide valuable insight into linear
programming and linear programming solutions in general. However, the fact that this solution
method is limited to problems with only two decision variables restricts its usefulness as a
general solution technique.
In this chapter, we will show how linear programming problems can be solved using several
personal computer software packages. We will also describe how to use a computer solution
result to experiment with a linear programming model to see what effect parameter changes have
on the optimal solution, referred to as sensitivity analysis.
Computer Solution
When linear programming was first developed in the 1940s, virtually the only way to solve a
problem was by using a lengthy manual mathematical solution procedure called the simplex
method. However, during the next six decades, as computer technology evolved, the computer
was used more and more to solve linear programming models. The mathematical steps of the
simplex method were simply programmed in prewritten software packages designed for the
solution of linear programming problems. The ability to solve linear programming problems
quickly and cheaply on the computer, regardless of the size of the problem, popularized linear
programming and expanded its use by businesses. There are currently dozens of software
packages with linear programming capabilities. Many of these are general-purpose management
science or quantitative methods packages with linear programming modules, among many other
modules for other techniques. There are also numerous software packages that are devoted
exclusively to linear programming and its derivatives. These packages are generally cheap,
efficient, and easy to use.
As a result of the easy and low-cost availability of personal computers and linear programming
software, the simplex method has become less of a focus in the teaching of linear programming.
Thus, at this point in our presentation of linear programming, we focus exclusively on computer
solution. However, knowledge of the simplex method is useful in gaining an overall, in-depth
understanding of linear programming for those who are interested in this degree of understanding.
As noted, computer solution itself is based on the simplex method. Thus, while we present linear
programming in the text in a manner that does not require use of the simplex method, we also
provide in-depth coverage of this topic on the companion Web site for this text.
In the next few sections, we demonstrate how to solve linear programming problems by
using Excel spreadsheets and QM for Windows, a typical general-purpose quantitative methods
software package.
Excel Spreadsheets
Excel can be used to solve linear programming problems, although the data input requirements can
be more time-consuming and tedious than with a software package like QM for Windows that is
specifically designed for the purpose. A spreadsheet requires that column and row headings for the
specific model be set up and that constraint and objective function formulas be input in their
entirety, as opposed to just the model parameters, as with QM for Windows. However, this is also
an advantage of spreadsheets, in that it enables the problem to be set up in an attractive format for
reporting and presentation purposes. In addition, once a spreadsheet is set up for one problem, it
can often be used as a template for others. Exhibit 3.1 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up for our
Beaver Creek Pottery Company example introduced in Chapter 2. Appendix B at the end of this
text is the tutorial “Setting Up and Editing a Spreadsheet,” using Exhibit 3.4 as an example.
The values for bowls and mugs and for profit are contained in cells B10, B11, and B12,
respectively. These cells are currently empty or zero because the model has not yet been solved.
The objective function for profit,
is embedded in cell B12 shown in bar.
This formula is essentially the same as 
where B10 and B11 represent 
and
x1
Z = 40x1 + 50x2,
C4*B10D4*B11,
The simplex method
is a procedure 
involving a set of
mathematical steps to
solve linear 
programming
problems.
See Web site Module A
for a chapter on “The
Simplex Solution
Method.”

74
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Click on “Data“ tab 
to invoke “Solver.“
=C6*B10+D6*B11
=G7–E7
=G6–E6
Decision variables—
  bowls (x1)=B10;
  mugs (x2)=B11
=C7*B10+D7*B11
Objective function
=C4*B10+D4*B11
EXHIBIT 3.1
and B12 equals Z. The objective function coefficients, 40 and 50, are in cells C4 and D4.
Similar formulas for the constraints for labor and clay are embedded in cells E6 and E7. For
example, in cell E6 we input the formula 
The 
signs in cells F6 and
F7 are for cosmetic purposes only; they have no real effect.
To solve this problem, first click on the “Data” tab on the toolbar at the top of the screen
and then click on “Solver” on the far right side of the Data toolbar. The window Solver Parame-
ters will appear, as shown in Exhibit 3.2. Initially all the windows on this screen are blank, and
we must input the objective function cell, the cells representing the decision variables, and the
cells that make up the model constraints.
When inputting the Solver parameters as shown in Exhibit 3.2, we first “Set Objective:”
which is B12 for our example. (Excel automatically inserts the $ sign next to cell addresses;
you should not type it in.) Next we indicate that we want to maximize the objective by clicking
on “Max.” We achieve our objective by changing cells B10 and B11, which represent our
model decision variables. The designation “B10:B11” means all the cells between B10 and B11,
inclusive. We next input our model constraints by clicking on “Add,” which will access the
screen shown in Exhibit 3.3.
Exhibit 3.3 shows our labor constraint. Cell E6 contains the constraint formula for labor
whereas cell G6 contains the labor hours available (i.e., 40). We continue
to add constraints until the model is complete. Note that we could have input our constraints
by adding a single constraint formula,
which means that the constraints in
cells E6 and E7 are less than or equal to the values in cells G6 and G7, respectively. It is also not
necessary to input the nonnegativity constraints for our decision variables,
This
can be done in the Solver Parameters screen (Exhibit 3.2).
Click on “OK” on the Add Constraint window after all constraints have been added. This will
return us to the Solver Parameters screen. There are two more necessary steps before proceeding
to solve the problem. On the Solver Parameters screen, check where it says, “Make Uncon-
strained Variables Non-Negative,” and where it says “Select a Solving Method,” select “Simplex
LP.” This will ensure that Solver uses the simplex procedure to solve the model and not some
other numeric method (which Excel has available). This is not too important for now, but later it
will ensure that we get the right reports for sensitivity analysis, a topic we will take up next.
B10:B117 = 0.
E6:E76 = G6:G7,
(C6*B10D6*B11),
6 =
C6*B10D6*B11.
x2,

COMPUTER SOLUTION
75
=C6*B10+D6*B11
=40
EXHIBIT 3.3
Slack—S1 = 0
and S2 = 0
EXHIBIT 3.4
Once the complete model is input, click on “Solve” at the bottom of the Solver Parameters
screen (Exhibit 3.2). First, a screen will appear, titled Solver Results, which will provide you with
the opportunity to select the reports you want and then when you click on “OK,” the solution
screen shown in Exhibit 3.4 will appear.
If there had been any extra, or slack, left over for labor or clay, it would have appeared in
column H on our spreadsheet, under the heading “Left Over.” In this case, there are no slack
resources left over.
Decision variables
=C7*B10+D7*B11≤120
=C6*B10+D6*B11≤40
Select “Simplex LP”
method
Click on “Add“ to add 
model constraints.
Objective function
x1, x2   0
≤
EXHIBIT 3.2

76
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
EXHIBIT 3.5
QM for Windows
Before demonstrating how to use QM for Windows, we must first make a few comments about
the proper form that constraints must be in before a linear programming model can be solved with
QM for Windows. The constraints formulated in the linear programming models presented in
Chapter 2 and in this chapter have followed a consistent form. All the variables in the constraint
have appeared to the left of the inequality, and all numerical values have been on the right-hand
side of the inequality. For example, in the pottery company model, the constraint for labor is
The value, 40, is referred to as the constraint quantity, or right-hand-side, value.
The standard form for a linear programming problem requires constraints to be in this form,
with variables on the left side and numeric values to the right of the inequality or equality sign.
This is a necessary condition to input problems into some computer programs, and specifically
QM for Windows, for linear programming solution.
Consider a model requirement that states that the production of product 
must be as
much as or more than the production of products 
and 
The model constraint for this
requirement is formulated as
This constraint is not in proper form and could not be input into QM for Windows as it is. It must
first be converted to
This constraint can now be input for computer solution.
Next, consider a problem requirement that the ratio of the production of product 
to
the production of products 
and 
must be at least 2 to 1. The model constraint for this
requirement is formulated as
x1
x2 + x3
 2
3 (x3)
2 (x2)
1 (x1)
x3 - x1 - x2  0
x3  x1 + x2
2 (x2).
1 (x1)
3 (x3)
x1 + 2x2 … 40
We can also generate several reports that summarize the model results. When you click on
“OK” from the Solver screen, the intermediate Solver Results screen provides an opportunity
for you to select several reports, including the answer report, shown in Exhibit 3.5. This report
provides a summary of the solution results.

COMPUTER SOLUTION
77
Management Science Application
Optimizing Production Quantities 
at GE Plastics
GE Plastics is a $5 billion global business that supplies plas-
tics and raw materials from plants around the world to com-
panies such as automotive, appliance, computer, and medical
equipment companies. Among its seven major divisions, the
High Performance Polymers (HPP) division is the fastest grow-
ing. HPP is a very heat tolerant polymer that is used in the
manufacture of microwave cookware, fire helmets, utensils,
and aircraft. HPP has a supply chain that consists of two levels
of manufacturing plants and distribution channels that is simi-
lar to those in all GE Plastics divisions. First-level plants convert
feedstocks into resins and then ship them to finishing plants,
where they are combined with additives to produce different
grades of end products. The products are then shipped to GE
Polymerland (a commercial front for GE plastics), which dis-
tributes them to customers. Each physical plant has multiple
plant lines that operate as independent manufacturing facili-
ties. HPP has 8 resin plant lines that feed 21 finishing plant
lines, which produce 24 grades of HPP products. HPP uses a
linear programming model to optimize production along this
supply chain of manufacturing plant lines and distribution
channels. The linear programming model objective function
maximizes the total contribution margin, which consists of
revenues minus the sum of manufacturing, additive, and dis-
tribution costs, subject to demand, manufacturing capacity,
and flow constraints. The decision variables are the amount of
each resin produced at each resin plant line that will be used
at each finishing plant line and the amount of each product at
each finishing plant line. The company uses the model to de-
velop a four-year planning horizon by solving 4 single-year
models; each single-year LP model has 3,100 variables and
1,100 constraints. The model is solved within an Excel frame-
work, using LINGO, a commercial optimization solver.
Source: Based on R. Tyagi, P. Kalish, K. Akbay, and G. Munshaw,
“GE Plastics Optimizes the Two-Echelon Global Fulfillment Network
at Its High Performance Polymers Division,” Interfaces 34, no. 5
(September–October 2004): 359–66.
Although this constraint does meet the condition that variables be on the left side of the inequal-
ity and numeric values on the right, it is not in proper form. The fractional relationship of the vari-
ables,
cannot be input into the most commonly used linear programming
computer programs in that form. It must be converted to
and then
We will demonstrate how to use QM for Windows by solving our Beaver Creek Pottery
Company example. The linear programming module in QM for Windows is accessed by clicking
on “Module” at the top of the initial window. This will bring down a menu with all the program
modules available in QM for Windows. By clicking on “Linear Programming,” a window for this
program will come up on the screen, and by clicking on “File” and then “New,” a screen for
inputting problem dimensions will appear. Exhibit 3.6 shows the data entry screen with the model
type and the number of constraints and decision variables for our Beaver Creek Pottery Company
example.
Exhibit 3.7 shows the data table for our example, with the model parameters, including the
objective function and constraint coefficients, and the constraint quantity values. Notice that we
also customized the row headings for the constraints by typing in “Labor (hrs)” and “Clay (lbs).”
x1 - 2x2 - 2x3  0
x1  21x2 + x32
x1> 1x2 + x32,
Fractional
relationships between
variables in
constraints must be
eliminated.
© Kristoffer Tripplaar/Alamy

78
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Set number
of constraints
and decision
variables.
Click here when finished.
EXHIBIT 3.6
EXHIBIT 3.7
Once the model parameters have been input, click on “Solve” to get the model solution, as shown
in Exhibit 3.8. It is not necessary to put the model into standard form by adding slack variables.
EXHIBIT 3.8
The marginal value is
the dollar amount one
would be willing to
pay for one additional
resource unit.
Notice the values 16 and 6 under the column labeled “Dual” for the “Labor” and “Clay” rows.
These dual values are the marginal values of labor and clay in our problem. This is useful infor-
mation that is provided in addition to the normal model solution values when you solve a linear
programming model. We talk about dual values in more detail later in this chapter, but for now it is
sufficient to say that the marginal value is the maximum dollar amount the company would be
willing to pay for one additional unit of a resource. For example, the dual value of 16 for the labor
constraint means that if 1 additional hour of labor could be obtained by the company, it would
increase profit by $16. Likewise, if 1 additional pound of clay could be obtained, it would increase
profit by $6. Thus, the company would be willing to pay up to $16 for 1 more hour of labor and up
to $6 for 1 more pound of clay. The dual value is not the purchase price of one of these resources;
it is the maximum amount the company would pay to get more of the resource. These dual values
are helpful to the company in making decisions about acquiring additional resources.

COMPUTER SOLUTION
79
EXHIBIT 3.9
QM for Windows provides solution results in several different formats, including a graphical
solution by clicking on “Window” and then selecting “Graph.” Exhibit 3.9 shows the graphical
solution for our Beaver Creek Pottery Company example.
Management Science Application
Improving Profitability at Norske Skog 
with Linear Programming
Norwegian paper (and newsprint) manufacturer Norske
Skog, with annual revenues of $3.9 billion and more than
6,400 employees working at 16 paper mills in 12 countries, is
the fourth-largest paper manufacturer in the world. Its
production lines at paper mills, consisting of pulping plants,
paper machines, and a finishing section, can cost more than
$500 million. These production lines produce paper 24 hours
per day, year round, closing only for routine maintenance; its
daily production could create a tabloid publication that would
stretch to the moon and back. However, during the past
10-plus years, the demand for paper has declined as electronic
media has replaced newsprint publications, jeopardizing the
company’s financial health and forcing the company to cut
costs by closing some of its plants and paper machines.
Norske Skog has employed a linear programming model to
help it make these difficult and complex decisions. The linear
programming model objective function maximized sales rev-
enue minus operating and fixed costs. It included 312 binary
variables representing the closure of plants and shutdown of
machines; 47,000 non-integer variables representing the
amounts of different paper products made on different ma-
chines for different customers and raw materials used on dif-
ferent machines; and 2,600 constraints. The model solution
called for the closing of one paper mill in Korea and one pa-
per mill in the Czech Republic, as well as the shutdown of one
paper machine in Norway. This resulted in a reduction of
450,000 tons of production capacity and total savings of $100
million annually—about 3% of Norske Skog’s annual revenue.
These decisions recommended by the linear programming
model placed the company in a more stable financial situation.
In addition, because of the analytical nature of the modeling
and decision process, stakeholders and the public trusted
the decision more than they had previous, nonquantifiable,
decisions.
Source: Based on G. Everett, A. Philpott, K. Vatn, and R. Gjessing,
“Norske Skog Improves Global Profitability Using Operations
Research,” Interfaces 40, no. 1 (January–February 2010): 58–70.
Luuk van der Lee/Hollandse Hoogte 

80
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Sensitivity analysis is
the analysis of the
effect of parameter
changes on the
optimal solution.
B
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
x1 = 24
x2 = 8
 Z = $1,360
Z = $40x1 + 50x2 = $1,360
C
A
FIGURE 3.1
Optimal solution
point
Sensitivity Analysis
When linear programming models were formulated in Chapter 2, it was implicitly assumed that
the parameters of the model were known with certainty. These parameters include the objective
function coefficients, such as profit per bowl; model constraint quantity values, such as available
hours of labor; and constraint coefficients, such as pounds of clay per bowl. In the examples
presented so far, the models have been formulated as if these parameters are known exactly or
with certainty. However, rarely does a manager know all these parameters exactly. In reality, the
model parameters are simply estimates (or “best guesses”) that are subject to change. For this
reason, it is of interest to the manager to see what effect a change in a parameter will have on the
solution to the model. Changes may be either reactions to anticipated uncertainties in the parame-
ters or reactions to information. The analysis of parameter changes and their effects on the model
solution is known as sensitivity analysis.
The most obvious way to ascertain the effect of a change in the parameter of a model is to
make the change in the original model, re-solve the model, and compare the solution results with
the original. However, as we will demonstrate in this chapter, in some cases the effect of changes
on the model can be determined without solving the problem again.
Changes in Objective Function Coefficients
The first model parameter change we will analyze is a change in an objective function coefficient.
We will use our now-familiar Beaver Creek Pottery Company example to illustrate this change:
subject to
hr. of labor
lb. of clay
The graphical solution for this problem is shown in Figure 3.1.
In Figure 3.1, the optimal solution point is shown to be at point 
which is the last point the objective function, denoted by the dashed line, touches as it leaves
the feasible solution area. However, what if we changed the profit of a bowl,
from $40 to
$100? How would that affect the solution identified in Figure 3.1? This change is shown in
Figure 3.2.
x1,
B1x1 = 24 and x2 = 82,
x1, x2  0
 4x1 + 3x2 … 120
x1 + 2x2 … 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2

SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
81
Z = $100x1 + 50x2 = $3,000
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
Z = $3,000
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
A
B
C
FIGURE 3.2
Changing the
objective function
coefficient
x1
Z = $40x1 + 100x2 = $2,000
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
A
x1 = 0
x2 = 20
Z = $2,000
B
C
FIGURE 3.3
Changing the
objective function
coefficient
x2
Increasing profit for a bowl (i.e., the 
coefficient) from $40 to $100 makes the objective
function line steeper, so much so that the optimal solution point changes from point B to
point C. Alternatively, if we increased the profit for a mug, the 
coefficient, from $50 to $100,
the objective function line would become flatter, to the extent that point A would become
optimal, with
This is shown in Figure 3.3.
x1 = 0, x2 = 20, and Z = +2,000
x2
x1
The sensitivity range
for an objective
coefficient is the
range of values over
which the current
optimal solution point
will remain optimal.
The objective of sensitivity analysis in this case is to determine the range of values for a
specific objective function coefficient over which the optimal solution point,
and 
will remain optimal. For example, the coefficient of 
in the objective function is originally
$40, but at some value greater than $40, point C will become optimal, and at some value less
than $40, point A will become optimal. The focus of sensitivity analysis is to determine
those two values, referred to as the sensitivity range for the 
coefficient, which we will
designate as .
c1
x1
x1
x2,
x1

82
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
For our simple example, we can look at the graph in Figure 3.1 and determine the sensitivity
range for the 
coefficient. The slope of the objective function is currently 
determined as
follows:
or
and
The objective function is now in the form of the equation of a straight line,
where
the intercept, a, equals 
and the slope, b, is 
If the slope of the objective function increases to 
the objective function line becomes
exactly parallel to the constraint line,
and point C becomes optimal (along with B). The slope of this constraint line is 
so we ask
ourselves what objective function coefficient for 
will make the objective function slope equal
The answer is determined as follows, where 
is the objective function coefficient for 
If the coefficient of 
is 66.67, then the objective function will have a slope of 
or 
This is illustrated in Figure 3.4(a).
We have determined that the upper limit of the sensitivity range for 
the 
coefficient, is
66.67. If profit for a bowl increases to exactly $66.67, the solution points will be both B and C.
If the profit for a bowl is more than $66.67, point C will be the optimal solution point.
The lower limit for the sensitivity range can be determined by observing Figure 3.4(b). In
this case, if the objective function line slope decreases (becomes flatter) from 
to the same
slope as the constraint line,
x1 + 2x2 = 40
-4>5
x1
c1,
-4>3.
-66.67>50,
x1
c1 = +66.67
-3c1 = -200
-c1
50 = -4
3
x1:
c1
-4>3?
x1
-4>3,
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
-4>3,
-4>5.
Z>50
y = a + bx,
x2 = Z
50 - 4x1
5
50x2 = Z - 40x1
Z = 40x1 + 50x2
-4>5,
x1
Slope = 4/5
Slope = 1/2
Slope = 4/5
Slope = 4/3
B
50
40
30
(a)
20
10
x1
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
C
A
50
40
30
(b)
20
10
x1
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
A
B
C
FIGURE 3.4
Determining the
sensitivity range
for c1

SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
83
then point A becomes optimal (along with B). The slope of this constraint line is 
that is,
In order to have an objective function slope of 
the profit for a bowl
would have to decrease to $25, as follows:
This is the lower limit of the sensitivity range for the 
coefficient.
The complete sensitivity range for the 
coefficient can be expressed as
This means that the profit for a bowl can vary anywhere between $25.00 and $66.67, and the op-
timal solution point,
and 
will not change. Of course, the total profit, or Z value,
will change, depending on whatever value 
actually is.
For the manager, this is useful information. Changing the production schedule in terms of
how many items are produced can have a number of ramifications in an operation. Packaging,
logistical, and marketing requirements for the product might need to be altered. However, with
the preceding sensitivity range, the manager knows how much the profit, and hence the selling
price and costs, can be altered without resulting in a change in production.
Performing the same type of graphical analysis will provide the sensitivity range for the 
objective function coefficient,
This range is 
This means that the profit for a
mug can vary between $30 and $80, and the optimal solution point, B, will not change. However,
for this case and the range for 
the sensitivity range generally applies only if one coefficient
is varied and the other held constant. Thus, when we say that profit for a mug can vary between
$30 and $80, this is true only if 
remains constant.
Simultaneous changes can be made in the objective function coefficients as long as the
changes taken together do not change the optimal solution point. However, determining the effect
of these simultaneous changes is overly complex and time-consuming using graphical analysis. In
fact, using graphical analysis is a tedious way to perform sensitivity analysis in general, and it is
impossible when the linear programming model contains three or more variables, thus requiring a
three-dimensional graph. However, Excel and QM for Windows provide sensitivity analysis for
linear programming problems as part of their standard solution output. Determining the effect of
simultaneous changes in model parameters and performing sensitivity analysis in general are much
easier and more practical using the computer. Later in this chapter we will show the sensitivity
analysis output for Excel and QM for Windows.
However, before moving on to computer-generated sensitivity analysis, we want to look at
one more aspect of the sensitivity ranges for objective function coefficients. Recall that the
model for our fertilizer minimization model from Chapter 2 is
subject to
and the solution shown graphically in Figure 3.5 is 
and 
The sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients are
Notice that the upper bound for the 
coefficient range is infinity. The reason for this upper
limit can be seen in the graphical solution of the problem shown in Figure 3.5.
x1
 0 … c2 … 4.5
 4 … c1 … 
Z = 24.
x1 = 0, x2 = 8,
x1, x2  0
 4x1 + 3x2  24
 2x1 + 4x2  16
minimize Z = +6x1 + 3x2
c1
c1,
30 … c2 … 80.
c2.
x2
c1
x2 = 8,
x1 = 24
25 … c1 … 66.67
x1
x1
c1 = +25
-2c1 = -50
-c1
50 = -1
2
-1>2,
x2 = 20 - 11>22x1.
-1>2,

84
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Slope = 4/3
x1 = 0
x2 = 8
Z = $24
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
x1
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
x2
0
A
C
B
Slope = 2
FIGURE 3.5
Fertilizer example:
sensitivity range
for c1
As the objective function coefficient for 
decreases from $6, the objective function slope of
decreases, and the objective function line gets flatter. When the coefficient,
equals $4, then
the slope of the objective function is 
which is the same as the constraint line,
This makes point B optimal (as well as A). Thus, the lower limit of the
sensitivity range for 
is $4. However, notice that as 
increases from $6, the objective function
simply becomes steeper and steeper as it rotates toward the 
axis of the graph. The objective
function will not come into contact with another feasible solution point. Thus, no matter how
much we increase cost for Super-gro fertilizer 
point A will always be optimal.
Objective Function Coefficient Ranges with the Computer
When we provided the Excel spreadsheet solution for the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example
earlier in this chapter, we did not include sensitivity analysis. However, Excel will also generate a
sensitivity report that provides the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients. When
you click on “Solve” in the Solver Parameters window, you will momentarily go to a Solver Results
screen, shown in Exhibit 3.10, which provides you with an opportunity to select different reports
before proceeding to the solution. This is how we selected our answer report earlier. The sensitivity
report for our Beaver Creek Pottery Company example is shown in Exhibit 3.11.
(x1),
x2
c1
c1
4x1 + 3x2 = 24.
-4>3,
c1,
-2
x1
EXHIBIT 3.10

SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
85
Sensitivity ranges
for objective
function coefficients
EXHIBIT 3.11
Sensitivity ranges
for objective
function coefficients
EXHIBIT 3.12
Notice that the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients (40 and 50) are not pro-
vided as an upper and lower limit but instead show an allowable increase and an allowable decrease.
For example, for the coefficient $40 for bowls (B10), the allowable increase of 26.67 results in an
upper limit of 66.67, whereas the allowable decrease of 15 results in a lower limit of 25.
The sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients for our example are presented
in QM for Windows in Exhibit 3.12. Notice that this output provides the upper and lower limits
of the sensitivity ranges for both variables,
and x2.
x1
Changes in Constraint Quantity Values
The second type of sensitivity analysis we will discuss is the sensitivity ranges for the constraint
quantity values—that is, the values to the right of the inequality signs in the constraints. For our
Beaver Creek Pottery Company model,
subject to
(labor, hr.)
(clay, lb.)
the constraint quantity values are 40 and 120.
Consider a change in which the manager of the pottery company can increase the labor hours
from 40 to 60. The effect of this change in the model is graphically displayed in Figure 3.6.
Increasing the available labor hours from 40 to 60 causes the feasible solution space to
change. It was originally OABC, and now it is 
is the new optimal solution, instead
of B. However, the important consideration in this type of sensitivity analysis is that the solution
mix (or variables that do not have zero values), including slack variables, did not change, even
OA¿B¿C. B¿
x1, x2  0
 4x1 + 3x2 + s2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 + s1 = 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2

86
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
B'
A'
x1 + 2x2 = 60
x1 + 2x2 = 40
x1 = 12
x2 = 24
s1 and s2 = 0
Z = $1,860
x1 = 24
x2 = 8
s1 and s2 = 0
Z = $1,360
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
A
B
C
FIGURE 3.6
Increasing the
labor constraint
quantity
though the values of 
and 
did change (from 
to 
). The
focus of sensitivity analysis for constraint quantity values is to determine the range over which
the constraint quantity values can change without changing the solution variable mix, specifi-
cally including the slack variables.
If the quantity value for the labor constraint is increased from 40 to 80 hours, the new solution
space is 
and a new solution variable mix occurs at 
as shown in Figure 3.7(a). Whereas
at the original optimal point, B, both 
and 
are in the solution, at the new optimal point,
only 
is produced (i.e.,
).
Thus, the upper limit of the sensitivity range for the quantity value for the first constraint, which
we will refer to as 
is 80 hours. At this value the solution mix changes such that bowls are no
longer produced. Furthermore, as 
increases past 80 hours,
increases (i.e., slack hours are
created). Similarly, if the value for 
is decreased to 30 hours, the new feasible solution space is
as shown in Figure 3.7(b). The new optimal point is at C, where no mugs 
are produced.
The new solution is 
and 
Again, the variable mix
is changed. Summarizing, the sensitivity range for the constraint quantity value for labor hours is
30 … q1 … 80 hr.
Z = +1,200.
x1 = 30, x2 = 0, s1 = 0, s2 = 0,
(x2)
OA¿C,
q1
s1
q1
q1,
x1 = 0, x2 = 40, s1 = 0, s2 = 0
x2
A¿,
x2
x1
A¿,
OA¿C,
x1 = 12, x2 = 24
x1 = 24, x2 = 8
x2
x1
The sensitivity range
for a right-hand-side
value is the range of
values over which the
quantity values can
change without
changing the solution
variable mix, includ-
ing slack variables.
10
20
30
40
50
(a)
60
70
80 x1
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
x2
10
0
C
C
B
A
A'
x1 = 0
x2 = 40
s1 = 0
s2 = 0
Z = $2,000
x1 + 2x2 = 80
x1 + 2x2 = 40
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80 x1
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
x2
10
0
B
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
s1 = 0
s2 = 0
Z = $1,200
x1 + 2x2 = 30
A'
A
(b)
FIGURE 3.7
Determining the
sensitivity range
for labor quantity

SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
87
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80 x1
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
x2
10
0
C
C'
B
A
4x1 + 3x2 = 160
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
10
20
30
40
50
(a)
(b)
60
70
80 x1
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
x2
10
0
B
A
x1 = 0
x2 = 20
s1, s2 = 0
Z = $800
x1 = 40
x2 = 0
s1, s2 = 0
Z = $1,600
C
C'
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
4x1 + 3x2 = 60
FIGURE 3.8
Determining the
sensitivity range
for clay quantity
The sensitivity range for clay can be determined graphically in a similar manner. If the quantity
value for the clay constraint,
is increased from 120 to 160, shown in
Figure 3.8(a), then a new solution space,
results, with a new optimal point,
Alternatively,
if the quantity value is decreased from 120 to 60, as shown in Figure 3.8(b), the new solution space
is 
and the new optimal point is 
Summarizing, the sensitivity ranges for 
and 
are
 60 … q2 … 160 lb.
 30 … q1 … 80 hr.
q2
q1
A1x1 = 0, x2 = 20, s1 = 0, s2 = 0, Z = +8002.
OAC¿,
C¿.
OAC¿,
4x1 + 3x2 … 120,
Other forms of 
sensitivity analysis 
include changing 
constraint parameter
values, adding new
constraints, and
adding new variables.
As was the case with the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficient, these
sensitivity ranges are valid for only one 
value. All other 
values are assumed to be held
constant. However, simultaneous changes can occur, as long as they do not change the
variable mix.
These ranges for constraint quantity values provide useful information for the manager,
especially regarding production scheduling and planning. If resources are reduced at the pottery
company, then at some point one of the products will no longer be produced, and the support
facilities and apparatus for that production will not be needed, or extra hours of resources will be
created that are not needed. A similar result, albeit a better one, will occur if resources are
increased because profit will be more than with a reduction in resources.
Constraint Quantity Value Ranges with Excel and QM for Windows
Previously we showed how to generate the sensitivity report for Excel, resulting in Exhibit 3.11.
This report is shown again in Exhibit 3.13, with the sensitivity ranges for the constraint quantity
values indicated. As mentioned previously, the ranges are expressed in terms of an allowable in-
crease and decrease instead of upper and lower limits.
The sensitivity ranges for the constraint quantity values with QM for Windows can be observed
in Exhibit 3.14.
Other Forms of Sensitivity Analysis
Excel and QM for Windows provide sensitivity analysis ranges for objective function coeffi-
cients and constraint quantity values as part of the standard solution output. However, there are
other forms of sensitivity analysis, including changing individual constraint parameters, adding
new constraints, and adding new variables.
qi
qi

88
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Sensitivity ranges
for constraint
quantity values
EXHIBIT 3.13
Sensitivity ranges
for constraint
quantity values
EXHIBIT 3.14
For instance, in our Beaver Creek Pottery Company example, if a new, less-experienced arti-
san were hired to make pottery, it might take this individual 1.33 hours to produce a bowl instead
of 1 hour. Thus, the labor constraint would change from 
to 
This change is illustrated in Figure 3.9.
Note that a change in the coefficient for 
in the labor constraint rotates the constraint line,
changing the solution space from OABC to OAC. It also results in a new optimal solution point,
C, where 
and 
Then 1.33 hours would be the logical upper limit
for this constraint coefficient. However, as we pointed out, this type of sensitivity analysis for
Z = +1,200.
x1 = 30, x2 = 0,
x1
1.33x1 + 2x2 … 40.
x1 + 2x2 … 40
1.33x1 + 2x2 = 40
x1 = 30
x2 = 0
Z = $1,200
x1 + 2x2 = 40
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
x2
0
A
C
B
FIGURE 3.9
Changing the 
coefficient in the
labor constraint
x1

SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
89
EXHIBIT 3.15
constraint variable coefficients is not typically provided in the standard linear programming
computer output. As a result, the most logical way to ascertain the effect of this type of change
is simply to run the computer program with different values.
Other types of sensitivity analyses are to add a new constraint to the model or to add a new
variable. For example, suppose the Beaver Creek Pottery Company added a third constraint for
packaging its pottery, as follows:
This would require the model to be solved again with the new constraint. This new constraint
does, in fact, change the optimal solution, as shown in the Excel spreadsheet in Exhibit 3.15. This
spreadsheet requires a new row (8) added to the original spreadsheet (first shown in Exhibit 3.1)
with our new constraint parameter values, and a new constraint,
added to Solver. In
the original model, the solution (shown in Exhibit 3.4) was 24 bowls and 8 mugs, with a profit of
$1,360. With the new constraint for packaging added, the solution is now 20 bowls and 10 mugs,
with a profit of $1,300.
E8 … G8,
0.20x1 + 0.10x2 … 5 hr.
If a new variable is added to the model, this would also require that the model be solved
again to determine the effect of the change. For example, suppose the pottery company were
contemplating producing a third product, cups, requiring 1.2 hours of labor and 2 pounds. of
clay. It can secure no additional resources, and the profit for a cup is estimated to be $30. This
change is reflected in the following model reformulation:
subject to
(labor, hr.)
(clay, lb.)
Solving this new formulation with the computer will show that this prospective change will
have no effect on the original solution—that is, the model is not sensitive to this change. The
estimated profit from cups was not enough to offset the production of bowls and mugs, and the
solution remained the same.
Shadow Prices
We briefly discussed dual values (also called shadow prices) earlier in this chapter, in our
discussion of QM for Windows. You will recall that a dual value was defined as the marginal
x1, x2, x3  0
 4x1 + 3x2 + 2x3 … 120
x1 + 2x2 + 1.2x3 … 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2 + 30x3
Constraint E8#G8
added to Solver
Added constraint
for packaging

90
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
value of one additional unit of resource. We need to mention shadow prices again at this point in
our discussion of sensitivity analysis because decisions are often made regarding resources by
considering the marginal value of resources in conjunction with their sensitivity ranges.
Consider again the Excel sensitivity report for the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example
shown in Exhibit 3.16.
Shadow prices
(dual values)
EXHIBIT 3.16
The shadow price (or marginal value) for labor is $16 per hour, and the shadow price for
clay is $6 per pound. This means that for every additional hour of labor that can be obtained,
profit will increase by $16. If the manager of the pottery company can secure more labor at $16
per hour, how much more can be obtained before the optimal solution mix will change and the
current shadow price is no longer valid? The answer is at the upper limit of the sensitivity range
for the labor constraint value. A maximum of 80 hours of labor can be used before the optimal
solution mix changes. Thus, the manager can secure 40 more hours, the allowable increase
shown in the Excel sensitivity output for the labor constraint. If 40 extra hours of labor can be
obtained, what is its total value? The answer is ($16/hr.)(40 hr.) 
In other words, profit
is increased by $640 if 40 extra hours of labor can be obtained. This is shown in the Excel out-
put in Exhibit 3.17, where increasing the labor constraint from 40 to 80 hours has increased
profit from $1,360 to $2,000, or by $640.
= +640.
Increase in profit
from $1,360 to
$2,000
Increase in labor
hours from
40 to 80
EXHIBIT 3.17

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
91
Looking back to Figure 3.7(a), this is the solution point at 
Increasing the labor hours
to more than 80 hours (the upper limit of the sensitivity range) will not result in an additional
increase in profit or a new solution; it will result only in slack hours of labor.
Alternatively, what would be the effect on profit if one of the Native American artisans were
sick one day during the week, and the available labor hours decreased from 40 to 32? Profit in
this case would decrease by $16 per hour, or a total amount of $128. Thus, total profit would fall
from $1,360 to $1,232.
Similarly, if the pottery company could obtain only 100 pounds of clay instead of its normal
weekly allotment of 120 pounds, what would be the effect on profit? Profit would decrease by
$6 per pound for 20 pounds, or a total of $120. This would result in an overall reduction in profit
from $1,360 to $1,240.
Thus, another piece of information that is provided by the sensitivity ranges for the
constraint quantity values is the range over which the shadow price remains valid. When 
increases past the upper limit of the sensitivity range or decreases below the lower limit, the
shadow price will change, specifically because slack (or surplus) will be created. Therefore,
the sensitivity range for the constraint quantity value is the range over which the shadow price
is valid.
The shadow price of $16 for 1 hour of labor is not necessarily what the manager would
pay for an hour of labor. This depends on how the objective function is defined. In the Beaver
Creek Pottery Company example, we are assuming that all the resources available, 40 hours
of labor and 120 pounds of clay, are already paid for. Even if the company does not use all
the resources, it still must pay for them. These are sunk costs. Therefore, the individual profit
values in the objective function for each product are not affected by how much of a resource
is actually used; the total profit is independent of the resources used. In this case, the shadow
prices are the maximum amounts the manager would pay for additional units of resource.
The manager would pay up to $16 for 1 extra hour of labor and up to $6 for an extra pound
of clay.
Alternatively, if each hour of labor and each pound of clay were purchased separately, and
thus were not sunk costs, profit would be a function of the cost of the resources. In this case, the
shadow price would be the additional amount, over and above the original cost of the resource,
that would be paid for one more unit of the resource.
Summary
This chapter has focused primarily on the computer solution of linear programming problems.
This required us first to show how a linear programming model is put into standard form, with
the addition of slack variables or the subtraction of surplus variables. Computer solution also
enabled us to consider the topic of sensitivity analysis, the analysis of the effect of model
parameter changes on the solution of a linear programming model. In the next chapter, we will
provide some examples of more complex linear programming model formulations than the
simple ones we have described so far.
qi
A¿.
The sensitivity range
for a constraint
quantity value is also
the range over which
the shadow price is
valid.
Example Problem
Solution
This example demonstrates the transformation of a linear programming model into standard
form, sensitivity analysis, computer solution, and shadow prices.
Problem Statement
The Xecko Tool Company is considering bidding on a job for two airplane wing parts. Each wing
part must be processed through three manufacturing stages—stamping, drilling, and finishing—
for which the company has limited available hours. The linear programming model to determine

92
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Drilling
Finishing
Optimal point
Stamping
35
40
30
25
20
15
10
5
x1
35
40
30
25
20
15
10
5
x2
0
A
D
C
B
A: x1 = 0
 
x2 = 14
 
Z = 12,740
C: x1 = 8.87
 
x2 = 7.15
 
Z = 12,269.62
B: x1 = 5.97
 
x2 = 10.82
 
Z = 13,722.49
D: x1 = 12.09
 
x2 = 0
 
Z = 7,857.14
*
B. The slack at point B, where 
and 
is computed as follows:
s3 = 11.35 hr.
 9.115.972 + 4.1110.822 + s3 = 110 1finishing, hr.2
s2 = 0 hr.
 6.215.972 + 4.9110.822 + s2 = 90 1drilling, hr.2
s1 = 0 hr.
 415.972 + 7.5110.822 + s1 = 105 1stamping, hr.2
x2 = 10.82,
x1 = 5.97
how many of part 
and part 
the company should produce in order to maximize its
profit is as follows:
subject to
(stamping, hr.)
(drilling, hr.)
(finishing, hr.)
A. Solve the model graphically.
B. Indicate how much slack resource is available at the optimal solution point.
C. Determine the sensitivity ranges for the profit for wing part 1 and the stamping hours
available.
D. Solve this model by using Excel.
Solution
A.
x1, x2  0
9.1x1 + 4.1x2 … 110
6.2x1 + 4.9x2 … 90
4x1 + 7.5x2 … 105
maximize Z = +650x1 + 910x2
2 (x2)
1 (x1)

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
93
C. The sensitivity range for the profit for part 1 is determined by observing the graph of the
model and computing how much the slope of the objective function must increase to make
the optimal point move from B to C. This is the upper limit of the range and is determined
by computing the value of 
that will make the slope of the objective function equal with
the slope of the constraint line for drilling,
The lower limit is determined by computing the value of 
that will equate the
slope of the objective function with the slope of the constraint line for stamping,
Summarizing,
The upper limit of the range for stamping hours is determined by first computing the
value for 
that would move the solution point from B to where the drilling constraint
intersects with the 
axis, where 
and 
The lower limit of the sensitivity range occurs where the optimal point B moves to C,
where 
and 
Summarizing,
D. The Excel spreadsheet solution to this example problem is as follows:
89.10 … q1 … 137.76.
q1 = 89.10
 4(8.87) + 7.5(7.15) = q1
x2 = 7.15:
x1 = 8.87
q1 = 137.76
 4(0) + 7.5(8.37) = q1
x2 = 18.37:
x1 = 0
x2
q1
485.33 … c1 … 1,151.43
c1 = 485.33
-c1
910 = -4
7.5
4x1 + 7.5x2 = 105:
c1
c1 = 1,151.43
-c1
910 = -6.2
4.9
6.2x1 + 4.9x2 = 90:
c1

94
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Problems
1. Given the following QM for Windows computer solution of a linear programming model,
graph the problem and identify the solution point, including variable values and slack, from
the computer output:
2. Explain the primary differences between a software package such as QM for Windows and
Excel spreadsheets for solving linear programming problems.
3. Given the following Excel spreadsheet for a linear programming model and Solver Parameters
window, indicate the formula for cell B13 and fill in the Solver Parameters window with the
appropriate information to solve the problem:

PROBLEMS
95
4. Solve the following model from Chapter 2 (Problem 11) using Excel:
subject to
(units, resource 1)
(units, resource 2)
(units, resource 3)
5. The following model was solved graphically in Chapter 2 (Problem 22):
subject to
(units, resource 1)
(units, resource 2)
(units, resource 3)
(units, resource 4)
Given the following Excel spreadsheet for this model, indicate the formulas in cells F6, F7, F8,
F9, G6, G7, G8, G9, and B14, and fill in the Solver Parameters window with the necessary
information to solve the model. Solve the model using Excel.
x1, x2  0
x2 … 10
x1 … 8
 2x1 + 4x2 … 40
 3x1 + 5x2 … 50
maximize Z = 5x1 + 8x2 (+ , profit)
x1, x2  0
x1 … 4
x1 + x2  5
 3x1 + 2x2 … 18
maximize Z = 3x1 + 6x2 (+ , profit)

96
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
6. Given the following graph of a linear programming model with a single constraint and the
objective function maximize 
determine the optimal solution point:
Determine the values by which 
and 
must decrease or increase in order to change the
current solution point to the other extreme point.
c2
c1
Z = 30x1 + 50x2,
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90 100 x1
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
x2
10
0
A
B
Resource Requirements per Unit
Product
Rubber (lb.)
Leather 1ft.22
Basketball
3
4
Football
2
5
Total resources available
500 lb.
800 ft.2
7. Southern Sporting Goods Company makes basketballs and footballs. Each product is produced
from two resources—rubber and leather. The resource requirements for each product and the
total resources available are as follows:

PROBLEMS
97
Hours/Unit
Product
Line 1
Line 2
A
12
4
B
4
8
Total hours
60
40
a. Formulate a linear programming model to determine the optimal product mix that will
maximize profit.
b. Transform this model into standard form.
11. Solve Problem 10 graphically.
a. Identify the amount of unused resources (i.e., slack) at each of the graphical extreme points.
b. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the production time on line 1 was reduced
to 40 hours?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the profit for product B was increased
from $7 to $15? to $20?
12. For the linear programming model formulated in Problem 10 and solved graphically in Problem 11:
a. Determine the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients, using graphical analysis.
b. Verify the sensitivity ranges determined in (a) by using the computer.
c. Using the computer, determine the shadow prices for additional hours of production time on line
1 and line 2 and indicate whether the company would prefer additional line 1 or line 2 hours.
13. Irwin Textile Mills produces two types of cotton cloth—denim and corduroy. Corduroy is a
heavier grade of cotton cloth and, as such, requires 7.5 pounds of raw cotton per yard,
whereas denim requires 5 pounds of raw cotton per yard. A yard of corduroy requires
3.2 hours of processing time; a yard of denim requires 3.0 hours. Although the demand for
denim is practically unlimited, the maximum demand for corduroy is 510 yards per month.
The manufacturer has 6,500 pounds of cotton and 3,000 hours of processing time available
Each basketball produced results in a profit of $12, and each football earns $16 in profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model to determine the number of basketballs and footballs
to produce in order to maximize profit.
b. Transform this model into standard form.
8. Solve the model formulated in Problem 7 for Southern Sporting Goods Company graphically.
a. Identify the amount of unused resources (i.e., slack) at each of the graphical extreme points.
b. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the profit for a basketball changed from $12
to $13? What would be the effect if the profit for a football changed from $16 to $15?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if 500 additional pounds of rubber could be
obtained? What would be the effect if 500 additional square feet of leather could be ob-
tained?
9. For the linear programming model for Southern Sporting Goods Company, formulated in
Problem 7 and solved graphically in Problem 8:
a. Determine the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients and constraint
quantity values, using graphical analysis.
b. Verify the sensitivity ranges determined in (a) by using the computer.
c. Using the computer, determine the shadow prices for the resources and explain their
meaning.
10. A company produces two products, A and B, which have profits of $9 and $7, respectively. Each
unit of product must be processed on two assembly lines, where the required production times
are as follows:

98
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
each month. The manufacturer makes a profit of $2.25 per yard of denim and $3.10 per yard
of corduroy. The manufacturer wants to know how many yards of each type of cloth to
produce to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Transform this model into standard form.
14. Solve the model formulated in Problem 13 for Irwin Textile Mills graphically.
a. How much extra cotton and processing time are left over at the optimal solution? Is the
demand for corduroy met?
b. What is the effect on the optimal solution if the profit per yard of denim is increased from $2.25
to $3.00? What is the effect if the profit per yard of corduroy is increased from $3.10 to $4.00?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if Irwin Mills could obtain only 6,000
pounds of cotton per month?
15. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 13 for Irwin Mills by using the
computer.
a. If Irwin Mills can obtain additional cotton or processing time, but not both, which should it
select? How much? Explain your answer.
b. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients and for the constraint
quantity values. Then explain the sensitivity range for the demand for corduroy.
16. United Aluminum Company of Cincinnati produces three grades (high, medium, and low) of
aluminum at two mills. Each mill has a different production capacity (in tons per day) for each
grade, as follows:
Mill
Aluminum Grade
1
2
High
6
2
Medium
2
2
Low
4
10
The company has contracted with a manufacturing firm to supply at least 12 tons of high-grade
aluminum, 8 tons of medium-grade aluminum, and 5 tons of low-grade aluminum. It costs United
$6,000 per day to operate mill 1 and $7,000 per day to operate mill 2. The company wants to know
the number of days to operate each mill in order to meet the contract at the minimum cost.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
17. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 16 for United Aluminum Company
graphically.
a. How much extra (i.e., surplus) high-, medium-, and low-grade aluminum does the company
produce at the optimal solution?
b. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the cost of operating mill 1 increased
from $6,000 to $7,500 per day?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the company could supply only 10 tons
of high-grade aluminum?
18. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 16 for United Aluminum Company
by using the computer.
a. Identify and explain the shadow prices for each of the aluminum grade contract requirements.
b. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients and the constraint quantity
values.
c. Would the solution values change if the contract requirements for high-grade aluminum were
increased from 12 tons to 20 tons? If yes, what would the new solution values be?

PROBLEMS
99
Biscuit
Labor (hr.)
Sausage (lb.)
Ham (lb.)
Flour (lb.)
Sausage
0.010
0.10
—
0.04
Ham
0.024
—
0.15
0.04
19. The Bradley family owns 410 acres of farmland in North Carolina on which they grow corn and
tobacco. Each acre of corn costs $105 to plant, cultivate, and harvest; each acre of tobacco costs
$210. The Bradleys have a budget of $52,500 for next year. The government limits the number
of acres of tobacco that can be planted to 100. The profit from each acre of corn is $300; the
profit from each acre of tobacco is $520. The Bradleys want to know how many acres of each
crop to plant in order to maximize their profit.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
20. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 19 for the Bradley family farm
graphically.
a. How many acres of farmland will not be cultivated at the optimal solution? Do the Bradleys
use the entire 100-acre tobacco allotment?
b. What would the profit for corn have to be for the Bradleys to plant only corn?
c. If the Bradleys can obtain an additional 100 acres of land, will the number of acres of corn
and tobacco they plan to grow change?
d. If the Bradleys decide not to cultivate a 50-acre section as part of a crop recovery program,
how will it affect their crop plans?
21. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 19 for the Bradley farm by using
the computer.
a. The Bradleys have an opportunity to lease some extra land from a neighbor. The neighbor is
offering the land to them for $110 per acre. Should the Bradleys lease the land at that price?
What is the maximum price the Bradleys should pay their neighbor for the land, and how
much land should they lease at that price?
b. The Bradleys are considering taking out a loan to increase their budget. For each dollar they
borrow, how much additional profit would they make? If they borrowed an additional
$1,000, would the number of acres of corn and tobacco they plant change?
22. The manager of a Burger Doodle franchise wants to determine how many sausage biscuits and
ham biscuits to prepare each morning for breakfast customers. The two types of biscuits require
the following resources:
The franchise has 6 hours of labor available each morning. The manager has a contract with a lo-
cal grocer for 30 pounds of sausage and 30 pounds of ham each morning. The manager also pur-
chases 16 pounds of flour. The profit for a sausage biscuit is $0.60; the profit for a ham biscuit is
$0.50. The manager wants to know the number of each type of biscuit to prepare each morning in
order to maximize profit.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
23. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 22 for the Burger Doodle restaurant
graphically.
a. How much extra sausage and ham is left over at the optimal solution point? Is there any idle
labor time?
b. What would the solution be if the profit for a ham biscuit were increased from $0.50 to
$0.60?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the manager could obtain 2 more pounds
of flour?

100
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
24. Solve the linear programming model developed in Problem 22 for the Burger Doodle restaurant
by using the computer.
a. Identify and explain the shadow prices for each of the resource constraints.
b. Which of the resources constraints profit the most?
c. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the profit of a sausage biscuit and the amount of sausage
available. Explain these sensitivity ranges.
25. Rucklehouse Public Relations has been contracted to do a survey following an election primary
in New Hampshire. The firm must assign interviewers to conduct the survey by telephone or in
person. One person can conduct 80 telephone interviews or 40 personal interviews in a single
day. The following criteria have been established by the firm to ensure a representative survey:
 At least 3,000 interviews must be conducted.
 At least 1,000 interviews must be by telephone.
 At least 800 interviews must be personal.
An interviewer conducts only one type of interview each day. The cost is $50 per day for a tele-
phone interviewer and $70 per day for a personal interviewer. The firm wants to know the mini-
mum number of interviewers to hire in order to minimize the total cost of the survey.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
26. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 25 for Rucklehouse Public Rela-
tions graphically.
a. Determine the sensitivity ranges for the daily cost of a telephone interviewer and the number
of personal interviews required.
b. Does the firm conduct any more telephone and personal interviews than are required, and if
so, how many more?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the firm was required by the client to in-
crease the number of personal interviews conducted from 800 to a total of 1,200?
27. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 25 for Rucklehouse Public Rela-
tions by using the computer.
a. If the firm could reduce the minimum interview requirement for either telephone or personal
interviews, which should the firm select? How much would a reduction of one interview in
the requirement you selected reduce total cost? Solve the model again, using the computer,
with the reduction of this one interview in the constraint requirement to verify your answer.
b. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the cost of a personal interview and the number of total in-
terviews required.
28. The Bluegrass Distillery produces custom-blended whiskey. A particular blend consists of rye
and bourbon whiskey. The company has received an order for a minimum of 400 gallons of the
custom blend. The customer specified that the order must contain at least 40% rye and not more
than 250 gallons of bourbon. The customer also specified that the blend should be mixed in the
ratio of two parts rye to one part bourbon. The distillery can produce 500 gallons per week,
regardless of the blend. The production manager wants to complete the order in 1 week. The
blend is sold for $5 per gallon.
The distillery company’s cost per gallon is $2 for rye and $1 for bourbon. The company wants
to determine the blend mix that will meet customer requirements and maximize profits.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
29. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 28 for the Bluegrass Distillery
graphically.
a. Indicate the slack and surplus available at the optimal solution point and explain their meanings.
b. What increase in the objective function coefficients in this model would change the optimal
solution point? Explain your answer.

PROBLEMS
101
30. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 28 for the Bluegrass Distillery by
using the computer.
a. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients and explain what the
upper and lower limits are.
b. How much would it be worth to the distillery to obtain additional production capacity?
c. If the customer decided to change the blend requirement for its custom-made whiskey to a
mix of three parts rye to one part bourbon, how would this change the optimal solution?
31. Prissy Pauline’s Barbecue Restaurant in Greensboro makes two primary food items fresh each
morning: pulled pork barbecue and beef brisket barbecue. These two items are sold as part of
different menu items, including sandwich and barbecue plates, with a variety of different sides.
The maximum amount of barbecue Prissy Pauline’s has ever sold in a day is 250 pounds, and
the least amount is 120 pounds. It generally sells more pork barbecue than beef barbecue—as
much as twice as much pork as beef barbecue, and as little as 20% more pork than beef. The
restaurant’s meat supplier delivers 150 pounds of pork and 110 pounds of beef each day.
Regardless of how it is served on the menu, the restaurant makes about $8.65 per pound for pork
barbecue and $10.95 per pound for beef barbecue. The restaurant wants to know how many
pounds of each type of barbecue to cook each day in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model graphically.
32. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 31 for Prissy Pauline’s Barbecue
Restaurant using the computer.
a. If the restaurant could get additional pork or beef from the meat supplier, which should it
get? Why?
b. If the restaurant orders 10 more pounds of beef from its supplier, how much would it increase
its profit? Is this something it should do?
c. The restaurant believes that if it reduces the price of its pork barbecue menu items such that
the profit from pork barbecue is $7.50 per pound, it could sell two and a half times more pork
than beef barbecue. Is this something the restaurant should do?
33. Xara Stores in the United States stocks a particular type of designer denim jeans that is manu-
factured in China and Brazil and imported to the Xara distribution center in the United States. It
orders 500 pairs of jeans each month from its two suppliers. The Chinese supplier charges Xara
$11 per pair of jeans, and the Brazilian supplier charges $16 per pair (and then Xara marks them
up almost 1,000%). Although the jeans from China are less expensive, they also have more
defects than those from Brazil. Based on past data, Xara estimates that 7% of the Chinese jeans
will be defective compared to only 2% from Brazil, and Xara does not want to import any more
than 5% defective items. However, Xara does not want to rely only on a single supplier, so it
wants to order at least 20% from each supplier every month.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
34. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 33 for Xara Stores graphically and
by using the computer.
a. If the Chinese supplier were able to reduce its percentage of defective pairs of jeans from
7% to 5%, what would be the effect on the solution?
b. If Xara Stores decided to minimize its defective items while budgeting $7,000 for purchasing
the jeans, what would be the effect on the solution?
35. Alexis Harrington received an inheritance of $95,000, and she is considering two speculative
investments—the purchase of land and the purchase of cattle. Each investment would be for
1 year. Under the present (normal) economic conditions, each dollar invested in land will return
the principal plus 20% of the principal; each dollar invested in cattle will return the principal
plus 30%. However, both investments are relatively risky. If economic conditions were to
deteriorate, there is an 18% chance she would lose everything she invested in land and a 30%

102
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
chance she would lose everything she invested in cattle. Alexis does not want to lose more than
$20,000 (on average). She wants to know how much to invest in each alternative to maximize
the cash value of the investments at the end of 1 year.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
36. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 35 for Alexis Harrington graphically.
a. How much would the return for cattle have to increase in order for Alexis to invest only
in cattle?
b. Should all of Alexis’s inheritance be invested according to the optimal solution?
c. How much “profit” would the optimal solution earn Alexis over and above her investment?
37. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 35 for Alexis Harrington by using
the computer.
a. If Alexis decided to invest some of her own savings along with the money from her inheritance,
what return would she realize for each dollar of her own money that she invested? How much
of her own savings could she invest before this return would change?
b. If the risk of losing the investment in land increased to 30%, how would this change the
optimal investment mix?
38. Transform the following linear programming model into standard form and solve by using the
computer:
subject to
39. Chemco Corporation produces a chemical mixture for a specific customer in 1,000-pound
batches. The mixture contains three ingredients—zinc, mercury, and potassium. The mixture
must conform to formula specifications that are supplied by the customer. The company wants
to know the amount of each ingredient it needs to put in the mixture that will meet all the
requirements of the mix and minimize total cost.
The customer has supplied the following formula specifications for each batch of
mixture:
 The mixture must contain at least 200 pounds of mercury.
 The mixture must contain at least 300 pounds of zinc.
 The mixture must contain at least 100 pounds of potassium.
 The ratio of potassium to the other two ingredients cannot exceed 1 to 4.
The cost per pound of mercury is $400; the cost per pound of zinc, $180; and the cost per
pound of potassium, $90.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model formulated in (a) by using the computer.
40. The following linear programming model formulation is used for the production of four different
products, with two different manufacturing processes and two different material requirements:
subject to
hr. (process 1)
hr. (process 2)
lb. (material A)
 15x1 + 23x2 + 18x3 + 25x4 … 3,600
 2.1x1 + 2.6x2 + 3.5x3 + 1.9x4 … 500
 4x1 + 3.5x2 + 4.6x3 + 3.9x4 … 600
maximize Z = +50x1 + 58x2 + 46x3 + 62x4
x1, x2, x3  0
x2  x3
x1  0.4 (x1 + x2 + x3)
x1
x2
… 3
 10x1 + 15x2 + 8x3 … 610
maximize Z = 140x1 + 205x2 + 190x3

PROBLEMS
103
lb. (material B)
a. Solve this problem by using the computer.
b. Identify the sensitivity ranges for the objective function coefficients and the constraint quantity
values.
c. Which is the most valuable resource to the firm?
d. One of the four products is not produced in the optimal solution. How much would the profit
for this product have to be for it to be produced?
41. Island Publishing Company publishes two types of magazines on a monthly basis: a restaurant and
entertainment guide and a real estate guide. The company distributes the magazines free to
businesses, hotels, and stores on Hilton Head Island in South Carolina. The company’s profits come
exclusively from the paid advertising in the magazines. Each of the restaurant and entertainment
guides distributed generates $0.50 per magazine in advertising revenue, whereas the real estate
guide generates $0.75 per magazine. The real estate magazine is a more sophisticated publication
that includes color photos, and accordingly it costs $0.25 per magazine to print, compared with only
$0.17 for the restaurant and entertainment guide. The publishing company has a printing budget of
$4,000 per month. There is enough rack space to distribute at most 18,000 magazines each month.
In order to entice businesses to place advertisements, Island Publishing promises to distribute at
least 8,000 copies of each magazine. The company wants to determine the number of copies of each
magazine it should print each month in order to maximize advertising revenue.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
42. Solve the linear programming model formulation in Problem 41 for Island Publishing Company
graphically.
a. Determine the sensitivity range for the advertising revenue generated by the real estate guide.
b. Does the company spend all of its printing budget? If not, how much slack is left over?
c. What would be the effect on the optimal solution if the local real estate agents insisted that
12,000 copies of the real estate guide be distributed instead of the current 8,000 copies, or
they would withdraw their advertising?
43. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 41 for Island Publishing Company
by using the computer.
a. How much would it be worth to Island Publishing Company to obtain enough additional
rack space to distribute 18,500 copies instead of the current 18,000 copies? 20,000 copies?
b. How much would it be worth to Island Publishing to reduce the requirement to distribute
the entertainment guide from 8,000 to 7,000 copies?
44. Mega-Mart, a discount store chain, is to build a new store in Rock Springs. The parcel of land the
company has purchased is large enough to accommodate a store with 140,000 square feet of floor
space. Based on marketing and demographic surveys of the area and historical data from its other
stores, Mega-Mart estimates its annual profit per square foot for each of the store’s departments
to be as shown in the table on the following page.
Each department must have at least 15,000 square feet of floor space, and no department
can have more than 20% of the total retail floor space. Men’s, women’s, and children’s clothing
plus housewares keep all their stock on the retail floor; however, toys, electronics, and auto
supplies keep some items (such as bicycles, televisions, and tires) in inventory. Thus, 10% of the
total retail floor space devoted to these three departments must be set aside outside the retail area
for stocking inventory. Mega-Mart wants to know the floor space that should be devoted to each
department in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
x1, x2, x3, x4  0
x1 + x2
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4
 .60
 8x1 + 12.6x2 + 9.7x3 + 10.5x4 … 1,700

104
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Department
Profit per ft.2
Men’s clothing
$4.25
Women’s clothing
5.10
Children’s clothing
4.50
Toys
5.20
Housewares
4.10
Electronics
4.90
Auto supplies
3.80
45.
a. In Problem 44, Mega-Mart is considering purchasing a parcel of land adjacent to the current
site on which it plans to build its store. The cost of the parcel is $190,000, and it would enable
Mega-Mart to increase the size of its store to 160,000 square feet. Discuss whether Mega-
Mart should purchase the land and increase the planned size of the store.
b. Suppose that the profit per square foot will decline in all departments by 20% if the
store size increases to 160,000 square feet. (If the stock does not turn over as fast,
increasing inventory costs will reduce profit.) How might this affect Mega-Mart’s
decision in (a)?
46. The Food Max grocery store sells three brands of milk in half-gallon cartons—its own brand,
a local dairy brand, and a national brand. The profit from its own brand is $0.97 per carton,
the profit from the local dairy brand is $0.83 per carton, and the profit from the national brand
is $0.69 per carton. The total refrigerated shelf space allotted to half-gallon cartons of milk is
36 square feet per week. A half-gallon carton takes up 16 square inches of shelf space. The
store manager knows that each week Food Max always sells more of the national brand than
of the local dairy brand and its own brand combined and at least three times as much of the
national brand as its own brand. In addition, the local dairy can supply only 10 dozen cartons
per week. The store manager wants to know how many half-gallon cartons of each brand to
stock each week in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
47.
a. If Food Max in Problem 46 could increase its shelf space for half-gallon cartons of milk, how
much would profit increase per carton?
b. If Food Max could get the local dairy to increase the amount of milk it could supply each
week, would it increase profit?
c. Food Max is considering discounting its own brand in order to increase sales. If it were to do
so, it would decrease the profit margin for its own brand to $0.86 per carton, but it would cut
the demand for the national brand relative to its own brand in half. Discuss whether the store
should implement the price discount.
48. John Hoke owns Hoke’s Spokes, a bicycle shop. Most of John’s bicycle sales are customer
orders; however, he also stocks bicycles for walk-in customers. He stocks three types of
bicycles—road-racing, cross-country, and mountain. A road-racing bike costs $1,200, a cross-
country bike costs $1,700, and a mountain bike costs $900. He sells road-racing bikes
for $1,800, cross-country bikes for $2,100, and mountain bikes for $1,200. He has $12,000
available this month to purchase bikes. Each bike must be assembled; a road-racing bike
requires 8 hours to assemble, a cross-country bike requires 12 hours, and a mountain bike
requires 16 hours. He estimates that he and his employees have 120 hours available to assem-
ble bikes. He has enough space in his store to order 20 bikes this month. Based on past sales,
John wants to stock at least twice as many mountain bikes as the other two combined because
mountain bikes sell better.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.

PROBLEMS
105
49. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 48 for Hoke’s Spokes by using the
computer.
a. Should John Hoke try to increase his budget for purchasing bikes, increase space to stock
bikes, or increase labor hours to assemble bikes? Why?
b. If John hired an additional worker for 30 hours at $10 per hour, how much additional profit
would he make, if any?
c. If John purchased a cheaper cross-country bike for $1,200 and sold it for $1,900, would this
affect the original solution?
50. Metro Food Services Company delivers fresh sandwiches each morning to vending machines
throughout the city. The company makes three kinds of sandwiches—ham and cheese, bologna,
and chicken salad. A ham and cheese sandwich requires a worker 0.45 minutes to assemble, a
bologna sandwich requires 0.41 minutes, and a chicken salad sandwich requires 0.50 minutes to
make. The company has 960 available minutes each night for sandwich assembly. Vending
machine capacity is available for 2,000 sandwiches each day. The profit for a ham and cheese
sandwich is $0.35, the profit for a bologna sandwich is $0.42, and the profit for a chicken salad
sandwich is $0.37. The company knows from past sales records that its customers buy as many
ham and cheese sandwiches as the other two sandwiches combined, if not more so, but customers
need a variety of sandwiches available, so Metro stocks at least 200 of each. Metro management
wants to know how many of each sandwich it should stock to maximize profit.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
51. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 50 for Metro Food Services Com-
pany by using the computer.
a. If Metro Food Services could hire another worker and increase its available assembly time
by 480 minutes or increase its vending machine capacity by 100 sandwiches, which should it
do? Why? How much additional profit would your decision result in?
b. What would the effect be on the optimal solution if the requirement that at least 200 sandwiches
of each kind be stocked was eliminated? Compare the profit between the optimal solution and
this solution. Which solution would you recommend?
c. What would the effect be on the optimal solution if the profit for a ham and cheese sandwich
was increased to $0.40? to $0.45?
52. Mountain Laurel Vineyards produces three kinds of wine—Mountain Blanc, Mountain Red, and
Mountain Blush. The company has 17 tons of grapes available to produce wine this season. A cask
of Blanc requires 0.21 ton of grapes, a cask of Red requires 0.24 ton, and a cask of Blush requires
0.18 ton. The vineyard has enough storage space in its aging room to store 80 casks of wine.
The vineyard has 2,500 hours of production capacity, and it requires 12 hours to produce a
cask of Blanc, 14.5 hours to produce a cask of Red, and 16 hours to produce a cask of Blush.
From past sales the vineyard knows that demand for the Blush will be no more than half of the
sales of the other two wines combined. The profit for a cask of Blanc is $7,500, the profit for a
cask of Red is $8,200, and the profit for a cask of Blush is $10,500.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
53. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 52 for Mountain Laurel Vineyards
by using the computer.
a. If the vineyard determined that the profit from Red was $7,600 instead of $8,200, how would
that affect the optimal solution?
b. If the vineyard could secure one additional unit of any of the resources used in the production
of wine, which one should it select?
c. If the vineyard could obtain 0.5 ton more of grapes, 500 more hours of production capacity,
or enough storage capacity to store 4 more casks of wine, which should it choose?
d. All three wines are produced in the optimal solution. How little would the profit for Blanc
have to be for it to no longer be produced?

106
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
54. Exeter Mines produces iron ore at four different mines; however, the ores extracted at each mine
are different in their iron content. Mine 1 produces magnetite ore, which has a 70% iron content;
mine 2 produces limonite ore, which has a 60% iron content; mine 3 produces pyrite ore, which
has a 50% iron content; and mine 4 produces taconite ore, which has only a 30% iron content.
Exeter has three customers that produce steel—Armco, Best, and Corcom. Armco needs 400 tons
of pure (100%) iron, Best requires 250 tons of pure iron, and Corcom requires 290 tons. It costs
$37 to extract and process 1 ton of magnetite ore at mine 1, $46 to produce 1 ton of limonite ore
at mine 2, $50 per ton of pyrite ore at mine 3, and $42 per ton of taconite ore at mine 4. Exeter
can extract 350 tons of ore at mine 1; 530 tons at mine 2; 610 tons at mine 3; and 490 tons at
mine 4. The company wants to know how much ore to produce at each mine in order to minimize
cost and meet its customers’ demand for pure (100%) iron.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
55. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 54 for Exeter Mines by using the
computer.
a. Do any of the mines have slack capacity? If yes, which one(s)?
b. If Exeter Mines could increase production capacity at any one of its mines, which should
it be? Why?
c. If Exeter decided to increase capacity at the mine identified in (b), how much could it
increase capacity before the optimal solution point (i.e., the optimal set of variables)
would change?
d. If Exeter determined that it could increase production capacity at mine 1 from 350 tons to
500 tons, at an increase in production costs to $43 per ton, should it do so?
56. Given the following linear programming model:
subject to
transform the model into standard form and solve by using the computer.
57. Tracy McCoy has committed to the local PTA to make some items for a bake sale on Saturday.
She has decided to make some combination of chocolate cakes, loaves of white bread, custard
pies, and sugar cookies. Thursday evening she goes to the store and purchases 20 pounds of
flour, 10 pounds of sugar, and 3 dozen eggs, which are the three main ingredients in all the baked
goods she is thinking about making. The following table shows how much of each of the main
ingredients is required for each baked good:
x1, x2, x3, x4  0
x3  x1 + x4
x2 + x3
x1 + x4
… 0.2
x1
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4
 0.3
 6x1 + 2x2 + 5x3 + 7x4  820
minimize Z = 8.2x1 + 7.0x2 + 6.5x3 + 9.0x4
Ingredient
Flour (cups)
Sugar (cups)
Eggs
Baking Time (min.)
Cake
2.5
2
2
45
Bread
9
0.25
0
35
Pie
1.3
1
5
50
Cookies
2.5
1
2
16

PROBLEMS
107
There are 18.5 cups in a 5-pound bag of flour and 12 cups in a 5-pound bag of sugar. Tracy plans
to get up and start baking on Friday morning after her kids leave for school and finish before
they return after soccer practice (8 hours). She knows that the PTA will sell a chocolate cake for
$12, a loaf of bread for $8, a custard pie for $10, and a batch of cookies for $6. Tracy wants to
decide how many of each type of baked good she should make in order for the PTA to make the
most money possible.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
58. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 57 for Tracy McCoy.
a. Are any of the ingredients left over?
b. If Tracy could get more of any ingredient, which should it be? Why?
c. If Tracy could get 6 more eggs, 20 more cups of flour, or 30 more minutes of oven time,
which should she choose? Why?
d. The solution values for this problem should logically be integers. If the solution values are
not integers, discuss how Tracy should decide how many of each item to bake. How do total
sales for this integer solution compare with those in the original, non-integer solution?
59. The Wisham family lives on a farm in South Georgia on which it produces a variety of crops and
livestock, including pecans. It has 5 acres of pecan trees that yield approximately 1,000 pounds of
unshelled pecans per acre each year. The family uses all of its pecan harvest to produce pecan pies,
cookies, 1-pound bags of shelled pecans, and 5-pound bags of unshelled pecans, which it sells in
town at the local farmers’ market. The family sells pies for $5, packages of a dozen cookies for $3,
bags of shelled pecans for $7, and bags of unshelled pecans for $16. A shelled pecan is half the
weight of an unshelled pecan. It requires 4 ounces of shelled pecans to make a pie, and 6 ounces of
shelled pecans to make a dozen cookies. The pies and cookies are baked in the family oven, and
there are 120 hours of baking time available. It takes 55 minutes to bake a batch of 4 pies and 15
minutes to bake a batch of 2 dozen cookies. It requires family members 6 minutes to shell the pecans
for a pie and package it, 4 minutes to shell the pecans for cookies and to package them, 10 minutes
to shell the pecans for a 1 lb. bag of shelled pecans and package them, and 1 minute to package a
bag of unshelled pecans; and there are 300 hours available from family members for shelling and
packaging. The Wisham family wants to know how many pecan pies, dozens of cookies, and bags
of shelled and unshelled pecans to produce in order to maximize its sales revenues.
Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
60. Solve the linear programming model formulated in Problem 59 for the Wisham family farm us-
ing the computer.
a. Are there any extra (slack) resources available?
b. If the Wisham family could obtain additional resources, which one would be of most value
to them? How much would they be willing to pay for this resource? Why?
c. If the family could obtain an additional 500 pounds of pecans or 30 hours of oven time,
which should they choose?
d. The family is thinking about buying a bigger oven for $3,000. If they do so, they could make
a batch of 5 pies or a batch 3 dozen cookies at one time. Should they buy the oven? Explain
your answer.
61. During the winter WeeMow Lawn Service contracts with customers for cutting lawns starting in
the spring. WeeMow provides service to residential and commercial customers. The service has
identified 50 possible residential customers and 15 potential commercial customers it has
contacted. WeeMow services a customer once every 2 weeks during the growing season. A
residential lawn on average takes 1.2 hours to cut, and a commercial property requires 5 hours to
cut; the service’s available work time is 8 hours, 6 days per week. The profit for a residential lawn
is $23, and the profit for a commercial property is $61. The service has established a weekly
budget of $350 for management, gas, and other materials, plus equipment repair. A residential

108
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
lawn averages $12 in management, gas, material, and repair costs, and a commercial property
averages $20 in costs. WeeMow wants to know how many residential and commercial jobs it
should contract for from among its potential customers in order to maximize profits.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model graphically.
62. Solve the liner programming model for WeeMow Lawn Service in Problem 61 using the
computer.
a. Which resources constrain how many jobs the service can contract for?
b. If WeeMow could increase its weekly budget by $50 per week, or increase its workday to
9 hours, which would be more profitable?
c. The solution to this problem should logically be integer, that is, whole jobs; however, the
optimal solution is not integer. How would you suggest that WeeMow address this discrepancy?
Do you think there is a way to handle this problem with the computer program you are using
to solve this problem?
Case Problem
Mossaic Tiles, Ltd.
Gilbert Moss and Angela Pasaic spent several summers
during their college years working at archaeological sites
in the Southwest. While at those digs, they learned how to
make ceramic tiles from local artisans. After college they
made use of their college experiences to start a tile manu-
facturing firm called Mossaic Tiles, Ltd. They opened their
plant in New Mexico, where they would have convenient
access to a special clay they intend to use to make a clay
derivative for their tiles. Their manufacturing operation
consists of a few relatively simple but precarious steps, in-
cluding molding the tiles, baking, and glazing.
Gilbert and Angela plan to produce two basic types of
tile for use in home bathrooms, kitchens, sunrooms, and
laundry rooms. The two types of tile are a larger, single-
colored tile and a smaller, patterned tile. In the manufac-
turing process, the color or pattern is added before a tile is
glazed. Either a single color is sprayed over the top of a
baked set of tiles or a stenciled pattern is sprayed on the
top of a baked set of tiles.
The tiles are produced in batches of 100. The first step
is to pour the clay derivative into specially constructed
molds. It takes 18 minutes to mold a batch of 100 larger
tiles and 15 minutes to prepare a mold for a batch of 100
smaller tiles. The company has 60 hours available each
week for molding. After the tiles are molded, they are
baked in a kiln: 0.27 hour for a batch of 100 larger tiles and
0.58 hour for a batch of 100 smaller tiles. The company
has 105 hours available each week for baking. After bak-
ing, the tiles are either colored or patterned and glazed.
This process takes 0.16 hour for a batch of 100 larger tiles
and 0.20 hour for a batch of 100 smaller tiles. Forty hours
are available each week for the glazing process. Each batch
of 100 large tiles requires 32.8 pounds of the clay deriva-
tive to produce, whereas each batch of smaller tiles
requires 20 pounds. The company has 6,000 pounds of the
clay derivative available each week.
Mossaic Tiles earns a profit of $190 for each batch of
100 of the larger tiles and $240 for each batch of 100
smaller patterned tiles. Angela and Gilbert want to know
how many batches of each type of tile to produce each
week to maximize profit. In addition, they have some
questions about resource usage they would like answered.
A. Formulate a linear programming model for Mossaic
Tiles, Ltd., and determine the mix of tiles it should
manufacture each week.
B. Transform the model into standard form.
C. Solve the linear programming model graphically.
D. Determine the resources left over and not used at the
optimal solution point.
E. Determine the sensitivity ranges for the objective
function coefficients and constraint quantity values
by using the graphical solution of the model.
F. For artistic reasons, Gilbert and Angela prefer to pro-
duce the smaller, patterned tiles. They also believe
that in the long run, the smaller tiles will be a more
successful product. What must the profit be for the
smaller tiles in order for the company to produce only
the smaller tiles?
G. Solve the linear programming model by using the com-
puter and verify the sensitivity ranges computed in (E).

CASE PROBLEM
109
Case Problem
“The Possibility” Restaurant—Continued
In “The Possibility” Restaurant case problem in Chapter 2,
Angela Fox and Zooey Caulfield opened a French restau-
rant called “The Possibility.” Initially, Angela and Zooey
could not offer a full, varied menu, so their chef, Pierre,
prepared two full-course dinners with beef and fish each
evening. In the case problem, Angela and Zooey wanted to
develop a linear programming model to help determine the
number of beef and fish meals they should prepare each
night. Solve Zooey and Angela’s linear programming
model by using the computer.
A. Angela and Zooey are considering investing in some
advertising to increase the maximum number of
meals they serve. They estimate that if they spend
$30 per day on a newspaper ad, it will increase the
maximum number of meals they serve per day from
60 to 70. Should they make the investment?
B. Zooey and Angela are concerned about the reliability of
some of their kitchen staff. They estimate that on some
evenings they could have a staff reduction of as much
as 5 hours. How would this affect their profit level?
C. The final question they would like to explore is rais-
ing the price of the fish dinner. Angela believes the
price for a fish dinner is a little low and that it could
be closer to the price of a beef dinner without affect-
ing customer demand. However, Zooey has noted that
Pierre has already made plans based on the number of
dinners recommended by the linear programming so-
lution. Angela has suggested a price increase that will
increase profit for the fish dinner to $14. Would this
be acceptable to Pierre, and how much additional
profit would be realized?
Julia’s Food Booth
Julia Robertson is a senior at Tech, and she’s investigating
different ways to finance her final year at school. She is
considering leasing a food booth outside the Tech stadium at
home football games. Tech sells out every home game, and
Julia knows, from attending the games herself, that everyone
eats a lot of food. She has to pay $1,000 per game for a
booth, and the booths are not very large. Vendors can sell
either food or drinks on Tech property, but not both. Only the
Tech athletic department concession stands can sell both
inside the stadium. She thinks slices of cheese pizza, hot
dogs, and barbecue sandwiches are the most popular food
items among fans and so these are the items she would sell.
Most food items are sold during the hour before the
game starts and during half time; thus it will not be possi-
ble for Julia to prepare the food while she is selling it. She
must prepare the food ahead of time and then store it in a
warming oven. For $600 she can lease a warming oven for
the six-game home season. The oven has 16 shelves, and
each shelf is 3 feet by 4 feet. She plans to fill the oven with
the three food items before the game and then again before
half time.
Julia has negotiated with a local pizza delivery company
to deliver 14-inch cheese pizzas twice each game—2 hours
before the game and right after the opening kickoff. Each
pizza will cost her $6 and will include 8 slices. She estimates
it will cost her $0.45 for each hot dog and $0.90 for each
barbecue sandwich if she makes the barbecue herself the
night before. She measured a hot dog and found it takes up
about 16 square inches of space, whereas a barbecue sand-
wich takes up about 25 square inches. She plans to sell a slice
of pizza and a hot dog for $1.50 apiece and a barbecue sand-
wich for $2.25. She has $1,500 in cash available to purchase
and prepare the food items for the first home game; for the
Case Problem
H. Mossaic believes it may be able to reduce the time
required for molding to 16 minutes for a batch of
larger tiles and 12 minutes for a batch of smaller tiles.
How will this affect the solution?
I. The company that provides Mossaic with clay has
indicated that it can deliver an additional 100 pounds
each week. Should Mossaic agree to this offer?
J. Mossaic is considering adding capacity to one of
its kilns to provide 20 additional glazing hours per
week, at a cost of $90,000. Should it make the
investment?
K. The kiln for glazing had to be shut down for 3 hours,
reducing the available kiln hours from 40 to 37. What
effect will this have on the solution?

110
CHAPTER 3
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: COMPUTER SOLUTION AND SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
remaining five games she will purchase her ingredients with
money she has made from the previous game.
Julia has talked to some students and vendors who have
sold food at previous football games at Tech as well as at
other universities. From this she has discovered that she can
expect to sell at least as many slices of pizza as hot dogs and
barbecue sandwiches combined. She also anticipates that
she will probably sell at least twice as many hot dogs as bar-
becue sandwiches. She believes that she will sell everything
she can stock and develop a customer base for the season if
she follows these general guidelines for demand.
If Julia clears at least $1,000 in profit for each game af-
ter paying all her expenses, she believes it will be worth
leasing the booth.
A. Formulate and solve a linear programming model for
Julia that will help you advise her if she should lease
the booth.
B. If Julia were to borrow some more money from a friend
before the first game to purchase more ingredients,
could she increase her profit? If so, how much should
she borrow and how much additional profit would
she make? What factor constrains her from borrowing
even more money than this amount (indicated in your
answer to the previous question)?
C. When Julia looked at the solution in (A), she realized
that it would be physically difficult for her to prepare
all the hot dogs and barbecue sandwiches indicated
in this solution. She believes she can hire a friend
of hers to help her for $100 per game. Based on the
results in (A) and (B), is this something you think she
could reasonably do and should do?
D. Julia seems to be basing her analysis on the
assumption that everything will go as she plans.
What are some of the uncertain factors in the model
that could go wrong and adversely affect Julia’s
analysis? Given these uncertainties and the results
in (A), (B), and (C), what do you recommend that
Julia do?

Linear Programming:
Modeling Examples
111
CHAPTER
4

In Chapters 2 and 3, two basic linear programming models, one for a maximization problem
and one for a minimization problem, were used to demonstrate model formulation, graphical
solution, computer solution, and sensitivity analysis. Most of these models were very
straightforward, consisting of only two decision variables and two constraints. They were
necessarily simple models so that the linear programming topics being introduced could be
easily understood.
In this chapter, more complex examples of model formulation are presented. These examples
have been selected to illustrate some of the more popular application areas of linear programming.
They also provide guidelines for model formulation for a variety of problems and computer solu-
tions with Excel and QM for Windows.
You will notice as you go through each example that the model formulation is presented in
a systematic format. First, decision variables are identified, then the objective function is formu-
lated, and finally the model constraints are developed. Model formulation can be difficult and
complicated, and it is usually beneficial to follow this set of steps in which you identify a
specific model component at each step instead of trying to “see” the whole formulation after the
first reading.
A Product Mix Example
Quick-Screen is a clothing manufacturing company that specializes in producing commem-
orative shirts immediately following major sporting events such as the World Series, Super
Bowl, and Final Four. The company has been contracted to produce a standard set of shirts
for the winning team, either State University or Tech, following a college football bowl
game on New Year’s Day. The items produced include two sweatshirts, one with silk-screen
printing on the front and one with print on both sides, and two T-shirts of the same
configuration. The company has to complete all production within 72 hours after the game,
at which time a trailer truck will pick up the shirts. The company will work around the
clock. The truck has enough capacity to accommodate 1,200 standard-size boxes. A standard-
size box holds 12 T-shirts, and a box of 12 sweatshirts is three times the size of a standard
box. The company has budgeted $25,000 for the production run. It has 500 dozen blank
sweatshirts and T-shirts each in stock, ready for production. This scenario is illustrated in
Figure 4.1.
The resource requirements, unit costs, and profit per dozen for each type of shirt are shown
in the following table:
112
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Processing 
Time (hr.) 
Cost
Profit 
per Dozen
per Dozen
per Dozen
Sweatshirt—F
0.10
$36
$90
Sweatshirt—B/F
0.25
48
125
T-shirt—F
0.08
25
45
T-shirt—B/F
0.21
35
65
The company wants to know how many dozen (boxes) of each type of shirt to produce in
order to maximize profit.

Decision Variables
This problem contains four decision variables, representing the number of dozens (boxes) of
each type of shirt to produce:
x2 = sweatshirts, back andfront printing
x1 = sweatshirts, front printing
A PRODUCT MIX EXAMPLE
113
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
TECH
BOWL
CHAMPS
1,200 Standard
size boxes 
TECH
BOWL
TECH
BOWL
TECH
BOWL
TECH
BOWL
TECH
BOWL
TECH
BOWL
T-shirts (500)
Front ($25/dz.)
Back/front ($35/dz.)
Front ($36/dz.)
Back/front ($48/dz.)
Sweatshirts (500)
FIGURE 4.1
Quick-Screen
Shirts
Summary of Linear Programming Model Formulation Steps
Step 1: Define the decision variables
How many (dozens of) T-shirts and sweatshirts of each type to produce
Step 2: Define the objective function
Maximize profit
Step 3: Define the constraints
The resources available, including processing time, blank shirts, budget, and shipping capacity
Following is a review of the model formulation steps for this problem:

The Objective Function
The company’s objective is to maximize profit. The total profit is the sum of the individual prof-
its gained from each type of shirt. The objective function is expressed as
Model Constraints
The first constraint is for processing time. The total available processing time is the 72-hour 
period between the end of the game and the truck pickup:
The second constraint is for the available shipping capacity, which is 1,200 standard-size boxes.
A box of sweatshirts is three times the size of a standard-size box. Thus, each box of sweatshirts
is equivalent in size to three boxes of T-shirts. This relative size differential is expressed in the
following constraint:
The third constraint is for the cost budget. The total budget available for production is $25,000:
The last two constraints reflect the available blank sweatshirts and T-shirts the company has 
in storage:
Model Summary
The linear programming model for Quick-Screen is summarized as follows:
subject to
Computer Solution with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet solution for this product mix example is shown in Exhibit 4.1. The deci-
sion variables are located in cells B14:B17. The profit is computed in cell B18, and the formula
for profit, B14*D5B15*E5B16*F5B17*G5, is shown on the formula bar at the top of
the spreadsheet. The constraint formulas are embedded in cells H7 through H11, under the col-
umn titled “Usage.” For example, the constraint formula for processing time in cell H7 is
D7*B14E7*B15F7*B16G7*B17. Cells H8 through H11 have similar formulas.
Cells K7 through K11 contain the formulas for the leftover resources, or slack. For exam-
ple, cell K7 contains the formula J7–H7. These formulas for leftover resources enable us to
x1, x2, x3, x4  0
x3 + x4 … 500
x1 + x2 … 500
 36x1 + 48x2 + 25x3 + 35x4 … 25,000
 3x1 + 3x2 + x3 + x4 … 1,200
 0.10x1 + 0.25x2 + 0.08x3 + 0.21x4 … 72
maximize Z = 90x1 + 125x2 + 45x3 + 65x4
x3 + x4 … 500 dozen T@shirts
x1 + x2 … 500 dozen sweatshirts
+36x1 + 48x2 + 25x3 + 35x4 … +25,000
3x1 + 3x2 + x3 + x4 … 1,200 boxes
0.10x1 + 0.25x2 + 0.08x3 + 0.21x4 … 72 hr
maximize Z = +90x1 + 125x2 + 45x3 + 65x4
x4 = T@shirts, back and front printing
x3 = T@shirts, front printing
114
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
This model can be
input as shown for
computer solution.

demonstrate a spreadsheet operation that can save you time in developing the spreadsheet model.
First, enter the formula for leftover resources, J7–H7, in cell K7, as we have already shown.
Next, using the right mouse button, click on “Copy.” Then cover cells K8:K11 with the cursor (by
holding the left mouse button down). Click the right mouse button again and then click on
“Paste.” This will automatically insert the correct formulas for leftover resources in cells K8
through K11 so that you do not have to type them all in individually. This copying operation can
be used when the variables in the formula are all in the same row or column. The copying opera-
tion simply increases the row number for each cell that the formulas are copied into (i.e., J8 and
H8, J9 and H9, J10 and H10, and J11 and H11).
Also, note the model formulation in the box in the lower right-hand corner of the spreadsheet
in Exhibit 4.1. The model formulations for the remaining linear programming models in this and
other chapters are included on the Excel files on the companion website accompanying this text.
The Solver Parameters window for this model is shown in Exhibit 4.2. Notice that we were
able to insert all five constraint formulas with one line in the “Subject to the Constraints:” box.
We used the constraint H7:H11 < J7:J11, which means that all the constraint usage val-
ues computed in cells H7 through H11 are less than the corresponding available resource values
computed in cells J7 through J11.
Computer Solution with QM for Windows
The QM for Windows solution for this problem is shown in Exhibit 4.3.
Solution Analysis
The model solution is
The manager of Quick-Screen might have to round off the solution to send whole boxes—for
example, 175 boxes of front-only sweatshirts, 57 of front and back sweatshirts, and 500 of front-only
Z = +45,522.22 profit
x3 = 500 boxes of front@only T@shirts
x2 = 57.78 boxes of front and back sweatshirts
x1 = 175.56 boxes of front@only sweatshirts
A PRODUCT MIX EXAMPLE
115
=D7*B14+E7*+B15+F7*B16+G7*B17
=J7–H7
Click on “Data” tab
to access Solver
Objective function
=F11*B16+G11*B17
These cells have no
effect; added for
“cosmetic” purposes.
Model formulation
included on all Excel
files on companion
Web site.
EXHIBIT 4.1

116
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
EXHIBIT 4.3
Includes all five
constraints.
EXHIBIT 4.2
T-shirts. This would result in a profit of $45,375.00, which is only $147.22 less than the optimal
profit value of $45,522.22.
We will discuss how to achieve “integer” solutions in greater detail in chapter 5.
Sensitivity Analysis
After formulating and solving this model, Quick-Screen might decide that it needs to produce and
ship at least some of each type of shirt. Management could evaluate this possibility by adding four
constraints that establish minimum levels of production for each type of shirt, including front and
back T-shirts, x4, none of which are produced in the current solution. The manager might also like
to experiment with the constraints to see the effect on the solution of adding resources. For exam-
ple, looking at the Ranging window for QM for windows in Exhibit 4.4, the dual value for pro-
cessing time shows profit would increase by $233.33 per hour (up to 98.33 hours, the upper limit

of the sensitivity range for this constraint quality value). Although the 72-hour limit seems pretty
strict, it might be possible to reduce individual processing times and achieve the same result.
A Diet Example
Breathtakers, a health and fitness center, operates a morning fitness program for senior citizens.
The program includes aerobic exercise, either swimming or step exercise, followed by a healthy
breakfast in the dining room. Breathtakers’ dietitian wants to develop a breakfast that will be
high in calories, calcium, protein, and fiber, which are especially important to senior citizens,
but low in fat and cholesterol. She also wants to minimize cost. She has selected the following
possible food items, whose individual nutrient contributions and cost from which to develop a
standard breakfast menu are shown in the following table:
A DIET EXAMPLE
117
EXHIBIT 4.4
After developing the simplex method for solving linear pro-
gramming problems, George Dantzig needed a good problem
to test it on. The problem he selected was the “diet problem”
formulated in 1945 by Nobel economist George Stigler. The
problem was to determine an adequate nutritional diet at mini-
mum cost (which was an important military and civilian issue
during World War II). Formulated as a linear programming
model, the diet problem consisted of 77 unknowns and nine
equations. It took nine clerks using hand-operated (mechanical)
desk calculators 120 person-days to obtain the optimal simplex
solution: a diet consisting primarily of wheat flour, cabbage,
and dried navy beans that cost $39.69 per year (in 1939 prices).
The solution developed by Stigler using his own numerical
method was only 24 cents more than the optimal solution.
Time Out
for George B. Dantzig
Breakfast 
Fat 
Cholesterol 
Iron 
Calcium Protein Fiber 
Food
Calories
(g)
(mg)
(mg)
(mg)
(g)
(g)
Cost 
1. Bran cereal (cup)
90
0
0
6
20
3
5
$0.18
2. Dry cereal (cup)
110
2
0
4
48
4
2
0.22
3. Oatmeal (cup)
100
2
0
2
12
5
3
0.10
4. Oat bran (cup)
90
2
0
3
8
6
4
0.12
5. Egg
75
5
270
1
30
7
0
0.10
6. Bacon (slice)
35
3
8
0
0
2
0
0.09
7. Orange
65
0
0
1
52
1
1
0.40
8. Milk—2% (cup)
100
4
12
0
250
9
0
0.16
9. Orange juice (cup)
120
0
0
0
3
1
0
0.50
10. Wheat toast (slice)
65
1
0
1
26
3
3
0.07

The dietitian wants the breakfast to include at least 420 calories, 5 milligrams of iron, 400 mil-
ligrams of calcium, 20 grams of protein, and 12 grams of fiber. Furthermore, she wants to limit
fat to no more than 20 grams and cholesterol to 30 milligrams.
Decision Variables
This problem includes 10 decision variables, representing the number of standard units of each
food item that can be included in each breakfast:
The Objective Function
The dietitian’s objective is to minimize the cost of a breakfast. The total cost is the sum of the
individual costs of each food item:
Model Constraints
The constraints are the requirements for the nutrition items:
+ 0.16x8 + 0.50x9 + 0.07x10
 minimize Z = +0.18x1 + 0.22x2 + 0.10x3 + 0.12x4 + 0.10x5 + 0.09x6 + 0.40x7
x10 = slices of wheat toast
x9 = cups of orange juice
x8 = cups of milk
x7 = oranges
x6 = slices of bacon
x5 = eggs
x4 = cups of oat bran
x3 = cups of oatmeal
x2 = cups of dry cereal
x1 = cups of bran cereal
118
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
90x1  110x2  100x3  90x4  75x5  35x6  65x7  100x8  120x9  65x10  420 calories
2x2  2x3  2x4  5x5  3x6  4x8  x10  20 g of fat
270x5  8x6  12x8  30 mg of cholesterol
6x1  4x2  2x3  3x4  x5  x7  x10  5 mg of iron
20x1  48x2  12x3  8x4  30x5  52x7  250x8  3x9  26x10  400 mg of calcium
3x1  4x2  5x3  6x4  7x5  2x6  x7  9x8  x9  3x10  20 g of protein
5x1  2x2  3x3  4x4  x7  3x10  12 g of fiber
Model Summary
The linear programming model for this problem can be summarized as follows:
subject to
90x1  110x2  100x3  90x4  75x5  35x6  65x7  100x8  120x9  65x10  420
2x2  2x3  2x4  5x5  3x6  4x8  x10  20
270x5  8x6  12x8  30
6x1  4x2  2x3  3x4  x5  x7  x10  5
20x1  48x2  12x3  8x4  30x5  52x7  250x8  3x9  26x10  400
3x1  4x2  5x3  6x4  7x5  2x6  x7  9x8  x9  3x10  20
5x1  2x2  3x3  4x4  x7  3x10  12
xi  0
+ 0.16x8 + 0.50x9 + 0.07x10
 minimize Z = 0.18x1 + 0.22x2 + 0.10x3 + 0.12x4 + 0.10x5 + 0.09x6 + 0.40x7

Computer Solution with Excel
The solution to our diet example using an Excel spreadsheet is shown in Exhibit 4.5. The
decision variables (i.e., “servings” of each menu item) for our problem are contained in cells
C5:C14 inclusive, and the constraint formulas are in cells F15 through L15. Cells F17 through
L17 contain the constraint (right-hand-side) values. For example, cell F15 contains the
constraint formula for calories, SUMPRODUCT(C5:C14,F5:F14). Then, when the Solver
Parameters window is accessed, the constraint F15>F17 will be added in. This constraint for-
mula in cell F15 could have been constructed by multiplying each of the values in column C by
each of the corresponding column F cell values. The equivalent constraint formula in cell F15 to
our SUMPRODUCT formula is C5*F5C6*F6C7*F7C8*F8C9*F9C10*F10
C11*F11C12*F12C13*F13C14*F14.
A DIET EXAMPLE
119
Decision
variables,
C5:C14
=SUMPRODUCT(C5:C14,F5:F14)
or
=C5*F5+C6*F6+C7*F7+C8*F8
+C9*F9+C10*F10+C11*F11
 
+C12*F12+C13*F13+C14*F14
=SUMPRODUCT(C5:C14,E5:E14)
or
=C5*E5+C6*E6+C7*E7+C8*E8
+C9*E9+C10*E10+C11*E11
 
+C12*E12+C13*E13+C14*E14
Constraint value,
420, typed in cell F17
EXHIBIT 4.5
The objective function formula is contained in cell C19, SUMPRODUCT(C5:C14,E5:E14).
In this case, the objective function value is also computed by using the Excel SUMPRODUCT
command rather than by individually multiplying each cell value in column C by each cell value
in column E and then summing them. This would be a tedious formula to type into cell C19. Al-
ternatively, the SUMPRODUCT() formula multiplies all the values in cells C5 through C14 by
all the corresponding values in cells E5 through E14 and then sums them.
The Solver Parameters dialog box for this problem is shown in Exhibit 4.6.
Solution Analysis
The solution is
The result of this simplified version of a real menu planning model is interesting in that it sug-
gests a very practical breakfast menu. This would be a healthy breakfast for anyone.
Z = +0.509 cost per meal
x10 = 2.975 slices of wheat toast
x8 = 1.241 cups of milk
x3 = 1.025 cups of oatmeal

Sensitivity Analysis
This model includes a daily minimum requirement of only 420 calories. The recommended
daily calorie requirement for an adult is approximately 2,000 calories. Thus, the breakfast
requirement is only about 21% of normal daily adult needs. In this model, the dietitian must
have felt a low-calorie breakfast was needed because the senior citizens had high-calorie
lunches and dinners. An alternative approach to a healthy diet is a high-calorie breakfast
followed by low-calorie, light meals and snacks the rest of the day. However, in this model, as
the calorie requirements are increased above 420, the model simply increases the cups of oat-
meal. For example, a 700-calorie requirement results in about 5 or 6 cups of oatmeal—not a
very appetizing breakfast. This difficulty can be alleviated by establishing upper limits on
the servings for each food item and solving the model again with a higher calorie
requirement.
An Investment Example
Kathleen Allen, an individual investor, has $70,000 to divide among several investments. The al-
ternative investments are municipal bonds with an 8.5% annual return, certificates of deposit
with a 5% return, treasury bills with a 6.5% return, and a growth stock fund with a 13% annual
return. The investments are all evaluated after 1 year. However, each investment alternative has a
different perceived risk to the investor; thus, it is advisable to diversify. Kathleen wants to know
how much to invest in each alternative in order to maximize the return.
The following guidelines have been established for diversifying the investments and lessen-
ing the risk perceived by the investor:
1. No more than 20% of the total investment should be in municipal bonds.
2. The amount invested in certificates of deposit should not exceed the amount invested in the
other three alternatives.
120
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Decision variables;
“servings” in
column C
Constraint for “calories” in column F;
=SUMPRODUCT(C5:C14, F5:F14) ≤ 420
EXHIBIT 4.6

3. At least 30% of the investment should be in treasury bills and certificates of deposit.
4. To be safe, more should be invested in CDs and treasury bills than in municipal bonds and
the growth stock fund, by a ratio of at least 1.2 to 1.
Kathleen wants to invest the entire $70,000.
Decision Variables
Four decision variables represent the monetary amount invested in each investment alternative:
deposit
The Objective Function
The objective of the investor is to maximize the total return from the investment in the four al-
ternatives. The total return is the sum of the individual returns from each alternative. Thus, the
objective function is expressed as
where
deposit
Model Constraints
In this problem, the constraints are the guidelines established for diversifying the total invest-
ment. Each guideline is transformed into a mathematical constraint separately.
The first guideline states that no more than 20% of the total investment should be in
municipal bonds. The total investment is $70,000; 20% of $70,000 is $14,000. Thus, this
constraint is
The second guideline indicates that the amount invested in certificates of deposit should
not exceed the amount invested in the other three alternatives. Because the investment in cer-
tificates of deposit is x2 and the amount invested in the other alternatives is 
the
constraint is
This constraint is not in what we referred to in Chapter 3 as standard form for a computer
solution. In standard form, all the variables would be on the left-hand side of the inequality
and all the numeric values would be on the right side. This type of constraint can be used
in Excel just as it is shown here; however, for solution with QM for Windows, all constraints
must be in standard form. We will go ahead and convert this constraint and others in this model
to standard form, but when we solve this model with Excel, we will explain how the model
constraints could be used in their original (nonstandard) form. To convert this constraint to
standard form,
must be subtracted from both sides of the 
sign to put this con-
straint in proper form:
x2 - x1 - x3 - x4 … 0
…
x1 + x3 + x4
(…),
x2 … x1 + x3 + x4
x1 + x3 + x4,
x1 … +14,000
0.130x4 = return from the investment in growth stock fund
0.065x3 = return from the investment in treasury bills
0.05x2 = return from the investment in certificates of
0.085x1 = return from the investment in municipal bonds
Z = total return from all investments
maximize Z = +0.085x1 + 0.05x2 + 0.065x3 + 0.130x4
x4 = amount (+) investedin growth stock fund
x3 = amount (+) investedin treasury bills
x2 = amount (+) investedin certificates of
x1 = amount (+) investedin municipal bonds
AN INVESTMENT EXAMPLE
121
Standard form
requires all variables
to be to the left of the
inequality and
numeric values 
to the right.

The third guideline specifies that at least 30% of the investment should be in treasury
bills and certificates of deposit. Because 30% of $70,000 is $21,000 and the amount invested
in certificates of deposit and treasury bills is represented by 
the constraint is
The fourth guideline states that the ratio of the amount invested in certificates of deposit
and treasury bills to the amount invested in municipal bonds and the growth stock fund should
be at least 1.2 to 1:
This constraint is not in standard linear programming form because of the fractional relationship
of the decision variables,
It is converted as follows:
Finally, the investor wants to invest the entire $70,000 in the four alternatives. Thus, the sum
of all the investments in the four alternatives must equal $70,000:
Model Summary
The complete linear programming model for this problem can be summarized as
subject to
Computer Solution with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet solution for the investment example is shown in Exhibit 4.7, and its Solver
Parameters window is shown in Exhibit 4.8. The spreadsheet is set up very similarly to the
x1, x2, x3, x4  0
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 70,000
-1.2x1 + x2 + x3 - 1.2x4  0
x2 + x3  21,000
x2 - x1 - x3 - x4 … 0
x1 … 14,000
maximize Z = +0.085x1 + 0.05x2 + 0.065x3 + 0.130x4
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = +70,000
-1.2x1 + x2 + x3 - 1.2x4  0
x2 + x3  1.2 (x1 + x4)
(x2 + x3)>(x1 + x4).
[(x2 + x3)>(x1 + x4)]  1.2
x2 + x3  +21,000
x2 + x3,
122
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
First guideline,
=D6*B13
Objective function, Z,
for total return
Total investment requirement,
=D10*B13+E10*B14+F10*B15+G10*B16
EXHIBIT 4.7
Standard form
requires that
fractional
relationships 
between variables 
be eliminated.

spreadsheet for our product mix example in Exhibit 4.1. The decision variables are located in
cells B13:B16. The total return (Z) is computed in cell B17, and the formula for Z is shown
on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The constraint formulas for the invest-
ment uidelines are embedded in cells H6 through H10. For example, the first guide-
line formula, in cell H6, is D6*B13, and the second guideline formula, in cell H7,
is D7*B13E7*B14F7*B15G7*B16. (Note that it would probably have been easier just
to type the guideline formulas directly into cells H6 through H10 rather than create the array of
constraint coefficients in D6:G10; however, for demonstration purposes, we wanted to show all
the parameter values.)
As mentioned earlier, it is not necessary to convert the original model constraints into stan-
dard form to solve this model using Excel. For example, the constraint for certificates of de-
posit,
could be entered in the spreadsheet in row 7 in Exhibit 4.7 as
follows. The value 1, the coefficient for 
could be entered in cell E7, E7*B14 could be en-
tered in cell J7, and the remainder of the constraint to the right side of the inequality could be
entered as B13B15B16 in cell H7. In the Solver Parameters window, this constraint is en-
tered, with the municipal bonds constraint, as H6:H7<J6:J7. The fourth guideline constraint
could be entered in its original form similarly.
Solution Analysis
The solution is
Sensitivity Analysis
The sensitivity report for our Excel spreadsheet solution to this problem is shown in Exhibit 4.9.
Z = +6,818.18
x4 = +31,818.20 invested in a growth stock fund
x3 = +38,181.80 invested in treasury bonds
x2,
x2 … x1 + x3 + x4,
AN INVESTMENT EXAMPLE
123
Guideline constraints
EXHIBIT 4.8

Notice that the dual (shadow price) value for constraint 5 (i.e., the sum of the investments
must equal $70,000) is 0.095. This indicates that for each additional $1 Kathleen Allen invests
(above $70,000), according to the existing investment guidelines she has established, she could
expect a return of 9.5%. The sensitivity ranges show that there is no upper bound on the amount
she could invest and still receive this return.
An interesting variation of the problem is to not specify that the entire amount available (in
this case, $70,000) must be invested. This changes the constraints for the first and third guide-
lines and the constraint that requires that the entire $70,000 be invested.
Recall that the first guideline is “no more than 20% of the total investment should be in mu-
nicipal bonds.” The total investment is no longer exactly $70,000 but the sum of all four invest-
ments,
The constraint showing that the amount invested in municipal bonds,
as a percentage (or ratio) of this total cannot exceed 20% is written as
Rewriting this constraint in a form more consistent with a linear programming solution (to elim-
inate the fractional relationship between variables) results in
and
The constraint for the third guideline, which stipulates that at least 30% of the total investment
(x1  x2  x3  x4) should be in treasury bills and CDs (x2  x3), is formulated similarly as
and
Because the entire $70,000 does not have to be invested, the last constraint becomes
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 … 70,000
-0.3x1 + 0.7x2 + 0.7x3 - 0.3x4  0
x2 + x3
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4
 0.30
0.8x1 - 0.2x2 - 0.2x3 - 0.2x4 … 0
x1 … 0.2(x1 + x2 + x3 + x4)
x1
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4
… 0.20
x1,
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4.
124
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Shadow price for the
amount available to invest
EXHIBIT 4.9

The complete linear programming model is summarized as
subject to
The solution to this altered model is exactly the same as the solution to our original model,
wherein the entire $70,000 must be invested. This is logical because only positive returns are
achieved from investing, and thus the investor would leave no money not invested. However,
if losses could be realized from some investments, then it might be a good idea to construct
the model so that the entire amount would not have to be invested.
x1, x2, x3, x4  0
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 … 70,000
-1.2x1 + x2 + x3 - 1.2x4  0
- 0.3x1 + 0.7x2 + 0.7x3 - 0.3x4  0
x2 - x1 - x3 - x4 … 0
 
0.8x1 - 0.2x2 - 0.2x3 - 0.2x4 … 0
maximize Z = +0.085x1 + 0.05x2 + 0.065x3 + 0.130x4
AN INVESTMENT EXAMPLE
125
Management Science Application
A Linear Programming Model for Optimal 
Portfolio Selection at GE Asset Management
GE Asset Management is a wholly owned subsidiary of
General Electric Company that manages investment portfolios
of the assets (worth billions of dollars) of various GE units and
other clients, including Genworth Financial and GE Insurance,
insurance units of GE that own other insurance businesses.
According to modern portfolio theory, the goal of portfolio
optimization is to manage risk through diversification and ob-
tain an optimal risk–return trade-off. Thus the objective of
portfolio management at GE Asset Management is to maxi-
mize return or minimize risk while matching the characteristics
of asset portfolios with corresponding liabilities. Assets include
cash flows for various insurance and financial products, prima-
rily in the form of corporate and government bonds.
Linear programming is used to determine asset allocations
for a portfolio. The portfolio optimization model GE Asset
Management formulated uses the variance of economic sur-
plus (the difference between the market values of assets and
liabilities), as a measure of total risk. GE initially used its linear
programming portfolio model to optimize more than 30 port-
folios valued at over $30 billion. Based on an analysis of these
portfolios, GE estimates that the potential benefits of the lin-
ear programming model could be approximately $75 million
over a 5-year period. 
GE is also using this model to develop strategies and
benchmarks for new cash investments, as well as to manage
life insurance portfolios, property and equity portfolios, and
mortgage insurance portfolios. The linear programming
model allows portfolio managers to perform portfolio analyt-
ics (e.g., sensitivity analysis) much faster than previous sys-
tems, enabling them to respond more quickly to changing
market conditions.
Source: Based on K. Chalermkraivuth, S. Bollapragada, M. Clark,
J. Deaton, L. Kiaer, J. Murdzek, W. Neeves, B. Scholz, and 
D. Toledano, “GE Asset Management, Genworth Financial, and GE 
Insurance Use a Sequential-Linear-Programming Algorithm to Optimize
Portfolios,” Interfaces 35, no. 5 (September–October 2005): 370–80.
© EIGHTFISH/Alamy

Exposure
(people/ad or commercial)
Cost
Television commercial
20,000
$15,000
Radio commercial
12,000
6,000
Newspaper ad
9,000
4,000
A Marketing Example
The Biggs Department Store chain has hired an advertising firm to determine the types and
amount of advertising it should invest in for its stores. The three types of advertising available
are television and radio commercials and newspaper ads. The retail chain desires to know the
number of each type of advertisement it should purchase in order to maximize exposure. It is es-
timated that each ad or commercial will reach the following potential audience and cost the fol-
lowing amount:
126
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
The company must consider the following resource constraints:
1. The budget limit for advertising is $100,000.
2. The television station has time available for 4 commercials.
3. The radio station has time available for 10 commercials.
4. The newspaper has space available for 7 ads.
5. The advertising agency has time and staff available for producing no more than a total of
15 commercials and/or ads.
Decision Variables
This model consists of three decision variables that represent the number of each type of adver-
tising produced:
number of television commercials
number of radio commercials
number of newspaper ads
The Objective Function
The objective of this problem is different from the objectives in the previous examples, in
which only profit was to be maximized (or cost minimized). In this problem, profit is not to be
maximized; instead, audience exposure is to be maximized. Thus, this objective function
demonstrates that although a linear programming model must either maximize or minimize
some objective, the objective itself can be in terms of any type of activity or valuation.
For this problem the objective audience exposure is determined by summing the audience
exposure gained from each type of advertising:
where
total level of audience exposure
estimated number of people reached by television commercials
estimated number of people reached by radio commercials
estimated number of people reached by newspaper ads
9,000x3 =
12,000x2 =
20,000x1 =
Z =
maximize Z = 20,000x1 + 12,000x2 + 9,000x3
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =

A MARKETING EXAMPLE
127
Model Constraints
The first constraint in this model reflects the limited budget of $100,000 allocated for advertisement:
where
$15,000x1  amount spent for television advertising
amount spent for radio advertising
amount spent for newspaper advertising
The next three constraints represent the fact that television and radio commercials are lim-
ited to 4 and 10, respectively, and newspaper ads are limited to 7:
television commercials
radio commercials
newspaper ads
The final constraint specifies that the total number of commercials and ads cannot exceed 15 be-
cause of the limitations of the advertising firm:
commercials and ads
Model Summary
The complete linear programming model for this problem is summarized as
subject to
$15,000x1  6,000x2  4,000x3  $100,000
Computer Solution with Excel
The solution to our marketing example using Excel is shown in Exhibit 4.10. The model decision
variables are contained in cells D6:D8. The formula for the objective function in cell E10 is shown
on the formula bar at the top of the screen. When Solver is accessed, as shown in Exhibit 4.11, it is
necessary to use only one formula to enter the model constraints: H6:H10 < J6:J10.
Solution Analysis
The solution shows
television commercials
radio commercials
newspaper ads
audience exposure
This is a case where a non-integer solution can create difficulties. It is not realistic to round 1.82 
television commercials to 2 television commercials, with 10 radio commercials and 3 newspaper
ads. Some quick arithmetic with the budget constraint shows that such a solution will exceed the
Z = 185,000
x3 = 3.18
x2 = 10
x1 = 1.82
x1, x2, x3  0
x1 + x2 + x3 … 15
x3 … 7
x2 … 10
x1 … 4
maximize Z = 20,000x1 + 12,000x2 + 9,000x3
x1 + x2 + x3 … 15
x3 … 7
x2 … 10
x1 … 4
4,000x3 =
6,000x2 =
+15,000x1 + 6,000x2 + 4,000x3 … +100,000

$100,000 budget limitation, although by only $2,000. Thus, the store must either increase its adver-
tising or plan for 1 television commercial, 10 radio commercials, and 3 newspaper ads. The audi-
ence exposure for this solution will be 167,000 people, or 18,000 fewer than the optimal number,
almost a 10% decrease. There may, in fact, be a better solution than this “rounded-down” solution.
The integer linear programming technique, which restricts solutions to integer values, should
be used. Although we will discuss the topic of integer programming in more detail in Chapter 5, for
now we can derive an integer solution by using Excel with a simple change when we input our con-
straints in the Solver Parameters window. We specify that our decision variable cells, D6:D8, are
integers in the Change Constraint window, as shown in Exhibits 4.12 and 4.13. This will result in
the spreadsheet solution in Exhibit 4.14 when the problem is solved, which you will notice is better
(i.e., 17,000 more total exposures) than the rounded-down solution.
128
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Objective function
=F6*D6+F7*D7+F8*D8
                      or
=SUMPRODUCT(D6:D8,F6:F8)
EXHIBIT 4.10
Include all five
constraints
EXHIBIT 4.11

A MARKETING EXAMPLE
129
Decision variables
Click on “int“ for 
integer.
EXHIBIT 4.12
Integer restriction
EXHIBIT 4.13
Integer solution
Better solution—17,000
more total exposures—than
rounded-down solution
EXHIBIT 4.14

From
To Store
Warehouse
A
B
C
1
$16
$18
$11
2
14
12
13
3
13
15
17
A Transportation Example
The Zephyr Television Company ships televisions from three warehouses to three retail stores on a
monthly basis. Each warehouse has a fixed supply per month, and each store has a fixed demand
per month. The manufacturer wants to know the number of television sets to ship from each ware-
house to each store in order to minimize the total cost of transportation.
Each warehouse has the following supply of televisions available for shipment each month:
Warehouse
Supply (sets)
1. Cincinnati
300
2. Atlanta
200
3. Pittsburgh
200
700
Each retail store has the following monthly demand for television sets:
Store
Demand (sets)
A. New York
150
B. Dallas
250
C. Detroit
200
600
Costs of transporting television sets from the warehouses to the retail stores vary as a result of
differences in modes of transportation and distances. The shipping cost per television set for each
route is as follows:
130
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Decision Variables
The model for this problem consists of nine decision variables, representing the number of tele-
vision sets transported from each of the three warehouses to each of the three stores:
where 
and 
The variable 
is referred to as a double-subscripted variable. The subscript, whether double
or single, simply gives a “name” to the variable (i.e., distinguishes it from other decision vari-
ables). For example, the decision variable 
represents the number of television sets shipped
from warehouse 3 in Pittsburgh to store A in New York.
The Objective Function
The objective function of the television manufacturer is to minimize the total transportation
costs for all shipments. Thus, the objective function is the sum of the individual shipping costs
from each warehouse to each store:
minimize Z  $16x1A  18x1B  11x1C  14x2A  12x2B  13x2C  13x3A  15x3B  17x3C
x3A
xij
j = A, B, C
i = 1, 2, 3,
xij = number of television sets shippedfrom warehouse i to store j
A double-subscripted
variable
is simply another 
form of 
variable name.

A TRANSPORTATION EXAMPLE
131
Model Constraints
The constraints in this model are the number of television sets available at each warehouse and the
number of sets demanded at each store. There are six constraints—one for each warehouse’s sup-
ply and one for each store’s demand. For example, warehouse 1 in Cincinnati is able to supply 300
television sets to any of the three retail stores. Because the number shipped to the three stores is
the sum of 
and 
the constraint for warehouse 1 is
This constraint is a
inequality for two reasons. First, no more than 300 television sets
can be shipped because that is the maximum available at the warehouse. Second, fewer than
300 can be shipped because 300 are not needed to meet the total demand of 600. That is, total
demand is less than total supply, which equals 700. To meet the total demand at the three stores,
all that can be supplied by the three warehouses is not needed. Thus, the other two supply con-
straints for warehouses 2 and 3 are also inequalities:
The three demand constraints are developed in the same way as the supply constraints,
except that the variables summed are the number of television sets supplied from each of the
three warehouses. Thus, the number shipped to one store is the sum of the shipments
from the three warehouses. They are equalities because all demands can be met:
Model Summary
The complete linear programming model for this problem is summarized as follows:
minimize Z  $16x1A  18x1B  11x1C  14x2A  12x2B  13x2C  13x3A  15x3B  17x3C
subject to
Computer Solution with Excel
The computer solution for this model was achieved using Excel and is shown in Exhibit 4.15.
Notice that the objective function contained in cell C11 is shown on the formula bar at the top of
the screen. The constraints for supply are included in cells F5, F6, and F7, whereas the demand
constraints are in cells C8, D8, and E8. Thus, a typical supply constraint for Cincinnati would
be C5D5E5≤H5. The Solver Parameters window is shown in Exhibit 4.16.
xij  0
x1C + x2C + x3C = 200
x1B + x2B + x3B = 250
x1A + x2A + x3A = 150
x3A + x3B + x3C … 200
x2A + x2B + x2C … 200
x1A + x1B + x1C … 300
x1C + x2C + x3C = 200
x1B + x2B + x3B = 250
x1A + x2A + x3A = 150
x3A + x3B + x3C … 200
x2A + x2B + x2C … 200
…
x1A + x1B + x1C … 300
x1C,
x1A, x1B,
In a “balanced”
transportation model,
supply
equals demand such
that all constraints
are equalities; in an
“unbalanced”
transportation model,
supply does not equal
demand, and one set
of constraints is ….

132
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
=C5+C6+C7
=C5+D5+E5
EXHIBIT 4.15
EXHIBIT 4.16
Decision variables
Demand constraints
Supply constraints
Solution Analysis
The solution is
Note that the surplus for the first constraint, which is the supply at the Cincinnati ware-
house, equals 100 TVs. This means that 100 TVs are left in the Cincinnati warehouse, which has
inventory and storage implications for the manager.
Z = +7,300 shipping cost
x3B = 50 TVs shippedfrom Pittsburgh to Dallas
x3A = 150 TVs shippedfrom Pittsburgh to New York
x2B = 200 TVs shippedfrom Atlanta to Dallas
x1C = 200 TVs shippedfrom Cincinnati to Detroit

This is an example of a type of linear programming model known as a transportation prob-
lem, which is the topic of Chapter 6. Notice that all the solution values are integer values. This is
always the case with transportation problems because of the unique characteristic that all the co-
efficient parameter values are ones and zeros.
A Blend Example
A petroleum company produces three grades of motor oil—super, premium, and extra—from
three components. The company wants to determine the optimal mix of the three components in
each grade of motor oil that will maximize profit. The maximum quantities available of each
component and their cost per barrel are as follows:
A BLEND EXAMPLE
133
Maximum Barrels 
Component
Available/Day
Cost/Barrel
1
4,500
$12
2
2,700
10
3
3,500
14
To ensure the appropriate blend, each grade has certain general specifications. Each grade
must have a minimum amount of component 1 plus a combination of other components, as
follows:
Component 
Selling
Grade
Specifications
Price/Barrel
Super
At least 50% of 1
$23
Not more than 30% of 2
Premium
At least 40% of 1
20
Not more than 25% of 3
Extra
At least 60% of 1
18
At least 10% of 2
The company wants to produce at least 3,000 barrels of each grade of motor oil.
Decision Variables
The decision variables for this problem must specify the quantity of each of the three compo-
nents used in each grade of motor oil. This requires nine decision variables, as follows:
of component i used in motor oil grade j per day, where 
and 
(super), p (premium), e (extra). For example, the amount of component 1 in super motor oil is
The total amount of each grade of motor oil will be
The Objective Function
The company’s objective is to maximize profit. This requires that the cost of each barrel be
subtracted from the revenue obtained from each barrel. Revenue is determined by multiply-
ing the selling price of each grade of motor oil by the total barrels of each grade produced.
extra:  x1e + x2e + x3e
premium:  
x1p + x2p + x3p
super:  
x1s + x2s + x3s
x1s.
j = s
i = 1, 2, 3
xij = barrels
“Profit” is maximized
in the objective
function by subtracting
cost from revenue.

134
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Cost is achieved by multiplying the cost of each component by the total barrels of each
component used:
Combining terms results in the following objective function:
Model Constraints
This problem has several sets of constraints. The first set reflects the limited amount of each
component available on a daily basis:
The next group of constraints is for the blend specifications for each grade of motor oil. The
first specification is that super contain at least 50% of component 1, which is expressed as
This constraint says that the ratio of component 1 in super to the total amount of super produced,
must be at least 50%. Rewriting this constraint in a form more consistent with
linear programming solution results in
and
This is the general form a linear programming constraint must be in before you can enter it for
computer solution. All variables are on the left-hand side of the inequality, and only numeric
values are on the right-hand side.
The constraint for the other blend specification for super grade, not more than 30% of
component 2, is developed in the same way:
and
The two blend specifications for premium motor oil are
The two blend specifications for extra motor oil are
 0.90x2e - 0.10x1e - 0.10x3e  0
 0.40x1e - 0.60x2e - 0.60x3e  0
 0.75x3p - 0.25x1p - 0.25x2p … 0
 0.60x1p - 0.40x2p - 0.40x3p  0
0.70x2s - 0.30x1s - 0.30x3s … 0
x2s
x1s + x2s + x3s
… 0.30
0.50x1s - 0.50x2s - 0.50x3s  0
x1s  0.50(x1s + x2s + x3s)
x1s + x2s + x3s,
x1s
x1s + x2s + x3s
 0.50
x3s + x3p + x3e … 3,500 bbl.
x2s + x2p + x2e … 2,700 bbl.
x1s + x1p + x1e … 4,500 bbl.
maximize Z = 11x1s + 13x2s + 9x3s + 8x1p + 10x2p + 6x3p + 6x1e + 8x2e + 4x3e
- 12(x1s + x1p + x1e) - 10(x2s + x2p + x2e) - 14(x3s + x3p + x3e)
 maximize Z = +23(x1s + x2s + x3s) + 20(x1p + x2p + x3p) + 18(x1e + x2e + x3e)
Standard form requires
that fractional
relationships between
variables be
eliminated.

The final set of constraints reflects the requirement that at least 3,000 barrels of each grade be
produced:
Model Summary
The complete linear programming model for this problem is summarized as follows:
subject to
Computer Solution with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet solution for this blend example is shown in Exhibit 4.17. Solver is shown
in Exhibit 4.18. The decision variables are located in cells B7:B15 in Exhibit 4.17. The total
profit is computed in cell C16, using the formula SUMPRODUCT(B7:B15,C7:C15), which
is also shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The constraint formulas are em-
bedded in cells H6 through H17. Notice that we did not develop an array of constraint coeffi-
cients on the spreadsheet for this model; instead, we typed the constraint formulas directly
into cells H6:H17, which seemed easier. For example, the constraint formula in cell H6
xij  0
x1e + x2e + x3e  3,000
x1p + x2p + x3p  3,000
x1s + x2s + x3s  3,000
 0.90x2e - 0.10x1e - 0.10x3e  0
 0.40x1e - 0.60x2e - 0.60x3e  0
 0.75x3p - 0.25x1p - 0.25x2p … 0
 0.60x1p - 0.40x2p - 0.40x3p  0
 0.70x2s - 0.30x1s - 0.30x3s … 0
 0.50x1s - 0.50x2s - 0.50x3s  0
x3s + x3p + x3e … 3,500
x2s + x2p + x2e … 2,700
x1s + x1p + x1e … 4,500
maximize Z = 11x1s + 13x2s + 9x3s + 8x1p + 10x2p + 6x3p + 6x1e + 8x2e + 4x3e
x1e + x2e + x3e  3,000 bbl.
x1p + x2p + x3p  3,000 bbl.
x1s + x2s + x3s  3,000 bbl.
A BLEND EXAMPLE
135
=B7+B10+B13
=B7+B8+B9
=0.5*B7–0.5*B8–0.5*B9
Decision variables—B7:B15
EXHIBIT 4.17

is B7B10B13, and the constraint formula in cell H9 is .5*B7–.5*B8–.5*B9. The
remaining cells in column H have similar constraint formulas.
Solution Analysis
The solution is
Summarizing these results, 3,000 barrels of super grade, premium, and extra are produced. Also,
4,500 barrels of component 1, and 2,700 barrels of component 2, and 1,800 barrels of component
3 are used. (This problem also contains multiple optimal solutions.)
Sensitivity Analysis
Exhibit 4.19 shows the sensitivity report for our Excel solution of the blend problem. Notice that
the shadow price for component 1 is $20. This indicates that component 1 is by far the most
critical resource for increasing profit. For every additional barrel of component 1 that can be ac-
quired, profit will increase by $20. For example, if the current available amount of component 1
was increased from 4,500 barrels to 4,501 barrels, profit would increase from $76,800 to
$76,820. (This dual price is valid up to 6,200 barrels of component 1, the upper limit for the sen-
sitivity range for this constraint quantity value.)
Z = +76,800
x3e = 900 bbl.
x2e = 300 bbl.
x1e = 1,800 bbl.
x2p = 1,800 bbl.
x1p = 1,200 bbl.
x3s = 900 bbl.
x2s = 600 bbl.
x1s = 1,500 bbl.
136
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
EXHIBIT 4.18
Recall that the
shadow price is the
marginal economic
value of one
additional unit of a
resource.

A MULTIPERIOD SCHEDULING EXAMPLE
137
The shadow price for
component 1 is $20.
The upper limit for the sensitivity range
for component 1 is 4500+1700=6200.
EXHIBIT 4.19
In the refinery industry, different grade stocks of oil and gasoline are available based on the
makeup and quality of the crude oil that is received. Thus, as crude oil properties change, it is
necessary to change blend requirements. Component availability changes as well. The general
structure of this model can be used on a daily basis to plan production based on component
availability and blend specification changes.
A Multiperiod Scheduling Example
PM Computers assembles its own brand of personal computers from component parts it pur-
chases overseas and domestically. PM sells most of its computers locally to different departments
at State University as well as to individuals and businesses in the immediate geographic region.
PM has enough regular production capacity to produce 160 computers per week. It can
produce an additional 50 computers with overtime. The cost of assembling, inspecting, and
packaging a computer during regular time is $190. Overtime production of a computer costs
$260. Furthermore, it costs $10 per computer per week to hold a computer in inventory for
future delivery. PM wants to meet all customer orders, with no shortages, to provide quality
service. PM’s order schedule for the next 6 weeks is as follows:
Week
Computer Orders
1
105
2
170
3
230
4
180
5
150
6
250

138
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Management Science Application
Linear Programming Blending Applications 
in the Petroleum Industry
By the early 1950s, private enterprise had started using
George Dantzig’s linear programming methods. One of the
first wide-scale important applications of linear programming
was in the oil industry. As Dantzig later reminisced, “They
started out with the simple problem of how to blend the gaso-
line for the right flash point, the right viscosity and the right
octane and try to do it in the cheapest way possible.” In 1955
Gifford Symonds wrote Linear Programming: The Solution of
Refinery Problems, the first formal account of the application
of linear programming in the petroleum industry (at
Esso), which included such problems as blending aviation
gasoline, the selection of crude oils to meet production
requirements, and the determination of production rates and
inventory levels to meet variable seasonal requirements. Today,
refinery blending and production planning problems are still
some of the most popular and effective applications of linear
programming. 
Different grades of gasoline are blended from a variety of
available stocks that are intermediate refinery products, such
as distilled gasoline, reformate gasoline, and catalytically
cracked gasoline, plus additives such as octane enhancers.
A typical refinery might have as many as 20 different compo-
nents that it blends into 4 or more grades of gasoline. The
properties or attributes of a blend are determined by a
combination of properties that exist in the gasoline stocks
(emanating from the original crude oil) and can include such
things as vapor pressure, sulfur content, and octane value.
A linear programming model would typically determine the vol-
ume of each blend subject to constraints for stock availability,
demand, and the property specifications (e.g., recipe) for each
blend. A typical linear programming model involving 4 blends
might include more than 40 variables and more than 70
constraints.
Source: Based on C. E. Bodington and T. E. Baker, “A History of
Mathematical Programming in the Petroleum Industry,” Interfaces 20,
no. 4 (July–August 1990): 117–27. 
PM Computers wants to determine a schedule that will indicate how much regular and overtime
production it will need each week to meet its orders at the minimum cost. The company wants
no inventory left over at the end of the 6-week period.
Decision Variables
This model consists of three different sets of decision variables for computers produced during
regular time each week, overtime production each week, and extra computers carried over as
inventory each week. This results in a total of 17 decision variables. Because this problem con-
tains a large number of decision variables, we will define them with names that will make them
a little easier to keep up with:
This will result in 6 decision variables for regular production (
etc.) and 6 decision variables for
overtime production. There are only 5 decision variables for inventory because the problem stipulates
that there is to be no inventory left over at the end of the 6-week period.
r1, r2,
ij = extra computers carried over as inventory in week j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5)
oj = overtime production of computers per week j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
rj = regular production of computers per week j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
© Will Newitt/Alamy

The Objective Function
The objective is to minimize total production cost, which is the sum of regular and overtime pro-
duction costs and inventory costs:
minimize Z  $190(r1  r2  r3  r4  r5  r6)  260(o1  o2  o3  o4  o5  o6)
 10(i1  i2  i3  i4  i5)
Model Constraints
This model includes three sets of constraints. The first two sets reflect the available capacity for
regular and overtime production, and the third set establishes the production schedule per week.
The available regular production capacity of 160 computers for each of the 6 weeks results
in six constraints, as follows:
The available overtime production capacity of 50 computers per week also results in six
constraints:
The next set of six constraints shows the regular and overtime production and inventory neces-
sary to meet the order requirement each week:
For example, 105 computers have been ordered in week 1. Regular production,
and overtime
production,
will meet this order, whereas any extra production that might be needed in a fu-
ture week to meet an order,
is subtracted because it does not go to meet the order. Subse-
quently, in week 2 the order of 170 computers is met by regular and overtime production,
plus inventory carried over from week 1,
Model Summary
The complete model for this problem is summarized as follows:
minimize Z  $190(r1  r2  r3  r4  r5  r6)  $260(o1  o2  o3  o4  o5  o6)
 10(i1  i2  i3  i4  i5)
subject to
rj, oj, ij  0
r6 + o6 + i5 = 250
r5 + o5 + i4 - i5 = 150
r4 + o4 + i3 - i4 = 180
r3 + o3 + i2 - i3 = 230
r2 + o2 + i1 - i2 = 170
r1 + o1 - i1 = 105
oj … 50 (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
rj … 160 (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
i1.
r2 + o2,
i1,
o1,
r1,
 week 6: r6 + o6 + i5 = 250
 week 5: r5 + o5 + i4 - i5 = 150
 week 4: r4 + o4 + i3 - i4 = 180
 week 3: r3 + o3 + i2 - i3 = 230
 week 2: r2 + o2 + i1 - i2 = 170
week 1: r1 + o1 - i1 = 105
oj … 50 computers in week j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
rj … 160 computers in week j (j = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6)
A MULTIPERIOD SCHEDULING EXAMPLE
139

140
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
=G7–H7
=B7+D7+I6; regular production +
overtime production + inventory
from previous week
Decision variables for
overtime production—
D6:D11
Decision variables for
regular production—
B6:B11
EXHIBIT 4.20
Management Science Application
Employee Scheduling with Management Science
One of the largest areas of application of management
science models is employee scheduling, which is often generally
referred to as the capacity-planning problem. The overall prob-
lem, and the subsequent model development, involves a staffing
component—that is, how many, when, and where employees
are needed—and a scheduling component, which determines
when and where each employee is assigned to work. This prob-
lem is generally solved in two parts. The staffing problem is
solved first using such management science modeling tech-
niques as demand forecasting, queuing analysis, simulation,
and/or inventory management. Once a staffing plan has been
developed, a schedule is constructed that assigns employees to
specific jobs or locations at specific times, using, most often, lin-
ear programming. A specific example of this type of problem is
the nurse scheduling problem, in which a specific number of
nurses in a hospital must be assigned to days and shifts over a
specified time period. The solution objective of this problem is
generally to minimize the number of nurses in order to avoid
waste (and save money) while making sure there is adequate
service for patient care. A good solution must also be able to sat-
isfy hospital, legislative, and union policies and maintain nurse
and patient morale and retention. Many solutions have been
developed for the employee scheduling problem—and the
nurse scheduling problem specifically—during the past 40 years
(basically since high-speed computers became available). In a re-
cent survey it was estimated that more than 570 systems were
currently available from system software development vendors
for the nurse scheduling problem alone.
Source: Based on D. Kellogg and S. Walczak, “Nurse Scheduling:
From Academia to Implementation or Not?” Interfaces 37, no. 4
(July–August 2007): 355–69.
Computer Solution with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet for this multiperiod scheduling example is shown in Exhibit 4.20, and the
accompanying Solver Parameters window is shown in Exhibit 4.21. The formula for the objective
function is embedded in cell C13 and is shown on the formula bar at the top of the screen. The decision
© Richard Green/Alamy

variables for regular production are included in cells B6:B11, whereas the variables for overtime
production are in cells D6:D11. The computers available each week in column G includes the regu-
lar production plus overtime production plus the inventory from the previous week. For example,
cell G7 (computers available in week 2) has the formula B7D7I6. Cell I7 (the inventory left
over in week 2) includes the formula G7–H7 (i.e., computers available minus computers ordered).
The actual constraint for week 2 would be G7>H7. It is also necessary to enter the con-
straints for available regular and overtime production capacities into Solver. For example, the
constraint for regular capacity would be 
Solution Analysis
The solution is
computers produced in regular time in week 1
computers produced in regular time in week 2
computers produced in regular time in week 3
computers produced in regular time in week 4
computers produced in regular time in week 5
computers produced in regular time in week 6
computers produced with overtime in week 3
computers produced with overtime in week 4
computers produced with overtime in week 5
computers produced with overtime in week 6
computers carried over in inventory in week 1
computers carried over in inventory in week 2
computers carried over in inventory in week 5
PM Computers must operate with regular production at full capacity during the entire 6-week
period. It must also resort to overtime production in weeks 3, 4, 5, and 6 in order to meet heavier
order volume in weeks 3 through 6.
i5 = 40
i2 = 45
i1 = 55
o6 = 50
o5 = 30
o4 = 20
o3 = 25
r6 = 160
r5 = 160
r4 = 160
r3 = 160
r2 = 160
r1 = 160
B6:B11"160.
A MULTIPERIOD SCHEDULING EXAMPLE
141
EXHIBIT 4.21

Sensitivity Analysis
As each week passes, PM Computers can use this model to update its production schedule should
order sizes change. For example, if PM is in week 2, and the orders for week 5 change from 150
computers to 200, the model can be altered and a new schedule computed. The model can also be
extended further out into the planning horizon to develop future production schedules.
PM may want to consider expanding its regular production capacity because of the heavy
overtime requirements in weeks 3 through 6. The dual values (from the sensitivity analysis report
from the computer output not shown here) for the constraints representing regular production in
weeks 3 through 6 show that for each capacity increase for regular production time that will enable
the production of one more computer, cost can be reduced by between $70 and $80. (This total
reduction would occur if processing time could be reduced without acquiring additional labor, etc.
If additional resources were acquired to achieve an increase in capacity, the cost would have to be
subtracted from the shadow price.)
A Data Envelopment Analysis Example
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) is a linear programming application that compares a number
of service units of the same type—such as banks, hospitals, restaurants, and schools—based on
their inputs (resources) and outputs. The model solution result indicates whether a particular unit
is less productive, or inefficient, compared with other units. For example, DEA has compared
hospitals where inputs include hospital beds and staff size and outputs include patient days for
different age groups.
As an example of a DEA linear programming application, consider a town with four
elementary schools—Alton, Beeks, Carey, and Delancey. The state has implemented a series of
standards of learning (SOL) tests in reading, math, and history that all schools are required to ad-
minister to all students in the fifth grade. The average test scores are a measurable output of the
school’s performance. The school board has identified three key resources, or inputs, that affect a
school’s SOL scores—the teacher-to-student ratio, supplementary funds per student (i.e., funding
generated by the PTA and other private sources over and above the normal budget), and the aver-
age educational level of the parents (where 12  high school graduate, 16  college graduate,
etc.). These inputs and outputs are summarized as follows:
teacher-to-student ratio
supplementary funds/student
average educational level of parents
average reading SOL score
average math SOL score
average history SOL score
The actual input and output values for each school are:
 output 3 =
 output 2 =
 output 1 =
 input 3 =
 input 2 =
 input 1 =
142
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Inputs
Outputs
School
1
2
3
1
2
3
Alton
.06
$260
11.3
86
75
71
Beeks
.05
320
10.5
82
72
67
Carey
.08
340
12.0
81
79
80
Delancey
.06
460
13.1
81
73
69

A DATA ENVELOPMENT ANALYSIS EXAMPLE
143
For example, at Alton, the teacher-to-student ratio is 0.06 (or approximately 1 teacher per 16.67
students), there is $260 per student supplemental funds, and the average parent educational
grade level is 11.3. The average scores on Alton’s reading, math, and history tests are 86, 75,
and 71, respectively.
The school board wants to identify the school or schools that are less efficient in converting
their inputs to outputs relative to the other elementary schools in the town. The DEA linear pro-
gramming model will compare one particular school with all the others. For a complete analy-
sis, a separate model is necessary for each school. For this example, we will evaluate the
Delancey school as compared with the other schools.
Decision Variables
The formulation of a DEA linear programming model is not as readily apparent as the previous
example models in this chapter. It is particularly difficult to define the decision variables in a
meaningful way.
In a DEA model, the decision variables are defined as a price per unit of each output and
each input. These are not the actual prices that inputs or outputs would be valued at. In economic
terms, these prices are referred to as implicit prices, or opportunity costs. These prices are a rel-
ative valuation of inputs and outputs among the schools. They do not have much meaning for us,
as will become apparent as the model is developed. For now, the decision variables will simply
be defined as
The Objective Function
The objective of our model is to determine whether Delancey is efficient. In a DEA model,
when we are attempting to determine whether a unit (i.e., a school) is efficient, it simplifies
things to scale the input prices so that the total value of a unit’s inputs equals 1. The efficiency
of the unit will then equal the value of the unit’s outputs. For this example, this means that
once we scale Delancey’s input prices so that they equal 1 (which we will do by formulating a
constraint), the efficiency of Delancey will equal the value of its outputs. The objective, then,
is to maximize the value of Delancey’s outputs, which also equals efficiency:
Because the school’s inputs will be scaled to 1, the maximum value that Delancey’s outputs, as
formulated in the objective function, can take on is 1. If the objective function equals 1, the
school is efficient; if the objective function is less than 1, the school is inefficient.
Model Constraints
The constraint that will scale the Delancey school’s inputs to 1 is formulated as
This sets the value of the inputs to 1 and ultimately forces the value of the outputs to 1 or less.
This also has the effect of making the values of the decision variables even less meaningful.
The values of the outputs are forced to be 1 or less by the next set of constraints. In general
terms, the efficiency of a school (or any productive unit) can be defined as
efficiency = value of outputs
value of inputs
.06y1 + 460y2 + 13.1y3 = 1
maximize Z = 81x1 + 73x2 + 69x3
yi = a price per unit of each input where i = 1, 2, 3
xi = a price per unit of each output where i = 1, 2, 3

It is not possible for a school or any service unit to be more than 100% efficient; thus, the
efficiency of the school must be less than or equal to 1 and
Converting this to standard linear form,
Substituting the model’s decision variables and parameters for inputs and outputs into this
general constraint form results in four constraints, one for each school:
 81x1 + 73x2 + 69x3 … .06y1 + 460y2 + 13.1y3
 81x1 + 79x2 + 80x3 … .08y1 + 340y2 + 12.0y3
 82x1 + 72x2 + 67x3 … .05y1 + 320y2 + 10.5y3
 86x1 + 75x2 + 71x3 … .06y1 + 260y2 + 11.3y3
value of school’s outputs … value of school’s inputs
value of school’s outputs
value of school’s inputs … 1
144
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Management Science Application
Evaluating American Red Cross Chapters 
Using DEA
The American Red Cross (ARC) is one of the world’s largest
nonprofit social service organizations. It provides disaster-relief
services, armed forces emergency communications, and
health and safety training to the general population. It is com-
posed of approximately 1,000 chapters and 8 service-area of-
fices that oversee the chapters, and its national headquarters
is in Washington, DC. Chapters conduct local fund-raising
campaigns to generate revenue, receive donations, receive
fees for providing health and safety courses. 
ARC chapters receive grants and contracts that support
their service infrastructure, including facilities, materials,
equipment, and employee recruiting, training and retention.
Accordingly, the ARC has pressure from the public to demon-
strate that it is responsible and accountable for the funds and
resources it receives in delivering services and achieving out-
comes. However, prior to 2001, while chapters reported per-
formance data to the national headquarters, they were not
individually evaluated or given feedback for improvement,
and little information was provided regarding customer satis-
faction. The ARC wanted to help its chapters by providing
quantifiable performance measurement and assessment of
how their inputs (i.e., resources, staff hours, money used to
deliver services) are effectively converted into outputs (i.e.,
measures of the outcomes their service provided). To this end,
a data envelopment analysis (DEA) model was developed. 
The ARC’s DEA model compares chapters according to
their efficiency in transforming inputs into outputs across four
activity areas: fund-raising, capacity creation and utilization,
the quantity and quality of services delivered, and outcome ef-
fectiveness. Each DEA model requires running a linear pro-
gramming model for each chapter for these four activities
each year—a total of 4,000 model runs—and the LP models
are run using Excel. In addition to annual savings estimated at
$700,000 for data analysis and reporting, the new DEA-based
performance measurement and reporting system enabled the
ARC to make recommendations to individual chapters for im-
provements based on comparisons with other chapters, and it
also provided visible and transparent results that are under-
standable to nontechnical parties.
Source: Based on K. Pasupathy and A. Medina-Borja, “Integrating Ex-
cel, Access, and Visual Basic to Deploy Performance Measurement
and Evaluation at the American Red Cross,” Interfaces 38, no. 4
(July–August 2008): 324–37.
© Jonathan Larsen/Diadem Images/Alamy

Model Summary
The complete linear programming model for determining the efficiency of the Delancey school is
subject to
The objective of this model is to determine whether Delancey is inefficient: If the value of the
objective function equals 1, the school is efficient; if it is less than 1, it is inefficient. As men-
tioned previously, the values of the decision variables,
and 
have little meaning for us. They
are the implicit prices of converting an input into an output, but they have been scaled to 1 to sim-
plify the model. The model solution selects values of 
and 
that will maximize the school’s
efficiency, the maximum of which is 1, but these values have no easily interpretable meaning
beyond that.
Computer Solution with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet for this DEA example is shown in Exhibit 4.22. The Solver Parameters 
window is shown in Exhibit 4.23. The decision variables are located in cells B12:B14 and
D12:D14.
The objective function value, Z, which is also the indicator of whether Delancey is ineffi-
cient, is shown in cell C16. This value is computed using the formula for the value of the 
Delancey school’s output, B8*B12C8*B13D8*B14, which is also shown in cell H8 and is
a measure of the school’s efficiency.
The output and input values for each school are embedded in cells H5:H8 and J5:J8, respec-
tively. These values are used to develop the model constraints shown in Solver as H5:H8 " J5:J8.
yi
xi
yi,
xi
xi, yi  0
81x1 + 73x2 + 69x3 … .06y1 + 460y2 + 13.1y3
81x1 + 79x2 + 80x3 … .08y1 + 340y2 + 12.0y3
82x1 + 72x2 + 67x3 … .05y1 + 320y2 + 10.5y3
86x1 + 75x2 + 71x3 … .06y1 + 260y2 + 11.3y3
.06y1 + 460y2 + 13.1y3 = 1
maximize Z = 81x1 + 73x2 + 69x3
A DATA ENVELOPMENT ANALYSIS EXAMPLE
145
=B5*B12+C5*B13+D5*B14
=E8*D12+F8*D13+G8*D14
Value of outputs, also in cell H8
EXHIBIT 4.22
The scaling constraint is shown as J81, where the formula for the value of the inputs for the
Delancey school, E8*D12F8*D13G8*D14, is embedded in cell J8.

Solution Analysis
The only relevant solution value is the value of the objective function:
Because this value is less than 1, the Delancey school is inefficient relative to the other schools.
It is less efficient at converting its resources into outputs than the other schools. This means that a
combination of efficient schools can achieve at least the same level of output as the Delancey
school achieved with fewer input resources than required by the Delancey school. In retrospect,
we can see that this is a logical result by looking back at the school’s inputs and outputs. Although
Delancey’s input values are among the highest, its output test scores are among the lowest.
It is a simple process to access the efficiency of the other three schools in the town. For ex-
ample, to ascertain the efficiency of the Alton school, make the value of its output in cell H5 the
objective function in Solver, and make the formula for the value of the Alton school’s inputs in
cell I5 the scaling constraint, J5  1, in Solver. The efficiency of the other two schools can be
assessed similarly. Doing so indicates an objective function value of 1 for each of the three other
schools, indicating that all three are efficient.
Summary
Generally, it is not feasible to attempt to “see” the whole formulation of the constraints and ob-
jective function at once, following the definition of the decision variables. A more prudent ap-
proach is to construct the objective function first (without direct concern for the constraints) and
then to direct attention to each problem restriction and its corresponding model constraint. This
is a systematic approach to model formulation, in which steps are taken one at a time. In other
words, it is important not to attempt to swallow the whole problem during the first reading.
Formulating a linear programming model from a written problem statement is often difficult,
but formulating a model of a “real” problem that has no written statement is even more difficult.
Z = 0.8582
146
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
EXHIBIT 4.23
A systematic
approach to model
formulation is first to
define decision vari-
ables, then construct
the objective function,
and finally develop
each constraint sepa-
rately; don’t try to
“see” it all at once.
Constraints for
outputs ≤ inputs
Scaling constraint

The steps for model formulation described in this section are generally followed; however, the prob-
lem must first be defined (i.e., a problem statement or some similar descriptive apparatus must be
developed). Developing such a statement can be a formidable task, requiring the assistance of many
individuals and units within an organization.
Developing the parameter values that are presented as givens in the written problem statements
of this chapter frequently requires extensive data collection efforts. The objective function and
model constraints can be very complex, requiring much time and effort to develop. Simply making
sure that all the model constraints have been identified and no important problem restrictions have
been omitted is difficult. Finally, the problems that one confronts in actual practice are typically
much larger than those presented in this chapter. It is not uncommon for linear programming mod-
els of real problems to encompass hundreds of functional relationships and decision variables. Un-
fortunately, it is not possible in a textbook to re-create a realistic problem environment with no
written problem statement and a model of large dimensions. What is possible is to provide the fun-
damentals of linear programming model formulation and solution—prerequisite to solving linear
programming problems in actual practice.
As a prelude to the problems, this section presents an example solution of the formulation and
computer solution of a linear programming problem.
Problem Statement
Bark’s Pet Food Company produces canned cat food called Meow Chow and canned dog food
called Bow Chow. The company produces the pet food from horse meat, ground fish, and a ce-
real additive. Each week the company has 600 pounds of horse meat, 800 pounds of ground fish,
and 1,000 pounds of cereal additive available to produce both kinds of pet food. Meow Chow
must be at least half fish, and Bow Chow must be at least half horse meat. The company has
2,250 16-ounce cans available each week. A can of Meow Chow earns $0.80 in profit, and a can
of Bow Chow earns $0.96 in profit. The company wants to know how many cans of Meow Chow
and Bow Chow to produce each week in order to maximize profit.
A. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
B. Solve the model by using the computer.
Solution
A. Model Formulation
Step 1: Define the Decision Variables
This problem encompasses six decision variables, representing the amount of each ingredient i
in pet food j:
xij  ounces of ingredient i in pet food j per week, where i  h (horse meat), f (fish), and 
c (cereal), and j  m (Meow Chow) and b (Bow Chow)
To determine the number of cans of each pet food produced per week, the total ounces of Meow
Chow produced,
and the total amount of Bow Chow produced,
would each be divided by 16 ounces.
Step 2: Formulate the Objective Function
The objective function is to maximize the total profit earned each week, which is determined by
multiplying the number of cans of each pet food produced by the profit per can. However,
xhb + xfb + xcb,
xhm + xfm + xcm,
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
147
Example Problem
Solution

because the decision variables are defined in terms of ounces, they must be converted to equiva-
lent cans by dividing by 16 ounces, as follows:
or
Step 3: Formulate the Model Constraints
The first set of constraints represents the amount of each ingredient available each week. The
problem provides these in terms of pounds of horse meat, fish, and cereal additives. Thus, be-
cause the decision variables are expressed as ounces, the ingredient amounts must be converted
to ounces by multiplying each pound by 16 ounces. This results in these three constraints:
Next, there are two recipe requirements specifying that at least half of Meow Chow be fish and
at least half of Bow Chow be horse meat. The requirement for Meow Chow is formulated as
or
The constraint for Bow Chow is developed similarly:
or
Finally, the problem indicates that the company has 2,250 16-ounce cans available each week.
These cans must also be converted to ounces to conform to our decision variables, which results
in the following constraint:
Step 4: The Model Summary
The complete model is summarized as
subject to
xij  0
xhm + xfm + xcm + xhb + xfb + xcb … 36,000
xhb - xfb - xcb  0
-xhm + xfm - xcm  0
xcm + xcb … 16,000
xfm + xfb … 12,800
xhm + xhb … 9,600
maximize Z = +0.05xhm + 0.05xfm + 0.05xcm + 0.06xhb + 0.06xfb + 0.06xcb
xhm + xfm + xcm + xhb + xfb + xcb … 36,000 oz.
xhb - xfb - xcb  0
xhb
xhb + xfb + xcb
 1
2
- xhm + xfm - xcm  0
xfm
xhm + xfm + xcm
 1
2
xcm + xcb … 16,000 oz. of cereal additive
xfm + xfb … 12,800 oz. of fish
xhm + xhb … 9,600 oz. of horse meat
maximize Z = +0.05(xhm + xfm + xcm) + 0.06(xhb + xfb + xcb)
maximize Z = 0.80
16 (xhm + xfm + xcm) + 0.96
16 (xhb + xfb + xcb)
148
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES

The computer solution for this model was generated by using the QM for Windows computer
software package.
The solution is
To determine the number of cans of each pet food, we must sum the ingredient amounts for each
pet food and divide by 16 ounces (the size of a can):
or
or
Note that this model has multiple optimal solutions. An alternate optimal solution is
and 
This converts to the same number of
cans of each pet food; however, the ingredient mix per can is different.
Problems
1. In the product mix example in this chapter, Quick-Screen is considering adding some extra oper-
ators who would reduce processing times for each of the four clothing items by 10%. This would
also increase the cost of each item by 10% and thus reduce unit profits by this same amount
(because an increase in selling price would not be possible). Can this type of sensitivity analysis
be evaluated using only original solution output, or will the model need to be solved again?
Should Quick-Screen undertake this alternative?
In this problem, the profit per shirt is computed from the selling price less fixed and vari-
able costs. The computer solution output shows the shadow price for T-shirts to be $4.11. If
Quick-Screen decided to acquire extra T-shirts, could the company expect to earn an additional
$4.11 for each extra T-shirt it acquires above 500, up to the sensitivity range limit of T-shirts?
xcb = 9,600.
xfm = 10,400, xcm = 6,400, xhb = 9,600,
19,200  16 = 1,200 cans of Bow Chow
xhb + xfb + xcb = 9,600 + 4,400 + 5,200 = 19,200 oz. of Bow Chow
 16,800  16 = 1,050 cans of Meow Chow
xhm + xfm + xcm = 0 + 8,400 + 8,400 = 16,800 oz. of Meow Chow
Z = +1,992
xcb =
5,200
xfb =
4,400
xhb =
9,600
xcm =
8,400
xfm =
8,400
xhm =
0
PROBLEMS
149
B. Computer Solution

If Quick-Screen produced equal numbers of each of the four shirts, how would the company
reformulate the linear programming model to reflect this condition? What is the new solution to
this reformulated model?
2. In the diet example in this chapter, what would be the effect on the optimal solution of increas-
ing the minimum calorie requirement for the breakfast to 500 calories? to 600 calories?
Increase the breakfast calorie requirement to 700 calories and reformulate the model to es-
tablish upper limits on the servings of each food item to what you think would be realistic and
appetizing. Determine the solution for this reformulated model.
3. In the investment example in this chapter, how would the solution be affected if the requirement
that the entire $70,000 be invested was relaxed such that it is the maximum amount available for
investment?
If the entire amount available for investment does not have to be invested and the amount
available is increased by $10,000 (to $80,000), how much will the total optimal return increase?
Will the entire $10,000 increase be invested in one alternative?
4. For the marketing example in this chapter, if the budget is increased by $20,000, how much will
audience exposures be increased?
If Biggs Department Store wanted the same total number of people exposed to each of the
three types of advertisements, how should the linear programming model be reformulated? What
would be the new solution for this reformulated model?
5. For the transportation example in this chapter, suppose that television sets not shipped were to
incur storage costs of $9 at Cincinnati, $6 at Atlanta, and $7 at Pittsburgh. How would these stor-
age costs be reflected in the linear programming model for this example problem, and what
would the new solution be, if any?
The Zephyr Television Company is considering leasing a new warehouse in Memphis. The
new warehouse would have a supply of 200 television sets, with shipping costs of $18 to New
York, $9 to Dallas, and $12 to Detroit. If the total transportation cost for the company (ignoring
the cost of leasing the warehouse) is less than with the current warehouses, the company will
lease the new warehouse. Should the warehouse be leased?
If supply could be increased at any one warehouse, which should it be? What restrictions
would there be on the amount of the increase?
6. For the blend example in this chapter, if the requirement that “at least 3,000 barrels of each grade
of motor oil” was changed to exactly 3,000 barrels of each grade, how would this affect the opti-
mal solution?
If the company could acquire more of one of the three components, which should it be? What
would be the effect on the total profit of acquiring more of this component?
7. On their farm, the Friendly family grows apples that they harvest each fall and make into three
products—apple butter, applesauce, and apple jelly. They sell these three items at several lo-
cal grocery stores, at craft fairs in the region, and at their own Friendly Farm Pumpkin Festi-
val for 2 weeks in October. Their three primary resources are cooking time in their kitchen,
their own labor time, and the apples. They have a total of 500 cooking hours available, and it
requires 3.5 hours to cook a 10-gallon batch of apple butter, 5.2 hours to cook 10 gallons of
applesauce, and 2.8 hours to cook 10 gallons of jelly. A 10-gallon batch of apple butter re-
quires 1.2 hours of labor, a batch of sauce takes 0.8 hour, and a batch of jelly requires 1.5
hours. The Friendly family has 240 hours of labor available during the fall. They produce
about 6,500 apples each fall. A batch of apple butter requires 40 apples, a 10-gallon batch of
applesauce requires 55 apples, and a batch of jelly requires 20 apples. After the products are
canned, a batch of apple butter will generate $190 in sales revenue, a batch of applesauce will
generate a sales revenue of $170, and a batch of jelly will generate sales revenue of $155. The
150
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES

PROBLEMS
151
Boat
Variable Cost
Selling Price
Bass
$12,500
$23,000
Ski
8,500
18,000
Speed
13,700
26,000
Friendlys want to know how many batches of apple butter, applesauce, and apple jelly to pro-
duce in order to maximize their revenues.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
8. a. If the Friendlys in Problem 7 were to use leftover apples to feed livestock, at an estimated cost
savings worth $0.08 per apple in revenue, how would this affect the model and solution?
b. Instead of feeding the leftover apples to the livestock, the Friendlys are thinking about pro-
ducing apple cider. Cider will require 1.5 hours of cooking, 0.5 hour of labor, and 60 apples
per batch, and it will sell for $45 per batch. Should the Friendlys use all their apples and pro-
duce cider along with their other three products?
9. A hospital dietitian prepares breakfast menus every morning for the hospital patients. Part of the
dietitian’s responsibility is to make sure that minimum daily requirements for vitamins A and B
are met. At the same time, the cost of the menus must be kept as low as possible. The main
breakfast staples providing vitamins A and B are eggs, bacon, and cereal. The vitamin require-
ments and vitamin contributions for each staple follow:
Vitamin Contributions
Minimum Daily
Vitamin
mg/Egg
mg/Bacon Strip
mg/Cereal Cup
Requirements
A
2
4
1
16
B
3
2
1
12
An egg costs $0.04, a bacon strip costs $0.03, and a cup of cereal costs $0.02. The dietitian
wants to know how much of each staple to serve per order to meet the minimum daily vitamin
requirements while minimizing total cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
10. Lakeside Boatworks is planning to manufacture three types of molded fiberglass recreational
boats—a fishing (bass) boat, a ski boat, and a small speedboat. The estimated selling price and
variable cost for each type of boat are summarized in the following table:
The company has incurred fixed costs of $2,800,000 to set up its manufacturing operation and
begin production. Lakeside has also entered into agreements with several boat dealers in the re-
gion to provide a minimum of 70 bass boats, 50 ski boats, and 50 speedboats. Alternatively, the
company is unsure of what actual demand will be, so it has decided to limit production to no
more than 120 of any one boat. The company wants to determine the number of boats that it
must sell to break even while minimizing its total variable cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

Brand
Cost/Gallon
Yodel
$1.50
Shotz
0.90
Rainwater
0.50
152
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Resource Requirements
Cost/Unit
Labor Hours/Unit
Clock
$7
2
Radio
10
3
Toaster
5
2
Plant
Product
Fresno
Dearborn
Super Two
$2
$4
Green Grow
2
3
11. The Pyrotec Company produces three electrical products—clocks, radios, and toasters. These
products have the following resource requirements:
The manufacturer has a daily production budget of $2,000 and a maximum of 660 hours of la-
bor. Maximum daily customer demand is for 200 clocks, 300 radios, and 150 toasters. Clocks
sell for $15, radios for $20, and toasters for $12. The company wants to know the optimal prod-
uct mix that will maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
12. Betty Malloy, owner of the Eagle Tavern in Pittsburgh, is preparing for Super Bowl Sunday, and
she must determine how much beer to stock. Betty stocks three brands of beer—Yodel, Shotz,
and Rainwater. The cost per gallon (to the tavern owner) of each brand is as follows:
The tavern has a budget of $2,000 for beer for Super Bowl Sunday. Betty sells Yodel at a rate of
$3.00 per gallon, Shotz at $2.50 per gallon, and Rainwater at $1.75 per gallon. Based on past
football games, Betty has determined the maximum customer demand to be 400 gallons of Yo-
del, 500 gallons of Shotz, and 300 gallons of Rainwater. The tavern has the capacity to stock
1,000 gallons of beer; Betty wants to stock up completely. Betty wants to determine the number
of gallons of each brand of beer to order so as to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
13. The Kalo Fertilizer Company produces two brands of lawn fertilizer—Super Two and Green
Grow—at plants in Fresno, California, and Dearborn, Michigan. The plant at Fresno has re-
sources available to produce 5,000 pounds of fertilizer daily; the plant at Dearborn has enough
resources to produce 6,000 pounds daily. The cost per pound of producing each brand at each
plant is as follows:
The company has a daily budget of $45,000 for both plants combined. Based on past sales, the
company knows the maximum demand (converted to a daily basis) is 6,000 pounds for Super

PROBLEMS
153
Two and 7,000 pounds for Green Grow. The selling price is $9 per pound for Super Two and $7
per pound for Green Grow. The company wants to know the number of pounds of each brand of
fertilizer to produce at each plant in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
14. Grafton Metalworks Company produces metal alloys from six different ores it mines. The
company has an order from a customer to produce an alloy that contains four metals accord-
ing to the following specifications: at least 21% of metal A, no more than 12% of metal B,
no more than 7% of metal C, and between 30% and 65% of metal D. The proportion of the
four metals in each of the six ores and the level of impurities in each ore are provided in the
following table:
Metal (%)
Ore
A
B
C
D
Impurities (%)
Cost/Ton
1
19
15
12
14
40
$27
2
43
10
25
7
15
25
3
17
0
0
53
30
32
4
20
12
0
18
50
22
5
0
24
10
31
35
20
6
12
18
16
25
29
24
When the metals are processed and refined, the impurities are removed.
The company wants to know the amount of each ore to use per ton of the alloy that will mini-
mize the cost per ton of the alloy.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
15. The Roadnet Transport Company expanded its shipping capacity by purchasing 90 trailer trucks
from a bankrupt competitor. The company subsequently located 30 of the purchased trucks at
each of its shipping warehouses in Charlotte, Memphis, and Louisville. The company makes
shipments from each of these warehouses to terminals in St. Louis, Atlanta, and New York. Each
truck is capable of making one shipment per week. The terminal managers have indicated their
capacity for extra shipments. The manager at St. Louis can accommodate 40 additional trucks
per week, the manager at Atlanta can accommodate 60 additional trucks, and the manager at
New York can accommodate 50 additional trucks. The company makes the following profit per
truckload shipment from each warehouse to each terminal. The profits differ as a result of differ-
ences in products shipped, shipping costs, and transport rates:
Terminal
Warehouse
St. Louis
Atlanta
New York
Charlotte
$1,800
$2,100
$1,600
Memphis
1,000
700
900
Louisville
1,400
800
2,200
The company wants to know how many trucks to assign to each route (i.e., warehouse to termi-
nal) to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

154
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
16. The Hickory Cabinet and Furniture Company produces sofas, tables, and chairs at its plant in
Greensboro, North Carolina. The plant uses three main resources to make furniture—wood, up-
holstery, and labor. The resource requirements for each piece of furniture and the total resources
available weekly are as follows:
Resource Requirements
Wood (board ft.)
Upholstery (yd.)
Labor (hr.)
Sofa
7
12
6
Table
5
—
9
Chair
4
7
5
Total available resources
2,250
1,000
240
The furniture is produced on a weekly basis and stored in a warehouse until the end of the week,
when it is shipped out. The warehouse has a total capacity of 650 pieces of furniture. Each sofa
earns $400 in profit, each table, $275, and each chair, $190. The company wants to know how
many pieces of each type of furniture to make per week to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
17. Lawns Unlimited is a lawn care and maintenance company. One of its services is to seed new
lawns as well as bare or damaged areas in established lawns. The company uses three basic grass
seed mixes it calls Home 1, Home 2, and Commercial 3. It uses three kinds of grass seed—tall
fescue, mustang fescue, and bluegrass. The requirements for each grass mix are as follows:
Mix
Mix Requirements
Home 1
No more than 50% tall fescue
At least 20% mustang fescue
Home 2
At least 30% bluegrass
At least 30% mustang fescue
No more than 20% tall fescue
Commercial 3
At least 50% but no more than 70% tall fescue
At least 10% bluegrass
The company believes it needs to have at least 1,200 pounds of Home 1 mix, 900 pounds of Home
2 mix, and 2,400 pounds of Commercial 3 seed mix on hand. A pound of tall fescue costs the com-
pany $1.70, a pound of mustang fescue costs $2.80, and a pound of bluegrass costs $3.25. The com-
pany wants to know how many pounds of each type of grass seed to purchase to minimize cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
18. Alexandra Bergson has subdivided her 2,000-acre farm into three plots and has contracted with
three local farm families to operate the plots. She has instructed each sharecropper to plant three
crops: corn, peas, and soybeans. The size of each plot has been determined by the capabilities of
each local farmer. Plot sizes, crop restrictions, and profit per acre are given in the following tables:
Plot
Acreage
1
500
2
800
3
700

PROBLEMS
155
Maximum Acreage
Profit/Acre
Corn
900
$600
Peas
700
450
Soybeans
1,000
300
Any of the three crops may be planted on any of the plots; however, Alexandra has placed several
restrictions on the farming operation. At least 60% of each plot must be under cultivation. Further,
to ensure that each sharecropper works according to his or her potential and resources (which de-
termined the acreage allocation), she wants the same proportion of each plot to be under cultiva-
tion. Her objective is to determine how much of each crop to plant on each plot to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
19. As a result of a recently passed bill, a congressman’s district has been allocated $4 million for pro-
grams and projects. It is up to the congressman to decide how to distribute the money. The con-
gressman has decided to allocate the money to four ongoing programs because of their importance
to his district—a job training program, a parks project, a sanitation project, and a mobile library.
However, the congressman wants to distribute the money in a manner that will please the most vot-
ers, or, in other words, gain him the most votes in the upcoming election. His staff’s estimates of
the number of votes gained per dollar spent for the various programs are as follows:
Program
Votes/Dollar
Job training
0.02
Parks
0.09
Sanitation
0.06
Mobile library
0.04
In order also to satisfy several local influential citizens who financed his election, he is obligated
to observe the following guidelines:
 None of the programs can receive more than 40% of the total allocation.
 The amount allocated to parks cannot exceed the total allocated to both the sanitation proj-
ect and the mobile library.
 The amount allocated to job training must at least equal the amount spent on the sanitation
project.
Any money not spent in the district will be returned to the government; therefore, the congress-
man wants to spend it all. The congressman wants to know the amount to allocate to each pro-
gram to maximize his votes.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
20. Anna Broderick is the dietitian for the State University football team, and she is attempting to
determine a nutritious lunch menu for the team. She has set the following nutritional guidelines
for each lunch serving:
 Between 1,500 and 2,000 calories
 At least 5 mg of iron
 At least 20 but no more than 60 g of fat
 At least 30 g of protein
 At least 40 g of carbohydrates
 No more than 30 mg of cholesterol

156
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
She selects the menu from seven basic food items, as follows, with the nutritional contribution
per pound and the cost as given:
Calories 
Iron 
Protein Carbohydrates 
Fat 
Cholesterol 
(per lb.)
(mg/lb.)
(g/lb.)
(g/lb.)
(g/lb.)
(mg/lb.)
$/lb.
Chicken
520
4.4
17
0
30
180
0.80
Fish
500
3.3
85
0
5
90
3.70
Ground beef
860
0.3
82
0
75
350
2.30
Dried beans
600
3.4
10
30
3
0
0.90
Lettuce
50
0.5
6
0
0
0
0.75
Potatoes
460
2.2
10
70
0
0
0.40
Milk (2%)
240
0.2
16
22
10
20
0.83
The dietitian wants to select a menu to meet the nutritional guidelines while minimizing the 
total cost per serving.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. If a serving of each of the food items (other than milk) was limited to no more than a half
pound, what effect would this have on the solution?
21. The Midland Tool Shop has four heavy presses it uses to stamp out prefabricated metal covers
and housings for electronic consumer products. All four presses operate differently and are of
different sizes. Currently the firm has a contract to produce three products. The contract calls for
400 units of product 1; 570 units of product 2; and 320 units of product 3. The time (in minutes)
required for each product to be produced on each machine is as follows:
Machine
Product
1
2
3
4
1
35
41
34
39
2
40
36
32
43
3
38
37
33
40
Machine 1 is available for 150 hours, machine 2 for 240 hours, machine 3 for 200 hours, and
machine 4 for 250 hours. The products also result in different profits, according to the machine
they are produced on, because of time, waste, and operating cost. The profit per unit per machine
for each product is summarized as follows:
Machine
Product
1
2
3
4
1
$7.8
$7.8
$8.2
$7.9
2
6.7
8.9
9.2
6.3
3
8.4
8.1
9.0
5.8
The company wants to know how many units of each product to produce on each machine in or-
der to maximize profit.
a. Formulate this problem as a linear programming model.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

PROBLEMS
157
22. The Cabin Creek Coal (CCC) Company operates three mines in Kentucky and West Virginia,
and it supplies coal to four utility power plants along the East Coast. The cost of shipping coal
from each mine to each plant, the capacity at each of the three mines, and the demand at each
plant are shown in the following table:
Plant
Mine
Mine
1
2
3
4
Capacity (tons)
1
$7
$9
$10
$12
220
2
9
7
8
12
170
3
11
14
5
7
280
Demand (tons)
110
160
90
180
The cost of mining and processing coal is $62 per ton at mine 1, $67 per ton at mine 2, and 
$75 per ton at mine 3. The percentage of ash and sulfur content per ton of coal at each mine is as
follows:
Mine
% Ash
% Sulfur
1
9
6
2
5
4
3
4
3 
Each plant has different cleaning equipment. Plant 1 requires that the coal it receives have no
more than 6% ash and 5% sulfur; plant 2 coal can have no more than 5% ash and sulfur com-
bined; plant 3 can have no more than 5% ash and 7% sulfur; and plant 4 can have no more than
6% ash and sulfur combined. CCC wants to determine the amount of coal to produce at each mine
and ship to its customers that will minimize its total cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
23. Ampco is a manufacturing company that has a contract to supply a customer with parts from
April through September. However, Ampco does not have enough storage space to store the
parts during this period, so it needs to lease extra warehouse space during the 6-month period.
Following are Ampco’s space requirements:
Month
Required Space (ft.2)
April
47,000
May
35,000
June
52,000
July
27,000
August
19,000
September
15,000
The rental agent Ampco is dealing with has provided it with the following cost schedule for
warehouse space. This schedule shows that the longer the space is rented, the cheaper it is. For

158
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
example, if Ampco rents space for all 6 months, it costs $1.00 per square foot per month,
whereas if it rents the same space for only 1 month, it costs $1.70 per square foot per month:
Rental Period 
(months)
$/ft.2/Month
6
$1.00
5
1.05
4
1.10
3
1.20
2
1.40
1
1.70
Ampco can rent any amount of warehouse space on a monthly basis at any time for any number
of (whole) months. Ampco wants to determine the least costly rental agreement that will exactly
meet its space needs each month and avoid having any unused space.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. Suppose that Ampco relaxed its restriction that it rent exactly the space it needs every month
such that it would rent excess space if it was cheaper. How would this affect the optimal
solution?
24. Brooks City has three consolidated high schools, each with a capacity of 1,200 students. The
school board has partitioned the city into five busing districts—north, south, east, west, and
central—each with different high school student populations. The three schools are located in
the central, west, and south districts. Some students must be bused outside their districts, and
the school board wants to minimize the total bus distance traveled by these students. The aver-
age distances from each district to the three schools and the total student population in each
district are as follows:
Distance (miles)
Central 
West 
South 
Student
District
School
School
School
Population
North
8
11
14
700
South
12
9
—
300
East
9
16
10
900
West
8
—
9
600
Central
—
8
12
500
The school board wants to determine the number of students to bus from each district to each
school to minimize the total busing miles traveled.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
25. a. In Problem 24 the school board decided that because all students in the north and east dis-
tricts must be bused, then at least 50% of the students who live in the south, west, and central
districts must also be bused to another district. Reformulate the linear programming model
to reflect this new set of constraints and solve by using the computer.
b. The school board has further decided that the enrollment at all three high schools should be
equal. Formulate this additional restriction in the linear programming model and solve by
using the computer.

PROBLEMS
159
26. The Southfork Feed Company makes a feed mix from four ingredients—oats, corn, soybeans,
and a vitamin supplement. The company has 300 pounds of oats, 400 pounds of corn, 200 pounds
of soybeans, and 100 pounds of vitamin supplement available for the mix. The company has the
following requirements for the mix:
 At least 30% of the mix must be soybeans.
 At least 20% of the mix must be the vitamin supplement.
 The ratio of corn to oats cannot exceed 2 to 1.
 The amount of oats cannot exceed the amount of soybeans.
 The mix must be at least 500 pounds.
A pound of oats costs $0.50; a pound of corn, $1.20; a pound of soybeans, $0.60; and a pound
of vitamin supplement, $2.00. The feed company wants to know the number of pounds of each
ingredient to put in the mix in order to minimize cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
27. The United Charities annual fund-raising drive is scheduled to take place next week. Donations
are collected during the day and night, by telephone, and through personal contact. The average
donation resulting from each type of contact is as follows:
Phone
Personal
Day
$2
$4
Night
3
7
The charity group has enough donated gasoline and cars to make at most 300 personal contacts
during one day and night combined. The volunteer minutes required to conduct each type of
interview are as follows:
Phone (min.)
Personal (min.)
Day
6
15
Night
5
12
The charity has 20 volunteer hours available each day and 40 volunteer hours available each
night. The chairperson of the fund-raising drive wants to know how many different types of con-
tacts to schedule in a 24-hour period (i.e., 1 day and 1 night) to maximize total donations.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
28. Ronald Thump is interested in expanding his firm. After careful consideration, he has deter-
mined three areas in which he might invest additional funds: (1) product research and devel-
opment, (2) manufacturing operations improvements, and (3) advertising and sales promotion.
He has $500,000 available for investment in the firm. He can invest in its advertising and sales
promotion program every year, and each dollar invested in this manner is expected to yield a
return of the amount invested plus 20% yearly. He can invest in manufacturing operations im-
provements every 2 years, with an expected return of the investment plus 30% (at the end of
each 2-year period). An investment in product research and development would be for a 3-year
period, with an expected return of the investment plus 50% (at the end of the 3-year period).
To diversify the total initial investment, he wishes to include the requirement that at least
$30,000 must be invested in the advertising and sales promotion program, at least $40,000 in

manufacturing operations improvements, and at least $50,000 in product research and devel-
opment initially (at the beginning of the first year). Ronald wants to know how much should
be invested in each of the three alternatives, during each year of a 4-year period, to maximize
the total ending cash value of the initial $500,000 investment.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
29. Iggy Olweski, a professional football player, is retiring, and he is thinking about going into the
insurance business. He plans to sell three types of policies—homeowner’s insurance, auto insur-
ance, and life insurance. The average amount of profit returned per year by each type of insur-
ance policy is as follows:
160
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Policy
Yearly Profit/Policy
Homeowner’s
$35
Auto
20
Life
58 
Each homeowner’s policy will cost $14 to sell and maintain; each auto policy, $12; and each life
insurance policy, $35. Iggy has projected a budget of $35,000 per year. In addition, the sale of a
homeowner’s policy will require 6 hours of effort; the sale of an auto policy, 3 hours; and the
sale of a life insurance policy, 12 hours. Based on the number of working hours he and several
employees could contribute, Iggy has estimated that he would have available 20,000 hours per
year. Iggy wants to know how many of each type of insurance policy he would have to sell each
year in order to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
30. A publishing house publishes three weekly magazines—Daily Life, Agriculture Today, and
Surf’s Up. Publication of one issue of each of the magazines requires the following amounts of
production time and paper:
Production (hr.)
Paper (lb.)
Daily Life
0.01
0.2
Agriculture Today
0.03
0.5
Surf’s Up
0.02
0.3
Each week the publisher has available 120 hours of production time and 3,000 pounds of paper.
Total circulation for all three magazines must exceed 5,000 issues per week if the company is to
keep its advertisers. The selling price per issue is $2.25 for Daily Life, $4.00 for Agriculture To-
day, and $1.50 for Surf’s Up. Based on past sales, the publisher knows that the maximum
weekly demand for Daily Life is 3,000 issues; for Agriculture Today, 2,000 issues; and for Surf’s
Up, 6,000 issues. The production manager wants to know the number of issues of each maga-
zine to produce weekly in order to maximize total sales revenue.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
31. The manager of a department store in Seattle is attempting to decide on the types and amounts
of advertising the store should use. He has invited representatives from the local radio station,

television station, and newspaper to make presentations in which they describe their audiences.
The television station representative indicates that a TV commercial, which costs $15,000,
would reach 25,000 potential customers. The breakdown of the audience is as follows:
PROBLEMS
161
Male
Female
Senior
5,000
5,000
Young
5,000
10,000
The newspaper representative claims to be able to provide an audience of 10,000 potential cus-
tomers at a cost of $4,000 per ad. The breakdown of the audience is as follows:
Male
Female
Senior
4,000
3,000
Young
2,000
1,000
The radio station representative says that the audience for one of the station’s commercials,
which costs $6,000, is 15,000 customers. The breakdown of the audience is as follows:
Male
Female
Senior
1,500
1,500
Young
4,500
7,500
The store has the following advertising policy:
 Use at least twice as many radio commercials as newspaper ads.
 Reach at least 100,000 customers.
 Reach at least twice as many young people as senior citizens.
 Make sure that at least 30% of the audience is female.
Available space limits the number of newspaper ads to seven. The store wants to know the opti-
mal number of each type of advertising to purchase to minimize total cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. Suppose a second radio station approaches the department store and indicates that its com-
mercials, which cost $7,500, reach 18,000 customers with the following demographic
breakdown:
Male
Female
Senior
2,400
3,600
Young
4,000
8,000
If the store considered this station along with the other media alternatives, how would this affect
the solution?

32. The Mill Mountain Coffee Shop blends coffee on the premises for its customers. It sells three
basic blends in 1-pound bags, Special, Mountain Dark, and Mill Regular. It uses four different
types of coffee to produce the blends—Brazilian, mocha, Colombian, and mild. The shop has
the following blend recipe requirements:
162
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Blend
Mix Requirements
Selling Price/Pound
Special
At least 40% Columbian, at least 30% mocha
$6.50
Dark
At least 60% Brazilian, no more than 10% mild
5.25
Regular
No more than 60% mild, at least 30% Brazilian
3.75
The cost of Brazilian coffee is $2.00 per pound, the cost of mocha is $2.75 per pound, the cost of
Colombian is $2.90 per pound, and the cost of mild is $1.70 per pound. The shop has 110 pounds
of Brazilian coffee, 70 pounds of mocha, 80 pounds of Colombian, and 150 pounds of mild cof-
fee available per week. The shop wants to know the amount of each blend it should prepare each
week to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
33. Toyz is a large discount toy store in Valley Wood Mall. The store typically has slow sales in the
summer months that increase dramatically and rise to a peak at Christmas. During the summer
and fall, the store must build up its inventory to have enough stock for the Christmas season. To
purchase and build up its stock during the months when its revenues are low, the store borrows
money.
Following is the store’s projected revenue and liabilities schedule for July through December
(where revenues are received and bills are paid at the first of each month):
Month
Revenues
Liabilities
July
$20,000
$60,000
August
30,000
60,000
September
40,000
80,000
October
50,000
30,000
November
80,000
30,000
December
100,000
20,000 
At the beginning of July, the store can take out a 6-month loan that carries an 11% interest rate
and must be paid back at the end of December. The store cannot reduce its interest payment by
paying back the loan early. The store can also borrow money monthly at a rate of 5% interest
per month.
Money borrowed on a monthly basis must be paid back at the beginning of the next month. The
store wants to borrow enough money to meet its cash flow needs while minimizing its cost of
borrowing.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
c. What would the effect be on the optimal solution if Toyz could secure a 9% interest rate for
a 6-month loan from another bank?
34. The Skimmer Boat Company manufactures the Water Skimmer bass fishing boat. The
company purchases the engines it installs in its boats from the Mar-gine Company, which

specializes in marine engines. Skimmer has the following production schedule for April,
May, June, and July:
PROBLEMS
163
Month
Production
April
60
May
85
June
100
July
120
Mar-gine usually manufactures and ships engines to Skimmer during the month the engines are
due. However, from April through July, Mar-gine has a large order with another boat customer,
and it can manufacture only 40 engines in April, 60 in May, 90 in June, and 50 in July. Mar-gine
has several alternative ways to meet Skimmer’s production schedule. It can produce up to 30 en-
gines in January, February, and March and carry them in inventory at a cost of $50 per engine
per month until it ships them to Skimmer. For example, Mar-gine could build an engine in Janu-
ary and ship it to Skimmer in April, incurring $150 in inventory charges. Mar-gine can also man-
ufacture up to 20 engines in the month they are due on an overtime basis, with an additional cost
of $400 per engine. Mar-gine wants to determine the least costly production schedule that will
meet Skimmer’s schedule.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
c. If Mar-gine were able to increase its production capacity in January, February, and March
from 30 to 40 engines, what would the effect be on the optimal solution?
35. The Donnor meat processing firm produces wieners from four ingredients: chicken, beef, pork,
and a cereal additive. The firm produces three types of wieners: regular, beef, and all-meat. The
company has the following amounts of each ingredient available on a daily basis:
Pounds/Day
Cost/Pound
Chicken
200
$.20
Beef
300
.30
Pork
150
.50
Cereal additive
400
.05
Each type of wiener has certain ingredient specifications, as follows:
Specifications
Selling Price/Pound
Regular
Not more than 10% beef and pork combined
$0.90
Not less than 20% chicken
Beef
Not less than 75% beef
1.25
All-meat
No cereal additive
1.75
Not more than 50% beef and pork combined
The firm wants to know how many pounds of wieners of each type to produce to maximize
profits.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

36. Joe Henderson runs a small metal parts shop. The shop contains three machines—a drill press, a
lathe, and a grinder. Joe has three operators, each certified to work on all three machines. How-
ever, each operator performs better on some machines than on others. The shop has contracted
to do a big job that requires all three machines. The times required by the various operators to
perform the required operations on each machine are summarized as follows:
164
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Operator
Drill Press (min.)
Lathe (min.)
Grinder (min.)
1
22
18
35
2
41
30
28
3
25
36
18
Joe Henderson wants to assign one operator to each machine so that the total operating time for
all three operators is minimized.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. Joe’s brother, Fred, has asked him to hire his wife, Kelly, who is a machine operator. Kelly
can perform each of the three required machine operations in 20 minutes. Should Joe hire
his sister-in-law?
37. Green Valley Mills produces carpet at plants in St. Louis and Richmond. The plants ship the car-
pet to two outlets in Chicago and Atlanta. The cost per ton of shipping carpet from each of the
two plants to the two warehouses is as follows:
To
From
Chicago
Atlanta
St. Louis
$40
$65
Richmond
70
30
The plant at St. Louis can supply 250 tons of carpet per week, and the plant at Richmond can
supply 400 tons per week. The Chicago outlet has a demand of 300 tons per week; the outlet
at Atlanta demands 350 tons per week. Company managers want to determine the number
of tons of carpet to ship from each plant to each outlet in order to minimize the total ship-
ping cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
38. Dr. Maureen Becker, the head administrator at Jefferson County Regional Hospital, must deter-
mine a schedule for nurses to make sure there are enough of them on duty throughout the day.
During the day, the demand for nurses varies. Maureen has broken the day into twelve 2-hour
periods. The slowest time of the day encompasses the three periods from 12:00 A.M. to 6:00 A.M.,
which, beginning at midnight, require a minimum of 30, 20, and 40 nurses, respectively. The de-
mand for nurses steadily increases during the next four daytime periods. Beginning with the 
6:00 A.M.–8:00 A.M. period, a minimum of 50, 60, 80, and 80 nurses are required for these four
periods, respectively. After 2:00 P.M. the demand for nurses decreases during the afternoon and
evening hours. For the five 2-hour periods beginning at 2:00 P.M. and ending at midnight, 70, 70,
60, 50, and 50 nurses are required, respectively. A nurse reports for duty at the beginning of one
of the 2-hour periods and works 8 consecutive hours (which is required in the nurses’ contract).

Dr. Becker wants to determine a nursing schedule that will meet the hospital’s minimum require-
ments throughout the day while using the minimum number of nurses.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
39. A manufacturer of bathroom fixtures produces fiberglass bathtubs in an assembly operation that
consists of three processes—molding, smoothing, and painting. The number of units that can
undergo each process in an hour is as follows:
Process
Output (units/hr.)
Molding
7
Smoothing
12
Painting
10
PROBLEMS
165
(Note: The three processes are continuous and sequential; thus, no more units can be smoothed
or painted than have been molded.) The labor costs per hour are $8 for molding, $5 for smooth-
ing, and $6.50 for painting. The company’s labor budget is $3,000 per week. A total of 120 hours
of labor is available for all three processes per week. Each completed bathtub requires 90 pounds
of fiberglass, and the company has a total of 10,000 pounds of fiberglass available each week.
Each bathtub earns a profit of $175. The manager of the company wants to know how many
hours per week to run each process to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
40. The admissions office at State University wants to develop a planning model for next year’s en-
tering freshman class. The university has 4,500 available openings for freshmen. Tuition is
$8,600 for an in-state student and $19,200 for an out-of-state student. The university wants to
maximize the money it receives from tuition, but by state mandate it can admit no more than
47% out-of-state students. Also, each college in the university must have at least 30% in-state
students in its freshman class. In order to be ranked in several national magazines, it wants the
freshman class to have an average SAT score of 1150. Following are the average SAT scores for
last year’s freshman class for in-state and out-of-state students in each college in the university
plus the maximum size of the freshman class for each college:
Average SAT Scores
College
In-State
Out-of-State
Total Capacity
1. Architecture
1350
1460
470
2. Arts and Sciences
1010
1050
1,300
3. Agriculture
1020
1110
240
4. Business
1090
1180
820
5. Engineering
1360
1420
1,060
6. Human Resources
1000
1400
610
a. Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine the number of in-state and
out-of-state students that should enter each college.
b. If the solution in (a) does not achieve the maximum freshman class size, discuss how you
might adjust the model to reach this class size.

41. A manufacturing firm located in Chicago ships its product by railroad to Detroit. Several differ-
ent routes are available, as shown in the following diagram, referred to as a network:
166
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Each circle in the network represents a railroad junction. Each arrow is a railroad branch be-
tween two junctions. The number above each arrow is the cost ($1,000s) necessary to ship 1 ton
of product from junction to junction. The firm wants to ship 5 tons of its product from Chicago
to Detroit at the minimum cost.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
42. A refinery blends four petroleum components into three grades of gasoline—regular, premium,
and diesel. The maximum quantities available of each component and the cost per barrel are as
follows:
Maximum Barrels
Component
Available/Day
Cost/Barrel
1
5,000
$ 9
2
2,400
7
3
4,000
12
4
1,500
6
4
3
5
8
2
7
Chicago
Detroit
1
2
3
4
5
To ensure that each gasoline grade retains certain essential characteristics, the refinery has put
limits on the percentages of the components in each blend. The limits as well as the selling
prices for the various grades are as follows:
Grade
Component Specifications
Selling Price/Barrel
Regular
Not less than 40% of 1
$12
Not more than 20% of 2
Not less than 30% of 3
Premium
Not less than 40% of 3
18
Diesel
Not more than 50% of 2
10
Not less than 10% of 1
The refinery wants to produce at least 3,000 barrels of each grade of gasoline. Management
wishes to determine the optimal mix of the four components that will maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

PROBLEMS
167
City
Available Technicians
Distance (mi.)
Cost ($)
Richmond
4
211
3,400
Charlotte
3
173
3,920
Atlanta
5
410
4,760
Greensboro
2
152
3,560
DC
6
263
4,980
Nashville
3
414
4,050
Norfolk
2
302
3,240
This table also shows the distances (in miles) from the cities to the town where Tech is located,
and the cost for relocating a technician for 1 month, which includes monthly salary and a bonus.
The national DirectCast office incurs this monthly cost. Since most of the technicians will com-
mute to their homes at least once a week for a few days, the company wants to minimize the total
distance incurred by its employees, but it would also like to keep its labor costs to $60,000 or less. 
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. If DirectCast wants to minimize its cost and not the distance traveled, how would this affect
the solution?
45. The Cash and Carry Building Supply Company has received the following order for boards in
three lengths:
Length
Order (quantity)
7 ft.
700
9 ft.
1,200
10 ft.
300
43. Melissa Beadle is a student at Tech, and she wants to decide how many hours each day to allo-
cate to the following activities: class; studying; leisure and fun stuff; personal activities such as
eating, bathing, cleaning, laundry, and so on; and sleeping. She has established weights indicat-
ing how her different activity hours relate to raising her grade point average. Each hour she
spends in class will raise her GPA by 0.3 points, 1 hour of studying will raise her GPA by
0.2 points, leisure and fun activities will raise her GPA by 0.05 points per hour, personal activi-
ties will raise her GPA by 0.10 points per hour, and sleep will increase her GPA by 0.15 points
per hour. Melissa has only 4 hours of class each day, and she knows she won’t study more than
8 hours in a day. She thinks she could spend up to 10 hours a day on leisure and having fun,
she’ll spend at least 2 hours but not more than 3 hours on personal stuff, and she’ll sleep at least
3 hours per day but not more than 10 hours.
a. Formulate a linear programming model that will allocate Melissa’s hours each day so that
her GPA (on a 4.0 scale) will be maximized.
b. Reformulate the model to reflect your own personal preferences relative to your daily activities.
44. Tech, with a student population of 30,000, is located in a small college town in Virginia. Direct-
Cast Cable TV has a small service staff that is sufficient to handle installations and TV hookups
for almost the entire year. However, for the month-long period right before and during the begin-
ning of fall semester in August, when all the students return, the cable TV service is overwhelmed
and must bring in an additional 14 technicians from other company offices. The DirectCast of-
fices in the following seven cities have available service technicians to loan, as shown:

168
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
The company has 25-foot standard-length boards in stock. Therefore, the standard-length boards
must be cut into the lengths necessary to meet order requirements. Naturally, the company
wishes to minimize the number of standard-length boards used. The company must therefore
determine how to cut up the 25-foot boards to meet the order requirements and minimize the
number of standard-length boards used.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. When a board is cut in a specific pattern, the amount of board left over is referred to as “trim
loss.” Reformulate the linear programming model for this problem, assuming that the objec-
tive is to minimize trim loss rather than to minimize the total number of boards used, and
solve this model. How does this affect the solution?
46. An investment firm has $1 million to invest in stocks, bonds, certificates of deposit, and real
estate. The firm wishes to determine the mix of investments that will maximize the cash value
at the end of 6 years.
Opportunities to invest in stocks and bonds will be available at the beginning of each of the
next 6 years. Each dollar invested in stocks will return $1.20 (a profit of $0.20) 2 years later;
the return can be immediately reinvested in any alternative. Each dollar invested in bonds will
return $1.40 3 years later; the return can be reinvested immediately.
Opportunities to invest in certificates of deposit will be available only once, at the beginning
of the second year. Each dollar invested in certificates will return $1.80 four years later. Oppor-
tunities to invest in real estate will be available at the beginning of the fifth and sixth years. Each
dollar invested will return $1.10 one year later.
To minimize risk, the firm has decided to diversify its investments. The total amount invested
in stocks cannot exceed 30% of total investments, and at least 25% of total investments must be
in certificates of deposit.
The firm’s management wishes to determine the optimal mix of investments in the various
alternatives that will maximize the amount of cash at the end of the sixth year.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
47. The Jones, Jones, Smith, and Rodman commodities trading firm knows the prices at which it
will be able to buy and sell a certain commodity during the next 4 months. The buying price 
and selling price 
for each of the given months (i) are as follows:
(pi)
(ci)
Month i
1
2
3
4
ci
$5
$6
$7
$8
pi
4
8
6
7
The firm’s warehouse has a maximum capacity of 10,000 bushels. At the beginning of the
first month, 2,000 bushels are in the warehouse. The trading firm wants to know the amounts
that should be bought and sold each month in order to maximize profit. Assume that no
storage costs are incurred and that sales are made at the beginning of the month, followed by
purchases.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
48. The production manager of Videotechnics Company is attempting to determine the upcoming 
5-month production schedule for video recorders. Past production records indicate that 2,000

PROBLEMS
169
recorders can be produced per month. An additional 600 recorders can be produced monthly on
an overtime basis. Unit cost is $10 for recorders produced during regular working hours and $15
for those produced on an overtime basis. Contracted sales per month are as follows:
Month
Contracted Sales (units)
1
1,200
2
2,100
3
2,400
4
3,000
5
4,000
Inventory carrying costs are $2 per recorder per month. The manager does not want any inventory
carried over past the fifth month. The manager wants to know the monthly production that will
minimize total production and inventory costs.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
49. The manager of the Ewing and Barnes Department Store has four employees available to assign
to three departments in the store—lamps, sporting goods, and linens. The manager wants each
of these departments to have at least one employee, but not more than two. Therefore, two de-
partments will be assigned one employee, and one department will be assigned two. Each em-
ployee has different areas of expertise, which are reflected in the daily sales each employee is
expected to generate in each department, as follows:
Department Sales
Employee
Lamps
Sporting Goods
Linens
1
$130
$150
$ 90
2
275
300
100
3
180
225
140
4
200
120
160
The manager wishes to know which employee(s) to assign to each department in order to maxi-
mize expected sales.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. Suppose that the department manager plans to assign only one employee to each department
and to lay off the least productive employee. Formulate a new linear programming model
that reflects this new condition and solve by using the computer.
50. Tidewater City Bank has four branches with the following inputs and outputs:
 output 3 = new accounts (100s)
 output 2 = loan applications
 output 1 = deposits, withdrawals, and checks processed (1,000s)
 input 3 = expenses (+1,000s)
 input 2 = space (100s ft.2)
 input 1 = teller hours (100s)

170
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
The monthly output and input values for each bank are as follows:
Outputs
Inputs
Bank
1
2
3
1
2
3
A
76
125
12
16
22
12
B
82
105
8
12
19
10
C
69
98
9
17
26
16
D
72
117
14
14
18
14
Using data envelopment analysis (DEA), determine which banks, if any, are inefficient.
51. Carillon Health Systems owns three hospitals, and it wants to determine which, if any, of the hos-
pitals are inefficient. The hospital inputs each month are (1) hospital beds (100s), (2) nonphysician
labor (1,000s hrs.), and (3) dollar value of supplies ($1000s). The hospital outputs are patient days
(100s) for three age groups—(1) under 15, (2) 15 to 65, and (3) over 65. The output and input
values for each hospital are as follows:
7
6
10
A
5
2
4
9
3
3
D
F
B
E
C
Outputs
Inputs
Hospital
1
2
3
1
2
3
A
9
5
18
7
12
40
B
6
8
9
5
14
32
C
5
10
12
8
16
47
Using DEA, determine which hospitals are inefficient.
52. Managers at the Transcontinent Shipping and Supply Company want to know the maximum ton-
nage of goods they can transport from city A to city F. The firm can contract for railroad cars on
different rail routes linking these cities via several intermediate stations, shown in the following
diagram; all railroad cars are of equal capacity:
The firm can transport a maximum amount of goods from point to point, based on the maximum
number of railroad cars shown on each route segment. Managers want to determine the maxi-
mum tonnage that can be shipped from city A to city F.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.

PROBLEMS
171
53. The law firm of Smith, Smith, Smith, and Jones is recruiting at law schools for new lawyers for
the coming year. The firm has developed the following estimate of the number of hours of case-
work it will need its new lawyers to handle each month for the following year:
Month
Casework (hr.)
Month
Casework (hr.)
January
650
July
750
February
450
August
900
March
600
September
800
April
500
October
650
May
700
November
700
June
650
December
500
Each new lawyer the firm hires is expected to handle 150 hours per month of casework and to
work all year. All casework must be completed by the end of the year. The firm wants to know
how many new lawyers it should hire for the year.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
54. In Problem 53, the optimal solution results in a fractional (i.e., non-integer) number of lawyers
being hired. Explain how you would go about logically determining a new solution with a whole
(integer) number of lawyers being hired and discuss the difference in results between this new
solution and the optimal non-integer solution obtained in Problem 53.
55. The Goliath Tool and Machine Shop produces a single product that consists of three subcompo-
nents that are assembled to form the product. The three components are manufactured in an op-
eration that involves two lathes and three presses. The production time (in minutes per unit) for
each machine for the three components is as follows:
Production Time (min.)
Component 1
Component 2
Component 3
Lathe
10
8
6
Press
9
21
15
The shop splits the lathe workload evenly between the two lathes, and it splits the press work-
load evenly among the three presses. In addition, the firm wishes to produce quantities of com-
ponents that will balance the daily loading among lathes and presses so that, on the average, no
machine is operated more than 1 hour per day longer than any other machine. Each machine op-
erates 8 hours per day.
The firm also wishes to produce a quantity of components that will result in completely as-
sembled products, without any partial assemblies (i.e., in-process inventories). The objective of
the firm is to maximize the number of units of assembled product per day.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. The production policies established by the Goliath Tool and Machine Shop are relatively re-
strictive. If the company were to relax either its machine balancing requirement (that no ma-
chine be operated more than an hour longer than any other machine) or its restriction on
in-process inventory, which would have the greatest impact on production output? What
would be the impact if both requirements were relaxed?

56. A ship has two cargo holds, one fore and one aft. The fore cargo hold has a weight capacity
of 70,000 pounds and a volume capacity of 30,000 cubic feet. The aft hold has a weight
capacity of 90,000 pounds and a volume capacity of 40,000 cubic feet. The shipowner has con-
tracted to carry loads of packaged beef and grain. The total weight of the available beef is 85,000
pounds; the total weight of the available grain is 100,000 pounds. The volume per mass of the
beef is 0.2 cubic foot per pound, and the volume per mass of the grain is 0.4 cubic foot per
pound. The profit for shipping beef is $0.35 per pound, and the profit for shipping grain is $0.12
per pound. The shipowner is free to accept all or part of the available cargo; he wants to know
how much meat and grain to accept to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
57. Eyewitness News is shown on channel 5 Monday through Friday evenings from 5:00 P.M. to 
6:00 P.M. During the hour-long broadcast, 18 minutes are allocated to commercials. The remaining
42 minutes of airtime are allocated to single or multiple time segments for local news and features,
national news, sports, and weather. The station has learned through several viewer surveys that
viewers do not consistently watch the entire news program; they focus on some segments more
closely than others. For example, they tend to pay more attention to the local weather than the na-
tional news (because they know they will watch the network news following the local broadcast).
As such, the advertising revenues generated for commercials shown during the different broadcast
segments are $850 per minute for local news and feature segments, $600 per minute for national
news, $750 per minute for sports, and $1,000 per minute for the weather. The production cost for
local news is $400 per minute, the cost for national news is $100 per minute, the cost for sports is
$175 per minute, and for weather it’s $90 per minute. The station budgets $9,000 per show for pro-
duction costs. The station’s policy is that the broadcast time devoted to local news and features
must be at least 10 minutes but not more than 25 minutes, whereas national news, sports, and
weather must have segments of at least 5 minutes each but not more than 10 minutes. Commercial
time must be limited to no more than 6 minutes for each of the four broadcast segment types. The
station manager wants to know how many minutes of commercial time and broadcast time to allo-
cate to local news, national news, sports, and weather to maximize advertising revenues.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve by using the computer.
58. The Douglas family raises cattle on their farm in Virginia. They also have a large garden in
which they grow ingredients for making two types of relish—chow-chow and tomato. These
they sell in 16-ounce jars at local stores and craft fairs in the fall. The profit for a jar of chow-
chow is $2.25, and the profit for a jar of tomato relish is $1.95. The main ingredients in each rel-
ish are cabbage, tomatoes, and onions. A jar of chow-chow must contain at least 60% 
cabbage, 5% onions, and 10% tomatoes, and a jar of tomato relish must contain at least 50%
tomatoes, 5% onions, and 10% cabbage. Both relishes contain no more than 10% onions. The
family has enough time to make no more than 700 jars of relish. In checking sales records for
the past 5 years, they know that they will sell at least 30% more chow-chow than tomato relish.
They will have 300 pounds of cabbage, 350 pounds of tomatoes, and 30 pounds of onions avail-
able. The Douglas family wants to know how many jars of relish to produce to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve by using the computer.
59. The White Horse Apple Products Company purchases apples from local growers and makes apple-
sauce and apple juice. It costs $0.60 to produce a jar of applesauce and $0.85 to produce a bottle of
apple juice. The company has a policy that at least 30% but not more than 60% of its output must be
applesauce.
The company wants to meet but not exceed the demand for each product. The marketing man-
ager estimates that the demand for applesauce is a maximum of 5,000 jars, plus an additional 
172
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES

3 jars for each $1 spent on advertising. The maximum demand for apple juice is estimated to be
4,000 bottles, plus an additional 5 bottles for every $1 spent to promote apple juice. The company
has $16,000 to spend on producing and advertising applesauce and apple juice. Applesauce sells
for $1.45 per jar; apple juice sells for $1.75 per bottle. The company wants to know how many
units of each to produce and how much advertising to spend on each to maximize profit.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
60. Mazy’s Department Store has decided to stay open on a 24-hour basis. The store manager has
divided the 24-hour day into six 4-hour periods and determined the following minimum person-
nel requirements for each period:
PROBLEMS
173
Time
Personnel Needed
Midnight–4:00 A.M.
90
4:00–8:00 A.M.
215
8:00–Noon
250
Noon–4:00 P.M.
65
4:00–8:00 P.M.
300
8:00–Midnight
125
Personnel must report for work at the beginning of one of these times and work 8 consecutive
hours. The store manager wants to know the minimum number of employees to assign for each
4-hour segment to minimize the total number of employees.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
61. Venture Systems is a consulting firm that develops e-commerce systems and Web sites for its
clients. It has six available consultants and eight client projects under contract. The consult-
ants have different technical abilities and experience, and as a result, the company charges dif-
ferent hourly rates for its services. Also, the consultants’ skills are more suited for some
projects than others, and clients sometimes prefer some consultants over others. The suitabil-
ity of a consultant for a project is rated according to a 5-point scale, in which 1 is the worst
and 5 is the best. The following table shows the rating for each consultant for each project, as
well as the hours available for each consultant and the contracted hours and maximum budget
for each project.
Project
Hourly
Available
Consultant
Rate
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Hours
A
$155
3
3
5
5
3
3
3
3
450
B
140
3
3
2
5
5
5
3
3
600
C
165
2
1
3
3
2
1
5
3
500
D
300
1
3
1
1
2
2
5
1
300
E
270
3
1
1
2
2
1
3
3
710
F
150
4
5
3
2
3
5
4
3
860
Project Hours
500
240
400
475
350
460
290
200
Contract Budget ($1,000s)
100
80
120
90
65
85
50
55

174
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
The company wants to know how many hours to assign each consultant to each project in order
to best utilize the consultants’ skills while meeting the clients’ needs.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
c. If the company’s objective is to maximize revenue while ignoring client preferences and con-
sultant compatibility, will this change the solution in (b)?
62. Great Northwoods Outfitters is a retail phone-catalog company that specializes in outdoor
clothing and equipment. A phone station at the company will be staffed with either full-time
operators or temporary operators 8 hours per day. Full-time operators, because of their experi-
ence and training, process more orders and make fewer mistakes than temporary operators.
However, temporary operators are cheaper because they receive a lower wage rate and are not
paid benefits. A full-time operator can process about 360 orders per week, whereas a tempo-
rary operator can process about 270 orders per week. A full-time operator averages 1.1 defec-
tive orders per week, and a part-time operator incurs about 2.7 defective orders per week. The
company wants to limit defective orders to 200 per week. The cost of staffing a station with
full-time operators is $610 per week, and the cost of a station with part-time operators is $450
per week. Using historical data and forecasting techniques, the company has developed esti-
mates of phone orders for an 8-week period, as follows:
Week
Orders
Week
Orders
1
19,500
5
33,400
2
21,000
6
29,800
3
25,600
7
27,000
4
27,200
8
31,000
Coal Producer
Tons
Cost/Ton
Million BTUs/Ton
ANCO
190,000
$23
26.2
Boone Creek
305,000
28
27.1
Century
310,000
24
25.6
The company does not want to hire or dismiss full-time employees after the first week (i.e., the
company wants a constant group of full-time operators over the 8-week period). The company
wants to determine how many full-time operators it needs and how many temporary operators to
hire each week to meet weekly demand while minimizing labor costs.
a. Formulate a linear programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
63. In Problem 62, Great Northwoods Outfitters is going to alter its staffing policy. Instead of hiring
a constant group of full-time operators for the entire 8-week planning period, it has decided to
hire and add full-time operators as the 8-week period progresses, although once it hires full-time
operators, it will not dismiss them. Reformulate the linear programming model to reflect this al-
tered policy and solve to determine the cost savings (if any).
64. Blue Ridge Power and Light Company generates electrical power at four coal-fired power plants
along the eastern seaboard in Virginia, North Carolina, Maryland, and Delaware. The company
purchases coal from six producers in southwestern Virginia, West Virginia, and Kentucky. Blue
Ridge has fixed contracts for coal delivery from the following three coal producers:

PROBLEMS
175
The power-producing capabilities of the coal produced by these suppliers differs according
to the quality of the coal. For example, coal produced by ANCO provides 26.2 million BTUs
per ton, while coal produced at Boone Creek provides 27.1 million BTUs per ton. Blue Ridge
also purchases coal from three backup auxiliary suppliers, as needed (i.e., it does not have
fixed contracts with these producers). In general, the coal from these backup suppliers is more
costly and lower grade.
Coal Producer
Available Tons
Cost/Ton
Million BTUs/Ton
DACO
125,000
$31
21.4
Eaton
95,000
29
19.2
Franklin
190,000
34
23.6
The demand for electricity at Blue Ridge’s four power plants is as follows (note that it re-
quires approximately 10 million BTUs to generate 1 megawatt hour):
Electricity
Power Plant
Demand (million BTUs)
1. Afton
4,600,000
2. Surrey
6,100,000
3. Piedmont
5,700,000
4. Chesapeake
7,300,000
For example, the Afton plant must produce at least 4,600,000 million BTUs next year, which
translates to approximately 460,000 megawatt hours.
Coal is primarily transported from the producers to the power plants by rail, and the cost of
processing coal at each plant is different. Following are the combined transportation and pro-
cessing costs for coal from each supplier to each plant.
Power Plant
Coal Producer
1. Afton
2. Surrey
3. Piedmont
4. Chesapeake
ANCO
$12.20
$14.25
$11.15
$15.00
Boone Creek
10.75
13.70
11.75
14.45
Century
15.10
16.65
12.90
12.00
DACO
14.30
11.90
16.35
11.65
Eaton
12.65
9.35
10.20
9.55
Franklin
16.45
14.75
13.80
14.90
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine how much coal should be pur-
chased and shipped from each supplier to each power plant in order to minimize cost.
65. Valley United Soccer Club has 16 boys’ and girls’ travel soccer teams. The club has access to
three town fields, which its teams practice on in the fall during the season. Field 1 is large
enough to accommodate two teams at one time, and field 3 can accommodate three teams,

176
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
whereas field 2 has enough room for only one team. The teams practice twice per week, ei-
ther on Monday and Wednesday from 3 P.M. to 5 P.M. or 5 P.M. to 7 P.M., or on Tuesday and
Thursday from 3 P.M. to 5 P.M. or 5 P.M. to 7 P.M. Field 3 is in the worst condition of all the
fields, so teams generally prefer the other fields; teams also do not like to practice at field 3
because it can get crowded with three teams. In general, the younger teams like to practice
right after school, while the older teams like to practice later in the day. In addition, some
teams must practice later because their coaches are available only after work. Some teams
also prefer specific fields because they’re closer to their players’ homes. Each team has been
asked by the club field coordinator to select three practice locations and times, in priority or-
der, and they have responded as follows:
Priority
Team
1
2
3
U11B
2, 3–5M
1, 3–5M
3, 3–5M
U11G
1, 3–5T
2, 3–5T
3, 3–5T
U12B
2, 3–5T
1, 3–5T
3, 3–5T
U12G
1, 3–5M
1, 3–5T
2, 3–5M
U13B
2, 3–5T
2, 3–5M
1, 3–5M
U13G
1, 3–5M
2, 3–5M
1, 3–5T
U14B
1, 5–7M
1, 5–7T
2, 5–7T
U14G
2, 3–5M
1, 3–5M
2, 3–5T
U15B
1, 5–7T
2, 5–7T
1, 5–7M
U15G
2, 5–7M
1, 5–7M
1, 5–7T
U16B
1, 5–7T
2, 5–7T
3, 5–7T
U16G
2, 5–7T
1, 5–7T
3, 5–7T
U17B
2, 5–7M
1, 5–7T
1, 5–7M
U17G
1, 5–7T
2, 5–7T
1, 5–7M
U18B
2, 5–7M
2, 5–7T
1, 5–7M
U18G
1, 5–7M
1, 5–7T
2, 5–7T
For example, the under-11 boys’ age group team has selected field 2 from 3 P.M. to 5 P.M. on
Monday and Wednesday as its top priority, field 1 from 3 P.M. to 5 P.M. on Monday and Wednes-
day as its second priority, and so on.
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to optimally assign the teams to fields
and times, according to their priorities. Are any of the teams not assigned to one of their top
three selections? If not, how might you modify or use the model to assign these teams to the
best possible time and location? How could you make sure that the model does not assign
teams to unacceptable locations and times—for example, a team whose coach can be at prac-
tice only at 5 P.M.?
66. The city of Salem has four police stations, with the following inputs and outputs:
 output 3 = convictions
 output 2 = traffic citations (100s)
 output 1 = calls respondedto (100s)
 input 3 = space (100s ft.2)
 input 2 = number of patrol vehicles
 input 1 = number of police officers

The monthly output and input data for each station are
PROBLEMS
177
Outputs
Inputs
Police Station
1
2
3
1
2
3
A
12.7
3.6
35
34
18
54
B
14.2
4.9
42
29
22
62
C
13.8
5.2
56
38
16
50
D
15.1
4.2
39
35
24
57
Help the city council determine which of the police stations are relatively inefficient.
67. USAir South Airlines operates a hub at the Pittsburgh International Airport. During the summer,
the airline schedules 7 flights daily from Pittsburgh to Orlando and 10 flights daily from Orlando
to Pittsburgh, according to the following schedule:
Leave 
Arrive
Leave
Arrive
Flight
Pittsburgh
Orlando
Flight
Orlando
Pittsburgh
1
6 A.M.
9 A.M.
A
6 A.M.
9 A.M.
2
8 A.M.
11 A.M.
B
7 A.M.
10 A.M.
3
9 A.M.
Noon
C
8 A.M.
11 A.M.
4
3 P.M.
6 P.M.
D
10 A.M.
1 P.M.
5
5 P.M.
8 P.M.
E
Noon
3 P.M.
6
7 P.M.
10 P.M.
F
2 P.M.
5 P.M.
7
8 P.M.
11 P.M.
G
3 P.M.
6 P.M.
H
6 P.M.
9 P.M.
I
7 P.M.
10 P.M.
J
9 P.M.
Midnight
The flight crews live in Pittsburgh or Orlando, and each day a new crew must fly one flight
from Pittsburgh to Orlando and one flight from Orlando to Pittsburgh. A crew must return
to its home city at the end of each day. For example, if a crew originates in Orlando and
flies a flight to Pittsburgh, it must then be scheduled for a return flight from Pittsburgh
back to Orlando. A crew must have at least 1 hour between flights at the city where it ar-
rives. Some scheduling combinations are not possible; for example, a crew on flight 1 from
Pittsburgh cannot return on flights A, B, or C from Orlando. It is also possible for a flight
to ferry one additional crew to a city in order to fly a return flight, if there are not enough
crews in that city.
The airline wants to schedule its crews in order to minimize the total amount of crew ground
time (i.e., the time the crew is on the ground between flights). Excessive ground time for a crew
lengthens its workday, is bad for crew morale, and is expensive for the airline. Formulate a lin-
ear programming model to determine a flight schedule for the airline and solve by using the
computer. How many crews need to be based in each city? How much ground time will each
crew experience?
68. The National Cereal Company produces a Light-Snak cereal package with a selection of small
pouches of four different cereals—Crunchies, Toasties, Snakmix, and Granolies. Each cereal is
produced at a different production facility and then shipped to three packaging facilities, where
the four different cereal pouches are combined into a single box. The boxes are then sent to 
one of three distribution centers, where they are combined to fill customer orders and shipped.

Facility
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
Unit cost
$.17
.20
.18
.16
.26
.29
.27
.12
.11
.14
The following diagram shows the weekly flow of the product through the production, packag-
ing, and distribution facilities (referred to as a “supply chain”):
178
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Ingredients capacities (per 1,000 pouches) per week are shown along branches 1–2, 1–3, 1–4,
and 1–5. For example, ingredients for 60,000 pouches are available at the production facility, as
shown on branch 1–2. The weekly production capacity at each plant (in 1,000s of pouches) is
shown at nodes 2, 3, 4, and 5. The packaging facilities at nodes 6, 7, and 8 and the distribution
centers at nodes 9, 10, and 11 have capacities for boxes (1,000s) as shown.
The various production, packaging, and distribution costs per unit at each facility are shown
in the following table:
Plant
Farm
4. Indiana
5. Georgia
Supply (bushels)
1. Ohio
.41
.57
24,000
2. Pennsylvania
.37
.48
18,000
3. New York
.51
.60
32,000
Plant Capacity
48,000
35,000
1
8
10
4
5
6
9
3
7
Packaging
Production
Ingredients
Distribution
16
12
19
50
46
60
50
40
12
60
14
50
14
11
12
55
2
Weekly demand for the Light-Snak product is 37,000 boxes.
Formulate and solve a linear programming model that indicates how much product must be pro-
duced at each facility to meet weekly demand at the minimum cost.
69. Valley Fruit Products Company has contracted with apple growers in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and
New York to purchase apples that the company then ships to its plants in Indiana and Georgia,
where they are processed into apple juice. Each bushel of apples produces 2 gallons of apple
juice. The juice is canned and bottled at the plants and shipped by rail and truck to
warehouses/distribution centers in Virginia, Kentucky, and Louisiana. The shipping costs per
bushel from the farms to the plants and the shipping costs per gallon from the plants to the dis-
tribution centers are summarized in the following tables:

CASE PROBLEM
179
Distribution Centers
Plant
6. Virginia
7. Kentucky
8. Louisiana
4. Indiana
.22
.10
.20
5. Georgia
.15
.16
.18
Demand (gal.)
9,000
12,000
15,000
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine the optimal shipments from the farms
to the plants and from the plants to the distribution centers in order to minimize total shipping costs.
70. In the event of a disaster situation at Tech from weather, an accident, or terrorism, victims will
be transported by emergency vehicles to three area hospitals: Montgomery Regional, Radford
Memorial, and Lewis Galt. Montgomery Regional is (on average) 10 minutes away from Tech,
Radford Memorial is 20 minutes away, and Lewis Galt is 35 minutes away. Tech wants to ana-
lyze a hypothetical disaster situation in which there are 15 victims with different types of 
injuries. The emergency facilities at Montgomery Regional can accommodate, at most, 8 victims;
Radford Memorial can handle 10 victims; and Lewis Galt can admit 7 victims. A priority has
been assigned for each victim according to the hospital that would best treat that victim’s type
of injury, as shown in the following table (where 1 reflects the best treatment).
Patient
Hospital
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Montgomery
1
1
2
2
2
1
3
3
3
1
3
3
2
1
3
Regional
Radford Memorial
2
2
3
3
1
3
3
1
1
1
3
3
2
2
3
Lewis Galt
3
3
1
1
3
2
1
2
2
2
1
1
1
2
1
For example, for victim 1’s type of injury, the best hospital is Montgomery Regional, the next
best is Radford Memorial, and Lewis Galt is the third best.
a. Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will send the victims to the hospital
best suited to administer to their specific injuries while keeping the average transport time to
22 minutes or less.
b. Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will minimize the average transport
time for victims while achieving an average hospital priority of at least 1.50 or better.
Case Problem
Summer Sports Camp at State University
Mary Kelly is a scholarship soccer player at State Univer-
sity. During the summer, she works at a youth all-sports
camp that several of the university’s coaches operate. The
sports camp runs for 8 weeks during July and August.
Campers come for a 1-week period, during which time they
live in the State dormitories and use the State athletic fields
and facilities. At the end of a week, a new group of kids
comes in. Mary primarily serves as one of the camp soccer
instructors. However, she has also been placed in charge of
arranging for sheets for the beds the campers will sleep on in
the dormitories. Mary has been instructed to develop a plan
for purchasing and cleaning sheets each week of camp at the
lowest possible cost.
Clean sheets are needed at the beginning of each week,
and the campers use the sheets all week. At the end of the
week, the campers strip their beds and place the sheets in
large bins. Mary must arrange either to purchase new sheets
or to clean old sheets. A set of new sheets costs $10. A lo-
cal laundry has indicated that it will clean a set of sheets for
$4. Also, a couple of Mary’s friends have asked her to let
them clean some of the sheets. They have told her they will
charge only $2 for each set of sheets they clean. However,
while the laundry will provide cleaned sheets in a week,

180
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
Mary’s friends can deliver cleaned sheets only in 2 weeks.
They are going to summer school and plan to launder the
sheets at night at a neighborhood Laundromat.
The accompanying table lists the number of campers who
have registered during each of the 8 weeks the camp will op-
erate. Based on discussions with camp administrators from
previous summers and on some old camp records and re-
ceipts, Mary estimates that each week about 20% of the
cleaned sheets that are returned will have to be discarded and
replaced. The campers spill food and drinks on the sheets, and
sometimes the stains do not come out during cleaning. Also,
the campers occasionally tear the sheets, or the sheets get torn
at the cleaners. In either case, when the sheets come back
from the cleaners and are put on the beds, 20% are taken off
and thrown away.
At the beginning of the summer, the camp has no sheets
available, so initially sheets must be purchased. Sheets are
thrown away at the end of the summer.
Week
Registered Campers
1
115
2
210
3
250
4
230
5
260
6
300
7
250
8
190
Mary’s major at State is management science, and she
wants to develop a plan for purchasing and cleaning sheets
by using linear programming. Help Mary formulate a lin-
ear programming model for this problem and solve it by
using the computer.
Spring Garden Tools
The Spring family has owned and operated a garden tool
and implements manufacturing company since 1952. The
company sells garden tools to distributors and also directly
to hardware stores and home improvement discount chains.
The Spring Company’s four most popular small garden
tools are a trowel, a hoe, a rake, and a shovel. Each of these
tools is made from durable steel and has a wooden handle.
The Spring family prides itself on its high-quality tools.
The manufacturing process encompasses two stages.
The first stage includes two operations—stamping out the
metal tool heads and drilling screw holes in them. The
completed tool heads then flow to the second stage, which
includes an assembly operation where the handles are at-
tached to the tool heads, a finishing step, and packaging.
The processing times per tool for each operation are pro-
vided in the following table:
Case Problem
Tool (hr./unit)
Total Hours 
Available per 
Operation Trowel Hoe Rake Shovel
Month
Stamping
0.04
0.17
0.06
0.12
500
Drilling
0.05
0.14
—
0.14
400
Assembly
0.06
0.13
0.05
0.10
600
Finishing
0.05
0.21
0.02
0.10
550
Packaging
0.03
0.15
0.04
0.15
500
Sheet Metal (ft.2)
Monthly Contracted Sales
Trowel
1.2
1,800
Hoe
1.6
1,400
Rake
2.1
1,600
Shovel
2.4
1,800
The steel the company uses is ordered from an iron and
steel works in Japan. The company has 10,000 square feet
of sheet steel available each month. The metal required for
each tool and the monthly contracted production volume
per tool are provided in the following table:
The primary reasons the company has survived and
prospered are its ability always to meet customer de-
mand on time and its high quality. As a result, the
Spring Company will produce on an overtime basis in
order to meet its sales requirements, and it also has a
long-standing arrangement with a local tool and die
company to manufacture its tool heads. The Spring
Company feels comfortable subcontracting the first-
stage operations because it is easier to detect defects
prior to assembly and finishing. For the same reason,
the company will not subcontract for the entire tool be-
cause defects would be particularly hard to detect after
the tool was finished and packaged. However, the com-
pany does have 100 hours of overtime available each
month for each operation in both stages. The regular

CASE PROBLEM
181
production and overtime costs per tool for both stages
are provided in the following table:
Stage 1
Stage 2
Regular
Overtime
Regular
Overtime
Cost
Cost
Cost
Cost
Trowel
$6.00
$6.20
$3.00
$3.10
Hoe
10.00
10.70
5.00
5.40
Rake
8.00
8.50
4.00
4.30
Shovel
10.00
10.70
5.00
5.40
The cost of subcontracting in stage 1 adds 20% to the
regular production cost.
The Spring Company wants to establish a production
schedule for regular and overtime production in each stage
and for the number of tool heads subcontracted, at the min-
imum cost. Formulate a linear programming model for this
problem and solve the model using the computer. Which
resources appear to be most critical in the production
process?
Susan Wong’s Personal Budgeting Model
After Susan Wong graduated from State University with
a degree in management science, she went to work for a
computer systems development firm in the Washington,
DC, area. As a student at State, Susan paid her normal
monthly living expenses for apartment rent, food, and en-
tertainment out of a bank account set up by her parents.
Each month they would deposit a specific amount of cash
into Susan’s account. Her parents also paid her gas, tele-
phone, and bank credit card bills, which were sent directly
to them. Susan never had to worry about things like health,
car, homeowners’, and life insurance; utilities; driver’s and
car licenses; magazine subscriptions; and so on. Thus,
while she was used to spending within a specific monthly
budget in college, she was unprepared for the irregular
monthly liabilities she encountered once she got a job and
was on her own.
In some months Susan’s bills would be modest and she
would spend accordingly, only to be confronted the next
month with a large insurance premium, or a bill for prop-
erty taxes on her condominium, or a large credit card bill,
or a bill for a magazine subscription, and so on the next
month. Such unexpected expenditures would result in
months when she could not balance her checking account;
she would have to pay her bills with her bank credit card
and then pay off her accumulated debt in installments
while incurring high interest charges. By the end of her
first year out of school, she had hoped to have some money
saved to begin an investment program, but instead she
found herself in debt.
Frustrated by her predicament, Susan decided to get
her financial situation in order. First, she sold the condo-
minium that her parents had helped her purchase and
moved into a cheaper apartment. This gave her enough
cash to clear her outstanding debts, with $3,800 left over to
start the new year with. Susan then decided to use some of
the management science she had learned in college to help
develop a budget. Specifically, she decided to develop a
linear programming model to help her decide how much
she should put aside each month in short-term investments
to meet the demands of irregular monthly liabilities and
save some money.
First, Susan went through all her financial records for
the year and computed her expected monthly liabilities for
the coming year, as shown in the following table:
Case Problem
Month
Bills
Month
Bills
January
$2,750
July
$3,050
February
2,860
August
2,300
March
2,335
September
1,975
April
2,120
October
1,670
May
1,205
November
2,710
June
1,600
December
2,980
Susan’s after-taxes-and-benefits salary is $29,400 per
year, which she receives in 12 equal monthly paychecks
that are deposited directly into her bank account.
Susan has decided that she will invest any money 
she doesn’t use to meet her liabilities each month in either
1-month, 3-month, or 7-month short-term investment vehicles
rather than just leaving the money in an interest-bearing
checking account. The yield on 1-month investments is 
6% per year nominal; on 3-month investments, the yield is
8% per year nominal; and on a 7-month investment, the
yield is 12% per year nominal. As part of her investment
strategy, any time one of the short-term investments comes
due, she uses the principal as part of her budget, but she
transfers any interest earned to another long-term invest-
ment (which she doesn’t consider in her budgeting process).

182
CHAPTER 4
LINEAR PROGRAMMING: MODELING EXAMPLES
For example, if she has $100 left over in January that she
invests for 3 months, in April, when the investment 
matures, she uses the $100 she originally invested in her
budget, but any interest on the $100 is invested elsewhere.
(Thus, the interest is not compounded over the course of
the year.)
Susan wants to develop a linear programming model to
maximize her investment return during the year so she can
take that money and reinvest it at the end of the year in a
longer-term investment program. However, she doesn’t
have to confine herself to short-term investments that will
all mature by the end of the year; she can continue to put
money toward the end of the year in investments that won’t
mature until the following year. Her budgeting process will
continue to the next year, so she can take out any surplus
left over after December and reinvest it in a long-term pro-
gram if she wants to.
A. Help Susan develop a model for the year that will
meet her irregular monthly financial obligations
while achieving her investment objectives and solve
the model.
B. If Susan decides she doesn’t want to include all her
original $3,800 in her budget at the beginning of the
year, but instead she wants to invest some of it directly
in alternative longer-term investments, how much does
she need to develop a feasible budget?
Walsh’s Juice Company
Walsh’s Juice Company produces three products from
unprocessed grape juice—bottled juice, frozen juice con-
centrate, and jelly. It purchases grape juice from three vine-
yards near the Great Lakes. The grapes are harvested at the
vineyards and immediately converted into juice at plants at
the vineyard sites and stored there in refrigerated tanks. The
juice is then transported to four different plants in Virginia,
Michigan, Tennessee, and Indiana, where it is processed into
bottled grape juice, frozen juice concentrate, and jelly. Vine-
yard output typically differs each month in the harvesting
season, and the plants have different processing capacities.
In a particular month the vineyard in New York has
1,400 tons of unprocessed grape juice available, whereas
the vineyard in Ohio has 1,700 tons and the vineyard in
Pennsylvania has 1,100 tons. The processing capacity per
month is 1,200 tons of unprocessed juice at the plant in 
Virginia, 1,100 tons of juice at the plant in Michigan, 1,400
tons at the plant in Tennessee, and 1,400 tons at the plant in
Indiana. The cost per ton of transporting unprocessed juice
from the vineyards to the plant is as follows:
Case Problem
Plant
Vineyard
Virginia
Michigan
Tennessee
Indiana
New York
$850
$720
$910
$750
Pennsylvania
970
790
1,050
880
Ohio
900
830
780
820
The plants are different ages, have different equipment, and
have different wage rates; thus, the cost of processing each
product at each plant ($/ton) differs, as follows:
Plant
Product
Virginia
Michigan
Tennessee
Indiana
Juice
$2,100
$2,350
$2,200
$1,900
Concentrate
4,100
4,300
3,950
3,900
Jelly
2,600
2,300
2,500
2,800
This month the company needs to process a total of 1,200
tons of bottled juice, 900 tons of frozen concentrate, and 700
tons of jelly at the four plants combined. However, the pro-
duction process for frozen concentrate results in some juice
dehydration, and the process for jelly includes a cooking stage
that evaporates water content. To process 1 ton of frozen con-
centrate requires 2 tons of unprocessed juice; 1 ton of jelly re-
quires 1.5 tons of unprocessed juice; and 1 ton of bottled juice
requires 1 ton of unprocessed juice.
Walsh’s management wants to determine how many
tons of grape juice to ship from each of the vineyards to
each of the plants and the number of tons of each product
to process at each plant. Thus, management needs a model
that includes both the logistical aspects of this problem and
the production processing aspects. It wants a solution that
will minimize total costs, including the cost of transporting
grape juice from the vineyards to the plants and the prod-
uct processing costs. Help Walsh’s solve this problem by
formulating a linear programming model and solve it by
using the computer.  
This case is based on T. Lewis, “Personal Operations Research:
Practicing OR on Ourselves,” Interfaces 26, no. 5 (September–October
1996): 34–41.

CASE PROBLEM
183
Case Problem
The King’s Landing Amusement Park
King’s Landing is a large amusement theme park located
in Virginia. The park hires high school and college students
to work during the summer months of May, June, July,August,
and September. The student employees operate virtually all
the highly mechanized, computerized rides; perform as en-
tertainers; perform most of the custodial work during park
hours; make up the workforce for restaurants, food serv-
ices, retail shops, and stores; drive trams; and park cars.
Park management has assessed the park’s monthly needs
based on previous summers’ attendance at the park and the
expected available workforce. Park attendance is relatively
low in May, until public schools are out, and then it in-
creases through June, July, and August, and decreases dra-
matically in September, when schools reopen after Labor
Day. The park is open 7 days a week through the summer,
until September, when it cuts back to weekends only. Man-
agement estimates that it will require 22,000 hours of labor
in each of the first 2 weeks of May, 25,000 hours during the
third week of May, and 30,000 hours during the last week
in May. During the first 2 weeks of June, it will require at
least 35,000 hours of labor and 40,000 hours during the last
2 weeks in June. In July 45,000 hours will be required each
week, and in August 45,000 hours will be needed each
week. In September the park will need only 12,000 hours in
the first week, 10,000 hours in each of the second and third
weeks, and 8,000 hours the last week of the month.
The park hires new employees each week from the
first week in May through August. A new employee
mostly trains the first week by observing and helping
more experienced employees; however, he or she works
approximately 10 hours under the supervision of an expe-
rienced employee. An employee is considered experi-
enced after completing 1 week on the job. Experienced
employees are considered part-time and are scheduled to
work 30 hours per week in order to eliminate overtime
and reduce the cost of benefits, and to give more students
the opportunity to work. However, no one is ever laid off
or will be scheduled for fewer (or more) than 30 hours,
even if more employees are available than needed. Man-
agement believes this is a necessary condition of employ-
ment because many of the student employees move to the
area during the summer just to work in the park and live
near the beach nearby. If these employees were sporadi-
cally laid off and were stuck with lease payments and
other expenses, it would be bad public relations and hurt
employment efforts in future summers. Although no one is
laid off, 15% of all experienced employees quit each week
for a variety of reasons, including homesickness, illness,
and other personal reasons, plus some are asked to leave
because of very poor job performance.
Park management is able to start the first week in May
with 700 experienced employees who worked in the park in
previous summers and live in the area. These employees are
generally able to work a lot of hours on the weekends and
then some during the week; however, in May attendance is
much heavier on the weekends, so most of the labor hours
are needed then. The park expects to have a pool of 1,500
available applicants to hire for the first week in May. After
the first week, the pool is diminished by the number of new
employees hired the previous week, but each week through
June the park gets 200 new job applicants, which decreases
to 100 new applicants each week for the rest of the summer.
For example, the available applicant pool in the second
week in May would be the previous week’s pool, which in
week 1 is 1,500, minus the number of new employees hired
in week 1 plus 200 new applicants. At the end of the last
week in August, 75% of all the experienced employees will
quit to go back to school, and the park will not hire any new
employees in September. The park must operate in September,
using experienced employees who live in the area, but the
weekly attrition rate for these employees in September
drops to 10%.
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to as-
sist the park’s management to plan and schedule the num-
ber of new employees it hires each week in order to
minimize the total number of new employees it must hire
during the summer.

Integer Programming
184
CHAPTER
5

INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELS
185
In the linear programming models formulated and solved in the previous chapters, the implicit
assumption was that solutions could be fractional or real numbers (i.e., non-integer). However,
non-integer solutions are not always practical.
When only integer solutions are practical or logical, it is sometimes assumed that non-
integer solution values can be “rounded off” to the nearest feasible integer values. This method
would cause little concern if, for example,
nails were rounded off to 8,000 nails
because nails cost only a few cents apiece. However, if we are considering the production of
jet aircraft and 
jet airliners, rounding off could affect profit (or cost) by millions of
dollars. In this case we need to solve the problem so that an optimal integer solution is
guaranteed. In this chapter the different forms of integer linear programming models are
presented.
Integer Programming Models
There are three basic types of integer linear programming models—a total integer model, a
0–1 integer model, and a mixed integer model. In a total integer model, all the decision vari-
ables are required to have integer solution values. In a 0–1 integer model, all the decision
variables have integer values of zero or one. Finally, in a mixed integer model, some of the
decision variables (but not all) are required to have integer solutions. The following three
examples demonstrate these types of integer programming models.
A Total Integer Model Example
The owner of a machine shop is planning to expand by purchasing some new machines—presses
and lathes. The owner has estimated that each press purchased will increase profit by $100 per
day and each lathe will increase profit by $150 daily. The number of machines the owner can
purchase is limited by the cost of the machines and the available floor space in the shop. The
machine purchase prices and space requirements are as follows:
x1 = 7.4
x1 = 8,000.4
The three types of
integer programming
models are total, 0–1,
and mixed.
In a total integer
model, all decision
variables have integer
solution values.
Machine
Required 
Floor Space (ft.2)
Purchase Price
Press
15
$8,000
Lathe
30
4,000
The owner has a budget of $40,000 for purchasing machines and 200 square feet of avail-
able floor space. The owner wants to know how many of each type of machine to purchase to
maximize the daily increase in profit.
The linear programming model for an integer programming problem is formulated in exactly
the same way as the linear programming examples in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. The only difference is
that in this problem, the decision variables are restricted to integer values because the owner can-
not purchase a fraction, or portion, of a machine. The linear programming model follows:
subject to
and integer
where
number of presses
number of lathes
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2 Ú 0
15x1 + 30x2 … 200 ft.2
+8,000x1 + 4,000x2 … +40,000
maximize Z = +100x1 + 150x2

The decision variables in this model are restricted to whole machines. The fact that both deci-
sion variables,
and 
can assume any integer value greater than or equal to zero is what gives
this model its designation as a total integer model.
A 0–1 Integer Model Example
A community council must decide which recreation facilities to construct in its community. Four
new recreation facilities have been proposed—a swimming pool, a tennis center, an athletic
field, and a gymnasium. The council wants to construct facilities that will maximize the ex-
pected daily usage by the residents of the community, subject to land and cost limitations. The
expected daily usage and cost and land requirements for each facility follow:
x2,
x1
186
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
In a 0–1 integer
model, the solution
values of the decision
variables are zero 
or one.
Recreation Facility
Expected Usage 
(people/day)
Cost
Land Requirements 
(acres)
Swimming pool
300
$35,000
4
Tennis center
90
10,000
2
Athletic field
400
25,000
7
Gymnasium
150
90,000
3
The community has a $120,000 construction budget and 12 acres of land. Because the
swimming pool and tennis center must be built on the same part of the land parcel, however,
only one of these two facilities can be constructed. The council wants to know which of the
recreation facilities to construct to maximize the expected daily usage. The model for this prob-
lem is formulated as follows:
subject to
acres
facility
or 1
where
construction of a swimming pool
construction of a tennis center
construction of an athletic field
construction of a gymnasium
In this model, the decision variables can have a solution value of either zero or one. If a facility
is not selected for construction, the decision variable representing it will have a value of zero. If
a facility is selected, its decision variable will have a value of one.
The last constraint,
reflects the contingency that either the swimming pool
or the tennis center 
can be constructed, but not both. In order for the sum of 
and 
to be less than or equal to one, either of the variables can have a value of one, or both variables
can equal zero. This is also referred to as a mutually exclusive constraint.
If the community had specified that either the swimming pool 
or the tennis center 
must
be built, but not both, then the last constraint would become an equation,
This would
result in a solution that would include 
or 
but both would not equal one (nor
would both equal zero). In this manner, the model forces a choice between the two facilities. For
this reason, it is often called a multiple-choice constraint.
A variation of the multiple-choice constraint can be used to formulate a situation in which
some specific number of facilities out of the total must be constructed. For example, if the
x2 = 1,
x1 = 1
x1 + x2 = 1.
(x2)
(x1)
x2
x1
(x2)
1x12
x1 + x2 … 1,
x4 =
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2, x3, x4 = 0
x1 + x2 … 1
4x1 + 2x2 + 7x3 + 3x4 … 12
+35,000x1 + 10,000x2 + 25,000x3 + 90,000x4 … +120,000
maximize Z = 300x1 + 90x2 + 400x3 + 150x4

community council had specified that exactly two of the four facilities must be built, this con-
straint would be formulated as
If, alternatively, the council had specified that no more than two facilities must be constructed,
the constraint would be
Another type of 0–1 model constraint is a conditional constraint. In a conditional constraint, the
construction of one facility is conditional upon the construction of another. Suppose, for exam-
ple, that the pet project of the head of the community council is the swimming pool, and she also
believes the tennis center is frivolous. The council head is very influential, so the rest of the coun-
cil knows that the tennis center has no chance of being selected if the pool is not selected first.
However, even if the pool is selected, there is no guarantee that the tennis center will also be
selected. Thus, the tennis center 
is conditional upon construction of the swimming pool 
This condition is formulated as
Notice that the tennis center 
cannot equal one (i.e., be selected) unless the pool 
equals
one. If the pool 
equals zero (i.e., it is not selected), then the tennis center 
must also equal
zero. However, this condition does allow the pool 
to equal one and be selected and the ten-
nis center to equal zero and not be selected.
A variation of this type of conditional constraint is the corequisite constraint, wherein if one
facility is constructed, the other one will also be constructed and vice versa. For example, sup-
pose the council worked out a political deal among themselves, wherein if the pool is accepted,
the tennis center must also be selected and vice versa. This constraint is written as
This constraint makes 
and 
equal the same value, either zero or one.
A Mixed Integer Model Example
Nancy Smith has $250,000 to invest in three alternative investments—condominiums, land, and
municipal bonds. She wants to invest in the alternatives that will result in the greatest return on
investment after 1 year.
Each condominium costs $50,000 and will return a profit of $9,000 if sold at the end of 1 year;
each acre of land costs $12,000 and will return a profit of $1,500 at the end of 1 year; and each
municipal bond costs $8,000 and will result in a return of $1,000 if sold at the end of 1 year. In addi-
tion, there are only 4 condominiums, 15 acres of land, and 20 municipal bonds available for purchase.
The linear programming model for this problem is formulated as follows:
subject to
condominiums
acres
bonds
and integer
where
condominiums purchased
acres of land purchased
bonds purchased
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x3 Ú 0
x2 Ú 0
x3 … 20
x2 … 15
x1 … 4
$50,000x1 + 12,000x2 + 8,000x3 … $250,000
maximize Z = +9,000x1 + 1,500x2 + 1,000x3
x2
x1
x2 = x1
(x1)
(x2)
(x1)
(x1)
(x2)
x2 … x1
(x1).
(x2)
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 … 2
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 2
INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELS
187
In a mixed integer
model, some solution
values for decision
variables are integers
and others can be
non-integer.

Notice that in this model, the solution values for condominiums 
and municipal bonds
must be integers. It is not possible to invest in a fraction of a condominium or to purchase
part of a bond. However, it is possible to purchase less than an acre of land (i.e., a portion of an
acre). Thus, two of the decision variables (
and 
) are restricted to integer values, whereas
the other variable 
can take on any real value greater than or equal to zero.
Integer Programming Graphical Solution
It may seem logical that an easy way to solve integer programming problems is to round off
fractional solution values to integer values. However, that can result in less-than-optimal
(i.e., suboptimal) results. This outcome can be seen by using graphical analysis. As an
(x2)
x3
x1
(x3)
(x1)
188
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Management Science Application
Allocating Operating Room Time at Toronto’s 
Mount Sinai Hospital
Mount Sinai Hospital in Toronto has 14 operating rooms
that serve five surgical departments, including surgery, gyne-
cology, ophthalmology, otolaryngology, and oral surgery. The
largest of these departments, surgery, consists of five subar-
eas, including orthopedics, general surgery, plastic surgery,
vascular surgery, and urology. The hospital has 397.50 operat-
ing room hours available per week, and it employs an integer
programming model to develop a master surgical schedule
that allocates operating room time to its five primary surgical
departments. A daily operating room schedule includes the
actual cases to be performed, start and end times, attending
physicians, and anesthetists, and it is similar to a production
schedule in a manufacturing plant. Operating room times are
assigned as blocks; whenever possible, only one department is
assigned to an operating room on a single day, thus consti-
tuting a block. It is possible to split blocks into morning and
afternoon sessions and to alternate the same block between
departments in different weeks, although the hospital
attempts to minimize these types of allocations and keep the
schedule as consistent as possible from week to week.
In the integer programming model, the decision variables,
equal the number of time blocks of operating room i,
assigned to department j, on day k. The objective is to minimize
the sum of the differences, or shortfalls, between the assigned
operating room times and target times, represented as penalty
functions, for all departments. A primary constraint is that the
sum of all times allocated to a department, j, over all days, k, be
(as nearly as possible) equal to a target number of hours. Addi-
tional constraints include daily and weekly bounds on the num-
ber of rooms assigned to a department, limits on the amount of
under- or overallocation of time to any particular department,
and daily room availability. The model solution provides an allo-
cation of time blocks to departments that minimizes the short-
age of time to each. Since its implementation, the model has
xijk,
reduced the clerical time for producing a schedule from days
(using a manual approach) to 1 or 2 hours, and has resulted in
roughly $20,000 per year in savings derived from the reduced
time required by the operating room manager for schedule
development. In addition, the model has provided hospital
management with greater flexibility, increased ability to explore
creative scheduling options, and generally improved quality
schedules. However, perhaps the model’s greatest benefit has
been to provide unbiased, equitable schedules through a con-
sistent, identifiable process, thus reducing conflict between
departments and surgeons.
Source: Based on J. T. Blake and J. Donald, “Mount Sinai Hospital
Uses Integer Programming to Allocate Operating Room Time,”
Interfaces 32, no. 2 (March–April 2002): 63–73.
Jupiterimages/Comstock/Thinkstock

example, consider the total integer model for the machine shop formulated in the previous
section:
subject to
and integer
First, we will use Excel to solve this model as a regular linear programming model without
the integer requirements, as shown in Exhibit 5.1.
x1, x2 Ú 0
15x1 + 30x2 … 200
8,000x1 + 4,000x2 … 40,000
maximize Z = 100x1 + 150x2
INTEGER PROGRAMMING GRAPHICAL SOLUTION
189
EXHIBIT 5.1
Notice that this model results in a non-integer solution of 2.22 presses and 5.56 lathes, or
and 
Because the solution values must be integers, let us first round off
these two values to the closest integer values, which are 
and 
However, if we sub-
stitute these values into the second model constraint, we find that this integer solution violates
the constraint and thus is infeasible:
In a model in which the constraints are all 
(and the constraint coefficients are positive), a
feasible solution is always ensured by rounding down. Thus, a feasible integer solution for this
problem is
However, one of the difficulties of simply rounding down non-integer values is that another
integer solution may result in a higher profit (i.e., in this problem, there may be an integer solu-
tion that will result in a profit higher than $950). In order to determine whether a better integer
solution exists, let us analyze the graph of this model, which is shown in Figure 5.1.
In Figure 5.1, the dots indicate integer solution points, and the point 
is the
rounded-down solution. Notice that as the objective function edge moves outward through
the feasible solution space, there is an integer solution point that yields a greater profit than
the rounded-down solution. This solution point is 
At this point,
which is $50 more profit per day for the machine shop than is realized by the rounded-down
integer solution.
This graphical analysis explicitly demonstrates the error that can result from solving 
an integer programming problem by simply rounding down. In the machine shop example,
Z = +1,000,
x1 = 1, x2 = 6.
x1 = 2, x2 = 5
Z = +950
x2 = 5
x1 = 2
…
210 + 200
 15(2) + 30162 … 200
 15x1 + 30x2 … 200
x2 = 6.
x1 = 2
x2 = 5.56.
x1 = 2.22
A feasible solution is
ensured by rounding
down non-integer
solution values.
Rounding non-integer
solution values up to
the nearest integer
value can result in an
infeasible solution.
A rounded-down
integer solution can
result in a less-than-
optimal (suboptimal)
solution.

the optimal integer solution is 
instead of the rounded-down solution,
(which is often called the suboptimal solution or result). Because erroneous results are caused
by rounding down regular solutions, a more direct approach for solving integer problems is required.
The traditional approach for solving integer programming problems is the branch and
bound method. It is a mathematical solution approach that can be applied to a number of differ-
ent types of problems. The branch and bound method is based on the principle that the total set
of feasible solutions (such as the feasible area in Figure 5.1) can be partitioned into smaller
subsets of solutions. These smaller subsets can then be evaluated systematically until the best
solution is found. The branch and bound method is a tedious and often complex mathematical
process. Fortunately, both Excel and QM for Windows have the capability to solve integer pro-
gramming problems, and thus we will rely on the computer to solve the different types of inte-
ger models demonstrated in this chapter. However, for the interested reader, the companion
Web site that accompanies this text includes a supplementary module, “Integer Programming:
The Branch and Bound Method,” that demonstrates the branch and bound method in detail.
Computer Solution of Integer Programming Problems 
with Excel and QM for Windows
Integer programming problems can be solved using Excel spreadsheets and QM for Windows.
In this section we demonstrate both of these computer solution approaches, using the examples
for 0–1, total, and mixed integer programming problems developed in the previous sections.
Solution of the 0–1 Model with Excel
Recall our recreational facilities example, formulated on page 186:
subject to
acres
facility
or 1
x1, x2, x3, x4 = 0
x1 + x2 … 1
4x1 + 2x2 + 7x3 + 3x4 … 12
+35,000x1 + 10,000x2 + 25,000x3 + 90,000x4 … +120,000
maximize Z = 300x1 + 90x2 + 400x3 + 150x4
x2 = 5
x1 = 2,
x1 = 1, x2 = 6,
190
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
2
4
6
8
10
16
2
0
4
6
8
10
16
x1
x2
(x1 = 1, x2 = 6, Z = 1,000)
Objective function
(x1 = 2, x2 = 5, Z = 950)
12
14
12
14
A
B
C
FIGURE 5.1
Feasible solution
space with integer
solution points
See Web site Module C
for a chapter on 
“Integer
Programming: The
Branch and Bound
Method.”

where
construction of a swimming pool
construction of a tennis center
construction of an athletic field
construction of a gymnasium
total expected usage (people) per day
Exhibit 5.2 shows this example model set up in Excel spreadsheet format. The decision variables
for the facilities are in cells C12:C15, and the objective function (Z) is embedded in cell C16. The
objective function is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The model constraints
are contained in cells G7, G8, and G9. For example, cell G7 includes the cost constraint,
C7*C12D7*C13E7*C14F7*C15, and the available budget of $120,000 is contained in
cell I7. Thus, the cost constraint will be written in Solver as G7…I7.
Z =
x4 =
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF INTEGER PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL AND QM FOR WINDOWS
191
Decision variables—
C12:C15
=C7*C12+D7*C13
+E7*C14+F7*C15
Objective function
EXHIBIT 5.2
Exhibit 5.3 shows the Solver Parameters screen for our spreadsheet example. Notice that
we have established the 0–1 condition of our variables by constraining the decision variable cells
to be binary (i.e., 0 or 1), as shown in the “Add Constraint” window in Exhibit 5.4.
In 1958, Ralph Gomory was the first individual to develop a
systematic (algorithmic) approach for solving linear integer pro-
gramming problems. His “cutting plane method” is an algebraic
approach based on the systematic addition of new constraints
(or cuts), which are satisfied by an integer solution but not by 
a continuous variable solution. An alternative to an algebraic
approach like Gomory’s is an enumerative approach, which is a
means of searching through all possible integer solutions (but in
an intelligent manner) to limit the extent of the search. One such
search method is the branch and bound technique, introduced
in 1960 by A. H. Land and A. C. Doig of the London School of
Economics and Political Science.
Time Out
for Ralph E. Gomory

Before solving the problem, click on the “Options” tab on the Solver Parameters screen
(see Exhibit 5.3). When the Options window shown in Exhibit 5.5 comes up, make sure “Ignore
Integer Constraints” is not activated (with a check). Return to the Solver Parameters window and
click on “Solve,” which results in the solution shown in Exhibit 5.6.
Solution of the 0–1 Model with QM for Windows
The 0–1 integer programming problem is solved in the “Integer and Mixed Integer” module of
QM for Windows. We will demonstrate this module by using our example for selecting recre-
ational facilities that we just solved with Excel.
Exhibit 5.7 shows the data input screen for our recreational facilities example problem. 
At the bottom of the screen, when you click on “Variable Type” for a variable, a menu will be 
displayed from which you can indicate if the variable is 0–1, integer, or real. In the case of this
192
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Restricts variables C12:C15
to 0–1 values.
EXHIBIT 5.3
Click on “bin“
for 0–1.
EXHIBIT 5.4

COMPUTER SOLUTION OF INTEGER PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL AND QM FOR WINDOWS
193
Return to solver
window
Deactivate
EXHIBIT 5.5
EXHIBIT 5.6
Click to solve.
Variable type
Click on “0/1“ to make variables 0 or 1.
EXHIBIT 5.7

example, all the variables should be designated 0–1. The model is solved by clicking on the
“Solve” button at the top of this screen, which results in the solution screen shown in Exhibit 5.8.
194
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
EXHIBIT 5.8
Management Science Application
College of Business Class Scheduling 
at Ohio University
The College of Business at Ohio University in Athens, Ohio,
encompasses four academic departments—Accounting, Finance,
Management Information Systems, and Marketing—with
approximately 65 to 75 instructors. Each academic term, the
college departments offer 110 to 130 sections of different
courses. The college’s home building is Copeland Hall, which
includes 14 to 16 classrooms. Prior to 1998 the college used a
manual process to schedule courses and instructors into class-
rooms at different times during the day. An associate dean
would allocate the classrooms to the different departments,
and the department chair would assign courses to instructors
and schedule the course sections to the rooms, sometimes tak-
ing into account instructor preferences. If a chairperson did not
use all of the department’s allocated classrooms, they were
shared with other departments, and if a department’s available
classrooms were not sufficient to accommodate all its courses,
they were assigned to classrooms outside the building.
While this process was workable, it was not optimal; and in-
structors’ preferences weren’t often considered, and they often
taught outside the building because course sections couldn’t be
matched with classrooms of sufficient size. For example, instruc-
tors might have wished to only teach certain courses at certain
times and on certain days, and they might have wanted to avoid
back-to-back classes.
Since 1998 the college has used an integer program-
ming model to develop course schedules. The model assigns
instructors to courses in classrooms during specific time slots,
based on instructor preference forms developed within the de-
partments. The typical integer programming model for course
scheduling in a semester includes more than 2,500 variables
and almost 2,000 constraints. The model has improved the
use of classroom space, instructors have to teach fewer
courses outside Copeland Hall (despite increasing enroll-
ments), instructors are more satisfied with their schedules, and
the time to develop schedules has been cut in half.
Source: Based on C. H. Martin, “Ohio University’s College of Busi-
ness Uses Integer Programming to Schedule Classes,” Interfaces 34,
no. 6 (November–December 2004): 460–65.
Rick Fatica/Ohio University
The solution shown in the QM for Windows output is
swimming pool
tennis center
athletic field
gymnasium
people per day expected usage
Z = 700
x4 = 0
x3 = 1
x2 = 0
x1 = 1

Solution of the Total Integer Model with Excel
We will demonstrate the Excel solution of a total integer programming problem for the machine
shop example we solved previously using the branch and bound method. Recall that this model
was formulated as
subject to
and integer
where
number of presses
number of lathes
The machine shop example set up in spreadsheet format is shown in Exhibit 5.9. This is
the same basic format as a linear programming model. The essential difference between solving
a regular linear programming model and an integer programming model is that we must desig-
nate the cells representing the decision variables as being “integer.” We accomplish this by
adding a constraint within Solver that establishes B10:B11 as integers, as shown in Exhibit 5.11.
The complete Solver, with all constraints, is shown in Exhibit 5.10. Clicking on the “Solve” but-
ton will generate the spreadsheet solution, as shown in Exhibit 5.12.
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2 Ú 0
15x1 + 30x2 … 200 ft.2
8,000x1 + 4,000x2 … +40,000
maximize Z = +100x1 + 150x2
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF INTEGER PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL AND QM FOR WINDOWS
195
Objective function
Slack, =G6–E6
=C6*B10+D6*B11
Decision variables—
B10:B11
EXHIBIT 5.9
Solution of the Mixed Integer Model with Excel
The solution of a mixed integer programming model with Excel will be demonstrated by using
the example for investments formulated earlier in the chapter:
subject to
condominiums
acres
bonds
and integer
where
condominiums purchased
acres of land purchased
bonds purchased
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x3 Ú 0
x2 Ú 0
x3 … 20
x2 … 15
x1 … 4
+50,000x1 + 12,000x2 + 8,000x3 … +250,000
maximize Z = +9,000x1 + 1,500x2 + 1,000x3

196
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Integer Solution
EXHIBIT 5.12
Integer variables
EXHIBIT 5.10
Click on”int.”
EXHIBIT 5.11

The Excel spreadsheet solution is shown in Exhibit 5.13, and the Solver Parameters win-
dow is shown in Exhibit 5.14. The decision variables are contained in cells B8:B10. The objec-
tive function formula is in cell B11. Notice that we did not include the constraint values for the
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF INTEGER PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL AND QM FOR WINDOWS
197
Available to invest
=C4*B8+D4*B9+E4*B10
EXHIBIT 5.13
Integer requirement for
condos (x1) and bonds (x3)
Constraints for acres,
condos, and bonds
EXHIBIT 5.14

availability of each type of investment (i.e., 4 condos, 15 acres of land, and 20 bonds) in the
spreadsheet setup. Instead, it was easier just to enter these constraints directly into Solver, as
shown in Exhibit 5.14. Notice in Solver that we have designated B8 and B10 as integers, but
we have not designated B9 as an integer, reflecting the fact that 
and 
are integers, whereas
is a real variable.
Solution of the Mixed Integer Model with QM for Windows
The “Integer and Mixed Integer” module of QM for Windows is used to solve our investment ex-
ample. When the problem data are input, we must designate the variable types for each decision
variable. In this case,
and 
are entered as integer variables, and 
is entered as a real vari-
able. The QM for Windows input screen for our investment example is shown in Exhibit 5.15,
and the solution screen is shown in Exhibit 5.16.
x2
x3
x1
x2
x3
x1
198
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
EXHIBIT 5.16
Click on “Real.“
EXHIBIT 5.15

0–1 INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELING EXAMPLES
199
Management Science Application
Forming Business Case Student Teams 
at Indiana University
The Kelley School of Business at Indiana University (Bloom-
ington) has more than 4,000 students. The school has an “in-
tegrated core” program, which consists of four courses
offered simultaneously in which business students must re-
ceive at least a C grade before they are allowed to move on to
advanced courses in their area of specialization. A program re-
quirement is that students must apply their knowledge of fi-
nance, marketing, operations, and strategy to a case study of
a hypothetical business situation. Students are divided into
teams of six or more for the cases, which account for 25% of
the students’ grades in the four program courses. About 800
students take the courses in the fall semester and about 300
in the fall and spring, resulting in between 50 and 130 teams.
Assigning this number of students to teams in an equitable
manner so that no team members perceive that they will be at
a disadvantage because of their team assignment is a difficult
and complex task. The program coordinator established con-
ditions to ensure, as much as possible, that the teams be equi-
table, including equal academic performance, diversity of
business functional areas, and an absence of a lone female or
international student member. The need for equal academic
performance among teams is evident, and since the case study
is done in the last 10 days of the semester, the academic per-
formance of each student to that point in time can be deter-
mined. Functional diversity was considered to be a desirable
team characteristic; however, since the school has more
finance and marketing majors, assigning students to teams ar-
bitrarily would not necessarily achieve a functionally diverse
team mix. Finally, past experience had shown that a single
female or international student team member sometimes
hindered team communication and did not always result in a
positive experience for that one member. An integer program-
ming model was developed to assign students to teams so
that these conditions ensuring equitable teams would be met.
The objective function minimizes the maximum deviation of a
team from the average academic performance of the entire
class. The model constraints ensure that all students are as-
signed to a team; teams consist of six students; no team has
more than two finance or marketing majors; and that female
and international students are assigned to teams in multiples
of two (i.e., a team might not have any female or international
students, but if it did there would be at least two). The integer
programming modeling approach resulted in teams that were
judged more cohesive, and that experienced less friction, than
with the previous team assignment method, thus allowing the
coordinator to conclude that the new method was more equi-
table from a student perspective.
Source: Based on R. Cutshall, S. Gavirneni, and K. Schultz, “Indiana
University’s Kelley School of Business Uses Integer Programming to
Form Equitable, Cohesive Student Teams,” Interfaces 37, no. 3
(May–June 2007): 265–76.
Creatas Images/Creatas/Thinkstock
0–1 Integer Programming Modeling Examples
Some of the most interesting and useful applications of integer programming involve 0–1 vari-
ables. In these applications the variables allow for the selection of an item (or activity) where a
value of one indicates that the item is selected, and a value of zero indicates that it is not. For ex-
ample, a decision variable might represent the purchase of a building; if the value of the variable
is one, the building is purchased. If the value is zero, the building is not purchased. We will
demonstrate three of the most popular applications of 0–1 integer programming—a capital
budgeting problem, a fixed charge and facility location problem, and a set covering problem.

200
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
A Capital Budgeting Example
The University Bookstore at Tech is considering several expansion projects, including developing
a store Web site for online retail and catalog purchases, buying an off-campus warehouse and its
subsequent expansion, developing a clothing and gift department specializing in university logo
apparel, opening a computer department carrying both hardware and software products, and
creating a banking pavilion of three automated teller machines outside the store. Some of the proj-
ects will be developed over a 2-year period and some over a 3-year period, as funds permit. The
net present value costs per year and the projected net present value of returns for a 5-year period
for each of the projects are shown in the following table:
NPV Return 
Project Costs/Year ($1,000s)
Project
($1,000s)
1
2
3
1. Web site
$120
$55
$40
$25
2. Warehouse
85
45
35
20
3. Clothing department
105
60
25
—
4. Computer department
140
50
35
30
5. ATMs
70
30
30
—
Available funds per year
$150
$110
$60
In addition, the store does not have enough space available to create both a computer depart-
ment and a clothing department. The bookstore director wants to know which projects to select to
maximize returns.
This problem requires a 0–1 integer programming model formulation where
selection of Web site project
selection of warehouse project
selection of clothing department project
selection of computer department project
selection of ATM project
if project i is selected; 0 if project i is not selected
subject to
or 1
Exhibit 5.17 shows this capital budgeting example set up in Excel spreadsheet format. The
decision variables for the projects are in cells C7:C11, and the objective function (Z) is in cell
D17. The objective function is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The
model constraints are included in cells E12:G12. For example, cell E12 contains the budget
constraint for year 1,
SUMPRODUCT (C7:C11, E7:E11), and the available budget is in cell
E14. Thus, this budget constraint will be included in Solver as 
The mu-
tually exclusive constraint,
is included in cell E15 as 
Exhibit 5.18 shows the Solver Parameters screen for the capital budgeting example. The 0–1
variable restriction has been established by clicking on “bin” (meaning the variables are binary)
=C9+C10.
x3 + x4 … 1,
E12:G12…E14:G14.
=
xi = 0
x3 + x4 … 1
25x1 + 20x2 + 30x4 … 60
40x1 + 35x2 + 25x3 + 35x4 + 30x5 … 110
55x1 + 45x2 + 60x3 + 50x4 + 30x5 … 150
maximize Z = +120x1 + 85x2 + 105x3 + 140x4 + 70x5
xi = 1
x5 =
x4 =
x3 =
x2 =
x1 =

0–1 INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELING EXAMPLES
201
=SUMPRODUCT(C7:C11,E7:E11)
=C9+C10
EXHIBIT 5.17
0–1 integer
restriction
Mutually exclusive
constraint
EXHIBIT 5.18
in the “Add Constraint” window. (Exhibit 5.4 showed the “bin” option.) The mutually exclusive
constraint is shown as 
The model solution is
(Web site)
(computer department)
(ATMs)
Z = +330,000
x5 = 1
x4 = 1
x1 = 1
E15…1.

202
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
A Fixed Charge and Facility Location Example
Frijo-Lane Food Products own farms in the Southwest and Midwest, where it grows and har-
vests potatoes. It then ships these potatoes to three processing plants in Atlanta, Baton Rouge,
and Chicago, where different varieties of potato products, including chips, are produced.
Recently, the company has experienced a growth in its product demand, so it wants to buy one
or more new farms to produce more potato products. The company is considering six new farms
with the following annual fixed costs and projected harvest:
Fixed Annual 
Projected Annual Harvest
Farm
Costs ($1,000s)
(thousands of tons)
1
$405
11.2
2
390
10.5
3
450
12.8
4
368
9.3
5
520
10.8
6
465
9.6
Plant (shipping costs, $/ton)
Farm
A
B
C
1
18
15
12
2
13
10
17
3
16
14
18
4
19
15
16
5
17
19
12
6
14
16
12
The company currently has the following additional available production capacity (tons) at its
three plants, which it wants to utilize:
Available Capacity
Plant
(thousands of tons)
A
12
B
10
C
14
The shipping costs ($) per ton from the farms being considered for purchase to the plants are as
follows:
The company wants to know which of the six farms it should purchase to meet available produc-
tion capacity at the minimum total cost, including annual fixed costs and shipping costs.
This problem is formulated as a 0–1 integer programming model because the selection of
the farms requires 0–1 decision variables:
if farm i is not selected, and 1 if farm i is selected,
where
i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6
yi = 0

0–1 INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELING EXAMPLES
203
The variables for the amounts shipped from each prospective farm to each plant are non-integer,
defined as follows:
where
The objective function (Z) combines shipping costs and the annual fixed costs, where
s:
The constraints for production capacity require that potatoes be shipped (i.e.,
variables have
positive values) only from a farm if it is selected; for example, for farm 1,
In this constraint, if 
then the 11.2 thousand tons of potatoes are available at farm 1
for shipment to one or more of the plants. Similar constraints are developed for each of the five
other farms. Constraints are also necessary for the production capacity to be filled at each plant.
The complete model is formulated as
subject to
or 1
Exhibit 5.19 shows this example model set up in Excel spreadsheet format. The decision
variables for the shipments between farms and plants,
are in cells C5:E10. The 0–1 
decision variables for farm selection,
are in cells C17:C22. The objective function (Z) is
embedded in cell C24 and is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The model
constraints for potato availability at the farms are embedded in cells H5:H10. For example, the
total amount shipped from farm 1,
is in cell G5 as 
The con-
straint formulation is in cell H5 as G5–C17*F5. The constraints for potatoes shipped from
the plants are in cells C12:E12. For example, the constraint formula in C12 is 
SUM
(C5:C10).
=
=
=C5+D5+E5.
x1A + x1B + x1C,
yi,
xij,
yi = 0
xij Ú 0
x1C + x2C + x3C + x4C + x5C + x6C = 14
x1B + x2B + x3B + x4B + x5B + x6B = 10
x1A + x2A + x3A + x4A + x5A + x6A = 12
x6A + x6B + x6C - 9.6y6 … 0
x5A + x5B + x5C - 10.8y5 … 0
x4A + x4B + x4C - 9.3y4 … 0
x3A + x3B + x3C - 12.8y3 … 0
x2A + x2B + x2C - 10.5y2 … 0
x1A + x1B + x1C - 11.2y1 … 0
+ 520y5 + 465y6
+ 16x6B + 12x6C + 405y1 + 390y2 + 450y3 + 368y4
+ 18x3C + 19x4A + 15x4B + 16x4C + 17x5A + 19x5B + 12x5C + 14x6A
minimize Z = 18x1A + 15x1B + 12x1C + 13x2A + 10x2B + 17x2C + 16x3A + 14x3B
y1 = 1,
x1A + x1B + x1C … 11.2y1
xij
16x6B + 12x6C + 405y1 + 390y2 + 450y3 + 368y4 + 520y5 + 465y6
18x3C + 19x4A + 15x4B + 16x4C + 17x5A + 19x5B + 12x5C + 14x6A +
minimize Z = 18x1A + 15x1B + 12x1C + 13x2A + 10x2B + 17x2C + 16x3A + 14x3B +
Z = +1,000
i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and j = A, B, C
xij = potatoes 1tons, 1,000s2shipped from farm i to plant j,

Exhibit 5.20 shows the Solver Parameters screen for this example. The 0–1 variable restric-
tion for the 
variables is established by the constraint
The farm harvest
(potato availability) constraints are shown as 
and the plant production capacity
constraints are shown as C12:E12=C11:E11.
H5:H10…0,
C17:C22=binary.
yi
204
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Plant capacity
constraints
Harvest constraints
0–1 integer
restriction
EXHIBIT 5.20
Objective function
=G10–C22*F10
=C10+D10+E10
=SUM(C5:C10)
EXHIBIT 5.19

0–1 INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELING EXAMPLES
205
The model solution is
(farm 1)
(farm 2)
(farm 4)
(farm 6)
A Set Covering Example
American Parcel Service (APS) has determined that it needs to add several new package distri-
bution hubs to service cities east of the Mississippi River. The company wants to construct the
minimum set of new hubs in the following 12 cities so that there is a hub within 300 miles of
each city (i.e., every city is covered by a hub):
City
Cities Within 300 Miles
1. Atlanta
Atlanta, Charlotte, Nashville
2. Boston
Boston, New York
3. Charlotte
Atlanta, Charlotte, Richmond
4. Cincinnati
Cincinnati, Detroit, Indianapolis, Nashville, Pittsburgh
5. Detroit
Cincinnati, Detroit, Indianapolis, Milwaukee, Pittsburgh
6. Indianapolis
Cincinnati, Detroit, Indianapolis, Milwaukee,
Nashville, St. Louis
7. Milwaukee
Detroit, Indianapolis, Milwaukee
8. Nashville
Atlanta, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Nashville, St. Louis
9. New York
Boston, New York, Richmond
10. Pittsburgh
Cincinnati, Detroit, Pittsburgh, Richmond
11. Richmond
Charlotte, New York, Pittsburgh, Richmond
12. St. Louis
Indianapolis, Nashville, St. Louis
This problem requires a 0–1 integer programming model in which the decision variables are the
available cities:
where
if city i is not selected as a hub and
if city i is selected
The objective function (Z) is to minimize the number of hubs:
The model constraints establish the set covering requirement (i.e., that each city be within 
300 miles of a hub). For example, Atlanta covers itself, Charlotte, and Nashville:
Atlanta: x1 + x3 + x8 Ú 1
minimize Z = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6 + x7 + x8 + x9 + x10 + x11 + x12
xi = 1,
xi = 0,
xi = city i, i = 1 to 12
x6A = 9,600 tons 
Z = +2,082,300
x4C = 2,800 tons
x4B = 1,900 tons 
 y6 = 1
x2B = 8,100 tons 
 y4 = 1
x2A = 2,400 tons 
 y2 = 1
x1C = 11,200 tons y1 = 1

In this constraint, at least one of the variables must equal 1 in order for Atlanta to be assured of
a hub within 300 miles. Similar constraints are developed for the other 11 cities.
The complete 0–1 integer programming model is summarized as follows:
subject to
Atlanta:
Boston:
Charlotte:
Cincinnati:
Detroit:
Indianapolis:
Milwaukee:
Nashville:
New York:
Pittsburgh:
Richmond:
St. Louis:
or 1
The Excel spreadsheet for this model is shown in Exhibit 5.21. The decision variables for the
cities and hub sites are in cells B20:M20, and the objective function (Z) is in cell B22. The for-
mula for the objective function embedded in B22 is the sum of the cities selected as hubs,
SUM
(B20:M20). The model constraints are in cells N7:N18. Notice that the values of 1 in cells B7, D7,
and I7 indicate the cities covered by a possible hub at Atlanta.
=
xi = 0
x6 + x8 + x12 Ú 1
x3 + x9 + x10 + x11 Ú 1
x4 + x5 + x10 + x11 Ú 1
x2 + x9 + x11 Ú 1
x1 + x4 + x6 + x8 + x12 Ú 1
x5 + x6 + x7 Ú 1
x4 + x5 + x6 + x7 + x8 + x12 Ú 1
x4 + x5 + x6 + x7 + x10 Ú 1
x4 + x5 + x6 + x8 + x10 Ú 1
x1 + x3 + x11 Ú 1
x2 + x9 Ú 1
x1 + x3 + x8 Ú 1
minimize Z = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6 + x7 + x8 + x9 + x10 + x11 + x12
206
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Objective function
=SUMPRODUCT(B18:M18,B20:M20)
Decision variables
in row 20 
EXHIBIT 5.21

0–1 INTEGER PROGRAMMING MODELING EXAMPLES
207
City constraints
set  1
EXHIBIT 5.22
Exhibit 5.22 shows the Solver Parameters screen for this problem. The 0–1 variable
restriction has been established by the constraints 
and Notice that the
formulas in cells N7:N18 are 
(i.e.,
) to complete the “set covering” con-
straints in the model.
N7:N18 Ú 1
set Ú 1
B20:M20 = binary
Notice that there is only one city covered by two hubs, Indianapolis (i.e., 2 in cell N12),
which is overlapped by both Detroit and St. Louis. Also, there are multiple optimal solutions to
this problem (i.e., different mixes of four hubs).

Summary
In this chapter, we found that simply rounding off non-integer simplex solution values for mod-
els requiring integer solutions is not always appropriate. Rounding can often lead to suboptimal
results. Therefore, direct solution approaches using the computer are needed to solve the three
forms of linear integer programming models—total integer models, 0–1 integer models, and
mixed integer models.
Having analyzed integer problems and the computer techniques for solving them, we have
now covered most of the basic forms of linear programming models and solution techniques.
Two exceptions are the transportation model and a problem that contains more than one objec-
tive, goal programming. These special cases of linear programming are presented in the next two
chapters.
208
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Management Science Application
Planning Next-Day Air Shipments 
at UPS
UPS is the leading package-delivery company in the
world, each day delivering more than 13 million packages to
8 million customers in more than 200 countries. UPS Air-
lines, the ninth-largest commercial airline in the United
States, with more than 345 aircraft, is the key component
that enables the company to provide expedited (express) de-
livery service. The airline’s next-day service delivers more
than 1 million packages each night and annually generates
more than $5 billion in revenue.
In the UPS air network, trucks transport originating
packages to ground centers and from ground centers to
more than 100 airports. Each plane carries its packages di-
rectly to one of six regional hubs (Columbia, SC, Dallas, TX,
Hartford, CT, Ontario, CA, Philadelphia, PA, and Rockford,
IL) or one all-points hub (in Louisville, KY), and it may stop
at an airport along the way to pick up additional packages.
Packages are sorted at the hubs and loaded onto aircraft for
outbound delivery to a destination airport. At the destina-
tion airport, workers transfer the packages to trucks that
move them to ground centers, where they are scanned,
sorted, and loaded onto smaller trucks for delivery to their
final destinations. Each type of aircraft has a maximum fly-
ing range, effective speed, landing restrictions at different
locations, and cargo capacity. The maximum number of air-
ports a plane can visit on a pickup or delivery route (not in-
cluding a hub) is two.
Planning a shipping network of this size with seven hubs,
more than 100 airports, more than 2,000 combinations of
airport origin and destination pairs, and a huge volume of
packages is a very large, complex problem. In 2000 the com-
pany implemented VOLCANO (Volume, Location, and Air-
craft Network Optimizer) to determine aircraft routes, fleet
assignments, and package routing to ensure overnight deliv-
ery at a minimum cost. VOLCANO is based on an integer
programming set covering model formulation. This system
saved the company more than $87 million between 2000
and 2002 by ensuring that it would use the most efficient
routes with the fewest planes. UPS estimated that it would
result in savings of more than $189 million over the next
decade.
Source: Based on A. P. Armacost, C. Barnharrt, K. A. Ware, and 
A. M. Wilson, “UPS Based on Optimizes Its Air Network,” Interfaces
34, no. 1 (January–February 2004): 15–25.
Thomas S. England/Bloomberg News

PROBLEMS
209
Example Problem
Solution
Problems
1. Consider the following linear programming model:
subject to
and integer
Demonstrate the graphical solution of this model.
x1, x2 Ú 0
3x1 + 4x2 … 10
maximize Z = 5x1 + 4x2
The following example problem demonstrates the model formulation and solution of a total
integer programming problem.
The Problem Statement
A textbook publishing company has developed two new sales regions and is planning to transfer
some of its existing sales force into these two regions. The company has 10 salespeople avail-
able for the transfer. Because of the different geographic configurations and the location of
schools in each region, the average annual expenses for a salesperson differ in the two regions;
the average is $10,000 per salesperson in region 1 and $7,000 per salesperson in region 2. The
total annual expense budget for the new regions is $72,000. It is estimated that a salesperson in
region 1 will generate an average of $85,000 in sales each year, and a salesperson in region 2
will generate $60,000 annually in sales. The company wants to know how many salespeople to
transfer into each region to maximize increased sales.
Formulate this problem and solve it by using QM for Windows.
Solution
Step 1: Formulate the Integer Programming Model
subject to
salespeople
expense budget
and integer
Step 2: Solve the Model Using QM for Windows
x1, x2 Ú 0
+10,000x1 + 7,000x2 … +72,000
x1 + x2 … 10
maximize Z = +85,000x1 + 60,000x2

2. Solve the following linear programming model by using the computer:
subject to
and integer
3. A tailor makes wool tweed sport coats and wool slacks. He is able to get a shipment of 
150 square yards of wool cloth from Scotland each month to make coats and slacks, and he has
200 hours of his own labor to make them each month. A coat requires 3 square yards of wool
and 10 hours to make, and a pair of slacks requires 5 square yards of wool and 4 hours to make.
The tailor earns $50 in profit from each coat he makes and $40 from each pair of slacks. He
wants to know how many coats and pairs of slacks to produce to maximize profit.
a. Formulate an integer linear programming model for this problem.
b. Determine the integer solution to this problem by using the computer. Compare this solution
with the solution without integer restrictions and indicate whether the rounded-down solu-
tion would have been optimal.
4. A jeweler and her apprentice make silver pins and necklaces by hand. Each week they have 
80 hours of labor and 36 ounces of silver available. It requires 8 hours of labor and 2 ounces of
silver to make a pin and 10 hours of labor and 6 ounces of silver to make a necklace. Each pin
also contains a small gem of some kind. The demand for pins is no more than six per week. A
pin earns the jeweler $400 in profit, and a necklace earns $100. The jeweler wants to know how
many of each item to make each week to maximize profit.
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer. Compare this solution with the solution without in-
teger restrictions and indicate whether the rounded-down solution would have been optimal.
5. A glassblower makes glass decanters and glass trays on a weekly basis. Each item requires 
1 pound of glass, and the glassblower has 15 pounds of glass available each week. A glass de-
canter requires 4 hours of labor, a glass tray requires only 1 hour of labor, and the glassblower
works 25 hours a week. The profit from a decanter is $50, and the profit from a tray is $10. The
glassblower wants to determine the total number of decanters 
and trays 
that he needs to
produce in order to maximize his profit.
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
6. The Livewright Medical Supplies Company has a total of 12 salespeople it wants to assign to
three regions—the South, the East, and the Midwest. A salesperson in the South earns $600 in
profit per month for the company, a salesperson in the East earns $540, and a salesperson in the
Midwest earns $375. The southern region can have a maximum assignment of 5 salespeople. The
company has a total of $750 per day available for expenses for all 12 salespeople. A salesperson
in the South has average expenses of $80 per day, a salesperson in the East has average expenses
of $70 per day, and a salesperson in the Midwest has average daily expenses of $50. The com-
pany wants to determine the number of salespeople to assign to each region to maximize profit.
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
7. Helen Holmes makes pottery by hand in her basement. She has 20 hours available each week to
make bowls and vases. A bowl requires 3 hours of labor, and a vase requires 2 hours of labor. It
requires 2 pounds of special clay to make a bowl and 5 pounds to produce a vase; she is able to
acquire 35 pounds of clay per week. Helen sells her bowls for $50 and her vases for $40. She
wants to know how many of each item to make each week to maximize her revenue.
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer. Compare this solution with the solution without integer
restrictions and indicate whether the rounded-down solution would have been optimal.
(x2)
(x1)
x1, x2 Ú 0
7x1 + 3x2 Ú 40
minimize Z = 3x1 + 6x2
210
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING

8. Lauren Moore has sold her business for $500,000 and wants to invest in condominium units
(which she intends to rent) and land (which she will lease to a farmer). She estimates that she
will receive an annual return of $8,000 for each condominium and $6,000 for each acre of land.
A condominium unit costs $70,000, and land costs $30,000 per acre. A condominium will cost
her $1,000 per unit, an acre of land will cost $2,000 for maintenance and upkeep, and $14,000
has been budgeted for these annual expenses. Lauren wants to know how much to invest in con-
dominiums and land to maximize her annual return.
a. Formulate a mixed integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
9. The owner of the Consolidated Machine Shop has $10,000 available to purchase a lathe, a press,
a grinder, or some combination thereof. The following 0–1 integer linear programming model
has been developed to determine which of the three machines (lathe,
press,
or grinder,
)
should be purchased in order to maximize annual profit:
subject to
(cost, $)
or 1
Solve this model by using the computer.
10. Solve the following mixed integer linear programming model by using the computer:
subject to
and integer
11. Northwoods Backpackers is a retail catalog store in Vermont that specializes in outdoor clothing
and camping equipment. Phone orders are taken each day by a large pool of computer operators,
some of whom are permanent and some temporary. A permanent operator can process an average of
76 orders per day, whereas a temporary operator can process an average of 53 orders per day. The
company averages at least 600 orders per day. The store has 10 computer workstations. A perma-
nent operator processes about 1.3 orders with errors each day, whereas a temporary operator aver-
ages 4.1 orders with errors daily. The store wants to limit errors to 24 per day. A permanent operator
is paid $81 per day, including benefits, and a temporary operator is paid $50 per day. The company
wants to know the number of permanent and temporary operators to hire to minimize costs.
Formulate an integer programming model for this problem and solve it by using the computer.
12. Consider the following linear programming model:
subject to
or 1
Solve this problem by using the computer.
13. In the example problem solution for this chapter on page 209, a textbook company was attempting
to determine how many sales representatives to assign to each of two new regions. The company
x1, x2, x3, x4 = 0
x1 + 10x2 + x3 … 10
10x1 + 7x2 + 20x3 + 15x4 … 40
2x1 + 4x2 + 3x3 + 7x4 … 10
maximize Z = 20x1 + 30x2 + 10x3 + 40x4
x2  0
x1, x3  0
x1 + 3x2 … 12
5x1 + 3x2 + 6x3 … 20
maximize Z = 5x1 + 6x2 + 4x3
x1, x2, x3 = 0
+5,000x1 + 6,000x2 + 4,000x3 … 10,000
maximize Z = 1,000x1 + 700x2 + 800x3 1profit, +2
x3
x2;
x1;
PROBLEMS
211

has now decided that if any sales representatives are assigned to region 1, a sales office must be es-
tablished there, at an annual cost of $18,000. This altered problem is an example of a type of integer
programming problem known as a “fixed charge” problem.
a. Reformulate the integer programming model to reflect this new condition.
b. Solve this new problem by using the computer.
14. The Texas Consolidated Electronics Company is contemplating a research and development pro-
gram encompassing eight research projects. The company is constrained from embarking on all
projects by the number of available management scientists (40) and the budget available for R&D
projects ($300,000). Further, if project 2 is selected, project 5 must also be selected (but not vice
versa). Following are the resource requirements and the estimated profit for each project:
Expense
Management
Estimated Profit 
Project
($1,000s)
Scientists Required
($1,000,000s)
1
$ 60
7
$0.36
2
110
9
0.82
3
53
8
0.29
4
47
4
0.16
5
92
7
0.56
6
85
6
0.61
7
73
8
0.48
8
65
5
0.41
Formulate the integer programming model for this problem and solve it by using the computer.
15. Mazy’s Department Store has decided to stay open for business on a 24-hour basis. The store
manager has divided the 24-hour day into six 4-hour periods and has determined the following
minimum personnel requirements for each period:
Time
Personnel Needed
Midnight–4:00 A.M.
90
4:00–8:00 A.M.
215
8:00 A.M.–Noon
250
Noon–4:00 P.M.
65
4:00–8:00 P.M.
300
8:00 P.M.–Midnight
125
Store personnel must report to work at the beginning of one of these time periods and must
work for 8 consecutive hours. The store manager wants to know the minimum number of em-
ployees to assign to each 4-hour segment to minimize the total number of employees. Formulate
and solve this problem.
16. The athletic boosters club for Beaconville has planned a 2-day fund-raising drive to purchase
uniforms for all the local high schools and to improve facilities. Donations will be solicited dur-
ing the day and night by telephone and personal contact. The boosters club has arranged for
local college students to donate their time to solicit donations. The average donation from each
type of contact and the time for a volunteer to solicit each type of donation are as follows:
Average Donation ($)
Average Interview Time (min.)
Phone
Personal
Phone
Personal
Day
$16
$33
6
13
Night
17
37
7
19
212
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING

The boosters club has gotten several businesses and car dealers to donate gasoline and cars for
the college students to use to make a maximum of 575 personal contacts daily during the fund-
raising drive. The college students will donate a total of 22 hours during the day and 43 hours at
night during the drive.
The president of the boosters club wants to know how many different types of donor contacts
to schedule during the drive to maximize total donations. Formulate and solve an integer pro-
gramming model for this problem. What is the difference in the total maximum value of dona-
tions between the integer and non-integer rounded-down solutions to this problem?
17. The Metropolitan Arts Council (MAC) wants to advertise its upcoming season of plays, con-
certs, and ballets. A television commercial that costs $25,000 will supposedly reach 53,000 po-
tential arts customers. The breakdown of the audience is as follows:
Age
Male
Female
35
12,000
20,000
35
7,000
14,000
A newspaper ad costs $7,000, and the newspaper claims that its ads will reach an audience of
30,000 potential arts customers, broken down as follows:
Age
Male
Female
35
12,000
8,000
35
6,000
4,000
A radio ad costs $9,000, and it is estimated to reach an audience of 41,000 arts customers,
with the following audience breakdown:
Age
Male
Female
35
7,000
11,000
35
10,000
13,000
The arts council has established several marketing guidelines. It wants to reach at least
200,000 potential arts customers. It believes older people are more likely to buy tickets than
younger people, so it wants to reach at least 1.5 times as many people over 35 as people under
35. The council also believes women are more likely to instigate ticket purchases to the arts than
men, so it wants its advertising audience to be at least 60% female.
a. Formulate and solve an integer programming model for MAC to determine the number of
ads of each type it should use at the minimum cost.
b. Solve this model without integer restrictions and compare the results.
18. Juan Hernandez, a Cuban athlete who visits the United States and Europe frequently, is allowed
to return with a limited number of consumer items not generally available in Cuba. The items,
which are carried in a duffel bag, cannot exceed a weight of 5 pounds. Once Juan is in Cuba, he
sells the items at highly inflated prices. The three most popular items in Cuba are denim jeans,
CD players, and CDs of U.S. rock groups. The weight and profit (in U.S. dollars) of each item
are as follows:
Item
Weight (lb.)
Profit
Denim jeans
2
$ 90
CD players
3
150
Compact discs
1
30
6
Ú
6
Ú
6
Ú
PROBLEMS
213

Juan wants to determine the combination of items he should pack in his duffel bag to maxi-
mize his profit. This problem is an example of a type of integer programming problem known as
a “knapsack” problem. Formulate and solve this problem.
19. The Avalon Floor Cleaner Company is trying to determine the number of salespeople it should
allocate to its three regions—the East, the Midwest, and the West. The company has 100 sales-
people that it wants to assign to the three regions. The annual average unit sales volume achieved
by a salesperson in each region is as follows:
Region
Units per Salesperson
East
25,000
Midwest
18,000
West
31,000
Because travel distances, costs of living, and other factors vary among the three regions, the an-
nual cost of having a salesperson is $5,000 in the East, $11,000 in the Midwest, and $7,000 in the
West. The company has $700,000 budgeted for expenses. To ensure nationwide exposure for its
product, the company has decided that each region must have at least 10 salespeople. The company
wants to know how many salespeople to allocate to each region to maximize total average units sold.
Formulate an integer programming model for this problem and solve it by using the computer.
20. During the war with Iraq in 1991, the Terraco Motor Company produced a lightweight, all-
terrain vehicle code-named “J99 Terra” for the military. The company is now planning to sell
the Terra to the public. It has five plants that manufacture the vehicle and four regional distribu-
tion centers. The company is unsure of public demand for the Terra, so it is considering reduc-
ing its fixed operating costs by closing one or more plants, even though it would incur an
increase in transportation costs. The relevant costs for the problem are provided in the following
table. The transportation costs are per thousand vehicles shipped; for example, the cost of ship-
ping 1,000 vehicles from plant 1 to warehouse C is $32,000.
Transportation Costs ($1,000s)
to Warehouse
Annual
Annual
From
Production
Fixed
Plant
A
B
C
D
Capacity
Operating Costs
1
$56
$21
$32
$65
12,000
$2,100,000
2
18
46
7
35
18,000
850,000
3
12
71
41
52
14,000
1,800,000
4
30
24
61
28
10,000
1,100,000
5
45
50
26
31
16,000
900,000
Annual
Demand
6,000
14,000
8,000
10,000
Formulate and solve an integer programming model for this problem to assist the company in
determining which plants should remain open and which should be closed and the number of
vehicles that should be shipped from each plant to each warehouse to minimize total cost.
21. The Otter Creek Winery produces three kinds of table wine—a blush, a white, and a red. The win-
ery has 30,000 pounds of grapes available to produce wine this season. A cask of blush requires
360 pounds of grapes, a cask of white requires 375 pounds, and a cask of red requires 410 pounds.
The winery has enough storage space in its aging room to store 67 casks of wine. The winery has
2,200 hours of production capacity, and it requires 14 hours to produce a cask of blush, 10 hours to
produce a cask of white, and 18 hours to produce a cask of red. From records of previous years’
214
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING

sales, the winery knows it will sell at least twice as much blush as red and at least 1.5 times as much
white as blush. The profit for a cask of blush is $12,100, the profit for a cask of white is $8,700,
and the profit for a cask of red is $10,500. The winery wants to know the number of casks of each
table wine to produce. Formulate and solve an integer programming model for this problem.
22. Brenda Last, an undergraduate business major at State University, is attempting to determine her
course schedule for the fall semester. She is considering seven 3-credit-hour courses, which are
shown in the following table. Also included are the average number of hours she expects to have
to devote to each course each week (based on information from other students) and her minimum
expected grade in each course, based on an analysis of the grading records of the teachers in
each course:
Course
Average Hours per Week
Minimum Grade
Management I
5
B
Principles of Accounting
10
C
Corporate Finance
8
C
Quantitative Methods
12
D
Marketing Management
7
C
Java Programming
10
D
English Literature
8
B
An A in a course earns 4 quality credits per hour, a B earns 3 quality credits, a C earns 2 qual-
ity credits, a D earns 1 quality credit, and an F earns no quality credits per hour. Brenda wants to
select a schedule that will provide at least a 2.0 grade point average. In order to remain a full-
time student, which she must do to continue receiving financial aid, she must take at least 12
credit hours. Principles of Accounting, Corporate Finance, Quantitative Methods, and Java Pro-
gramming all require a lot of computing and mathematics, and Brenda would like to take no
more than two of these courses. To remain on schedule and meet prerequisites, she needs to take
at least three of the following courses: Management I, Principles of Accounting, Java Program-
ming, and English Literature. Brenda wants to develop a course schedule that will minimize the
number of hours she has to work each week.
a. Formulate a 0–1 integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer. Indicate how many total hours Brenda should ex-
pect to work on these courses each week and her minimum grade point average.
23. The artisans at Jewelry Junction in Phoenix are preparing to make gold jewelry during a 2-month pe-
riod for the Christmas season. They can make bracelets, necklaces, and pins. Each bracelet requires
6.3 ounces of gold and 17 hours of labor, each necklace requires 3.9 ounces of gold and 10 hours of
labor, and each pin requires 3.1 ounces of gold and 7 hours of labor. Jewelry Junction has available
125 ounces of gold and 320 hours of labor. A bracelet sells for $1,650, a necklace for $850, and a pin
for $790. The store wants to know how many of each item to produce to maximize revenue.
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer. Compare this solution with the solution with the in-
teger restrictions relaxed and indicate whether the rounded-down solution would have been
optimal.
24. Harry and Melissa Jacobson produce handcrafted furniture in a workshop on their farm. They have
obtained a load of 600 board feet of birch from a neighbor and are planning to produce round
kitchen tables and ladder-back chairs during the next 3 months. Each table will require 30 hours of
labor, each chair will require 18 hours, and between them they have a total of 480 hours of labor
available. A table requires 40 board feet of wood to make, and a chair requires 15 board feet. 
A table earns the couple $575 in profit, and a chair earns $120 in profit. Most people who buy 
PROBLEMS
215

a table also want four chairs to go with it, so for every table that is produced, at least four chairs
must also be made, although additional chairs can also be sold separately. Formulate and solve an
integer programming model to determine the number of tables and chairs the Jacobsons should
make to maximize profit.
25. The Jacobsons in Problem 24 have been approached by a home furnishings company that needs
a wooden stool for its catalog. The company has asked the Jacobsons to produce a batch of 
20 wooden stools, and the Jacobsons would realize a profit of $65 for each stool. A stool will re-
quire 4 board feet of wood and 5 hours to produce. Formulate and solve an integer programming
model to help the Jacobsons determine whether they should also produce the stools.
26. The Skimmer Boat Company manufactures three kinds of molded fiberglass recreational
boats—a bass fishing boat, a ski boat, and a speedboat. The profit for a bass boat is $20,500, the
profit for a ski boat is $12,000, and the profit for a speedboat is $22,300. The company believes
it will sell more bass boats than the other two boats combined but no more than twice as many.
The ski boat is its standard production model, and bass boats and speedboats are modifications.
The company has production capacity to manufacture 210 standard (ski-type) boats; however, a
bass boat requires 1.3 times the standard production capacity, and a speedboat requires 1.5 times
the normal production capacity. In addition, a bass boat uses one high-powered engine and a
speedboat uses two, and only 160 high-powered engines are available. The company wants to
know how many boats of each type to produce to maximize profit. Formulate and solve an inte-
ger programming model for this problem.
27. The Reliance Manufacturing Company produces an aircraft part. The company can produce the
part entirely at a flexible work center with multiple computerized machines. The company has
four work centers, all of which are different because they were purchased at different times.
Each work center has a single operator; however, the company’s operators have different skill
levels, resulting in different levels of daily output and product quality. The following tables show
the average daily output and average number of defects per day for each of the company’s five
operators who are capable of producing the aircraft part:
Average Daily Output per Machine
Operator
A
B
C
D
1
18
20
21
17
2
19
15
22
18
3
20
20
17
19
4
24
21
16
23
5
22
19
21
21
Average Number of Defects Daily 
per Machine
Operator
A
B
C
D
1
0.3
0.9
0.6
0.4
2
0.8
0.5
1.1
0.7
3
1.1
1.3
0.6
0.8
4
1.2
0.8
0.6
0.9
5
1.0
0.9
1.0
1.0
The company wants to determine which operator to assign to each machine to maximize
daily output and keep the percentage of defects to less than 4%.
a. Formulate a 0–1 integer programming model for this problem.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
216
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING

28. Corsouth Mortgage Associates is a large home mortgage firm in the Southeast. It has a pool of
permanent and temporary computer operators who process mortgage accounts, including posting
payments and updating escrow accounts for insurance and taxes. A permanent operator can
process 220 accounts per day, and a temporary operator can process 140 accounts per day. On av-
erage, the firm must process and update at least 6,300 accounts daily. The company has 32 com-
puter workstations available. Permanent and temporary operators work 8 hours per day. 
A permanent operator averages about 0.4 error per day, whereas a temporary operator averages 
0.9 error per day. The company wants to limit errors to 15 per day. A permanent operator is paid
$120 per day, whereas a temporary operator is paid $75 per day. Corsouth wants to determine the
number of permanent and temporary operators it needs to minimize cost. Formulate and solve an
integer programming model for this problem and compare this solution to the non-integer solution.
29. In Problem 28, Corsouth Mortgage Associates is considering hiring some hourly, part-time com-
puter operators in addition to its permanent and temporary operators. A part-time operator can
process 12 accounts per hour, averages 0.16 error per hour, and is paid $4.50 per hour. Corsouth
wants to know the number of permanent and temporary employees it should use, plus the number of
part-time hours it should arrange for. Formulate and solve a mixed integer model for this problem.
30. Texmart is a locally owned “big-box” retail store chain in Texas with 75 stores, primarily located
in the Dallas–Fort Worth area. In order to compete with national big-box store chains, Texmart is
planning to undertake several “sustainability” (i.e., “green”) projects at its stores. The national
chains have been heavily publicizing their sustainability efforts, including the reduction of green-
house gas (GHG) emissions, which has had a positive effect on their sales. They have also demon-
strated that sustainability projects can have a positive impact on cost (especially energy) savings.
The projects Texmart is considering include installing solar panels at some or all of its stores; in-
stalling small wind turbines; replacing some or all of its 165 trucks with more fuel-efficient hy-
brid trucks; reducing waste, including recycling; and reducing plastic bags in their stores. The
costs for these projects, the resulting reduction in GHG emissions, the energy savings, and the
annual costs savings are shown in the following table:
Sustainable Projects
Solar
Wind
Shipping/
Waste/
Plastic
Power
Power
Vehicles
Recycling
Bags
Media/public relations score
3
2
1
1
2
Cost
2,600,000 
950,000
38,000
365,000
175,000
GHG reductions (metric 
17,500
8,600
25
1,700
900
tons per year)
Cost savings ($)
220,000
125,000
26,000
75,000
45,000
Energy savings (kWh)
400,000
150,000
34,000
1,200
55,000
Units
75
75
165
75
75
The media public/relations score in this table designates the importance of a particular project
relative to the other projects in generating public awareness and publicity. For example, a score
of 3 indicates that the solar power project will have the greatest public impact. However, Tex-
mart believes if it undertakes a project, it will require a threshold number of projects to make an
impact—specifically, a solar power installation at 1 store or more, wind power projects at least 
3 stores, at least 10 new trucks, at least 2 waste/recycling store projects, and at least 6 stores with
plastic bag reduction projects. Texmart has budgeted $30 million for sustainable projects, and it
wants to achieve GHG emission reductions of at least 250,000 metric tons per year; it wants to
achieve annual cost savings of at least $4 million; and, it wants to achieve annual energy savings of 
at least 5 million kilowatt hours (kWh), while maximizing the public relations impact of its 
sustainability program. Develop and solve a linear programming model to help Texmart deter-
mine how many projects of each type it should undertake. 
PROBLEMS
217

31. In Problem 30, reformulate and solve the model so that Texmart maximizes its cost savings and
does not consider the media/public relations impact at all.
32. The Office of Homeland Security and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have
jointly mandated that cities and localities develop plans for establishing emergency command
centers in multiple locations to dispense vaccines and antibiotics and provide security and po-
lice coordination in the event of major emergency events, such as terrorist attacks, bioterrorism,
and natural pandemics. These command centers must be located such that one is within 15 min-
utes of every person in the general population. For cities with large populations and geographic
areas, this could result in a large number of centers and create logistical problems in setting them
up quickly and staffing them. As such, cities would like to create the minimum number of com-
mand centers possible. In order to determine where it should locate its command centers, a city
has divided its geographic area into four quadrants—northeast, northwest, southeast, and south-
west. Within each quadrant, it has established four sectors with potential sites for command
centers—A, B, C, and D—usually where there is a sufficient facility capable of housing a center
and not necessarily centrally located. The potential command center site in a sector is always
within 15 minutes of the population in the other three sectors in the quadrant and also within 
15 minutes of the population in some sectors in adjacent quadrants, as shown in the following table:
Sector
Adjacent Quadrant Sectors Within 15 Minutes
1. NE-A
NW-A, SE-A
2. NE-B
NW-A, NW-B
3. NE-C
SE-A, SE-C
4. NE-D
NW-A, NW-C, SE-B, SW-A
5. NW-A
NE-A, NE-B, NE-D
6. NW-B
NE-B
7. NW-C
NE-D, SE-B
8. NW-D
SW-B, SW-D
9. SE-A
NE-C
10. SE-B
NE-D, NW-C, SW-A, SW-C
11. SE-C
NE-C, SW-C
12. SE-D
SW-C, SW-D
13. SW-A
NE-D, SE-B
14. SW-B
NW-D
15. SW-C
SE-B, SE-C, SE-D
16. SW-D
NW-D, SE-D
Determine the location of the minimum number of command centers for the city.
33. Tech offers a number of off-campus courses in its professional and executive masters of infor-
mation technology (MIT) programs at various locations around the state. The courses are taught
by a group of regular Tech information technology faculty and adjuncts they hire from around
the state. There are two main considerations in assigning individual faculty to courses: the travel
distance and the average course teaching evaluation scores from past years. The college would
like to minimize the mileage for teaching the courses not only for each faculty member’s benefit
but also to reduce program expenses. It would also like to have the faculty member who does
the best job with a particular course teach that course. The following table shows the mileage for
each faculty member to each course location and his or her average teaching evaluation scores
(on a 5.00 scale, where “5” is outstanding and “1” is poor) for the fall semester:
218
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING

PROBLEMS
219
Course
Teacher
(mileage/score)
Abrahams
Bray
Clayton
Dennis
Evans
Farah
Gonzalez
Hampton
MIT 125
35/4.10
35/4.63
71/4.55
35/4.43
119/3.78
215/4.21
35/4.93
94/4.06
MIT 225
74/4.05
74/3.78
95/4.61
74/4.26
147/3.69
135/2.78
74/4.12
112/4.02
MIT 250
74/3.97
74/4.17
95/4.12
74/3.45
147/3.91
135/3.94
74/4.33
112/4.11
MIT 300
35/2.95
35/3.67
71/4.14
35/3.95
119/3.25
215/4.33
35/4.71
94/3.99
MIT 325
210/4.63
210/4.12
105/3.95
210/4.55
55/3.45
45/3.52
210/4.85
110/4.06
MIT 375
175/4.15
175/3.95
115/4.06
175/3.92
67/3.88
65/4.11
175/4.13
134/4.07
MIT 400
210/4.22
210/4.55
105/3.52
210/4.34
55/3.66
45/4.16
210/4.66
110/3.95
MIT 425
175/4.36
175/4.44
115/3.95
175/3.88
67/4.01
65/3.77
175/4.15
134/4.23
MIT 450
74/3.78
74/4.03
95/4.11
74/3.94
147/3.54
135/2.95
74/4.24
112/3.96
MIT 500
175/3.87
175/3.45
115/3.86
175/3.84
67/3.92
65/3.45
175/3.81
134/3.76
Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will assign all the faculty members such
that all courses are covered and each faculty member teaches at least one, but no more than two
courses. Explain your solution approach.
34. Rowntown Cab Company has 70 drivers that it must schedule in three 8-hour shifts. However,
the demand for cabs in the metropolitan area varies dramatically according to the time of day.
The slowest period is between midnight and 4:00 A.M. The dispatcher receives few calls, and the
calls that are received have the smallest fares of the day. Very few people are going to the airport
at that time of night or taking other long-distance trips. It is estimated that a driver will average
$80 in fares during that period. The largest fares result from the airport runs in the morning.
Thus, the drivers who start their shift during the period from 4:00 A.M. to 8:00 A.M. average $500
in total fares, and drivers who start at 8:00 A.M. average $420. Drivers who start at noon average
$300, and drivers who start at 4:00 P.M. average $270. Drivers who start at the beginning of the
8:00 P.M. to midnight period earn an average of $210 in fares during their 8-hour shift.
To retain customers and acquire new ones, Rowntown must maintain a high customer service
level. To do so, it has determined the minimum number of drivers it needs working during every 
4-hour time segment—10 from midnight to 4:00 A.M., 12 from 4:00 to 8:00 A.M., 20 from 8:00 A.M.
to noon, 25 from noon to 4:00 P.M., 32 from 4:00 to 8:00 P.M., and 18 from 8:00 P.M. to midnight.
a. Formulate and solve an integer programming model to help Rowntown Cab schedule its drivers.
b. If Rowntown has a maximum of only 15 drivers who will work the late shift from midnight
to 8:00 A.M., reformulate the model to reflect this complication and solve it.
c. All the drivers like to work the day shift from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., so the company has de-
cided to limit the number of drivers who work this 8-hour shift to 20. Reformulate the model
in (b) to reflect this restriction and solve it.
35. Globex Investment Capital Corporation owns six companies that have the following estimated
returns (in millions of dollars) if sold in one of the next 3 years:
Year Sold
(estimated return, $1,000,000s)
Company
1
2
3
1
$14
$18
$23
2
9
11
15
3
18
23
27
4
16
21
25
5
12
16
22
6
21
23
28
To operating funds, the company must sell at least $20 million worth of assets in year 1, $25
million in year 2, and $35 million in year 3. Globex wants to develop a plan for selling these
companies during the next 3 years to maximize return.
Formulate an integer programming model for this problem and solve it by using the computer.

36. The Heartland Distribution Company is a food warehouse and distributor that has a contract with
a grocery store chain in several Midwest and Southeast cities. The company wants to construct
new warehouses/distribution centers in some of the cities it services to serve the stores in those
cities plus all the other stores in the other cities that don’t have distribution centers. A distribu-
tion center can effectively service all stores within a 300-mile radius. The company also wants
to limit its fixed annual costs to under $900,000. The company wants to build the minimum
number of distribution centers possible.
The following table shows the cities within 300 miles of every city and the projected fixed an-
nual charge for a distribution center in each city:
Annual Fixed Charge 
City
($1,000s)
Cities Within 300 Miles
1. Atlanta
$276
Atlanta, Charlotte, Nashville
2. Charlotte
253
Atlanta, Charlotte, Richmond
3. Cincinnati
394
Cincinnati, Cleveland, Indianapolis,
Louisville, Nashville, Pittsburgh
4. Cleveland
408
Cincinnati, Cleveland, Indianapolis, Pittsburgh
5. Indianapolis
282
Cincinnati, Cleveland, Indianapolis, Louisville,
Nashville, St. Louis
6. Louisville
365
Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Louisville,
Nashville, St. Louis
7. Nashville
268
Atlanta, Cincinnati, Indianapolis, Louisville,
Nashville, St. Louis
8. Pittsburgh
323
Cincinnati, Cleveland, Pittsburgh, Richmond
9. Richmond
385
Charlotte, Pittsburgh, Richmond
10. St. Louis
298
Indianapolis, Louisville, Nashville, St. Louis
a. Formulate an integer programming model for this problem and solve it by using the computer.
b. What is the solution if the cost constraint is removed from the original model formulation?
What is the difference in cost?
37. The Kreeger Grocery Store chain has bought out a competing grocery store chain. However, it
now has too many stores in close proximity to each other in certain cities. In Roanoke the chain
has 10 stores, and it does not want any stores closer than 2 miles to each other. Following are the
monthly revenues ($1,000s) from each store and a map showing the general proximity of the
stores. Stores within 2 miles of each other are circled.
Monthly Revenue 
Store
($1,000s)
1
$127
2
83
3
165
4
96
5
112
6
88
7
135
8
141
9
117
10
94
220
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
3
1
2
4
5
6
7
8
10
9
Develop and solve an integer program-
ming model to determine which stores
the Kreeger chain should keep open in
Roanoke.

38. A youth soccer club has contracted with Holiday Helpers, a local travel agency, to broker hotel
rooms for out-of-town teams that have entered the club’s Labor Day weekend soccer tourna-
ment. The agency has 12 teams it needs to arrange rooms for at 8 possible hotels. The following
tables show the number of rooms each team needs, the number of rooms available at each hotel,
the room rate at each hotel, and the maximum room rate each team wants to pay:
Max 
Rooms 
Room 
Rooms 
Team
Rate
Needed
Hotel
Rate
Available
1. Arsenal
$ 70
15
A. Holiday
$ 90
41
2. United
75
18
B. Roadside
75
26
3. Wildcats
60
20
C. Bates
55
38
4. Rage
80
12
D. Hampson
95
25
5. Rapids
110
17
E. Tilton
100
26
6. Storm
90
10
F. Marks
80
38
7. Tigers
70
18
G. Bayside
70
35
8. Stars
80
18
H. Harriott
80
52
9. Comets
80
20
10. Hurricanes
65
16
11. Strikers
90
20
12. Bees
100
14
a. All of a team’s rooms must be at the same hotel. Formulate a model and develop a solution
for the agency to reserve rooms for as many teams as possible, according to their needs.
b. The travel agency has requested that each team indicate three hotels it would prefer to stay
at, in order of priority, based on price, location, and facilities. The teams’ preferences are
shown in the following table:
Team
Hotel
Priority
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
1
C
B
C
F
D
F
C
F
H
C
A
E
2
G
G
—
H
E
A
G
H
F
—
H
A
3
—
C
—
B
A
H
—
B
B
—
F
D
Determine a revised hotel room allocation to assign rooms to all teams while reflecting their
preferences to the greatest possible extent.
39. The Tech Software School contracts to train employees of companies in the use of various software
products and packages. The training programs are all delivered on three consecutive days but require
different daily durations, depending on the software product. For a specific 7-day week (including
weekends), the school has contracted with eight different companies for training sessions for differ-
ent software products. The companies can send their employees to the Tech training facility only on
certain days, as shown in the following table, with the hourly training requirements per day:
Hours
Earliest
Latest
Company
First Day
Second Day
Third Day
Start Day
Start Day
A
4
6
3
1
4
B
3
2
5
1
3
C
7
1
1
2
5
D
1
3
6
2
5
E
8
5
2
3
5
F
5
5
5
1
5
G
6
3
3
3
5
H
4
6
6
3
4
PROBLEMS
221

The school has 20 staff-hours per day available for these training sessions.
a. Develop a feasible training schedule for the eight companies.
b. Develop a feasible training schedule for the companies that will minimize the weekend train-
ing hours (where the weekend includes days 6 and 7).
40. Each day Seacoast Food Services makes deliveries to four restaurants it supplies in the metro
Atlanta area. The service uses one truck that starts at its warehouse, makes a delivery to each
restaurant, and then returns to the warehouse. The mileage between the warehouse, 1, and each
of the restaurants, 2, 3, 4, and 5, is shown in the following table:
Location
Location
1
2
3
4
5
1
—
10
15
20
40
2
10
—
12
16
24
3
15
12
—
10
20
4
20
16
10
—
16
5
40
24
20
16
—
Formulate and solve an integer programming model to determine the route (or tour) the truck
should take to start at the warehouse, visit each restaurant once, and return to the warehouse with
the minimum total distance traveled.
41. HTM Realty has a storefront rental property in downtown Draperton, a small college town next
to the Tech campus. The property encompasses four business spaces that open onto College Av-
enue. HTM has a long-term tenant in each space, and their leases are all running out at approxi-
mately the same time. HTM wants to significantly increase the rent for each space, and the
current tenants have all indicated that they will stay on at a slightly increased rent but not at the
rental price that HTM wants. HTM has shopped the spaces around and has gotten commitments
from four new tenants at the higher rent. However, HTM realizes that there is a very high likeli-
hood that the current tenants will remain in business and pay their rent for a new 3-year lease,
whereas there is a much smaller likelihood that the new tenants will be able to stay in business
and fulfill their lease payments. The following table shows the current and prospective new ten-
ants for each space, their monthly payments for a 3-year lease, and the probability that each will
remain in business:
222
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Current
Lease 
New 
Lease 
Space
Tenant
Payment
Probability
Tenant
Payment
Probability
A
Doughnut Shop
$1,200
.90
Sub Shop
$2,400
.50
B
Jewelry Store
800
.90
Dress Shop
1,200
.70
C
Music Store
1,000
.95
Restaurant
2,000
.40
D
Gift & Card Shop
1,100
.95
Tech Logo Store
1,800
.60
HTM wants to lease each space to businesses that will maximize their expected lease payments.
It also wants a likelihood that at least three of the businesses will stay in business. Formulate
and solve an integer programming model for this problem.
42. The Valley Times and World News publishes and delivers a morning newspaper 7 days a week.
The bundled papers are delivered by trucks to a number of area communities where they are
picked up by carriers at a central location in the community, who then deliver the individual
newspapers to customers along various predetermined routes. The papers arrive at the central
distribution location around 6 A.M., and they must be delivered by 8 A.M. The routes include
homes, stores, restaurants, and newspaper machines. One community, Hannah Creek, has 

10 routes, and six available paper carriers, who have requested a delivery contract. The follow-
ing table shows the time (in minutes) required to deliver the newspapers along each route, the
number of papers delivered on each route, and the vehicle capacity (in number of papers) of each
carrier:
PROBLEMS
223
Carrier
A
B
C
D
E
F
Vehicle capacity
600
720
450
510
660
550
Route
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Time (mins)
29
35
15
35
20
23
35
40
45
50
Papers delivered
200
240
110
90
65
135
80
170
150
270
Formulate and solve a linear integer programming model that will minimize the total number of
carriers needed to make the deliveries and that will determine which carrier will be assigned
each route and the total number of papers delivered by each of the selected carriers.
43. The BigRig Trucking Company participates in an Internet transportation exchange where cus-
tomers advertise their shipments including load weight and volume, and trip origin and destina-
tion. BigRig then computes the cost and time of the trip and determines the bid it should make
for the shipment to achieve a certain profit level. Twelve customers have posted shipments on
the exchange, and BigRig has three trucks available for shipments. Each truck has a load capac-
ity of 80,000 pounds and 5,500 cubic feet and available driving time of 90 hours. The following
table shows the load parameters (i.e., weight in pounds and volume in cubic feet) for each cus-
tomer shipment and the profit BigRig would realize from each shipment:
Customer
Profit ($)
Load (lb.)
Load (ft.3)
Time (hours)
1
20,000
44,000
1,600
51
2
17,000
39,000
2,100
22
3
15,000
24,000
3,200
45
4
7,000
33,000
3,700
36
5
18,000
18,000
4,400
110
6
12,000
21,000
2,900
105
7
5,000
15,000
1,100
44
8
4,600
19,000
1,600
56
9
11,000
23,000
800
60
10
6,200
36,000
1,800
25
11
14,000
55,000
3,700
37
12
9,000
45,000
2,900
41
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine which customer shipments
BigRig should bid on in order to maximize profit.
44. Twobucks Coffee Company currently operates 12 coffee shops in downtown Nashville. The
company has been losing money and wants to downsize by closing some stores. Its policy has
been to saturate the downtown area with stores so that one is virtually always in the sight of a
potential or current customer. However, the company’s new policy is to have enough stores so
that each is within 5 minutes’ walking distance of another store. The company would also like to
have annual operating costs of no more than $900,000.

The following table shows the coffee shops within 5 minutes’ walking distance of another shop
and the average annual cost of the existing stores:
224
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Store Location
Annual Average 
Operating Cost ($)
Stores Within 5 Minutes’ Walking Distance
1. 3rd Street
456
3rd Street, Rose Street
2. 10th Street
207
10th Street, South Street, Broad Street
3. South Street
139
South Street, Hill Street, 10th Street
4. Mulberry Avenue
246
Mulberry Avenue, Beamer Boulevard
5. Rose Street
177
Rose Street, 3rd Street, Church Street
6. Wisham Avenue
212
Wisham Avenue, Broad Street, 23rd Avenue
7. Richmond Road
195
Richmond Road, Broad Street
8. Hill Street
170
Hill Street, South Street
9. 23rd Avenue
184
23rd Avenue, Wisham Avenue
10. Broad Street
163
Broad Street, Wisham Avenue, Richmond Road,
10th Street
11. Church Street
225
Church Street, Rose Street, Beamer Boulevard
12. Beamer Boulevard
236
Beamer Boulevard, Mulberry Avenue, Church
Street
Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will select the minimum number of stores
the company will need to achieve its new policy objective.
45. The town of Hillsboro recently purchased a 55-acre tract of farm land, and it has $550,000 bud-
geted to develop recreational facilities. The impetus for the purchase was the need for more soc-
cer fields to meet the increasing demand of youth soccer in the area. However, once the land was
purchased, a number of other interest groups began to lobby the town council to develop other
recreational facilities including rugby, football, softball, and baseball fields, plus walking and
running trails, a children’s playground, and a dog park. The following table shows the amount
of acreage required by each project, the annual expected usage for each facility, and the cost to
construct each facility. Also included is a priority designation determined by the town’s recre-
ation committee based on several public hearings and their perceptions of the critical need of
each facility.
Facility
Annual Usage (people)
Acres
Cost ($)
Priority
Rugby fields
4,700
7
75,000
3
Football fields
12,500
12
180,000
2
Soccer fields
32,000
20
350,000
1
Dog park
7,500
6
45,000
3
Playground
41,000
3
120,000
2
Walking/running trails
47,000
25
80,000
1
Softball fields
23,000
5
115,000
2
Baseball fields
16,000
8
210,000
3
a. Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will maximize annual usage and
achieve an average priority level of no more than 1.75.
b. Reformulate the model such that the objective is to achieve the minimum average priority
level while achieving an annual usage of at least 120,000.
c. What combination of facilities will use the maximum acreage available without exceeding
the budget and achieving an average priority level of no more than 1.75? What is the annual
usage with these facilities?

CASE PROBLEM
225
Case Problem
PM Computer Services
Paulette Smith and Maureen Becker are seniors in engi-
neering and business, respectively, at State University.
They have set up a company, PM Computer Services, to
assemble and sell their own brand of personal computers.
They buy component parts on the open market from a vari-
ety of sources in the United States and overseas, and they
assemble their computers, mostly at night, in their three-
bedroom apartment. They sell their computers primarily to
departments at State University and to other students. They
hire other students to perform the assembly operations
and to test and package the computers. In addition to man-
aging the operations, Paulette and Maureen help with all
other tasks, including sales and accounting.
They pay the students who work for them $8 per hour
for a 40-hour week, or $1,280 per month. They hire students
on a monthly basis, and their delivery schedule is also on a
monthly (i.e., end-of-the-month) basis. PM currently has
five employees. PM Computers has determined that each of
its employees is able to produce 12.7 computers, on average,
per month. When the monthly demand for its computers ex-
ceeds its regular production capacity, PM employs limited
overtime. Each computer produced on an overtime basis
adds $12 to the labor cost of a computer. A PM employee
can produce 0.6 computer per month on an overtime basis.
Paulette and Maureen have received the following
computer orders for the next 6 months:
Month i
Computer Orders
1
63
2
74
3
95
4
57
5
68
6
86
In the past, PM has met its demand strictly from regu-
lar and overtime production. To meet demand in some
months when it did not have sufficient regular and over-
time production, the company would plan ahead and pro-
duce computers in previous months with available
capacity. However, Paulette and Maureen’s apartment was
completely filled with components and workspace, so they
could not store completed computers. Instead, they leased
warehouse space in town to store their completed comput-
ers for delivery in future months. They had to transport the
computers across town to the warehouse and pay for all
handling; also, the warehouse had to be climate controlled.
The cost of holding a computer in storage at the warehouse
is $15 per month.
Paulette and Maureen are considering an alternative
production strategy wherein they would hire new workers
on a monthly basis as needed and lay off workers when
they are not needed. They estimate the cost of hiring new
workers to be $200, primarily for related paperwork and
training. The cost of laying off a worker is $320, or ap-
proximately 1 week’s wages. They may want to rehire
some of the workers they lay off at a later date, so they
want them to leave with a good feeling about PM.
Determine a planning schedule for PM Computer
Services, indicating the number of employees working
each month, including the number hired and the number
laid off, the number of computers produced each month
in both regular time and overtime, and the number of
computers carried over in inventory each month. There
should be no inventory left over after month 6. Provide
integer solution values for these different variables. Com-
pare this solution with the one you would obtain without
integer restrictions.
Case Problem
The Tennessee Pterodactyls
The Tennessee Pterodactyls is a new professional basket-
ball franchise in Nashville. The team’s general manager,
Jerry East, and coach, Phil Riley, are trying to develop a
roster of players. They drafted seven players from a pool to
which the other teams in the league contributed two
players each. However, the general manager and coach
perceive these acquisitions to be no more than role players.
They believe that the nucleus of their new team must come
from the free agents who are currently available on the
market. The team is well under the salary cap, and the
owner has made $50 million per year available to them 

226
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Per-Game Averages
Projected
Annual Salary
Player
Position
Points
Rebounds
Assists
Minutes
($1,000,000s)
1. Mack Madonna
Back court
14.7
4.4
9.3
40.3
$  8.2
2. Darrell Boards
Front court
12.6
10.6
2.1
34.5
6.5
3. Silk Curry
Back court
13.5
8.7
1.7
29.3
5.2
4. Ramon Dion
Back court
27.1
7.1
4.5
42.5
16.4
5. Joe Eastcoast
Back court
18.1
7.5
5.1
41.0
14.3
6. Abdul Famous
Front court
22.8
9.5
2.4
38.5
23.5
7. Hiram Grant
Front court
9.3
12.2
3.5
31.5
4.7
8. Antoine Roadman
Front court
10.2
12.6
1.8
44.4
7.1
9. Fred Westcoast
Front court
16.9
2.5
11.4
42.7
15.8
10. Magic Jordan
Back court
28.5
6.5
1.3
38.1
26.4
11. Barry Bird
Front court
24.8
8.6
6.9
42.6
19.5
12. Grant Hall
Front court
11.3
12.5
3.2
39.5
8.6
Jerry and Phil want to sign five free agents. They would
like the group they sign to average at least 80 points per
game (16 points per player), pull down an average of 40 re-
bounds per game (8 per player), dish out an average of
25 assists, and have averaged 190 minutes (38 minutes per
player) per game in the past. Furthermore, they do not want
to sign more than two front court and three back court play-
ers. Their immediate objective is to identify the players who
as a group will meet their objectives at the minimum cost.
A. Formulate an integer linear programming model to
help the general manager and coach determine which
players they should sign and solve it by using the
computer.
B. Is the money provided by the owner sufficient to sign
the group of players identified in (A)? If not, reformu-
late the model so that the available funds are a constraint
and the objective is to maximize the average points of
the group.
to sign players. The coach and general manager have put
together the following list of 12 free agents, with important
statistics for each, including their rumored asking price in
terms of annual salary:
Case Problem
New Offices at Atlantic 
Management Systems
Atlantic Management Systems is a consulting firm that spe-
cializes in developing computerized decision support systems
for computer manufacturing companies. The firm currently
has offices in Chicago, Charlotte, Pittsburgh, and Houston. It
is considering opening new offices in one or more cities—
including Atlanta, Boston, Washington, DC, St. Louis,
Miami, Denver, and Detroit—and it has $14 million available
for this purpose. Because of the highly specialized nature of
its high-tech consulting work, the firm must necessarily staff
any new offices with a minimum number of its employees
from its existing offices. However, it has a limited number of
employees available to transfer to any new offices. In addi-
tion, the cost of transferring employees depends on the city
they are leaving and the city to which they might move.
Following are the costs for opening a new office in each
of the prospective cities and the start-up staffing needs at
each office:
Prospective 
Setup Cost
Staffing Needs 
Office
($1,000,000s)
(employees)
1. Atlanta
$1.7
9
2. Boston
3.6
14
3. Denver
2.1
8
4. Detroit
2.5
12
5. Miami
3.1
11
6. St. Louis
2.7
7
7. Washington, DC
4.1
18
The numbers of employees available for transfer from each
of the current offices are as follows:
Existing Office
Available Employees
Chicago
24
Charlotte
19
Pittsburgh
16
Houston
21

CASE PROBLEM
227
Prospective New Offices (costs, $1,000s)
Current Office
1. Atlanta
2. Boston
3. Denver
4. Detroit
5. Miami
6. St. Louis
7. Washington, DC
1. Chicago
$19
$32
$27
$14
$23
$14
$41
2. Charlotte
14
47
31
28
35
18
53
3. Pittsburgh
16
39
26
23
31
19
48
4. Houston
22
26
21
18
28
24
43
The firm has ranked the possible new offices according to
their profit potential, with Washington, DC, being the best
(i.e., greatest potential), as follows:
New Office
Rank
Washington, DC
1
Miami
2
Atlanta
3
Boston
4
Denver
5
St. Louis
6
Detroit
7
In addition, the firm wants at least one new office in the
Midwest (i.e., Detroit and/or St. Louis) and one new office
in the Southeast (i.e., Atlanta or Miami).
Formulate and solve an integer programming model to
help Atlantic Systems determine how many new offices it
should open, where they should be located, and how to
transfer employees.
The costs (in thousands of dollars) of transferring an em-
ployee from an existing office to a new office differ according
Case Problem
Scheduling Television Advertising Slots
at the United Broadcast Network
The United Broadcast Network (UBN) sells to advertis-
ers commercial advertising slots on its television shows.
The network announces its new fall television schedule
during the previous spring and shortly thereafter begins
selling its inventory of advertising slots to its customers.
Long-standing priority customers receive the first opportu-
nities to purchase advertising slots. The new fall season be-
gins in the third week of September. Advertising slots are
mostly 15 seconds and 30 seconds in duration. The net-
work develops a detailed sales plan for the year, typically
on a monthly, bimonthly, 6-week, or quarterly basis. Ad-
vertisers generally have certain shows in mind that they
prefer to advertise on in order to reach a certain demo-
graphic audience that they want to market their product to,
as well as a specific advertising budget. The network sells
advertising slots at rates based on a performance score 
related to the popularity of a show, primarily determined
by demographics and audience size.
Nanocom, a business software development firm,
wants to purchase 30- and 15-second advertising slots on
several shows this coming fall. Nanocom wants to reach an
older, more mature, upper-income audience that is likely to
include many high-tech businesspeople. It has an advertis-
ing budget of $600,000, and it has informed the UBN ad-
vertising staff that it prefers to purchase ads on the
following shows: Bayside, Newsline, The Hour, Cops
and Lawyers, The Judge, Friday Night Football, and ER
Doctor. Newsline and The Hour are news magazine shows,
whereas the others are adult dramas, except for Friday
Night Football, which is professional football. Nanocom
wants at least 50% of the total number of advertising slots
it purchases to be on Newsline, The Hour, and Friday
Night Football. Nanocom would like UBN to develop a
sales plan covering the 6-week period beginning with the
third week in October through November (including the
November sweeps).
to housing costs and moving expenses plus cost of living
adjustments. They are as follows:

228
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
As indicated, UBN bases its sales plans on perform-
ance scores for the different shows. The primary objective
of both UBN and the advertiser is to develop a sales plan
that will achieve the highest total performance score. The
performance scores are based on several factors, including
how well the show matches the desired audience demo-
graphics, the audience strength of the show, the historical
ratings for the time slot, the competing shows in the 
same time slot, and the performance of adjacent shows.
The network sets its advertising rates based on these
performance scores. Both the performance scores and the
rates are then multiplied by a weighting factor that is
based on the week of the show and, because total viewers
vary according to the week of the year, the total audience
expected during that week. The following table shows the
costs, performance scores, and available inventory of
advertising slots for 15- and 30-second commercials for
each show:
Commercial
Show
Length (seconds)
Cost ($1,000s)
Performance Score
Available Inventory
Bayside
30
$50.0
115.2
3
15
25.0
72.0
3
Newsline
30
41.0
160.0
4
15
20.5
100.0
1
The Hour
30
36.0
57.6
3
15
18.0
36.0
3
Cops and Lawyers
30
45.0
136.0
4
15
27.5
85.0
2
The Judge
30
52.0
100.8
2
15
26.0
63.0
2
Friday Night Football
30
25.0
60.8
4
15
12.5
38.0
2
ER Doctor
30
46.0
129.6
3
15
23.0
81.0
1
The network advises, and Nanocom agrees, that there
should be a minimum and maximum number of advertising
slots during each of the 6 weeks and that Nanocom should
have at most only one ad slot (either 15 or 30 seconds) per
show per week. The following table shows the weighting
factor each week and the minimum and maximum numbers
of slots per week:
October
November
Week
3
4
1
2
3
4
Weight
1.1
1.2
1.2
1.4
1.4
1.6
Minimum
1
1
2
2
2
3
Maximum
4
5
5
5
5
5
Assist UBN in developing a sales plan for the 6-week
period to maximize the total performance score for
Nanocom.

CASE PROBLEM
229
Case Problem
The Draperton Parks and Recreation
Department’s Formation of Girls’ 
Basketball Teams
Each fall the Draperton Parks and Recreation Depart-
ment holds a series of tryouts for its boys’ and girls’ youth
basketball leagues. All leagues are formed by age group,
each usually encompassing a couple of ages. One such
grouping is the 12- to 13-year-old girls’ league. This is a
particularly competitive age group because the girls are all
trying to improve their skills in hopes of making the high
school junior varsity team in the immediate future and the
high school varsity in several years. Some of the girls even
hope to make the high school varsity next year, when they
are freshmen. This is also the first age group in which not
all girls who try out are placed on teams; some are cut. In
the younger age groups, all players are assigned to teams.
However, at this age group, four teams are formed, each
with only seven players. This policy was agreed upon by a
committee consisting of the Recreation Department direc-
tor, a group of parents of past players, and the high school
boys’ and girls’ basketball coaching staff. The small roster
size allows each player to get a lot of playing time and
makes the games more competitive. It also makes
the teams more competitive in tournaments with teams
from other towns and cities. This makes the girls very
competitive, and it makes their parents even more compet-
itive. Sandy Duncan, the Recreation Department’s director
of team sports, knows from past experience that parents do
a lot of jockeying and politicking during tryouts. This has
given rise to parental protests regarding the tryout process
and about how players are selected and assigned to teams.
Sandy and the player evaluators have frequently been ac-
cused of showing favoritism and stupidity.
This year, in an effort to blunt some of this criticism,
Sandy has devised a tryout process that will hopefully re-
move her (and any other person) from direct involvement
with the player selection and team formation process.
First, she conducted tryouts for all 36 players who were
trying out over two weekends that included four sessions
each weekend: one on Friday evening, two on Saturday,
and one on Sunday afternoon. She formed an evaluation
team of several coaches from other towns and some of the
current players and assistant coaches from the nearby State
University women’s basketball team. Each player was as-
signed a tryout number and evaluated for different skills
and ability, and at the end of the tryouts, each player was
given an overall score from 1 to 10, with 10 being the high-
est, as follows:
Player
Score
Player
Score
Player
Score
1
7
13
10
25
8
2
6
14
9
26
4
3
9
15
9
27
9
4
5
16
4
28
9
5
7
17
5
29
3
6
8
18
5
30
3
7
3
19
6
31
3
8
3
20
3
32
6
9
4
21
2
33
6
10
6
22
1
34
7
11
4
23
7
35
8
12
8
24
5
36
10
Sandy took a course in management science while she was
a student at State University, and she wants to develop an
integer linear programming model to use these evaluation
scores to select the players and assign them to the four
teams in a fair and equitable manner. She wants to select
the best players, and in order to have competitive, equally
matched teams, she wants each team to have an average
overall player evaluation score between 6 and 7. As she sat
down one evening to work on this problem, she quickly re-
alized that it would require a relatively complex integer
programming model. Help Sandy formulate and solve an
integer programming model for this problem to select the
best players, assign seven players to each team, and
achieve the average team evaluation score Sandy wants for
each team. Compare the teams formed by your model and
determine whether you think they are competitive (i.e.,
whether the model has achieved Sandy’s objectives). Also,
determine whether any deserving players were unfairly cut
by the model.

230
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
Case Problem
Developing Project Teams 
for Management 4394
All students in the College of Business at State Univer-
sity are required to take a capstone course, Management
4394, the last semester of their senior year. This course
consists primarily of a semester-long case project that
pulls together all the business disciplines to test the
students’ knowledge in the major business areas of man-
agement, marketing, finance, accounting, quantitative
methods, and operations. A difficult task for the course in-
structor is dividing the students in a class into equitable
teams that will enhance the learning process and engender
teamwork. The project teams should be relatively equal 
in terms of student ability and performance. Further, the
teams should reflect different functional skills; that is,
the teams should include a mix of different majors. 
Also, the college would like the teams to be diverse in terms
of gender and nationalities in order to prepare the students
for working with diverse individuals when they graduate
and take a job. Consider one course section of Management
4394 with 18 students. The instructor wants to divide the
class into six project teams of three members each. The in-
structor’s main objective for the teams is that they be rela-
tively equal in terms of academic capability. Since the
only means of assessing capability is a student’s grade
point average (GPA), the instructor has determined that
one way to achieve this objective is for the teams 
to have a minimum average GPA of 2.80 while also striv-
ing to achieve the maximum overall average team GPA
possible. It is also important that the teams have a mix of
members with different majors to enhance the teams’
functional capabilities, but the instructor does not want
there to be more than two of the same major on any single
team. In order to achieve some degree of diversity among
team members the instructor wants there to be at least one
female and one international student on each team, but not
more than two females or two international students on a
team. Following is a table that shows the breakdown of
GPAs, majors, gender, and internationality of each student
in the class.
Student
GPA
Gender
International (yes or no)
Major
1
3.04
M
Yes
FIN
2
2.35
M
No
FIN/ACCT
3
2.26
M
Yes
MGT
4
2.15
M
Yes
MKTG
5
3.23
F
No
MGT
6
3.95
F
No
FIN
7
2.87
M
No
FIN
8
2.65
F
No
FIN
9
3.12
M
No
FIN
10
3.08
M
Yes
MKTG
11
3.35
M
Yes
MKTG
12
2.78
M
No
ACCT
13
2.56
F
Yes
MKTG
14
2.91
F
No
ACCT
15
3.40
F
Yes
MGT
16
3.12
M
Yes
FIN
17
2.75
M
Yes
ACCT
18
3.06
F
No
MGT
Note that only two students are both female and interna-
tional, and that student 2 is a double major. 
Formulate and solve an integer linear programming
model for this problem to determine project teams that will
meet the instructor’s guidelines for team formation. How
successfully do you think your model achieves the instruc-
tor’s guidelines? In other words, do you consider the teams
to be diverse and relatively equitable in terms of functional
and academic capability? If not, how do you think you
might need to change your model to better meet the team
formation guidelines?
This case problem is based on R. Cutshall, S. Gavirneni, and K. Schultz,
“Indiana University’s Kelley School of Business Uses Integer Program-
ming to Form Equitable, Cohesive Student Teams,” Interfaces 37, no. 3
(May–June 2007): 265–76.

CASE PROBLEM
231
Case Problem
Scheduling the Lead Balloon’s
Summer Tour
The Lead Balloon is a popular ’80s rock band that broke
up in the 1990s but recently got back together to publish a
new CD and go on tour. They want to schedule a summer
tour that will encompass 16 possible cities in the eastern
half of the United States. However, because of family and
business commitments, plus the fact they are not so young
and energetic as they used to be, the tour will encompass
only 12 weeks, from mid-May to mid-August, when their
children will be out of school, so that their families can
join them on the tour most of the time. The band also
wants to limit the number of concerts each week. Follow-
ing is a list of the possible cities with the weeks that the
local arenas in each city will be available (marked with
an X) during the tour. Also included is the concert capac-
ity of the arena in each city.
Based on its popularity and fame it is a foregone con-
clusion that the band will sell out everywhere it goes.
Thus, the band wants to schedule the cities that will maxi-
mize the total attendance at its concerts, which basically
means it wants to schedule the cities with the largest are-
nas, if possible. The band has also stipulated that it wants
to perform at least one concert but no more than two con-
certs each week. Also, because of the band’s high-tech
equipment and gear, and sound and stage setup require-
ments, logistical constraints limit the travel between two
cities in any one week to 500 miles.
Develop a summer tour schedule for the band that
will maximize total attendance.
May
June
July
August
City
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
3
4
1
2
Capacity
Atlanta
X
X
X
X
19,500
Boston
X
X
X
X
X
18,500
Cincinnati
X
X
X
X
X
X
16,200
Charlotte
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
17,600
Cleveland
X
X
X
X
22,700
Detroit
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
24,200
DC
X
X
X
X
21,500
Philadelphia
X
X
X
X
X
X
21,300
Dallas
X
X
X
X
17,400
Miami
X
X
X
X
X
15,700
Orlando
X
X
X
X
X
16,300
Houston
X
X
X
X
X
18,200
Indianapolis
X
X
X
X
X
X
25,400
Nashville
X
X
X
X
X
X
16,500
Chicago
X
X
X
X
X
22,800
New York
X
X
X
X
X
20,700
Case Problem
Developing Kathleen Taylor’s 401(k) Plan
Kathleen Taylor has been working for a government con-
tractor, Summit Solutions, in Washington, DC, for over a
year. She is now eligible to participate in the company’s
401(k) retirement plan. The company has provided 
Kathleen with the information in the table on the following
page about the various funds that are available for her to 
invest in.

232
CHAPTER 5
INTEGER PROGRAMMING
International funds invest in global/overseas compa-
nies; small-cap funds invest in companies that have a mar-
ket capitalization (i.e., the number of outstanding shares
multiplied by the stock price per share), in general, be-
tween $300 million and $2 billion; mid-cap funds invest in
companies with a market capitalization between $2 and
$10 billion; and large-cap funds invest in companies over
$10 billion. The Evening Star rating is developed by an in-
dependent investment analysis firm, and it rates funds
based on their risk-adjusted performance over various time
periods. “5” is best, “1” is worst; stocks trading close to
their analysts’ fair value estimates receive a “3”, while
stocks trading at large discounts compared to their ana-
lysts’ fair value estimate receive a “4” or “5” rating. The
expense ratio is the total percentage of fund assets used for
operating expenses (i.e., administrative, management,
advertising, etc.).
Since Kathleen is young and expects to build her
401(k) plan over a long period of time, she wants to
employ a relatively aggressive investment strategy. She has
read investment literature that suggests a relatively aggres-
sive plan would invest 5% to 35% in international funds,
5% to 25% in small-cap funds, 5% to 35% in mid-cap
funds, 20% to 50% in large-cap funds, and 5% to 10% in
bond funds. Kathleen plans to contribute $900 of her
salary each month to her plan, which the company will
match. She has also developed a few of her own invest-
ment guidelines: to diversify, she wants to invest in five
funds, one in each investment category; she wants to
achieve an average Evening Star rating of at least 3.7; she
wants to invest in funds that average at least $10,000 mil-
lion in size; she wants to achieve an average expense ratio
for her five funds of no more than 1.10; and she wants to
maximize the average 5-year return of the five funds she
selects, weighted by the amount she invests in each. 
Develop an investment plan for Kathleen using linear
programming. How would her investment plan change if
she wanted to maximize the Evening Star rating?
Evening Star
5-Year
Fund Size
Expense
Rating
Return 
($1,000,000s)
Ratio
International
Parham International Value
3
12.58
2,066
1.67
Jarus Overseas
4
6.94
7,404
1.97
U.S. Fund EuroPacific
2
7.86
19,859
1.19
Admiral Foreign Investor
5
7.54
42,035
1.32
SPS Emerging Market
3
5.57
11,139
1.15
Small-Cap
Maxam Small Cap Return
4
5.87
1,302
1.43
U.S. Small Cap Select
2
3.99
770
1.21
Veritas Small Cap Value
4
2.97
3,049
1.74
Oak Small Cap Growth 
3
3.8
4,320
1.49
Mid-Cap
Federal Mid Cap Growth
3
4.13
729
1.05
T. Row Price Growth
2
6.30
4,145
1.33
Draper Structured Mid Cap
2
7.73
1,467
1.31
Jarus Mid Cap Value
3
4.05
4,632
1.52
Maxam Mid Cap Opportunity
4
5.76
2,537
1.17
Large-Cap
T. Row Price Bluechip Growth
3
6.01
6,374
1.23
Jarus Diversified Equity Income
2
3.22
962
1.05
Draper Strategic Growth
4
7.81
9,991
1.16
Centennial Common Stock Growth
3
2.16
20,194
0.99
Marius Stock Growth
2
9.88
19,648
1.12
Bond
Maxam Global Bond
3
8.37
12,942
1.03
Parham High Yield
5
6.25
3,106
1.00
Madison Federated Bond Portfolio
3
5.66
8,402
1.14
Draper U.S. Government Bond
4
7.41
1,045
0.90
Federated High Income
3
5.85
11,211
0.82

Transportation,
Transshipment, and
Assignment Problems
233
CHAPTER
6

In this chapter, we examine three special types of linear programming model formulations—
transportation, transshipment, and assignment problems. They are part of a larger class of
linear programming problems known as network flow problems. We are considering these
problems in a separate chapter because they represent a popular group of linear programming
applications.
These problems have special mathematical characteristics that have enabled management
scientists to develop very efficient, unique mathematical solution approaches to them. These
solution approaches are variations of the traditional simplex solution procedure. Like the sim-
plex method, we have placed these detailed manual, mathematical solution procedures—called
the transportation method and assignment method—on the companion Web site that accompa-
nies this text. As in previous chapters, we will focus on model formulation and solution by
using the computer, specifically by using Excel and QM for Windows.
The Transportation Model
The transportation model is formulated for a class of problems with the following unique
characteristics: (1) A product is transported from a number of sources to a number of destina-
tions at the minimum possible cost; and (2) each source is able to supply a fixed number of
units of the product, and each destination has a fixed demand for the product. Although the
general transportation model can be applied to a wide variety of problems, it is this particular
application to the transportation of goods that is most familiar and from which the problem
draws its name.
The following example demonstrates the formulation of the transportation model. Wheat
is harvested in the Midwest and stored in grain elevators in three different cities—Kansas
City, Omaha, and Des Moines. These grain elevators supply three flour mills, located in
Chicago, St. Louis, and Cincinnati. Grain is shipped to the mills in railroad cars, each car
capable of holding 1 ton of wheat. Each grain elevator is able to supply the following number
of tons (i.e., railroad cars) of wheat to the mills on a monthly basis:
Grain Elevator
Supply
1. Kansas City
150
2. Omaha
175
3. Des Moines
275
Total
600 tons
Each mill demands the following number of tons of wheat per month:
Mill
Demand
A. Chicago
200
B. St. Louis
100
C. Cincinnati
300
Total
600 tons
The cost of transporting 1 ton of wheat from each grain elevator (source) to each mill
(destination) differs, according to the distance and rail system. (For example, the cost of
234
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
In a transportation
problem, items are
allocated from
sources to
destinations at 
a minimum cost.
See Web site 
Module B for 
a chapter on the
“Transportation and
Assignment Solution
Methods.”

The problem is to determine how many tons of wheat to transport from each grain elevator
to each mill on a monthly basis to minimize the total cost of transportation. A diagram of the
different transportation routes, with supply and demand, is given in Figure 6.1.
THE TRANSPORTATION MODEL
235
Des Moines
St. Louis
Cincinnati
Chicago
Omaha
Kansas City
300
200
100
275
175
150
FIGURE 6.1
Network of 
transportation
routes for wheat
shipments
The linear programming
model for a transportation
problem has constraints
for supply at each source
and demand at each
destination.
Mill
Grain Elevator
A. Chicago
B. St. Louis
C. Cincinnati
1. Kansas City
$6
$ 8
$10
2. Omaha
7
11
11
3. Des Moines
4
5
12
shipping 1 ton of wheat from the grain elevator at Omaha to the mill at Chicago is $7.) These
costs are shown in the following table:
The linear programming model for this problem is formulated as follows:
minimize Z = $6x1A + 8x1B + 10x1C + 7x2A + 11x2B + 11x2C + 4x3A + 5x3B + 12x3C
subject to
In this model the decision variables,
represent the number of tons of wheat trans-
ported from each grain elevator, i (where 
), to each mill, j (where 
). The
objective function represents the total transportation cost for each route. Each term in the
objective function reflects the cost of the tonnage transported for one route. For example,
j = A, B, C
i = 1, 2, 3
xij,
xij Ú 0
x1C + x2C + x3C = 300
x1B + x2B + x3B = 100
x1A + x2A + x3A = 200
x3A + x3B + x3C = 275
x2A + x2B + x2C = 175
x1A + x1B + x1C = 150

if 20 tons are transported from elevator 1 to mill A, the cost ($6) is multiplied by 
which equals $120.
The first three constraints in the linear programming model represent the supply at each
elevator; the last three constraints represent the demand at each mill. As an example, consider
the first supply constraint,
This constraint represents the tons of
wheat transported from Kansas City to all three mills: Chicago 
St. Louis 
and
Cincinnati 
The amount transported from Kansas City is limited to the 150 tons available.
Note that this constraint (as well as all others) is an equation 
rather than a
inequality
because all the tons of wheat available will be needed to meet the total demand of 600 tons. In
other words, the three mills demand 600 total tons, which is the exact amount that can be sup-
plied by the three grain elevators. Thus, all that can be supplied will be, in order to meet de-
mand. This type of model, in which supply exactly equals demand, is referred to as a balanced
transportation model.
Realistically, however, an unbalanced problem, in which supply exceeds demand or de-
mand exceeds supply, is a more likely occurrence. In our wheat transportation example, if the
demand at Cincinnati is increased from 300 tons to 350 tons, a situation is created in which total
demand is 650 tons and total supply is 600 tons. This will result in the following change in our
linear programming model of this problem:
minimize Z = 6x1A + 8x1B + 10x1C + 7x2A + 11x2B + 11x2C + 4x3A + 5x3B + 12x3C
subject to
One of the demand constraints will not be met because there is not enough total supply to meet
total demand. If, instead, supply exceeds demand, then the supply constraints will be
Sometimes one or more of the routes in the transportation model may be prohibited.
That is, units cannot be transported from a particular source to a particular destination.
When this situation occurs, we must make sure that the variable representing that route does
not have a value in the optimal solution. This can be accomplished by assigning a very large
relative cost as the coefficient of this prohibited variable in the objective function. For ex-
ample, in our wheat-shipping example, if the route from Kansas City to Chicago is
prohibited (perhaps because of a rail strike), the variable 
is given a coefficient of 100
instead of 6 in the objective function, so 
will equal zero in the optimal solution because
of its high relative cost. Alternatively, the prohibited variable can be deleted from the model
formulation.
x1A
x1A
….
xij Ú 0
x1C + x2C + x3C … 350
x1B + x2B + x3B … 100
x1A + x2A + x3A … 200
x3A + x3B + x3C = 275
x2A + x2B + x2C = 175
x1A + x1B + x1C = 150
…
(=)
(x1C).
(x1B),
(x1A),
x1A + x1B + x1C = 150.
x1A(= 20),
236
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Several years before George Dantzig formalized the linear
programming technique, in 1941 Frank L. Hitchcock formu-
lated the transportation problem as a method for supplying
a product from several factories to a number of cities, given
varying freight rates. In 1947 T. C. Koopmans independently
formulated the same type of problem. Koopmans, an Ameri-
can economist originally from the Netherlands and a professor
at Chicago and Yale, was awarded the Nobel Prize in 1975.
Time Out
for Frank L. Hitchcock and Tjalling C. Koopmans
In a balanced
transportation model
in which supply
equals demand, all
constraints are 
equalities.
In an unbalanced
transportation model,
supply is greater than
demand or demand is
greater than supply.

Computer Solution of a Transportation Problem
Because a transportation problem is formulated as a linear programming model, it can be solved
with Excel and using the linear programming module of QM for Windows that we introduced in
previous chapters. However, management science packages such as QM for Windows also have
transportation modules that enable problems to be input in a special transportation tableau for-
mat. We will first demonstrate the solution of the wheat-shipping problem solved earlier in this
chapter, this time by using Excel spreadsheets.
Computer Solution with Excel
We will first demonstrate how to solve a transportation problem by using Excel. A transporta-
tion problem must be solved in Excel as a linear programming model, using Solver, as demon-
strated in Chapters 3 and 4. Exhibit 6.1 shows a spreadsheet setup to solve our wheat-shipping
example. Notice that the objective function formula for total cost is contained in cell C10 and is
shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. It is constructed as a SUMPRODUCT of
the decision variables in cells C5:E7 and a cost array in cells K5:M7. Cells G5:G7 in column
G and cells C9:E9 in row 9, labeled “Grain Shipped,” contain the constraint formulas for supply
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF A TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM
237
Management Science Application
Transportation Models at Nu-kote 
International
Nu-kote International, located near Nashville, Tennessee, is
the largest independent manufacturer and distributor of sup-
plies for home and office printing equipment, including ink-jet,
laser, and toner cartridges; ribbons; and thermal fax supplies. It
produces more than 2,000 products for use in more than
30,000 different types of imaging devices, and it serves more
than 5,000 customers (e.g., commercial dealers and retail
stores) around the world.
Nu-kote’s transportation network includes five plants and
four warehouses in China; Chatsworth, California; Rochester,
New York; Connellsville, Pennsylvania; and Franklin, Tennessee.
Almost 80% of Nu-kote’s products are manufactured in its
Chatsworth plant or imported from China through the port of
Long Beach. Nu-kote originally shipped most of its orders to
its customers from its Franklin warehouse, which is within 500
miles of 50% of the U.S. population and within 1,000 miles of
80% of its customers. The other three U.S. warehouses were
used for storing materials for manufacturing and for storing
finished goods before shipping them to Franklin.
Nu-kote developed an Excel spreadsheet linear program-
ming model to determine the optimal (least-cost) shipments
of items from its vendors and plants to its warehouses and
from its warehouses to its customers. Different linear pro-
gramming models were tested for different warehouse
configurations; they included between 5,000 and 9,700 vari-
ables and 2,450 constraints. Decision variables were defined
for the units of each product shipped from each vendor and
plant to each warehouse and from each warehouse to each
customer; constraints included capacities and demand at
each facility. Nu-kote used the models to determine that 
it was more cost-effective to ship products to customers
from two warehouses than from one, so it expanded its
Chatsworth warehouse to ship finished products to cus-
tomers from it, in addition to shipping from its Franklin ware-
house. This new two-warehouse system reduced shipping
times to its customers and saved approximately $1 million in
annual transportation and inventory costs.
Source: Based on L. J. LeBlanc, J. A. Hill, G. W. Greenwell, and A. O.
Czesnat, “Nu-kote’s Spreadsheet Linear-Programming Models for Op-
timizing Transportation,” Interfaces 34, no. 2 (March–April 2004):
139–46.
Henryk Sadura/Shutterstock

Exhibit 6.3 shows the optimal solution, with the amounts shipped from sources to destina-
tions and the total cost. Figure 6.2 shows a network diagram of the optimal shipments.
and demand, respectively. For example, the constraint formula in cell G7 for the grain shipped
from Des Moines to the three mills is
and the right-hand-side quantity value of
275 available tons is in cell F7.
C7D7E7,
238
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Objective function
=D5+D6+D7
=C7+D7+E7
Decision variables
in cells C5:E7
Cost array in
cells K5:M7
EXHIBIT 6.1
Demand constraints
Supply constraints
EXHIBIT 6.2
Exhibit 6.2 shows the Solver Parameters window for our example. Cell C10, containing the
objective function formula, is minimized. The constraint formula 
includes all
three demand constraints, and the constraint formula 
includes all three supply
constraints. Before solving this problem, remember to select “Simplex.LP” to invoke the linear
programming solution approach.
G5:G7F5:F7
C9:E9C8:E8

COMPUTER SOLUTION OF A TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM
239
EXHIBIT 6.3
25
125
175
175
100
1
Kansas City
(150)
Omaha
(175)
Des Moines
(275)
Chicago
(200)
St. Louis
(100)
Cincinnati
(300)
A
2
B
3
C
FIGURE 6.2
Transportation
network
solution for
wheat-shipping
example
EXHIBIT 6.4
Computer Solution with Excel QM
Excel QM, which was introduced in Chapter 1, includes a spreadsheet macro for transportation
problems. When Excel QM is activated, clicking on “Transportation” from the drop-down window
will result in the Spreadsheet Initialization window, as shown in Exhibit 6.4. In this window, we
set the number of sources (i.e., origins) and destinations to 3, select “Minimize” as the objective,
and type in the title for our example. To exit this window, we click on “OK,” and the spreadsheet
shown in Exhibit 6.5 is displayed. The transportation problem is completely set up as shown, with
all the necessary formulas already in the cells. However, initially the data values in cells B10:E13
are empty; the spreadsheet in Exhibit 6.5 includes the values that we have typed in.

To solve the problem, we follow the instructions in the box superimposed on the spreadsheet
in Exhibit 6.5—click on “Data” at the top of the spreadsheet, then click on “Solver,” and when
Solver appears, click on “Solve.” We have not shown the Solver Parameters window here; how-
ever, it is the same Excel Solver as shown in all previous chapters. It already includes all the
decision variables and constraints required to solve the problem; thus, all that is needed is to click
on “Solve.” The spreadsheet with the solution is shown in Exhibit 6.6. You will notice that
although the total cost is the same as in the solution we obtained with Excel in Exhibit 6.3,
the decision variable values in cells B17:D19 are different. This is because this problem has mul-
tiple optimal solutions, and this is the alternate solution to the one we got previously in Excel.
240
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
3. Click on “Data,”
“Solver,” and then
“Solve.”
2. Enter data values
for problems;
initially this array
is blank.
1. Click on “Add Ins,” then “Excel QM”
or “Taylor” to access the macro menu.
EXHIBIT 6.5
Click on “Data” tab and then “Solver.”
EXHIBIT 6.6

QM for Windows Solution
To access the transportation module for QM for Windows, click on “Module” at the top of the
screen and then click on “Transportation.” Once you are in the transportation module, click on
“File” and then “New” to input the problem data. QM for Windows allows for any of three 
initial solution methods—northwest corner, minimum cell cost, or VAM—to be selected. These
are the three starting solution procedures used in the mathematical procedure for solving trans-
portation problems. Because these techniques are not included in the text (but are included on
the Web site Module B transportation and assignment problems), it makes no difference which
starting procedure we use. Exhibit 6.7 shows the input data for our wheat-shipping example.
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF A TRANSPORTATION PROBLEM
241
Use any starting 
method.
EXHIBIT 6.7
EXHIBIT 6.8
EXHIBIT 6.9
Once the data are input, clicking on “Solve” at the top of the screen will generate the solution,
as shown in Exhibits 6.8 and 6.9. QM for Windows will indicate if multiple optimal solutions ex-
ist, but it will not identify alternate solutions. This is the same optimal solution that we achieved
earlier in our Excel QM solution. Exhibits 6.8 and 6.9 show the solution results in two different ta-
bles, or formats. Exhibit 6.8 shows the shipments in each cell (or decision variable) plus total cost,
and Exhibit 6.9 lists the individual shipments from each source to destination and their costs.
Sensitivity Analysis
Once a transportation problem is set up in any of the software formats—Excel, Excel QM, or
QM for Windows—it is simple to perform sensitivity analysis by changing the model size or
parameters. For example, we’ll change our wheat-shipping example to reflect the unbalanced
conditions we discussed on page 236, where the demand at Cincinnati is 350 tons, resulting in
demand exceeding available supply. We’ll also increase the shipping cost from Des Moines to

242
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Added new row to
reflect demand ≥ supply.
Change in
cost
EXHIBIT 6.10
Management Science Application
Matching Wineries with Distributors
California, with more than 1,500 wineries, has a greater
than 90% share of American wine production, with $45 billion
in annual direct sales and related revenues (from tourism, etc.).
The majority of these wineries are small businesses that face
difficult barriers in getting their wines to market because of
government distribution regulations. In most states middleman
distributors are required by regulations, and currently 20 dis-
tributors control 70% of the national wine market, most of
which seek to represent high-volume producers like Turning
Leaf. This makes it difficult for many small wineries to partner
with a distributor. To bypass this potential bottleneck, small
wineries often attempt to partner with specialty distributors
who seek lesser-known brands for wine shops, restaurants,
and other clients looking for a greater, unique variety. These
distributors are typically small businesses as well, with a limited
geographic scope. This author developed a transportation
model to help wineries partner with these small specialty dis-
tributors. The model’s objective function seeks to maximize the
volume of wine allocated, weighted by the geographical at-
tractiveness of a distributor for a winery. This weighting is nec-
essary, since it may be more beneficial for a winery to form a
relationship with a distributor in a more desirable market for
long-term strategic marketing purposes than to sell a large vol-
ume of wine in a geographic area that has less long-term
strategic interest. The model constraints reflect traditional trans-
portation supply-and-demand conditions. The model matches
wineries with distributors and allows a winery product to be
allocated across multiple distributors. A total of 476 potential
winery–distributor pairings in California were considered in the
model, and the solution resulted in 31 possible winery–distributor
pairings that if implemented would result in the distribution of 
60 different wines totaling more than 50,000 cases (out of
124,000 cases demanded by the distributors).
Source: Based on S. Cholette, “A Novel Problem for a Vintage
Technique: Using Mixed-Integer Programming to Match Wineries and
Distributors,” Interfaces 37, no. 3 (May–June 2007): 231–39.
© Cephas Picture Library/Alamy
St. Louis from $5/ton to $7/ton. The new Excel solution to this revised version of our example is
shown in Exhibit 6.10. Note that we could have handled the extra demand in two ways: We
could have made the demand constraints
constraints in Solver, or we could create an extra
row with “slack” variables to take up the amount demanded but not supplied. We chose the
second method, as shown in cells C8:E8 in Exhibit 6.10. 
…

The basic structure of this model is shown in the graphical network in Figure 6.3.
THE TRANSSHIPMENT MODEL
243
12
12
14
10
10
15
16
6
200
100
300
8
7
11
11
17
300
300
5
4
Des Moines
1
3
6
7
8
Cincinnati
St. Louis
Chicago
Kansas
City
Omaha
5
Colorado
4
Nebraska
2
FIGURE 6.3
Network of 
transshipment
routes
The Transshipment Model
The transshipment model is an extension of the transportation model in which intermediate trans-
shipment points are added between the sources and destinations. An example of a transshipment
point is a distribution center or warehouse located between plants and stores. In a transshipment
problem, items may be transported from sources through transshipment points on to destinations,
from one source to another, from one transshipment point to another, from one destination to an-
other, or directly from sources to destinations, or some combination of these alternatives.
We will expand our wheat-shipping example to demonstrate the formulation of a transship-
ment model. Wheat is harvested at farms in Nebraska and Colorado before being shipped to the
three grain elevators in Kansas City, Omaha, and Des Moines, which are now transshipment
points. The amount of wheat harvested at each farm is 300 tons. The wheat is then shipped to the
mills in Chicago, St. Louis, and Cincinnati. The shipping costs from the grain elevators to the
mills remain the same, and the shipping costs from the farms to the grain elevators are as follows:
Grain Elevator
Farm
3. Kansas City
4. Omaha
5. Des Moines
1. Nebraska
$16
$10
$12
2. Colorado
15
14
17
The transshipment
model includes
intermediate points
between sources and
destinations.
As with the transportation problem, a linear programming model is developed with 
supply-and-demand constraints. The available supply constraints for the farms in Nebraska and
Colorado are
The demand constraints at the Chicago, St. Louis, and Cincinnati mills are
x38 + x48 + x58 = 300
x37 + x47 + x57 = 100
x36 + x46 + x56 = 200
x23 + x24 + x25 = 300
x13 + x14 + x15 = 300

Next we must develop constraints for the grain elevators (i.e., transshipment points) at
Kansas City, Omaha, and Des Moines. To develop these constraints we follow the principle that
at each transshipment point, the amount of grain shipped in must also be shipped out. For exam-
ple, the amount of grain shipped into Kansas City is
and the amount shipped out is
Thus, because whatever is shipped in must also be shipped out, these two amounts must
equal each other:
or
The transshipment constraints for Omaha and Des Moines are constructed similarly:
The complete linear programming model, including the objective function, is summarized
as follows:
minimize Z = $16x13 + 10x14 + 12x15 + 15x23 + 14x24 + 17x25 + 6x36 + 8x37 + 10x38
+ 7x46 + 11x47 + 11x48 + 4x56 + 5x57 + 12x58
subject to
Computer Solution with Excel
Because the transshipment model is formulated as a linear programming model, it can be solved
with either Excel or QM for Windows. Here we will demonstrate its solution with Excel.
Exhibit 6.11 shows the spreadsheet solution and Exhibit 6.12 the Solver for our wheat-
shipping transshipment example. A network diagram of the optimal solution is shown in
Figure 6.4. The spreadsheet is similar to the original spreadsheet for the regular transporta-
tion problem in Exhibit 6.1 except that there are two tables of variables—one for shipping
from the farms to the grain elevators and one for shipping grain from the elevators to the
mills. Thus, the decision variables (i.e., the amounts shipped from sources to destinations)
are in cells B6:D7 and C13:E15. The constraint for the amount of grain shipped from the
farm in Nebraska to the three grain elevators (i.e., the supply constraint for Nebraska) in cell
F6 is
which sums cells 
The amount of grain shipped to
Kansas City from the farms in cell B8 is 
Similar constraints are developed
for the shipments from the grain elevators to the mills.
SUM(B6:B7).
B6C6D6.
SUM(B6:D6),
xij Ú 0
x15 + x25 - x56 - x57 - x58 = 0
x14 + x24 - x46 - x47 - x48 = 0
x13 + x23 - x36 - x37 - x38 = 0
x38 + x48 + x58 = 300
x37 + x47 + x57 = 100
x36 + x46 + x56 = 200
x23 + x24 + x25 = 300
x13 + x14 + x15 = 300
x15 + x25 - x56 - x57 - x58 = 0
x14 + x24 - x46 - x47 - x48 = 0
x13 + x23 - x36 - x37 - x38 = 0
x13 + x23 = x36 + x37 + x38
x36 + x37 + x38
x13 + x23
244
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

Two cost arrays have been developed for the shipping costs in cells I6:K7 and
cells J13:L15, which are then multiplied by the variables in cells B6:D7 and C13:E15 and
added together. The objective function,
is shown on the toolbar at the top of Exhibit 6.11. Constructing the 
objective function with cost arrays like this is a little easier than typing in all the variables
and costs in a single objective function when there are many variables and costs. A network
diagram of the optimal solution is shown in Figure 6.4.
(C13:E15,J13:L15),
SUMPRODUCT(B6:D7,I6:K7)SUMPRODUCT
THE TRANSSHIPMENT MODEL
245
Constraints for transshipment flows;
i.e., shipments in = shipments out
Objective function
Cost arrays
=SUM(B6:D6)
=SUM(C13:C15)
=SUM(C13:E13)
=SUM(B6:B7)
EXHIBIT 6.11
Transshipment
constraints in
cells C20:C22
EXHIBIT 6.12

246
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
300
300
300
100
200
1
4
Nebraska
(300)
2
Colorado
(300)
3
Kansas City
5
Des Moines
7
6
Chicago
(200)
8
Cincinnati
(300)
St. Louis
(100)
Omaha
FIGURE 6.4
Transshipment
network
solution for
wheat-shipping
example
Management Science Application
Transporting Mail at the U.S. Postal Service
The United States Postal Service (USPS) has one of the most
complex transportation networks in the world, annually deliv-
ering more than 200 billion pieces of mail. USPS delivers
various types of mail in different shapes, weights, and sizes,
through intermediate points and facilities, using various modes
of transportation. On an average weekday the USPS highway
transportation network alone will include more than 75,000
trips between more than 30,000 facilities. USPS transportation
analysts use management science models to identify cost-sav-
ings opportunities in its highway transportation network. One
model, the Highway Corridor Analytic Program (HCAP), opti-
mizes the selection of trips between facilities (such as bulk mail
centers, transfer and mail consolidation centers, processing
and distribution centers, priority mail centers, and air mail cen-
ters) to minimize total transportation costs subject to delivery
requirements. The models includes originating facilities and
pickup times, destination facilities and delivery times, delivery
volume, whether or not the delivery can be split, stops be-
tween the origins and destinations, transportation capacity,
and the variable transportation costs (i.e., cost per unit of vol-
ume). The model identifies existing and potential new trips that
can possibly transport the mail from an origin to a destination,
including stops. Thus, the model includes 0–1 decision vari-
ables (that equal one if a trip is selected and zero if it is not)
and real variables that indicate the proportion of a delivery’s
volume that is routed using a specific trip. The model solution
identifies the optimal set of trips that satisfies the delivery re-
quirements. The HCAP model has saved the USPS more than
$5 million in annual transportation cost savings.
Source: Based on A. Pajunas, E. Matto, M. Trick, and L. Zuluaga,
“Optimizing Highway Transportation at the United States Postal Ser-
vice,” Interfaces 37, no. 6 (November–December 2007): 515–25.
AP Photo/The Republic, Joel Philippsen

The linear programming formulation of the assignment model is similar to the formulation
of the transportation model, except all the supply values for each source equal one, and all the
demand values at each destination equal one. Thus, our example is formulated as follows:
minimize Z = 210xAR + 90xAA + 180xAD + 160xAC + 100xBR + 70xBA + 130xBD
+ 200xBC + 175xCR + 105xCA + 140xCD + 170xCC + 80xDR + 65xDA
+ 105xDD + 120xDC
subject to
This is a balanced assignment model. An unbalanced model exists when supply exceeds de-
mand or demand exceeds supply.
Computer Solution of an Assignment Problem
The assignment problem can be solved using the assignment modules in QM for Windows and
Excel QM, and with Excel spreadsheets. We will solve our example of assigning ACC officials
to game sites first by using Excel, followed by Excel QM, and then by using QM for Windows.
Computer Solution with Excel
As is the case with transportation problems, Excel can be used to solve assignment problems, but only
as linear programming models. Exhibit 6.13 shows an Excel spreadsheet for our ACC basketball offi-
cials example. The objective function in cell C11 was developed by creating a mileage array in cells
C16:F19 and multiplying it by the decision variables in cells C5:F8. The model constraints for avail-
able teams (supply) are contained in the cells in column H, and the constraints for teams of officials at
the game sites (demand) are contained in the cells in row 10.
xij Ú 0
xAC + xBC + xCC + xDC = 1
xAD + xBD + xCD + xDD = 1
xAA + xBA + xCA + xDA = 1
xAR + xBR + xCR + xDR = 1
xDR + xDA + xDD + xDC = 1
xCR + xCA + xCD + xCC = 1
xBR + xBA + xBD + xBC = 1
xAR + xAA + xAD + xAC = 1
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF AN ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM
247
The Assignment Model
The assignment model is a special form of a linear programming model that is similar to the
transportation model. There are differences, however. In the assignment model, the supply at
each source and the demand at each destination are each limited to one unit.
The following example will demonstrate the assignment model. The Atlantic Coast Confer-
ence (ACC) has four basketball games on a particular night. The conference office wants to as-
sign four teams of officials to the four games in a way that will minimize the total distance
traveled by the officials. The supply is always one team of officials, and the demand is for only
one team of officials at each game. The distances in miles for each team of officials to each game
location are shown in the following table:
An assignment model
is for a special form
of transportation
problem in which all
supply and demand
values equal one.
The travel distances
to each game for each
team of officials
Game Sites
Officials
Raleigh
Atlanta
Durham
Clemson
A
210
90
180
160
B
100
70
130
200
C
175
105
140
170
D
80
65
105
120 

Exhibit 6.14 shows the Solver Parameters screen for our example. Before clicking on “Solve,”
remember to invoke “Simplex LP” to solve as a linear programming model. The optimal solution
is shown in Exhibit 6.15. A network diagram of the optimal solution is shown in Figure 6.5.
248
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Objective function
Decision
variables,
C5:F8
=C5+D5+E5+F5
=D5+D6+D7+D8
Mileage array
EXHIBIT 6.13
Simplex LP
EXHIBIT 6.14
Computer Solution with Excel QM
Excel QM also includes a spreadsheet macro for assignment problems. It is very similar to the Excel
QM macro demonstrated earlier in this chapter for the transportation problem, and the spreadsheet
setup is very much like that of the Excel spreadsheet in Exhibit 6.15. The assignment macro is
accessed (from the “Excel QM” menu) and applied similarly to the transportation problem macro. It
already includes all the cell and constraint formulas necessary to solve the problem. The solution to
our ACC basketball example with Excel QM is shown in Exhibit 6.16.

COMPUTER SOLUTION OF AN ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM
249
EXHIBIT 6.15
1
Raleigh
Atlanta
Durham
Clemson
1
1
1
A
B
C
D
FIGURE 6.5
Assignment
network solution
for ACC officials
example
EXHIBIT 6.16

Computer Solution with QM for Windows
The data input for our example is shown in Exhibit 6.17, followed by the solution in Exhibit 6.18.
250
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
EXHIBIT 6.17
Management Science Application
Supplying Empty Freight Cars at 
Union Pacific Railroad
Union Pacific (UP) Railroad, serving 23 states in the west-
ern two-thirds of the United States, is the largest railroad in
North America, with more than 32,000 miles of track and an
annual payroll of $37 billion. It has approximately 105,000
freight cars including automobile cars, boxcars, flat cars, and
gondolas. UP delivers empty cars to its customers, who, in
turn, use them to transport goods between locations in North
America and Mexico. It also transports loaded cars from its
customers to their clients, and cars loaded by shippers of
other railroads whose clients are in the UP rail network. The
assignment of empty cars to meet customer demand is a dif-
ficult problem for UP because of a variety of factors, includ-
ing the fact that empty cars are scattered across the vast UP
rail network, often at great distances from customer demand;
the supply of available cars is frequently much smaller than
demand; and car assignments must be made to customers
according to UP’s standards for excellent service at minimum
cost. The company solved this problem by using a transporta-
tion model that minimizes transportation costs (including
penalty costs, incentives, unmet demand costs, and holding
costs) subject to supply-and-demand constraints. Decision
variables include the number of cars of a certain type as-
signed according to a daily schedule to meet customer de-
mand. UP uses the model to regularly solve its car assignment
problem and to investigate new operating policies. The model
has resulted in a 35% return on investment by reducing the
manpower required in the process to meet demand and by
reducing the operating costs of managing the movement of
empty cars.
Source: Based on A. K. Narisetty, J.-P. P. Richard, D. Ramcharan,
D. Murphy, G. Minks, and J. Fuller, “An Optimization Model for
Empty Freight Car Assignment at Union Pacific Railroad,” Interfaces
38, no. 2 (March–April 2008): 89–102.
Susan E. Benson/Stock Connection

COMPUTER SOLUTION OF AN ASSIGNMENT PROBLEM
251
Management Science Application
Assigning Umpire Crews at Professional 
Tennis Tournaments
At tennis tournaments, as in all sporting events, the role of
the officials who interpret and enforce the rules of play is critical.
In professional tennis a set of umpires oversee matches. At
a large tennis tournament such as the U.S. Open, up to
18 matches may be played simultaneously, and on each court up
to 10 umpires, including a chair umpire and 9 line umpires, may
be calling a match. Chief umpires assign umpire crews to
matches according to an intricate set of guidelines based on ex-
perience, qualifications, and skills. Chair umpire assignments are
based primarily on nationality, player histories, and experience,
whereas line umpires are assigned according to skill and experi-
ence at a particular position (i.e., lines on the court). Also, since
coaching is prohibited during matches, all players, male or
female, must be accompanied by an umpire if they leave the
court. As a result, line umpires also must be assigned to courts
to ensure that at least two male and two female umpires are on
each court at all times. Also, line umpires cannot stay on a court
all day; they must be rotated to allow for breaks and meals. Um-
pire crews travel from court to court in a session as groups and
typically rotate on and off courts every hour, thus requiring mul-
tiple crews to be assigned to groups of courts. Tournaments can
run anywhere from 1 to 3 weeks, with increasing visibility (thus
increasing umpire skill requirements) as the tournament pro-
gresses. In 2002 while attending the U.S. Open, one of the au-
thors noticed the difficulty the chief umpires were having trying
to reschedule crews following extensive rain delays. He and his
coauthors subsequently developed a linear programming model
for assigning umpire crews to matches during a tournament.
The model is based on a skill rating system that rates umpires
from 1 (the best) to 7 according to their historical performance.
Each court is assigned a priority, and position (line) assignments
on each court are based on a required maximum and minimum
skill rating. The overall objective (function) of the model
minimizes the weighted deviation of the skill ratings of the um-
pires assigned to each position on the court from target skill rat-
ings for each court position (i.e., chair and lines). The model
includes several constraints. First, each available umpire can be
assigned only once during a scheduling session (i.e., time pe-
riod); second, each crew must have the correct number of um-
pires, and each umpire must have a skill rating consistent with
the court position for the assignment; and third, each crew must
have the appropriate minimal gender makeup. In 2004 the
United States Tennis Association spent 2,513 hours scheduling
umpire crews for all U.S. tournaments. The model developed by
the authors reduced this time by 68% to 91%, enabling chief
umpires to spend about 75% of the time they previously used
for umpire crew scheduling for managing the tournament
instead.
Source: Based on A. Farmer, J. Smith, and L. Miller, “Scheduling Um-
pire Crews for Professional Tennis Tournaments,” Interfaces 37, no. 2
(March–April 2007): 187–96.
AP Photo/Sang Tan
EXHIBIT 6.18

This example will demonstrate the procedure for solving a transportation problem.
Problem Statement
A concrete company transports concrete from three plants to three construction sites. The sup-
ply capacities of the three plants, the demand requirements at the three sites, and the transporta-
tion costs per ton are as follows:
Construction Site
Plant
A
B
C
Supply (tons)
1
$ 8
$ 5
$ 6
120
2
15
10
12
80
3
3
9
10
80
Demand (tons)
150
70
100
280
Determine the linear programming model formulation for this problem and solve it by using
Excel.
Solution
Step 1: The Linear Programming Model Formulation
minimize Z = $8x1A + 5x1B + 6x1C + 15x2A + 10x2B + 12x2C + 3x3A + 9x3B + 10x3C
subject to
x1A + x1B + x1C = 120
x2A + x2B + x2C = 80
x3A + x3B + x3C = 80
x1A + x2A + x3A
150
x1B + x2B + x3B
70
x1C + x2C + x3C
100
xij
0
Ú
…
…
…
252
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Summary
In this chapter, three special types of linear programming problems were presented—the trans-
portation problem, the transshipment problem, and the assignment problem. As mentioned at
the beginning of the chapter, they are part of a larger class of linear programming problems,
known as network flow problems. In the next chapter, we examine several additional examples
of network flow problems, including the shortest route problem, the minimal spanning tree prob-
lem, and the maximal flow problem. Although they have different objectives, they share the same
general characteristics as the transportation and assignment problems—that is, the flow of items
from sources to destinations.
Example Problem
Solution

PROBLEMS
253
Problems
1. Green Valley Mills produces carpet at plants in St. Louis and Richmond. The carpet is then
shipped to two outlets, located in Chicago and Atlanta. The cost per ton of shipping carpet from
each of the two plants to the two warehouses is as follows:
To (cost)
From
Chicago
Atlanta
St. Louis
$40
$65
Richmond
70
30
The plant at St. Louis can supply 250 tons of carpet per week; the plant at Richmond can supply
400 tons per week. The Chicago outlet has a demand of 300 tons per week, and the outlet at
Atlanta demands 350 tons per week. The company wants to know the number of tons of carpet
to ship from each plant to each outlet in order to minimize the total shipping cost. Solve this
transportation problem.
2. A transportation problem involves the following costs, supply, and demand:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
4
Supply
1
$500
$750
$300
$450
12
2
650
800
400
600
17
3
400
700
500
550
11
Demand
10
10
10
10
Solve this problem by using the computer.
Step 2: Excel Solution

254
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
3. Given a transportation problem with the following costs, supply, and demand, find the optimal
solution by using the computer:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
Supply
A
$
6
$
7
$
4
100
B
5
3
6
180
C
8
5
7
200
Demand
135
175
170
4. Consider the following transportation problem:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
Supply
A
$ 6
$
9
$100
130
B
12
3
5
70
C
4
8
11
100
Demand
80
110
60
Formulate this problem as a linear programming model and solve it by using the computer.
5. Solve the following linear programming problem:
minimize Z = 3x11 + 12x12 + 8x13 + 10x21 + 5x22 + 6x23 + 6x31 + 7x32 + 10x33
subject to
6. Consider the following transportation problem:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
Supply
A
$ 6
$
9
$ 7
130
B
12
3
5
70
C
4
8
11
100
Demand
80
110
60
Solve it by using the computer.
xij Ú 0
x13 + x23 + x33 … 80
x12 + x22 + x32 … 110
x11 + x21 + x31 … 70
x31 + x32 + x33 = 100
x21 + x22 + x23 = 30
x11 + x12 + x13 = 90

7. Steel mills in three cities produce the following amounts of steel:
Location
Weekly Production (tons)
A. Bethlehem
150
B. Birmingham
210
C. Gary
320
680
These mills supply steel to four cities, where manufacturing plants have the following demand:
Location
Weekly Demand (tons)
1. Detroit
130
2. St. Louis
70
3. Chicago
180
4. Norfolk
240
620
Shipping costs per ton of steel are as follows:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
4
A
$14
$ 9
$16
$18
B
11
8
7
16
C
16
12
10
22
Because of a truckers’ strike, shipments are prohibited from Birmingham to Chicago. Formulate
this problem as a linear programming model and solve it by using the computer.
8. In Problem 7, what would be the effect on the optimal solution of a reduction in production 
capacity at the Gary mill from 320 tons to 290 tons per week?
9. Coal is mined and processed at the following four mines in Kentucky, West Virginia, and Virginia:
Location
Capacity (tons)
A. Cabin Creek
90
B. Surry
50
C. Old Fort
80
D. McCoy
  60
280
These mines supply the following amount of coal to utility power plants in three cities:
Plant
Demand (tons)
1. Richmond
120
2. Winston-Salem
100
3. Durham
110
330
PROBLEMS
255

The railroad shipping costs (in thousands of dollars) per ton of coal are shown in the following
table. Because of railroad construction, shipments are prohibited from Cabin Creek to Richmond:
To (cost, in $1,000s)
From
1
2
3
A
$ 7
$10
$ 5
B
12
9
4
C
7
3
11
D
9
5
7
Formulate this problem as a linear programming model and solve it by using the computer.
10. Oranges are grown, picked, and then stored in warehouses in Tampa, Miami, and Fresno. These
warehouses supply oranges to markets in New York, Philadelphia, Chicago, and Boston. The
following table shows the shipping costs per truckload (in hundreds of dollars), supply, and de-
mand. Because of an agreement between distributors, shipments are prohibited from Miami to
Chicago:
To (cost, in $100s)
From
New York
Philadelphia
Chicago
Boston
Supply
Tampa
$
9
$ 14
$ 12
$ 17
200
Miami
11
10
6
10
200
Fresno
12
8
15
7
200
Demand
130
170
100
150
Formulate this problem as a linear programming model and solve it by using the computer.
11. A manufacturing firm produces diesel engines in four cities—Phoenix, Seattle, St. Louis, and
Detroit. The company is able to produce the following numbers of engines per month:
Plant
Production
1. Phoenix
5
2. Seattle
25
3. St. Louis
20
4. Detroit
25
Three trucking firms purchase the following numbers of engines for their plants in three cities:
Firm
Demand
A. Greensboro
10
B. Charlotte
20
C. Louisville
15
The transportation costs per engine (in hundreds of dollars) from sources to destinations 
are shown in the following table. However, the Charlotte firm will not accept engines made in
256
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

Seattle, and the Louisville firm will not accept engines from Detroit; therefore, those routes are
prohibited:
To (cost, in $100s)
From
A
B
C
1
$ 7
$ 8
$ 5
2
6
10
6
3
10
4
5
4
3
9
11
Formulate this problem as a linear programming model and solve it by using the computer.
12. The Interstate Truck Rental firm has accumulated extra trucks at three of its truck leasing out-
lets, as shown in the following table:
Leasing Outlet
Extra Trucks
1. Atlanta
70
2. St. Louis
115
3. Greensboro
  60
Total
245
The firm also has four outlets with shortages of rental trucks, as follows:
Leasing Outlet
Truck Shortage
A. New Orleans
80
B. Cincinnati
50
C. Louisville
90
D. Pittsburgh
  25
Total
245
The firm wants to transfer trucks from those outlets with extras to those with shortages at the
minimum total cost. The following costs of transporting these trucks from city to city have been
determined:
To (cost)
From
A
B
C
D
1
$ 70
$80
$45
$90
2
120
40
30
75
3
110
60
70
80
Solve this problem by using the computer.
PROBLEMS
257

13. The Shotz Beer Company has breweries in two cities; the breweries can supply the following
numbers of barrels of draft beer to the company’s distributors each month:
Brewery
Monthly Supply (bbl)
A. Tampa
3,500
B. St. Louis
5,000
Total
8,500
The distributors, which are spread throughout six states, have the following total monthly demand:
Distributor
Monthly Demand (bbl)
1. Tennessee
1,600
2. Georgia
1,800
3. North Carolina
1,500
4. South Carolina
950
5. Kentucky
1,250
6. Virginia
1,400
Total
8,500
The company must pay the following shipping costs per barrel:
To (cost)
From
1
2
3
4
5
6
A
$0.50
$0.35
$0.60
$0.45
$0.80
$0.75
B
0.25
0.65
0.40
0.55
0.20
0.65
Solve this problem by using the computer.
14. In Problem 13, the Shotz Beer Company management negotiated a new shipping contract with a
trucking firm between its Tampa brewery and its distributor in Kentucky. This contract reduces
the shipping cost per barrel from $0.80 per barrel to $0.65 per barrel. How will this cost change
affect the optimal solution?
15. Computers Unlimited sells microcomputers to universities and colleges on the East Coast and
ships them from three distribution warehouses. The firm is able to supply the following numbers
of microcomputers to the universities by the beginning of the academic year:
Distribution 
Supply 
Warehouse
(microcomputers)
1. Richmond
420
2. Atlanta
610
3. Washington, DC
   340
Total
1,370
Four universities have ordered microcomputers that must be delivered and installed by the be-
ginning of the academic year:
Demand
University
(microcomputers)
A. Tech
520
B. A & M
250
C. State
400
D. Central
   380
Total
1,550
258
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

The shipping and installation costs per microcomputer from each distributor to each university
are as follows:
To (cost)
From
A
B
C
D
1
$22
$17
$30
$18
2
15
35
20
25
3
28
21
16
14
Solve this problem by using the computer.
16. In Problem 15, Computers Unlimited wants to better meet demand at the four universities it sup-
plies. It is considering two alternatives: (1) expand its warehouse at Richmond to a capacity of
600, at a cost equivalent to an additional $6 in handling and shipping per unit; or (2) purchase a
new warehouse in Charlotte that can supply 300 units with shipping costs of $19 to Tech, $26 to
A & M, $22 to State, and $16 to Central. Which alternative should management select, based
solely on transportation costs (i.e., no capital costs)?
17. Computers Unlimited in Problem 15 has determined that when it is unable to meet the demand
for microcomputers at the universities it supplies, the universities tend to purchase microcom-
puters elsewhere in the future. Thus, the firm has estimated a shortage cost for each microcom-
puter demanded but not supplied that reflects the loss of future sales and goodwill. These costs
for each university are as follows:
University
Cost/Microcomputer
A. Tech
$40
B. A & M
65
C. State
25
D. Central
50
Solve Problem 15 with these shortage costs included. Compute the total transportation cost and
the total shortage cost.
18. A severe winter ice storm has swept across North Carolina and Virginia, followed by over a foot
of snow and frigid, single-digit temperatures. These weather conditions have resulted in numer-
ous downed power lines and power outages, causing dangerous conditions for much of the pop-
ulation. Local utility companies have been overwhelmed and have requested assistance from
unaffected utility companies across the Southeast. The following table shows the number of util-
ity trucks with crews available from five different companies in Georgia, South Carolina, and
Florida; the demand for crews in seven different areas that local companies cannot get to; and
the weekly cost (in thousands of dollars) of a crew going to a specific area (based on the visiting
company’s normal charges, the distance the crew has to come, and living expenses in an area):
Area (cost, in $1,000s)
Crews 
Crew
NC-E
NC-SW
NC-P
NC-W
VA-SW
VA-C
VA-T
Available
GA-1
15.2
14.3
13.9
13.5
14.7
16.5
18.7
12
GA-2
12.8
11.3
10.6
12.0
12.7
13.2
15.6
10
SC-1
12.4
10.8
9.4
11.3
13.1
12.8
14.5
14
FL-1
18.2
19.4
18.2
17.9
20.5
20.7
22.7
15
FL-2
19.3
20.2
19.5
20.2
21.2
21.3
23.5
12
Crews
9
7
6
8
10
9
7
Needed
Determine the number of crews that should be sent from each utility to each affected area to
minimize total costs.
PROBLEMS
259

19. A large manufacturing company is closing three of its existing plants and intends to transfer
some of its more skilled employees to three plants that will remain open. The number of em-
ployees available for transfer from each closing plant is as follows:
Closing Plant
Transferable Employees
1
60
2
105
3
  70
Total
235
The following number of employees can be accommodated at the three plants remaining 
open:
Open Plants
Employees Demanded
A
45
B
90
C
  35
Total
170
Each transferred employee will increase product output per day at each plant, as shown in the
following table:
To (employees)
From
A
B
C
1
5
8
6
2
10
9
12
3
7
6
8
The company wants to transfer employees to ensure the maximum increase in product output.
Solve this problem by using the computer.
20. The Sav-Us Rental Car Agency has six lots in Nashville, and it wants to have a certain number of
cars available at each lot at the beginning of each day for local rental. The agency would like a
model it could quickly solve at the end of each day that would tell it how to redistribute the cars
among the six lots in the minimum total time. The times required to travel between the six lots
are as follows:
To (min.)
From
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
—
12
17
18
10
20
2
14
—
10
19
16
15
3
14
10
—
12
8
9
4
8
16
14
—
12
15
5
11
21
16
18
—
10
6
24
12
9
17
15
—
260
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

The agency would like the following number of cars at each lot at the end of the day. Also
shown is the number of available cars at each lot at the end of a particular day. Determine the
optimal reallocation of rental cars by using any initial solution approach and any solution
method:
Lot (cars)
Cars
1
2
3
4
5
6
Available
37
20
14
26
40
28
Desired
30
25
20
40
30
20
21. Bayville has built a new elementary school, increasing the town’s total to four schools—Addi-
son, Beeks, Canfield, and Daley. Each has a capacity of 400 students. The school board wants to
assign children to schools so that their travel time by bus is as short as possible. The school
board has partitioned the town into five districts conforming to population density—north,
south, east, west, and central. The average bus travel time from each district to each school is
shown as follows:
Travel Time (min.)
District
Addison
Beeks
Canfield
Daley
Student Population
North
12
23
35
17
250
South
26
15
21
27
340
East
18
20
22
31
310
West
29
24
35
10
210
Central
15
10
23
16
290
Determine the number of children that should be assigned from each district to each school to
minimize total student travel time.
22. In Problem 21, the school board determined that it does not want any of the schools to be 
overly crowded compared with the other schools. It would like to assign students from each 
district to each school so that enrollments are evenly balanced between the four schools. How-
ever, the school board is concerned that this might significantly increase travel time. Determine 
the number of students to be assigned from each district to each school such that school enroll-
ments are evenly balanced. Does this new solution appear to significantly increase travel time
per student?
23. The Easy Time Grocery chain operates in major metropolitan areas on the East Coast. The stores
have a “no-frills” approach, with low overhead and high volume. They generally buy their stock
in volume at low prices. However, in some cases they actually buy stock at stores in other areas
and ship it in. They can do this because of high prices in the cities they operate in compared with
costs in other locations. One example is baby food. Easy Time purchases baby food at stores in
Albany, Binghamton, Claremont, Dover, and Edison and then trucks it to six stores in and
around New York City. The stores in the outlying areas know what Easy Time is up to, so they
limit the number of cases of baby food Easy Time can purchase. The following table shows the
profit Easy Time makes per case of baby food, based on where the chain purchases it and at
PROBLEMS
261

which store it is sold, plus the available baby food per week at purchase locations and the shelf
space available at each Easy Time store per week:
Easy Time Store (profit/case)
Purchase 
Location
1
2
3
4
5
6
Supply
Albany
$ 9
$ 8
$11
$12
$7
$ 8
26
Binghamton
10
10
8
6
9
7
40
Claremont
8
6
6
5
7
4
20
Dover
4
6
9
5
8
10
40
Edison
12
10
8
9
6
7
45
Demand
25
15
30
18
27
35
Determine where Easy Time should purchase baby food and how the food should be distributed
to maximize profit.
24. Suppose that in Problem 23 Easy Time can purchase all the baby food it needs from a New
York City distributor at a price that will result in a profit of $9 per case at stores 1, 3, and 4; $8
per case at stores 2 and 6; and $7 per case at store 5. Should Easy Time purchase all, none, or
some of its baby food from the distributor rather than purchase it at other stores and truck it in?
25. In Problem 23, if Easy Time could arrange to purchase more baby food from one of the outlying
locations, which should it be, how many additional cases could be purchased, and how much
would this increase profit?
26. The Roadnet Transport Company expanded its shipping capacity by purchasing 90 trailer
trucks from a competitor that went bankrupt. The company subsequently located 30 of the pur-
chased trucks at each of its shipping warehouses in Charlotte, Memphis, and Louisville. The
company makes shipments from each of these warehouses to terminals in St. Louis, Atlanta,
and New York. Each truck is capable of making one shipment per week. The terminal managers
have indicated their capacity of extra shipments. The manager at St. Louis can accommodate
40 additional trucks per week, the manager at Atlanta can accommodate 60 additional trucks,
and the manager at New York can accommodate 50 additional trucks. The company makes the
following profit per truckload shipment from each warehouse to each terminal. The profits dif-
fer as a result of differences in products shipped, shipping costs, and transport rates:
Terminal (profit)
Warehouse
St. Louis
Atlanta
New York
Charlotte
$1,800
$2,100
$1,600
Memphis
1,000
700
900
Louisville
1,400
800
2,200
Determine how many trucks to assign to each route (i.e., warehouse to terminal) in order to max-
imize profit.
27. During the Gulf War in Iraq, large amounts of military matériel and supplies had to be shipped daily
from supply depots in the United States to bases in the Middle East. The critical factor in the move-
ment of these supplies was speed. The following table shows the number of planeloads of supplies
available each day from each of six supply depots and the number of daily loads demanded at each
262
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

of five bases. (Each planeload is approximately equal in tonnage.) Also included are the transport
hours per plane, including loading and fueling, actual flight time, and unloading and refueling:
Military Base
Supply
Depot
A
B
C
D
E
Supply
1
36
40
32
43
29
7
2
28
27
29
40
38
10
3
34
35
41
29
31
8
4
41
42
35
27
36
8
5
25
28
40
34
38
9
6
31
30
43
38
40
6
Demand
9
6
12
8
10
Determine the optimal daily flight schedule that will minimize total transport time.
28. PM Computer Services produces personal computers from component parts it buys on the open
market. The company can produce a maximum of 300 personal computers per month. PM wants
to determine its production schedule for the first 6 months of the new year. The cost to produce
a personal computer in January will be $1,200. However, PM knows the cost of component parts
will decline each month so that the overall cost to produce a PC will be 5% less each month. The
cost of holding a computer in inventory is $15 per unit per month. Following is the demand for
the company’s computers each month:
Month
Demand
Month
Demand
January
180
April
210
February
260
May
400
March
340
June
320
Determine a production schedule for PM that will minimize total cost.
29. In Problem 28, suppose that the demand for personal computers increased each month, as 
follows:
Month
Demand
Month
Demand
January
410
April
620
February
320
May
430
March
500
June
380
In addition to the regular production capacity of 300 units per month, PM Computer Services
can also produce an additional 200 computers per month by using overtime. Overtime produc-
tion adds 20% to the cost of a personal computer.
Determine a production schedule for PM that will minimize total cost.
30. National Foods Company has five plants where it processes and packages fruits and vegetables. It has
suppliers in six cities in California, Texas, Alabama, and Florida. The company owns and operates its
own trucking system for transporting fruits and vegetables from its suppliers to its plants. However, it
is now considering outsourcing all its shipping to outside trucking firms and getting rid of its own
trucks. It currently spends $245,000 per month to operate its own trucking system. It has determined
PROBLEMS
263

monthly shipping costs (in thousands of dollars per ton) of using outside shippers from each of its
suppliers to each of its plants, as shown in the following table:
Processing Plants ($1,000s/ton)
Suppliers
Denver
St. Paul
Louisville
Akron
Topeka
Supply (tons)
Sacramento
$3.7
$4.6
$4.9
$5.5
$4.3
18
Bakersfield
3.4
5.1
4.4
5.9
5.2
15
San Antonio
3.3
4.1
3.7
2.9
2.6
10
Montgomery
1.9
4.2
2.7
5.4
3.9
12
Jacksonville
6.1
5.1
3.8
2.5
4.1
20
Ocala
6.6
4.8
3.5
3.6
4.5
15
Demand (tons)
20
15
15
15
20
90
Should National Foods continue to operate its own shipping network or sell its trucks and out-
source its shipping to independent trucking firms?
31. In Problem 30, National Foods would like to know what the effect would be on the optimal so-
lution and the company’s decision regarding its shipping if it negotiates with its suppliers in
Sacramento, Jacksonville, and Ocala to increase their capacity to 25 tons per month. What would
be the effect of negotiating instead with its suppliers at San Antonio and Montgomery to in-
crease their capacity to 25 tons each?
32. Orient Express is a global distribution company that transports its clients’ products to customers
in Hong Kong, Singapore, and Taipei. All the products Orient Express ships are stored at three dis-
tribution centers—one in Los Angeles, one in Savannah, and one in Galveston. For the coming
month the company has 450 containers of computer components available at the Los Angeles
center, 600 containers available at Savannah, and 350 containers available at Galveston. The
company has orders for 600 containers from Hong Kong, 500 containers from Singapore, and
500 containers from Taipei. The shipping costs per container from each U.S. port to each of the
overseas ports are shown in the following table:
Overseas Port (cost/container)
U.S. Distribution 
Center
Hong Kong
Singapore
Taipei
Los Angeles
$300
$210
$340
Savannah
490
520
610
Galveston
360
320
500
Orient Express, as the overseas broker for its U.S. customers, is responsible for unfulfilled
orders, and it incurs stiff penalty costs from overseas customers if it does not meet an order.
The Hong Kong customers charge a penalty cost of $800 per container for unfulfilled demand,
Singapore customers charge a penalty cost of $920 per container, and Taipei customers charge
$1,100 per container. Formulate and solve a transportation model to determine the shipments
from each U.S. distribution center to each overseas port that will minimize shipping costs.
Indicate what portion of the total cost is a result of penalties.
33. Binford Tools manufactures garden tools. It uses inventory, overtime, and subcontracting to ab-
sorb demand fluctuations. Expected demand, regular and overtime production capacity, and sub-
contracting capacity are provided in the following table for the next four quarters for its basic
line of steel garden tools:
264
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

Regular
Overtime
Subcontracting
Quarter
Demand
Capacity
Capacity
Capacity
1
9,000
9,000
1,000
3,000
2
12,000
10,000
1,500
3,000
3
16,000
12,000
2,000
3,000
4
19,000
12,000
2,000
3,000
The regular production cost per unit is $20, the overtime cost per unit is $25, the cost to subcon-
tract a unit is $27, and the inventory carrying cost is $2 per unit. The company has 300 units in
inventory at the beginning of the year.
Determine the optimal production schedule for the four quarters to minimize total costs.
34. The National Western Railroad’s rail network covers most of the U.S. West and Midwest. On a
daily basis it sends empty freight cars from various locations in its rail network to its customers
for their use. Sometimes there are not enough freight cars to meet customer demand. The trans-
portation costs for shipping empty freight cars, shown as follows, are directly related to distance
traveled and the number of rail centers that must handle the car movement.
PROBLEMS
265
Customer Location
Freight Car 
Location
A. Milwaukee B. Omaha
C. Topeka D. Tucson E. Denver F. Wichita G. Minneapolis H. Memphis I. Kansas City Supply
1. Portland
27
23
23
26
21
29
40
45
23
1,100
2. Fresno
31
26
25
22
20
34
47
43
26
720
3. Long 
38
31
32
18
24
27
51
48
34
1,450
Beach
4. Salt Lake 
28
18
17
24
9
20
32
35
19
980
City
5. El Paso
41
27
24
11
18
22
46
30
25
650
6. Houston
38
24
22
16
27
25
41
28
23
1,025
7. St. Louis
15
14
10
27
23
12
19
10
9
1,330
8. Chicago
12
13
15
31
26
17
14
15
14
1,275
Demand
974
1,225
1,690
710
1,261
663
301
479
1,227
Determine the number of empty freight cars that should be sent from each rail network location
to customers to meet demand at the minimum total cost.
35. Al, Barbara, Carol, and Dave have joined together to purchase two season tickets to the Giants’
home football games. Because there are eight home games, each person will get tickets to two
games. Each person has ranked the games they prefer from 1 to 8, with 1 being most preferred
and 8 least preferred, as follows:
Person
Game
Al
Barbara
Carol
Dave
1. Cowboys
1
2
1
4
2. Redskins
3
4
4
1
3. Cardinals
7
8
8
7
4. Eagles
2
7
5
3
5. Bengals
5
6
6
8
6. Packers
6
3
2
5
7. Saints
8
5
7
6
8. Jets
4
1
3
2

Determine the two games each person should get tickets for that will result in the groups’ great-
est degree of satisfaction. Do you think the participants will think your allocation is fair?
36. World Foods, Inc., imports food products such as meats, cheese, and pastries to the United States
from warehouses at ports in Hamburg, Marseilles, and Liverpool. Ships from these ports deliver
the products to Norfolk, New York, and Savannah, where they are stored in company warehouses
before being shipped to distribution centers in Dallas, St. Louis, and Chicago. The products are
then distributed to specialty food stores and sold through catalogs. The shipping costs
($/1,000 lb.) from the European ports to the U.S. cities and the available supplies (1,000 lb.) at
the European ports are provided in the following table:
U.S. City
European Port
4. Norfolk
5. New York
6. Savannah
Supply
1. Hamburg
$420
$390
$610
55
2. Marseilles
510
590
470
78
3. Liverpool
450
360
480
37
The transportation costs ($/1,000 lb.) from each U.S. city of the three distribution centers and
the demands (1,000 lb.) at the distribution centers are as follows:
Distribution Center
Warehouse
7. Dallas
8. St. Louis
9. Chicago
4. Norfolk
$ 75
$ 63
$81
5. New York
125
110
95
6. Savannah
68
82
95
Demand
60
45
50
Determine the optimal shipments between the European ports and the warehouses and the distri-
bution centers to minimize total transportation costs.
37. A sports apparel company has received an order for a college basketball team’s national champi-
onship T-shirt. The company can purchase the T-shirts from textile factories in Mexico, Puerto Rico,
and Haiti. The shirts are shipped from the factories to companies in the United States that silk-screen
the shirts before they are shipped to distribution centers. Following are the production and transporta-
tion costs ($/shirt) from the T-shirt factories to the silk-screen companies to the distribution centers,
plus the supply of T-shirts at the factories and demand for the shirts at the distribution centers:
Silk-Screen Company
T-shirt Factory
4. Miami
5. Atlanta
6. Houston
Supply (1,000s)
1. Mexico
$4
$6
$3
18
2. Puerto Rico
3
5
5
15
3. Haiti
2
4
4
23
Distribution Center
Silk-Screen
Company
7. New York
8. St. Louis
9. Los Angeles
4. Miami
$ 5
$ 7
$ 9
5. Atlanta
7
6
10
6. Houston
8
6
8
Demand (1,000s)
20
12
20
266
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

Determine the optimal shipments to minimize total production and transportation costs for the
apparel company.
38. Walsh’s Fruit Company contracts with growers in Ohio, Pennsylvania, and New York to purchase
grapes. The grapes are processed into juice at the farms and stored in refrigerated vats. Then the juice
is shipped to two plants, where it is processed into bottled grape juice and frozen concentrate. The
juice and concentrate are then transported to three food warehouses/distribution centers. The trans-
portation costs per ton from the farms to the plants and from the plants to the distributors, and the
supply at the farms and demand at the distribution centers are summarized in the following tables:
Plant
Farm
4. Indiana
5. Georgia
Supply (1,000 tons)
1. Ohio
$16
21
72
2. Pennsylvania
18
16
105
3. New York
22
25
83
Distribution Center
Plant
6. Virginia
7. Kentucky
8. Louisiana
4. Indiana
$23
$15
$29
5. Georgia
20
17
24
Demand (1,000 tons)
90
80
120
a. Determine the optimal shipments from farms to plants to distribution centers to minimize to-
tal transportation costs.
b. What would be the effect on the solution if the capacity at each plant were 140,000 tons?
39. A national catalog and Internet retailer has three warehouses and three major distribution cen-
ters located around the country. Normally, items are shipped directly from the warehouses to the
distribution centers; however, each of the distribution centers can also be used as an intermedi-
ate transshipment point. The transportation costs ($/unit) between warehouses and distribution
centers, the supply at the warehouses (100 units), and the demand at the distribution centers 
(100 units) for a specific week are shown in the following table:
Distribution Center
Warehouse
A
B
C
Supply
1
$12
$ 11
$ 7
70
2
8
6
14
80
3
9
10
12
50
Demand
60
100
40
The transportation costs ($/unit) between the distribution centers are
Distribution Center
Distribution Center
A
B
C
A
$—
$8
$3
B
1
—
2
C
7
2
—
Determine the optimal shipments between warehouses and distribution centers to minimize total
transportation costs.
PROBLEMS
267

40. Horizon Computers manufactures laptops in Germany, Belgium, and Italy. Because of high tar-
iffs between international trade groups, it is sometimes cheaper to ship partially completed lap-
tops to factories in Puerto Rico, Mexico, and Panama and have them completed before final
shipment to U.S. distributors in Texas, Virginia, and Ohio. The cost ($/unit) of the completed
laptops plus tariffs and shipment costs from the European plants directly to the United States
and supply and demand are as follows:
U.S. Distributor
European Plant
7. Texas
8. Virginia
9. Ohio
Supply (1,000s)
1. Germany
$2,600
$1,900
$2,300
5.2
2. Belgium
2,200
2,100
2,600
6.3
3. Italy
1,800
2,200
2,500
4.5
Demand (1,000s)
2.1
3.7
7.8
Alternatively, the unit costs of shipping partially completed laptops to plants for finishing before
sending them to the United States are as follows:
Factory
European Plant
4. Puerto Rico
5. Mexico
6. Panama
1. Germany
$1,400
$1,200
$1,100
2. Belgium
1,600
1,100
900
3. Italy
1,500
1,400
1,200
U.S. Distributor
Factory
7. Texas
8. Virginia
9. Ohio
4. Puerto Rico
$800
$700
$ 900
5. Mexico
600
800
1,100
6. Panama
900
700
1,200
Determine the optimal shipments of laptops that will meet demand at the U.S. distributors at the
minimum total cost.
41. The Midlands Field Produce Company contracts with potato farmers in Colorado, Minnesota,
North Dakota, and Wisconsin for monthly potato shipments. Midlands picks up the potatoes at
the farms and ships mostly by truck (and sometimes by rail) to its sorting and distribution centers
in Ohio, Missouri, and Iowa. At these centers the potatoes are cleaned, rejects are discarded, and
the potatoes are sorted according to size and quality. They are then shipped to combination plants
and distribution centers in Virginia, Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Texas, where the company pro-
duces a variety of potato products and distributes bags of potatoes to stores. Exceptions are the
Ohio distribution center, which will accept potatoes only from farms in Minnesota, North Dakota,
and Wisconsin, and the Texas plant, which won’t accept shipments from Ohio because of dis-
agreements over delivery schedules and quality issues. Following are summaries of the shipping
costs from the farms to the distribution centers and the processing and shipping costs from the
distribution centers to the plants, as well as the available monthly supply at each farm, the pro-
cessing capacity at the distribution centers, and the final demand at the plants (in bushels):
268
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

Distribution Center ($/bushel)
Farm
5. Ohio
6. Missouri
7. Iowa
Supply (bushels)
1. Colorado
$—
$1.09
$1.26
1,600
2. Minnesota
0.89
1.32
1.17
1,100
3. North Dakota
0.78
1.22
1.36
1,400
4. Wisconsin
1.19
1.25
1.42
1,900
Processing Capacity (bushels)
1,800
2,200
1,600
Plant ($/bushel)
Distribution Center
8. Virginia
9. Pennsylvania
10. Georgia
11. Texas
5. Ohio
$4.56
$3.98
$4.94
$—
6. Missouri
3.43
5.74
4.65
5.01
7. Iowa
5.39
6.35
5.70
4.87
Demand (bushels)
1,200
900
1,100
1,500
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine the optimal monthly shipments
from the farms to the distribution centers and from the distribution centers to the plants to mini-
mize total shipping and processing costs.
42. KanTech Corporation is a global distributor of electrical parts and components. Its customers are
electronics companies in the United States, including computer manufacturers and audio/visual
product manufacturers. The company contracts to purchase components and parts from
manufacturers in Russia, Eastern and Western Europe, and the Mediterranean, and it has them de-
livered to warehouses in three European ports, Gdansk, Hamburg, and Lisbon. The various com-
ponents and parts are loaded into containers based on demand from U.S. customers. Each port
has a limited fixed number of containers available each month. The containers are then shipped
overseas by container ships to the ports of Norfolk, Jacksonville, New Orleans, and Galveston.
From these seaports, the containers are typically coupled with trucks and hauled to inland ports in
Front Royal (Virginia), Kansas City, and Dallas. There are a fixed number of freight haulers avail-
able at each port each month. These inland ports are sometimes called “freight villages,” or inter-
modal junctions, where the containers are collected and transferred from one transport mode to
another (i.e., from truck to rail or vice versa). From the inland ports, the containers are transported
to KanTech’s distribution centers in Tucson, Pittsburgh, Denver, Nashville, and Cleveland. Fol-
lowing are the handling and shipping costs ($/container) between each of the embarkation and
destination points along this overseas supply chain and the available containers at each port:
U.S. Port
Available
European Port
4. Norfolk
5. Jacksonville
6. New Orleans
7. Galveston
Containers
1. Gdansk
$1,725
$1,800
$2,345
$2,700
125
2. Hamburg
1,825
1,750
1,945
2,320
210
3. Lisbon
2,060
2,175
2,050
2,475
160
PROBLEMS
269

Inland Port
Intermodal
U.S. Port
8. Dallas
9. Kansas City
10. Front Royal
Capacity (containers)
4. Norfolk
$825
$545
$ 320
85
5. Jacksonville
750
675
450
110
6. New Orleans
325
605
690
100
7. Galveston
270
510
1,050
130
Intermodal
Capacity (containers)
170
240
140
Distribution Center
Inland Port
11. Tucson
12. Denver
13. Pittsburgh
14. Nashville
15. Cleveland
8. Dallas
$ 450
$830
$ 565
$420
$960
9. Kansas City
880
520
450
380
660
10. Front Royal
1,350
390
1,200
450
310
Demand
85
60
105
50
120
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine the optimal shipments from each
point of embarkation to each destination along this supply chain that will result in the minimum
total shipping cost.
43. In Problem 42, KanTech Corporation is just as concerned that its U.S. distributors receive ship-
ments in the minimum amount of time as they are about minimizing their shipping costs. 
Suppose that each U.S. distributor receives one major container shipment each month. Follow-
ing are summaries of the shipping times (in days) between each of the embarkation and destina-
tion points along KanTech’s overseas supply chain. These times encompass not only travel time
but also processing, loading, and unloading times at each port:
U.S. Port
European Port 
4. Norfolk
5. Jacksonville
6. New Orleans
7. Galveston
1. Gdansk
22
24
27
30
2. Hamburg
17
20
23
26
3. Lisbon
25
21
24
26
Inland Port
U.S. Port
8. Dallas
9. Kansas City
10. Front Royal
4. Norfolk
10
8
6
5. Jacksonville
12
9
8
6. New Orleans
8
7
10
7. Galveston
12
6
8
Distribution Center
Inland Port
11. Tucson
12. Denver
13. Pittsburgh
14. Nashville
15. Cleveland
8. Dallas
5
6
5
7
8
9. Kansas City
6
4
4
5
7
10. Front Royal
10
5
7
4
6
270
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

a. Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine the optimal shipping route
for each distribution center along this supply chain that will result in the minimum total ship-
ping time. Determine the shipping route and time for each U.S. distributor.
b. Suppose the European ports can accommodate only three shipments each. How will this af-
fect the solution in part (a)?
44. Blue Mountain Coffee Company produces various blends of Free Trade, organic specialty cof-
fees that it sells to wholesale customers. The company imports 25 million pounds of coffee
beans annually from coffee plantations in Brazil, Indonesia, Kenya, Colombia, Côte d’Ivoire,
and Guatemala. The beans are shipped from these countries to U.S. ports in Galveston, New
Orleans, Savannah, and Jacksonville, where they are loaded onto container trucks and shipped
to the company’s plant in Vermont. The shipping costs (in dollars per million pounds) from the
countries to the U.S. ports, the amount of beans (in millions of pounds) contracted from the
growers in each country, and the port capacities are shown in the following table:
PROBLEMS
271
U.S. Port
Grower Country
Galveston
New Orleans
Savannah
Jacksonville
Supply
1. Brazil
$30,000
$36,000
$29,000
$41,000
6.6
2. Colombia
19,000
23,000
28,000
35,000
3.2
3. Indonesia
53,000
47,000
45,000
39,000
4.1
4. Kenya
45,000
54,000
48,000
41,000
5.8
5. Côte d’ Ivoire
35,000
33,000
27,000
29,000
1.7
6. Guatemala
14,000
17,000
24,000
28,000
3.6
Capacity
7.8
9
8.1
6.7  
The shipping costs from each port to the plant in Vermont are shown in the following table:
U.S. Port
Vermont
7. Galveston
$61,000
8. New Orleans
55,000
9. Savannah
38,000
10. Jacksonville
43,000
Determine the optimal shipments from the grower countries to the plant in Vermont that will
minimize shipping costs.
45. The Pinnacle Company is a U.S.–based manufacturer of furniture and appliances that offshored
all of its actual manufacturing operations to Asia about a decade ago. It then set up distribution
centers at various locations on the East Coast, near ports where its items were imported on con-
tainer ships. In many cases, Pinnacle’s appliances and furniture arrive partially assembled, and
the company completes the assembly at its distribution centers before sending the finished prod-
ucts to retailers. For example, appliance motors, electric controls, housings, and furniture pieces
might arrive from different Asian manufacturers in separate containers. Recently Pinnacle began
exporting its products to various locations in Europe, and demand steadily increased. As a re-
sult, the company determined that shipping items to the United States, assembling the products,
and then turning around and shipping them to Europe was inefficient and not cost effective. The
company now plans to open three new distribution centers near ports in Europe, and it will ship
its items from Asian ports to distribution centers at the European ports, offload some of the items
for final product assembly, and then ship the partially filled containers on to the U.S. distribu-
tion centers. The following table shows the seven possible locations near container ports in
Europe, and their container capacity that Pinnacle has identified to construct its proposed three

distribution centers; the container shipments from each of its Asian ports; and the container ship-
ping cost from each of the Asian ports to each possible distribution center location.
272
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Proposed Distribution Center
Asian Port
F. Rotterdam
G. Hamburg
H. Antwerp
I. Bremen
J. Valencia
K. Lisbon
L. Le Havre
Container
Center Cost
$16,725,000 
$19,351,000
$13,766,000
$15,463,000
$12,542,000
$13,811,000
$22,365,000
Shipments
A. Hong Kong
$3,466 
$3,560 
$3,125
$3,345
$3,060
$3,120
$3,658
235
B. Shanghai
$3,190
$3,020
$3,278
$3,269
$2,987
$2,864
$3,725
170
C. Busan
$2,815
$2,700
$2,890
$3,005
$2,465
$2,321
$3,145
165
D. Mumbai
$2,412
$2,560
$2,515
$2,875
$2,325
$2,133
$2,758
325
E. Kaoshiung
$2,600
$2,800
$2,735
$2,755
$2,473
$2,410
$2,925
405
Capacity
565
485
520
490
310
410
605
The following table shows the demand from each of the U.S. ports and the cost for container
shipments from each of the possible distribution center locations to each of the U.S. ports:
U.S. Port
Proposed 
Distribution Centers
M. New York
N. Savannah
O. Miami
P. New Orleans
F. Rotterdam
$2,045
$1,875
$1,675
$2,320
G. Hamburg
$2,875
$2,130
$1,856
$2,415
H. Antwerp
$2,415
$2,056
$1,956
$2,228
I. Bremen
$2,225
$1,875
$2,075
$2,652
J. Valencia
$1,865
$1,725
$1,548
$1,815
K. Lisbon
$1,750
$1,555
$1,420
$1,475
L. Le Havre
$3,056
$2,280
$2,065
$2,425
Demand
440
305
190
365
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to determine which three distribution center
locations in Europe Pinnacle should select, and the shipments from each of the Asian ports to
these selected distribution centers and from the European distribution centers to the U.S. ports.
46. In Problem 45, reformulate the model so that Pinnacle minimizes its shipping costs while select-
ing its three new distribution centers within a budget of $45 million. What is the difference in
this solution, if any?
47. Solve the following linear programming problem:
minimize Z = 18x11
30x12
20x13
18x14
25x21
27x22
22x23
16x24
30x31
26x32
19x33
32x34
40x41
36x42
27x43
29x44
30x51
26x52
18x53
24x54
subject to
x11 + x12 + x13 + x14
1
x21 + x22 + x23 + x24
1
x31 + x32 + x33 + x34
1
x41 + x42 + x43 + x44
1
x51 + x52 + x53 + x54
1
x11 + x21 + x31 + x41 + x51 = 1
x12 + x22 + x32 + x42 + x52 = 1
x13 + x23 + x33 + x43 + x53 = 1
x14 + x24 + x34 + x44 + x54 = 1
xij
0
Ú
…
…
…
…
…
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+

48. A plant has four operators to be assigned to four machines. The time (minutes) required by each
worker to produce a product on each machine is shown in the following table:
Machine (min.)
Operator
A
B
C
D
1
10
12
9
11
2
5
10
7
8
3
12
14
13
11
4
8
15
11
9
Determine the optimal assignment and compute total minimum time.
49. A shop has four machinists to be assigned to four machines. The hourly cost of having each 
machine operated by each machinist is as follows:
Machine (cost/hr.)
Machinist
A
B
C
D
1
$12
$11
$ 8
$14
2
10
9
10
8
3
14
8
7
11
4
6
8
10
9
However, because he does not have enough experience, machinist 3 cannot operate 
machine B.
a. Determine the optimal assignment and compute total minimum cost.
b. Formulate this problem as a general linear programming model.
50. The Omega pharmaceutical firm has five salespersons, whom the firm wants to assign to five
sales regions. Given their various previous contacts, the salespersons are able to cover the re-
gions in different amounts of time. The amount of time (days) required by each salesperson to
cover each city is shown in the following table:
Region (days)
Salesperson
A
B
C
D
E
1
17
10
15
16
20
2
12
9
16
9
14
3
11
16
14
15
12
4
14
10
10
18
17
5
13
12
9
15
11
Which salesperson should be assigned to each region to minimize total time? Identify the opti-
mal assignments and compute total minimum time.
PROBLEMS
273

51. The Bunker Manufacturing firm has five employees and six machines and wants to assign the
employees to the machines to minimize cost. A cost table showing the cost incurred by each em-
ployee on each machine follows:
Machine
Employee
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
$12
$ 7
$20
$14
$ 8
$10
2
10
14
13
20
9
11
3
5
3
6
9
7
10
4
9
11
7
16
9
10
5
10
6
14
8
10
12
Because of union rules regarding departmental transfers, employee 3 cannot be assigned to
machine E, and employee 4 cannot be assigned to machine B. Solve this problem, indicate the
optimal assignment, and compute total minimum cost.
52. Given the following cost table for an assignment problem, determine the optimal assignment and
compute total minimum cost:
Machine
Operator
A
B
C
D
1
$10
$2
$ 8
$ 6
2
9
5
11
9
3
12
7
14
14
4
3
1
4
2
53. An electronics firm produces electronic components, which it supplies to various electrical
manufacturers. Quality control records indicate that different employees produce different
numbers of defective items. The average number of defects produced by each employee for each
of six components is given in the following table:
Component
Employee
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
30
24
16
26
30
22
2
22
28
14
30
20
13
3
18
16
25
14
12
22
4
14
22
18
23
21
30
5
25
18
14
16
16
28
6
32
14
10
14
18
20
Determine the optimal assignment that will minimize the total average number of defects pro-
duced by the firm per month.
274
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

54. A dispatcher for Citywide Taxi Company has six taxicabs at different locations and five cus-
tomers who have called for service. The mileage from each taxi’s present location to each cus-
tomer is shown in the following table:
Customer
Cab
1
2
3
4
5
A
7
2
4
10
7
B
5
1
5
6
6
C
8
7
6
5
5
D
2
5
2
4
5
E
3
3
5
8
4
F
6
2
4
3
4
Determine the optimal assignment(s) that will minimize the total mileage traveled.
55. The Southeastern Conference has nine basketball officials who must be assigned to three con-
ference games, three to each game. The conference office wants to assign the officials so that
the total distance they travel will be minimized. The distance (in miles) each official would
travel to each game is given in the following table:
Game
Official
Athens
Columbia
Nashville
1
165
90
130
2
75
210
320
3
180
170
140
4
220
80
60
5
410
140
80
6
150
170
190
7
170
110
150
8
105
125
160
9
240
200
155
Determine the optimal assignment(s) to minimize the total distance traveled by the officials.
56. In Problem 55, officials 2 and 8 recently had a confrontation with one of the coaches in the game
in Athens. They were forced to eject the coach after several technical fouls. The conference
office decided that it would not be a good idea to have these two officials work the Athens game
so soon after this confrontation, so they decided that officials 2 and 8 will not be assigned to the
Athens game. How will this affect the optimal solution to this problem?
57. State University has planned six special catered events for the Saturday of its homecoming foot-
ball game. The events include an alumni brunch, a parents’ brunch, a booster club luncheon, a
postgame party for season ticket holders, a lettermen’s dinner, and a fund-raising dinner for
major contributors. The university wants to use local catering firms as well as the university
catering service to cater these events, and it has asked the caterers to bid on each event. The bids
PROBLEMS
275

(in thousands of dollars) based on menu guidelines for the events prepared by the university are
shown in the following table:
Event
Alumni
Parents’
Booster
Postgame
Lettermen’s
Contributors’
Caterer
Brunch
Brunch
Club Lunch
Party
Dinner
Dinner
Al’s
$12.6
$10.3
$14.0
$19.5
$25.0
$30.0
Bon Apetít
14.5
13.0
16.5
17.0
22.5
32.0
Custom
13.0
14.0
17.6
21.5
23.0
35.0
Divine
11.5
12.6
13.0
18.7
26.2
33.5
Epicurean
10.8
11.9
12.9
17.5
21.9
28.5
Fouchéss
13.5
13.5
15.5
22.3
24.5
36.0
University
12.5
14.3
16.0
22.0
26.7
34.0
The Bon Apetít, Custom, and University caterers can handle two events, whereas each of the other
four caterers can handle only one. The university is confident that all the caterers will do a high-
quality job, so it wants to select the caterers for the events that will result in the lowest total cost.
Determine the optimal selection of caterers to minimize total cost.
58. A university department head has five instructors to be assigned to four different courses. All the
instructors have taught the courses in the past and have been evaluated by the students. The rat-
ing for each instructor for each course is given in the following table (a perfect score is 100):
Course
Instructor
A
B
C
D
1
80
75
90
85
2
95
90
90
97
3
85
95
88
91
4
93
91
80
84
5
91
92
93
88
The department head wants to know the optimal assignment of instructors to courses to maxi-
mize the overall average evaluation. The instructor who is not assigned to teach a course will be
assigned to grade exams.
59. The coach of the women’s swim team at State University is preparing for the conference swim
meet and must choose the four swimmers she will assign to the 800-meter medley relay team.
The medley relay consists of four strokes—backstroke, breaststroke, butterfly, and freestyle. The
coach has computed the average times (in minutes) each of her top six swimmers has achieved
in each of the four strokes for 200 meters in previous swim meets during the season, as follows:
Stroke (min.)
Swimmer
Backstroke
Breaststroke
Butterfly
Freestyle
Annie
2.56
3.07
2.90
2.26
Beth
2.63
3.01
3.12
2.35
Carla
2.71
2.95
2.96
2.29
Debbie
2.60
2.87
3.08
2.41
Erin
2.68
2.97
3.16
2.25
Fay
2.75
3.10
2.93
2.38
Determine for the coach the medley relay team and its total expected relay time.
276
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

60. Biggio’s Department Store has six employees available to assign to four departments in the
store—home furnishings, china, appliances, and jewelry. Most of the six employees have
worked in each of the four departments on several occasions in the past and have demon-
strated that they perform better in some departments than in others. The average daily sales
for each of the six employees in each of the four departments are shown in the following table:
Department Sales
Employee
Home Furnishings
China
Appliances
Jewelry
1
$340
$160
$610
$290
2
560
370
520
450
3
270
—
350
420
4
360
220
630
150
5
450
190
570
310
6
280
320
490
360
Employee 3 has not worked in the china department before, so the manager does not want to as-
sign this employee to china.
Determine which employee to assign to each department and indicate the total expected daily sales.
61. The Vanguard Publishing Company wants to hire seven of the eight college students who have
applied as salespeople to sell encyclopedias during the summer. The company desires to allo-
cate them to three sales territories. Territory 1 requires three salespeople, and territories 2 and 3
require two salespeople each. It is estimated that each salesperson will be able to generate the
amounts of dollar sales per day in each of the three territories as given in the following table:
Territory
Salesperson
1
2
3
A
$110
$150
$130
B
90
120
80
C
205
160
175
D
125
100
115
E
140
105
150
F
100
140
120
G
180
210
160
H
110
120
90
Help the company allocate the salespeople to the three territories so that sales will be maximized.
62. Carolina Airlines, a small commuter airline in North Carolina, has six flight attendants that it
wants to assign to six monthly flight schedules in a way that will minimize the number of nights
they will be away from their homes. The numbers of nights each attendant must be away from
home with each schedule are given in the following table:
Schedule
Attendant
A
B
C
D
E
F
1
7
4
6
10
5
8
2
4
5
5
12
7
6
3
9
9
11
7
10
8
4
11
6
8
5
9
10
5
5
8
6
10
7
6
6
10
12
11
9
9
10
PROBLEMS
277

Identify the optimal assignments that will minimize the total number of nights the attendants
will be away from home.
63. The football coaching staff at Tech focuses its recruiting on several key states, including
Georgia, Florida, Virginia, Pennsylvania, New York, and New Jersey. The staff includes seven as-
sistant coaches, two of whom are responsible for Florida, a high school talent–rich state,
whereas one coach is assigned to each of the other five states. The staff has been together for
a long time, and at one time or another all the coaches have recruited in all the states. The head
coach has accumulated some data on the past success rate (i.e., percentage of targeted recruits
signed) for each coach in each state, as shown in the following table:
State
Coach
GA
FL
VA
PA
NY
NJ
Allen
62
56
65
71
55
63
Bush
65
70
63
81
75
72
Crumb
46
53
62
55
64
50
Doyle
58
66
70
67
71
49
Evans
77
73
69
80
80
74
Fouch
68
73
72
80
78
57
Goins
72
60
74
72
62
61
Determine the optimal assignment of coaches to recruiting regions that will maximize the overall
success rate and indicate the average percentage success rate for the staff with this assignment.
64. Kathleen Taylor is a freshman at Roanoke College, and she wants to develop her schedule for
the spring semester. Courses are offered with class periods either on Monday and Wednesday or
Tuesday and Thursday for 1 hour and 15 minutes duration, with 15 minutes between class peri-
ods. For example, a course designated as 8M meets on Monday and Wednesday from 8:00 A.M.
to 9:15 A.M.; the next class on Monday and Wednesday (9M) meets from 9:30 to 10:45; the next
class (11M) is from 11:00 A.M. to 12:15 P.M.; and so on. Kathleen wants to take the following six
freshman courses, with the available sections shown in order of her preference, based on the pro-
fessor who’s teaching the course and the time:
Course
Sections Available
Math
11T, 12T, 9T, 11M, 12M, 9M, 8T, 8M
History
11T, 11M, 14T, 14M, 8T, 8M
English
9T, 11T, 14T, 11M, 12T, 14M, 12M, 9M
Biology
14T, 11M, 12M, 14M, 9M, 8T, 8M
Spanish
9T, 11M, 12M, 8T
Psychology
14T, 11T, 12T, 9T, 14M, 8M
For example, there are eight sections of math offered, and Kathleen’s first preference is the 11T
section, her second choice is the 12T section, and so forth.
a. Determine a class schedule for Kathleen that most closely meets her preferences.
b. Determine a class schedule for Kathleen if she wants to leave 11:00 A.M. to noon open for
lunch every day.
c. Suppose Kathleen wants all her classes on two days, either Monday and Wednesday or Tuesday
and Thursday. Determine schedules for each and indicate which most closely matches her
preferences.
65. CareMed, an HMO health care provider, operates a 24-hour outpatient clinic in Draperton, near
the Tech campus. The facility has a medical staff with doctors and nurses who see regular local
patients according to a daily appointment schedule. However, the clinic sees a number of Tech
278
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

students who visit the clinic each day and evening without appointments because their families
are part of the CareMed network. The clinic has 12 nurses who work according to three 8-hour
shifts. Five nurses are needed from 8:00 A.M. to 4:00 P.M., four nurses work from 4:00 P.M. to
midnight, and 3 nurses work overnight from midnight to 8:00 A.M. The clinic administrator
wants to assign nurses to a shift according to their preferences and seniority (i.e., when the num-
ber of nurses who prefer a shift exceeds the shift demand, the nurses are assigned according to
seniority). While the majority of nurses prefer the day shift, some prefer other shifts because of
the work and school schedules of their spouses and families. Following are the nurses’ shift pref-
erences (where 1 is most preferred) and their years working at the clinic:
Shift
Nurse
8 A.M. to 4 P.M.
4 P.M. to Midnight
Midnight to 8 A.M.
Years’ Experience
Adams
1
2
3
2
Baxter
1
3
2
5
Collins
1
2
3
7
Davis
3
1
2
1
Evans
1
3
2
3
Forrest
1
2
3
4
Gomez
2
1
3
1
Huang
3
2
1
1
Inchio
1
3
2
2
Jones
2
1
3
3
King
1
3
2
5
Lopez
2
3
1
2
Formulate and solve a linear programming model to assign the nurses to shifts according to their
preferences and seniority.
66. The MidSouth Trucking Company based in Nashville has eight trucks located throughout the East
and Midwest that have delivered their loads and are available for shipments. Through their Inter-
net logistics site MidSouth has received shipping requests from 12 customers. The following table
shows the mileage for a truck to travel to a customer location, pick up the load, and deliver it.
Truck
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
1
500
730
620
410
550
600
390
480
670
710
440
590
2
900
570
820
770
910
660
650
780
840
950
590
670
3
630
660
750
540
680
750
810
560
710
1200
490
650
4
870
1200
810
670
710
820
1200
630
700
900
540
620
5
950
910
740
810
630
590
930
650
840
930
460
560
6
1100
860
800
590
570
550
780
610
1300
840
550
790
7
610
710
910
550
810
730
910
720
850
760
580
630
8
560
690
660
640
720
670
830
690
880
1000
710
680
Determine the optimal assignment of trucks to customers that will minimize the total mileage.
67. In Problem 66, assume that the customers have the following truck capacity percentage loads:
Customer
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
Capacity
89
78
94
82
90
83
88
79
71
96
78
85
Determine the optimal assignment of trucks to customers that will minimize total mileage while
also achieving at least an average truck load capacity of 85%. Does this load capacity require-
ment significantly increase the total mileage?
PROBLEMS
279

280
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Game Site
Team
Rank
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Jackets
1
146
207
361
215
244
192
187
467
Big Red
2
213
0
193
166
312
233
166
631
Knights
3
95
176
348
388
377
245
302
346
Tigers
4
112
243
577
0
179
412
276
489
Bulldogs
5
375
598
112
203
263
307
422
340
Wasps
6
199
156
196
257
389
388
360
288
Blue Jays
7
345
231
207
326
456
276
418
374
Blue Devils
8
417
174
178
442
0
308
541
462
Cavaliers
9
192
706
401
194
523
233
244
446
Rams
10
167
157
233
294
421
272
367
521
Eagles
11
328
428
175
236
278
266
409
239
Beavers
12
405
310
282
278
344
317
256
328
Bears
13
226
268
631
322
393
338
197
297
Hawks
14
284
161
176
267
216
281
0
349
Lions
15
522
209
218
506
667
408
270
501
Panthers
16
197
177
423
183
161
510
344
276
68. The Hilton Island Tennis Club is hosting its annual professional tennis tournament. One of the
tournament committee’s scheduling activities is to assign chair umpires to the various matches.
The tennis association rates chair umpires from 1 (best) to worst (4) based on experience,
consistency, and player and coach evaluations. On a particular afternoon 12 matches start at 
1:00 P.M. Fifteen chair umpires are available to officiate the matches. The matches are prioritized
from 1 to 12 in order of importance, based on the rankings and seedings of the players involved,
and whether it is a singles or a doubles match. The committee wants to assign the best umpires
to the highest priority matches. The following tables show the match priorities and the umpire 
ratings.
Umpire
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
Rating
3
4
3
1
2
2
3
2
4
4
2
1
4
3
3
Match
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
Priority
2
11
6
4
9
10
12
3
1
5
7
8
Determine the optimal assignment of umpires to matches.
69. The National Collegiate Lacrosse Association is planning its annual national championship tour-
nament. It selects 16 teams from conference champions and the highest ranked at-large teams to
play in the single-elimination tournament. The teams are ranked from 1 (best) to 16 (worst), and in
the first round of the tournament, the association wants to pair the teams so that high-ranked teams
play low-ranked teams (i.e., seed them so that 1 plays 16, 2 plays 15, etc.). The eight first-round
game sites are predetermined and have been selected based on stadium size and conditions, as well
as historical local fan interest in lacrosse. Because of limited school budgets for lacrosse and a de-
sire to boost game attendance, the association wants to assign teams to game sites so that all
schools will have to travel the least amount possible. The following table shows the 16 teams in or-
der of their ranking and the distance (in miles) for each of the teams to each of the 8 game sites. 

Formulate and solve a linear programming model that will assign the teams to the game sites 
according to the association’s guidelines.
70. Suppose that in Problem 69, the association wants to consider allowing some flexibility in pair-
ing the teams according to their rankings (i.e., seedings)—for example 1 might play 14 or 
2 might play 12—in order to see to what extent overall team travel might be reduced. Reformu-
late and solve the model in order to see what effect this might have.
CASE PROBLEM
281
Case Problem
The Department of Management Science
and Information Technology at Tech
The management science and information technology de-
partment at Tech offers between 36 and forty 3-hour course
sections each semester. Some of the courses are taught by
graduate student instructors, whereas 20 of the course sec-
tions are taught by the 10 regular, tenured faculty in the de-
partment. Before the beginning of each year, the department
head sends the faculty a questionnaire, asking them to rate
their preference for each course using a scale from 1 to 5,
where 1 is “strongly preferred,” 2 is “preferred but not as
strongly as 1,” 3 is “neutral,” 4 is “prefer not to teach but not
strongly,” and 5 is “strongly prefer not to teach this course.”
The faculty have returned their preferences, as follows:
For the fall semester the department will offer two sec-
tions each of 3424 and 4464; three sections of 3434, 3444,
4434, 4444, and 4454; and one section of 3454.
The normal semester teaching load for a regular faculty
member is two sections. (Once the department head deter-
mines the courses, he will assign the faculty he schedules
the course times so they will not conflict.) Help the depart-
ment head determine a teaching schedule that will satisfy
faculty teaching preferences to the greatest degree possible.
Course
Faculty Member
3424
3434
3444
3454
4434
4444
4454
4464
Clayton
2
4
1
3
2
5
5
5
Houck
3
3
4
1
2
5
5
4
Huang
2
3
2
1
3
4
4
4
Major
1
4
2
5
1
3
2
2
Moore
1
1
4
4
2
3
3
5
Ragsdale
1
3
1
5
4
1
1
2
Rakes
3
1
2
5
3
1
1
1
Rees
3
4
3
5
5
1
1
3
Russell
4
1
3
2
2
5
5
5
Sumichrast
4
3
1
5
2
3
3
1

282
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
The three waste disposal sites at Whitewater, Los Canos,
and Duras can accommodate a maximum of 65, 80, and
105 barrels per week, respectively.
In addition to shipping directly from each of the six
plants to one of the three waste disposal sites, Rachel is
also considering using each of the plants and waste dis-
posal sites as intermediate shipping points. Trucks would
be able to drop a load at a plant or disposal site to be
picked up and carried on to the final destination by another
truck, and vice versa. Stateline would not incur any han-
dling costs because Polychem has agreed to take care of all
local handling of the waste materials at the plants and the
waste disposal sites. In other words, the only cost Stateline
incurs is the actual transportation cost. So Rachel wants to
be able to consider the possibility that it may be cheaper to
drop and pick up loads at intermediate points rather than
ship them directly.
Rachel estimates the shipping costs per barrel between
each of the six plants to be as follows:
Plant
Waste per Week (bbl)
Kingsport
35
Danville
26
Macon
42
Selma
53
Columbus
29
Allentown
38
The estimated shipping cost per barrel between each of
the three waste disposal sites is as follows.
Plant
Plant
Kingsport Danville Macon Selma Columbus Allentown
Kingsport
$—
$ 6
$ 4
$ 9
$ 7
$ 8
Danville
6
—
11
10
12
7
Macon
5
11
—
3
7
15
Selma
9
10
3
—
3
16
Columbus
7
12
7
3
—
14
Allentown
8
7
15
16
14
—
Rachel wants to determine the shipping routes that will
minimize Stateline’s total cost in order to develop a con-
tract proposal to submit to Polychem for waste disposal.
She particularly wants to know if it would be cheaper to
ship directly from the plants to the waste sites or if she
should drop and pick up some loads at the various plants
and waste sites. Develop a model to assist Rachel and
solve the model to determine the optimal routes.
Waste Disposal Site
Waste Disposal Site
Whitewater
Los Canos
Duras
Whitewater
$—
$12
$10
Los Canos
12
—
15
Duras
10
15
—
Case Problem
Stateline Shipping and Transport Company
Rachel Sundusky is the manager of the South-Atlantic of-
fice of the Stateline Shipping and Transport Company. She
is in the process of negotiating a new shipping contract with
Polychem, a company that manufactures chemicals for in-
dustrial use. Polychem wants Stateline to pick up and trans-
port waste products from its six plants to three waste
disposal sites. Rachel is very concerned about this proposed
arrangement. The chemical wastes that will be hauled can be
hazardous to humans and the environment if they leak. In
addition, a number of towns and communities in the region
where the plants are located prohibit hazardous materials
from being shipped through their municipal limits. Thus, not
only will the shipments have to be handled carefully and
transported at reduced speeds, they will also have to traverse
circuitous routes in many cases.
Rachel has estimated the cost of shipping a barrel of
waste from each of the six plants to each of the three waste
disposal sites as shown in the following table:
Waste Disposal Site
Plant
Whitewater
Los Canos
Duras
Kingsport
$12
$15
$17
Danville
14
9
10
Macon
13
20
11
Selma
17
16
19
Columbus
7
14
12
Allentown
22
16
18
The plants generate the following amounts of waste
products each week:

CASE PROBLEM
283
Case Problem
Burlingham Textile Company
Brenda Last is the personnel director at the Burlingham
Textile Company. The company’s plant is expanding, and
Brenda must fill five new supervisory positions in carding,
spinning, weaving, inspection, and shipping. Applicants
for the positions are required to take a written psychologi-
cal and aptitude test. The test has different modules that in-
dicate an applicant’s aptitude and suitability for a specific
area and position. For example, one module tests the psy-
chological traits and intellectual skills that are best suited
for the inspection department, which are different from the
traits and skills required in shipping. Brenda has had 
10 applicants for the five positions and has compiled the
results from the test. The test scores for each position
module for each applicant (where the higher the score, the
better) are as follows:
Brenda wants to offer the vacant positions to the five most qual-
ified candidates. Determine an optimal assignment for Brenda.
There is a possibility that one or more of the successful
applicants will turn down a position offer, and Brenda wants
to be able to hire the next-best person into a position if
someone rejects a job offer. If the applicant selected for the
carding job turns it down, whom should Brenda offer this
job to next? If the applicants for both the carding and spin-
ning jobs turn them down, which of the remaining appli-
cants should Brenda offer each job to? How would a third
applicant be selected if three of the job offers were declined?
Brenda believes this is a particularly good group of ap-
plicants. She would like to retain a few of the people for
several more supervisory positions that she believes will
open up soon. She has two vacant clerical positions that
she can offer to the two best applicants not selected for the
five original supervisory positions. Then when the supervi-
sory positions open, she can move these people into them.
How should Brenda identify these two people?
Case Problem
The Graphic Palette
The Graphic Palette is a firm in Charleston, South
Carolina, that does graphic artwork and produces color
and black-and-white posters, lithographs, and banners. The
firm’s owners, Kathleen and Lindsey Taylor, have been ap-
proached by a client to produce a spectacularly colored
poster for an upcoming arts festival. The poster is more
complex than anything Kathleen and Lindsey have previ-
ously worked on. It requires color screening in three
stages, and the processing must proceed rapidly to produce
the desired color effect.
By suspending all their other jobs, they can devote
three machines to the first stage, four to the second stage,
and two to the last stage of the process. Posters that come
Test Module Scores
Applicant
Carding
Spinning
Weaving
Inspection
Shipping
Roger Acuff
68
75
72
86
78
Melissa Ball
73
82
66
78
85
Angela Coe
92
101
90
79
74
Maureen Davis
87
98
75
90
92
Fred Evans
58
62
93
81
75
Bob Frank
93
79
94
92
96
Ellen Gantry
77
92
90
81
93
David Harper
79
66
90
85
86
Mary Inchavelia
91
102
95
90
88
Marilu Jones
72
75
67
93
93

284
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
Case Problem
Scheduling at Hawk Systems, Inc.
Jim Huang and Roderick Wheeler were sales representa-
tives in a computer store at a shopping mall in Arlington,
Virginia, when they got the idea of going into business in
the burgeoning and highly competitive microcomputer
market. Jim went to Taiwan over the summer to visit rela-
tives and made a contact with a new firm producing dis-
play monitors for microcomputers, which was looking for
an East Coast distributor in America. Jim made a tentative
deal with the firm to supply a maximum of 500 monitors
per month and called Rod to see if he could find a building
they could operate out of and some potential customers.
Rod went to work. The first thing he did was send bids
to several universities in Maryland, Virginia, and Pennsylvania
for contracts as an authorized vendor for monitors at the
schools. Next, he started looking for a facility to operate
from. Jim and his operation would provide minor physical
modifications to the monitors, including some labeling,
testing, packaging, and then storage in preparation for
shipping. He knew he needed a building with good secu-
rity, air-conditioning, and a loading dock. However, his
search proved to be more difficult than he anticipated.
Building space of the type and size he needed was very
limited in the area and very expensive. Rod began to worry
that he would not be able to find a suitable facility at all.
He decided to look for space in the Virginia and Maryland
Machine (cost)
Machine
4
5
6
7
1
$18
$23
$25
$21
2
20
26
24
19
3
24
24
22
23
Machine (cost)
Machine
8
9
4
$36
$41
5
40
52
6
42
46
7
33
49
off the machines at each stage can be processed on any of
the machines at the next stage. However, all the machines
are of different models and of varying ages, so they cannot
process the same number of posters in the specified time
frame necessary to complete the job. The different ma-
chine capacities at each stage are as follows:
Kathleen and Lindsey are unsure how to route the posters
from one stage to the next to make as many posters as they
possibly can at the lowest cost. Determine how to route the
posters through the various stages for Graphic Palette to
minimize costs.
Because the machines are of different ages and types, the
costs of producing posters on them differ. For example, a
poster that starts on machine 1 and then proceeds to
machine 4 costs $18. If this poster at machine 4 is then
processed on machine 8, it costs an additional $36. The
processing costs for each combination of machines for
stages 1, 2, and 3 are as follows:
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Machine 1 = 750
Machine 4 = 530
Machine 8 = 620
Machine 2 = 900
Machine 5 = 320
Machine 9 = 750
Machine 3 = 670
Machine 6 = 450
Machine 7 = 250

CASE PROBLEM
285
suburbs and countryside; and although he found some
good locations, the shipping costs out to those locations
were extremely high.
Disheartened by his lack of success, Rod sought help
from his sister-in-law Miriam, a local real estate agent.
Rod poured out the details of his plight to Miriam over
dinner at Rod’s mother’s house, and she was sympathetic.
She told Rod that she owned a building in Arlington that
might be just what he was looking for, and she would
show it to him the next day. As promised, she showed him
the ground floor of the building, and it was perfect. It had
plenty of space, good security, and a nice office; further-
more, it was in an upscale shopping area with lots of good
restaurants. Rod was elated; it was just the type of envi-
ronment he had envisioned for them to set up their busi-
ness in. However, his joy soured when he asked Miriam
what the rent was. She said she had not worked out the de-
tails, but the rent would be around $100,000 per year. Rod
was shocked, so Miriam said she would offer him an alter-
native: a storage fee of $10 per monitor for every monitor
purchased and in stock the first month of operation, with
an increase of $2 per month per unit for the remainder of
the year. Miriam explained that based on what he told her
about the business, they would not have any sales until the
universities opened around the end of August or the first
of September, and that their sales would fall off to nothing
in May or June. She said her offer meant that she would
share in their success or failure. If they ended up with
some university contracts, she would reap a reward along
with them; if they did not sell many monitors, she would
lose on the deal. But in the summer months after school
ended, if they had no monitors in stock, they would pay
her nothing.
Rod mulled this over, and it sounded fair. He loved the
building. Also, he liked the idea that they would not be in-
debted for a flat lease payment and that the rent was essen-
tially on a per-unit basis. If they failed, at least they would not
be stuck with a huge lease. So he agreed to Miriam’s offer.
When Jim returned from Taiwan, he was skeptical
about Rod’s lease arrangement with Miriam. He was cha-
grined that Rod hadn’t performed a more thorough analysis
of the costs, but Rod explained that it was pretty hard to do
an analysis when he did not know their costs, potential
sales, or selling price. Jim said he had a point, and his con-
cern was somewhat offset by the fact that Rod had gotten
contracts with five universities as an authorized vendor for
monitors at a selling price of $180 per unit. So the two sat
down to begin planning their operation.
First, Jim said he had thought of a name for their enter-
prise, Hawk Systems, Inc., which he said stood for Huang
and Wheeler Computers. When Rod asked how Jim got a k
out of computers, Jim cited poetic license.
Jim said that he had figured that the total cost of the
units for them—including the purchase of the units,
shipping, and their own material, labor, and administra-
tive costs—would be $100 per unit during the first 4
months but would then drop to $90 per month for the fol-
lowing 4 months and, finally, to $85 per month for the
remainder of the year. Jim said that the Taiwan firm was
anticipating being able to lower the purchase price be-
cause its production costs would go down as it gained
experience.
Jim thought their own costs would go down, too. He also
explained that they would not be able to return any items, so
it was important that they develop a good order plan that
would minimize costs. This was now much more important
than Jim had originally thought because of their peculiar
lease arrangement based on their inventory level. Rod said
that he had done some research on past computer sales at the
universities they had contracted with and had come up with
the following sales forecast for the next 9 months of the aca-
demic year (from September through May):
September
340
October
650
November
420
December
200
January
660
February
550
March
390
April
580
May
120
Rod explained to Jim that computer equipment purchases
at universities go up in the fall, then drop until January, and
then peak again in April, just before university budgets are
exhausted at the end of the academic year.
Jim then asked Rod what kind of monthly ordering
schedule from Taiwan they should develop to meet de-
mand while minimizing their costs. Rod said that it was a
difficult question, but he remembered that when he was in
college in a management science course, he had seen a
production schedule developed using a transportation
model. Jim suggested he get out his old textbook and get
busy, or they would be turning over all their profits to
Miriam.
However, before Rod was able to develop a schedule,
Jim got a call from the Taiwan firm, saying that it had got-
ten some more business later in the year and it could no
longer supply up to 500 units per month. Instead, it could
supply 700 monitors for the first 4 months and 300 for the

286
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS
In the production of jackets at the plants, 37.5% of the
goatskin leather and 50% of the lambskin leather is waste
(i.e., it is discarded during the production process and sold
for other byproducts). After production, a goatskin jacket
weighs approximately 3 pounds, and a lambskin jacket
weighs approximately 2.5 pounds (neither with linings,
which are added in the United States).
Following are the costs per pound, in U.S. dollars, for
tanning the uncut leather, shipping it, and producing the
leather jackets at each plant:
Case Problem
Global Shipping at Erken Apparel
International
Erken Apparel International manufactures clothing items
around the world. It has currently contracted with a U.S. retail
clothing wholesale distributor for men’s goatskin and lamb-
skin leather jackets for the next Christmas season. The distrib-
utor has distribution centers in Indiana, North Carolina, and
Pennsylvania. The distributor supplies the leather jackets to a
discount retail chain, a chain of mall boutique stores, and a
department store chain. The jackets arrive at the distribution
centers unfinished, and at the centers the distributor adds a
unique lining and label specific to each of its customers. The
distributor has contracted with Erken to deliver the following
number of leather jackets to its distribution centers in late fall:
Distribution 
Goatskin 
Lambskin 
Center
Jackets
Jackets
Indiana 
1,000
780
North Carolina
1,400
950
Pennsylvania
1,600
1,150
Erken has tanning factories and clothing manufacturing
plants to produce leather jackets in Spain, France, Italy,
Venezuela, and Brazil. Its tanning facilities are in Mende in
France, Foggia in Italy, Saragosa in Spain, Feira in Brazil,
and El Tigre in Venezuela. Its manufacturing plants are in
Limoges, Naples, and Madrid in Europe and in Sao Paulo
Tanning 
Goatskin 
Lambskin 
Factory
Supply (lb.)
Supply (lb.)
Mende
4,000
4,400
Foggia
3,700
5,300
Saragosa
6,500
4,650
Feira
5,100
6,850
El Tigre
3,600
5,700
Plant
Production Capacity (lb.)
Madrid
7,800
Naples
5,700
Limoges
8,200
Sao Paulo
7,600
Caracas
6,800
and Caracas in South America. Following are the supplies of
available leather from each tanning facility and the process-
ing capacity at each plant (in pounds) for this particular or-
der of leather jackets:
next 5. Jim and Rod worried about what this would do to
their inventory costs.
A. Formulate and solve a transportation model to determine
an optimal monthly ordering and distribution schedule
for Hawk Systems that will minimize costs.
B. If Hawk Systems has to borrow approximately $200,000
to start up the business, will it end up making anything
the first year?
C. What will the change in the supply pattern from the
Taiwan firm cost Hawk Systems?
D. How did Miriam fare with her alternative lease arrange-
ment? Would she have been better off with a flat
$100,000 lease payment?

CASE PROBLEM
287
Plant ($/lb.)
Tanning
Factory
Madrid
Naples
Limoges
Sao Paulo
Caracas
Mende
$24
$22
$16
$21
$23
Foggia
31
17
22
19
22
Saragosa
18
25
28
23
25
Feira
—
—
—
16
18
El Tigre
—
—
—
14
15
Note that the cost of jacket production is the same for
goatskin and lambskin. Also, leather can be tanned in
France, Spain, and Italy and shipped directly to the South
American plants for jacket production, but the opposite is
not possible due to high tariff restrictions (i.e., tanned
leather is not shipped to Europe for production).
Once the leather jackets are produced at the plants in
Europe and South America, Erken transports them to ports
in Lisbon, Marseilles, and Caracas and then from these ports
to U.S. ports in New Orleans, Jacksonville, and Savannah.
The available shipping capacity at each port and the trans-
portation costs from the plants to the ports are as follows:
Port ($/lb.)
Plant
Lisbon
Marseilles
Caracas
Madrid
0.75
1.05
—
Naples
3.45
1.35
—
Limoges
2.25
0.60
—
Sao Paulo
—
—
1.15
Caracas
—
—
0.20
Capacity (lb.)
8,000
5,500
9,000
The shipping costs ($/lb.) from each port in Europe 
and South America to the U.S. ports and the available truck
and rail capacity for transport at the U.S. ports are as 
follows:
U.S. Port ($/lb.)
Port
New Orleans
Jacksonville
Savannah
Lisbon
$2.35
$1.90
$1.80
Marseilles
3.10
2.40
2.00
Caracas
1.95
2.15
2.40
Capacity (lb.)
8,000
5,200
7,500
The transportation costs ($/lb.) from the U.S. ports to the
three distribution centers are as follows:
Distribution Center ($/lb.)
U.S. Port
Indiana
North Carolina
Pennsylvania
New Orleans
$0.65
$0.52
$0.87
Jacksonville
0.43
0.41
0.65
Savannah
0.38
0.34
0.50
Erken wants to determine the least costly shipments of
material and jackets that will meet the demand at the U.S.
distribution centers. Develop a transshipment model for
Erken that will result in a minimum cost solution.
Case Problem
WeeMow Lawn Service
WeeMow Lawn Service provides lawn service, includ-
ing mowing lawns and lawn care, landscaping, and lawn
maintenance, to residential and commercial customers in
the Draper town community. In the summer WeeMow has
three teams that it schedules daily for jobs. Team 1 has five
members, team 2 has four members, and team 3 has three
members. On a normal summer day WeeMow will have
approximately 14 jobs. Each team works 10 hours a day,
but because of the heat plus work breaks, each team actu-
ally works only 45 minutes out of every hour. The follow-
ing table shows the times (in minutes) and costs (in
dollars) required for each team to complete the 14 jobs for
a specific day.

Team 1
Team 2
Team 3
Job
Time (min.)
Cost ($)
Time (min.)
Cost ($)
Time (min.)
Cost ($)
A
45
48
65
55
78
50
B
67
70
72
60
85
55
C
90
94
105
84
125
75
D
61
65
78
65
97
60
E
75
80
93
75
107
66
F
48
55
70
65
95
60
G
65
70
83
70
110
67
H
67
72
84
74
100
65
I
95
100
110
90
130
80
J
60
65
78
65
95
62
K
47
55
64
57
84
56
L
114
118
135
110
155
95
M
85
90
107
98
125
75
N
63
67
81
72
102
68
The WeeMow manager wants to develop a schedule of
team assignments to the jobs for this day. Formulate and
solve a linear programming model to determine the assign-
ments of teams to jobs that will minimize total job time for
the day, given a daily budget of $1,000. Indicate how many
minutes each crew will work during the day. Next, refor-
mulate and solve this model if cost minimization is the ob-
jective. Of these two models, which one do you think the
manger should select and why?
288
CHAPTER 6
TRANSPORTATION, TRANSSHIPMENT, AND ASSIGNMENT PROBLEMS

CHAPTER
7
Network Flow Models
289

A network is an arrangement of paths connected at various points, through which one or more
items move from one point to another. Everyone is familiar with such networks as highway sys-
tems, telephone networks, railroad systems, and television networks. For example, a railroad net-
work consists of a number of fixed rail routes (paths) connected by terminals at various junctions
of the rail routes.
In recent years, using network models has become a very popular management science
technique for a couple of very important reasons. First, a network is drawn as a diagram,
which literally provides a picture of the system under analysis. This enables a manager to
visually interpret the system and thus enhances the manager’s understanding. Second, a large
number of real-life systems can be modeled as networks, which are relatively easy to conceive
and construct.
In this and the next chapter, we will look at several different types of network models. In this
chapter we will present a class of network models directed at the flow of items through a system.
As such, these models are referred to as network flow models. We will discuss the use of net-
work flow models to analyze three types of problems: the shortest route problem, the minimal
spanning tree problem, and the maximal flow problem. In Chapter 8, we will present the network
techniques PERT and CPM, which are used extensively for project analysis.
Network Components
Networks are illustrated as diagrams consisting of two main components: nodes and branches.
Nodes represent junction points—for example, an intersection of several streets. Branches
connect the nodes and reflect the flow from one point in the network to another. Nodes are
denoted in the network diagram by circles, and branches are represented by lines connecting
the nodes. Nodes typically represent localities, such as cities, intersections, or air or railroad
terminals; branches are the paths connecting the nodes, such as roads connecting cities and in-
tersections or railroad tracks or air routes connecting terminals. For example, the different rail-
road routes between Atlanta, Georgia, and St. Louis, Missouri, and the intermediate terminals
are shown in Figure 7.1.
290
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Networks are popular
because they provide
a picture of a system
and because a large
number of systems
can be easily modeled
as networks.
2
1
3
4
Nashville
Atlanta
Memphis
St. Louis
4
3
5
6
FIGURE 7.1
Network of
railroad routes
Network flow models
describe the flow of
items through a
system.
Branches,
represented as lines,
connect nodes and
show flow from one
point to another.
Nodes, denoted by
circles, represent
junction points
connecting branches.
A network is an
arrangement of paths
connected at various
points, through which
items move.
The network shown in Figure 7.1 has four nodes and four branches. The node representing
Atlanta is referred to as the origin, and any of the three remaining nodes could be the
destination, depending on what we are trying to determine from the network. Notice that a num-
ber has been assigned to each node. Numbers provide a more convenient means of identifying
the nodes and branches than do names. For example, we can refer to the origin (Atlanta) as node
1 and the branch from Atlanta to Nashville as branch 1–2.
Typically, a value that represents a distance, length of time, or cost is assigned to each
branch. Thus, the purpose of the network is to determine the shortest distance, shortest length of

time, or lowest cost between points in the network. In Figure 7.1, the values 4, 6, 3, and 5, corre-
sponding to the four branches, represent the lengths of time, in hours, between the attached
nodes. Thus, a traveler can see that the route to St. Louis through Nashville requires 10 hours
and the route to St. Louis through Memphis requires 8 hours.
The Shortest Route Problem
The shortest route problem is to determine the shortest distance between an originating point
and several destination points. For example, the Stagecoach Shipping Company transports or-
anges by six trucks from Los Angeles to six cities in the West and Midwest. The different routes
between Los Angeles and the destination cities and the length of time, in hours, required by a
truck to travel each route are shown in Figure 7.2.
THE SHORTEST ROUTE PROBLEM
291
Phoenix
Dallas
Denver
St. Louis
Des Moines
Salt Lake City
16
35
12
14
8
25
19
22
17
14
15
9
Los
Angeles
FIGURE 7.2
Shipping routes
from Los Angeles
2
4
5
7
6
3
1
16
35
9
15
22
17
14
19
8
12
14
25
FIGURE 7.3
Network of
shipping routes
The values assigned
to branches typically
represent distance,
time, or cost.
The shortest route
problem is to find the
shortest distance 
between an origin and
various destination
points.
The shipping company manager wants to determine the best routes (in terms of the mini-
mum travel time) for the trucks to take to reach their destinations. This problem can be solved
by using the shortest route solution technique. In applying this technique, it is convenient to rep-
resent the system of truck routes as a network, as shown in Figure 7.3.
To repeat our objective as it relates to Figure 7.3, we want to determine the shortest routes
from the origin (node 1) to the six destinations (nodes 2 through 7).

The Shortest Route Solution Approach
We begin the shortest route solution technique by starting at node 1 (the origin) and determining
the shortest time required to get to a directly connected (i.e., adjacent) node. The three nodes di-
rectly connected to node 1 are 2, 3, and 4, as shown in Figure 7.4. Of these three nodes, the
shortest time is 9 hours to node 3. Thus, we have determined our first shortest route from nodes
1 to 3 (i.e., from Los Angeles to Phoenix). We will now refer to nodes 1 and 3 as the permanent
set to indicate that we have found the shortest route to these nodes. (Because node 1 has no route
to it, it is automatically in the permanent set.)
292
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
9 *
2
4
3
1
16
35
0*
9
35
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1}
1–2
1–4
1–3
16
35
9 *
FIGURE 7.4
Network with
node 1 in the 
permanent set
2
4
3
1
6
16
35
0*
9
9
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 3}
1–2
1–4
3–4
3–6
16
35
24
31
*
15
22
*
FIGURE 7.5
Network with
nodes 1 and 3 in
the permanent set
Determine the initial
shortest route from
the origin (node 1) to
the closest node (3).
Determine all nodes
directly connected to
the permanent set.
The permanent set
indicates the nodes
for which the shortest
route to has been
found.
Notice in Figure 7.4 that the shortest route to node 3 is drawn with a heavy line, and the
shortest time to node 3 (9 hours) is enclosed by a box. The table accompanying Figure 7.4 de-
scribes the process of selecting the shortest route. The permanent set is shown to contain only
node 1. The three branches from node 1 are 1–2, 1–4, and 1–3, and this last branch has the min-
imum time of 9 hours.
Next, we will repeat the foregoing steps used to determine the shortest route to node 3. First,
we must determine all the nodes directly connected to the nodes in the permanent set (nodes 1 and
3). Nodes 2, 4, and 6 are all directly connected to nodes 1 and 3, as shown in Figure 7.5.
The next step is to determine the shortest route to the three nodes (2, 4, and 6) directly
connected to the permanent set nodes. There are two branches starting from node 1 (1–2 and
1–4) and two branches from node 3 (3–4 and 3–6). The branch with the shortest time is to
node 2, with a time of 16 hours. Thus, node 2 becomes part of the permanent set. Notice in
our computations accompanying Figure 7.5 that the time to node 6 (branch 3–6) is 31 hours,

which is determined by adding the branch 3–6 time of 22 hours to the shortest route time of 9
hours at node 3.
As we move to the next step, the permanent set consists of nodes 1, 2, and 3. This indicates
that we have found the shortest route to nodes 1, 2, and 3. We must now determine which nodes
are directly connected to the permanent set nodes. Node 5 is the only adjacent node not cur-
rently connected to the permanent set, so it is connected directly to node 2. In addition, node 4
is now connected directly to node 2 (because node 2 has joined the permanent set). These addi-
tions are shown in Figure 7.6.
THE SHORTEST ROUTE PROBLEM
293
Redefine the
permanent set.
2
4
3
1
6
5
16
35
9
24
9
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3}
1–4
2–4
2–5
3–4
3–6
35
28
41
24
31
*
15
22
*
25
12
FIGURE 7.6
Network with
nodes 1, 2, and 
3 in the
permanent set
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
24
9
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3, 4}
2–5
3–6
4–5
4–7
4–6
41
31
38
43
41
*
15
22
25
*
31
17
19
14
FIGURE 7.7
Network with
nodes 1, 2, 3, 
and 4 in the
permanent set
Five branches lead from the permanent set nodes (1, 2, and 3) to their directly connected
nodes, as shown in the table accompanying Figure 7.6. The branch representing the route with
the shortest time is 3–4, with a time of 24 hours. Thus, we have determined the shortest route to
node 4, and it joins the permanent set. Notice that the shortest time to node 4 (24 hours) is the
route from node 1 through node 3. The other routes to node 4 from node 1 through node 2 are
longer; therefore, we will not consider them any further as possible routes to node 4.
To summarize, the shortest routes to nodes 1, 2, 3, and 4 have all been determined, and these
nodes now form the permanent set.
Next, we repeat the process of determining the nodes directly connected to the permanent
set nodes. These directly connected nodes are 5, 6, and 7, as shown in Figure 7.7. Notice in
Figure 7.7 that we have eliminated the branches from nodes 1 and 2 to node 4 because we deter-
mined that the route with the shortest time to node 4 does not include these branches.

From the table accompanying Figure 7.7 we can see that of the branches leading to
nodes 5, 6, and 7, branch 3–6 has the shortest cumulative time, of 31 hours. Thus, node 6 is
added to our permanent set. This means that we have now found the shortest routes to nodes
1, 2, 3, 4, and 6.
Repeating the process, we observe that the nodes directly connected (adjacent) to our per-
manent set are nodes 5 and 7, as shown in Figure 7.8. (Notice that branch 4–6 has been elimi-
nated because the best route to node 6 goes through node 3 instead of node 4.)
294
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
24
9
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3, 4, 6}
2–5
4–5
4–7
6–7
41
38
43
45
*
15
22
25
*
31
19
14
14
38
FIGURE 7.8
Network with
nodes 1, 2, 3, 4,
and 6 in the
permanent set
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
24
9
16
Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}
4–7
6–7
5–7
43
45
46
*
15
22
*
31
19
14
14
38
0
43
8
FIGURE 7.9
Network with
nodes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5,
and 6 in the
permanent set
Of the branches leading from the permanent set nodes to nodes 5 and 7, branch 4–5 has the
shortest cumulative time, of 38 hours. Thus, node 5 joins the permanent set. We have now deter-
mined the routes with the shortest times to nodes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 (as denoted by the heavy
branches in Figure 7.8).
The only remaining node directly connected to the permanent set is node 7, as shown in
Figure 7.9. Of the three branches connecting node 7 to the permanent set, branch 4–7 has the
shortest time, of 43 hours. Therefore, node 7 joins the permanent set.
The routes with the shortest times from the origin (node 1) to each of the other six nodes
and their corresponding travel times are summarized in Figure 7.10 and Table 7.1.

In summary, the steps of the shortest route solution method are as follows:
1. Select the node with the shortest direct route from the origin.
2. Establish a permanent set with the origin node and the node that was selected in step 1.
3. Determine all nodes directly connected to the permanent set nodes.
4. Select the node with the shortest route (branch) from the group of nodes directly connected
to the permanent set nodes.
5. Repeat steps 3 and 4 until all nodes have joined the permanent set.
Computer Solution of the Shortest Route Problem with QM for Windows
QM for Windows includes modules for each of the three network flow models that will be pre-
sented in this chapter—shortest route, minimal spanning tree, and maximal flow. The QM for
Windows solution for the shortest route from node 1 to node 7 for the Stagecoach Shipping
Company example is shown in Exhibit 7.1.
THE SHORTEST ROUTE PROBLEM
295
Steps of the shortest
route solution method.
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
24
9
16
15
22
31
19
14
38
0
43
FIGURE 7.10
Network with op-
timal routes from
Los Angeles to all
destinations
EXHIBIT 7.1
From Los Angeles to:
Route
Total Hours
Salt Lake City (node 2)
1–2
16
Phoenix (node 3)
1–3
9
Denver (node 4)
1–3–4
24
Des Moines (node 5)
1–3–4–5
38
Dallas (node 6)
1–3–6
31
St. Louis (node 7)
1–3–4–7
43 
TABLE 7.1
Shortest travel
time from origin to
each destination 

The solution screen in Exhibit 7.1 provides the shortest route from the start node, 1 (Los
Angeles), to the end node, 7 (St. Louis). The shortest route from any node in the network to
any other node can be determined by indicating the desired origin and destination nodes at the
top of the solution screen. For example, the shortest route from node 1 to node 5 is shown in
Exhibit 7.2.
296
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Destination node
Distance to node 5,
Des Moines
EXHIBIT 7.2
Computer Solution of the Shortest Route Problem with Excel
We can also solve the shortest route problem with Excel spreadsheets by formulating and solving
the shortest route network as a 0–1 integer linear programming problem. To formulate the linear
programming model, we first define a decision variable for each branch in the network, as follows:
To reduce the complexity and size of our model formulation, we will also assume that items
can flow only from a lower node number to a higher node number (e.g., 3 to 4 but not 4 to 3).
This greatly reduces the number of variables and branches to consider.
The objective function is formulated by minimizing the sum of the multiplication of each
branch value and the travel time for each branch:
There is one constraint for each node, indicating that whatever comes into a node must also 
go out. This is referred to as conservation of flow. This means that one “truck” leaves node 1
(Los Angeles) either through branch 1–2, branch 1–3, or branch 1–4. This constraint for node 1
is formulated as
At node 2, a truck would come in through branch 1–2 and depart through 2–4 or 2–5, as follows:
This constraint can be rewritten as
x12 - x24 - x25 = 0
x12 = x24 + x25
x12 + x13 + x14 = 1
+ 19x47 + 8x57 + 14x67
 minimize Z = 16x12 + 9x13 + 35x14 + 12x24 + 25x25 + 15x34 + 22x36 + 14x45 + 17x46
selected
xij = 0 if branch i-j is not selected as part of the shortest route and 1 if branch i-j is

Constraints at nodes 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7 are constructed similarly, resulting in the complete linear
programming model, summarized as follows:
subject to
or 1
This model is solved in Excel much the same way as any other linear programming prob-
lem, using “Solver”. Exhibit 7.3 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to solve the Stagecoach
Shipping Company example. The decision variables,
are represented by cells A6:A17.
Thus, a value of 1 in one of these cells means that branch has been selected as part of the short-
est route. Cells F6:F17 contain the travel times (in hours) for each branch, and the objective
function formula is contained in cell F18, shown on the formula bar at the top of the screen.
The model constraints reflecting the flow through each node are included in the box on the
right side of the spreadsheet. For example, cell I6 contains the constraint formula for node 1,
A6A7A8, and cell I7 contains the constraint formula for node 2, A6A9A10.
xij,
xij = 0
x47 + x57 + x67 = 1
x36 + x46 - x67 = 0
x25 + x45 - x57 = 0
x14 + x24 + x34 - x45 - x46 - x47 = 0
x13 - x34 - x36 = 0
x12 - x24 - x25 = 0
x12 + x13 + x14 = 1
+ 19x47 + 8x57 + 14x67
 minimize Z = 16x12 + 9x13 + 35x14 + 12x24 + 25x25 + 15x34 + 22x36 + 14x45 + 17x46
THE SHORTEST ROUTE PROBLEM
297
Decision variables
First constraint;
=A6+A7+A8
Constraint for node 2;
=A6–A9–A10
Total hours
EXHIBIT 7.3
Exhibit 7.4 shows the Solver Parameters screen, which is accessed from the “Data” tab at the
top of the screen. Notice that the constraint for node 1 embedded in cell I6 equals 1, indicating
that one truck is leaving node 1, and the constraint for node 7, embedded in cell I12, also equals
1, indicating that one truck will end up at node 7. This is an integer programming model, so be
sure to click on “Options” and deactivate the “Ignore Integer Constraints” button.

The Excel solution is shown in Exhibit 7.5. Notice that cells A7, A11, and A15 have values
of 1 in them, indicating that these branches, 1–3, 3–4, and 4–7, are on the shortest route. The to-
tal distance in travel time is 43 hours, as shown in cell F18.
298
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
The minimal spanning
tree problem is to 
connect all nodes in a
network so that the 
total branch lengths
are minimized.
Flow constraints
One truck leaves
node 1, and one truck
ends at node 7.
EXHIBIT 7.4
One truck flows out
of node 1; one truck
flows into node 7.
EXHIBIT 7.5
The Minimal Spanning Tree Problem
In the shortest route problem presented in the previous section, the objective was to determine
the shortest routes between the origin and the destination nodes in the network. In our exam-
ple, we determined the best route from Los Angeles to each of the six destination cities. The
minimal spanning tree problem is similar to the shortest route problem, except that the objec-
tive is to connect all the nodes in the network so that the total branch lengths are minimized.

The resulting network spans (connects) all the points in the network at a minimum total dis-
tance (or length).
To demonstrate the minimal spanning tree problem, we will consider the following exam-
ple. The Metro Cable Television Company is to install a television cable system in a community
consisting of seven suburbs. Each of the suburbs must be connected to the main cable system.
The cable television company wants to lay out the main cable network in a way that will mini-
mize the total length of cable that must be installed. The possible paths available to the cable tel-
evision company (by consent of the town council) and the feet of cable (in thousands of feet)
required for each path are shown in Figure 7.11.
THE MINIMAL SPANNING TREE PROBLEM
299
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.11
Network of 
possible
cable TV paths
In Figure 7.11, the branch from node 1 to node 2 represents the available cable path between
suburbs 1 and 2. The branch requires 16,000 feet of cable. Notice that the network shown in
Figure 7.11 is identical to the network in Figure 7.2 that we used to demonstrate the shortest
route problem. The networks were intentionally made identical to demonstrate the difference
between the results of the two types of network models.
The Minimal Spanning Tree Solution Approach
The solution approach to the minimal spanning tree problem is actually easier than the shortest
route solution method. In the minimal spanning tree solution approach, we can start at any node in
the network. However, the conventional approach is to start with node 1. Beginning at node 1, we
select the closest node (i.e., the shortest branch) to join our spanning tree. The shortest branch
from node 1 is to node 3, with a length of 9 (thousand feet). This branch is indicated with a
heavy line in Figure 7.12. Now we have a spanning tree consisting of two nodes: 1 and 3. 
Start with any node in
the network and select
the closest node to
join the spanning tree.
Select the closest
node to any node in
the spanning area.
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.12
Spanning tree with
nodes 1 and 3
The next step is to select the closest node not currently in the spanning tree. The node closest to 
either node 1 or node 3 (the nodes in our present spanning tree) is node 4, with a branch length
of 15,000 feet. The addition of node 4 to our spanning tree is shown in Figure 7.13.

300
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.13
Spanning tree
with nodes 1, 3,
and 4
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.15
Spanning tree
with nodes 1, 2, 3,
4, and 5
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.14
Spanning tree
with nodes 1, 2, 3,
and 4
Next, we repeat the process of selecting the closest node to our present spanning tree (nodes 1,
3, and 4). The closest node not now connected to the nodes in our spanning tree is node 2. The
length of the branch from node 4 to node 2 is 12,000 feet. The addition of node 2 to the spanning
tree is shown in Figure 7.14.
Our spanning tree now consists of nodes 1, 2, 3, and 4. The node closest to this spanning
tree is node 5, with a branch length of 14,000 feet to node 4. Thus, node 5 joins our spanning
tree, as shown in Figure 7.15.
The spanning tree now contains nodes 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5. The closest node not currently con-
nected to the spanning tree is node 7. The branch connecting node 7 to node 5 has a length of
8,000 feet. Figure 7.16 shows the addition of node 7 to the spanning tree.

THE MINIMAL SPANNING TREE PROBLEM
301
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.16
Spanning tree
with nodes 1, 2, 3,
4, 5, and 7
2
4
3
1
6
5
7
16
9
15
22
19
14
25
35
17
14
8
12
FIGURE 7.17
Minimal spanning
tree for cable TV
network
Notice the difference between the minimal spanning tree network shown in Figure 7.17 and
the shortest route network shown in Figure 7.10. The shortest route network represents the short-
est paths between the origin and each of the destination nodes (i.e., six different routes). In con-
trast, the minimal spanning tree network shows how to connect all seven nodes so that the total
distance (length) is minimized.
In summary, the steps of the minimal spanning tree solution method are as follows:
1. Select any starting node (conventionally, node 1 is selected).
2. Select the node closest to the starting node to join the spanning tree.
3. Select the closest node not currently in the spanning tree.
4. Repeat step 3 until all nodes have joined the spanning tree.
Computer Solution of the Minimal Spanning Tree Problem 
with QM for Windows
The minimal spanning tree solution for our Metro Cable Television Company example using
QM for Windows is shown in Exhibit 7.6.
Steps of the minimal
spanning tree solution
method.
Now our spanning tree includes nodes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 7. The only remaining node not con-
nected to the spanning tree is node 6. The node in the spanning tree closest to node 6 is node 7,
with a branch length of 14,000 feet. The complete spanning tree, which now includes all seven
nodes, is shown in Figure 7.17.
The spanning tree shown in Figure 7.17 requires the minimum amount of television cable
to connect the seven suburbs—72,000 feet. This same minimal spanning tree could have been
obtained by starting at any of the six nodes other than node 1.

302
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
EXHIBIT 7.6
Management Science Application
Determining Optimal Milk Collection 
Routes in Italy
ASSO.LA.C. is an Italian dairy company that collects raw
milk from farmers in different towns. Many of these farms are
small and inaccessible by a “complete” truck and trailer. The
trailer must be uncoupled and parked, the farm visited by the
truck and the milk collected, and then the truck and trailer
must be coupled again. The milk is collected from the farms by
a fleet of tank trucks that transport the milk to a central ware-
house. The trucks are compartmentalized to collect milk of dif-
ferent types, and when milk of a particular type has been
collected in a truck compartment, it cannot be used to hold a
different type of milk. 
The problem has the following constraints: Each node in
the network (of farms) can be a loading point or parking
area (for decoupling), the tank truck cannot exceed its ca-
pacity, multiple trucks can collect milk from a particular
farmer, the time required for collections along a route can-
not exceed the work shift, and only one milk type can be as-
signed to a compartment. The solution approach consists of
two mathematical models: one that minimizes the size of the
fleet and one that minimizes the town collection route
length.
In the test case for the solution approach, the company
collected milk from 158 farmers in four towns in Calabria, 
a region in southern Italy, and transported it to a central ware-
house in the city of Castrovillari. The model solution resulted
in a reduction in the total truck travel distance of 14.4%, and
the average truck fill rate increased from 85% to 95%, which
translates into annual cost savings of 
166,000. This reduc-
tion in the collection and transportation costs allows the com-
pany to pay higher milk prices to farmers, thus inviting higher
volume.
Source: Based on M. Caramia and F. Guerriero, “A Milk Collection
Problem with Incompatibility Constraints,” Interfaces 40, no. 2
(March–April 2010): 130–43.
:
blojfo/Shutterstock

THE MAXIMAL FLOW PROBLEM
303
For a directed branch,
flow is possible in
only one direction.
5
2
3
1
4
6
Output
Input
Omaha
6
4
7
3
8
3
5
0
2
6
0
0
0
0
4
0
2
St. Louis
0
FIGURE 7.18
Network of
railway system
The Maximal Flow Problem
In the shortest route problem, we determined the shortest truck route from the origin (Los Angeles)
to six destinations. In the minimal spanning tree problem, we found the shortest connected net-
work for television cable. In neither of these problems was the capacity of a branch limited to a
specific number of items. However, there are network problems in which the branches of the
network have limited flow capacities. The objective of these networks is to maximize the total
amount of flow from an origin to a destination. These problems are referred to as maximal flow
problems.
Maximal flow problems can involve the flow of water, gas, or oil through a network of
pipelines; the flow of forms through a paper processing system (such as a government agency);
the flow of traffic through a road network; or the flow of products through a production line sys-
tem. In each of these examples, the branches of the network have limited and often different
flow capacities. Given these conditions, the decision maker wants to determine the maximum
flow that can be obtained through the system.
An example of a maximal flow problem is illustrated by the network of a railway system
between Omaha and St. Louis shown in Figure 7.18. The Scott Tractor Company ships tractor
parts from Omaha to St. Louis by railroad. However, a contract limits the number of railroad
cars the company can secure on each branch during a week.
Given these limiting conditions, the company wants to know the maximum number of rail-
road cars containing tractor parts that can be shipped from Omaha to St. Louis during a week.
The number of railroad cars available to the tractor company on each rail branch is indicated by
the number on the branch to the immediate right of each node (which represents a rail junction).
For example, six cars are available from node 1 (Omaha) to node 2, eight cars are available from
node 2 to node 5, five cars are available from node 4 to node 6 (St. Louis), and so forth. The num-
ber on each branch to the immediate left of each node is the number of cars available for shipping
in the opposite direction. For example, no cars are available from node 2 to node 1. The branch
from node 1 to node 2 is referred to as a directed branch because flow is possible in only one di-
rection (from node 1 to node 2, but not from 2 to 1). Notice that flow is possible in both direc-
tions on the branches between nodes 2 and 4 and nodes 3 and 4. These are referred to as
undirected branches.
The Maximal Flow Solution Approach
The first step in determining the maximum possible flow of railroad cars through the rail system
is to choose any path arbitrarily from origin to destination and ship as much as possible on 
that path. In Figure 7.19, we will arbitrarily select the path 1–2–5–6. The maximum number of
The maximal flow
problem is to maximize
the amount of flow of
items from an origin to 
a destination.

304
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Recompute branch
flow in both directions.
Select other feasible
paths arbitrarily and
determine maximum
flow along the paths
until flow is no longer
possible.
railroad cars that can be sent through this route is four. We are limited to four cars because that
is the maximum amount available on the branch between nodes 5 and 6. This path is shown in
Figure 7.19.
Arbitrarily choose
any path through the
network from origin
to destination and
ship as much as
possible.
In 1959, E. W. Dijkstra of the Netherlands proposed 
the solution procedures (shown in this chapter) for both the
minimal spanning tree problem and the shortest route 
problem. Earlier, in 1955, L. R. Ford, Jr., and D. R. Fulkerson
(colleagues of George Dantzig’s) of the RAND Corporation
introduced the procedure for solving the maximal flow
network problem, which evolved from the study of trans-
portation problems. The original problem analyzed was of a
rail network connecting cities in which each rail link had
capacity limitations.
Time Out
for E. W. Dijkstra, L. R. Ford, Jr., and D. R. Fulkerson
5
2
3
1
4
6
4
4
6
4
7
3
8
3
5
0
2
6
0
0
0
0
4
0
2
0
4
4
4
4
2
4
4
4
0
FIGURE 7.19
Maximal flow for
path 1–2–5–6
Notice that the remaining capacities of the branches from node 1 to node 2 and from node
2 to node 5 are now two and four cars, respectively, and that no cars are available from node 5
to node 6. These values were computed by subtracting the flow of four cars from the original
number available. The actual flow of four cars along each branch is shown enclosed in a box.
Notice that the present input of four cars into node 1 and output of four cars from node 6 are
also designated.
The final adjustment on this path is to add the designated flow of four cars to the values at
the immediate left of each node on our path, 1–2–5–6. These are the flows in the opposite direc-
tion. Thus, the value 4 is added to the zeros at nodes 2, 5, and 6. It may seem incongruous to
designate flow in a direction that is not possible; however, it is the means used in this solution
approach to compute the net flow along a branch. (If, for example, a later iteration showed a flow
of one car from node 5 to node 2, then the net flow in the correct direction would be computed
by subtracting this flow of one in the wrong direction from the previous flow of four in the cor-
rect direction. The result would be a net flow of three in the correct direction.)
We have now completed one iteration of the solution process and must repeat the
preceding steps. Again, we arbitrarily select a path. This time we will select path 1–4–6,
as shown in Figure 7.20. The maximum flow along this path is four cars, which is subtracted at
each of the nodes. This increases the total flow through the network to eight cars (because the
flow of four along path 1–4–6 is added to the flow previously determined in Figure 7.19).
As a final step, the flow of four cars is added to the flow along the path in the opposite 
direction at nodes 4 and 6.

THE MAXIMAL FLOW PROBLEM
305
5
2
3
1
4
6
8
8
2
4
7
3
4
3
5
0
2
6
4
4
0
4
0
0
2
0
4
4
0
4
4
1
FIGURE 7.20
Maximal flow for
path 1–4–6
5
2
3
1
4
6
14
14
2
0
7
3
4
3
0
2
6
4
4
4
0
4
2
0
6
6
1
4
6
1
0
6
FIGURE 7.21
Maximal flow for
path 1–3–6
5
2
3
1
4
6
15
15
2
0
1
3
4
3
6
2
0
4
4
4
0
4
2
6
1
0
4
0
1
3
7
1
1
1
5
FIGURE 7.22
Maximal flow for
path 1–3–4–6
Now, we arbitrarily select another path. This time, we will choose path 1–3–6, with a
maximum possible flow of six cars. This flow of six is subtracted from the branches along
path 1–3–6 and added to the branches in the opposite direction, as shown in Figure 7.21. 
The flow of 6 for this path is added to the previous flow of 8, which results in a total flow of
14 railroad cars.
Notice that at this point the number of paths we can take is restricted. For example, we can-
not take the branch from node 3 to node 6 because zero flow capacity is available. Likewise, no
path that includes the branch from node 1 to node 4 is possible.
The available flow capacity along the path 1–3–4–6 is one car, as shown in Figure 7.22. This
increases the total flow from 14 cars to 15 cars. The resulting network is shown in Figure 7.23.
Close observation of the network in Figure 7.23 shows that there are no more paths with available
flow capacity. All paths out of nodes 3, 4, and 5 show zero available capacity, which prohibits any
further paths through the network.
This completes the maximal flow solution for our example problem. The maximum flow
is 15 railroad cars. The flows that will occur along each branch appear in boxes in Figure 7.23.
Steps of the maximal
flow solution method.

306
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
In summary, the steps of the maximal flow solution method are as follows:
1. Arbitrarily select any path in the network from origin to destination.
2. Adjust the capacities at each node by subtracting the maximal flow for the path selected in
step 1.
3. Add the maximal flow along the path in the opposite direction at each node.
4. Repeat steps 1, 2, and 3 until there are no more paths with available flow capacity.
5
2
3
1
4
6
15
15
2
0
3
4
3
0
4
4
4
0
4
6
7
0
0
3
7
1
1
5
5
4
4
0
4
6
4
FIGURE 7.23
Maximal flow for
railway network
Management Science Application
Distributing Railway Cars to Customers 
at CSX
CSX Transportation, Inc., is one of the nation’s major freight
railroad companies, with a 21,000-mile rail network and
35,000 employees. CSX serves 23 states and 70 ports in the
eastern part of the United States and Canada, and it has an-
nual revenues of $11 billion. Every day CSX distributes hun-
dreds of empty railroad cars (i.e., boxcars, gondolas, hoppers,
tank cars) to its customers. CSX delivers an empty car to the
location where a customer is loading, the car is loaded, and
then it is transported to the customer’s destination. At the
destination, the car is unloaded and becomes available for an-
other customer order. The empty car distribution problem is
large and complex and has significant cost implications. 
CSX maintains a fleet of 90,000 railroad cars that it relo-
cates in a rail network with thousands of locations every day.
Hauling empty cars hundreds of thousands of miles every day
wears out tracks and cars, requires additional trains to haul
the cars, and congests rail yards while generating no revenue.
The company wants to provide the customers with the cars
they need at the lowest cost possible, but the cars available
change constantly throughout the day. 
CSX’s solution is a network flow optimization model with an
objective function that minimizes the costs of transporting empty
cars (the model variables), including a car’s travel distance costs,
time and handling costs, and penalty costs for lateness and deliv-
ering the wrong car. Model constraints ensure that all car orders
are met, that the supply of each type of car is not exceeded, that
cars are delivered within an allowable time frame, and that each
car delivered is the type ordered. The model is solved every 
15 minutes throughout the day in order to respond to rapidly
changing conditions, such as supply and demand changes. 
CSX estimates that the distribution system saves the com-
pany $51 million annually and has saved the company $561 mil-
lion since its implementation several years ago. It is also
estimated that the model has saved $1.4 billion in capital expen-
diture avoidance because it did not have to buy an estimated
18,000 new cars to support the additional miles the company
has avoided. It is further estimated that the public has benefited
by an estimated savings of $600 million for improved highway
safety; reductions in congestion, pollution, and greenhouse
gases; and reductions in tax-supported road maintenance.   
Source: Based on M. Gorman, D. Acharya, and D. Sellers, “CSX
Railway Uses OR to Cash In on Optimized Equipment Distribution,”
Interfaces 40, no. 1 (January–February 2010): 5–16.
© Eric Bechtold / Alamy

THE MAXIMAL FLOW PROBLEM
307
EXHIBIT 7.7
Computer Solution of the Maximal Flow Problem with Excel
The maximal flow problem can also be solved with Excel, much the same way as we solved the
shortest route problem, by formulating it as an integer linear programming model and solving it
by using “Solver”.
The decision variables represent the flow along each branch, as follows:
flow along branch i–j and integer
To reduce the size and complexity of the model formulation, we will also eliminate flow
along a branch in the opposite direction (e.g., flow from 4 to 2 is zero).
Before proceeding with the model formulation and developing the objective function, we
must alter the network slightly to be able to solve it as a linear programming problem. We will
create a new branch from node 6 back to node 1,
The flow along this branch from the end of
the network back to the start corresponds to the maximum amount that can be shipped from node
6 to node 1 and then back through the network to node 6. In effect, we are creating a continual
flow through the network so that the most that goes through and comes out at node 6 is the most
that can go through the network beginning at node 1. As a result, the objective is to maximize the
amount that flows from node 6 back to node 1:
The constraints follow the same premise as the shortest route problem; that is, whatever flows
into a node must flow out. Thus, at node 1, we have the following constraint, showing that the
amount flowing from 6–1 must flow out through branches 1–2, 1–3, and 1–4:
x61 = x12 + x13 + x14
maximize Z = x61
x61.
xij =
Computer Solution of the Maximal Flow Problem with QM for Windows
The program input and maximal flow solution for the Scott Tractor Company example using
QM for Windows is shown in Exhibit 7.7. (Note that this problem has multiple optimal solu-
tions, and the branch flows are slightly different for this solution.)

308
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
This constraint can be rewritten as
Similarly, the constraint at node 2 is written as
We must also develop a set of constraints reflecting the capacities along each branch, as follows:
The capacity for 
can be any relatively large number (compared to the other branch capaci-
ties); we set it at the sum of the capacities on the branches leaving node 1.
The complete linear programming model for our Scott Tractor Company example is sum-
marized as follows:
subject to
and integer
The Excel spreadsheet set up to solve this integer linear programming model for the Scott
Tractor Company example is shown in Exhibit 7.8. The decision variables,
are represented by
cells C6:C15. Cells D6:D15 include the branch capacities. The objective function, which is to
maximize the flow along branch 6–1, is included in cell C16. The model constraints reflecting the
flow through each node are included in the box on the right side of the spreadsheet. For example,
cell G6 contains the constraint formula at node 1, C15C6C7C8, and cell G7 contains the
constraint formula for node 2, C6C9C10. The constraints for the branch capacities are ob-
tained by adding the formula C6:C15 
D6:D15 in Solver in Exhibit 7.9.
"
xij,
xij Ú 0
x61 … 17
x56 … 4
x46 … 5
x36 … 6
x34 … 2
x25 … 8
x24 … 3
x14 … 4
x13 … 7
x12 … 6
x36 + x46 + x56 - x61 = 0
x25 - x56 = 0
x14 + x24 + x34 - x46 = 0
x13 - x34 - x36 = 0
x12 - x24 - x25 = 0
x61 - x12 - x13 - x14 = 0
maximize Z = x61
x61
x25 … 8  x61 … 17
x24 … 3  x56 … 4
x14 … 4  x46 … 5
x13 … 7  x36 … 6
x12 … 6  x34 … 2
x12 - x24 - x25 = 0
x61 - x12 - x13 - x14 = 0

Exhibit 7.9 shows the Solver Parameters screen for this model.
THE MAXIMAL FLOW PROBLEM
309
Flow into and out of
nodes must equal
each other.
EXHIBIT 7.9
Decision
variables
Constraint at node 6;
=C12+C13+C14–C15
Constraint at node 1;
=C15–C6–C7–C8
Objective–maximize
flow from node 6
EXHIBIT 7.8

Summary
In this chapter, we examined a class of models referred to as network flow models. These in-
cluded the shortest route network, the minimal spanning tree network, and the maximal flow
network model. These network models are all concerned with the flow of an item (or items)
through an arrangement of paths (or routes).
We demonstrated solution approaches for each of the three types of network models pre-
sented in this chapter. At times, it may have seemed tiresome to go through the various steps of
these solution methods, when the solutions could have more easily been found by simply looking
closely at the networks. However, as the sizes of networks increase, intuitive solution by observa-
tion becomes more difficult, thus creating the need for a solution procedure. Of course, as with
the other techniques in this text, when a network gets extremely large and complex, computerized
solution becomes the best approach.
In the next chapter, we will continue our discussion of networks by presenting the network
analysis techniques known as CPM and PERT. These network techniques are used primarily for
project analysis and are not only the most popular types of network analysis but also two of the
most widely applied management science techniques.
310
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Example Problem
Solution
EXHIBIT 7.10
The Excel solution is shown in Exhibit 7.10. Notice that the flows along each branch are
shown in cells C6:C15 and the total network flow is 15 in cell C16.
The following example illustrates the solution methods for the shortest route and minimal span-
ning tree network flow problems.
Problem Statement
A salesman for Healthproof Pharmaceutical Company travels each week from his office in 
Atlanta to one of five cities in the Southeast where he has clients. The travel time (in hours) 
between cities along interstate highways is shown along each branch in the following 
network:

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
311
5
2
1
3
4
6
6
5
4
3
2
2
7
5
A. Determine the shortest route from Atlanta to each of the other five cities in the network.
B. Assume that the network now represents six different communities in a city and that the 
local transportation authority wants to design a rail system that will connect all six com-
munities with the minimum amount of track. The miles between each community are
shown on each branch. Develop a minimal spanning tree for this problem.
Solution
Step 1 (Part A): Determine the Shortest Route Solution
1. Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1}
1–2
5
1–3
5
1–4
7
2. Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2}
1–3
5
1–4
7
2–5
11
3. Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3}
1–4
7
2–5
11
3–4
7
4. Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3, 4}
4–5
10
4–6
9
5. Permanent set
Branch
Time
{1, 2, 3, 4, 6}
4–5
10
6–5
13
6. Permanent set
{1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}

The shortest route network follows:
312
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
1
3
4
6
5
2
5
5
2
2
3
2
3
1
4
5
6
7
25
21
30
17
12
25
10
15
18
9
12
10
2
5
5
10
6
9
4
7
3
5
1
5
7
5
2
3
Step 2 (Part B): Determine the Minimal Spanning Tree
1. The closest unconnected node to node 1 is node 2.
2. The closest unconnected node to 1 and 2 is node 3.
3. The closest unconnected node to 1, 2, and 3 is node 4.
4. The closest unconnected node to 1, 2, 3, and 4 is node 6.
5. The closest unconnected node to 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6 is node 5.
The minimal spanning tree follows; the shortest total distance is 17 miles:
Problems
1. Given the following network with the indicated distances between nodes (in miles), determine
the shortest route from node 1 to each of the other six nodes (2, 3, 4, 5, 6, and 7):

2. Frieda Millstone and her family live in Roanoke, Virginia, and they are planning an auto vaca-
tion across Virginia, their ultimate destination being Washington, DC. The family has developed
the following network of possible routes and cities to visit on their trip:
PROBLEMS
313
5
6
4
3
2
1
Staunton
Roanoke
Richmond
Charlottesville
Washington, DC
Winchester
2
2
1
4
2
3
2
3
2
5
7
6
4
3
2
1
Staunton
Charlottesville
Richmond
Petersburg
Danville
Roanoke
Lynchburg
85
53
88
65
137
117
24
61
72
31
The time, in hours, between cities (which is affected by the type of road and the number of in-
termediate towns) is shown along each branch. Determine the shortest route that the Millstone
family can travel from Roanoke to Washington, DC.
3. The Roanoke, Virginia, distributor of Rainwater Beer delivers beer by truck to stores in six other
Virginia cities, as shown in the following network:
The mileage between cities is shown along each branch. Determine the shortest truck route from
Roanoke to each of the other six cities in the network.
4. The plant engineer for the Bitco manufacturing plant is designing an overhead conveyor 
system that will connect the distribution/inventory center to all areas of the plant. The network

Determine the shortest conveyor route from the distribution/inventory center at node 1 to each
of the other six areas of the plant.
5. The Burger Doodle restaurant franchises in Los Angeles are supplied from a central warehouse
in Inglewood. The location of the warehouse and its proximity, in minutes of travel time, to the
franchises are shown in the following network:
314
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
3
2
1
5
10
8
9
6
4
7
28
18
35
25
48
24
27
20
32
50
25
36
29
45
41
40
17
Pomona
Pasadena
Downey
Long Beach
Inglewood
Westwood
San Fernando Valley
Anaheim
Huntington Beach
Burbank
of possible conveyor routes through the plant, with the length (in feet) along each branch,
follows:
Trucks supply each franchise on a daily basis. Determine the shortest route from the warehouse
at Inglewood to each of the nine franchises.
5
4
3
2
1
7
6
120
160
210
190
50
130
40
140
50
80

6. The Petroco gasoline distributor in Jackson, Mississippi, supplies service stations in nine other
southeastern cities, as shown in the following network:
PROBLEMS
315
1
2
5
8
9
7
10
6
4
3
177
254
193
150
166
204
248
169
94
196
208
246
212
180
202
376
241
Nashville
Birmingham
Montgomery
Mobile
Baton Rouge
Jackson
Memphis
Tallahassee
Atlanta
Knoxville
2
1
3
5
8
4
7
10
6
9
7
8
10
6
4
3
9
10
8
11
14
9
5
4
8
5
12
7
The distance, in miles, is shown on each branch. Determine the shortest route from Jackson to
the nine other cities in the network.
7. The Hylton Hotel has a limousine van that transports guests to various business and tourist
locations around the city. The following network indicates the different routes the limousine
could follow from the hotel at node 1 to the nine locations (nodes 2 through 10):
The values on each branch in the network are the distances, in miles, between the locations. De-
termine the shortest route from the hotel to each of the nine destinations and indicate the dis-
tance for each route.

8. A steel mill in Gary supplies steel to manufacturers in eight other midwestern cities by truck, as
shown in the following network:
316
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
4
5
6
8
9
7
3
2
1
Detroit
Cleveland
Pittsburgh
Columbus
Toledo
Ft. Wayne
Indianapolis
Gary
6
4.5
4
5
3
3
4
4
2.5
2
3
3
4
3
3.5
3
Cincinnati
5
6
2
3
1
10
9
12
11
8
7
4
3
4
2
4
7
7
7
9
7
6
11
10
9
8
5
3
12
5
9
2
8
11
3
6
6
10
8
2
The travel time between cities, in hours, is shown along each branch. Determine the shortest
route from Gary to each of the other eight cities in the network.
9. Determine the shortest route from node 1 (origin) to node 12 (destination) for the following net-
work. Distances are given along the network branches:
10. The members of the Vistas Club are planning a month long hiking and camping trip through the
Blue Ridge Mountains, from north Georgia to Virginia. There are a number of trails through the
mountains that connect at various campgrounds, crossings, and cabins. The following network
shows the different connecting trails and the distance of each connecting branch, in miles:

Determine the shortest path from node 1 in north Georgia to node 13 in Virginia and indicate the
total mileage of the trail.
11. Hard Rock Concrete Supply makes concrete at its plant in Centerville, Virginia, and delivers it to
construction sites throughout the metropolitan Washington, DC, area. The following network shows
the possible routes and distances (in miles) from the concrete plant to seven construction sites:
PROBLEMS
317
73
73
81
62
75
96
89
71
47
81
105
144
78
84
43
94
54
85
98
106
58
55
3
2
4
1
5
8
11
13
12
7
9
10
6
14
20
10
15
8
10
28
18
9
12
24
18
12
17
5
7
8
6
1
2
3
4
Determine the shortest route a concrete truck would take from the plant at node 1 to node 8 and
the total distance for this route, using the shortest route method.
12. George is camped deep in the jungle, and he wants to make his way back to the coast and civi-
lization. Each of the paths he can take through the jungle has obstacles that can delay him, in-
cluding hostile natives, wild animals, dense forests and vegetation, swamps, rivers and streams,
snakes, insects, and mountains. Following is the network of paths that George can take, with the
time (in days) to travel each branch:

318
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
9
10
11
14
13
12
8
5
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
Winchester
Front
Royal
Luray
Port
Republic
Staunton
McDowell
Franklin
Moorefield
Strasburg
Romney
Woodstock
Mount
Jackson
New
Market
Harrisonburg
1
4
4
4
5
7
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
3
2
3
4
6
7
Coast
5
2
4
1
2
5
2
6
6
4
5
5
3
3
3
7
3
2
3
2
2
2
2
4
4
4
4
1
3
3
3
3
3
1
George’s
Camp
7
11
13
15
17
16
14
12
8
9
10
5
4
1
2
6
3
Determine the shortest (time) path for George to take and indicate the total time.
13. In 1862, during the second year of the Civil War, General Thomas J. “Stonewall” Jackson fought
a brilliant military campaign in the Shenandoah Valley in Virginia. One of his victories was at
the Battle of McDowell. Using the following figure and your imagination, determine the short-
est path and how long it will take (in days) for General Jackson to move his army from Winches-
ter to McDowell to fight the battle:

15. John Clooney, a bush pilot in Alaska, makes regular charter flights in his floatplane to various
towns and cities in western Alaska. His passengers include hunters, fishermen, backpackers and
campers, and tradespeople hired for jobs in the different localities. He also carries some cargo
for delivery. The following network shows the possible air routes between various towns and
cities John might take (with the times, in hours). For safety reasons, he flies point-to-point, fly-
ing over at least one town along a route, even though he might not land there. In the upcoming
week John has scheduled charter flights for Kotzebue, Nome, and Stebbins. Determine the short-
est route between John’s home base in Anchorage and each of these destinations.
PROBLEMS
319
1
2
9
11
19
21
22
17
13
6
3
4
5
12
16
20
18
15
10
8
7
14
17
27
23
17
18
18
24
12
14
14
41
37
16
16
30
35
42
20
23
28
34
29
29
31
18
15
16
17
19
19
19
24
12
22
22
26
26
Voyager
Earth
14. The Voyager spacecraft has been transported by an alien being to the Delta Quadrant of space,
millions of light-years from Earth. Captain Janeway and her crew are attempting to plot the
shortest course home. Following is a network of the possible routes through the Delta Quadrant,
where the nodes are different worlds, planetary systems, and space anomalies, and the values on
the branches are the actual times, in years, between nodes. Determine the shortest route from the
Voyager’s present location (at node 1) to Earth.

16. From 1840 to 1850, more than 12,000 pioneers migrated west in wagon trains. It was typically
about a 2,000-mile journey, and pioneers averaged about 10 miles per day. One pioneer family,
the Smiths, is planning to join a wagon train traveling west to Oregon. The destination is Fort
Vancouver, which is near present-day Portland. The family plans to join a wagon train in 
St. Louis. However, the trains follow various trails west that are mostly determined by the loca-
tion of forts and trading posts along the way. The Smith family wants to choose a wagon train
that will get them to Oregon in the shortest amount of time. They have checked around with the
different wagon train leaders plus immigrants, soldiers, fur traders, and scouts who have previ-
ously made the trip west, and from the information they have gathered, they have developed the
following network, with estimated times (in days) along each branch:
320
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
14
15
12
13
10
9
11
8
7
2
6
5
4
1
3
1
1
4
3
3
2
2
5
5
4
4
3
1
1
1
2
2
2
1.5
1.5
2.5
1.5
1.5
2.5
2.5
3.5
2.5
2.5
3.5
1.5
Wales
Nome
Stebbins
Iditarod
Bethel
Anchorage
Nikolai
Dillingham
Good News
Bay
Stony
River
St. Marys
Kotzebue
Koyuk
Galena
Shungnak

321
64
56
16
38
43
36
22
40
84
32
12
31
32
28
62
53
58
21
28
3
4
6
25
22
9
25
54
70
18
53
58
15
38
35
17
16
14
15
13
12
10
11
9
7
8
6
5
4
3
2
1
Ft. Vancouver (OR)
Ft. Benton
Ft. Hall
Ft. Bridger
Ft. Union
Ft. Laramie
Ft. Kearney
St. Joseph
Independence
Ft. Scott
Ft. Smith (AR)
St. Louis
(MO)
Ft. Leavenworth
Ft. Vasquez
Ft. Boise
Ft. Sutter
Ft. Genoa

a. Determine the shortest route for the Smiths from St. Louis to Ft. Vancouver.
b. Another family, the Steins, is leaving from Ft. Smith, Arkansas. Determine the shortest route
for the Steins to Ft. Vancouver, Oregon.
17. A new police car costs the Bay City Police Department $26,000. The annual maintenance cost
for a car depends on the age of the car at the beginning of the year. (All cars accumulate approx-
imately the same mileage each year.) The maintenance costs increase as a car ages, as shown in
the following table:
322
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
1
4
2
7
5
3
6
25
10
18
9
12
15
10
25
12
17
30
21
19. A developer is planning a development that includes subdivisions of houses, cluster houses,
townhouses, apartment complexes, shopping areas, a daycare center and playground, a commu-
nity center, and a school, among other facilities. The developer wants to connect the facilities
and areas in the development with the minimum number of streets possible. The following net-
work shows the possible street routes and distances (in thousands of feet) between 10 areas in
the development that must be connected:
Car Age (yr.)
Annual Maintenance Cost
Used Selling Price
0
$ 3,000
$    —
1
4,500
15,000
2
6,000
12,000
3
8,000
8,000
4
11,000
4,000
5
14,000
2,000
6
0
In order to avoid the increasingly high maintenance costs, the police department can sell a car
and purchase a new car at the end of any year. The selling price for a car at the end of each year
of use is also shown in the table. It is assumed that the price of a new car will increase $500 each
year. The department’s objective is to develop a car replacement schedule that will minimize to-
tal cost (i.e., the purchase cost of a new car plus maintenance costs minus the money received
for selling a used car) during the next 6 years. Develop a car replacement schedule, using the
shortest route method.
18. Given the following network, with the indicated distances between nodes, develop a minimal
spanning tree:

Determine a minimal spanning tree network of streets to connect the 10 areas, and indicate the
total streets (in thousands of feet) needed.
20. One of the opposing forces in a simulated army battle wishes to set up a communications sys-
tem that will connect the eight camps in its command. The following network indicates the dis-
tances (in hundreds of yards) between the camps and the different paths over which a
communications line can be constructed:
PROBLEMS
323
7.2
3.6
4.1
8.2
5.9
5.6
2.1
3.4
2.8
6.1
4.6
6.5
4.8
5.5
5.4
6.3
2.7
2.7
7.8
8
7
9
10
4
3
2
5
6
1
1
2
3
4
8
5
6
7
7
5
6
4
3
8
4
10
12
6
2
3
5
5
4
7
8
5
2
1
3
6
90
60
40
50
80
60
30
70
45
160
40
55
65
110
Using the minimal spanning tree approach, determine the minimum distance communication
system that will connect all eight camps.
21. The management of the Dynaco manufacturing plant wants to connect the eight major manufac-
turing areas of its plant with a forklift route. Because the construction of such a route will take a
considerable amount of plant space and disrupt normal activities, management wants to mini-
mize the total length of the route. The following network shows the distance, in yards, between
the manufacturing areas (denoted by nodes 1 through 8):

The miles between cities are shown on each branch. Determine a pipeline system that will con-
nect all 10 cities, using the minimum number of miles of pipe, and indicate how many miles of
pipe will be used.
23. A major hotel chain is constructing a new resort hotel complex in Greenbranch Springs, West
Virginia. The resort is in a heavily wooded area, and the developers want to preserve as much of
the natural beauty as possible. To do so, the developers want to connect all the various facilities
in the complex with a combination walking–riding path that will minimize the amount of path-
way that will have to be cut through the woods. The following network shows possible connect-
ing paths and corresponding distances (in yards) between the facilities:
324
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
1
8
10
4
5
6
9
3
2
7
Omaha
Denver
Albuquerque
Oklahoma
City
Little Rock
Kansas
City
Des Moines
St. Louis
Indianapolis
Nashville
260
250
250
235
320
340
270
340
260
240
750
520
400
450
490
210
120
175
580
310
2
4
3
1
5
7
8
6
Tennis
court
Spa
Artist colony
Craft houses
Golf course
Pond
Hotel
420
670
320
160
205
Stables
175
330
200
110
150
190
215
310
275
150
Determine the minimal spanning tree forklift route for the plant and indicate the total yards the
route will require.
22. Several oil companies are jointly planning to build an oil pipeline to connect several southwest-
ern, southeastern, and midwestern cities, as shown in the following network:
Determine the path that will connect all the facilities with the minimum amount of construction
and indicate the total length of the pathway.

Determine the ventilation system that will connect the various rooms and buildings of the plant,
using the minimum number of feet of ductwork, and indicate how many feet of ductwork will
be used.
25. The town council of Whitesville has decided to construct a bicycle path that will connect the
various suburbs of the town with the shopping center, the downtown area, and the local college.
The council hopes the local citizenry will use the bike path, thus conserving energy and decreas-
ing traffic congestion. The various paths that can be constructed and their lengths (in miles) are
shown in the following network:
PROBLEMS
325
2
6
7
8
4
3
1
5
140
170
110
260
190
70
230
120
90
130
210
160
80
5
8
9
6
2
1
3
4
7
3
6
2
4
9
3
6
1
5
2
7
5
8
4
7
2
24. The Barrett Textile Mill is remodeling its plant and installing a new ventilation system. The pos-
sible ducts connecting the different rooms and buildings at the plant, with the length (in feet)
along each branch, are shown in the following network:
Determine the bicycle pathway that will require the minimum amount of construction to con-
nect all the areas of the town. Indicate the total length of the path.
26. Determine the minimal spanning tree for the network in Problem 9.
27. State University has decided to reconstruct the sidewalks throughout the east side of its campus
to provide wheelchair access. However, upgrading sidewalks is a very expensive undertaking, so
for the first phase of this project, university administrators want to make sure they connect all
buildings with wheelchair access with the minimum number of refurbished sidewalks possible.

Following is a network of the existing sidewalks on the east side of campus, with the feet be-
tween each building shown on the branches:
326
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
5
8
12
13
14
3
2
4
1
11
7
9
10
6
154
91
125
178
147
86
105
114
105
130
112
61
88
127
76
210
116
107
67
63
92
195
120
82
93
73
84
95
1
4
11
14
13
12
9
8
3
2
5
6
7
10
52
35
311
186
80
114
82
48
86
98
39
127
56
48
58
29
102
71
64
38
57
83
93
71
62
92
105
208
276
Determine a minimal spanning tree network that will connect all the buildings on campus with
wheelchair access sidewalks and indicate the number of feet of sidewalk.
28. Tech wants to develop an area network that will connect its server at its computer and satellite
center with the main campus buildings to improve Internet service. The cable will be laid prima-
rily through existing electrical tunnels, although some cable will have to be buried underground.
The following network shows the possible cable connections between the computer center at
node 1 and the various buildings, with the distances, in feet, along the branches:

Determine a minimal spanning tree network that will connect all the buildings and indicate the
total amount of cable that will be needed to do so.
29. Given the following network, with the indicated flow capacities of each branch, determine the
maximum flow from source node 1 to destination node 6 and the flow along each branch:
PROBLEMS
327
1
4
6
5
2
3
8
10
5
2
3
6
0
4
3
9
5
7
4
0
1
0
6
0
0
0
2
3
4
1
5
7
6
10
15
18
0
9
5
3
14
2
0
0
10
3
5
4
12
0
1
4
12
4
7
1
4
6
5
2
3
4
8
17
0
6
30
8
5
11
0
4
9
14
0
12
20
15
3
30. Given the following network, with the indicated flow capacities along each branch, determine
the maximum flow from source node 1 to destination node 7 and the flow along each branch:
31. Given the following network, with the indicated flow capacities along each branch, determine
the maximum flow from source node 1 to destination node 6 and the flow along each branch:

32. A new stadium complex is being planned for Denver, and the Denver traffic engineer is
attempting to determine whether the city streets between the stadium complex and the inter-
state highway can accommodate the expected flow of 21,000 cars after each game. The vari-
ous traffic arteries between the stadium (node 1) and the interstate (node 8) are shown in the
following network:
328
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
1
4
7
8
3
6
2
5
10
7
8
0
4
5
0
2
9
0
2
6
4
0
2
8
0
0
6
3
0
1
5
6
5
0
1
4
7
5
3
2
6
8
Los Angeles
Salt Lake City
Kansas City
Chicago
St. Louis
Denver
Phoenix
Dallas
10
7
5
2
4 6
1
5
1
3
8
5
9
3
6
2
8
8
7
10
0
9
4
5
4
7
The flow capacities on each street are determined by the number of available lanes, the use of
traffic police and lights, and whether any lanes can be opened or closed in either direction. The
flow capacities are given in thousands of cars. Determine the maximum traffic flow the streets
can accommodate and the amount of traffic along each street. Will the streets be able to handle
the expected flow after a game?
33. The FAA has granted a license to a new airline, Omniair, and awarded it several routes be-
tween Los Angeles and Chicago. The flights per day for each route are shown in the following 
network:
Determine the maximum number of flights the airline can schedule per day from Chicago to 
Los Angeles and indicate the number of flights along each route.
34. The National Express Parcel Service has established various truck and air routes around the
country over which it ships parcels. The holiday season is approaching, which means a 

Determine the maximum tonnage of packages that can be transported per day from station 1 to
station 7 and indicate the flow along each branch.
35. The traffic management office in Richmond is attempting to analyze the potential traffic flow
from a new office complex under construction to an interstate highway interchange during the
evening rush period. Cars leave the office complex via one of three exits, and then they travel
through the city streets until they arrive at the interstate interchange. The following network
shows the various street routes (branches) from the office complex (node 1) to the interstate in-
terchange (node 9):
PROBLEMS
329
1
4
6
7
5
2
3
6
5
0
2
3
4
1
2
6
4
2
4
0
0
0
4
7
6
1
2
9
3
1
4
9
7
5
3
2
8
6
0
2
4
3
2
2
1
0
7
4
6
0
5
4
2
0
5
6
0
3
6
4
0
8
0
7
3
0
0
0
All intermediate nodes represent street intersections, and the values accompanying the branches
emanating from the nodes represent the traffic capacities of each street, expressed in thousands
of cars per hour. Determine the maximum flow of cars that the street system can absorb during
the evening rush hour.
36. The Dynaco Company manufactures a product in five stages. Each stage of the manufacturing
process is conducted at a different plant. The following network shows the five different stages
dramatic increase in the number of packages that will be sent. The service wants to know the
maximum flow of packages it can accommodate (in tons) from station 1 to station 7. The net-
work of routes and the flow capacities (in tons of packages per day) along each route are shown
in the following network:

and the routes over which the partially completed products are shipped to the various plants at
the different stages:
330
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
7
4
1
5
2
6
3
10
8
9
0
15
2
8
9
8
9
7
6
10
0
0
0
14
5
5
7
0
8
4
12
6
11
0
10
11
16
7
0
6
3
12
8
3
13
4
5 17
5
6
4
3
2
1
9
10
7
8
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
Stage 5
7
10
8
0
6
9
0
0
3
4
1
0
0
8
0
0
0
7
0
0
0
0
7
8
6
0
0
10
0
0
7
5
Stage 5 (at node 10) is the distribution center in which final products are stored. Although each
node represents a different plant, plants at the same stage perform the same operation. (For exam-
ple, at stage 2 of the manufacturing process, plants 2, 3, and 4 all perform the same manufactur-
ing operation.) The values accompanying the branches emanating from each node indicate the
maximum number of units (in thousands) that a particular plant can produce and ship to another
plant at the next stage. (For example, plant 3 has the capacity to process and ship 7,000 units of
the product to plant 5.) Determine the maximum number of units that can be processed through
the five-stage manufacturing process and the number of units processed at each plant.
37. Suppose in Problem 36 that the processing cost per unit at each plant is different because of dif-
ferent machinery, workers’ abilities, overhead, and so on, according to the following table:
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 3
Stage 4
1. $3
2. $5
5. $22
7. $12
3.
7
6.
19
8.
14
4.
4
9.
16
There are no differentiated costs at stage 5, the distribution center. Given a budget of $700,000,
determine the maximum number of units that can be processed through the five-stage manufac-
turing process.
38. Given the following network, with the indicated flow capacities along each branch, determine
the maximum flow from source node 1 to destination node 10 and the flow along each path:

39. A manufacturing company produces different variations of a product at different work centers in its
plant on a daily basis. Following is a network showing the various work centers in the plant, the
daily capacities at each work center, and the flow of the partially completed products between work
centers:
PROBLEMS
331
4
3
6
9
12
13
15
10
11
7
8
14
1
2
5
40
65
75
0
0
0
0
0
50
0
0
0
30
40
25
35
20
30
25
45
0
0
0
0
75
120
85
90
50
60
70
35
0
0
50
0
0
65
55
90
60
0
0
0
190 0
0
0
0
0
0
110
0
0
60
0
0
0
15
12
14
13
11
6
2
1
3
9
10
4
8
7
5
18 10
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
21
6
6
23
0
0
0
0
0
0 0
0
0
22
20
10
0
20
0
0
7
4
0
21
9
17
18
15
12
5
16
16
12
24
22
Charleston
I-26
Node 1 represents the point where raw materials enter the process, and node 15 is the packaging
and distribution center. Determine the maximum number of units that can be completed each
day and the number of units processed at each work center.
40. The following network shows the major roads that would be part of the hurricane evacuation
routes for Charleston, South Carolina:

The destination is the interchange of Interstate 26 and Interstate 526, north of Charleston. The
nodes represent road intersections, and the values at the nodes are the traffic capacities, in thou-
sands of cars. Determine the maximum flow of cars that can leave Charleston during a hurricane
evacuation and the optimal flow along each road segment (branch 1).
41. In Problem 42 in Chapter 6, KanTech Corporation ships electronic components in containers
from seaports in Europe to U.S. ports, from which the containers are transported by truck or rail
to inland ports and then transferred to an alternative mode of transportation before being shipped
to KanTech’s U.S. distributors. Using the shipping capacity at each port, develop a maximal
flow network to determine the number of containers to ship through each port to meet demand
at the distribution centers.
332
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Case Problem
The Pearlsburg Rescue Squad
The Pearlsburg (West Virginia) Rescue Squad serves a
mountainous, rural area in southern West Virginia. The only
access to the homes, farms, and small crossroad communi-
ties and villages is a network of dirt, gravel, and poorly
paved roads. The rescue squad had just returned from an
emergency at Blake’s Crossing, and two of the squad mem-
bers, Melanie Hart and Ben Cross, were cleaning up and
getting the truck back in proper order for the next call.
“You know, Ben,” said Melanie, “that was close. We
could have lost little Randy if we had been a few minutes
later in getting to their farm.”
“Yep,” said Ben.
After a moment Melanie continued, “I was sort of won-
dering about the route Dave took to get there. It seems to me
if we had gone around by Cedar Creek, we could have gotten
there a few minutes sooner. And as close as things got, a few
minutes could have made a big difference, don’t you think?”
“Yep,” said Ben.
“Well, I was wondering, Ben, why don’t we study all
these different ways to get to the little communities and
farms around here so we will always know what the quick-
est way to all the different places is?”
Ben thought a moment before answering. “It would
take us a while to time all the different ways you could get
from here to everywhere we go.”
“That’s true,” Melanie answered, “but I’ve been study-
ing a way to work out this sort of problem in one of my
college courses. All we have to do is get the times it takes
to travel each piece of road between all these little commu-
nities, and I think I can do the rest. Will you help me?”
“Sure,” Ben said.
“Okay, then, here’s what we’ll do. I’ll write down all
the routes you should time, and I’ll time the rest all the
way over to Holbrook.”
Here is the combined list of times (in minutes) Melanie
and Ben compiled for all the route segments between
Pearlsburg and Holbrook:

CASE PROBLEM
333
Segment
Time
Pearlsburg to Kitchen Corner
10
Pearlsburg to Quarry
15
Pearlsburg to Morgan Creek
12
Kitchen Corner to Cutter’s Store
20
Kitchen Corner to Stone House
14
Kitchen Corner to Quarry
8
Quarry to Blake’s Crossing
18
Quarry to Cedar Creek
9
Morgan Creek to Quarry
16
Morgan Creek to Cedar Creek
7
Morgan Creek to Homer
18
Morgan Creek to McKinney Farm
11
Stone House to Cutter’s Store
10
Stone House to Blake’s Crossing
6
Segment
Time
Cedar Creek to Blake’s Crossing
10
Cedar Creek to Wellis Farm
17
Cedar Creek to Homer
5
Cutter’s Store to Blake’s Crossing
12
Cutter’s Store to Bottom Town
14
Blake’s Crossing to Bottom Town
6
Blake’s Crossing to Holbrook
15
Blake’s Crossing to Wellis Farm
9
Homer to Wellis Farm
11
Homer to McKinney Farm
8
McKinney Farm to Wellis Farm
21
Wellis Farm to Holbrook
10
Bottom Town to Holbrook
12
Determine the shortest routes from Pearlsburg to all
the different communities and farms visited by the rescue
squad.
Case Problem
AROUND THE WORLD IN 80 DAYS
In the novel Around the World in 80 Days by Jules Verne,
Phileas T. Fogg wagered four of his fellow members of the
Reform Club in London £5,000 apiece that he could travel
around the world in 80 days. This would have been an as-
tounding feat in 1872, the year in which the novel is set.
Then, the fastest modes of travel were rail and ship; how-
ever, much of the world still traveled by coach, wagon,
horse, elephant, or donkey, or on foot. Phileas Fogg was not
a frivolous man. He would not have undertaken such a large
wager if he had not carefully researched the feasibility of
such a trip and been confident of his chances. Although he
undoubtedly analyzed various routes to circumnavigate the
globe, he did not have knowledge of techniques such as the
shortest route method, nor did he have a computer to help
him select an optimal route. If he had, he might have cho-
sen a route that would have completed his trip in less than
80 days or possibly would not have been so quick to make
his wager. On the next page is a network of the various
routes of the day for traveling around the world from Lon-
don. Fogg traveled eastward. The travel time, in days, is
shown on each branch. Travel times are based as much on
available modes of transportation at the time as on distance.
Using the shortest route method (and the computer), select
the best route for Mr. Fogg. Would the route you deter-
mined have won him his wager?

42
48
51
54
2
4
7
6
1
5
3
8
13
53
52
50
49
47
41
43
46
45
9
14
18
11
15
10
16
12
20
17
21
24
23
22
29
28
31
25
26
30
32
33
37
39
35
34
19
27
38
36
40
44
45
46
41
43
47
42
48
9
Seattle
Winnipeg
San
Francisco
Denver
Los
Angeles
St.
Louis
Baltimore
New York
St.
John’s
Montreal
Chicago
8
3
6
3
4
5
5
3
5
4
2
7
9
10
7
4
3
4
2
9
4
4
7
9
20
23
18
2
4
5
3
4
4
2
2
6
3
3
3
14
3
8
15
12
4
4
3
4
5
8
4
5
2
5
4
12
18
9
3
6
4
24
25
31
5
9
2
2
28
24
22
26
3
9
6
8
5
10
12
4
5
3
1
2
2
3
3
4
5
3
2
2
3
3
17
15
9
1
23
London
Copenhagen
Berlin
Prague
Naples
Budapest
Malta
Athens
Cairo
Aden
Tehran
Kabul
Karachi
Bombay
Madras
Singapore
Jakarta
Darwin Port Moresby
Marquesas
Panama
San Juan
Delhi
Calcutta
Bangkok
Hong Kong
Beijing
Shanghai
Yokohama
Los Angeles
San Francisco
Denver
Seattle
Winnipeg
Istanbul
Kiev
Moscow
Novosibirsk
Minsk
Stockholm
St. Petersburg
Lisbon
Madrid
Gibraltar
Casablanca
Panama
San Juan
Algiers
Barcelona
Paris
334

CASE PROBLEM
335
Case Problem
The Battle of the Bulge
On December 16, 1944, in the last year of World War II,
two German panzer armies, supported by a third army of
infantry, together totaling more than 250,000 men, staged
a massive counteroffensive in northern France, over-
whelming the American First Army in the Ardennes. The
offensive emanated from the German defensive line along
the Our River, north of the city of Luxembourg, and was
directed almost due west toward Namur and Liége in Bel-
gium. The result, after several days of fighting, was a huge
“bulge” in the Allied line and, therefore, this last major
ground battle of World War II became known as the Battle
of the Bulge.
On December 20, General Dwight D. Eisenhower,
Supreme Allied Commander, called on General George Pat-
ton to attack the German offensive with his Third Army,
which was then situated near Verdun, approximately 100
miles due south of the German left flank. Patton’s immedi-
ate objective was to relieve the 101st Airborne and elements
of Patton’s own 9th and 10th Armored Divisions surrounded
at Bastogne. Within 48 hours, on December 22, Patton was
able to begin his counteroffensive, with three divisions total-
ing approximately 62,000 men.
The winter weather was cold with snow and fog, and the
roads were icy, making the movement of troops, tanks, sup-
plies, and equipment a logistical nightmare. Nevertheless, on
December 26 Bastogne was relieved, and on January 12,
1945, the Battle of the Bulge effectively ended in one of the
great Allied victories of the war.
General Patton’s staff did not have knowledge of the
maximal flow technique nor access to computers to help
plan the Third Army’s troop movements during the Battle of
the Bulge. However, the figure on the following page shows
the road network between Verdun and Bastogne, with
(imagined) troop capacities (in thousands) along each road
branch between towns. Using the maximal flow technique
(and your imagination), determine the number of troops that
should be sent along each road in order to get the maximum
number of troops to Bastogne. Also indicate the total number
of troops that would be able to get to Bastogne.



France
Recogne
Neufchateau
Florenville
Montmedy
Virton
Paliseul
Bouillon
Stenay
Verdun
Longuyen
Longwy
Tintigny
Havange
Thionville
Briey
Etain
Patton’s
Third Army
German
      Army
Bastogne
Our River
Diekirch
Arlon
Martelange
Luxembourg
16
18
18
19
12
12
24
23
27
21
10
10
10
10
10
17
16
15
11
14
4
4
5
5
14
15
16
12
12
12
9
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
9
9
9
9
9
7
7
7
7
8
6
8
8
6
8
8
8
9
21
20
17
18
19
15
14
13
12
11
16
3
6
2
1
5
4
7
9
8
10
336

CASE PROBLEM
337
2
4
6
1
5
3
8
13
9
14
18
15
10
16
12
20
17
21
24
23
22
28
26
30
32
33
19
27
31
29
7
11
25
Nevada
Site
Salt Lake
City
Cheyenne
Omaha
Des Moines
Davenport/Moline/
Rock Island
Chicago
Toledo
Cleveland
Pittsburgh
Charleston
Knoxville
Nashville
Memphis
Little Rock
Oklahoma
City
Amarillo
Albuquerque
Las Vegas
Denver
Topeka
Wichita
Tulsa
Kansas
City
St. Louis
Springfield
Indianapolis
Evansville
Louisville
Cincinnati
Lexington
Columbus
Akron
8
6.5
8
10.5
2
9
3.5
2.5
3.5
3
3
3
3.5
3.5
3.5
4.5
4.25
2
2
3
2.7
3.2
3
2
2
1.5
2
2
2
1.5
4.5
2
2.5
4
6
8
8.5
1
2
2.5
2.5
4.5
5.5
18
7
8
9.5
4.5
4
2.5
6
3.5
3
1.5
3
3
3
5.5
4
2
0.5
Case Problem
Nuclear Waste Disposal at PAWV
Power and Light
PAWV Power and Light has contracted with a waste dis-
posal firm to have nuclear waste from its nuclear power
plants in Pennsylvania disposed of at a government-oper-
ated nuclear waste disposal site in Nevada. The waste must
be shipped in reinforced container trucks across the coun-
try, and all travel must be confined to the interstate high-
way system. The government insists that the waste
transport must be completed within 42 hours and that the
trucks travel through the least populated areas possible.
The following network shows the various interstate seg-
ments the trucks might use from Pittsburgh to the Nevada
waste site and the travel time (in hours) estimated for each
road segment.
The approximate population (in millions) for the 
metropolitan areas the trucks might travel through are as
follows:
Population 
Population 
City
(1,000,000s)
City
(1,000,000s)
Akron
0.50
Las Vegas
1.60
Albuquerque
1.00
Lexington
0.50
Amarillo
0.30
Little Rock
0.60
Charleston
1.30
Louisville
0.93
Cheyenne
0.16
Memphis
1.47
Chicago
10.00
Nashville
1.00
Cincinnati
1.20
Oklahoma City
1.30
Cleveland
1.80
Omaha
1.40
Columbus
0.75
Salt Lake City
1.20
Davenport/Moline/
Springfield
0.36
Rock Island
1.00
St. Louis
2.00
Denver
2.20
Toledo
0.76
Des Moines
0.56
Topeka
0.30
Evansville
0.30
Tulsa
1.00
Indianapolis
1.60
Wichita
0.73
Kansas City
2.10
Knoxville
0.54
Determine the optimal route the trucks should take from
Pittsburgh to the Nevada site to complete the trip within 
42 hours and expose the trucks to the least number of peo-
ple possible.

338
CHAPTER 7
NETWORK FLOW MODELS
Line
Time
Line
Time
1
2.1
8
1.8
2
1.5
9
1.6
3
1.5
10
1.6
4
1.3
11
1.6
5
2.1
12
1.6
6
1.5
13
2.3
7
1.3
14
3.4
Case Problem
A Day in Paris
Kathleen Taylor, a student at Tech, is planning to visit her
sister, Lindsey, who is living in Toulouse, France, over the
summer break. She is going to fly from Dulles Airport in
Washington to Charles de Gaulle Airport in Paris, and be-
cause of the time changes, this travel will take a full day. In
Paris, Kathleen is going to spend 2 nights and 1 full day be-
fore taking the train to Toulouse. Kathleen has never been to
Paris, so she wants to spend her 1 day there seeing as many
of the famous attractions as she can, including the Eiffel
Tower, the Louvre, Notre Dame Cathedral, the Arch de Tri-
umph, the Pantheon, and the Palace at Versailles. She plans
to stay at a youth hostel very near Sacre Coeur in Montmartre
and from there use the Paris Metro to visit as many of the
sites as she can in a day. She has downloaded a detailed
Metro map from the French rail Web site at www.ratp.fr and
has discovered that the Metro system is huge, with almost
250 stations and 14 lines throughout Paris. 
There’s no question that Kathleen can get to all the
sites by the Metro, but she is concerned about her limited
time frame and her ability to get from location to location
quickly. She has determined the following information 
regarding the average times (in minutes) between stations
for each line:
She’s also guessing that the subway stops about 
1 minute at each station. If she has to change lines, she as-
sumes it will take her at least 5 minutes. She plans to leave
early in the morning, when the sites open, and she has no
specific time she must be back to the hostel.
Kathleen, a business student, would like to use some of
kind of logical, systematic approach to help her plan her
movement using the Metro around the city to the different
sites. Help Kathleen develop a route around the city to
each of the sites she wants to see, starting from her youth
hostel in Montmartre, for the day she’ll be in Paris. Do you
think she’ll be able to see all the sites she wants to see? 

CHAPTER
8
Project Management
339

One of the most popular uses of networks is for project analysis. Such projects as the construction
of a building, the development of a drug, or the installation of a computer system can be represented
as networks. These networks illustrate the way in which the parts of the project are organized, and
they can be used to determine the time duration of the projects. The network techniques that are
used for project analysis are CPM and PERT. CPM stands for critical path method, and PERT is an
acronym for project evaluation and review technique. These two techniques are very similar.
There were originally two primary differences between CPM and PERT. With CPM, a
single, or deterministic, estimate for activity time was used, whereas with PERT probabilistic
time estimates were employed. The other difference was related to the mechanics of drawing the
project network. In PERT, activities were represented as arcs, or arrowed lines, between two
nodes, or circles, whereas in CPM, activities were represented as the nodes or circles. However,
these were minor differences, and over time CPM and PERT have been effectively merged into
a single technique, conventionally referred to as simply CPM/PERT.
CPM and PERT were developed at approximately the same time (although independently)
during the late 1950s. The fact that they have already been so frequently and widely applied
attests to their value as management science techniques.
The Elements of Project Management
Management is generally perceived to be concerned with the planning, organization, and control of
an ongoing process or activity such as the production of a product or delivery of a service. Project
management is different in that it reflects a commitment of resources and people to a typically im-
portant activity for a relatively short time frame, after which the management effort is dissolved. Pro-
jects do not have the continuity of supervision that is typical in the management of a production
process. As such, the features and characteristics of project management tend to be somewhat unique.
Figure 8.1 provides an overview of project management, which encompasses three major
processes—planning, scheduling, and control. It also includes a number of the more prominent
elements of these processes. In the remainder of this section we will discuss some of the fea-
tures of the project planning process.
Project Planning
Project plans generally include the following basic elements:
 Objectives—A detailed statement of what is to be accomplished by the project, how it will
achieve the company’s goals and meet the strategic plan, and an estimate of when it needs
to be completed, the cost, and the return.
 Project scope—A discussion of how to approach the project, the technological and
resource feasibility, the major tasks involved, and a preliminary schedule; it includes a
justification of the project and what constitutes project success.
 Contract requirements—A general structure of managerial, reporting, and performance
responsibilities, including a detailed list of staff, suppliers, subcontractors, managerial
requirements and agreements, reporting requirements, and a projected organizational structure.
 Schedules—A list of all major events, tasks, and subschedules, from which a master
schedule is developed.
 Resources—The overall project budget for all resource requirements and procedures for
budgetary control.
 Personnel—Identification and recruitment of personnel required for the project team,
including special skills and training.
 Control—Procedures for monitoring and evaluating progress and performance, including
schedules and cost.
 Risk and problem analysis—Anticipation and assessment of uncertainties, problems, and
potential difficulties that might increase the risk of project delays and/or failure and
threaten project success.
340
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT

Project Return
In order for a project to be selected to be undertaken, it typically has to offer some kind of posi-
tive gain or benefit for the organization that is considering it. In a business, one of the most pop-
ular measures of benefit is return on investment (ROI). ROI is a performance measure that is
often used to evaluate the expected outcome of a project or to compare a number of different
projects. To calculate ROI, the benefit (return) of a project is divided by the cost of the project;
the result is expressed as a percentage or a ratio:
If a project does not have a positive ROI, or if another project has a higher ROI, then the proj-
ect might not be undertaken. ROI is a very popular metric for project planning because of its
versatility and simplicity.
However, projects sometimes have benefits that cannot be measured in a tangible way with
something like an ROI; these benefits are referred to as “soft” returns. For example, a project that
has raising employee satisfaction as its goal can result in real benefits—increased productivity, im-
proved quality, and lower costs—that are difficult to measure monetarily in the short run. 
A project by an online retailer to install backup power generators to keep orders coming in and cus-
tomers happy during a power outage is like insurance for something that may never happen, making
an ROI difficult to determine. A “green” project may not have a tangible dollar ROI, but it can pro-
tect a company against regulatory infractions and improve the company’s public image. Projects un-
dertaken by government agencies and not-for-profit organizations typically do not have an ROI-type
benefit; they are undertaken to benefit the “public good.” In general, it may be more appropriate to
measure a project’s benefit not just in terms of financial return but also in terms of the positive im-
pact it may have on a company’s employees and customers (i.e., quality improvement). 
ROI =
(gain from project - cost of project)
cost of project
THE ELEMENTS OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
341
Planning
WBS
Activity
Stay on
schedule
Earned value analysis (EVA)
Gantt chart
WBS
Team
Manager
Resources
CPM/PERT
Cost control
0
2
4
6
8
RAM
ROI = $$
OBS 1.1 1.2
Scope
1.3 1.4
Scheduling
Control
September
S M T
W T
F
S
1
2
3
4
5
6
8
7
9 10 11 12 13
15
14
16 17 18 19 20
22
21
23
29
28
30
24 25 26 27
S
S
S
S
S
S S
S
S
M
i
c
r
o
s
o
f
t
P
r
o
j
e
c
t
1
3
2
4
7
5
6
1
2
3

FIGURE 8.1
The project management process
Return on investment
is a measure used to
evaluate projects cal-
culated by dividing
the dollar gain minus
the dollar cost of a
project by the cost.

The Project Team
A project team typically consists of a group of individuals selected from other areas in the
organization, or from consultants outside the organization, because of their special skills,
expertise, and experience related to the project activities. Members of the engineering staff,
particularly industrial engineering, are often assigned to project work because of their technical
skills. The project team may also include various managers and staff personnel from specific
areas related to the project. Even workers can be involved on the project team if their jobs are a
function of the project activity. For example, a project team for the construction of a new load-
ing dock facility at a plant might logically include truck drivers; forklift operators; dock work-
ers; and staff personnel and managers from purchasing, shipping, receiving, and packaging; as
well as engineers to assess vehicle flow, routes, and space considerations.
Assignment to a project team is usually temporary and thus can have both positive and neg-
ative repercussions. The temporary loss of workers and staff from their permanent jobs can be
disruptive for both the employees and the work area. An employee must sometimes “serve two
masters,” in a sense, reporting to both the project manager and a regular supervisor. Alterna-
tively, because projects are usually “exciting,” they provide an opportunity to do work that is
342
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Project teams are 
made up of individuals 
from various areas
and departments
within a company.
Management Science Application
Managing Projects in China
China is the most likely country in the world where U.S.
companies will be doing global business in the future.
Business between U.S. and Chinese companies includes proj-
ects in which diversity and teamwork will be critical factors in
determining project success; however, the cultural differences
between the United States and China are probably as great as
they could possibly be, thus making project teamwork a po-
tential problem that requires special attention. That doesn’t
mean that the way things are done in the United States (or in
China) is better or worse, just different. Following are some
examples of these cultural differences that should be ad-
dressed to achieve project success.
First, whereas U.S. companies value individualism, China,
reflecting 2,000 years of traditional Confucian values, does not.
Chinese managers can be good, but their leadership style is
typically different from that of U.S. project managers, being
more collaborative rather than direct. Relationships are very
important in China. The Chinese word guanxi (gwan-shee)
refers to the strong reliance of business on social connections.
A Chinese business partner with strong, well-placed relation-
ships can enhance project success; however, such relationships
are developed slowly. The Chinese focus on the long-term
rather than the short-term view prevalent in many Western
companies. “Face” or mianzi (me-ahn-zee) is very important in
China. Every conversation, meeting, meal, and social or busi-
ness engagement is an opportunity for an individual to gain or
lose stature. Rudeness and anger have very negative conse-
quences; raising your voice to a Chinese manager will cause
him or her shame and embarrassment and brand the offending
person as a barbarian. Rank is important in China; people of
high rank are afforded an extraordinary degree of deference.
Consequently, instructions from team leaders are respected and
followed, and advice from junior team members is not gener-
ally expected or valued. Humility helps—U.S. food is not better
than Chinese food, and the U.S. way of doing business is not
better than the Chinese way; they’re just different. Gifts are im-
portant in China, not so much for their intrinsic value as for
their symbolic value (of respect). They should reflect a degree of
thoughtfulness and effort, for example, not just a logo T-shirt.
Patience is a respected virtue in China, where time is used as a
competitive tool. The little things can be important; learn the
Chinese way of doing things like smiling, being friendly, and
paying attention, which can pay off in successful teamwork.
Source: Based on Bud Baker, “When in China . . . ,” PM Network
20, no. 6 (June 2006): 24–25.
Jupiterimages/Comstock/Thinkstock

new and innovative, and the employee may be reluctant to report back to a more mundane, regu-
lar job after the project is completed.
The most important member of a project team is the project manager. The job of managing
a project is subject to a great deal of uncertainty and the distinct possibility of failure. Because
each project is unique and usually has not been attempted previously, the outcome is not as
certain as the outcome of an ongoing process would be. A degree of security is attained in the
supervision of a continuing process that is not present in project management. The project team
members are often from diverse areas of the organization and possess different skills, which
must be coordinated into a single, focused effort to successfully complete the project. In addi-
tion, the project is invariably subject to time and budgetary constraints that are not the same as
normal work schedules and resource consumption in an ongoing process. Overall, there is usu-
ally more perceived and real pressure associated with project management than in a normal
management position. However, there are potential rewards, including the ability to demonstrate
one’s management abilities in a difficult situation, the challenge of working on a unique project,
and the excitement of doing something new.
Scope Statement
A scope statement is a document that provides a common understanding of a project. It
includes a justification for the project that describes what factors have created a need within
the company for the project. It also includes an indication of what the expected results of the
project will be and what will constitute project success. Further, the scope statement might in-
clude a list of the types of planning reports and documents that are part of the project man-
agement process.
A similar planning document is the statement of work (SOW). In a large project, the SOW is
often prepared for individual team members, groups, departments, subcontractors, and suppli-
ers. This statement describes the work in sufficient detail so that the team member responsible
for it knows what is required and whether he or she has sufficient resources to accomplish the
work successfully and on time. For suppliers and subcontractors, it is often the basis for deter-
mining whether they can perform the work and for bidding on it. Some companies require that
an SOW be part of an official contract with a supplier or subcontractor.
Work Breakdown Structure
The work breakdown structure (WBS) is an organizational chart used for project planning.
It organizes the work to be done on a project by breaking down the project into its major com-
ponents, referred to as modules. These components are then subdivided into more detailed sub-
components, which are further broken down into activities, and, finally, into individual tasks.
The end result is an organizational structure of the project made up of different levels, with
the overall project at the top level and the individual tasks at the bottom. A WBS helps iden-
tify activities and determine individual tasks, project workloads, and the resources required. It
also helps to identify the relationships between modules and activities and avoid unnecessary
duplication of activities. A WBS provides the basis for developing and managing the project
schedule, resources, and modifications.
There is no specific model for a WBS, although it is most often in the form of a chart or a
table. In general, there are two good ways to develop a WBS. One way is to start at the top and
work your way down, asking “What components constitute this level?” until the WBS is devel-
oped in sufficient detail. Another way is to brainstorm the entire project, writing down each item
on a sticky note and then organizing the sticky notes into a WBS. The upper levels of the WBS
tend to contain the summary activities, major components or functional areas involved in the
project that indicate what is to be done. The lower levels tend to describe the detailed work
activities of the project within the major components or modules. They typically indicate how
things are done.
THE ELEMENTS OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
343
A scope statement
includes a project 
justification and the
expected results.
A work breakdown
structure is an 
organizational chart
that breaks down the
project into modules
for planning.
The project manager
is often under great
pressure.

Installation
Area
prep
Tech/
Engineer
Wiring
Connections
Testing
Hardware
Software/
system
Computerized order
processing system
Personnel
Connections
Wiring
Servers
Monitors
Final
testing
Performance
Development
Software
customization
Modifications
System
Testing
Software
System
Training
Software
System
Changeover
Customers
Suppliers
Recruiting
Interviews
Testing
Job
training
Individual
Group
Software
Hardware
Orientation
Goals
Objectives
System
Software
Hardware
FIGURE 8.2
Work breakdown structure for computer order-processing system project
344

THE ELEMENTS OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
345
Figure 8.2 shows a WBS for a project for installing a new computerized order process-
ing system for a manufacturing company that links customers, the manufacturer, and the
manufacturer’s suppliers. The WBS is organized according to the three major project cate-
gories for the development of the system: hardware, software/system, and personnel. Within
each of these categories, the major tasks and activities under those tasks are detailed. For ex-
ample, under hardware, a major task is installation, and activities required in installation in-
clude area preparation, technical/engineering layouts and configurations, wiring, and
electrical connections.
Responsibility Assignment Matrix
After the WBS is developed, to organize the project work into smaller, manageable elements, the
project manager assigns the work elements to organizational units—departments, groups, indi-
viduals, or subcontractors—by using an organizational breakdown structure (OBS). An OBS is
a table or chart that shows which organizational units are responsible for work items. After the
OBS is developed, the project manager can then develop a responsibility assignment matrix
(RAM). A RAM shows who in the organization is responsible for doing the work in the project.
Figure 8.3 shows a RAM for the “Hardware/Installation” category from the WBS for the com-
puterized order processing project shown in Figure 8.2. Notice that there are three levels of work
assignments in the matrix, reflecting who is responsible for the work, who actually performs the
work, and who performs support activities. As with the WBS, there are many different forms
both the OBS and RAM can take, depending on the needs and preferences of the company, proj-
ect team, and project manager.
A responsibility
assignment matrix is
a table or chart that
shows who is respon-
sible for project work.
OBS Units
1.1.1
Area prep
1.1.2
Tech/Engineer
1.1.3
Wiring
1.1.4
Connections
WBS Activities—Hardware/Installation
Hardware engineering
Systems engineering
Software engineering
Technical support
Electrical staff
Hardware vendor
Quality manager
Customer/supplier liaison
Level of responsibility:     1 = Overall responsibility      2 = Performance responsibility      3 = Support
3
1
2
3
1
3
3
2
3
1
2
3
1
3
2
2
3
3
3
FIGURE 8.3
A responsibility 
assignment matrix
Project Scheduling
A project schedule evolves from the planning documents discussed previously. It is typically the
most critical element in the project management process, especially during the implementation
phase (i.e., the actual project work), and it is the source of most conflict and problems. One rea-
son is that frequently the single most important criterion for the success of a project is that it be
finished on time. If a stadium is supposed to be finished in time for the first game of the season
and it’s not, there will be a lot of angry ticket holders; if a school building is not completed by
the time the school year starts, there will be a lot of angry parents; if a shopping mall is not com-
pleted on time, there will be a lot of angry tenants; if a new product is not completed by the
scheduled launch date, millions of dollars can be lost; and if a new military weapon is not

completed on time, it could affect national security. Also, time is a measure of progress that is
very visible. It is an absolute with little flexibility; you can spend less money or use fewer peo-
ple, but you cannot slow down or stop the passage of time.
Developing a schedule encompasses four basic steps. First, define the activities that must be
performed to complete the project; second, sequence the activities in the order in which they
must be completed; third, estimate the time required to complete each activity; and fourth,
develop the schedule based on the sequencing and time estimates of the activities.
Because scheduling involves a quantifiable measure, time, there are several quantitative
techniques available that can be used to develop a project schedule, including the Gantt chart
and CPM/PERT networks. There are also various computer software packages that can be used
to schedule projects, including the popular Microsoft Project. Later in this chapter we will dis-
cuss CPM/PERT and Microsoft Project in greater detail. For now, we will describe one of the
oldest and most widely used scheduling techniques, the Gantt chart.
The Gantt Chart
Using a Gantt chart is a traditional management technique for scheduling and planning
small projects that have relatively few activities and precedence relationships. This schedul-
ing technique (also called a bar chart) was developed by Henry Gantt, a pioneer in the field
of industrial engineering at the artillery ammunition shops of the Frankford Arsenal in 1914.
The Gantt chart has been a popular project scheduling tool since its inception and is still
widely used today. It is the direct precursor of the CPM/PERT technique, which we will dis-
cuss later.
The Gantt chart is a graph with a bar representing time for each activity in the project being
analyzed. Figure 8.4 illustrates a Gantt chart of a simplified project description for building a
house. The project contains only seven general activities, such as designing the house, laying
the foundation, ordering materials, and so forth. The first activity is “design house and obtain
financing,” and it requires 3 months to complete, shown by the bar from left to right across the
chart. After the first activity is finished, the next two activities, “lay foundation” and “order and
receive materials,” can start simultaneously. This set of activities demonstrates how a prece-
dence relationship works; the design of the house and the financing must precede the next two
activities.
The activity “lay foundation” requires 2 months to complete, so it will be finished, at the
earliest, at the end of month 5. “Order and receive materials” requires 1 month to complete, and
it could be finished after month 4. However, observe that it is possible to delay the start of this
activity 1 month, until month 4. This delay would still enable the activity to be completed by the
end of month 5, when the next activity, “build house,” is scheduled to start. This extra time for
the activity “order and receive materials” is called slack. Slack is the amount of time by which
an activity can be delayed without delaying any of the activities that follow it or the project as a
whole. The remainder of the Gantt chart is constructed in a similar manner, and the project is
scheduled to be completed at the end of month 9.
346
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
A Gantt chart is a
graph or bar chart
with a bar for each
project activity that
shows the passage of
time.
Slack is the amount of
time an activity can
be delayed without
delaying the project.
Both CPM and PERT are based on the network diagram,
which is an outgrowth of the bar, or Gantt, chart that was de-
signed to control the time element of a program. Henry
Gantt, a pioneer in the field of industrial engineering, first
employed the Gantt chart in the artillery ammunition shops
at the Frankford Arsenal in 1914, when World War I was
declared. The chart graphically depicted actual versus esti-
mated production time.
Time Out
for Henry Gantt

A Gantt chart provides a visual display of a project schedule, indicating when activities are
scheduled to start and to finish and where extra time is available and activities can be delayed. A
project manager can use a Gantt chart to monitor the progress of activities and see which ones
are ahead of schedule and which ones are behind schedule. A Gantt chart also indicates the
precedence relationships between activities; however, these relationships are not always easily
discernible. This problem is one of the disadvantages of the Gantt chart method, and it limits the
chart’s use to smaller projects with relatively few activities. The CPM/PERT network technique,
which we will talk about later, does not suffer this disadvantage.
Project Control
Project control is the process of making sure a project progresses toward successful completion.
It requires that the project be monitored and progress measured so that any deviations from the
project plan, and particularly the project schedule, are minimized. If the project is found to be
deviating from the plan (i.e., it is not on schedule, cost overruns are occurring, activity results
are not as expected), corrective action must be taken. In the rest of this section we will describe
several key elements of project control, including time and cost management and performance
monitoring.
Time management is the process of making sure a project schedule does not slip and that
a project is on time. This requires monitoring of individual activity schedules and frequent
updates. If the schedule is being delayed to an extent that jeopardizes the project success, it may
be necessary for the project manager to shift resources to accelerate critical activities. Some ac-
tivities may have slack time, so resources can be shifted from them to activities that are not on
schedule. This is referred to as time–cost trade-off. However, this can also push the project cost
THE ELEMENTS OF PROJECT MANAGEMENT
347
0
2
4
6
8
10
1
3
5
7
9
Activity
Design house
and obtain
financing
Lay foundation
Order and 
receive
materials
Build house
Select paint
Select carpet
Finish work
Month
Month
FIGURE 8.4
A Gantt chart

above the budget. In some cases it may be that the work needs to be corrected or made more ef-
ficient. In other cases, it may occur that original activity time estimates upon implementation
prove to be unrealistic and the schedule must be changed, and the repercussions of such changes
on project success must be evaluated.
Cost management is often closely tied to time management because of the time–cost
trade-off occurrences mentioned previously. If the schedule is delayed, costs tend to go up in
order to get the project back on schedule. Also, as a project progresses, some cost estimates
may prove to be unrealistic or erroneous. Therefore, it may be necessary to revise cost
estimates and develop budget updates. If cost overruns are excessive, corrective actions must
be taken.
Performance management is the process of monitoring a project and developing timed (i.e.,
daily, weekly, monthly) status reports to make sure that goals are being met and the plan is
being followed. It compares planned target dates for events, milestones, and work completion
348
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Management Science Application
An Interstate Highway Construction 
Project in Virginia
One of the most frequent applications of project manage-
ment is construction projects. Many companies and government
agencies contractually require a formal project management
process plan as part of the bid process. One such project involves
the construction of four new high occupancy toll (HOT) lanes to-
taling 96 miles on I-495, one of the nation’s busiest traffic corri-
dors, near Washington, DC. The cost of the project is estimated
at $1.4 billion. 
HOT lanes are toll lanes that operate alongside existing
highways to provide drivers with a faster and more reliable
travel option—for a fee. This Virginia Department of Trans-
portation (VDOT) 5-year project, scheduled to be completed in
2013, also includes replacing more than 50 aging bridges and
overpasses, upgrading 10 interchanges, improving bike and
pedestrian access, and improving sound protection for local
neighborhoods. The project employs as many as 500 skilled
workers on-site who work under extreme safety conditions.
As many as a 250,000 vehicles pass through this corridor daily,
so all work is done under heavy traffic conditions, and much
of it is done at night, during off-hours and weekends, which
adds costs for premium-time and late-shift pay. All these fac-
tors make scheduling complex and difficult. 
A dimension that has added complexity to the HOT proj-
ect is that it requires a public–private partnership between
VDOT and private contractors. While VDOT as a government
agency has a responsibility to review and evaluate every con-
tract package carefully (and sometimes slowly), the private
contractors want to accelerate the contract biding and award
process in order to maintain schedules. When designs have
not been approved and contracts have not been bid, the con-
tractors may not be able to keep workers busy, and work will
slow down and lag. Thus, the project management process re-
quires a high degree of communication and coordination be-
tween team members, as well as focused administration by
the project leaders. 
Sources: Based on S. Gale, “A Closer Look: Virginia Department of
Transportation,” PM Network 23, no. 4 (April 2009): 48–51; and the
Virginia Department of Transportation Web site, http://virginiadot.org.
Dennis Brack/Newscom

CPM/PERT
349
CPM used a single
activity time estimate,
and in the network,
activities were nodes.
PERT used multiple
activity time estimates,
and in the network,
activities were lines
between nodes.
with dates actually achieved to determine whether the project is on schedule or behind schedule.
Key measures of performance include deviation from the schedule, resource usage, and cost
overruns. The project manager and individuals and organizational units with performance respon-
sibility develop these status reports.
Earned value analysis (EVA) is a specific system for performance management. Activities
“earn value” as they are completed. EVA is a recognized standard procedure for numerically
measuring a project’s progress, forecasting its completion date and final cost, and providing
measures of schedule and budget variation as activities are completed. For example, an EVA
metric such as schedule variance compares the work performed during a time period with the
work that was scheduled to be performed; a negative variance means the project is behind sched-
ule. Cost variance is the budgeted cost of work performed minus the actual cost of the work; a
negative variance means the project is over budget. EVA works best when it is used in conjunc-
tion with a WBS that compartmentalizes project work into small packages that are easier to
measure. The drawbacks of EVA are that it is sometimes difficult to measure work progress, and
the time required for data measurement can be considerable.
CPM/PERT
Critical path method (CPM) and project evaluation and review technique (PERT) were
originally developed as separate techniques. (See the TIME OUT box on page 350.) Both are
derivatives of the Gantt chart and, as a result, are very similar. There were originally two pri-
mary differences between CPM and PERT. With CPM, a single estimate for activity time was
used that did not allow for variation; activity times were treated as if they were known with
certainty. With PERT, multiple time estimates were used for each activity that reflected variation;
activity times were treated as probabilistic. The other difference was in the mechanics of
drawing a network. In PERT, activities were represented as arcs, or lines with arrows, between
circles called nodes, whereas in CPM activities were represented by the nodes, and the arrows
between them showed precedence relationships (i.e., which activity came before another). How-
ever, over time CPM and PERT have effectively merged into a single technique conventionally
known as CPM/PERT.
The advantage of CPM/PERT over the Gantt chart is in the use of a network (instead of a
graph) to show the precedence relationships between activities. A Gantt chart does not clearly
show precedence relationships, especially for larger networks. Put simply, a CPM/PERT
network provides a better picture; it is visually easier to use, which makes using CPM/PERT a
popular technique for project planners and managers.
AOA Networks
A CPM/PERT network is drawn with branches and nodes, as shown in Figure 8.5. As previously
mentioned, when CPM and PERT were first developed, they employed different conventions for
drawing a network. With CPM, the nodes in Figure 8.5 represent the project activities. The
branches with arrows in between the nodes indicate the precedence relationships between activ-
ities. For example, in Figure 8.5, activity 1, represented by node 1, precedes activity 2, and 2
must be finished before 3 can start. This approach to constructing a network is called activity-
on-node (AON). Alternatively, with PERT, the branches in between the nodes represent activi-
ties, and the nodes reflect events or points in time such as the end of one activity and the start of
another. This approach is called activity-on-arrow (AOA), and the activities are identified by the
node numbers at the start and end of an activity (for example, activity 
which precedes
activity 
in Figure 8.5). In this chapter we will focus on the AON convention, but we will
first provide an overview of the AOA network.
2 S 3
1 S 2,

To demonstrate how an AOA network is drawn, we will revisit the example of building a
house that we used as a Gantt chart example in Figure 8.4. The comparable CPM/PERT network
for this project is shown in Figure 8.6. The precedence relationships are reflected in this network
by the arrangement of the arrowed (or directed) branches. The first activity in the project is to
design the house and obtain financing. This activity must be completed before any subsequent
activities can begin. Thus, activity 
laying the foundation, and activity 
ordering
and receiving materials, can start only when node 2 is realized, indicating that activity 
has been completed. The number 3 above this branch signifies a time estimate of 3 months for
the completion of this activity. Activity 
and activity 
can occur concurrently; nei-
ther depends on the other, and both depend only on the completion of activity 1 S 2.
2 S 4
2 S 3
1 S 2
2 S 4,
2 S 3,
350
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
3
2
1
Node
Branch
FIGURE 8.5
Nodes and
branches
7
6
4
2
1
3
5
3
2
1
0
1
1
3
1
Finish
work
Select
carpet
Build
house
Select
paint
Dummy
Lay
foundation
Order and
receive
materials
Design
house and 
obtain financing
FIGURE 8.6
Expanded network
for building a
house, showing
concurrent 
activities
When the activities of laying the foundation 
and ordering and receiving materials
are completed, activities 
and 
can begin simultaneously. However, notice
activity 
which is referred to as a dummy activity. A dummy activity is used in an AOA
network to show a precedence relationship, but it does not represent any actual passage of time.
These activities have the precedence relationship shown in Figure 8.7(a). However, in an AOA
network, two or more activities are not allowed to share the same start and ending nodes because
3 S 4,
4 S 6
4 S 5
(2 S 4)
(2 S 3)
In 1956, a research team at E. I. du Pont de Nemours & Com-
pany, Inc., led by a du Pont engineer, Morgan R. Walker, and a
Remington-Rand computer specialist, James E. Kelley, Jr., initi-
ated a project to develop a computerized system to improve
the planning, scheduling, and reporting of the company’s en-
gineering programs (including plant maintenance and con-
struction projects). The resulting network approach is known
as the critical path method (CPM). At virtually the same time,
the U.S. Navy established a research team composed of mem-
bers of the Navy Special Projects Office, Lockheed (the prime
contractor), and the consulting firm of Booz, Allen, Hamilton,
led by D. G. Malcolm, that developed PERT for the design of a
management control system for the Polaris Missile Project
(a ballistic missile–firing nuclear submarine). The Polaris proj-
ect eventually included 23 PERT networks encompassing
2,000 events and 3,000 activities.
Time Out
for Morgan R. Walker, James E. Kelley, Jr., and D. G. Malcolm
A dummy activity
shows a precedence
relationship but no
passage of time.

that would give them the same name designation (i.e.,
). Activity 
is inserted to give
the two activities separate end nodes and thus separate identities, as shown in Figure 8.7(b).
Returning to the network shown in Figure 8.6, we see that two activities start at node 4.
Activity 
is the actual building of the house, and activity 
is the search for and selec-
tion of the paint for the exterior and interior of the house. Activity 
and activity 
can
begin simultaneously and take place concurrently. Following the selection of the paint (activity
) and the realization of node 5, the carpet can be selected (activity 
) because the car-
pet color is dependent on the paint color. This activity can also occur concurrently with the build-
ing of the house (activity 
). When the building is completed and the paint and carpet are
selected, the house can be finished (activity 
).
AON Networks
Figure 8.8 shows the comparable AON network to the AOA network in Figure 8.6 for our house-
building project. Notice that the activities and activity times are on the nodes and not on the activ-
ities, as with the AOA network. The branches or arrows simply show the precedence relationships
between the activities. Also, notice that there is no dummy activity; dummy activities are not re-
quired in an AON network because no two activities have the same start and ending nodes, so they
will never be confused. This is one of the advantages of the AON convention, although both AOA
and AON have minor advantages and disadvantages. In general, the two methods both accom-
plish the same thing, and the one that is used is usually a matter of individual preference. How-
ever, for our purposes, the AON network has one distinct advantage: It is the convention used in
6 S 7
4 S 6
5 S 6
4 S 5
4 S 5
4 S 6
4 S 5
4 S 6
3 S 4
2 S 3
CPM/PERT
351
4
2
3
2
1
0
3
2
Dummy
Lay
foundation
Order and
receive materials
Order and
receive materials
Lay foundation
(a) Incorrect precedence relationship
(b) Correct precedence relationship
FIGURE 8.7
A dummy activity
2
2
1
3
3
1
4
3
5
1
6
1
7
1
Start
Design house
and obtain
financing
Order and
receive materials
Select paint
Select carpet
Activity number
Activity time
Build house
Lay foundation
Finish work
FIGURE 8.8
AON network for
house-building
project

the popular Microsoft Project software package. Because we will demonstrate how to use that
software later in this chapter, we will use AON.
The Critical Path
A network path is a sequence of connected activities that runs from the start to the end of the
network. The network shown in Figure 8.8 has several paths. In fact, close observation of this
network shows four paths, identified in Table 8.1 as A, B, C, and D.
352
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
The critical path is
the longest path
through the network;
it is the minimum time
in which the network
can be completed.
Path
Events
A
1 →2 →4 →7
B
1 →2 →5 →6 →7
C
1 →3 →4 →7
D
1 →3 →5 →6 →7
TABLE 8.1
Paths through the
house-building
network
The project cannot be completed (i.e., the house cannot be built) until the longest path in
the network is completed. This is the minimum time in which the project can be completed. The
longest path is referred to as the critical path. To better understand the relationship between the
minimum project time and the critical path, we will determine the length of each of the four
paths shown in Figure 8.8.
By summing the activity times (shown in Figure 8.8) along each of the four paths, we can
compute the length of each path, as follows:
2
2
1
3
3
1
4
3
5
1
6
1
7
1
Start
Finish
Start at 5 months
Start at 3 months
Start at 6 months
Finish at 9 months
FIGURE 8.9
Activity start time
path A: 1 →2 → 4 → 7
3 + 2 + 3 + 1 = 9 months
path B: 1 →2 →5 →6 →7
3 + 2 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 8 months
path C: 1 →3 → 4 →7
3 + 1 + 3 + 1 = 8 months
path D: 1 →3 →5 →6 →7
3 + 1 + 1 + 1 + 1 = 7 months
Because path A is the longest, it is the critical path; thus, the minimum completion time for
the project is 9 months. Now let us analyze the critical path more closely. From Figure 8.9 we can

see that activity 3 cannot start until 3 months have passed. It is also easy to see that activity 4 will
not start until 5 months have passed (i.e., the sum of activity 1 and 2 times). The start of activity 4
is dependent on the two activities leading into node 4. Activity 2 is completed after 5 months, but
activity 3 is completed at the end of 4 months. Thus, we have two possible start times for activity
4: 5 months and 4 months. However, because the activity on node 4 cannot start until all preced-
ing activities have been finished, the soonest node 4 can be started is 5 months.
Now, let us consider the activity following node 4. Using the same logic as before, we can
see that activity 7 cannot start until after 8 months (5 months at node 4 plus the 3 months
required by activity 4), or after 7 months (on path 1-3-5-6-7). Because all activities preceding
node 7 must be completed before activity 7 can start, the soonest this can occur is 8 months.
Adding 1 month for activity 7 to the time at node 7 gives a project duration of 9 months. Recall
that this is the time of the longest path in the network, or the critical path.
This brief analysis demonstrates the concept of a critical path and the determination of the
minimum completion time of a project. However, this is a cumbersome method for determining
a critical path. Next, we will discuss a mathematical approach for scheduling the project activi-
ties and determining the critical path.
Activity Scheduling
In our analysis of the critical path, we determined the earliest time that each activity could be fin-
ished. For example, we found that the earliest time activity 4 could start was at 5 months. This time
is referred to as the earliest start time, and it is expressed symbolically as ES.
In order to show the earliest start time on the network, as well as some other activity times
we will develop in the scheduling process, we will alter our node structure a little. Figure 8.10
shows the structure for node 1, the first activity in our example network for designing a house
and obtaining financing.
CPM/PERT
353
1
0
3
3
0
3
Activity
number
Earliest
start
Earliest
finish
Activity
duration
Latest
start
Latest
finish
FIGURE 8.10
Activity-on-node
configuration
To determine the earliest start time for every activity, we make a forward pass through the
network. That is, we start at the first node and move forward through the network. The earliest
time for an activity is the maximum time for all preceding activities that have been completed—
the time when the activity start node is realized.
The earliest finish time, EF, for an activity is the earliest start time plus the activity time es-
timate. For example, if the earliest start time for activity 1 is at time 0, then the earliest finish
time is 3 months. In general, the earliest start and finish times for an activity are computed ac-
cording to the following mathematical formulas:
The earliest start and earliest finish times for all the activities in our project network are
shown in Figure 8.11.
EF = ES + t
ES = Maximum (EF immediate predecessors)
ES is the earliest time
an activity can start.
EF is the earliest start
time plus the activity
time estimate.

The earliest start time for the first activity in the network (for which there are no predeces-
sor activities) is always zero, or 
This enables us to compute the earliest finish time for
activity 1 as
The earliest start time for activity 2 is
The corresponding earliest finish time is
For activity 3 the earliest start time is 3 months, and the earliest finish time is 4 months.
Now consider activity 4, which has two predecessor activities. The earliest start time is
computed as
and the earliest finish time is
All the remaining earliest start and finish times are computed similarly. Notice in Figure 8.11
that the earliest finish time for activity 7, the last activity in the network, is 9 months, which is the
total project duration, or critical path time.
Companions to the earliest start and finish are the latest start (LS) and finish (LF) times. The
latest start time is the latest time an activity can start without delaying the completion of the project
beyond the project’s critical path time. For our example, the project completion time (and earliest
finish time) at node 7 is 9 months. Thus, the objective of determining latest times is to see how long
each activity can be delayed without the project exceeding 9 months.
EF = ES + t = 5 + 3 = 8 months
= Max 15, 42 = 5 months
ES = Max 1EF immediate predecessors2
EF = ES + t = 3 + 2 = 5 months
= 3 months
ES = Max (EF immediate predecessors)
EF = ES + t = 0 + 3 = 3 months
ES = 0.
354
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
2
3
5
2
1
0
3
3
3
3
4
1
4
5
8
3
5
5
6
1
6
6
7
1
7
8
9
1
Start
Design house
and obtain
financing
Order and
receive materials
Select paint
Select carpet
Build house
Lay foundation
Finish work
FIGURE 8.11
Earliest activity
start and finish
times
LS is the latest time
an activity can start
without delaying the
critical path time.

In general, the latest start and finish times for an activity are computed according to the
following formulas:
Whereas a forward pass through the network is made to determine the earliest times, the lat-
est times are computed using a backward pass. We start at the end of the network at node 7 and
work backward, computing the latest time for each activity. Because we want to determine how
long each activity in the network can be delayed without extending the project time, the latest fin-
ish time at node 7 cannot exceed the earliest finish time. Therefore, the latest finish time at node
7 is 9 months. This and all other latest times are shown in Figure 8.12.
LF = Minimum 1LS immediately following predecessors2
LS = LF - t
CPM/PERT
355
A forward pass is
used to determine
earliest times.
A backward pass is
used to determine 
latest times.
2
3
5
2
3
5
1
0
3
3
0
3
3
3
4
1
4
5
4
5
8
3
5
8
5
5
6
1
6
7
6
6
7
1
7
8
7
8
9
1
8
9
Start
Design house
and obtain
financing
Order and
receive materials
Select paint
Select carpet
Build house
Lay foundation
Finish work
FIGURE 8.12
Latest activity
start and finish
times
Starting at the end of the network, the critical path time, which is also equal to the earliest
finish time of activity 7, is 9 months. This automatically becomes the latest finish time for
activity 7, or
Using this value, the latest start time for activity 7 can be computed:
The latest finish time for activity 6 is the minimum of the latest start times for the activities fol-
lowing node 6. Because activity 7 follows node 6, the latest start time is computed as follows:
The latest start time for activity 6 is
For activity 4, the latest finish time is 8 months, and the latest start time is 5 months; for
activity 5, the latest finish time is 7 months, and the latest start time is 6 months.
LS = LF - t = 8 - 1 = 7 months
= 8 months
LF = Min 1LS following activities2
LS = LF - t = 9 - 1 = 8 months
LF = 9 months

Now consider activity 3, which has two activities following it. The latest finish time is com-
puted as follows:
The latest start time is
All the remaining latest start and latest finish times are computed similarly. Figure 8.12 includes
the earliest and latest start times and earliest and latest finish times for all activities.
Activity Slack
The project network in Figure 8.12, with all activity start and finish times, highlights the critical
path 
we determined earlier by inspection. Notice that for the activities on the
critical path, the earliest start times and latest start times are equal. This means that these activi-
ties on the critical path must start exactly on time and cannot be delayed at all. If the start of any
activity on the critical path is delayed, then the overall project time will be increased. As a re-
sult, we now have an alternative way to determine the critical path besides simply inspecting the
network. The activities on the critical path can be determined by seeing for which activities
or 
. In Figure 8.12, the activities 1, 2, 4, and 7 all have earliest start times and
latest start times that are equal (and 
); thus, they are on the critical path.
For those activities not on the critical path, the earliest and latest start times (or earliest and
latest finish times) are not equal, and slack time exists. Slack is the amount of time an activity
can be delayed without affecting the overall project duration. In effect, it is extra time available
for completing an activity.
Slack, S, is computed using either of the following formulas:
or
For example, the slack for activity 3 is computed as follows:
If the start of activity 3 were delayed for 1 month, the activity could still be completed by month 5
without delaying the project completion time. The slack for each activity in our example project
network is shown in Table 8.2 and in Figure 8.13.
S = LS - ES = 4 - 3 = 1 month
S = LF - EF
S = LS - ES
EF = LF
EF = LF
ES = LS
(1 S 2 S 4 S 7)
LS = LF - t = 5 - 1 = 4 months
= Min 15, 62 = 5 months
LF = Min 1LS following activities2
356
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Activity
LS
ES
LF
EF
Slack, S
*1
0
0
3
3
0
*2
3
3
5
5
0
3
4
3
5
4
1
*4 
5
5
8
8
0
5
6
5
7
6
1
6
7
6
8
7
1
*7
8
8
9
9
0
*Critical path activities 
TABLE 8.2
Activity slack

Notice in Figure 8.13 that activity 3 can be delayed 1 month and activity 5, which follows
it, can be delayed 1 more month, but then activity 6 cannot be delayed at all, even though it has
1 month of slack. If activity 3 starts late, at month 4 instead of month 3, then it will be completed
at month 5, which will not allow activity 5 to start until month 5. If the start of activity 5 is de-
layed 1 month, then it will be completed at month 7, and activity 6 cannot be delayed at all with-
out exceeding the critical path time. The slack on these three activities is called shared slack.
This means that the sequence of activities 
can be delayed 2 months jointly without
delaying the project, but not 3 months.
Slack is obviously beneficial to a project manager because it enables resources to be tem-
porarily pulled away from activities with slack and used for other activities that might be de-
layed for various reasons or for which the time estimate has proven to be inaccurate.
The times for the network activities are simply estimates for which there is usually not a lot
of historical basis (because projects tend to be unique undertakings). As such, activity time esti-
mates are subject to quite a bit of uncertainty. However, the uncertainty inherent in activity time
estimates can be reflected to a certain extent by using probabilistic time estimates instead of the
single, deterministic estimates we have used so far.
Probabilistic Activity Times
In the project network for building a house presented in the previous section, all the activity
time estimates were single values. By using only a single activity time estimate, we in effect
assume that activity times are known with certainty (i.e., they are deterministic). For example,
in Figure 8.8, the time estimate for activity 2 (laying the foundation) is shown to be 2 months.
Because only this one value is given, we must assume that the activity time does not vary
(or varies very little) from 2 months. In reality, however, it is rare that activity time estimates
can be made with certainty. Project activities are likely to be unique, and thus there is little
historical evidence that can be used as a basis to predict actual times. However, we earlier in-
dicated that one of the primary differences between CPM and PERT was that PERT used
probabilistic activity times. It is this approach to estimating activity times for a project net-
work that we discuss in this section.
3 S 5 S 6
PROBABILISTIC ACTIVITY TIMES
357
2
3
5
2
3
5
1
0
3
3
0
3
3
3
4
1
4
5
4
5
8
3
5
8
5
5
6
1
6
7
6
6
7
1
7
8
7
8
9
1
8
9
Start
Design house
and obtain
financing
Order and
receive materials
Select paint
Select carpet
Build house
S = 0
S = 0
S = 0
S = 0
S = 1
S = 1
S = 1
Lay foundation
Finish work
FIGURE 8.13
Activity slack
Shared slack is total
slack available 
for combination of 
activities.

Probabilistic Time Estimates
To demonstrate the use of probabilistic activity times, we will employ a new example. (We could
use the house-building network from the previous section; however, a network that is a little larger
and more complex will provide more experience with different types of projects.) The Southern
Textile Company has decided to install a new computerized order processing system that will link
the company with customers and suppliers online. In the past, orders for the cloth the company
produces were processed manually, which contributed to delays in delivering orders and resulted
in lost sales. The company wants to know how long it will take to install the new system.
The network for the installation of the new order processing system is shown in Figure 8.14.
We will briefly describe the activities.
The network begins with three concurrent activities: The new computer equipment is installed
(activity 1); the computerized order processing system is developed (activity 2); and people are re-
cruited to operate the system (activity 3). Once people are hired, they are trained for the job (activity
6), and other personnel in the company, such as marketing, accounting, and production personnel,
are introduced to the new system (activity 7). Once the system is developed (activity 2), it is tested
manually to make sure that it is logical (activity 5). Following activity 1, the new equipment is
tested, and any necessary modifications are made (activity 4), and the newly trained personnel begin
training on the computerized system (activity 8). Also, node 9 begins the testing of the system on
the computer to check for errors (activity 9). The final activities include a trial run and changeover
to the system (activity 11) and final debugging of the computer system (activity 10).
At this stage in a project network, we previously assigned a single time estimate to each
network activity. In a PERT project network, however, we determine three time estimates for each
activity, which will enable us to estimate the mean and variance for a beta distribution of the activ-
ity times. We assume that the activity times can be described by a beta distribution for several
reasons. First, the beta distribution mean and variance can be approximated with three estimates.
Second, the beta distribution is continuous, but it has no predetermined shape (such as the bell shape
of the normal curve). It will take on the shape indicated—that is, be skewed—by the time estimates
given. This is beneficial because typically we have no prior knowledge of the shapes of the distribu-
tions of activity times in a unique project network. Third, although other types of distributions have
been shown to be no more or less accurate than the beta, it has become traditional to use the beta
distribution for probabilistic network analysis.
The three time estimates for each activity are the most likely time, the optimistic time, and the
pessimistic time. The most likely time is the time that would most frequently occur if the activity
were repeated many times. The optimistic time is the shortest possible time within which the ac-
tivity could be completed if everything went right. The pessimistic time is the longest possible
time the activity would require to be completed, assuming that everything went wrong. In general,
the person most familiar with an activity makes these estimates to the best of his or her knowledge
and ability. In other words, the estimate is subjective. (See Chapter 11 for subjective probability.)
These three time estimates can subsequently be used to estimate the mean and variance of a
beta distribution. If
the mean and variance are computed as follows:
These formulas provide a reasonable estimate of the mean and variance of the beta distribu-
tion, a distribution that is continuous and can take on various shapes—that is, exhibit skewness.
 variance: v = ¢b - a
6
≤
2
 mean 1expected time2: t = a + 4m + b
6
b = pessimistic time estimate
m = most likely time estimate
a = optimistic time estimate
358
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Three time estimates
for each activity—a
most likely, an
optimistic, and a
pessimistic—provide
an estimate of the
mean and variance of
a beta distribution.
A beta distribution is
a probability 
distribution whose
shape is based on 
3 time estimates.

1
6,8,10
2
3,6,9
5
2,3,4
4
2,4,12
8
3,7,11
10
1,4,7
6
3,4,5
7
2,2,2
9
2,4,6
11
1,10,13
3
1,3,5
Start
Finish
Equipment
installation
System
development
Manual
testing
System
testing
System
training
System
changeover
Final
debugging
Equipment testing
and modification
Job
training
Orientation
Position
recruiting
FIGURE 8.14
Network for order processing system installation
359

The three time estimates for each activity are shown in Figure 8.14 and in Table 8.3. The
mean and the variance for all the activities in the network shown in Figure 8.14 are also given in
Table 8.3.
360
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Time Estimates (weeks)
Mean Time 
Variance 
Activity
a
m
b
t
v
1
6
8
10
8
4/9
2
3
6
9
6
1
3
1
3
5
3
4/9
4
2
4
12
5
25/9
5
2
3
4
3
1/9
6
3
4
5
4
1/9
7
2
2
2
2
0
8
3
7
11
7
16/9
9
2
4
6
4
4/9
10
1
4
7
4
1
11
1
10
13
9
4
TABLE 8.3
Activity time
estimates for
Figure 8.14
As an example of the computation of the individual activity mean times and variances, con-
sider activity 1. The three time estimates 
are substituted in our beta dis-
tribution formulas as follows:
The other values for the mean and variance in Table 8.3 are computed similarly.
Once the expected activity times have been computed for each activity, we can determine the
critical path the same way we did previously, except that we use the expected activity times, t.
Recall that in the project network, we identified the critical path as the one containing those ac-
tivities with zero slack. This requires the determination of earliest and latest event times, as shown
in Figure 8.15.
Observing Figure 8.15, we can see that the critical path encompasses activities
because these activities have no available slack. We can also see that the
expected project completion time 
is 25 weeks. However, it is possible to compute the variance
for project completion time. To determine the project variance, we sum the variances for those ac-
tivities on the critical path. Using the variances computed in Table 8.3 and the critical path activi-
ties shown in Figure 8.15, we can compute the variance for project duration 
as follows:
(vp)
(tp)
2 S 5 S 8 S 11,
v = ¢ b - a
6
≤
2
= ¢ 10 - 6
6
≤
2
= 4
9 week
t = a + 4m + b
6
=
6 + 4182 + 10
6
= 8 weeks
(a = 6, m = 8, b = 10)
Critical Path Activity
Variance
2
1
5
1/9
8
16/9
11
4
62/9
vp = 62>9 = 6.9 weeks
The critical path has
no slack.
The project variance
is the sum of the 
variances of the 
critical path activities

2
0
6
6
0
6
5
6
9
3
6
9
6
3
7
4
5
9
7
3
5
2
14
16
4
8
13
5
16
21
1
0
8
8
1
9
3
0
3
3
2
5
9
9
13
4
12
16
11 16
25
9
16
25
10 13
17
4
21
25
8
9
16
7
9
16
Start
Finish
S = 1
S = 8
S = 0
S = 3
S = 0
S = 8
S = 0
S = 2
S = 11
S = 0
S = 2
FIGURE 8.15
Earliest and latest activity times
361

The CPM/PERT method assumes that the activity times are statistically independent, which
allows us to sum the individual expected activity times and variances to get an expected project
time and variance. It is further assumed that the network mean and variance are normally distrib-
uted. This assumption is based on the central limit theorem of probability, which for CPM/PERT
analysis and our purposes states that if the number of activities is large enough and the activities
are statistically independent, then the sum of the means of the activities along the critical path
will approach the mean of a normal distribution. For the small examples in this chapter, it is ques-
tionable whether there are sufficient activities to guarantee that the mean project completion time
and variance are normally distributed. Although it has become conventional in CPM/PERT analy-
sis to employ probability analysis by using the normal distribution, regardless of the network size,
the prudent user of CPM/PERT analysis should bear this limitation in mind.
Given these assumptions, we can interpret the expected project time 
and variance 
as the mean 
and variance 
of a normal distribution:
In turn, we can use these statistical parameters to make probabilistic statements about the project.
Probability Analysis of the Project Network
Using the normal distribution, probabilities can be determined by computing the number of stan-
dard deviations (Z) a value is from the mean, as illustrated in Figure 8.16.
s2 = 6.9 weeks
m = 25 weeks
(s2)
(m)
(vp)
(tp)
362
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Probability
 = 25 weeks
Z = x – μ
σ
Time
Zσ
x
μ
FIGURE 8.16
Normal
distribution
of network
duration
 = 25
weeks
Time
x = 30 weeks
P(x     30 weeks)

μ
FIGURE 8.17
Probability that
the network will
be completed in 
30 weeks or less
The Z value is computed using the following formula:
This value is then used to find the corresponding probability in Table A.1 of Appendix A.
For example, suppose the textile company manager told customers that the new order process-
ing system would be completely installed in 30 weeks. What is the probability that it will, in fact, be
ready by that time? This probability is illustrated as the shaded area in Figure 8.17.
Z = x - m
s
The expected project
time is assumed to be
normally distributed
based on the central
limit theorem.

To compute the Z value for a time of 30 weeks, we must first compute the standard devia-
tion 
from the variance 
Next, we substitute this value for the standard deviation, along with the value for the mean
and our proposed project completion time (30 weeks), into the following formula:
A Z value of 1.90 corresponds to a probability of .4713 in Table A.1 in Appendix A. This
means that there is a 
probability of completing the project in 30 weeks
or less.
Suppose one customer, frustrated with delayed orders, has told the textile company that if
the new ordering system is not working within 22 weeks, she will trade elsewhere. The proba-
bility of the project’s being completed within 22 weeks is computed as follows:
A Z value of 1.14 (the negative indicates the area is to the left of the mean) corre-
sponds to a probability of .3729 in Table A.1 of Appendix A. Thus, there is only a .1271
(.5000 - .3729) probability that the customer will be retained, as illustrated in Figure 8.18.
=
- 3
2.63 = -1.14
Z = 22 -25
2.63
.9713 1.5000 + .47132
= 30 - 25
2.63
= 1.90
Z = x - m
s
s = 26.9 = 2.63
s2 = 6.9
(s2):
(s)
PROBABILISTIC ACTIVITY TIMES
363
 = 25
weeks
x = 22
weeks
.3729
P (x     22 weeks) = .1271

μ
FIGURE 8.18
Probability that
the network will
be completed in 
22 weeks or less
CPM/PERT Analysis with QM for Windows and Excel QM
The capability to perform CPM/PERT network analysis is a standard feature of most manage-
ment science software packages for the personal computer. To illustrate the application of QM
for Windows and Excel QM, we will use our example of installing an order processing system
at Southern Textile Company. The QM for Windows solution output is shown in Exhibit 8.1, and
the Excel QM solution is shown in Exhibit 8.2.

364
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Management Science Application
The T5 Project at Heathrow Airport
British Airport Authority’s terminal five (T5) at Heathrow Air-
port in London was completed in March 2008, for a cost of
£4.3 billion. It was one of Europe’s largest construction proj-
ects, taking 5.5 years to complete the construction, with the
help of 60,000 people. Located between two runways in a
space equal in size to Hyde Park in London, T5 has the largest
single-span roof in Europe, made up of six sections and requir-
ing 10 months to lift into place. T5 also boasts 11 miles of
baggage conveyor belt. The facility has provided Heathrow
(and British Airways) with 47 additional aircraft stands and in-
creased Heathrow’s capacity by 35 million passengers per year. 
For the first time in a project of this size and complexity,
off-site prefabrication was used extensively. This involved as-
sembling components in off-site modules (2,800 in all) and
then transporting them to the building site, where they were
bolted together, thus reducing on-site construction time and
disruption and construction traffic at the airport. Key clients
worked collaboratively through integrated teams. A Web-
based system was created to provide an effective communica-
tion vehicle for all project participants so that they could
collaborate effectively. The Internet enabled the diverse off-
site project module manufacturers in Dover and Scotland to
be coordinated though a database system, or “virtual fac-
tory.” The supply of material, equipment, and workflows
could all be monitored through one integrated system. All
project participants could see when modules were in produc-
tion, completed, delivered, and stored. The database system
included a “lessons learned” component, where lessons
learned were recorded for all participants to see and learn
from. The system was especially important for planning and
coordinating deliveries between suppliers because of the high
volume of deliveries and the limited on-site space involved.
The modules in particular required wide load deliveries, and
roads had to be closed for delivery. 
The collaborative nature of this project, combined with
the “virtual factory” web-based computer system facilitated
the performance of the integrated project teams, resulting in
a reduction in construction times, a safer working environ-
ment, and better quality.
Sources: Based on J. Summers, “The Virtual Factory,” Quality World
31, no. 10 (October 2005): 24–28; and P. Curmi, “Terminal Velocity,”
Quality World 33, no. 8 (August 2007): 17–21. 
e30/ZUMA Press/Newscom
EXHIBIT 8.1

Microsoft Project
Microsoft Project is a popular and widely used software package for project management and
CPM/PERT analysis. It is also relatively easy to use. We will demonstrate how to use Microsoft
Project, using the project network for building a house shown in Figure 8.13. (Note that the
Microsoft Project file for this example can be downloaded from the text Web site.)
When you open Microsoft Project, a screen comes up for a new project, as shown in
Exhibit 8.3. Notice that the “Gantt Chart Tools” tab on the toolbar ribbon at the top of the
screen is highlighted. The initial step is to set the project up in this window. First, type in the
activity name, “Design and finance” under the “Task Name” column, and then type in the ac-
tivity duration in the “Duration” column, which is 3 months for this activity. This only requires
MICROSOFT PROJECT
365
Input time estimates.
Input activity predecessors.
EXHIBIT 8.2
Gantt chart tools
Start date
Activity name
Create precedence relationships
by typing in predecessor activities,
separated by commas, or by
clicking on “link” icon.
Activity duration,
i.e., “3 mo”
EXHIBIT 8.3

that you type “3 mo” and Project will recognize it as 3 months. Next, type in a “Start” date,
such as “May 11, 2011.” The start date can also be selected from the drop-down calendar. (Note
that a start date must be designated for all starting activities that don’t have predecessors, which
in the case of this example is only the first activity.) This first activity has no predecessor, so
leave the “Predecessor” cell for this activity blank and drop down to the next line to enter the
next activity, “Lay foundation.” Repeat the process followed for the first activity by typing
in the duration, “2 mo” but do not type in the start and finish dates; the program will do this
automatically when you start identifying activity predecessors. Toggle over to the
“Predecessor” cell for this activity and type in “1” (indicating that activity 1 is the predecessor
activity for this activity 2). Next, drop down to the next line and type in the information for
activity 3, “Order materials,” the duration of “1 mo” and that its “Predecessor” is activity 1.
Exhibit 8.4 shows our progress so far.
366
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Change timescale
Click on “Entire Project” to
fit Gantt chart on screen.
Predecessor activities;
separated by commas
if more than one
Right-click on time line
to change scale
EXHIBIT 8.4
Before proceeding to finishing inputting the project data, we’ll make a few comments. First,
note the emerging Gantt chart forming on the calendar part of your window (on the right-hand
part of the screen) for the activities we’ve entered. This chart might not be on your screen when
you start because the timescale on the calendar does not conform to your start date. If the Gantt
chart is not there, you can make it appear by moving the tab at the bottom of the calendar part of
the screen ahead (i.e., to the right) until your start date appears, and this view should contain the
beginning of your Gantt chart. Also, notice at the top of the window that we have switched to the
“View” tab. On this toolbar ribbon, if you click on “Timescale,” you can insert the time units of
the project, which in this case is months, or you can accomplish the same thing by right-clicking
on the time line just above the Gantt chart and then clicking on “Timescale” from the drop-down
menu. You can also condense the size of your Gantt chart to fit on the calendar part of your screen
by clicking on the button on the “Entire Project” icon on the toolbar.
Microsoft Project uses a “standard” calendar for scheduling project activities; for example,
it automatically removes weekend days from the list of working days. Holidays and vacation
days can also be designated by first clicking on the “Project” tab and then clicking on the
“Change Working Time” icon. This will bring up a window with a calendar and menu for chang-
ing work times.
The activity predecessor relationships showing, for example, activity 1 precedes activity 2,
can also be established by placing the cursor on activity 1, then holding down the “Ctrl” key while
clicking on activity 2 and then clicking on the “link” icon (i.e., the little chain link) from the
“Task” tab under “Gantt Chart Tools.”

Next, we will finish typing in the rest of the information for our project, as shown in
Exhibit 8.5. Notice on this screen that we have switched back to the “Format” tab under
“Gantt Chart Tools,” which allows us to select the “Critical Tasks” box to highlight the criti-
cal path on the Gantt Chart in red. Note that the “pins” in the cells next to each activity in
the “Task Mode” column on our data window indicate that we have manually scheduled ac-
tivities (or tasks); the other “Task Mode” option is to allow Microsoft Project to automati-
cally schedule the activities. For our purposes, manual scheduling is sufficient.
MICROSOFT PROJECT
367
Select “Critical Tasks” to
highlight critical path.
Critical activities
highlighted in red.
EXHIBIT 8.5
Click “Zoom” to make
network larger on screen.
EXHIBIT 8.6
In order to show the network diagram of our project, click on “View” on the toolbar and
then on “Network Diagram,” which results in the screen shown in Exhibit 8.6. (We also used the
“Zoom” icon to make the network larger.) Notice that the critical path is highlighted in red.
Clicking on the “Gantt Chart” icon on the far left of the toolbar ribbon will return you to the
Gantt Chart screen, where we typed in our project data.
The latest version of Microsoft Project does not have PERT (three time estimate ) capabili-
ties, thus to use Microsoft Project when you have three time estimates, you must first manually
(or using Excel) compute the mean activity times and use these as single time estimates in
Microsoft Project. Exhibit 8.7 shows the Microsoft Project “Gantt Chart” window for our

“Order Processing System” project example, where the mean activity time estimates are used.
Exhibit 8.8 shows the network diagram. Notice that we gave this project a start date of May 11,
2011, which had to be designated as the start date for all three of our starting activities (that do
not have predecessors): 1, 2, and 3.
368
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Click on “Network
Diagram” to get network.
Critical path in red
EXHIBIT 8.8
EXHIBIT 8.7
Microsoft Project also has many additional tools and features, including project updating
and activity completion, resource management, work stoppages, development of work break-
down structures (WBS), and the ability to change work times, including shortened days, holi-
days, and vacation time. To access information about these features, access the various “Help”
screens from the different Microsoft Project windows or press the F1 key.

Project Crashing and Time–Cost Trade-Off
To this point, we have demonstrated the use of CPM and PERT network analysis for determin-
ing project time schedules. This in itself is valuable to a manager planning a project. However,
in addition to scheduling projects, a project manager is frequently confronted with the problem
of having to reduce the scheduled completion time of a project to meet a deadline. In other
words, the manager must finish the project sooner than indicated by the CPM or PERT network
analysis.
Project duration can be reduced by assigning more labor to project activities, often in the
form of overtime, and by assigning more resources (material, equipment, etc). However, addi-
tional labor and resources cost money and hence increase the overall project cost. Thus, the de-
cision to reduce the project duration must be based on an analysis of the trade-off between time
and cost.
Project crashing is a method for shortening project duration by reducing the time of one or
more of the critical project activities to a time that is less than the normal activity time. This re-
duction in the normal activity times is referred to as crashing. Crashing is achieved by devoting
more resources, measured in terms of dollars, to the activities to be crashed.
To demonstrate how project crashing works, we will employ the original network for con-
structing a house shown in Figure 8.8. This network is repeated in Figure 8.19, except that the
activity times previously shown as months have been converted to weeks. Although this ex-
ample network encompasses only single-activity time estimates, the project crashing proce-
dure can be applied in the same manner to PERT networks with probabilistic activity time
estimates.
PROJECT CRASHING AND TIME–COST TRADE-OFF
369
2
8
1
12
3
4
4
12
5
4
6
4
7
4
FIGURE 8.19
The project
network for 
building a house
In Figure 8.19, we will assume that the times (in weeks) shown on the network activities are
the normal activity times. For example, normally 12 weeks are required to complete activity 1.
Furthermore, we will assume that the cost required to complete this activity in the time indicated
is $3,000. This cost is referred to as the normal activity cost. Next, we will assume that the build-
ing contractor has estimated that activity 1 can be completed in 7 weeks, but it will cost $5,000
to complete the activity instead of $3,000. This new estimated activity time is known as the
crash time, and the revised cost is referred to as the crash cost.
Project crashing
shortens the project
time by reducing 
critical activity times
at a cost.

Activity 1 can be crashed a total of 5 weeks (normal time - crash time = 12 - 7 = 5 weeks),
at a total crash cost of $2,000 (crash cost - normal cost = $5,000 - 3,000 = $2,000). Dividing
the total crash cost by the total allowable crash time yields the crash cost per week:
If we assume that the relationship between crash cost and crash time is linear, then activity 1
can be crashed by any amount of time (not exceeding the maximum allowable crash time) at a
rate of $400 per week. For example, if the contractor decided to crash activity 1 by only 2 weeks
(for an activity time of 10 weeks), the crash cost would be $800 ($400 per 
weeks). The
linear relationships between crash cost and crash time and between normal cost and normal time
are illustrated in Figure 8.20.
week * 2
total crash cost
total crash time = +2,000
5
= +400 per week
370
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
1,000
2
Weeks
$
4
6
8
10
12
14
2,000
3,000
4,000
5,000
6,000
7,000
0
Crash cost
Crash time
Crashed activity
Normal activity
Normal time
Normal cost
FIGURE 8.20
Time–cost
relationship 
for crashing 
activity 1
The normal times and costs, the crash times and costs, the total allowable crash times, and the
crash cost per week for each activity in the network in Figure 8.19 are summarized in Table 8.4.
Recall that the critical path for the house-building network encompassed activities
and the project duration was 9 months, or 36 weeks. Suppose that the home
builder needed the house in 30 weeks and wanted to know how much extra cost would be in-
curred to complete the house in this time. To analyze this situation, the contractor would crash
the project network to 30 weeks, using the information in Table 8.4.
1 S 2 S 4 S 7,
Crash cost and crash
time have a linear 
relationship.
Normal
Crash
Total Allowable
Crash
Time
Time
Normal
Crash
Crash Time
Cost per
Activity
(weeks)
(weeks)
Cost
Cost
(weeks)
Week
1
12
7
$ 3,000
$ 5,000
5
$ 400
2
8
5
2,000
3,500
3
500
3
4
3
4,000
7,000
1
3,000
4
12
9
50,000
71,000
3
7,000
5
4
1
500
1,100
3
200
6
4
1
500
1,100
3
200
7
4
3
15,000
22,000
1
7,000
$75,000
$110,700 
TABLE 8.4
Normal activity
and crash data 
for the network in
Figure 8.19

The objective of project crashing is to reduce the project duration while minimizing the cost
of crashing. Because the project completion time can be shortened only by crashing activities on
the critical path, it may turn out that not all activities have to be crashed. However, as activities
are crashed, the critical path may change, requiring crashing of previously noncritical activities
to further reduce the project completion time.
We start the crashing process by looking at the critical path and seeing which activity has the
minimum crash cost per week. Observing Table 8.4 and Figure 8.21, we see that on the critical path
activity 1 has the minimum crash cost of $400. Thus, activity 1 will be reduced as much as possible.
Table 8.4 shows that the maximum allowable reduction for activity 1 is 5 weeks, but we can reduce
activity 1 only to the point where another path becomes critical. When two paths simultaneously
become critical, activities on both must be reduced by the same amount. (If we reduce the activity
time beyond the point where another path becomes critical, we may incur an unnecessary cost.) This
last stipulation means that we must keep up with all the network paths as we reduce individual
activities, a condition that makes manual crashing very cumbersome. Later we will demonstrate an
alternative method for project crashing, using linear programming; however, for the moment we
will pursue this example in order to demonstrate the logic of project crashing.
PROJECT CRASHING AND TIME–COST TRADE-OFF
371
As activities are
crashed, the critical
path may change, and
several paths may be-
come critical.
2
8
$400
1
$500
$3,000
$7,000
$200
$200
$7,000
12
3
4
4
12
5
4
6
4
7
4
FIGURE 8.21
Network with 
normal activity
times and weekly
activity crashing
costs
It turns out that activity 1 can be crashed by the total amount of 5 weeks without another path’s
becoming critical because activity 1 is included in all four paths in the network. Crashing this
activity results in a revised project duration of 31 weeks, at a crash cost of $2,000. The revised
network is shown in Figure 8.22.
This process must now be repeated. The critical path in Figure 8.22 remains the same, and
the new minimum activity crash cost on the critical path is $500 for activity 2. Activity 2 can
be crashed a total of 3 weeks, but because the contractor desires to crash the network to only
30 weeks, we need to crash activity 2 by only 1 week. Crashing activity 2 by 1 week does not
result in any other path’s becoming critical, so we can safely make this reduction. Crashing
activity 2 to 7 weeks (i.e., a 1-week reduction) costs $500 and reduces the project duration to
30 weeks.
The extra cost of crashing the project to 30 weeks is $2,500. Thus, the contractor could in-
form the customer that an additional cost of only $2,500 would be incurred to finish the house
in 30 weeks.

As indicated earlier, the manual procedure for crashing a network is very cumbersome and
generally unacceptable for project crashing. It is basically a trial-and-error approach that is
useful for demonstrating the logic of crashing; however, it quickly becomes unmanageable for
larger networks. This approach would have become difficult if we had pursued even the house-
building example to a crash time more than 30 weeks.
Project Crashing with QM for Windows
QM for Windows also has the capability to crash a network completely. In other words, it
crashes the network by the maximum amount possible. In our house-building example in the
previous section, we crashed the network to only 30 weeks, and we did not consider by how
much the network could have actually been crashed. Alternatively, QM for Windows crashes a
network by the maximum amount possible. The QM for Windows solution for our house-
building example is shown in Exhibit 8.9. Notice that the network has been crashed to 24 weeks,
at a total crash cost of $31,500.
372
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
EXHIBIT 8.9
2
8
1
7
3
4
4
12
5
4
6
4
7
4
$400
$500
$7,000
$7,000
$200
$3,000
$200
FIGURE 8.22
Revised network
with activity 1
crashed

The General Relationship of Time and Cost
In our discussion of project crashing, we demonstrated how the project critical path time could
be reduced by increasing expenditures for labor and direct resources. The implicit objective of
crashing was to reduce the scheduled completion time for its own sake—that is, to reap the re-
sults of the project sooner. However, there may be other important reasons for reducing project
time. As projects continue over time, they consume various indirect costs, including the cost of
facilities, equipment, and machinery; interest on investment; utilities, labor, and personnel
costs; and the loss of skills and labor from members of the project team who are not working at
their regular jobs. There also may be direct financial penalties for not completing a project on
time. For example, many construction contracts and government contracts have penalty clauses
for exceeding the project completion date.
In general, project crash costs and indirect costs have an inverse relationship; crash costs
are highest when the project is shortened, whereas indirect costs increase as the project duration
increases. This time–cost relationship is illustrated in Figure 8.23. The best, or optimal, project
time is at the minimum point on the total cost curve.
PROJECT CRASHING AND TIME–COST TRADE-OFF
373
Management Science Application
Reconstructing the Pentagon After 9/11
On September 11, 2001, at 9:37 A.M., American Airlines
flight 77, which had been hijacked by terrorists, was flown into
the west face of the Pentagon in Arlington, Virginia. More than
400,000 square feet of office space was destroyed, and an addi-
tional 1.6 million square feet was damaged. Almost immediately,
the “Phoenix Project” to restore the Pentagon was initiated. A
deadline of 1 year was established for project completion, which
required the demolition and removal of the destroyed portion of
the building, followed by the building restoration, including
restoration of the limestone facade. The Pentagon consists of
five rings of offices (housing 25,000 employees) that emanate
from the center of the building; ring A is the innermost ring, and
ring E is the outermost. Ten corridors radiate out from the build-
ing’s hub, bisecting the ring, and forming the Pentagon’s five dis-
tinctive wedges. At the time of the attack, the Pentagon was
undergoing a 20-year, $1.2 billion renovation program, and the
renovation of Wedge 1, which was demolished in the 9/11 at-
tack, was nearing completion. As a result, the Phoenix Project
leaders were able to use the Wedge 1 renovation project struc-
ture and plans as a basis for their own reconstruction plan and
schedule, saving much time in the process. Project leaders were
in place and able to assign resources on the very day of the at-
tack. The project included more than 30,000 activities and a
3,000-member project team and required 3 million person-hours
of work. Over 56,000 tons of contaminated debris were
removed from the site, 2.5 million pounds of limestone were
used to reconstruct the facade (using the original drawings from
1941), 21,000 cubic yards of concrete were poured, and 3,800
tons of reinforcing steel were placed. The Phoenix Project was
completed almost a month ahead of schedule and nearly $194
million under the original budget estimate of $700 million.
Source: Based on N. Bauer, “Rising from the Ashes,” PM Network 18,
no. 5 (May 2004): 24–32.
AP Photo/Dept. of Defense, Grant Greenwalt
Crash costs increase
as project time
decreases; indirect
costs increase as 
project time increases.

Formulating the CPM/PERT Network as a Linear 
Programming Model
First we will look at the linear programming formulation of the general CPM/PERT network
model and then at the formulation of the project crashing network.
We will formulate the linear programming model of a CPM/PERT network, using the AOA
convention. As the first step in formulating the linear programming model, we will define the
decision variables. In our discussion of CPM/PERT networks using the AOA convention, we
designated an activity by its start and ending node numbers. Thus, an activity starting at node 1
and ending at node 2 was referred to as activity 
We will use a similar designation to de-
fine the decision variables of our linear programming model.
We will use a different scheduling convention. Instead of determining the earliest activity
start time for each activity, we will use the earliest event time at each node. This is the earliest
time that a node (i or j) can be realized. In other words, it is the earliest time that the event the
node represents, either the completion of all the activities leading into it or the start of all activi-
ties leaving it, can occur. Thus, for an activity 
the earliest event time of node i will be 
and the earliest event time of node j will be xj.
The objective of the project network is to determine the earliest time the project can be com-
pleted (i.e., the critical path time). We have already determined from our discussion of
CPM/PERT network analysis that the earliest event time of the last node in the network equals
the critical path time. If we let xi equal the earliest event times of the nodes in the network, then
the objective function can be expressed as
Because the value of Z is the sum of all the earliest event times, it has no real meaning; however,
it will ensure the earliest event time at each node.
Next, we must develop the model constraints. We will define the time for activity 
as 
(as we did earlier in this chapter). From our previous discussion of CPM/PERT network analy-
sis, we know that the difference between the earliest event time at node j and the earliest event
time at node i must be at least as great as the activity time 
A set of constraints that expresses
this condition is defined as
xj - xi Ú tij
tij.
tij
i S j
minimize Z = a
i xi
xi,
i S j,
1 S 2.
374
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
The objective function
for the linear
programming model
is to minimize project
duration.
Minimum cost =
optimal project time
Cost ($)
Total project costs
Indirect cost
Direct cost
Crashing
Time
Project duration
FIGURE 8.23
The time–cost
trade-off

The general linear programming model of formulation of a CPM/PERT network can be
summarized as
minimize Z = a
i xi
FORMULATING THE CPM/PERT NETWORK AS A LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL
375
7
6
4
2
1
3
5
12
ET = 0
ET = 20
ET = 32
ET = 36
ET = 24
ET = 20
ET = 12
4
12
4
4
4
8
0
FIGURE 8.24
CPM/PERT
network for the
house-building
project, with 
earliest event
times
The linear programming model for the network in Figure 8.24 is
subject to
Notice in this model that there is a constraint for each activity in the network.
Solution of the CPM/PERT Linear Programming Model with Excel
The linear programming model of the CPM/PERT network in the preceding section enables us to
use Excel to schedule the project. Exhibit 8.10 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to determine
the earliest event times for each node—that is, the xi and xj values in our linear programming
model for our house-building example. The earliest start times, our decision variables, are in cells
B6:B12. Cells F6:F13 contain the model constraints. For example, cell F6 contains the constraint
formula B7B6, and cell F7 contains the formula B8B7. These constraint formulas will be
set 
the activity times in column G when we access Solver. (Also, because activity 
is a
dummy, a constraint for F90 must be added to Solver.)
3 S 4
Ú
xi, xj Ú 0
x7 - x6 Ú 4
x6 - x5 Ú 4
x6 - x4 Ú 12
x5 - x4 Ú 4
x4 - x3 Ú 0
x4 - x2 Ú 4
x3 - x2 Ú 8
x2 - x1 Ú 12
minimize Z = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6 + x7
subject to
for all activities 
where
earliest event time of node i
earliest event time of node j
time of activity 
The solution of this linear programming model will indicate the earliest event time of each node
in the network and the project duration.
As an example of the linear programming model formulation and solution of a project network,
we will use the house-building network from Figure 8.6 with times converted to weeks. This net-
work, with activity times in weeks and earliest event times, is shown in Figure 8.24.
i S j
tij =
xj =
xi =
xi, xj Ú 0
i S j
xj - xi Ú tij,

The Solver Parameters window with the model data is shown in Exhibit 8.11. Notice that
the objective is to minimize the sum of the activity times in cell B13. Thus, cell B12 actually
contains the project duration, the earliest event time for node 7.
376
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
=B7–B6
Decision variables,
B6:B12
EXHIBIT 8.10
EXHIBIT 8.11
The solution is shown in Exhibit 8.12. Notice that the earliest time at each node is given in
cells B6:B12, and the total project duration is 36 weeks. However, this output does not indicate
the critical path. The critical path can be determined by accessing the sensitivity report for this
problem. Recall that when you click on “Solve” from Solver, a screen comes up, indicating that
Solver has reached a solution. This screen also provides the opportunity to generate several dif-
ferent kinds of reports, including an answer report and a sensitivity report. When we click on
“Sensitivity” under the report options, the information shown in Exhibit 8.13 is provided.

The information in which we are interested is the shadow price for each of the activity
constraints. The shadow price for each activity will be either 1 or 0. A positive shadow price of
1 for an activity means that you can reduce the overall project duration by an amount with a cor-
responding decrease by the same amount in the activity duration. Alternatively, a shadow price
of 0 means that the project duration will not change, even if you change the activity duration by
some amount. This means that those activities with a shadow price of 1 are on the critical path.
Cells F6, F7, F9, F11, and F13 have shadow prices of 1, and referring back to Exhibit 8.12, we
see that these cells correspond to activities 
and 
which are
the activities on the critical path.
Project Crashing with Linear Programming
The linear programming model required to perform project crashing analysis differs from the
linear programming model formulated for the general CPM/PERT network in the previous sec-
tion. The linear programming model for project crashing is somewhat longer and more complex.
6 S 7,
1 S 2, 2 S 3, 3 S 4, 4 S 6,
FORMULATING THE CPM/PERT NETWORK AS A LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL
377
EXHIBIT 8.12
A shadow price of 1
indicates critical path.
EXHIBIT 8.13

The objective for our general linear programming model was to minimize project duration;
the objective of project crashing is to minimize the cost of crashing, given the limits on how
much individual activities can be crashed. As a result, the general linear programming model
formulation must be expanded to include crash times and cost. We will continue to define the
earliest event times for activity 
as 
and 
In addition, we will define the amount of time
each activity 
is crashed as 
Thus, the decision variables are defined as
The objective of project crashing is to reduce the project duration at the minimum possible
crash cost. For our house-building network, the objective function is written as
minimize Z = $400y12 + 500y23 + 3,000y24 + 200y45 + 7,000y46 + 200y56 + 7,000y67
The objective function coefficients are the activity crash costs per week from Table 8.4; the vari-
ables 
indicate the number of weeks each activity will be reduced. For example, if activity
is crashed by 2 weeks, then 
and a cost of $800 is incurred.
The model constraints must specify the limits on the amount of time each activity can be
crashed. Using the allowable crash times for each activity from Table 8.4 enables us to develop
the following set of constraints:
For example, the first constraint,
specifies that the amount of time by which activity
is reduced cannot exceed 5 weeks.
The next group of constraints must mathematically represent the relationship between earli-
est event times for each activity in the network, as the constraint 
did in our original
linear programming model. However, we must now reflect the fact that activity times can be
crashed by an amount 
Recall the formulation of the activity 
constraint for the general
linear programming model formulation in the previous section:
This constraint can also be written as
This latter constraint indicates that the earliest event time at node 1 
plus the normal activity
time (12 weeks) cannot exceed the earliest event time at node 2 
To reflect the fact that this
activity can be crashed, it is necessary only to subtract the amount by which it can be crashed
from the left-hand side of the preceding constraint:
amount activity 
can be crashed
This revised constraint now indicates that the earliest event time at node 2 
is deter-
mined not only by the earliest event time at node 1 plus the activity time but also by the
(x2)
x1 + 12 - y12 … x2
1 S 2
(x2).
(x1),
x1 + 12 … x2
x2 - x1 Ú 12
1 S 2
yij.
xj - xi Ú tij
1 S 2
y12 … 5,
y67 … 1
y56 … 3
y46 … 3
y45 … 3
y34 … 0
y24 … 1
y23 … 3
y12 … 5
y12 = 2,
1 S 2
yij
yij = amount of time by which activity i S j is crashed 1i.e., reduced2
xj = earliest event time of node j
xi = earliest event time of node i
yij.
i S j
xj.
xi
i S j
378
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
The objective of the
project crashing
model is to minimize
the cost of crashing.

amount the activity is crashed. Each activity in the network must have a similar constraint, as
follows:
Finally, we must indicate the project duration we are seeking (i.e., the crashed project time).
Because the housing contractor wants to crash the project from the 36-week normal critical path
time to 30 weeks, our final model constraint specifies that the earliest event time at node 7
should not exceed 30 weeks:
The complete linear programming model formulation is summarized as follows:
minimize Z = $400y12 + 500y23 + 3,000y24 + 200y45 + 7,000y46 + 200y56 + 7,000y67
subject to
Project Crashing with Excel
Because we have been able to develop a linear programming model for project crashing, we can
also solve this model by using Excel. Exhibit 8.14 shows a modified version of the Excel spread-
sheet we developed earlier, in Exhibit 8.10, to determine the earliest event times for our
CPM/PERT network for the house-building project. We have added columns H, I, and J for the
activity crash costs, the activity crash times, and the actual activity crash times. Cells J6:J13
correspond to the yij variables in the linear programming model. The constraint formulas for
each activity are included in cells F6:F13. For example, cell F6 contains the formula
J6B7B6, and cell F7 contains the formula J7B8B7. These constraints and the oth-
ers in column F must be set 
the activity times in column G. The objective function formula in
Ú
xi, yij Ú 0
x7 … 30
y67 + x7 - x6 Ú 4
y56 + x6 - x5 Ú 4
y46 + x6 - x4 Ú 12
y45 + x5 - x4 Ú 4
y34 + x4 - x3 Ú 0
y24 + x4 - x2 Ú 4
y23 + x3 - x2 Ú 8
y12 + x2 - x1 Ú 12
y67 … 1
y56 … 3
y46 … 3
y45 … 3
y34 … 0
y24 … 1
y23 … 3
y12 … 5
x7 … 30
x6 + 4 - y67 … x7
x5 + 4 - y56 … x6
x4 + 12 - y46 … x6
x4 + 4 - y45 … x5
x3 + 0 - y34 … x4
x2 + 4 - y24 … x4
x2 + 8 - y23 … x3
x1 + 12 - y12 … x2
FORMULATING THE CPM/PERT NETWORK AS A LINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL
379

cell B16 is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The crashing goal of 
30 weeks is included in cell B15.
The problem in Exhibit 8.14 is solved by using Solver, as shown in Exhibit 8.15. Notice that
there are two sets of decision variables, in cells B6:B12 and in cells J6:J13. The project crash-
ing solution is shown in Exhibit 8.16.
380
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
EXHIBIT 8.14
EXHIBIT 8.15

Summary
In this chapter, we discussed two of the most popular management science techniques—CPM and
PERT networks. Their popularity is due primarily to the fact that a network forms a picture of the
system under analysis that is easy for a manager to interpret. Sometimes, it is difficult to explain
a set of mathematical equations to a manager, but a network often can be easily explained.
CPM/PERT has been applied in a variety of government agencies concerned with project control,
including various military agencies, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA),
the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), and the General Services Administration
(GSA). These agencies are frequently involved in large-scale projects involving millions of dol-
lars and many subcontractors. Examples of such governmental projects include the development
of weapons systems, aircraft, and NASA space exploration projects. It has become a common
practice for these agencies to require subcontractors to develop and use a CPM/PERT analysis to
maintain management control of the myriad project components and subprojects.
CPM/PERT has also been widely applied in the private sector. Two of the major areas of
application of CPM/PERT in the private sector have been research and development (R&D)
and construction. CPM/PERT has been applied to various R&D projects, such as developing
new drugs, planning and introducing new products, and developing new and more powerful
computer systems. CPM/PERT analysis has been particularly applicable to construction proj-
ects. Almost every type of construction project—from building a house to constructing a major
sports stadium to building a ship to constructing an oil pipeline—has been subjected to net-
work analysis.
Network analysis is also applicable to the planning and scheduling of major events, such as
summit conferences, sports festivals, basketball tournaments, football bowl games, parades, po-
litical conventions, school registrations, and rock concerts. The availability of powerful, user-
friendly project management software packages for the personal computer has also served to
increase the use of this technique.
SUMMARY
381
EXHIBIT 8.16

The following example will illustrate CPM/PERT network analysis and probability analysis.
Problem Statement
Given the following AON network and activity time estimates, determine the expected project
completion time and variance, as well as the probability that the project will be completed in 
28 days or less:
382
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Example Problem
Solution
1
2
3
4
7
5
6
Start
Finish
Time Estimates (weeks)
Activity
a
m
b
1
5
8
17
2
7
10
13
3
3
5
7
4
1
3
5
5
4
6
8
6
3
3
3
7
3
4
5
Solution
Step 1: Compute the Expected Activity Times and Variances
Using the following formulas, compute the expected time and variance for each activity:
v = ¢ b - a
6
≤
2
t = a + 4m + b
6

For example, the expected time and variance for activity 1 is
These values and the remaining expected times and variances for each activity follow:
= 4
v = ¢ 17 - 5
6
≤
2
= 9
t =
5 + 4182 + 17
6
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
383
1
0
9
9
0
9
2
0
10
10
4
14
3
9
14
5
9
14
4
9
12
3 17 20
7 20 24
4 20 24
5 14 20
6
14 20
6 14 17
3
21 24
Start
Finish
S = 0
S = 4
S = 0
S = 8
S = 0
S = 0
S = 7
Activity
t
v
1
9
4
2
10
1
3
5
4/9
4
3
4/9
5
6
4/9
6
3
0
7
4
1/9
Step 2: Determine the Earliest and Latest Times at Each Node
The earliest and latest activity times and the activity slack are shown on the following network:

Step 3: Identify the Critical Path and Compute Expected Project Completion Time and
Variance
After observing the foregoing network and those activities with no slack (i.e.,
), we can
identify the critical path as 
The expected project completion time 
is 
24 days. The variance is computed by summing the variances for the activities in the critical path:
Step 4: Determine the Probability That the Project Will Be Completed in 28 Days 
or Less
The following normal probability distribution describes the probability analysis:
= 5 days
vp = 4 + 4>9 + 4>9 + 1>9
(tp)
1 S 3 S 5 S 7.
S = 0
384
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Activity
Activity Predecessor
Time (weeks)
1
—
5
2
—
4
3
1
3
4
2
6
 = 24
Time (days)
x = 28
P(x  28)
μ
Compute Z by using the following formula:
The corresponding probability from Table A.1 in Appendix A is .4633; thus,
Problems
1. Construct a Gantt chart for the following set of activities and indicate the project completion
time:
P1x … 282 = .9633
= 1.79
= 28 - 24
25
Z = x - m
s

PROBLEMS
385
2. Construct a Gantt chart for the following set of activities and indicate the project completion
time and slack for each activity:
Activity
Activity Predecessor
Time (weeks)
1
—
3
2
—
7
3
1
2
4
2
5
5
2
6
6
4
1
7
5
4
3. Construct a Gantt chart and project network for the following set of activities, compute the
length of each path in the network, and indicate the critical path:
Activity
Activity Predecessor
Time (months)
1
—
4
2
—
7
3
1
8
4
1
3
5
2
9
6
3
5
7
3
2
8
4, 5, 6
6
9
2
5
4. Identify all the paths in the following network, compute the length of each, and indicate the crit-
ical path (activity times are in weeks):
1
7
3
6
4
5
2
10
7
2
5
4
6
3
Start
5. For the network in Problem 4, determine the earliest and latest activity times and the slack for
each activity. Indicate how the critical path would be determined from this information.
6. Given the following network, with activity times in months, determine the earliest and latest ac-
tivity times and slack for each activity. Indicate the critical path and the project duration.

1
8
2
10
6
5
8
15
11
4
12
7
10
18
4
4
5
6
3
9
7
7
9
12
Start
Finish
386

PROBLEMS
387
1
10
2
7
3
15
4
4
5
6
6
12
7
7
8
9
Start
7. Given the following network, with activity times in weeks, determine the earliest and latest activ-
ity times and the slack for each activity. Indicate the critical path and the project duration:

388
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
8. In one of the little-known battles of the Civil War, General Tecumseh Beauregard lost the Third
Battle of Bull Run because his preparations were not complete when the enemy attacked. If the
critical path method had been available, the general could have planned better. Suppose that the
following planning network, with activity times in days, had been available:
1
2
3
5
2
2
4
4
6
3
5
4
11
2
10
3
8
3
7
1
9
1
12
1
Develop
plan
Plan
fortifications
Army
march
Move
engineering
division
Build
pontoon bridges
Create
supply lines
Troops build
earthworks
Cavalry disruption
of enemy supply lines
Advance
cavalry scout
Cavalry
reconnaissance
Artillery
placement
Attack
Determine the earliest and latest activity times and the activity slack for the network. Indicate
the critical path and the time between the general’s receipt of battle orders and the onset of 
battle.
9. A group of developers is building a new shopping center. A consultant for the developers has
constructed the following project network and assigned activity times, in weeks.

2
12
1
8
3
3
4
9
7
12
11
20
12
5
13
16
15
5
14
17
16
6
17
3
8
7
9
30
10
21
5
3
6
2
Start
Finish
Contract for
construction crew
and equipment
Purchase
material
Build
foundation
Exterior
electrical
Partial paving
Sewage system
Building
construction
Interior
electrical
Exterior
lighting
Build
parking lots
Final
wiring
Interior
finish
Exterior landscaping
and painting
Furnish
Heating and
air conditioning
Plumbing
Excavation
389

Determine the earliest and latest activity times, activity slack, critical path, and duration for the
project.
10. A farm owner is going to erect a maintenance building with a connecting electrical generator and
water tank. The activities, activity descriptions, and estimated durations are given in the following
table:
390
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
1
6,10,15
2
2,7,16
3
4,8,11
5
7,9,20
6
4,12,15
4
3,10,15
7
3,6,9
8
5,9,16
10
4,12,16
11
2,9,14
9
3,20,35
Start
Finish
Activity
Activity Duration
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
(weeks)
a
Excavate
—
2
b
Erect building
a
6
c
Install generator
a
4
d
Install tank
a
2
e
Install maintenance equipment
b
4
f
Connect generator and tank to building
b, c, d
5
g
Paint finish
b
3
h
Check out facility
e, f
2
(Notice that the activities are defined not by node numbers but by activity descriptions. This al-
ternative form of expressing activities and precedence relationships is often used in
CPM/PERT.) Construct the network for this project, identify the critical path, and determine the
project duration time.
11. Given the following network and activity time estimates, determine the expected time and vari-
ance for each activity and indicate the critical path:

12. The Farmer’s American Bank of Leesburg is planning to install a new computerized accounts
system. Bank management has determined the activities required to complete the project, the
precedence relationships of the activities, and activity time estimates, as shown in the following
table:
Time Estimates 
(weeks)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Position recruiting
—
5
8
17
b
System development
—
3
12
15
c
System training
a
4
7
10
d
Equipment training
a
5
8
23
e
Manual system test
b, c
1
1
1
f
Preliminary system changeover
b, c
1
4
13
g
Computer–personnel interface
d, e
3
6
9
h
Equipment modification
d, e
1
2.5
7
i
Equipment testing
h
1
1
1
j
System debugging and installation
f, g
2
2
2
k
Equipment changeover
g, i
5
8
11
Determine the expected project completion time and variance and determine the probability that
the project will be completed in 40 weeks or less.
13. Consider the network in Problem 6, but with the following new time estimates for each activity:
PROBLEMS
391
Time Estimates (mo.)
Activity
a
m
b
1
4
8
12
2
6
10
15
3
2
10
14
4
1
4
13
5
3
6
9
6
3
6
18
7
2
8
12
8
9
15
22
9
5
12
21
10
7
20
25
11
5
6
12
12
3
8
20
Determine the following:
a. Expected activity times
b. Earliest activity times
c. Latest activity times
d. Activity slack
e. Critical path
f. Expected project duration and variance
14. The Virginia Department of Transportation is undertaking a construction project to widen a large
section of interstate highway near Washington, DC. The project includes the construction of a
number of new bridges, interchanges, and overpasses. The first step in the project is to appoint a
project manager and develop a project team, whose members will be departmental employees and
private consultants and operatives. The team for a project this size also requires a large support

staff with a variety of technical skills. Once the team is selected and the staff is in place, the next
task is to select a primary contractor to manage and oversee the construction. The following ac-
tivities are standard for the planning and scheduling of this process:
Time Estimates 
(weeks)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Select project manager
—
1
2
2
b
Develop team recruitment plan
a
1
2
3
c
Implement team recruitment process
b
3
6
8
d
Staff needs assessment
b
1
2
3
e
Staff recruitment advertising
d
1
1
1
f
Staff selection evaluation procedures
b
1
2
4
g
Select project team members
c
2
4
6
h
Develop contractor bid requirements
a
1
4
6
i
Develop contractor bid evaluation procedure
g, h
2
3
4
j
Staff applicant evaluation and selection
e, f, g
2
4
5
k
Solicit contractor bids
i, j
4
6
10
l
Contractor bid evaluation
k
3
6
8
m
Select contractor and complete negotiations
l
2
3
5
Construct the CPM/PERT network for this project and determine the project schedule. Identify
the critical path and determine the expected project duration time and variance. What is the
probability that the team and contractor will be in place and the project started within 6 months?
within 1 year?
15. The Matsusaki Company near Nashville, Tennessee, is a direct auto parts supplier for the nearby
Neptune auto manufacturing plant. In order to gain a competitive advantage and meet quality re-
quirements of its customers, Matsusaki has undertaken a project to achieve ISO certification.
The goal of the international ISO organization and the certification process is the development
of a quality management system that provides for continual improvement emphasizing defect
prevention and the reduction of process variation and waste. The project management team has
developed the following list of required activities necessary to achieve ISO certification:
Time Estimates 
(weeks)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Appointment of company task force
—
1
2
3
b
Development of feasibility plan
a
2
3
4
c
Selection of third party registrar and auditor
b
1
2
3
d
Development of quality manual, procedure,
b
10
14
20
and instruction documents
e
Quality system training for all employees
b
4
7
10
f
Outside training for company quality managers 
b
4
7
10
and internal plant auditors
g
Plant preparation and organization to meet 
e
18
24
32
ISO 9001 standards including use of SPC charts 
to identify non-conforming processes
h
Preparation of ISO application documents with 
c
4
6
10
outside auditor; set schedule for submissions to 
registrar
i
Internal audit of plant
d, f, h, g
10
12
16
392
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT

Time Estimates 
(weeks)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
j
Corrective action plans for necessary process 
i
8
12
20
improvements
k
Outside auditor visit and audit
j
1
2
3
l
Corrective action plans developed based on 
k
2
4
5
auditor report and implemented
m
Follow up visit and re-audit by auditor
l
1
2
4
n
Auditor recommendation to registrar for 
m
1
2
2
ISO certification
Construct the network for this project and determine the project schedule. Identify the critical
path and determine the expected project duration time and variance. What is the probability that
the certification project can be completed within 1 year? within 18 months?
16. Consider the network in Problem 8, but with the following new time estimates for each activity:
PROBLEMS
393
Time Estimates (days)
Activity
a
m
b
1
1
2
6
2
1
3
5
3
3
5
10
4
3
6
14
5
2
4
9
6
2
3
7
7
1
1.5
2
8
1
3
5
9
1
1
5
10
2
4
9
11
1
2
3
12
1
1
1
Determine the following:
a. Expected activity times
b. Earliest activity times
c. Latest activity times
d. Activity slack
e. Critical path
f. Expected project duration and variance
17. For the CPM/PERT network in Problem 13, determine the probability that the network duration
will exceed 50 months.
18. The Center for Information Technology at State University has outgrown its office in Bates (B)
Hall and is moving to Allen (A) Hall, which has more space. The move will take place during
the 3-week break between the end of summer semester and the beginning of fall semester.
Movers will be hired from the university’s physical plant to move the furniture, boxes of books,
and files that the faculty will pack. The center has hired a local retail computer firm to move its

office computers so they won’t be damaged. Following is a list of activities, their precedence re-
lationships, and probabilistic time estimates for this project:
Time Estimates 
(days)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Pack A offices
—
1
3
5
b
Network A offices
—
2
3
5
c
Pack B offices
—
2
4
7
d
Movers move A offices
a
1
3
4
e
Paint and clean A offices
d
2
5
8
f
Move computers
b, e
1
2
2
g
Movers move B offices
b, c, e
3
6
8
h
Computer installation
f
2
4
5
i
Faculty move and unpack
g
3
4
6
j
Faculty set up computers and offices
h, i
1
2
4
Determine the earliest and latest start and finish times, the critical path, and the expected project
duration. What is the probability that the center will complete its move before the start of the
fall semester?
19. Jane and Jim Smith are going to give a dinner party on Friday evening at 7:00 P.M. Their two
children, Jerry and Judy, are going to help them get ready. The Smiths will all get home from
work and school at 4:00 P.M. Jane and Jim have developed a project network to help them sched-
ule their dinner preparations. Following is a list of the activities, the precedence relationships,
and the activity times involved in the project:
394
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Time Estimates (min.)
Activity
Activity
Activity
Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Prepare salad
—
18
25
31
b
Prepare appetizer
—
15
23
30
c
Dust/clean
—
25
40
56
d
Vacuum
c
20
30
45
e
Prepare dessert
a, b
12
21
30
f
Set table
d
10
17
25
g
Get ice from market
f
5
12
18
h
Prepare/start tenderloin
e
10
20
25
i
Cut and prepare vegetables
e
9
15
22
j
Jim shower and dress
g
8
10
15
k
Jane shower and dress
h, i, j
20
27
40
l
Uncork wine/water carafes
h, i, j
6
10
15
m
Prepare bread
k, l
4
7
10
n
Prepare and set out dishes
k, l
10
14
20
o
Cut meat
k, l
7
15
20
p
Heat vegetable dish
k, l
3
4
6
q
Put out appetizers
m
4
6
7
r
Pour champagne
o
5
8
10
Develop a project network and determine the earliest and latest start and finish times, activity
slack, and critical path. Compute the probability that they will be ready by 7:00 P.M.

PROBLEMS
395
20. The Stone River Textile Mill was inspected by OSHA and found to be in violation of a number
of safety regulations. The OSHA inspectors ordered the mill to alter some existing machinery to
make it safer (add safety guards, etc.); purchase some new machinery to replace older, danger-
ous machinery; and relocate some machinery to make safer passages and unobstructed entrances
and exits. OSHA gave the mill only 35 weeks to make the changes; if the changes were not made
by then, the mill would be fined $300,000.
The mill determined the activities in a CPM/PERT network that would have to be completed
and then estimated the indicated activity times, as shown in the following table:
Time Estimates 
(weeks)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Order new machinery
—
1
2
3
b
Plan new physical layout
—
2
5
8
c
Determine safety changes 
—
1
3
5
in existing machinery
d
Receive equipment
a
4
10
25
e
Hire new employees
a
3
7
12
f
Make plant alterations
b
10
15
25
g
Make changes in existing machinery
c
5
9
14
h
Train new employees
d, e
2
3
7
i
Install new machinery
d, e, f
1
4
6
j
Relocate old machinery
d, e, f, g
2
5
10
k
Conduct employee safety orientation
h, i, j
2
2
2
Construct the project network for this project and determine the following:
a. Expected activity times
b. Earliest and latest activity times and activity slack
c. Critical path
d. Expected project duration and variance
e. The probability that the mill will be fined $300,000
21. In the Third Battle of Bull Run, for which a CPM/PERT network was developed in Problem 16,
General Beauregard would have won if his preparations had been completed in 15 days. What
would the probability of General Beauregard’s winning the battle have been?
22. On May 21, 1927, Charles Lindbergh landed at Le Bourget Field in Paris, completing his fa-
mous transatlantic solo flight. The preparation period prior to his flight was quite hectic, and
time was very critical because several other famous pilots of the day were also planning transat-
lantic flights. Once Ryan Aircraft was contracted to build the Spirit of St. Louis, it took only a
little over 2.5 months to construct the plane and fly it to New York for the takeoff. If CPM/PERT
had been available to Charles Lindbergh, it no doubt would have been useful in helping him plan
this project. Use your imagination and assume that a CPM/PERT network with the following es-
timated activity times was developed for the flight.

5
4
1
2
7
6
8
10
9
3
13
12
15
16
14
11
Start
Finish
Locate and
purchase Atlantic
charts
Develop
navigation
charts
Design
plane
Order and receive
whirlwind engine
Construct
landing gear
Construct
wing
Construct
fuselage
Apply for
license
Assemble
plane
Test engine
Redesign
Order
special gas
Ship
gas east
Test
flight
Fly to
New York
Order carburetor
and air heater
396

Time Estimates (days)
Activity
a
m
b
1
1
3
5
2
4
6
10
3
20
35
50
4
4
7
12
5
2
3
5
6
8
12
25
7
10
16
21
8
5
9
15
9
1
2
2
10
6
8
14
11
5
8
12
12
5
10
15
13
4
7
10
14 
5
7
12
15
5
9
20
16
1
3
7
PROBLEMS
397
Determine the expected project duration and variance and the probability of completing the proj-
ect in 67 days.
23. RusTech Tooling is a large job shop operation that builds machine tools and dies to manufacture
parts for specialized items. The company primarily bids on government-related contracts to pro-
duce parts for such items as military aircraft and weapons systems, as well as the space program.
The company is bidding on a contract to produce a component part for the fuselage assembly in
a new space shuttle. A major criterion for selecting the winning bid, besides low cost, is the time
required to produce the part. However, if the company is awarded the contract, it will be strictly
held to the completion date specified in the bid, and any delays will result in severe financial
penalties. To determine the project completion time to put in its bid, the company has identified
the project activities, precedence relationships, and activity times shown in the following table:
Time Estimates (weeks)
Activity
Activity Predecessor
a
m
b
a
—
3
5
9
b
a
2
5
8
c
a
1
4
6
d
a
4
6
10
e
b
2
8
11
f
b
5
9
16
g
c
4
12
20
h
c
6
9
13
i
d
3
7
14
j
d
8
14
22
k
f, g
9
12
20
l
h, i
6
11
15
m
e
4
7
12
n
j
3
8
16
o
n
5
10
18

If RusTech wants to be 90% certain that it can deliver the part without incurring a penalty, what
time frame should it specify in the bid?
24. PM Computers is an international manufacturer of computer equipment and software. It is going
to introduce a number of new products in the coming year, and it wants to develop marketing pro-
grams to accompany the product introductions. The marketing program includes the preparation
of printed materials distributed directly by the company and used by the company’s marketing
personnel, vendors, and representatives; print advertising in regular magazines, trade journals,
and newspapers; and television commercials. The program also includes extensive training pro-
grams for marketing personnel, vendors, and representatives about the new products. A project
management team with members from the marketing department and manufacturing areas has
developed the following list of activities for the development of the marketing program:
Time Estimates 
(days)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Preliminary budget and plan approval
—
10
15
20
b
Select marketing personnel for training
—
5
9
12
c
Develop overall media plan
a
15
25
30
d
Prepare separate media plans
c
12
20
25
e
Develop training plan
c
5
8
12
f
Design training course
e
6
14
20
g
Train marketing personnel
b, f
16
20
25
h
Plan TV commercials with agency
d
15
25
35
i
Draft in-house print materials
d
8
15
20
j
Develop print advertising layouts with agency
d
16
23
30
k
Review print advertising layouts
j
4
9
12
l
Review TV commercials 
h
3
7
12
m
Review and print in-house materials
i
3
5
7
n
Release advertising to print media
g, i, k
2
4
8
o
Release TV commercials to networks
l
4
7
10
p
Final marketing personnel review
g, i, k
4
5
9
q
Run media advertising, mailings
m, n, o
15
20
30
Construct the network for this project and determine the activity schedule. Identify the critical
path and determine the expected project duration time and variance. What is the probability that
the program can be completed within 4 months?
25. A marketing firm is planning to conduct a survey of a segment of the potential product audience
for one of its customers. The planning process for preparing to conduct the survey consists of
six activities, with precedence relationships and activity time estimates as follows:
398
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Time Estimate 
Activity
Activity Description
Activity Predecessor
(days)
a
Determine survey objectives
—
3
b
Select and hire personnel
a
3
c
Design questionnaire
a
5
d
Train personnel
b, c
4
e
Select target audience
c
3
f
Make personnel assignments
d, e
2

a. Determine all paths through the network from node a to node f and the duration of each. Also
indicate the critical path.
b. Determine the earliest and latest activity start and finish times.
c. Determine the slack for each activity.
26. Lakeland-Bering Aircraft Company is preparing a contract proposal to submit to the defense de-
partment for a new military aircraft, the X-300J jet fighter. Part of the proposal is a development
and production schedule for completion of the first aircraft. The project consists of three primary
categories: engine design and development, development and production of the airframe (e.g.,
the aircraft body), and design and development of the aircraft avionics (e.g., the electronic sys-
tems, equipment, and other devices used to operate and control the aircraft). Following is a list
of the project activities, with time estimates (in months):
Time
Estimates (mo.)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
1
General design
—
5
10
22
2
Engine design
—
20
33
57
3
Airframe design
1
6
17
33
4
Avionics design
1
2
8
20
5
Develop test engine
2
7
10
12
6
Develop test airframe
3
8
11
18
7
Develop interim avionics
4
7
15
28
8
Develop engine
2
19
24
41
9
Assemble test aircraft
5, 6, 7
4
6
10
10
Test avionics
4
5
10
16
11
Conduct engine/airframe flight trials
9
5
9
12
12
Conduct avionics flight trials
10
5
9
24
13
Produce engine
8
11
14
15
14
Produce airframe
11
12
15
20
15
Produce avionics
11, 12
14
16
25
16
Final assembly/finish
13, 14, 15
2
3
5
Develop the project network and determine the critical path, the expected project duration, and
the variance. What is the probability that the project will be completed within 8 years?
27. The Valley United Soccer Club is planning a soccer tournament for the weekend of April 29
and 30. The club’s officers know that by March 30 they must send out acceptances to teams
that have applied to enter and that by April 15 they must send out the tournament game sched-
ule to teams that have been selected to play. Their tentative plan is to begin the initial activities
for tournament preparation, including sending out the application forms to prospective teams,
on January 20. Following is a list of tournament activities, their precedence relationships, and
estimates of their duration, in days:
PROBLEMS
399

Time
Estimates (days)
Activity
Activity
Activity Description
Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Send application forms
—
5
7
10
b
Get volunteer workers
—
10
18
26
c
Line up referees
—
7
10
14
d
Reserve fields
—
14
21
35
e
Receive and process forms
a
30
30
30
f
Determine age divisions
b, c, d, e
4
9
12
g
Assign fields to divisions
f
4
7
10
h
Sell program ads
b
14
21
30
i
Acquire donated items 
b
15
20
26
for team gift bags
j
Schedule games
g
6
14
18
k
Design ads
h
5
8
10
l
Fill gift bags
i
9
12
17
m
Process team T-shirt orders
e
7
10
14
n
Send acceptance letters
f
4
7
12
o
Design and print programs
j, k, l, n
14
18
24
p
Put together registration 
o
5
7
10
boxes (programs, gifts, etc.)
q
Send out game schedules
j, k, l, n
5
8
12
r
Assign referees to games
j, k, l, n
4
7
10
s
Get trophies
f
20
28
35
t
Silk-screen T-shirts
m
12
17
25
u
Package team T-shirt orders
t
5
8
12
Develop a project network for the club’s tournament preparation process and determine the like-
lihood that it will meet its schedule milestones and complete the process according to the sched-
uled tournament date of April 29.
28. During a violent thunderstorm with very high wind gusts in the third week of March, the broad-
cast tower for the public radio station WVPR, atop Poor Mountain in Roanoke, collapsed. This
greatly reduced the strength of the station’s signal in the area. The station management immedi-
ately began plans to construct a new tower. Following is a list of the required activities for build-
ing the new tower with optimistic (a), most likely (m), and pessimistic (b) time estimates (in
days); however, the sequence of the activities has not been designated:
400
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Time Estimates (days)
Activity
Activity Description
a
m
b
a
Removal of debris
5
8
12
b
Survey new tower site
3
6
8
c
Procure structural steel
15
21
30
d
Procure electrical/broadcasting equipment
18
32
40
e
Grade tower site
4
7
10
f
Pour concrete footings and anchors
10
18
22
g
Deliver and unload steel
3
5
9
h
Deliver and unload electrical/broadcast equipment
1
2
4
i
Erect tower
25
35
50
j
Connect electrical cables between tower and building
4
6
10
k
Construct storm drains and tiles
10
15
21
l
Backfill and grade tower site
4
7
9
m
Clean up 
3
6
10
n
Obtain inspection approval
1
4
7

Using your best judgment, develop a CPM/PERT network for this project and determine the ex-
pected project completion time. Also determine the probability that the station signal will be
back at full strength within 3 months.
29. The following table contains the activities for planning a wedding and the activity time esti-
mates; however, the precedence relationships between activities are not included:
PROBLEMS
401
Time (days)
Activity
Activity Description
a
m
b
a
Determine date
1
10
15
b
Obtain marriage license
1
5
8
c
Select bridal attendants
3
5
7
d
Order dresses
10
14
21
e
Fit dresses
5
10
12
f
Select groomsmen
1
2
4
g
Order tuxedos
3
5
7
h
Find and rent church
6
14
20
i
Hire florist
3
6
10
j
Develop/print programs
15
22
30
k
Hire photographer
3
10
15
l
Develop guest list
14
25
40
m
Order invitations
7
12
20
n
Address and mail invitations
10
15
25
o
Compile RSVP list
30
45
60
p
Reserve reception hall
3
7
10
q
Hire caterer
2
5
8
r
Determine reception menu
10
12
16
s
Make final order
2
4
7
t
Hire band
10
18
21
u
Decorate reception hall
1
2
3
v
Wedding ceremony
0.5
0.5
0.5
w
Wedding reception
0.5
0.5
0.5
Using your best judgment, determine the project network, critical path, and expected project du-
ration. If it is January 1 and a couple is planning a June 1 wedding, what is the probability that it
can be done on time?
30. The following table provides the information necessary to construct a project network and proj-
ect crash data:
a. Construct the project network.
b. Compute the total allowable crash time per activity and the crash cost per week for each 
activity.
Activity Time
Activity 
(weeks)
Cost
Activity
(i, j)
Activity Predecessor
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
a
(1, 2)
—
20
8
$1,000
$1,480
b
(1, 4)
—
24
20
1,200
1,400
c
(1, 3)
—
14
7
700
1,190
d
(2, 4)
a
10
6
500
820
e
(3, 4)
c
11
5
550
730

c. Determine the maximum possible crash time for the network and manually crash the net-
work the maximum amount.
d. Compute the normal project cost and the cost of the crashed project.
e. Formulate the general linear programming model for this network and solve it.
f. Formulate the linear programming crashing model that would crash this network by the max-
imum amount and solve it.
31. The following table provides the information necessary to construct a project network and proj-
ect crash data:
402
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Costs
Activity
(i, j)
(normal cost, crash cost)
1
(1, 2)
($100, $400)
2
(1, 3)
($250, $400)
3
(2, 3)
($400, $800)
4
(2, 4)
($200, $400)
5
(3, 4)
($150, $300)
6
(3, 5)
($100, $100)
7
(4, 5)
($300, $500)
a. Formulate the general linear programming model for this project network, using most likely
activity times (m).
Activity Time 
Activity 
(weeks)
Cost 
Activity
(i, j)
Activity Predecessor
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
a
(1, 2)
—
16
8
$2,000
$4,400
b
(1, 3)
—
14
9
1,000
1,800
c
(2, 4)
a
8
6
500
700
d
(2, 5)
a
5
4
600
1,300
e
(3, 5)
b
4
2
1,500
3,000
f
(3, 6)
b
6
4
800
1,600
g
(4, 6)
c
10
7
3,000
4,500
h
(5, 6)
d, e
15
10
5,000
8,000
a. Construct the project network.
b. Manually crash the network to 28 weeks.
c. Formulate the general linear programming model for this network.
d. Formulate the linear programming crashing model that would crash this model by the maxi-
mum amount.
32. Formulate the general linear programming model for Problem 4, and solve it.
33. Formulate the general linear programming model for the project network for installing an order
processing system shown in Figure 8.14 and solve it.
34. Reconstruct the example problem at the end of this chapter as an AOA network. Assume that the
most likely times (m) are the normal activity times and that the optimistic times (a) are the activ-
ity crash times. Further assume that the activities have the following normal and crash costs:

b. Formulate the linear programming crashing model that would crash this network by the max-
imum amount.
c. Solve this model by using the computer.
35. The following table provides the crash data for the network project described in Problem 12:
PROBLEMS
403
Activity Time (weeks)
Activity Cost
Activity
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
a
9
7
$4,800
$ 6,300
b
11
9
9,100
15,500
c
7
5
3,000
4,000
d
10
8
3,600
5,000
e
1
1
0
0
f
5
3
1,500
2,000
g
6
5
1,800
2,000
h
3
3
0
0
i
1
1
0
0
j
2
2
0
0
k
8
6
5,000
7,000
The normal activity times are considered to be deterministic and not probabilistic. Using the
computer, crash the network to 26 weeks. Indicate how much it would cost the bank and then in-
dicate the critical path.
36. The following table provides the crash data for the network project described in Problem 6:
Activity Time (months)
Activity Cost ($1,000s)
Activity
Normal
Crash
Normal
Crash
1
8
5
$ 700
$1,200
2
10
9
1,600
2,000
3
9
7
900
1,500
4
4
2
500
700
5
6
3
500
900
6
5
4
500
800
7
7
5
700
1,000
8
15
12
1,400
2,000
9
12
10
1,800
2,300
10
18
14
1,400
3,200
11
4
3
500
800
12
7
6
800
1,400
Using the computer, crash the network to 32 months. Indicate the first critical path activities and
then the cost of crashing the network.

404
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
Case Problem
The Bloodless Coup Concert
John Aaron called the meeting of the Programs and Arts
Committee of the Student Government Association to order.
“Okay, okay, everybody, quiet down. I have an impor-
tant announcement to make,” he shouted above the noise.
The room got quiet, and John started again, “Well, you
guys, we can have the Coup.”
His audience looked puzzled, and Randy Jones asked,
“What coup have we scored this time, John?”
“The Coup, the Coup! You know, the rock group, the
Bloodless Coup!”
Everyone in the room cheered and started talking ex-
citedly. John stood up and waved his arms and shouted,
“Hey, calm down, everybody, and listen up.” The room
quieted again, and everyone focused on John. “The good
news is that they can come.” He paused a moment. “The
bad news is that they will be here in 18 days.”
The students groaned and seemed to share Jim Hast-
ings’ feelings: “No way, man. It can’t be done. Why can’t
we put it off for a couple of weeks?”
John answered, “They’re just starting their new tour
and are looking for some warm-up concerts. They’ll be
traveling near here for their first concert date in DC and
saw they had a letter from us, so they said they could come
now. But that’s it—now or never.” He looked around the
room at the solemn faces. “Look, you guys, we can handle
this. Let’s think of what we have to do. Come on, perk up.
Let’s make a list of everything we have to do to get ready
and figure out how long it will take. So somebody tell me
what we have to do first!”
Anna Mendoza shouted from the back of the room,
“We have to find a place; you know, get an auditorium
somewhere. I’ve done that before, and it should take any-
where from 2 days up to 7 days, most likely about 4 days.”
“Okay, that’s great,” John said, as he wrote down the
activity “Secure auditorium” on the blackboard, with the
times out to the side. “What’s next?”
“We need to print tickets—and quick,” Tracey Shea
called. “It could only take 1 day if the printer isn’t busy,
but it could take up to 4 days if he is. It should probably
take about 2 days.”
“But we can’t print tickets until we know where the
concert will be because of the security arrangement,” Andy
Taylor noted.
“Right,” said John. “Get the auditorium first; then print
the tickets. What else?”
“We need to make hotel and transportation arrange-
ments for the Coup and their entourage while they’re
here,” Jim Hastings proposed. “But we better not do that
until we get the auditorium. If we can’t find a place for the
concert, everything falls through.”
“How long do you think it will take to make the
arrangements?” John asked.
“Oh, between 3 and 10 days, probably about 5, most
likely,” Jim answered.
“We also have to negotiate with the local union for
concert employees, stagehands, and whoever else we need
to hire,” Reggie Wilkes interjected. “That could take 1 day
or up to 8 days, but 3 days would be my best guess.”
“We should probably also hold off on talking to the
union until we get the auditorium,” John added. “That will
probably be a factor in the negotiations.”
“After we work things out with the union, we can hire
some stagehands,” Reggie continued. “That could take as
few as 2 days but as long as 7. I imagine it’ll take about 4
days. We should also be able to get some student ushers at
the same time, once we get union approval. That could
take only 1 day, but it has taken 5 days in the past; 3 days
is probably the most likely.”
“We need to arrange a press conference,” said Art Co-
hen, who was leaning against a wall. “This is a heavy
group, big time.”
“But doesn’t a press conference usually take place at
the hotel?” John asked.
“Yeah, that’s right,” Art answered. “We can’t make
arrangements for the press conference until we work
things out with the hotel. When we do that, it should take
about 3 days to set up a press conference—2 days if we’re
lucky, and 4 at the most.”
The room got quiet as everyone thought.
“What else?” John asked.
“Hey, I know,” Annie Roark spoke up. “Once we hire
the stagehands, they have to set up the stage. I think that
could be done in a couple of days, but it could take up to
6 days, with 3 most likely.” She paused for a moment be-
fore adding, “And we can also assign the ushers to their
jobs once we hire them. That shouldn’t take long, maybe
only 1 day—3 days worst, probably 2 days would be a
good time to put down.”
“We also have to do some advertising and promotion if
we want people to show up for this thing,” mentioned Art
nonchalantly. “I guess we need to wait until we print the
tickets, so we’ll have something to sell. That depends on
the media, the paper, and radio stations. I’ve worked with

CASE PROBLEM
405
this before. It could get done really quick, like 2 days, if we
can make the right contacts. But it could take a lot longer,
like 12 days, if we hit any snags. We probably ought to
count on 6 days as our best estimate.”
“Hey, if we’re going to promote this, shouldn’t we also
have a preliminary act, some other group?” Annie asked.
“Wow, I forgot all about that!” John exclaimed. “Hiring
another act will take me between 4 and 8 days; I can proba-
bly do it in 5. I can start on that right away, at the same time
you guys are arranging for an auditorium.” He thought for a
moment. “But we really can’t begin to work on the promo-
tion until I get the lead-in group. So what’s left?”
“Sell the tickets,” shouted several people at once.
“Right,” said John. “We have to wait until they’re
printed; but I don’t think we have to wait for the advertis-
ing and promotion to start, do we?”
“No,” Jim replied. “But we should hire the preliminary
act first so people will know what they’re buying a ticket for.”
“Agreed,” said John. “The tickets could go quick; I
suppose in the first day.”
“Or,” interrupted Mike Eggleston, “it could take
longer. I remember 2 years ago, it took 12 days to sell out
for the Cosmic Modem.”
“Okay, so it’s between 1 and 12 days to sell the tickets,”
said John, “but I think about 5 days is more likely. Every-
body agree?”
The group nodded in unison, and they all turned at
once to the list of activities and times John had written on
the blackboard.
Use PERT analysis to determine the probability that
the concert preparations will be completed in time.
Case Problem
Moore Housing Contractors
Moore Housing Contractors is negotiating a deal with
Countryside Realtors to build six houses in a new devel-
opment. Countryside wants Moore Contractors to start in
late winter or early spring, when the weather begins to
moderate, and build on through the summer and into the
fall. The summer months are an especially busy time for
the realty company, and it believes it can sell the houses
almost as soon as they are ready, and maybe even before.
The houses all have similar floor plans and are of approx-
imately equal size; only the exteriors are noticeably
different. The completion time is so critical for Country-
side Realtors that it is insisting that a project management
network accompany the contractor’s bid for the job, with
an estimate of the completion time for a house. The real-
tor also needs to be able to plan its offerings and market-
ing for the summer. It wants each house to be completed
within 45 days after it is started. If a house is not com-
pleted within this time frame, it wants to be able to
charge the contractor a penalty. Mary and Sandy Moore,
the president and vice president, respectively, of Moore
Contractors, are concerned about the prospect of a
penalty charge. They want to be very confident that they
can meet the deadline for a house before they enter into
any kind of agreement with a penalty involved. (If there
is a reasonable likelihood that they cannot finish a house
within 45 days, they want to increase their bid to cover
potential penalty charges.)
The Moores are experienced home builders, so it was
not difficult for them to list the activities involved in build-
ing a house or to estimate activity times. However, they
made their estimates conservatively and tended to increase
their pessimistic estimates to compensate for the possibil-
ity of bad weather and variations in their workforce. A list
of the activities involved in building a house and the activity
time estimates follow on the next page.

Time (days)
Activity
Activity Description
Activity Predecessor
a
m
b
a
Excavation, pour footers
—
3
4
6
b
Lay foundation
a
2
3
5
c
Frame and roof
b
2
4
5
d
Lay drain tiles
b
1
2
4
e
Sewer (floor) drains
b
1
2
3
f
Install insulation
c
2
4
5
g
Pour basement floor
e
2
3
5
h
Rough plumbing, pipes
e
2
4
7
i
Install windows
f
1
3
4
j
Rough electrical wiring
f
1
2
4
k
Install furnace, air conditioner
c, g
3
5
8
l
Exterior brickwork
i
5
6
10
m
Install plasterboard, mud, plaster
j, h, k
6
8
12
n
Roof shingles, flashing
l
2
3
6
o
Attach gutter, downspouts
n
1
2
5
p
Grading
d, o
2
3
7
q
Lay subflooring
m
3
4
6
r
Lay driveway, walks, landscape
p
4
6
10
s
Finish carpentry
q
3
5
12
t
Kitchen cabinetry, sink, and appliances
q
2
4
8
u
Bathroom cabinetry, fixtures
q
2
3
6
v
Painting (interior and exterior)
t, u
4
6
10
w
Finish wood floors, lay carpet
v, s
2
5
8
x
Final electrical, light fixtures
v
1
3
4
406
CHAPTER 8
PROJECT MANAGEMENT
a. Develop a CPM/PERT network for Moore Housing
Contractors and determine the probability that the com-
pany can complete a house within 45 days. Does it
appear that the Moores might need to increase their
bid to compensate for potential penalties?
b. Indicate which project activities Moore Housing
Contractors should be particularly diligent to keep on
schedule by making sure workers and materials are
always available. Also indicate which activities the
company might shift workers from as the need arises.

CHAPTER
9
Multicriteria
Decision Making
407

In all the linear programming models presented in Chapters 2 through 8, a single objective was
either maximized or minimized. However, a company or an organization often has more than one
objective, which may relate to something other than profit or cost. In fact, a company may 
have several criteria, that is, multiple criteria, that it will consider in making a decision instead of
just a single objective. For example, in addition to maximizing profit, a company in danger of a 
labor strike might want to avoid employee layoffs, or a company about to be fined for pollution
infractions might want to minimize the emission of pollutants. A company deciding between sev-
eral potential research and development projects might want to consider the probability of suc-
cess of each of the projects, the cost and time required for each, and potential profitability in
making a selection.
In this chapter, we discuss three techniques that can be used to solve problems when they
have multiple objectives: goal programming, the analytical hierarchy process, and scoring
models. Goal programming is a variation of linear programming in that it considers more than
one objective (called goals) in the objective function. Goal programming models are set up in
the same general format as linear programming models, with an objective function and linear
constraints. The model solutions are very much like the solutions to linear programming models.
The format for the analytical hierarchy process and scoring models, however, is quite different
from that of linear programming. These methods are based on a comparison of decision alterna-
tives for different criteria that reflects the decision maker’s preferences. The result is a mathe-
matical “score” for each alternative that helps the decision maker rank the alternatives in terms
of preferability.
Goal Programming
As we mentioned, a goal programming model is very similar to a linear programming model,
with an objective function, decision variables, and constraints. Like linear programming, goal pro-
gramming models with two decision variables can be solved graphically and by using QM for
Windows and Excel. We begin our presentation of goal programming as we did linear program-
ming, demonstrating through an example of how to formulate a model. This will illustrate the main
differences between goal and linear programming.
Model Formulation
We will use the Beaver Creek Pottery Company example again to illustrate the way a goal pro-
gramming model is formulated and the differences between a linear programming model and a
goal programming model. Recall that this model was originally formulated in Chapter 2 as 
follows:
subject to
hr. of labor
lb. of clay
where
number of bowls produced
number of mugs produced
The objective function, Z, represents the total profit to be made from bowls and mugs, given
that $40 is the profit per bowl and $50 is the profit per mug. The first constraint is for available
labor. It shows that a bowl requires 1 hour of labor, a mug requires 2 hours, and 40 hours of
labor are available daily. The second constraint is for clay, and it shows that each bowl requires
4 pounds of clay, each mug requires 3 pounds, and the daily limit of clay is 120 pounds.
x2 =
x1 =
x1, x2 Ú 0
4x1 + 3x2 … 120
x1 + 2x2 … 40
maximize Z = +40x1 + 50x2
408
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Goal programming is
a form of linear
programming that 
includes multiple goals
instead of a single 
objective.

This is a standard linear programming model; as such, it has a single objective function for
profit. However, let us suppose that instead of having one objective, the pottery company has
several objectives, listed here in order of importance:
1. To avoid layoffs, the company does not want to use fewer than 40 hours of labor per day.
2. The company would like to achieve a satisfactory profit level of $1,600 per day.
3. Because the clay must be stored in a special place so that it does not dry out, the company
prefers not to keep more than 120 pounds on hand each day.
4. Because high overhead costs result when the plant is kept open past normal hours, the
company would like to minimize the amount of overtime.
These different objectives are referred to as goals in the context of the goal programming
technique. The company would, naturally, like to come as close as possible to achieving each of
these goals. Because the regular form of the linear programming model presented in previous
chapters considers only one objective, we must develop an alternative form of the model to re-
flect these multiple goals. Our first step in formulating a goal programming model is to trans-
form the linear programming model constraints into goals.
Labor Goal
The first goal of the pottery company is to avoid underutilization of labor—that is, using fewer than
40 hours of labor each day. To represent the possibility of underutilizing labor, the linear program-
ming constraint for labor,
hours of labor, is reformulated as
This reformulated equation is referred to as a goal constraint. The two new variables,
and 
are called deviational variables. They represent the number of labor hours less than 40
and the number of labor hours exceeding 40 
More specifically,
represents labor
underutilization, and 
represents overtime. For example, if 
bowls and 
mugs,
then a total of 25 hours of labor have been expended. Substituting these values into our goal con-
straint gives
Because only 25 hours were used in production, labor was underutilized by 15 hours
Thus, if we let 
hours and 
(because there is obviously no
overtime), we have
Now consider the case where 
bowls and 
mugs. This means that a total of
50 hours have been used for production, or 10 hours above the goal level of 40 hours. This extra
10 hours is overtime. Thus,
(because there is no underutilization) and 
hours.
In each of these two brief examples, at least one of the deviational variables equaled zero.
In the first example,
and in the second example,
This is because it is impossi-
ble to use fewer than 40 hours of labor and more than 40 hours of labor at the same time.
Of course, both deviational variables,
and 
could have equaled zero if exactly 40 hours were
used in production. These examples illustrate one of the fundamental characteristics of goal pro-
gramming: At least one or both of the deviational variables in a goal constraint must equal zero.
The next step in formulating our goal programming model is to represent the goal of not using
fewer than 40 hours of labor. We do this by creating a new form of objective function:
minimize P1d1
-
d1
+,
d1
-
d1
- = 0.
d1
+ = 0,
d1
+ = 10
d1
- = 0
x2 = 20
x1 = 10
 40 = 40
 25 + 15 - 0 = 40
 25 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
d1
+ = 0
d1
- = 15
(40 - 25 = 15).
 25 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
 (5) + 21102 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
x2 = 10
x1 = 5
d1
+
d1
-
(d1
+).
(d1
-)
d1
+,
d1
-
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40 hr.
x1 + 2x2 … 40
GOAL PROGRAMMING
409
All goal constraints
are equalities that in-
clude deviational
variables,
and d+.
d-
A negative deviational
variable 
is the
amount by which a
goal level is
underachieved.
(d-)
The different objectives
in a goal programming
problem are referred 
to as goals.
A positive deviational
variable 
is the
amount by which a
goal level is exceeded.
(d+)
At least one or both
deviational variables
in a goal constraint
must equal zero.

The objective function in all goal programming models is to minimize deviation from the
goal constraint levels. In this objective function, the goal is to minimize 
the underutilization
of labor. If 
equaled zero, then we would not be using fewer than 40 hours of labor. Thus, it is
our objective to make 
equal zero or the minimum amount possible. The symbol 
in the ob-
jective function designates the minimization of 
as the first-priority goal. This means that
when this model is solved, the first step will be to minimize the value of 
before any other
goal is addressed.
The fourth-priority goal in this problem is also associated with the labor constraint. The
fourth goal,
reflects a desire to minimize overtime. Recall that hours of overtime are repre-
sented by 
the objective function, therefore, becomes
As before, the objective is to minimize the deviational variable 
In other words, if 
equaled
zero, there would be no overtime at all. In solving this model, the achievement of this fourth-ranked
goal will not be attempted until goals one, two, and three have been considered.
Profit Goal
The second goal in our goal programming model is to achieve a daily profit of $1,600. Recall
that the original linear programming objective function was
Now we reformulate this objective function as a goal constraint with the following goal level:
The deviational variables 
and 
represent the amount of profit less than $1,600 
and the amount of profit exceeding $1,600 
The pottery company’s goal of achieving
$1,600 in profit is represented in the objective function as
Notice that only 
is being minimized, not 
because it is logical to assume that the pot-
tery company would be willing to accept all profits in excess of $1,600 (i.e., it does not desire to
minimize 
excess profit). By minimizing 
at the second-priority level, the pottery company
hopes that 
will equal zero, which will result in at least $1,600 in profit.
Material Goal
The third goal of the company is to avoid keeping more than 120 pounds of clay on hand each
day. The goal constraint is
Because the deviational variable 
represents the amount of clay less than 120 pounds, and
represents the amount in excess of 120 pounds, this goal can be reflected in the objective
function as
The term 
represents the company’s desire to minimize 
the amount of clay in 
excess of 120 pounds. The 
designation indicates that it is the pottery company’s third most
important goal.
P3
d3
+,
P3d3
+
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d1
+
d3
+
d3
-
4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120 lb.
d2
-
d2
-
d2
+,
d2
+,
d2
-
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P4d1
+
(d2
+).
(d2
-)
d2
+
d2
-
40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = +1,600
Z = 40x1 + 50x2
d1
+
d1
+.
minimize P1d1
-, P4d1
+
d1
+;
P4,
d1
-
d1
-
P1
d1
-
d1
-
d1
-,
410
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
The objective function
in a goal programming
model seeks to
minimize the deviation
from goals in order of
the goal priorities.

The complete goal programming model can now be summarized as follows:
subject to
The one basic difference between this model and the standard linear programming model is
that the objective function terms are not summed to equal a total value, Z. This is because the devi-
ational variables in the objective function represent different units of measure. For example,
and 
represent hours of labor,
represents dollars, and 
represents pounds of clay. It would
be illogical to sum hours, dollars, and pounds. The objective function in a goal programming
model specifies only that the deviations from the goals represented in the objective function be
minimized individually, in order of their priority.
Alternative Forms of Goal Constraints
Let us now alter the preceding goal programming model so that our fourth-priority goal limits
overtime to 10 hours instead of minimizing overtime. Recall that the goal constraint for labor is
In this goal constraint,
represents overtime. Because the new fourth-priority goal is to
limit overtime to 10 hours, the following goal constraint is developed:
Although this goal constraint looks unusual, it is acceptable in goal programming to have an
equation with all deviational variables. In this equation,
represents the amount of overtime
less than 10 hours, and 
represents the amount of overtime greater than 10 hours. Because the
company desires to limit overtime to 10 hours,
is minimized in the objective function:
Now let us consider the addition of a fifth-priority goal to this example. Assume that the pottery
company has limited warehouse space, so it can produce no more than 30 bowls and 20 mugs daily.
If possible, the company would like to produce these numbers. However, because the profit for mugs
is greater than the profit for bowls (i.e., $50 rather than $40), it is more important to achieve the goal
for mugs. This fifth goal requires that two new goal constraints be formulated, as follows:
Notice that the positive deviational variables 
and 
have been deleted from these goal con-
straints. This is because the statement of the fifth goal specifies that “no more than 30 bowls and 20
mugs” can be produced. In other words, positive deviation, or overproduction, is not possible.
Because the actual goal of the company is to achieve the levels of production shown in these
two goal constraints, the negative deviational variables 
and 
are minimized in the objective
function. However, recall that it is more important to the company to achieve the goal for mugs be-
cause mugs generate greater profit. This condition is reflected in the objective function, as follows:
Because the goal for mugs is more important than the goal for bowls, the degree of impor-
tance should be in proportion to the amount of profit (i.e., $50 for each mug and $40 for each
bowl). Thus, the goal for mugs is more important than the goal for bowls by a ratio of 5 to 4.
The coefficients of 5 for 
and 4 for 
are referred to as weights. In other words, the
minimization of 
is “weighted” higher than the minimization of 
at the fifth priority level.
d5
-
d6
-
P5d5
-
P5d6
-
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d4
+, 4P5d5
- + 5P5d6
-
d6
-
d5
-
d6
+
d5
+
x2 + d6
- = 20 mugs
x1 + d5
- = 30 bowls
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d4
+
d4
+
d4
+
d4
-
d1
+ + d4
- - d4
+ = 10
d1
+
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
d3
+
d2
-
d1
+
d1
-
x1, x2, d1
-, d1
+, d2
-, d2
+, d3
-, d3
+ Ú 0
 4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120
 40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 1,600
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d1
+
GOAL PROGRAMMING
411
Terms are not summed
in the objective 
function because the
deviational variables
often have different
units of measure.
Goal constraints can
include all deviational
variables.

When this model is solved, the achievement of the goal for minimizing (bowls) is more impor-
tant, even though both goals are at the same priority level.
Notice, however, that these two weighted goals have been summed because they are at the
same priority level. Their sum represents achievement of the desired goal at this particular pri-
ority level. The complete goal programming model, with the new goals for both overtime and
production, is
subject to
Graphical Interpretation of Goal Programming
In Chapter 2, we analyzed the solution of linear programming models by using graphical analysis.
Because goal programming models are linear, they can also be analyzed graphically. The origi-
nal goal programming model for Beaver Creek Pottery Company, formulated at the beginning
of this chapter, will be used as an example:
subject to
To graph this model, the deviational variables in each goal constraint are set equal to zero,
and we graph each subsequent equation on a set of coordinates, just as in Chapter 2. Figure 9.1
is a graph of the three goal constraints for this model.
Notice that in Figure 9.1 there is no feasible solution space indicated, as in a regular linear
programming model. This is because all three goal constraints are equations; thus, all solution
points are on the constraint lines.
x1, x2, d1
-, d1
+, d2
-, d2
+, d3
-, d3
+ Ú 0
 4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120
 40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 1,600
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d1
+
x1, x2, d1
-, d1
+, d2
-, d2
+, d3
-, d3
+, d4
-, d4
+, d5
-, d6
- Ú 0
x2 + d6
- = 20
x1 + d5
- = 30
d1
+ + d4
- - d4
+ = 10
 4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120
 40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 1,600
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d4
+, 4P5d5
- + 5P5d6
-
412
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
x1
x2
35
40
45
35 40
45
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
x1 + 2x2 = 40
40x1 + 50x2 = 1,600
FIGURE 9.1
Goal constraints
Two or more goals at
the same priority level
can be assigned
weights to indicate
their relative
importance.

GRAPHICAL INTERPRETATION OF GOAL PROGRAMMING
413
Graphical solution 
illustrates the goal
programming solution 
logic—seeking to
achieve goals by mini-
mizing deviation in
order of their priority.
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
x1
x2
35
40
45
35 40
45
x1 + 2x2 = 40
d1
d1
+
–
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
x1
x2
35
40
45
35 40
45
40x1 + 50x2 = 1,600
d2
+
d2
–
d1
+
d1
–
FIGURE 9.3
The second-
priority goal: 
minimize d2
-
FIGURE 9.2
The first-priority
goal: minimize d1
-
The solution logic in a goal programming model is to attempt to achieve the goals in the ob-
jective function, in order of their priorities. As a goal is achieved, the next highest-ranked goal is
then considered. However, a higher-ranked goal that has been achieved is never given up in 
order to achieve a lower-ranked goal.
In this example, we first consider the first-priority goal, minimizing 
The relationship of
and 
to the goal constraint is shown in Figure 9.2. The area below the goal constraint line
represents possible values for 
and the area above the line represents values
d1
-,
x1 + 2x2 = 40
d1
+
d1
-
d1
-.
for 
In order to achieve the goal of minimizing 
the area below the constraint line corre-
sponding to 
is eliminated, leaving the shaded area as a possible solution area.
Next, we consider the second-priority goal, minimizing 
In Figure 9.3, the area below
the constraint line 
represents the values for 
and the area above the line
represents the values for 
To minimize 
the area below the constraint line corresponding
to 
is eliminated. Notice that by eliminating the area for 
we do not affect the first-priority
goal of minimizing d1
-.
d2
-,
d2
-
d2
-,
d2
+.
d2
-,
40x1 + 50x2 = 1,600
d2
-.
d1
-
d1
-,
d1
+.
One goal is never
achieved at the
expense of another
higher-priority goal.
Next, the third-priority goal, minimizing 
is considered. Figure 9.4 shows the areas cor-
responding to 
and 
To minimize 
the area above the constraint line 4x1 + 3x2 = 120
d3
+,
d3
+.
d3
-
d3
+,

414
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
x1
x2
35
40
45
35 40
45
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
d2
+
d2
–
d1
+
d1
–
A
B
C
d3
+
d3
–
x1 = 15
x2 = 20
D
FIGURE 9.5
The fourth-priority
goal (minimize d1
)
and the solution
5
10
15
20
25
30
5
0
10
15
20
25
30
x1
x2
35
40
45
35 40
45
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
d2
+
d2
–
d1
+
d1
–
A
B
C
d3
+
d3
–
FIGURE 9.4
The third-priority
goal: minimize d3

is eliminated. After considering the first three goals, we are left with the area between the line
segments AC and BC, which contains possible solution points that satisfy the first three goals.
Finally, we must consider the fourth-priority goal, minimizing 
To achieve this final goal,
the area above the constraint line 
must be eliminated. However, if we eliminate
this area, then both 
and 
must take on values. In other words, we cannot minimize 
totally
without violating the first- and second-priority goals. Therefore, we want to find a solution point
that satisfies the first three goals but achieves as much of the fourth-priority goal as possible.
Point C in Figure 9.5 is a solution that satisfies these conditions. Notice that if we move
down the goal constraint line 
toward point 
is further minimized; how-
ever,
takes on a value as we move past point C. Thus, the minimization of 
would be ac-
complished only at the expense of a higher-ranked goal.
d1
+
d2
-
D, d1
+
4x1 + 3x2 = 120
d1
+
d3
-
d2
-
x1 + 2x2 = 40
d1
+.
The solution at point C is determined by simultaneously solving the two equations that in-
tersect at this point. Doing so results in the following solution:
d1
+ = 15 hours
x2 = 20 mugs
x1 = 15 bowls

Because the deviational variables 
and 
all equal zero, they have been minimized,
and the first three goals have been achieved. Because 
hours of overtime, the fourth-
priority goal has not been achieved. The solution to a goal programming model such as this one
is referred to as the most satisfactory solution rather than the optimal solution because it satis-
fies the specified goals as well as possible.
Computer Solution of Goal Programming Problems 
with QM for Windows and Excel
Goal programming problems can be solved using QM for Windows and Excel spreadsheets.
In this section, we will demonstrate how to use both computer alternatives to solve the Beaver
Creek Pottery Company example we solved graphically in the previous section.
d1
+ = 15
d3
+
d1
-, d2
-,
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF GOAL PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH QM FOR WINDOWS AND EXCEL
415
Goal programming
solutions do not
always achieve all
goals, and they are
not optimal; they
achieve the best or
most satisfactory so-
lution possible.
Management Science Application
Developing Television Advertising Sales 
Plans at NBC
The National Broadcasting Company (NBC), a subsidiary of
General Electric, generated more than $4 billion in revenue in
2000 from its television network. In May the network an-
nounces its programming schedule for the broadcast year, which
begins in the third week in September. Soon after that initial an-
nouncement, the network begins the sale of its inventory of ad-
vertising slots on its TV shows to advertisers. During this time
advertising agencies approach the network with requests to pur-
chase time for their clients for the year. The requests generally
include a budget, the demographic audience in which the client
is interested, and a desired program mix. NBC subsequently de-
velops a sales plan consisting of a schedule of television com-
mercials that will meet the client’s requirements. The most
popular commercial durations are 30 and 15 seconds, although
60- and 120-second slots are not uncommon.
After the network finalizes its programming schedule, it de-
velops a rating forecast that projects the audience size for sev-
eral demographic groupings for each airing of a show. These
ratings projections are based on such factors as the strength of
the show, historical ratings for a time slot, competing shows on
other networks, and the performance of adjacent shows. The
network then develops advertising rate cards that set the prices
of advertising slots for each airing of a show. The prices vary ac-
cording to the time of the year the show airs. For example, prices
are high during the sweeps months of November, February, and
May and are lower in January and the summer; thus prices are
weighted for different weeks of the year. The sales management
staff prioritizes sales requests based on the client’s importance to
NBC. NBC also desires to make the most profitable use of its
limited inventory. It is optimal for NBC to use as little premium
inventory as possible in meeting each client’s request.
NBC uses a 0–1 integer goal programming model to de-
velop annual advertising sales plans for individual clients. The
model minimizes the amount of premium inventory assigned to
a sales plan while also minimizing the penalty incurred in not
meeting other goals. Goals are for inventory (i.e., airtime avail-
ability), product conflict (i.e., no two similar products should ad-
vertise on the same show), client budget constraints, show–mix
goals, unit–mix (i.e., commercial length) goals, and weekly
weighting constraints. The decision variables are 0–1 and indi-
cate the number of commercials of each length aired on shows
during weeks included in the sales plan. The model has enabled
NBC to save millions of dollars of premium inventory while
meeting customer requirements, and it has reduced the time re-
quired to develop a sales plan from 3 to 4 hours to 20 minutes.
It is estimated that this model and associated planning systems
increase NBC’s revenue by at least $50 million per year.
Source: Based on S. Bollapragada, et al., “NBC Optimization Systems
Increase Revenues and Productivity,” Interfaces 32, no. 1 (January–
February 2002): 47–60.
Diver721/Dreamstime.com

QM for Windows
We will demonstrate how to solve a goal programming model by using our Beaver Creek Pot-
tery Company example, which was formulated as follows:
subject to
QM for Windows includes a goal programming module that can be accessed by clicking
on the “Module” button at the top of the screen. The model parameters are entered onto the data
input screen as shown in Exhibit 9.1. Notice that each prioritized deviational variable must be
assigned a weight, which for this problem is always one. The solution is obtained by clicking
on the “Solve” button at the top of the screen. The solution summary for our model is shown in
Exhibit 9.2.
x1, x2, d1
-, d1
+, d2
-, d2
+, d3
-, d3
+ Ú 0
 4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120
 40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 1,600
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d1
+
416
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
EXHIBIT 9.2
EXHIBIT 9.1
QM for Windows will also provide a graphical analysis of a goal programming model. We
click on the “Windows” button and then select “Graph” from the menu. The graph for our ex-
ample is shown in Exhibit 9.3.

Excel Spreadsheets
Solving a goal programming problem by using Excel is similar to solving a linear programming
model, although not quite as straightforward. Exhibit 9.4 shows the spreadsheet format for our
Beaver Creek Pottery Company example. Cells G5, G6, and G7, under the heading “Constraint
Total,” contain the formulas for our goal constraints, including deviational variables. The formula
for the labor constraint is shown on the formula bar at the top of the screen in Exhibit 9.4. The
model decision variables are in cells B10 and B11, and the deviational variables are in cells
E5:F7. The goals are established by setting the constraint formulas in G5 to G7 equal to the goal
levels in cells I5 to I7.
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF GOAL PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH QM FOR WINDOWS AND EXCEL
417
EXHIBIT 9.3
Deviational variables—
E5:F7
Decision
variables—
B10:B11
Goal constraint
for cell G5
EXHIBIT 9.4
When using a spreadsheet (or any regular linear programming program) to solve a goal pro-
gramming problem, it must be solved sequentially. In this procedure, a new problem is formu-
lated and solved for each priority goal in the objective function, beginning with the highest
priority. In other words, the minimization of the deviational variable at the highest priority is the
initial objective. Once a solution for this formulation is achieved, the value of the deviational
variable that is the objective is added to the model as a constraint, and the second-priority devia-
tional variable becomes the new objective. A new solution is achieved for each new objective

sequentially until all the priorities are exhausted or it is clear that a better solution cannot be
reached. For our purposes, this means editing Excel’s Solver for each new solution.
Exhibit 9.5 shows the Solver Parameters window for our spreadsheet example. Recall
that the first-priority goal for our model is the minimization of the negative deviational
variable 
for our labor goal. This deviational variable is located in cell E5; thus, we
start Solver by minimizing cell E5. We identify B10:B11 (the decision variables) as well as
E5:F7 (the deviational variables) as variables in the model. The model constraints are for our
goals (i.e., G5:G7  I5:I7).
1d1
- 2
418
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Decision and
deviational variables
Minimize deviational variable
for first-priority goal in E5.
Goal constraints
EXHIBIT 9.5
The spreadsheet with the solution to our example problem is shown in Exhibit 9.6. We know
this is the most satisfactory solution we can achieve from the QM for Windows solution, so it
will not be necessary to perform any additional sequential steps. From the spreadsheet we can
see that we have achieved all the goals except the fourth-priority goal, to minimize d1
+.
EXHIBIT 9.6

However, if we had not achieved all our top goals so readily, the next step would be to in-
clude E50 as a constraint in Solver and then minimize our next-priority goal, which would
be E6 (i.e.,
).
Next, we will use Excel to solve a slightly more complicated goal programming model—
that is, the altered Beaver Creek Pottery Company example we developed at the beginning of
this chapter, with goals for overtime and maximum storage levels for bowls and mugs:
subject to
The spreadsheet for this modified version of our example is shown in Exhibit 9.7. The spread-
sheet is set up much the same as the original version of this example, with the exception of the goal
constraint for overtime. The formula for this goal constraint is included in cell G8 as
F5E8F8. In addition, the positive deviational variables for the last two goal constraints are
now included in the formulas embedded in cells G9 and G10. For example, in cell G9 the constraint
formula is C9*
.
B13+E9
x1, x2, d1
-, d1
+, d2
-, d2
+, d3
-, d3
+, d4
-, d4
+, d5
-, d6
- Ú 0
x2 + d6
- = 20
x1 + d5
- = 30
d1
+ + d4
- - d4
+ = 10
 4x1 + 3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 120
 40x1 + 50x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 1,600
x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 40
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
-, P3d3
+, P4d4
+, 4P5d5
- + 5P5d6
-
d2
-
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF GOAL PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH QM FOR WINDOWS AND EXCEL
419
The concept of goal programming was first introduced in 1955
by Abraham Charnes and William Cooper of the Carnegie Insti-
tute of Technology, with R. O. Ferguson, a consultant for the
Methods Engineering Council. They developed a model for a
plan for executive compensation for a division of General Electric
(using competing salary offers for executives as multiple goals),
and they solved it by reducing it to an equivalent linear program-
ming formulation. However, it was not until 1961 that Charnes
and Cooper coined the name goal programming. Yuji Ijiri of 
Stanford (and a former doctoral student of Cooper’s at Carnegie
Tech) in 1965 developed the concept of preemptive priorities for
treating multiple goals and the general solution approach.
Time Out
for Abraham Charnes and William W. Cooper
=C9*B13+E9
Goal constraint for labor
Goal constraint
for overtime;
=F5+E8–F8
EXHIBIT 9.7

The Solver Parameters window for this spreadsheet is shown in Exhibit 9.8, and the result-
ing solution is shown in Exhibit 9.9.
420
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
EXHIBIT 9.8
First two priority
goals, minimizing
d1 and d2, achieved.
Third-priority
goal to minimize
d3 not achieved.
–
–
+
EXHIBIT 9.9
You will notice that this solution achieves the first two priority goals for minimizing 
and
which are in cells E5 and E6. However, the third-priority goal to minimize 
is not
achieved because its cell (F7) has a value of 24 in it. Thus, we must follow the sequential ap-
proach to attempt to obtain a better solution. We accomplish this by including 
(the
E50
d3
+
d2
-,
d1
-

achievement of our first goal) as a constraint in Solver, as well as our second-priority goal that
this solution achieved,
, and then minimizing F7. This Solver Parameters screen is shown
in Exhibit 9.10.
E60
COMPUTER SOLUTION OF GOAL PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH QM FOR WINDOWS AND EXCEL
421
First- and second-priority
goals achieved; add E5=0
and E6=0.
EXHIBIT 9.10
Fourth-priority goal to minimize
overtime, d1, not achieved.
+
EXHIBIT 9.11
The solution is shown in Exhibit 9.11. This is the same solution that we obtained for our orig-
inal version of the model, without the alterations for overtime and production levels. This solution
achieves the first three priority goals. We could continue to attempt to achieve the fourth-priority
goal by including 
as a constraint in Solver and minimizing cell F5 (i.e.,
); however, doing
so will not result in a better solution without sacrificing the goal achievement at the higher-priority
levels. Thus, this is the best solution we can achieve.
d1
+
F70

The Analytical Hierarchy Process
Goal programming is a method that provides us with a mathematical “quantity” for the decision
variables that best achieves a set of goals. It answers the question “How much?” The analytical
hierarchy process (AHP), developed by Thomas Saaty, is a method for ranking decision alter-
natives and selecting the best one when the decision maker has multiple objectives, or criteria,
on which to base the decision. Thus, it answers the question Which one? A decision maker usually
has several alternatives from which to choose when making a decision. For example, someone
buying a house might have several houses for sale from which to choose; someone buying a new
car might have several makes and styles to consider; and a prospective student might select a
college to attend from a group of schools. In each of these examples, the decision maker would
typically make a decision based on how the alternatives compare, according to several criteria.
For example, a home buyer might consider the cost, proximity of schools, trees, neighborhood,
and public transportation when comparing several houses; a car buyer might compare different
cars based on price, interior comfort, mileage per gallon, and appearance. In each case, the deci-
sion maker will select the alternative that best meets his or her decision criteria. AHP is a
process for developing a numeric score to rank each decision alternative, based on how well
each alternative meets the decision maker’s criteria.
422
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Management Science Application
Selecting Students for Graduate Studies 
Abroad at Dar Al-Hekma Women’s College
Prior to 1999, all universities and colleges in Saudi Arabia
were public institutions; however, in 1999, in response to in-
creased demand for higher education, the Ministry of Higher
Education in Saudi Arabia began allowing nonprofit, private
colleges. Dar Al-Hekma, located in Jeddah, was one of the first
private colleges for women instituted under this new policy.
Dar Al-Hekma offers a 4-year degree program with de-
grees in business information systems, interior design, and
special education. One of the initial problems the new college
faced was the lack of qualified women to staff the three de-
partments. To help alleviate this problem, the Ministry of
Higher Education provided the college with nine scholarships
to send women to the United States and United Kingdom for
graduate studies. A committee consisting of faculty members
from local public universities and members of the college’s
board of trustees was established to select the nine candidates
in what was expected to be a highly competitive process.
Given the various criteria that could be used to select the
scholarship candidates, the committee decided to use the analyt-
ical hierarchy process (AHP) for the selection process. Two overall
sets of criteria were determined: a qualitative set and a quantita-
tive set. The qualitative set of criteria included subcriteria for per-
sonality, work experience, and other information, while the
quantitative set included subcriteria for language and previous
academic achievement/degrees. Various measures—such as in-
terviews, essays, work experience, grade point average, degrees
awarded, and TOEFL scores—were used to rank candidates in
each category.
The AHP model was successful in helping the committee se-
lect the candidates. The AHP model reduced subjectivity and en-
sured fairness in the highly competitive selection process; it
provided a systematic framework for committee interaction and
decision making, and it saved time and removed potential per-
sonal and political conflicts from the process. The AHP process
was so successful that it was subsequently used by the college for
other decision situations, including the selection of financial aid re-
cipients for enrolling students and internal faculty grant recipients.
Source: Based on A. M. A. Bahurmoz, “The Analytical Hierarchy
Process at Dar Al-Hekma, Saudi Arabia,” Interfaces 33, no. 4
(July–August 2003): 70–78.
AP Photo/Sakchai Lalit
AHP is a method for
ranking decision
alternatives and
selecting the best one
given multiple
criteria.

THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
423
We will demonstrate AHP by using an example. Southcorp Development builds and oper-
ates shopping malls around the country. The company has identified three potential sites for its
latest project, near Atlanta, Birmingham, and Charlotte. The company has identified four pri-
mary criteria on which it will compare the sites—(1) the customer market base (including overall
market size and population at different age levels); (2) income level; (3) infrastructure (including
utilities and roads); and (4) transportation (i.e., proximity to interstate highways for supplier
deliveries and customer access).
The overall objective of the company is to select the best site. This goal is at the top of the
hierarchy of the problem. At the next (second) level of the hierarchy, we determine how the four
criteria contribute to achieving the objective. At the level of the problem hierarchy, we deter-
mine how each of the three alternatives (Atlanta, Birmingham, and Charlotte) contributes to
each of the four criteria.
The general mathematical process involved in AHP is to establish preferences at each of these
hierarchical levels. First, we mathematically determine our preferences for each site for each crite-
rion. For example, we first determine our site preferences for the customer market base. We might
decide that Atlanta has a better market base than the other two cities; that is, we prefer Atlanta for
the customer market criterion. Then we determine our site preferences for income level, and so on.
Next, we mathematically determine our preferences for the criteria—that is, which of the four cri-
teria is most important, which is the next most important, and so on. For example, we might 
decide that the customer market is a more important criterion than the others. Finally, we combine
these two sets of preferences—for sites within each criterion and for the four criteria—to 
mathematically derive a score for each site, with the highest score being the best.
In the following sections, we describe these general steps in greater detail.
Pairwise Comparisons
In AHP the decision maker determines how well each alternative “scores” on a criterion by using
pairwise comparisons. In a pairwise comparison, the decision maker compares two alternatives
(i.e., a pair) according to one criterion and indicates a preference. For example, Southcorp might
compare the Atlanta (A) site with the Birmingham (B) site and decide which one it prefers accord-
ing to the customer market criterion. These comparisons are made by using a preference scale,
which assigns numeric values to different levels of preference.
The standard preference scale used for AHP is shown in Table 9.1. This scale has been de-
termined by experienced researchers in AHP to be a reasonable basis for comparing two items
or alternatives. Each rating on the scale is based on a comparison of two items. For example, if
the Atlanta site is “moderately preferred” to the Birmingham site, then a value of 3 is assigned
to this particular comparison. The rating of 3 is a measure of the decision maker’s preference for
one of the alternatives over the other.
If Southcorp compares Atlanta to Birmingham and moderately prefers Atlanta, resulting
in a comparison value of 3 for the customer market criterion, it is not necessary for South-
corp to compare Birmingham to Atlanta to determine a separate preference value for this
In a pairwise compar-
ison, two alternatives
are compared accord-
ing to a criterion, and
one is preferred.
A preference scale
assigns numeric val-
ues to different levels
of preference.
Preference Level
Numeric Value
Equally preferred
1
Equally to moderately preferred
2
Moderately preferred
3
Moderately to strongly preferred
4
Strongly preferred
5
Strongly to very strongly preferred
6
Very strongly preferred
7
Very strongly to extremely preferred
8
Extremely preferred
9
TABLE 9.1
Preference scale
for pairwise 
comparisons

“opposite” comparison. The preference value of B for A is simply the reciprocal or inverse
of the preference of A for B. Thus, in our example if the preference value of Atlanta for
Birmingham is 3, the preference value of Birmingham for Atlanta is 1/3.
Southcorp’s pairwise comparison ratings for each of the three sites for the customer market
criterion are summarized in a matrix, a rectangular array of numbers. This pairwise compari-
son matrix will have a number of rows and columns equal to the decision alternatives:
424
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
A pairwise
comparison matrix
summarizes the 
pairwise comparisons
for a criterion.
Customer Market
Site
A
B
C
A
1
3
2
B
1/3
1
1/5
C
1/2
5
1
This matrix shows that the customer market in Atlanta (A) is equally to moderately pre-
ferred (2) over the Charlotte (C) customer market, but Charlotte (C) is strongly preferred (5)
over Birmingham (B). Notice that any site compared against itself, such as A compared to A,
must be “equally preferred,” with a preference value of 1. Thus, the values along the diagonal of
our matrix must be 1s.
The remaining pairwise comparison matrices for the other three criteria—income level, in-
frastructure, and transportation—have been developed by Southcorp as follows:
Income Level
Infrastructure
Transportation
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
1
6
1 3
1 6
1
1 9
3
9
1
1
1 3
1
3
1
7
1
1 7
1
1
1 3
1 2
3
1
4
2
1 4
1
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
Developing Preferences Within Criteria
The next step in AHP is to prioritize the decision alternatives within each criterion. For our site se-
lection example, this means that we want to determine which site is the most preferred, the second
most preferred, and the third most preferred for each of the four criteria. This step in AHP is re-
ferred to as synthesization. The mathematical procedure for synthesization is very complex and
beyond the scope of this text. Instead, we will use an approximation method for synthesization that
provides a reasonably good estimate of preference scores for each decision in each criterion.
The first step in developing preference scores is to sum the values in each column of the pair-
wise comparison matrices. The column sums for our customer market matrix are shown as follows:
In synthesization,
decision alternatives
are prioritized within
each criterion.
Customer Market
Site
A
B
C
A
1
3
2
B
1/3
1
1/5
C
1/2
5
1
11/6
9
16/5

Next, we divide each value in a column by its corresponding column sum. This results in a
normalized matrix, as follows:
Customer Market
Site
A
B
C
A
6/11
3/9
5/8
B
2/11
1/9
1/16
C
3/11
5/9
5/16
Notice that the values in each column sum to 1. The next step is to average the values in
each row. At this point, we convert the fractional values in the matrix to decimals, as shown in
Table 9.2. The row average for each site is also shown in Table 9.2.
THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
425
Customer Market
Site
A
B
C
Row Average
A
0.5455
0.3333
0.6250
0.5012
B
0.1818
0.1111
0.0625
0.1185
C
0.2727
0.5556
0.3125
0.3803
1.0000
TABLE 9.2
The normalized
matrix with 
row averages 
The row averages in Table 9.2 provide us with Southcorp’s preferences for the three sites
for the customer market criterion. The most preferred site is Atlanta, followed by Charlotte; the
least preferred site (for this criterion) is Birmingham. We can write these preferences as a matrix
with one column, which we will refer to as a vector:
Customer Market
A
B
C
0 5012
0 1185
0 3803
1 0000
.
.
.
.
Income Level
Infrastructure
Transportation
A
B
C
A
B
C
A
B
C
0 2819
0 0598
0 6583
0 1790
0 6850
0 1360
0 1561
0 6196
0 2243
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
The preference vectors for the other decision criteria are computed similarly:
These four preference vectors for the four criteria are summarized in a single preference matrix,
shown in Table 9.3.

Criterion
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
0.1993
0 6535
0 0860
0 0612
.
.
.
426
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Criterion
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
Row Averages
Market
0.1519
0.1375
0.2222
0.2857
0.1993
Income
0.7595
0.6878
0.6667
0.5000
0.6535
Infrastructure
0.0506
0.0764
0.0741
0.1429
0.0860
Transportation
0.0380
0.0983
0.0370
0.0714
0.0612
1.0000
TABLE 9.3
Criteria preference
matrix
Criterion
Site
Market
Income Level
Infrastructure
Transportation
A
0.5012
0.2819
0.1790
0.1561
B
0.1185
0.0598
0.6850
0.6196
C
0.3803
0.6583
0.1360
0.2243
Ranking the Criteria
The next step in AHP is to determine the relative importance, or weight, of the criteria—that is,
to rank the criteria from most important to least important. This is accomplished the same way
we ranked the sites within each criterion: using pairwise comparisons. The following pairwise
comparison matrix for the four criteria in our example was developed by using the preference
scale in Table 9.1:
Criterion
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
Market
1
1/5
3
4
Income
5
1
9
7
Infrastructure
1/3
1/9
1
2
Transportation
1/4
1/7
1/2
1
The normalized matrix converted to decimals, with the row averages for each criterion, is
shown in Table 9.4.
TABLE 9.4
Normalized matrix
for criteria, with
row averages
The preference vector, computed from the normalized matrix by computing the row aver-
ages in Table 9.4, is as follows:
Clearly, income level is the highest-priority criterion, and customer market is second. Infra-
structure and transportation appear to be relatively unimportant third- and fourth-ranked priorities
in terms of the overall objective of determining the best site for the new shopping mall. The next
step in AHP is to combine the preference matrices we developed for the sites for each criterion in
Table 9.3 with the preceding preference vector for the four criteria.

Criterion
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
0.1993
0 6535
0 0860
0 0612
.
.
.
THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
427
Site
Score
Charlotte
0.5314
Atlanta
0.3091
Birmingham
0.1595
1.0000
Criterion
Site
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
A
B
C
0.5012
0.1185
0.3803
0.2819
0.0598
0.6583
0.1790
0.6850
0.1360
0.1561
0.6196
0.2243
Developing an Overall Ranking
Recall that earlier we summarized Southcorp’s preferences for each site for each criterion in a
preference matrix shown in Table 9.3 and repeated as follows:
In the previous section, we used pairwise comparisons to develop a preference vector for
the four criteria in our example:
Based on these scores developed by AHP, Charlotte should be selected as the site for the
new shopping mall, with Atlanta ranked second and Birmingham third. To rely on this result to
make its site selection decision, Southcorp must have confidence in the judgments it made in the
pairwise comparisons, and it must also have confidence in AHP. However, whether the AHP-
recommended decision is the one made by Southcorp or not, following this process can help
identify and prioritize criteria and enlighten the company about how it makes decisions.
Following is a summary of the mathematical steps used to arrive at the AHP-recommended
decision:
1. Develop a pairwise comparison matrix for each decision alternative (site) for each criterion.
2. Synthesization:
a. Sum the values in each column of the pairwise comparison matrices.
b. Divide each value in each column of the pairwise comparison matrices by the correspon-
ding column sum—these are the normalized matrices.
c. Average the values in each row of the normalized matrices—these are the preference vectors.
d. Combine the vectors of preferences for each criterion (from step 2c) into one preference
matrix that shows the preference for each site for each criterion.
An overall score for each site is computed by multiplying the values in the criteria prefer-
ence vector by the preceding criteria matrix and summing the products, as follows:
site A score = 0.1993(0.5012) + 0.6535(0.2819) + 0.0860(0.1790) + 0.0612(0.1561) = 0.3091
site B score = 0.1993(0.1185) + 0.6535(0.0598) + 0.0860(0.6850) + 0.0612(0.6196) = 0.1595
site C score = 0.1993(0.3803) + 0.6535(0.6583) + 0.0860(0.1360) + 0.0612(0.2243) = 0.5314
The three sites, in order of the magnitude of their scores, result in the following AHP ranking:

3. Develop a pairwise comparison matrix for the criteria.
4. Compute the normalized matrix by dividing each value in each column of the matrix by the
corresponding column sum.
5. Develop the preference vector by computing the row averages for the normalized matrix.
6. Compute an overall score for each decision alternative by multiplying the criteria
preference vector (from step 5) by the criteria matrix (from step 2d).
7. Rank the decision alternatives, based on the magnitude of their scores computed in step 6.
AHP Consistency
AHP is based primarily on the pairwise comparisons a decision maker uses to establish preferences
between decision alternatives for different criteria. The normal procedure in AHP for developing
these pairwise comparisons is for an interviewer to elicit verbal preferences from the decision
maker, using the preference scale in Table 9.1. However, when a decision maker has to make a lot
of comparisons (i.e., three or more), he or she can lose track of previous responses. Because AHP
is based on these responses, it is important that they be in some sense valid and especially that the
428
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Management Science Application
Analyzing Advanced-Technology 
Projects at NASA
Evaluating advanced-technology projects at the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) is a critical multi-
criteria decision-making process. During the past two decades,
technological advances have increased the number of possible
projects that NASA might undertake. At the same time, the
government and public have become more demanding about
cost accountability. The project evaluation and selection process
is very complex, requiring the consideration and analysis of vast
amounts of information, concerning such things as safety, sys-
tems engineering, cost, reliability, implementation, and project
success without a formal, structured decision-making model.
At the Shuttle Project Engineering Office at the Kennedy
Space Center, a multicriteria group decision-making model
called CROSS (consensus-ranking organizational-support sys-
tem) was developed for the project evaluation process, based
in part on the analytical hierarchy process (AHP).
Prior to the implementation of CROSS, the Shuttle Project
Engineering Office used a 15-member working committee 
to evaluate advanced-technology projects, which are inde-
pendent requests for engineering changes to the space shut-
tle program. Each committee member represents a specific 
department at the Kennedy Space Center. Committee mem-
bers assigned each an assessment score from 1 to 10, and these
scores were averaged to produce an overall score. Projects
were then sorted into three categories, based on these 
scores: superior, borderline, and inferior. This process was con-
sidered to be very intuitive and subjective—and thus subject
to inconsistency.
CROSS guides the committee through a systematic evalua-
tion process, using AHP to weight the stakeholder departments
that will be responsible for implementation of selected projects.
The stakeholders then use AHP to identify and weight the crite-
ria that should be used to evaluate the projects. For example, a
typical evaluation scenario might include a budget of $6 million,
with 10 possible projects (costing a total of $15 million) encom-
passing six stakeholder departments and 40 criteria. Individual
project scores are calculated by using an Excel program. AHP is
also used to evaluate the decision makers’ consistency. CROSS
helped NASA decision makers to think systematically about the
project evaluation and selection process and improve the qual-
ity of their decisions. It also brought consistency to the decision-
making process.
Source: Based on M. Tavana, “CROSS: A Multicriteria Group-
Decision-Making Model for Evaluating and Prioritizing Advanced-
Technology Projects at NASA,” Interfaces 33, no. 3 (May–June 2003):
40–56.
NASA/Jack Pfaller

responses be consistent. That is, a preference indicated for one set of pairwise comparisons needs
to be consistent with another set of comparisons.
Using our site selection example, suppose for the income level criterion Southcorp indi-
cates that A is “very strongly preferred” to B and that A is “moderately preferred” to C.
That’s fine, but then suppose Southcorp says that C is “equally preferred” to B for the same
criterion. That comparison is not entirely consistent with the previous two pairwise
comparisons. To say that A is strongly preferred over B and moderately preferred over C and
then turn around and say C is equally preferred to B does not reflect a consistent preference
rating for the three sets of pairwise comparisons. A more logical comparison would be that C
is preferred to B to some degree. This kind of inconsistency can creep into AHP when the
decision maker is asked to make verbal responses for a lot of pairwise comparisons. In gen-
eral, they are usually not a serious problem; some degree of slight inconsistency is expected.
However, a consistency index can be computed that measures the degree of inconsistency in
the pairwise comparisons.
To demonstrate how to compute the consistency index (CI), we will check the consistency
of the pairwise comparisons for the four site selection criteria. This matrix, shown as follows, is
multiplied by the preference vector for the criteria:
THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
429
A consistency index
measures the degree
of inconsistency in
pairwise comparisons.
Market
Income
Infrastructure
Transportation
Criteria
Market
Income
Infrastructur e
Transportatio n
1
1 5
3
4
5
1
9
7
1 3
1 9
1
2
1 4
1 7
1 2
1
0 1993
0 6535
0 0860
0 0612
.
.
.
.
N
N
N
N
N
N
*
The product of the multiplication of this matrix and vector is computed as follows:
Next, we divide each of these values by the corresponding weights from the criteria prefer-
ence vector:
If the decision maker, Southcorp, were a perfectly consistent decision maker, then each of
these ratios would be exactly 4, the number of items we are comparing—in this case, four criteria.
Next, we average these values by summing them and dividing by 4:
16.6257
4
= 4.1564
 16.6257
 0.2474>0.0612 = 4.0422
 0.3474>0.0860 = 4.0401
 2.8524>0.6535 = 4.3648
 0.8328>0.1993 = 4.1786
 (1>4)(0.1993) + (1>7)(0.6535) + (1>2)(0.0860) + (1)10.06122 = 0.2473
 (1>3)(0.1993) + (1>9)(0.6535) + (1)(0.0860) + (2)(0.0612) = 0.3474
 (5)(0.1993) + (1)(0.6535) + (9)(0.0860) + (7)(0.0612) = 2.8524
 (1)(0.1993) + (1>5)(0.6535) + (3)(0.0860) + (4)(0.0612) = 0.8328

The consistency index, CI, is computed using the following formula:
where
the number of items being compared
the average we computed previously
If 
then Southcorp would be a perfectly consistent decision maker. Because South-
corp is not perfectly consistent, the next question is the degree of inconsistency that is accept-
able. An acceptable level of consistency is determined by comparing the CI to a random index,
RI, which is the consistency index of a randomly generated pairwise comparison matrix. The RI
has the values shown in Table 9.5, depending on the number of items, n, being compared. In our
example,
because we are comparing four criteria.
n = 4
CI = 0,
= 0.0521
CI = 4.1564 - 4
3
4.1564 =
n =
CI = 4.1564 - n
n - 1
430
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Management Science Application
Ranking Twentieth-Century 
Army Generals
A group of 10 military historians participated in a study to
rank the greatest U.S. Army generals of the twentieth century
using the analytical hierarchy process. An initial set of 
21 generals was pared to a group of 7, which included Omar
Bradley, Dwight Eisenhower, Douglas MacArthur, George 
Marshall, George Patton, John Pershing, and Matthew Ridgeway.
The group used two main criteria—skills and actions. The skills
criteria were subsequently broken into four subcriteria including
conceptual skills to handle ideas, process information, and deal
with uncertainty; interpersonal skills to communicate and work
with others; tactical skills to attain proficiency; and technical
skills to assemble and organize equipment, personnel, sched-
ules, budgets, and facilities to accomplish their missions. The
actions criteria were broken down into contribution to conflict
(i.e., the general’s impact on the wartime conflict he conducted
and his contributions to the outcome); responsibility for the
size and location of his forces and the importance of his deci-
sions; success; and total wartime service. Each general’s per-
formance criteria were evaluated according to a set of
ratings—superior, very good, good, and poor. The rankings
fell into three groups. The top-ranked general was George
Marshall followed by Dwight Eisenhower. The second group
included Matthew Ridgeway, Douglas MacArthur, and John
Pershing, and the final grouping included George Patton and
Omar Bradley.
Source: Based on T. Retchless, B. Golden, and E. Wasil, “Ranking
U.S. Army Generals of the 20th Century: A Group Decision-Making
Application of the Analytical Hierarchy Process,” Interfaces 37, no. 2
(March–April 2007): 163–75.
The Granger Collection, NYC — All rights reserved.
n
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
RI
0
0.58
0.90
1.12
1.24
1.32
1.41
1.45
1.51
TABLE 9.5
RI values for n
items being
compared

The degree of consistency for the pairwise comparisons in the decision criteria matrix is de-
termined by computing the ratio of CI to RI:
In general, the degree of consistency is satisfactory if 
and in this case, it is.
If 
then there are probably serious inconsistencies, and the AHP results may not
be meaningful.
Remember that in this instance, we have evaluated the degree of consistency only for the
pairwise comparisons in the decision criteria preference matrix. This does not mean that we have
verified the consistency for the entire AHP. We would still have to evaluate the pairwise compar-
isons for each of the four individual criterion matrices before we could be sure the entire AHP
for this problem was consistent.
AHP with Excel Spreadsheets
The various computational steps involved in AHP can be accomplished with Excel spreadsheets.
Exhibit 9.12 shows a spreadsheet formatted for our Southcorp site selection example. The
spreadsheet includes the pairwise comparison matrix for our customer market criterion. Notice
that the pairwise comparisons have been entered as fractions. We can enter fractions in Excel by
dragging the cursor over the object cells, in this case B5:D7, and then clicking on “Format” at
the top of the screen. When the “Format” menu comes down, we click on “Cells” and then se-
lect “Fraction” from the menu.
CI>RI 7 0.10,
CI>RI 6 0.10,
CI
RI = 0.0521
0.90
= 0.0580
THE ANALYTICAL HIERARCHY PROCESS
431
Click on “Format,” then “Cells,”
then “Fraction” to enter fractions.
=SUM(B5:B7)
Row average
formula for F14
=B5/B8
EXHIBIT 9.12
The sum for column A in the pairwise comparison matrix is obtained by inserting the 
formula 
in cell B8. The sums for columns B and C can then be obtained by put-
ting the cursor on cell B8, clicking on the right mouse button, and clicking on “Copy.” Then we
drag the cursor over cells B8:D8 and press the “Enter” key. This will compute the sum for the
other two columns.
The cell values for the normalized matrix at the bottom of the spreadsheet in Exhibit 9.12
can be computed as follows. First, make sure you convert the cell values to decimal numbers. To
start, divide the value in cell B5 by the column sum in cell B8 by typing 
in cell B14.
This results in the value 0.5455 in cell B14. Next, with the cursor on B14, click the right mouse
B5/B8
SUM(B5:B7)

432
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
button and then click on “Copy.” Drag the cursor across cells B14:D14 and press the “Enter”
key. This will compute the values for cells C14 and D14. Repeat this process for each row to
complete the normalized matrix.
To compute the row averages from the normalized matrix, first type the formula
in cell F14. This formula is displayed on the formula bar at the top of the
spreadsheet. This will compute the value 0.5013 in cell F14. Next, with the cursor on cell F14,
click the right mouse button and copy the formula in cell F14 to F15 and F16 by dragging the
cursor across cells F14:F16.
Recall that these row averages represent the preference vector for the customer market cri-
terion. To complete this stage in AHP, we would need to compute the preference vectors for the
other three criteria for income level, infrastructure, and transportation.
The next step in AHP is to develop the pairwise comparison matrix and normalized matrix for
our four criteria. The spreadsheet to accomplish this step is shown in Exhibit 9.13. These two matri-
ces are constructed in the same way as the two similar matrices in Exhibit 9.12.
SUM(B14:D14)/3
=SUM(B5:B8)
=SUM(B14:E14)/4
=B5/B9
EXHIBIT 9.13
The final step in AHP is to develop an overall ranking. This requires Southcorp’s preference
matrix for each site for all four criteria (Table 9.3) and the preference vector for the criteria, both
of which are included in the spreadsheet shown in Exhibit 9.14.
Cells F14:F16 from
Exhibit 9.12
Cells G14:G17 from
Exhibit 9.13
Atlanta score
in cell C12
EXHIBIT 9.14

SCORING MODELS
433
All the values in the two matrices in Exhibit 9.14 were entered as input from previous AHP
steps (i.e., Exhibits 9.12 and 9.13). The score for Atlanta was computed using the formula em-
bedded in cell C12 and shown on the formula bar. Similar formulas were used for the other two
site scores in cells C13 and C14.
Exhibit 9.15 shows the spreadsheet for evaluating the degree of consistency for the pairwise
comparisons in the preference matrix for the four criteria. The spreadsheet is broken down into
steps that are self-explanatory.
=(4.1564 – 4)/3
=G12/0.90
=I5/G5
=SUM(B11:B14)
EXHIBIT 9.15
Scoring Models
For selecting among several alternatives according to various criteria, a scoring model is a
method similar to AHP, but it is mathematically simpler. There are several versions of scoring
models. In the scoring model that we will use, the decision criteria are weighted in terms of their
relative importance, and each decision alternative is graded in terms of how well it satisfies the
criteria, according to the following formula:
where
a weight between 0 and 1.00 assigned to criterion j, indicating its relative importance,
where 1.00 is extremely important and 0 is not important at all. The sum of the total
weights equals 1.00.
a grade between 0 and 100 indicating how well the decision alternative i satisfies 
criterion j, where 100 indicates extremely high satisfaction and 0 indicates virtually 
no satisfaction.
the total “score” for decision alternative i, where the higher the score, the better.
To demonstrate the scoring model, we will use an example. Sweats and Sweaters is a chain
of stores specializing in cotton apparel. The company wants to open a new store in one of four
malls around the Atlanta metropolitan area. The company has indicated five criteria that are im-
portant in its decision about where to locate: proximity of schools and colleges, area median in-
come, mall vehicle traffic flow and parking, quality and size (in terms of number of stores in the
mall), and proximity of other malls or shopping areas. The company has weighted each of these
criteria in terms of its relative importance in the decision-making process, and it has analyzed
Si =
gij =
wj =
Si = agij wj

434
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
each potential mall location and graded them according to each criterion as shown in the follow-
ing table:
Grades for Alternative (0 to 100)
Weight
Decision Criteria
(0 to 1.00)
Mall 1
Mall 2
Mall 3
Mall 4
School proximity
0.30
40
60
90
60
Median income
0.25
75
80
65
90
Vehicle traffic
0.25
60
90
79
85
Mall quality and size
0.10
90
100
80
90
Proximity of other shopping
0.10
80
30
50
70
The scores,
for the decision alternative are computed as follows:
Because mall 4 has the highest score, it would be the recommended decision, followed by mall 3,
mall 2, and finally mall 1.
Scoring Model with Excel Solution
The steps included in computing the scores of the decisions in the scoring model are rela-
tively simple and straightforward. Exhibit 9.16 shows a spreadsheet set up for the Sweats and
Sweaters store location example. The formula that computes the score for mall 1 in cell D10,
is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spread-
sheet. This formula is copied and pasted using the right mouse button into cells E10, F10,
and G10.
SUMPRODUCT (C5:C9, D5:D9),
S4 = (.30)(60) + (.25)(90) + (.25)(85) + (.10)(90) + (.10)1702 = 77.75
S3 = (.30)(90) + (.25)(65) + (.25)(79) + (.10)(80) + (.10)(50) = 76.00
S2 = (.30)(60) + (.25)(80) + (.25)(90) + (.10)(100) + (.10)(30) = 73.50
S1 = (.30)(40) + (.25)(75) + (.25)(60) + (.10)(90) + (.10)(80) = 62.75
Si,
EXHIBIT 9.16

Summary
This chapter introduced the concept of making decisions when there is more than one objective
or criterion to consider. Three specific modeling techniques were presented to solve decision-
making problems with multiple criteria: goal programming, the analytical hierarchy process
(AHP), and scoring methods. These techniques can be applied to a wide variety of decision-
making situations when there are objectives besides just profit or cost. They are often applicable
to decision-making problems in public or governmental organizations in which the levels of
service or efficiency in carrying out numerous goals are more important than are profit or cost.
The presentation of goal programming completes the coverage of linear programming. One
of the implicit assumptions of linear programming has been that all parameters and values in the
model were known with certainty. Upcoming chapters will consider techniques that are proba-
bilistic and are used when a situation includes uncertainty.
SUMMARY
435
Management Science Application
A Scoring Model for Determining U.S. Army 
Installation Regions
Before 2002 the U.S. Army allowed five major commands
to manage army installations, which included about 100 
major army bases in the United States. However, senior military
leaders were concerned that this level of decentralization did
not result in standard services and equitable resource alloca-
tion among the installations. Furthermore, decentralization
unnecessarily increased overhead costs and resulted in redun-
dant support activities. As a result, the Installation Manage-
ment Agency (IMA), headquartered in Washington, DC, was
created to manage all army installations worldwide according
to a regional organization plan, with four regions in the
United States. The IMA was created to achieve three main
functions: centralize command and control of installations; en-
sure operational capability (i.e., that the installations have the
facilities and equipment to train, deploy, sustain, and care for
the units, soldiers, and families); and improve and ensure the
quality of the resource allocation process for analyzing and pri-
oritizing resource needs. Partly because of political pressures,
the United States Military Academy was asked to analyze the
four-region management structure to justify its creation and to
recommend possibly better alternative regional organizations
in terms of number, location, and manpower. Eight regional
organizational alternatives were identified for analysis, from a
single region up to eight regions. The primary dimensions of
the regional alternatives were the IMA functions mentioned
above, plus the manpower assigned to a region, the number
of regions, the regional boundaries, and the location of the
headquarters. A scoring model was developed that measured
how well each regional alternative would perform the IMA
functions according to a number of measures related to the
dimensions of the analysis. Weights were assigned to each
measure based on their importance. The scoring model analy-
sis showed that four regions managed installations effectively.
Reducing the number of regions below four reduced the func-
tional effectiveness, whereas increasing the number of regions
to more than four provided little additional benefit.
Source: Based on T. Trainor, G. Parnell, B. Kwinn, J. Brence,
E. Tollefson, and P. Downes, “The U.S. Army Uses Decision Analysis in
Designing Its U.S. Installation Regions,” Interfaces 37, no. 3 (May–June
2007): 253–64.
Jay Mallin/Newscom

436
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Example Problem
Solutions
As a prelude to the problems section, the following examples demonstrate the formulations and
solutions of a goal programming problem, and an AHP problem.
Problem Statement
Rucklehouse Public Relations has contracted to do a survey following an election primary in New
Hampshire. The firm must assign interviewers to carry out the survey. The interviews are conducted
by telephone and in person. One person can conduct 80 telephone interviews or 40 personal inter-
views in a day. It costs $50 per day for a telephone interviewer and $70 per day for a personal inter-
viewer. The following three goals, which are listed in order of their priority, have been established
by the firm to ensure a representative survey:
a. At least 3,000 total interviews should be conducted.
b. An interviewer should conduct only one type of interview each day. The firm wants to
maintain its daily budget of $2,500.
c. At least 1,000 interviews should be by telephone.
Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of interviewers to hire to
satisfy these goals and then solve the model.
Solution
Step 1: Model Formulation
subject to
interviews
budget
telephone interviews
where
number of telephone interviewers
number of personal interviewers
Step 2: The QM for Windows Solution
x2 =
x1 =
80x1 + d3
- - d3
+ = 1,000
50x1 + 70x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = +2,500
80x1 + 40x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 3,000
minimize P1d1
-, P2d2
+, P3d3
-

Problem Statement
Grace LeMans wants to purchase a new mountain bike, and she is considering three models—the
Xandu Mark III, the Yellow Hawk Z9, and the Zodiak MB5. Grace has identified three criteria for
selection on which she will base her decision: purchase price, gear action, and weight/durability.
Grace has developed the following pairwise comparison matrices for the three criteria:
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTIONS
437
Price
Bike
X
Y
Z
X
1
3
6
Y
1/3
1
2
Z
1/6
1/2
1
Grace has prioritized her decision criteria according to the following pairwise comparisons:
Criteria
Price
Gears
Weight
Price
1
3
5
Gears
1/3
1
2
Weight
1/5
1/2
1
Weight/Durability
Bike
X
Y
Z
X
1
3
1
Y
1/3
1
1/2
Z
1
2
1
Gear Action
Bike
X
Y
Z
X
1
1/3
1/7
Y
3
1
1/4
Z
7
4
1
Using AHP, develop an overall ranking of the three bikes Grace is considering.
Solution
Step 1: Develop Normalized Matrices and Preference Vectors for All the Pairwise 
Comparison Matrices for Criteria
Price
Bike
X
Y
Z
Row Averages
X
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
0.6667
Y
0.2222
0.2222
0.2222
0.2222
Z
0.1111
0.1111
0.1111
0.1111
1.0000

The preference vectors are summarized in the following matrix:
438
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Criteria
Price
Gears
Weight
0.6479
0.2299
0.1222
Price
Gears
Weight
X
Y
Z
Price
Gears
Weight
0.6479
0.2299
0.1222
0 6667
0 0853
0 4429
0 2222
0 2132
0 1698
0 1111
0 7014
0 3873
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.
.

Step 2: Rank the Criteria
Criteria
Price
Gears
Weight
Row Averages
Price
0.6522
0.6667
0.6250
0.6479
Gears
0.2174
0.2222
0.2500
0.2299
Weight
0.1304
0.1111
0.1250
0.1222
1.0000
Gear Action
Bike
X
Y
Z
Row Averages
X
0.0909
0.0625
0.1026
0.0853
Y
0.2727
0.1875
0.1795
0.2132
Z
0.6364
0.7500
0.7179
0.7014
1.0000
Weight/Durability
Bike
X
Y
Z
Row Averages
X
0.4286
0.5000
0.4000
0.4429
Y
0.1429
0.1667
0.2000
0.1698
Z
0.4286
0.3333
0.4000
0.3873
1.0000
Criteria
Bike
Price
Gears
Weight
X
0.6667
0.0853
0.4429
Y
0.2222
0.2132
0.1698
Z
0.1111
0.7014
0.3873
The preference vector for the criteria is
Step 3: Develop an Overall Ranking

Problems
1. A manufacturing company produces products 1, 2, and 3. The three products have the following
resource requirements and produce the following profit:
PROBLEMS
439
Bike
Score
Xandu
0.5057
Zodiak
0.2806
Yellow Hawk
0.2138
1.0000
bike X score = 0.6667(0.6479) + 0.0853(0.2299) + 0.4429(0.1222)
= 0.5057
bike Y score = 0.2222(0.6479) + 0.2132(0.2299) + 0.1698(0.1222)
= 0.2138
bike Z score = 0.1111(0.6479) + 0.7014(0.2299) + 0.3873(0.1222)
= 0.2806
The ranking of the three bikes, in order of the magnitude of their scores, is
Product
Labor (hr./unit)
Material (lb./unit)
Profit ($/unit)
1
5
4
$3
2
2
6
5
3
4
3
2
At present, the firm has a daily labor capacity of 240 available hours and a daily supply of 400 pounds
of material. The general linear programming formulation for this problem is as follows:
subject to
Management has developed the following set of goals, arranged in order of their importance to
the firm:
(1) Because of recent labor relations difficulties, management wants to avoid underutilization of
normal production capacity.
(2) Management has established a satisfactory profit level of $500 per day.
(3) Overtime is to be minimized as much as possible.
(4) Management wants to minimize the purchase of additional materials to avoid handling and
storage problems.
Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of each product to produce to
best satisfy the goals.
x1, x2, x3 Ú 0
 4x1 + 6x2 + 3x3 … 400
 5x1 + 2x2 + 4x3 … 240
maximize Z = 3x1 + 5x2 + 2x3

Instead of its original objective of cost minimization, Computers Unlimited has indicated the
following goals, arranged in order of their importance:
(1) A&M has been one of its better long-term customers, so Computers Unlimited wants to
meet all of A&M’s demands.
(2) Because of recent problems with a trucking union, it wants to ship at least 80 units from the
Washington warehouse to Central University.
(3) To maintain the best possible relations with all its customers, Computers Unlimited would
like to meet no less than 80% of each customer’s demand.
(4) It would like to keep total transportation costs to no more than 110% of the $22,470 total
cost achieved with the optimal allocation, using the transportation solution method.
(5) Because of dissatisfaction with the trucking firm it uses for the Atlanta-to-State deliveries, it
would like to minimize the number of units shipped over this route.
a. Formulate a goal programming model for this problem to determine the number of micro-
computers to ship on each route to achieve the goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
3. The Bay City Parks and Recreation Department has received a federal grant of $600,000 to ex-
pand its public recreation facilities. City council representatives have demanded four different
types of facilities—gymnasiums, athletic fields, tennis courts, and swimming pools. In fact, the
demand by various communities in the city has been for 7 gyms, 10 athletic fields, 8 tennis
courts, and 12 swimming pools. Each facility costs a certain amount, requires a certain number
of acres, and is expected to be used a certain amount, as follows:
440
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
University
Warehouse
Tech
A&M
State
Central
Supply
Richmond
$22
17
30
18
420
Atlanta
15
35
20
25
610
Washington
28
21
16
14
340
Demand
520
250
400
380
2. In Problem 15 in Chapter 6, Computers Unlimited sells microcomputers and distributes them
from three warehouses to four universities. The available supply at the three warehouses, de-
mand at the four universities, and shipping costs are shown in the following table:
Expected Usage 
Facility
Cost
Required Acres
(people/week)
Gymnasium
$80,000
4
1,500
Athletic field
24,000
8
3,000
Tennis court
15,000
3
500
Swimming pool
40,000
5
1,000
The Parks and Recreation Department has located 50 acres of land for construction (although
more land could be located, if necessary). The department has established the following goals,
listed in order of their priority:
(1) The department wants to spend the total grant because any amount not spent must be re-
turned to the government.
(2) The department wants the facilities to be used by a total of at least 20,000 people each week.
(3) The department wants to avoid having to secure more than the 50 acres of land already
located.

(4) The department would like to meet the demands of the city council for new facilities. How-
ever, this goal should be weighted according to the number of people expected to use each
facility.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine how many of each type of facility should
be constructed to best achieve the city’s goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer so that the solution values are integers.
4. A farmer in the Midwest has 1,000 acres of land on which she intends to plant corn, wheat, and
soybeans. Each acre of corn costs $100 for preparation, requires 7 worker-days of labor, and
yields a profit of $30. An acre of wheat costs $120 to prepare, requires 10 worker-days of labor,
and yields $40 profit. An acre of soybeans costs $70 to prepare, requires 8 worker-days, and
yields $20 profit. The farmer has taken out a loan of $80,000 for crop preparation and has con-
tracted with a union for 6,000 worker-days of labor. A midwestern granary has agreed to pur-
chase 200 acres of corn, 500 acres of wheat, and 300 acres of soybeans. The farmer has
established the following goals, in order of their importance:
(1) To maintain good relations with the union, the labor contract must be honored; that is, the
full 6,000 worker-days of labor contracted for must be used.
(2) Preparation costs should not exceed the loan amount so that additional loans will not have
to be secured.
(3) The farmer desires a profit of at least $105,000 to remain in good financial condition.
(4) Contracting for excess labor should be avoided.
(5) The farmer would like to use as much of the available acreage as possible.
(6) The farmer would like to meet the sales agreement with the granary. However, the goal
should be weighted according to the profit returned by each crop.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of acres of each crop the
farmer should plant to satisfy the goals in the best possible way.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
5. The Growall Fertilizer Company produces three types of fertilizer—Supergro, Dynaplant, and
Soilsaver. The company has the capacity to produce a maximum of 2,000 tons of fertilizer in a
week. It costs $800 to produce a ton of Supergro, $1,500 for Dynaplant, and $500 for Soilsaver.
The production process requires 10 hours of labor for a ton of Supergro, 12 hours for a ton of
Dynaplant, and 18 hours for a ton of Soilsaver. The company has 800 hours of normal produc-
tion labor available each week. Each week the company can expect a demand for 800 tons of
Supergro, 900 tons of Dynaplant, and 1,100 tons of Soilsaver. The company has established the
following goals, in order of their priority:
(1) The company does not want to spend over $20,000 per week on production, if possible.
(2) The company would like to limit overtime to 100 hours per week.
(3) The company wants to meet demand for all three fertilizers; however, it is twice as im-
portant to meet the demand for Supergro as it is to meet the demand for Dynaplant, and
it is twice as important to meet the demand for Dynaplant as it is to meet the demand for
Soilsaver.
(4) It is desirable to avoid producing under capacity, if possible.
(5) Because of union agreements, the company wants to avoid underutilization of labor.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of tons of each brand of
fertilizer to produce to satisfy the goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
6. The Barrett Textile Mill was checked by inspectors enforcing Occupational Safety and Health
Administration (OSHA) codes. The inspectors found violations in four categories: hazardous
materials, fire protection, hand-powered tools, and machine guarding. In each category the
mill was not in 100% compliance. Each percentage point of increase in the compliance level
in each category will reduce the frequency of accidents, decrease the accident cost per worker,
PROBLEMS
441

and constitute progress toward satisfying the OSHA compliance level. However, achieving
compliance does cost the mill money. The following table shows the benefits (in accident fre-
quency and accident cost per worker) and the costs of a percentage point increase in compli-
ance in each category:
442
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Accident Frequency 
Reduction (accidents/ 
Accident Cost/
Cost/Percentage
Category
105 hr. of exposure)
Worker Reduction
Point Compliance
1. Hazardous materials
0.18
$1.21
$135
2. Fire protection
0.11
0.48
87
3. Hand-powered tools
0.17
0.54
58
4. Machine guarding 
0.21
1.04
160
To achieve 100% compliance in all four categories, the mill will have to increase compliance in
hazardous materials by 60 percentage points (i.e., it is now at 40% compliance), in fire protec-
tion by 28 percentage points, in hand-powered tools by 35 percentage points, and in machine
guarding by 17 percentage points. However, the management of the mill faces a dilemma, in that
only $52,000 is available to spend on safety. Any larger expenditure could jeopardize the finan-
cial standing of the mill. Thus, management hopes to achieve a level of accident reduction and
compliance that is within the company’s budget limitation and that will satisfy OSHA authori-
ties enough to temporarily delay punitive action. Therefore, management has established four
goals, listed here in order of importance:
(1) Do not exceed the budget constraint of $52,000.
(2) Achieve the percentage increases in compliance necessary to achieve 100% compliance in
each category.
(3) Achieve total accident frequency reduction of 20 accidents/105 hours of exposure. (This
goal denotes management’s desire to minimize the frequency of accidents even if 100%
compliance cannot be achieved in all categories.)
(4) Reduce the total accident cost per worker by $115.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the percentage points of compliance
needed in each category to satisfy the goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
7. Solve the following goal programming model graphically and by using the computer:
subject to
8. Solve the following goal programming model graphically and by using the computer:
subject to
xj, di
-, di
+ Ú 0
3x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 1,400
5x1 + d2
- - d2
+ = 2,500
x1 + x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 800
minimize P1d1
- + P1d1
+, P2d2
-, P3d3
-, 3P4d2
+ + 5P4d3
+
xj, di
-, di
+ Ú 0
x2 + d3
- - d3
+ = 50
x1 + d2
- - d2
+ = 30
 4x1 + 2x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 80
minimize P1d1
+, P2d2
-, P3d3
-

9. Solve the following goal programming model by using the computer:
subject to
10. The Wearever Carpet Company manufactures two brands of carpet—shag and sculptured—
in 100-yard lots. It requires 8 hours to produce one lot of shag carpet and 6 hours to pro-
duce one lot of sculptured carpet. The company has the following production goals, in
prioritized order:
(1) Do not underutilize production capacity, which is 480 hours.
(2) Achieve product demand of 40 (100-yard) lots for shag and 50 (100-yard) lots for 
sculptured carpet. Meeting demand for shag is more important than meeting demand for sculp-
tured, by a ratio of 5 to 2.
(3) Limit production overtime to 20 hours.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the amount of shag and sculptured car-
pet to produce to best meet the company’s goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
11. The East Midvale Textile Company produces denim and brushed-cotton cloth. The average pro-
duction rate for both types of cloth is 1,000 yards per hour, and the normal weekly production
capacity (running two shifts) is 80 hours. The marketing department estimates that the maxi-
mum weekly demand is for 60,000 yards of denim and 35,000 yards of brushed cotton. The
profit is $3.00 per yard for denim and $2.00 per yard for brushed cotton. The company has es-
tablished the following four goals, listed in order of importance:
(1) Eliminate underutilization of production capacity to maintain stable employment levels.
(2) Limit overtime to 10 hours.
(3) Meet demand for denim and brushed cotton weighted according to profit for each.
(4) Minimize overtime as much as possible.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of yards (in 1,000-yard lots)
to produce to satisfy the goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
12. The Oregon Atlantic Company produces two kinds of paper—newsprint and white wrapping pa-
per (butcher paper). It requires 5 minutes to produce a yard of newsprint and 8 minutes to pro-
duce a yard of wrapping paper. The company has 4,800 minutes of normal production capacity
available each week. The profit is $0.20 for a yard of newsprint and $0.25 for a yard of wrap-
ping paper. The weekly demand is for 500 yards of newsprint and 400 yards of wrapping paper.
The company has established the following goals, in order of priority:
(1) Limit overtime to 480 minutes.
(2) Achieve a profit of $300 each week.
(3) Fulfill the demand for the products in order of magnitude of their profits.
(4) Avoid underutilization of production capacity.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of yards of each type of
paper to produce weekly to satisfy the various goals.
b. Solve the goal programming model by using the computer.
13. A rural clinic hires its staff from nearby cities and towns on a part-time basis. The clinic attempts
to have a general practitioner (GP), a nurse, and an internist on duty during at least a portion 
of each week. The clinic has a weekly budget of $1,200. A GP charges the clinic $40 per hour,
xj, di
-, di
+ Ú 0
x2 + d4
- = 6
d2
+ + d3
- - d3
+ = 10
 2x1 + x2 + d2
- - d2
+ = 20
 4x1 + 6x2 + d1
- - d1
+ = 48
minimize P1d3
-, P2d2
-, P3d1
+, P4d2
+
PROBLEMS
443

a nurse charges $20 per hour, and an internist charges $150 per hour. The clinic has established
the following goals, in order of priority:
(1) A nurse should be available at least 30 hours per week.
(2) The weekly budget of $1,200 should not be exceeded.
(3) A GP or an internist should be available at least 20 hours per week.
(4) An internist should be available at least 6 hours per week.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of hours to hire each staff
member to satisfy the various goals.
b. Solve the model by using the computer.
14. The Eaststate Manufacturing Company produces four different airplane parts from fabricated
sheet metal for several major aircraft companies. The manufacturing process consists of four
operations—stamping, assembly, finishing, and packaging. The processing times per unit for
each operation and total available hours per year to produce these parts are as follows:
444
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Sheet
Estimated Annual
Part
Metal (ft.2)
Demand
Profits
1
2.6
2,600
$ 90
2
1.4
1,800
100
3
2.5
4,100
80
4
3.2
1,200
120
Part (hr./unit)
Operation
1
2
3
4
Total Hours/Year
Stamping
0.06
0.17
0.10
0.14
700
Assembly
0.18
0.20
—
0.14
700
Finishing
0.07
0.20
0.08
0.12
800
Packaging
0.09
0.12
0.07
0.15
600
The sheet metal required for each part, the estimated annual demand, and the profit per part are
as follows:
The company has 15,000 square feet of fabricated metal delivered each month. The company
has the following prioritized production goals:
(1) Avoid overtime, which would erode profit levels.
(2) Meet parts demand.
(3) Achieve an annual profit of $700,000.
(4) Avoid ordering more material because a surcharge is required by the supplier for changing
the standard monthly order.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the amount of each part to produce to
achieve the company’s objectives.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
c. How would the solution be affected if the first two priorities were reversed?
15. Mac’s Warehouse is a large discount store that operates 7 days per week. The store needs the fol-
lowing number of full-time employees working each day of the week:
Day
Number of Employees
Day
Number of Employees
Sunday
47
Thursday
34
Monday
22
Friday
43
Tuesday
28
Saturday
53
Wednesday
35

Each employee must work 5 consecutive days each week and then have 2 days off. For example,
any employee who works Sunday through Thursday has Friday and Saturday off. The store cur-
rently has a total of 60 employees available to work. Mac’s has developed the following set of
prioritized goals for employee scheduling:
(1) The store would like to avoid hiring any additional employees.
(2) The most important days for the store to be fully staffed are Saturday and Sunday.
(3) The next most important day to be fully staffed is Friday.
(4) The store would like to be fully staffed the remaining 4 days in the week.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of employees who should
begin their 5-day workweek each day of the week to achieve the store’s objectives.
b. Solve this model by using the computer.
16. Infocomp Systems Lab is a research and development (R&D) company that develops computer
systems and software primarily for the medical industry. The lab has proposals from its own
researchers for eight new projects. Each of the proposed research projects requires limited 
resources, and it is not possible to undertake all of them. The following table shows the devel-
opmental budget, the number of researchers, and the expected annual sales from each project if
successfully developed and implemented:
PROBLEMS
445
The lab has developed the following set of prioritized goals for selecting which projects to
initiate:
(1) The company would like to remain within a total developmental budget of $5,000,000.
(2) The number of available research personnel is 27, and Infocomp would like to avoid obtain-
ing extra researchers.
(3) The company would like the expected future annual sales from the implemented projects to
be at least $6,500,000.
(4) Projects 1, 3, 4, and 6 are considered offensive in that they represent new product initiatives,
while projects 2, 5, 7, and 8 are existing product upgrades and thus defensive in nature. The
lab would like to select at least two projects from each group.
(5) Projects 2, 3, 5, 6, and 7 are considered the most risky of the projects, and the company
would prefer not to select any more than three of these projects.
(6) The lab’s owner has indicated that she would like to see projects 5 and 6 initiated if doing
so would not interfere with the achievement of any of the more important goals determined
by the lab’s top management.
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine which projects Infocomp Systems Lab
should select to best achieve its goals.
b. Solve this model by using the computer. (Note that the solution requires 0–1 integer values
for the variables in the model.)
17. Texmart is a locally owned “big-box” retail store chain in Texas with 75 stores, primarily lo-
cated in the Dallas–Fort Worth area. In order to compete with national big-box store chains,
Developmental
Number of 
Expected Annual 
Project
Budget ($1,000,000s)
Research Personnel
Sales ($1,000,000s)
1
$0.675
6
$0.82
2
1.050
5
1.75
3
0.725
7
1.60
4
0.430
8
1.90
5
1.240
10
0.93
6
0.890
6
1.70
7
1.620
7
1.30
8
1.200
6
1.80

Texmart is planning to undertake several “sustainability” (i.e., “green”) projects at its stores.
These national chains have been heavily publicizing their sustainability efforts, including the
reduction of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions, which has had a positive effect on their sales.
They have also demonstrated that sustainability projects can have a positive impact on cost (es-
pecially energy) savings. The projects Texmart is considering include installing solar panels at
some or all of its stores, installing small wind turbines, replacing some or all of its 165 trucks
with more fuel-efficient hybrid trucks, and implementing waste reduction programs at its
stores, including recycling and reducing the use of plastic bags in stores. The costs for these
projects (per store or truck), the resulting reduction in GHG emissions, the energy savings, and
the annual costs savings are shown in the following table:
Sustainable Projects
Solar
Wind
Shipping/
Waste/
Plastic
Power
Power
Vehicles
Recycling
Bags
Cost ($)
$2,600,000 
950,000
38,000
365,000
175,000
GHG reductions 
17,500
8,600
25
1,700
900
(metric tons per year)
Cost savings ($)
220,000
125,000
26,000
75,000
45,000
Energy savings (kWh)
400,000
150,000
34,000
1,200
55,000
Units
75
75
165
75
75
Texmart has established the following four goals, in order of importance:
(1) It doesn’t want to exceed is program budget of $30 million for sustainable projects.
(2) It wants to achieve GHG emission reductions of at least 250,000 metric tons per year.
(3) It wants to achieve annual cost savings of at least $4 million.
(4) It wants to achieve annual energy savings of at least 5 million kilowatt hours (kWh).
a. Formulate a goal programming model to determine the number of each type of project to un-
dertake to satisfy the goals.
b. Solve the model by using the computer. 
18. Dampier Associates is a holding company that specializes in buying out small to medium-sized
textile companies. The company is currently considering purchasing three companies in the 
Carolinas: Alton Textiles, Bonham Mills, and Core Textiles. The main criteria the company uses to
determine which companies it will purchase are current profitability and growth potential. Dampier
moderately prefers growth potential over profitability in making a purchase decision. Dampier’s
pairwise comparisons for the three target textile companies it is considering are as follows:
Profitability
Company
A
B
C
A
1
1/3
7
B
3
1
9
C
1/7
1/9
1
Growth Potential
Company
A
B
C
A
1
1/2
1/5
B
2
1
1/3
C
5
3
1
Develop an overall ranking of the three companies for Dampier Associates by using AHP.
446
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

19. Check the pairwise comparisons for Dampier Associates in Problem 18 for consistency.
20. Bernard Mee, the head of the department of management science at Tech, is evaluating faculty
for raises at the end of the academic year. He is considering three faculty members for raises:
John Abbott, Megan Bates, and Debbie Cook. Faculty evaluations are based on three criteria—
teaching, research, and service. Professor Mee’s pairwise comparisons for each of the three
faculty members for each criterion and his pairwise comparison matrix for the three criteria are
as follows:
Teaching
Faculty Member
A
B
C
A
1
2
1/3
B
1/2
1
1/5
C
3
5
1
Research
Faculty Member
A
B
C
A
1
3
1/2
B
1/3
1
1
C
2
1
1
Service
Faculty Member
A
B
C
A
1
3
6
B
1/3
1
2
C
1/6
1/2
1
Criterion
Teaching
Research
Service
Teaching
1
3
5
Research
1/3
1
2
Service
1/5
1/2
1
Determine an overall ranking of the three faculty members by using AHP.
21. Check the pairwise comparisons for the criteria in Problem 20 for consistency and indicate
whether the level of consistency is acceptable.
22. Megan Moppett is a sales representative for Technical Software Systems (TSS), and she receives a
commission for every new system installation she sells to a client. Her earnings during the past few
years have been very high, and she wants to invest in a mutual fund. She is considering three funds:
the Temple Global Fund, the Alliance Blue Chip Fund, and the Madison Bond Fund. She has three
criteria for selection—potential return (based on historical trends and forecasts), risk, and the
PROBLEMS
447

fund’s load factor. Megan’s pairwise comparisons for the funds for each of their criteria and her
pairwise comparison of the three criteria are as follows:
Return
Fund
Global
Blue Chip
Bond
Global
1
1/4
2
Blue Chip
4
1
6
Bond
1/2
1/6
1
Risk
Fund
Global
Blue Chip
Bond
Global
1
2
1/3
Blue Chip
1/2
1
1/5
Bond
3
5
1
Load
Fund
Global
Blue Chip
Bond
Global
1
1
1/3
Blue Chip
1
1
1/3
Bond
3
3
1
Criterion
Return
Risk
Load
Return
1
3
5
Risk
1/3
1
2
Load
1/5
1/2
1
Determine the fund in which Megan should invest.
23. In Problem 22, if Megan Moppett has $85,000 to invest and she wants to diversify by investing
in all three funds, how much should she invest in each?
24. Alex Wall is shopping for a new four-wheel-drive utility vehicle and has identified three
models from which she will choose—an Explorer, a Trooper, and a Passport. She will make
her selection based on Consumer Digest ratings, price, and each vehicle’s appearance.
Following are Alex’s pairwise comparisons for the vehicles for each of her criteria and her
criteria preferences:
Consumer Digest Rating
Vehicle
Explorer
Trooper
Passport 
Explorer
1
4
3
Trooper
1/4
1
1/2
Passport
1/3
2
1
448
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Price
Vehicle
Explorer
Trooper
Passport
Explorer
1
1/4
1/6
Trooper
4
1
2
Passport
6
1/2
1
Appearance
Vehicle
Explorer
Trooper
Passport
Explorer
1
4
3
Trooper
1/4
1
1/2
Passport
1/3
2
1
Criterion
Consumer Digest Rating
Price
Appearance
Consumer Digest Rating
1
2
4
Price
1/2
1
3
Appearance
1/4
1/3
1
Using AHP, determine which vehicle Alex should purchase.
25. Station WRCH in Richmond, Virginia, is interviewing candidates for the job of news anchor on its
6:00 P.M. Eyewitness News show. There are three final candidates for the job—June Pawlie, Kellie
Cooric, and Tim Brokenaw. The criteria the station manager will use to make the selection are
camera appearance, intelligence, and speaking ability (or speech). The station manager’s pairwise
comparisons for the job for each of these candidates and for the three criteria are as follows:
Appearance
Anchor
Pawlie
Cooric
Brokenaw
Pawlie
1
2
7
Cooric
1/2
1
5
Brokenaw
1/7
1/5
1
Intelligence
Anchor
Pawlie
Cooric
Brokenaw
Pawlie
1
1/3
1/4
Cooric
3
1
1/2
Brokenaw
4
2
1
Speech
Anchor
Pawlie
Cooric
Brokenaw
Pawlie
1
1/3
2
Cooric
3
1
6
Brokenaw
1/2
1/6
1
PROBLEMS
449

Criterion
Appearance
Intelligence
Speech
Appearance
1
8
3
Intelligence
1/8
1
1/5
Speech
1/3
5
1
Using AHP, determine which candidate the station manager should hire as news anchor.
26. Carol Latta is visiting hotels in Los Angeles to decide where to hold a convention for a national
organization of college business school teachers she represents. There are three hotels from
which to choose—the Cheraton, the Milton, and the Harriott. The criteria she is to use to make
her selection are ambiance, location (based on safety and walking distance to attractions and
restaurants), and cost to the organization. Following are the pairwise comparisons she has de-
veloped that indicate her preference for each hotel for each criterion and her pairwise compar-
isons for the criteria:
Ambiance
Hotel
Cheraton
Milton
Harriott
Cheraton
1
1/2
1/5
Milton
2
1
1/3
Harriott
5
3
1
Location
Hotel
Cheraton
Milton
Harriott
Cheraton
1
5
3
Milton
1/5
1
1/4
Harriott
1/3
4
1
Cost
Hotel
Cheraton
Milton
Harriott
Cheraton
1
2
5
Milton
1/2
1
2
Harriott
1/5
1/2
1
Criterion
Ambiance
Location
Cost
Ambiance
1
2
4
Location
1/2
1
3
Cost
1/4
1/3
1
Develop an overall ranking of the three hotels, using AHP, to help Carol Latta decide where to
hold the meeting.
27. Aaron Zeitel is a high school senior deciding which college to attend in the fall. He has narrowed
his choices to three liberal arts schools: Arrington, Barton, and Claiborne. His criteria for selec-
tion are the school’s academic reputation, location (and especially proximity to his home), the
cost of tuition and room and board, and the social and cultural opportunities available. Following
450
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

are Aaron’s pairwise comparisons of the schools for each of the four criteria and his pairwise
comparisons for the criteria:
Academic
College
A
B
C
A
1
1/2
3
B
2
1
4
C
1/3
1/4
1
Location
College
A
B
C
A
1
1
3
B
1
1
5
C
1/3
1/5
1
Cost
College
A
B
C
A
1
1/2
1/4
B
2
1
1/2
C
4
2
1
Social
College
A
B
C
A
1
3
6
B
1/3
1
3
C
1/6
1/3
1
Criterion
Academic
Location
Cost
Social
Academic
1
4
1/2
3
Location
1/4
1
1/5
1/2
Cost
2
5
1
3
Social
1/3
2
1/3
1
Using AHP, determine which college Aaron should select and check the consistency of the pair-
wise comparison matrix for the criteria.
28. Whitney Eggleston operates a computerized dating service for students at Tech. She uses AHP
to help match her clients. Whitney is attempting to match Chris with either Robin, Terry, or
Kelly. She evaluates her clients according to three criteria—physical attractiveness, intelligence,
and personality, and she had Chris do pairwise comparisons on this set of criteria, as follows:
Criterion
Attractiveness
Intelligence
Personality
Attractiveness
1
1
3
Intelligence
1
1
2
Personality
1/3
1/2
1
PROBLEMS
451

Whitney herself did the pairwise comparisons for Robin, Terry, and Kelly, based on their data
sheets and a personal interview with each:
Attractiveness
Client
Robin
Terry
Kelly
Robin
1
3
5
Terry
1/3
1
2
Kelly
1/5
1/2
1
Intelligence
Client
Robin
Terry
Kelly
Robin
1
2
1/2
Terry
1/2
1
1/4
Kelly
2
4
1
Personality
Client
Robin
Terry
Kelly
Robin
1
2
1/3
Terry
1/2
1
1/2
Kelly
3
2
1
Who is the best match for Chris, according to Whitney’s AHP analysis?
29. Rockingham Systems is considering three R&D projects it has identified as A, B, and C. Rock-
ingham is not sure it will undertake all three projects, so it wants to rank them in terms of prefer-
ability. Rockingham will use three criteria to rank the projects—profit potential, probability of
success, and cost. Following are Rockingham’s pairwise comparisons for the projects for each
of the three criteria and for the criteria:
Profit
Project
A
B
C
A
1
4
6
B
1/4
1
2
C
1/6
1/2
1
P(Success)
Project
A
B
C
A
1
2
1/3
B
1/2
1
1/6
C
3
6
1
452
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Cost
Project
A
B
C
A
1
1/3
1/4
B
3
1
1/2
C
4
2
1
Criteria
Profit
P(Success)
Cost
Profit
1
2
6
P(Success)
1/2
1
4
Cost
1/6
1/4
1
Rank the projects for Rockingham Systems by using AHP.
30. Professor Rakes is selecting a new graduate assistant from a pool of second-year MBA students.
He will make his selection based on the student’s grade point average (GPA) to date, the overall
GMAT (entrance exam) score, and the undergraduate degree discipline. Professor Rakes has de-
veloped the following pairwise comparisons for these criteria:
Criteria
GPA
GMAT
Degree
GPA
1
5
1/3
GMAT
1/5
1
1/6
Degree
3
6
1
The files of the three students, Adrian, Bon, and Corey, provide the following data:
Student
GPA
GMAT
Degree
Adrian
3.6
560
Business
Bon
3.8
670
English
Corey
3.0
610
Engineering
Use AHP to help Professor Rakes select a graduate assistant.
31. The Bay City Parks and Recreation Department is considering building several new facili-
ties, including a gym, an athletic field, a tennis pavilion, and a pool. It will base its decision
on which facilities to build depending on projected usage (from surveys) and construction
and operating costs. The department strongly prefers usage to cost as a criterion for selec-
tion. Following are the department’s pairwise comparisons, reflecting its preferences for
each facility for the two criteria:
Usage
Facility
Gym
Field
Tennis
Pool
Gym
1
1/3
3
2
Field
3
1
5
4
Tennis
1/3
1/5
1
1/3
Pool
1/2
1/4
3
1
PROBLEMS
453

Cost
Facility
Gym
Field
Tennis
Pool
Gym
1
1/4
1/2
3
Field
4
1
3
7
Tennis
2
1/3
1
4
Pool
1/3
1/7
1/4
1
Rank the facilities, using AHP, and check the pairwise comparisons for consistency.
32. Students at a college in Ohio are planning a spring break vacation to one of three locations: Myr-
tle Beach (MB), Daytona Beach (DB), or Ft. Lauderdale (FL). They are to base their decision on
three criteria—weather, cost, and potential fun (based on an Internet survey of friends and ac-
quaintances at other colleges). The students have developed the following pairwise comparisons
for the locations for each criterion and for the three criteria:
Weather
Location
MB
DB
FL
MB
1
1/3
1/3
DB
3
1
1
FL
3
1
1
Cost
Location
MB
DB
FL
MB
1
3
5
DB
1/3
1
2
FL
1/5
1/2
1
Fun
Location
MB
DB
FL
MB
1
1/2
5
DB
2
1
3
FL
1/5
1/3
1
Criteria
Weather
Cost
Fun
Weather
1
4
1/4
Cost
1/4
1
1/5
Fun
4
5
1
If the students use AHP to help make a decision, which location will they select for their spring
break vacation?
33. Check the pairwise comparisons in Problem 32 for consistency.
34. The management science and information technology majors at Tech select one of two available
options within the major—decision support systems (DSS) or operations management (OM).
454
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Student advisers use AHP with the students to determine which option they should select. The
criteria used by the advisers are student aptitude and interests, faculty who teach in the options,
and potential job availability. An adviser has helped one major develop the following pairwise
comparisons:
Aptitude
Option
DSS
OM
DSS
1
3
OM
1/3
1
Faculty
Option
DSS
OM
DSS
1
1/5
OM
5
1
Jobs
Option
DSS
OM
DSS
1
4
OM
1/4
1
Criteria
Aptitude
Faculty
Jobs
Aptitude
1
1/2
1/4
Faculty
2
1
1/3
Jobs
4
3
1
Which option should the student select?
35. The Des Moines Twisters, a women’s professional basketball team, needs a new point guard and
is considering signing one of three college players—Keisha Jones, Natasha Franklin, and Kath-
leen Taylor. The team will base its decision of which player to sign on four criteria: the player’s
shooting ability, rebounding ability, ball handling skills, and attitude. Following is a survey of
the three players’ college game statistics for their senior year:
Per-Game Statistics
Field Goal Free Throw
Player
Points
(%)
(%)
Rebounds Assists Turnovers Minutes
Keisha Jones
18.6
47.5
75.7
10.3
4.1
3.2
33.9
Natasha Franklin
22.9
38.5
64.2
12.4
3.6
1.8
32.5
Kathleen Taylor
16.5
62.1
88.3
7.6
6.7
0.6
37.4
Although the coach can base some of her pairwise comparisons on these statistics, it is more dif-
ficult to assess attitude. She has interviewed each player, and she moderately prefers Keisha
Jones’s attitude to Kathleen Taylor’s and strongly prefers Keisha Jones’s attitude to Natasha
Franklin’s.
PROBLEMS
455

Assume the coach’s role and develop pairwise comparisons for all four of the criteria and be-
tween the criteria. Use AHP to determine which player you would select.
36. The town of Blacksburg needs a larger modern middle school. The current middle school is in the
center of town and is over 40 years old. There are two proposals for a new school—renovate and ex-
pand the current facility and keep it in town or build a new school on the outskirts of town. Different
groups in town have strong feelings about the proposals. Some citizens want to retain the sense of
tradition of the old school and like it in town, where it helps engender a sense of community. Others
view the old school as antiquated and beyond saving and believe keeping the school in town near
bars, traffic, and college students to be negative. The county school board will make the final deci-
sion. The school board has asked several management science professors from the local college to
use AHP to help evaluate the proposals. The school board has identified four groups from which it
wants to solicit input regarding their preferences: the middle school PTA, the middle school teach-
ers, current and former middle school students, and the town council. The management science pro-
fessors have developed the following pairwise comparison matrices for each of these groups:
PTA
Proposal
Renovate
New
Renovate
1
1/3
New
3
1
Teachers
Proposal
Renovate
New
Renovate
1
1/9
New
9
1
Students
Proposal
Renovate
New
Renovate
1
2
New
1/2
1
Town Council
Proposal
Renovate
New
Renovate
1
5
New
1/5
1
The school board’s pairwise comparison of the four groups from which it is soliciting prefer-
ences is as follows:
Group
PTA
Teachers
Students
Town Council
PTA
1
5
2
1/4
Teachers
1/5
1
1/4
1/7
Students
1/2
4
1
1/5
Town council
4
7
5
1
456
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

a. Based on the AHP analysis conducted by the management science professors, which pro-
posal should the school board select?
b. Check the school board’s pairwise comparison of the criteria for consistency.
37. Given the following pairwise comparisons, indicate your preferences according to the prefer-
ence scale in Table 9.1.
a. Steak to chicken
b. Hot dogs to hamburgers
c. Republicans to Democrats
d. Soccer to football
e. College basketball to professional basketball
f. Management science to management
g. Domino’s to Pizza Hut
h. McDonald’s to Wendy’s
i. Ford to Honda
j. Dickens to Faulkner
k. Beatles to Beethoven
l. New York to Los Angeles
m. Chicago to Atlanta
n. American League to National League
38. Federated Health Care has contracted to be Tech’s primary health care provider for faculty and staff.
There are three major hospitals in the area (within 35 miles)—County, Memorial, and General—
that have full-service emergency rooms. Federated wants to designate one of the hospitals as its pri-
mary care emergency room for its members. The company’s criteria for selection are quality of
medical care, as determined by a patient survey; distance to the emergency room by the majority of
its members; speed of medical attention at the emergency room; and cost. Following are the pair-
wise comparisons of the emergency rooms for each of the four criteria and the pairwise compar-
isons for the criteria:
Medical Care
Hospital
County
Memorial
General
County
1
1/6
1/3
Memorial
6
1
3
General
3
1/3
1
Distance
Hospital
County
Memorial
General
County
1
7
4
Memorial
1/7
1
2
General
1/4
1/2
1
Speed of Attention
Hospital
County
Memorial
General
County
1
1/2
3
Memorial
2
1
4
General
1/3
1/4
1
PROBLEMS
457

Cost
Hospital
County
Memorial
General
County
1
6
4
Memorial
1/6
1
1/2
General
1/4
2
1
Criterion
Medical Care
Distance
Speed of Attention
Cost
Medical care
1
8
6
3
Distance
1/8
1
1/2
1/6
Speed of attention
1/6
2
1
1/4
Cost
1/3
6
4
1
Using AHP, determine which hospital emergency room Federated Health Care should designate
as its primary care provider.
39. The department of management science at Tech offers four sections of introductory quantitative
methods in the fall semester, each taught by a different teacher. A group of students have devel-
oped the following criteria to rank the sections: time and day, grading history of the instructor,
classroom atmosphere (i.e., relaxed or formal), amount of homework, and the teacher’s sense of
humor. Following are the students’ preferences for these criteria:
Criterion
Time/Day
Grading
Atmosphere
Homework
Jokes
Time/day
1
2
7
3
8
Grading
1/2
1
6
3
9
Atmosphere
1/7
1/6
1
1/4
2
Homework
1/3
1/3
4
1
7
Jokes
1/8
1/9
1/2
1/7
1
Following are the students’ pairwise comparisons of the sections for the criteria:
Time/Day
Section
1
2
3
4
1
1
3
5
7
2
1/3
1
2
5
3
1/5
1/2
1
3
4
1/7
1/5
1/3
1
Grading
Section
1
2
3
4
1
1
1/7
1/8
2
2
7
1
2
6
3
8
1/2
1
5
4
1/2
1/6
1/5
1
458
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Atmosphere
Section
1
2
3
4
1
1
6
3
3
2
1/6
1
3
2
3
1/3
1/3
1
1
4
1/3
1/2
1
1
Homework
Section
1
2
3
4
1
1
1/4
1/8
1/2
2
4
1
1/3
4
3
8
3
1
5
4
2
1/4
1/5
1
Jokes
Section
1
2
3
4
1
1
1/5
3
4
2
5
1
6
7
3
1/3
1/6
1
3
4
1/4
1/7
1/3
1
a. Using AHP, rank the courses for the students.
b. Using this framework and these criteria, but with your own preferences for a course with
multiple sections that you are familiar with at your school, develop a ranking of the sections.
40. A faculty committee in the department of management science at Tech is evaluating three new
textbooks for its introductory management science course, which all business students are re-
quired to take. The texts, identified by the authors, are Adams/Jones, Barnes, and Cook/Smith.
The committee’s selection criteria are topical coverage, readability, cost, and the available sup-
plements. Following are the committee’s pairwise comparisons of the three textbooks for each
of the four criteria and the committee’s pairwise comparisons for the criteria:
Coverage
Textbook
A
B
C
A
1
1/5
1/4
B
5
1
3
C
4
1/3
1
Readability
Textbook
A
B
C
A
1
2
3
B
1/2
1
3
C
1/3
1/3
1
PROBLEMS
459

Cost
Textbook
A
B
C
A
1
1/2
1/5
B
2
1
1/3
C
5
3
1
Supplements
Textbook
A
B
C
A
1
4
7
B
1/4
1
3
C
1/7
1/3
1
Criterion
Coverage
Readability
Cost
Supplements
Coverage
1
1/2
1/4
2
Readability
2
1
1/3
5
Cost
4
3
1
3
Supplements
1/2
1/5
1/3
1
Using AHP, determine which textbook the committee should select. Check the consistency of
the pairwise comparison matrix for the criteria.
41. On the day of the professional football draft, the owner, general manager, and coaching staff of
the New York Gladiators are attempting to decide which of the available players they should se-
lect as their pick approaches. They have three players on their big board whom they would like:
Al Stonecrusher, a defensive lineman, Bruce Kowslaski, a tight end, and Charlie Speedman, a
running back. They evaluate players according to four criteria—the player’s projected salary de-
mands, speed, and size (i.e., height and weight), and the team’s position needs. Following are
the group’s pairwise comparisons for the players for each of the four criteria and the pairwise
comparisons for the criteria:
Salary
Player
A
B
C
A
1
5
3
B
1/5
1
1/2
C
1/3
2
1
Speed
Player
A
B
C
A
1
1/5
3
B
5
1
6
C
1/3
1/6
1
460
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Position
Player
A
B
C
A
1
1/2
1/5
B
2
1
1/3
C
5
3
1
Size
Player
A
B
C
A
1
4
2
B
1/4
1
1/3
C
1/2
3
1
Criterion
Salary
Speed
Position
Size
Salary
1
1/5
1/3
1/2
Speed
5
1
3
2
Position
3
1/3
1
2
Size
2
1/2
1/2
1
Using AHP, determine which player the Gladiators should select. Check the consistency of the
pairwise comparison matrix for the criteria.
42. The four most famous generals during the American Civil War were Ulysses S. Grant, William
Tecumseh Sherman, Robert E. Lee, and Stonewall Jackson. Historians have always debated
which was the greatest general from among these four. Following are the pairwise comparisons
for five criteria that might be used to evaluate the generals: leadership, including interpersonal
skills and the ability to communicate with others and delegate responsibility; tactical and techni-
cal skills in planning and directing their armies, including the efficient use of their resources;
their direct impact on the battles they were involved in; their decision-making skills both be-
tween and during battles; and their overall success in the war.
Interpersonal Skills/Leadership
General
Grant
Lee
Jackson
Sherman
Grant
1
1/4
1/3
2
Lee
4
1
2
8
Jackson
3
1/2
1
5
Sherman
1/2
1/8
1/5
1
Tactical Skills
General
Grant
Lee
Jackson
Sherman
Grant
1
1/4
1/5
2
Lee
4
1
1/3
6
Jackson
5
3
1
8
Sherman
1/2
1/6
1/8
1
PROBLEMS
461

Impact on Battle
General
Grant
Lee
Jackson
Sherman
Grant
1
1/4
1/7
2
Lee
4
1
1/3
3
Jackson
7
3
1
9
Sherman
1/2
1/3
1/9
1
Decision Making
General
Grant
Lee
Jackson
Sherman
Grant
1
1/2
3
3
Lee
2
1
3
5
Jackson
1/3
1/3
1
3
Sherman
1/3
1/5
1/3
1
Overall Success
General
Grant
Lee
Jackson
Sherman
Grant
1
5
7
6
Lee
1/5
1
2
3
Jackson
1/7
1/2
1
2
Sherman
1/6
1/3
1/2
1
Interpersonal
Tactical
Impact
Decision
Overall
Criterion
Skills/Leadership
Skills
on Battles
Making
Success
Interpersonal
skills/leadership
1
1/4
1/3
1/5
1/9
Tactical skills
4
1
1/2
1/3
1/6
Impact on battles
3
2
1
1/2
1/5
Decision making
5
3
2
1
1/4
Overall success
9
6
5
4
1
Using AHP, rank these four Civil War generals.
43. For Problem 42, develop your own pairwise comparisons for and among the criteria using your
own knowledge of Civil War history and any Internet research you might perform, and develop
your own AHP ranking of the four generals.
44. The owners of the Blitz professional soccer team are disappointed in their team’s home at-
tendance, so they are considering moving to one of four cities: Atlanta, Birmingham,
Charlotte, or Durham. The criteria the owners are using to make their decision are population
in the 15–40 age group, soccer interest (measured by youth, high school, and college soccer
game participation and attendance), media market, entertainment and sports competition,
462
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

and the proposed playing facility. Following are the owners’ pairwise comparisons for the
four potential cities for each of the five criteria, and the owners’ pairwise comparisons for
the criteria:
Population
City
A
B
C
D
A
1
5
4
9
B
1/5
1
1/3
4
C
1/4
3
1
5
D
1/9
1/4
1/5
1
Soccer Interest
City
A
B
C
D
A
1
3
1
1/4
B
1/3
1
1/3
1/6
C
1
3
1
1/2
D
4
6
2
1
Media Market
City
A
B
C
D
A
1
5
3
7
B
1/5
1
1/4
2
C
1/3
4
1
3
D
1/7
1/2
1/3
1
Competition
City
A
B
C
D
A
1
2
1/3
1/7
B
1/2
1
1/4
1/6
C
3
4
1
1/4
D
7
6
4
1
Playing Facility
City
A
B
C
D
A
1
1/2
1/4
1/7
B
2
1
1/3
1/5
C
4
3
1
1/4
D
7
5
4
1
PROBLEMS
463

Soccer 
Media 
Playing 
Criterion
Population
Interest
Market
Competition
Facility
Population
1
1/5
1/2
2
1/4
Soccer interest
5
1
3
6
4
Media market
2
1/3
1
3
1/2
Competition
1/2
1/6
1/3
1
1/2
Playing facility
4
1/4
2
2
1
Using AHP determine which city the owners should select to relocate to.
45. Check the pairwise comparisons for the five criteria in Problem 44 for consistency.
46. Texmart is a locally owned “big-box” retail store chain in Texas, with stores primarily located in
the Dallas–Fort Worth area. In order to compete with national big-box store chains, it is plan-
ning to undertake several “sustainability” (i.e., “green”) projects at its stores. These national
chains have been heavily publicizing their sustainability efforts, including the reduction of
greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions (in metric tons per year) and energy savings (in kilowatt
hours), which have had a positive effect on their sales. They have also demonstrated that sus-
tainability projects can have a positive impact on cost (especially energy) savings. The projects
Texmart is considering include installing solar panels at its stores, installing small wind turbines
at its stores, replacing their trucks with more fuel-efficient hybrid trucks, and implementing
waste reduction programs at its stores, including recycling and reducing the use of plastic bags.
The criteria Texmart wants to use to evaluate the projects include the media and public response
to the projects they undertake, the cost of the projects, the amount of GHG emissions reduction,
and the amount of energy savings. Following are the pairwise comparisons for the projects for
these four criteria, and the pairwise comparisons for the criteria:
464
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Media/Public Response
Project
Solar Power
Wind Power
Shipping/Vehicles
Waste/Recycling
Solar power
1
3
5
7
Wind power
1/3
1
3
5
Shipping/vehicles
1/5
1/3
1
3
Waste/recycling
1/7
1/5
1/3
1
Cost ($)
Project
Solar Power
Wind Power
Shipping/Vehicles
Waste/Recycling
Solar power
1
1/3
1/5
1/7
Wind power
3
1
1/2
1/5
Shipping/vehicles
5
2
1
1/3
Waste/recycling
7
5
3
1
GHG Reductions
Project
Solar Power
Wind Power
Shipping/Vehicles
Waste/Recycling
Solar power
1
3
2
4
Wind power
1/3
1
2
3
Shipping/vehicles
1/2
1/2
1
3
Waste/recycling
1/4
1/3
1/3
1

Energy Savings
Project
Solar Power
Wind Power
Shipping/Vehicles
Waste/Recycling
Solar power
1
2
4
8
Wind power
1/2
1
3
5
Shipping/vehicles
1/4
1/3
1
3
Waste/recycling
1/8
1/5
1/3
1
Media/Public
Criterion
Response
Cost ($)
GHG Reduction
Energy Savings
Media/public response
1
2
3
5
Cost ($)
1/2
1
2
3
GHG reduction
1/3
1/2
1
2
Energy savings
1/5
1/3
1/2
1
Using AHP, rank the projects for Texmart.
47. Labran Jones has played for the Cleveland professional basketball team for the past eight sea-
sons and has established himself as one of the top players in the league. He has recently become
a free agent, meaning he can sign a new contract with Cleveland or with any other team in the
league. While he has enjoyed playing for Cleveland, which is near his hometown, the team has
never seriously contended for a championship, so Labran is strongly considering moving to one
of three other teams that he thinks have more championship potential. Other factors he is con-
sidering are salary (although Cleveland is offering him more money than the other teams), the
possible media attention and endorsements he might receive by playing in another city, and the
city itself and lifestyle where he would be playing. Following are the pairwise comparisons for
the four teams for these four criteria and the pairwise comparisons for the criteria:
Salary ($)
City
Cleveland
Miami
New York
Chicago
Cleveland
1
5
4
3
Miami
1/5
1
1/3
1/2
New York
1/4
3
1
2
Chicago
1/3
2
1/2
1
Media Exposure/Endorsements
City
Cleveland
Miami
New York
Chicago
Cleveland
1
1
1/4
1/2
Miami
1
1
1/4
1/2
New York
4
4
1
2
Chicago
2
2
1/2
1
City/Lifestyle
City
Cleveland
Miami
New York
Chicago
Cleveland
1
1/4
3
2
Miami
4
1
5
4
New York
1/3
1/5
1
1/2
Chicago
1/2
1/4
2
1
PROBLEMS
465

Championship Potential
City
Cleveland
Miami
New York
Chicago
Cleveland
1
1/7
1/2
1/4
Miami
7
1
5
3
New York
2
1/5
1
1/2
Chicago
4
1/3
2
1
Criterion
Championship
Salary
Salary ($)
Media Exposure
City/Lifestyle
Potential
Salary ($)
1
1/4
1/3
1/5
Media exposure
4
1
1/2
1/3
City/lifestyle
3
2
1
1/2
Championship potential
5
3
2
1
Using AHP, determine which team Labran should select to sign a new contract with.
48. For Problem 47, check the consistency of the pairwise comparison matrices for all four criteria
and the criteria.
49. Balston Healthcare operates three hospitals and a number of clinics in its citywide network.
It is planning to open a new wellness center and clinic facility that focuses on geriatric
clients in one of four suburbs. The following table shows the weighted criteria for each
location:
Scores (0 to 100)
Location Factors
Weight
Ashcroft
Brainerd
Crabtree
Dowling
Elderly population
0.55
75
80
65
75
Income level
0.15
65
75
90
85
Land availability
0.10
90
70
90
80
Average age
0.10
80
70
80
75
Public transportation
0.05
95
55
75
95
Crime rate
0.05
95
70
85
90
Recommend a site for the new Balston healthcare facility, based on these weighted location fac-
tors and scores.
50. The owners of the Blitz professional soccer team in Problem 44 have decided to also use a scor-
ing model, with an expanded set of criteria, to help them decide in which city—Atlanta,
Birmingham, Charlotte, or Durham—they should relocate their team. They have graded the 
possible cities according to the following weighted criteria:
466
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Relocation City
Decision Criteria
Weight
Atlanta
Birmingham
Charlotte
Durham
Soccer interest
0.25
70
40
75
90
Entertainment competition
0.18
33
45
60
95
Playing facility
0.12
50
65
70
85
Population (ages 15–40)
0.10
100
70
90
25
Media market
0.07
100
65
95
40
Income level (ages 15–40)
0.05
80
70
80
60
Tax incentives
0.05
20
40
75
60
Airline transportation
0.05
100
70
95
65
Cultural diversity
0.05
100
80
90
75
General sports interest
0.03
75
95
85
65
Local government support
0.03
30
60
75
90
Community support
0.02
20
35
50
75
Develop a scoring model to help the owners decide which city to select to relocate to. Based on
these scoring model results and the results of the AHP model in Problem 44, which city would
you recommend?
51. Visit one or more local car dealers and select four new models of cars you might like to purchase.
Using AHP and your own preferences, rank your selections according to the following criteria:
price, style/appearance, reliability/maintenance, engine size, gas mileage, safety, and features/
options. (You may need to access some additional references, such as Consumer Reports, to facil-
itate your judgments.) After you have ranked your car selections using AHP, develop a scoring
model to perform the same analysis. Then compare the results of the two models and discuss
which method you prefer.
52. Arsenal Electronics is to construct a new $1.2 billion semiconductor plant and has selected four
small towns in the Midwest as potential sites. The important decision criteria and grades for each
town are as follows:
Town
Decision Criterion
Weight
Abbeton
Bayside
Cane Creek
Dunnville
Work ethic
0.18
80
90
70
75
Quality of life
0.16
75
85
95
90
Labor laws/unionization
0.12
90
90
60
70
Infrastructure
0.10
60
50
60
70
Education
0.08
80
90
85
95
Labor skill and education
0.07
75
65
70
80
Cost of living
0.06
70
80
85
75
Taxes
0.05
65
70
55
60
Incentive package
0.05
90
95
70
80
Government regulations
0.03
40
50
65
55
Environmental regulations
0.03
65
60
70
80
Transportation
0.03
90
80
95
80
Space for expansion
0.02
90
95
90
90
Urban proximity
0.02
60
90
70
80
Develop a scoring model to determine in which town the plant should be built.
PROBLEMS
467

53. The Dynaco Manufacturing Company is to build a new plant to make ring bearings (used in au-
tomobiles and trucks). The site selection team is evaluating three sites, and it has graded the im-
portant weighted criteria for each as follows:
Building Site
Decision Criterion
Weight
1
2
3
Labor pool and climate
0.30
80
65
90
Proximity to suppliers
0.20
100
91
75
Wage rates
0.15
60
95
72
Community environment
0.15
75
80
80
Proximity to customers
0.10
65
90
95
Shipping modes
0.05
85
92
65
Air service
0.05
50
65
90
Develop a scoring model to determine which site the selection team should recommend.
54. Exotech Computers manufactures computer components such as chips, circuit boards, mother-
boards, keyboards, LCD panels, and the like, and sells them around the world. It wants to con-
struct a new warehouse and distribution center in Asia to serve emerging markets there. It has
identified sites in Shanghai, Hong Kong, and Singapore and has graded the important weighted
decision criteria for each site as follows:
City
Decision Criterion
Weight
Shanghai
Hong Kong
Singapore
Political stability
0.25
50
60
90
Economic growth
0.18
90
70
75
Port facilities
0.15
60
95
90
Container support
0.10
50
80
90
Land construction cost
0.08
90
20
30
Transportation/distribution
0.08
50
80
70
Duties and tariffs
0.07
70
90
90
Trade regulations
0.05
70
95
95
Airline service
0.02
60
80
70
Area roads
0.02
60
70
80
Recommend a site based on these decision criteria and grades.
55. State University is to construct a new student center and athletic complex that will include a
bookstore, a post office, theaters, a market, a minimall, meeting rooms, a swimming pool, and
weight and exercise rooms. The university administration has hired a site selection specialist to
468
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

identify the best potential sites on campus for the new facility. The site specialist has identified
four sites on campus and has graded the important weighted decision criteria for each site as
follows:
Campus Site
Decision Criterion
Weight
South
West A
West B
East
Proximity to housing
0.23
70
90
65
85
Student traffic
0.22
75
80
60
85
Parking availability
0.16
90
60
80
70
Plot size, terrain
0.12
80
70
90
75
Infrastructure
0.10
50
60
40
60
Off-campus accessibility
0.06
90
70
70
70
Proximity to dining facilities
0.05
60
80
70
90
Visitor traffic
0.04
70
80
65
55
Landscape and aesthetics
0.02
50
40
60
70
Which site should the specialist recommend?
56. Following an all-star school soccer career, Kelly Williams has been offered scholarships to
five universities. She has had a difficult time making a decision and has decided to use a
scoring model to help evaluate the different offers. The following table includes a weighted
list of criteria she has developed and a grade showing how well each school satisfies the
criteria:
University
Decision Criterion
Weight
Tech
State
A&M
Central
Western
Playing time
0.29
61
52
93
83
77
Coach
0.20
87
92
66
55
80
Conference affiliation
0.17
42
57
80
92
63
School prestige
0.13
98
72
65
81
83
Program status
0.08
78
82
59
62
75
Degree program/major
0.08
72
80
75
93
89
Dollar value of scholarship
0.05
93
88
75
82
74
Rank the universities according to their scores to assist Kelly in making her decision.
57. The Carter family wants to purchase a time-share condominium for 1 week during the summer
in Hilton Head, South Carolina. There are many resort complexes from which to choose, and the
PROBLEMS
469

Carters have narrowed their list to five. They have graded their choices according to the follow-
ing weighted criteria:
Resort Location
Decision Criterion
Weight
Albermarle
Beachfront
Calypso
Dafuskie
Edenisle
Specific summer week
.40
80
70
70
90
60
Cost
.20
50
70
90
60
90
Proximity to beach
.15
70
60
70
50
80
Condominium quality
.05
90
80
90
60
80
Pool size
.05
40
60
70
80
100
Cleanliness
.05
70
90
90
80
90
Crowdedness of beach
.05
30
80
50
70
60
Condominium size
.05
100
70
90
80
90
Use a scoring model to determine a recommended resort for the Carters’ time-share purchase.
58. Robin Dillon has recently accepted a new job in the Washington, DC, area and has been hunting
for a condominium to purchase. From friends and coworkers she has compiled a list of five pos-
sible condominium complexes that she might move into. The following table indicates the
weighted criteria that Robin intends to use in her decision-making process and a grade indicat-
ing how well each complex satisfies each criterion:
Condominium Complex
Fairfax
Dupont
Tysons
Alexandria
Manassas
Decision Criterion
Weight
Forest
Gardens
Terrace
Commons
Farms
Purchase price
.30
92
85
75
62
79
Neighborhood location
.18
76
63
95
90
80
Proximity to Metro train
.12
78
75
76
85
60
Shopping
.10
65
80
98
92
75
Security
.10
75
78
90
95
83
Recreational facilities
.05
96
90
82
81
93
Distance to job
.05
85
67
95
75
65
Condo floor plan
.05
80
78
86
92
90
Complex size
.05
65
60
92
89
70
Use a scoring model to help Robin determine which condominium she should purchase.
59. The New River Rapids Under-15 Girls’Travel Soccer Team is determining which tournaments it
should enter during the fall season. The manager has identified six possible tournaments, and
the team wants to enter three of them. The team manager first surveyed the parents and players
and determined a list of decision criteria and their relative weights. The manager then asked the
parents and players to grade the tournaments on how well they satisfied the criteria. The criteria,
weights, and average grades are summarized as follows:
470
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING

Tournament
Decision
Criterion
Weight Roanoke Greensboro Bristol Richmond Knoxville Charlotte
Distance
0.24
81
73
85
92
66
84
Tournament 
0.21
91
88
79
83
75
69
dates
Hotel cost
0.16
86
75
92
67
73
71
Level of 
0.14
88
93
63
79
89
94
competition
Field quality
0.10
84
91
70
87
77
81
Shopping
0.07
81
83
77
92
90
97
Attractions
0.06
73
82
80
91
96
87
Restaurants
0.02
83
88
65
95
72
91
To what three tournaments should the manager recommend the team apply, given the prefer-
ences indicated by the parents and players?
60. As part of an aggressive expansion plan, StarTrack Coffee is planning to open three new retail
stores in the city. The following table shows the location factors it considers to be important in-
dicators of future profitability and how management has graded each location according to each
of these factors:
Location Factor
Business 
Shopping
Vehicle
Pedestrian
Land and Construction
Location
Density
Density
Traffic
Traffic
Cost
1
75
81
55
75
63
2
62
56
83
67
82
3
73
45
71
70
74
4
81
69
77
65
66
5
77
86
75
65
82
6
64
75
65
80
91
7
89
86
67
73
67
8
91
90
64
80
65
9
56
64
77
69
82
10
66
68
81
72
87
11
67
81
75
66
85
12
83
73
77
70
90
Use your own judgment to determine weights for each of the location factors and recommend
the three new store sites. Are there other location factors that you think might be important? 
61. Federated Electronics, Ltd., manufactures display screens and monitors for computers and tele-
visions, which it sells to companies around the world. It wants to construct a new warehouse and
distribution center in Asia to serve emerging markets there. It has identified potential sites in the
PROBLEMS
471

port cities Shanghai, Singapore, Pusan, Kaohsiung, and Hong Kong. The following table shows
the factors in the location decision and the grade of each location for each factor:
Port Score (0 to 100)
Location Factor
Shanghai
Singapore
Pusan
Kaohsiung
Hong Kong
Facility cost
65
75
80
90
55
Labor rates
75
70
85
95
60
Labor availability
70
65
85
80
70
Infrastructure
80
80
65
70
95
Transportation
75
65
75
75
90
Container availability
70
80
65
75
85
Expansion/modernization
80
75
90
80
95
Political stability
65
70
85
80
90
Duties, tariffs, and fees
75
80
80
90
70
Trade regulations
65
75
80
80
75
The weights indicating the importance of each location factor are not included. Determine what
you think these weights should be and recommend the best location for the new distribution
center.
62. Select four fast-food restaurants (e.g., McDonald’s, Burger King, Wendy’s, Domino’s) in your
area and develop a scoring model that includes decision criteria, weights, and grades to rank the
restaurants from best to worst.
472
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Case Problem
Oakdale County School Busing
The Oakdale County School Board was meeting in spe-
cial session. A federal judge had ordered the board to pres-
ent an acceptable busing plan for racially balancing the four
high schools in Oakdale County within a week. The judge
had previously given the school board several opportunities
to informally present a plan, but the members had been un-
able to agree among themselves. Every time they met and
started to develop a plan to bus students from one high
school district to another, an argument would arise before
they got past the first busing move, and they would adjourn
the meeting. This time, however, they knew the judge had
lost patience and they had to agree on something.
Of the four schools, only West High School was racially
balanced, with 500 white students and 500 black students.
North High School had 1,000 white students and only 300
black students; East High School was almost as bad, with
1,050 white students and 400 black students. South High
School was predominantly black, with 800 black students
and 450 white students. Overall, of the 5,000 students in
Oakdale County, 60% were white and 40% black.
“Look,” said John Connor, a school board member
from the West district, “rather than starting off by trying to
shift students from one district to another, why don’t we
try to establish what we want to accomplish—you know,
what our goals are?”
Several of the other members nodded in agreement,
and Fred Harvey, the board chairman, said, “Good idea,
John.”
“Okay, the first goal seems pretty evident to me,” John
said. “Sixty percent of our students are white, and 40% are
black, so that’s what we need our schools to be, 60% and
40%.”
“That’s okay for you to say, John,” Betty Philips argued,
“because your district has those proportions already—so
you won’t have any busing. But my district in the North is a
long way from that ratio, and we would have to bus a lot of
our students to achieve a 60%/40% ratio.”
“I’m not saying it, Betty,” said John. “That is basically
what Judge Barry has been saying for 6 months.”

CASE PROBLEM
473
“John’s right, Betty, and we’re not busing students yet;
we’re just putting down our objectives,” said Fred. “I think
that has to be our highest-priority objective. How about the
rest of you?”
They all nodded their agreement, even Betty Philips,
reluctantly.
“Since we know we’re going to have to bus students
to achieve this ratio at each school, I think we ought to
try to minimize the amount of traveling the students will
have to do,” suggested Mickey Gibboney, a member from
the South district.
Fred Harvey noted that page 10 of their handout had a
chart showing the average mileage a student in one district
would have to travel on a bus to the high school in each of
the other districts. The chart looked like this:
The other members nodded and agreed.
“Okay,” said Fred Harvey, “that’ll be our number-two
goal.”
Betty Philips spoke up again. “I’ll tell you another
thing I don’t want to see happen, and that’s any more over-
crowding at North High School. We have 100 students
more than capacity now.”
“You think you have problems!” Bob Wilson ex-
claimed. “In East we have 1,450 students and capacity for
1,000. I think no overcrowding is a great idea!”
“I agree,” said Mickey Gibboney. “We’re 250 over our
capacity at South High School.”
“That’s a nice idea,” John Connor responded, “and I real-
ize that we have 200 students less than our capacity at West
High School. However, let’s face it, in the county we have ca-
pacity for 4,400, not 5,000, students, so there’s going to be
some overcrowding. I think our objective should be that all
four schools share in the overcrowding proportionally.”
“That sounds reasonable to me,” said Fred Harvey.
“How about the rest of you? Okay to say our number-three
goal is to be as close to capacity at each school as possible
but share proportionally in the overcrowding?”
They all voiced their approval.
“Well,” John Connor concluded, “I think we have iden-
tified the things we want to accomplish in our plan. Now if
we could just use some magic trick to find a plan for bus-
ing students between the districts that would achieve all
these goals.”
The others nodded and frowned.
A. Formulate a goal programming model to help the
board with its dilemma.
B. Solve the goal programming model by using the 
computer.
Distance (mi.)
District/School
North
South
East
West
North
—
30
12
20
South
30
—
18
26
East
12
18
—
24
West
20
26
24
—
“Why don’t we try to set some reasonable objectives
for total busing miles, for the students’ sake and for budg-
eting reasons?” Cassandra Watkins asked. “I would sug-
gest about 30,000 miles per day, based on the miles we bus
students now. If we get much higher than that, we’re not go-
ing to have the money to pay for it, and it means we’ll be
busing students all over the place.”
Case Problem
Catawba Valley Highway Patrol
Broderick Crawford is the district commander for the
Catawba Valley highway patrol district in western Pennsyl-
vania. He is attempting to assign highway patrol cars to dif-
ferent road segments in his district. The primary function of
the highway patrol force is to patrol roads outside incorpo-
rated city and town limits in the district to deter traffic viola-
tors and accidents. This objective is typically achieved by
maintaining a visible presence—letting motorists see patrol
units on a regular basis and giving out warnings, citations,
and so forth. Secondary activities of a patrol unit include
providing assistance to motorists, answering distress calls,
handling emergencies and accidents when called to the
scene, and occasionally apprehending criminals.
Commander Crawford has 23 patrol cars that he wants
to assign to the following six major road segment areas:
road segment 1, interstate, north
road segment 2, urban area, north
road segment 3, four-lane highway, east
road segment 4, two-lane highway, west
road segment 5, interstate/four-lane highway, south
road segment 6, two-lane highway (heavy truck traffic),
south

474
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Each of these road segments includes the primary ar-
teries, as indicated earlier, plus adjoining roads. All the
road segments have different levels of traffic density and
accident rates, which are key factors in determining how
many patrol units to assign. However, these factors do not
always coincide. For example, interstate highway seg-
ments typically have high traffic density but low accident
rates, whereas some two-lane highways have low traffic
density but high accident rates. Differences often occur be-
cause of variations in road conditions (such as sharp
curves, visibility, and width). Other conditions, such as
heavy truck traffic (as on segment 6), also contribute to
high accident rates.
Each segment requires different operating costs, in-
cluding maintenance and repair, fuel, and so on because of
different operating conditions. The commander’s most
pressing objective is to limit daily operating costs to $450.
The daily operating costs per road segment are as follows:
The commander’s second-most-important goal is to re-
duce the average accident rate for the district by five acci-
dents per million miles traveled. The commander’s next
goals (in order) are to achieve 350 physical contacts and
30,000 sight contacts per day in the district.
If no patrol units are assigned in the district, the aver-
age time to respond to a distress call anywhere in the dis-
trict from the main district headquarters and motor pool is
28 minutes. Each car assigned to a road segment reduces
the overall average response time in the district by the fol-
lowing amounts:
Road Segment
Operating Cost
1
$20
2
18
3
22
4
24
5
17
6
19
The commander would like to reduce the accident rate
for the district as well as increase both physical and sight
contacts, which are deterrents to potential traffic violators.
The commander would also like to achieve a reasonable
average response time for a patrol unit to respond to a call
for each road segment. The average accident rate reduction
(per million miles traveled) and physical contacts and sight
contacts per car for each road segment are shown in the
following table:
Patrol Unit
Physical
Sight 
Road
Accident Reduction
Contacts Contacts 
Segment (per million mi. traveled) (per day) (per day)
1
0.27
18
1,700
2
0.21
26
900
3
0.28
10
650
4
0.19
34
230
5
0.23
25
1,600
6
0.33
17
520
Road 
Reduction in Average
Segment
Response Time (min.)
1
0.32
2
0.65
3
0.43
4
0.87
5
0.55
6
0.49
The commander’s last objective is to achieve an average
response time to distress calls of 15 minutes. Because of local
and political pressure, the commander has to assign at least
two patrol units to each road segment. In addition, the com-
mander believes that a maximum of five patrol units is suffi-
cient for any particular road segment.
Formulate and solve a goal programming model to de-
termine the number of patrol units to assign to each road
segment to achieve the commander’s goals.

CASE PROBLEM
475
Case Problem
Katherine Miller’s Job Selection
Katherine Miller is a senior in the department of infor-
mation technology at Tech. For the past few months she
has been involved in the job search process. She has an ex-
cellent résumé, with a high grade point average and a
strong record of campus participation in clubs and activi-
ties. As a result, she has had a number of good interviews
with various companies. She now has job offers from five
companies—American Systems Developers, Anderssun
Consulting,
National Computing Software Systems
(NCSS), the Gulf-South Company, and Electronic Village.
American Systems Developers and Anderssun Consult-
ing are both large national consulting firms with offices in
several major cities. If Katherine accepted the offer of ei-
ther of these firms, she would primarily work on project
teams assigned to develop decision support and information
systems for corporate clients around the country. If she
went with American Systems Developers, her home base
would be in Atlanta, and if she accepted Anderssun’s offer,
she would be located in Washington, DC. However, in both
cases she would be traveling a great deal and could some-
times be on the road at a client location for as much as 6 to
9 months. NCSS is a software and computer systems devel-
opment company with a campus-like location in Chicago.
Although her job with NCSS would involve some traveling,
it would never be more than several weeks at any one time.
Gulf-South is a bank holding company that operates eight
different banks and its various branches in six southeastern
states. If Katherine accepted Gulf-South’s offer, she would
be located in Tampa, where she would work in operations
systems. She would be involved in developing information
and support systems for bank operations, and she would
have minimal travel. Electronic Village is a national chain
of discount stores specializing in electronic products, such
as televisions, DVRs, CD players, MP3 players, and
computers. Her job with Electronic Village would be at its
corporate headquarters in Nashville, Tennessee, where she
would develop and maintain computer systems to be used
for inventory control at the hundreds of Electronic Village
stores across the country. She would be required to travel
very little.
American Systems Developers has offered Katherine a
starting salary of $38,000 annually, and Anderssun Con-
sulting has offered her $41,000 per year. NCSS has offered
her an annual salary of $46,000, whereas Gulf-South has
offered her $35,000 per year, and Electronic Village has
offered her a salary of $32,000 per year.
Katherine is having a difficult time making her decision.
All the companies have excellent reputations, are financially
healthy, and have good opportunities for advancement. All
are demanding in terms of the workload they require. 
All five companies have given Katherine only a few weeks
to make a decision regarding their offers.
Katherine has decided to use the analytical hierarchy
process (AHP) to help decide which job offer she should
accept. She has developed a list of criteria that are impor-
tant to her in deciding which job to take. The criteria, in
no particular order, are (1) salary; (2) cost of living in the
city where she would be located; (3) amount of travel as-
sociated with her job; (4) climate (weather) where she
would be located; (5) entertainment and cultural opportu-
nities, including sports, theater, museums, parks, and so
on; (6) universities where she can work on an MBA de-
gree part time and at night; (7) the crime rate in the city
where she would live; (8) the nature of the job and what
she would be doing; and (9) her proximity to friends and
relatives. Katherine realizes that she has very limited in-
formation on which to compare the five jobs, based on
most of these criteria, so she knows she needs to go to the
library and do some research, especially on the five differ-
ent job locations.
Put yourself in Katherine’s shoes and, using all or
some of her criteria and your own preferences and knowl-
edge, develop an overall ranking of the jobs, using AHP.

476
CHAPTER 9
MULTICRITERIA DECISION MAKING
Case Problem
Selecting National Baseball Hall 
of Fame Members
Each November the Baseball Writers’ Association of
America (BBWAA) releases its list of that year’s nominees
for induction into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in
Cooperstown, New York. There are 575 voting members of
the BBWAA, and candidates must be named on 75% of the
ballots cast to gain entry into the National Baseball Hall of
Fame. There is no limit to the number of players who can
be nominated or who can be elected. Go to the BBWAA
Web site at http://bbwaa.com/ and from the list of this
year’s nominees select the five or six “field players” (as
opposed to pitchers) who you think are the top candidates
for selection, and develop an AHP model using your own
criteria to rank these candidates. Criteria might include,
among other things, hits, lifetime batting average, home
runs, runs batted in, runs, stolen bases, awards, years
played, fielding percentage, number of World Series par-
ticipated in, and a comparison with Hall of Famers overall
and at their field position (e.g., catcher, first base, outfield).
Player bios including their playing statistics can be ob-
tained by searching the Internet.

CHAPTER
10
Nonlinear Programming
477

More attention has been devoted to linear programming in this text than to any other single topic.
It is a very versatile technique that can be and has been applied to a wide variety of problems.
Besides chapters devoted specifically to linear programming models and applications, we have also
presented several variations of linear programming, integer and goal programming, and unique
applications of linear programming for transportation and assignment problems. In all these cases,
all the objective functions and constraints were linear; that is, they formed a line or plane in space.
However, many realistic business problems have relationships that can be modeled only with non-
linear functions. When problems fit the general linear programming format but include nonlinear
functions, they are referred to as nonlinear programming problems.
Nonlinear programming problems are given a separate name because they are solved 
in a different manner than are linear programming problems. In fact, their solution is considerably
more complex than that of linear programming problems, and it is often difficult, if not impossible,
to determine an optimal solution, even for a relatively small problem. In linear programming
problems, solutions are found at the intersections of lines or planes, and though there may be a
very large number of possible solution points, the number is finite, and a solution can eventually
be found. However, in nonlinear programming there may be no intersection or corner points; in-
stead, the solution space can be an undulating line or surface, which includes virtually an infi-
nite number of points. For a realistic problem, the solution space may be like a mountain range,
with many peaks and valleys, and the maximum or minimum solution point could be at the top
of any peak or at the bottom of any valley. What is difficult in nonlinear programming is deter-
mining if the point at the top of a peak is just the highest point in the immediate area (called a
local optimal, in calculus terms) or the highest point of all (called the global optimal).
The solution techniques for nonlinear programming problems generally involve searching the
solution surface for peaks or valleys—that is, high points or low points. The problem encountered
by these methods is that they sometimes have trouble determining whether the high point they have
identified is just a local optimal solution or the global optimal solution. Thus, finding a solution is
often difficult and can involve very complex mathematics that are beyond the scope of this text.
In this chapter, we present the basic structure of nonlinear programming problems and use
Excel to solve simple models.
Nonlinear Profit Analysis
We begin our presentation of nonlinear programming models by determining the optimal value
for a single nonlinear function. To demonstrate the solution procedure, we will use a profit func-
tion based on break-even analysis. In Chapter 1 we used break-even analysis to begin our study
of model building, so it seems appropriate that we return to this basic model to complete our
study of model building.
Recall that in break-even analysis the profit function, Z, is formulated as
where
sales volume (i.e., demand)
price
fixed cost
variable cost
One important but somewhat unrealistic assumption of this break-even model is that volume, or
demand, is independent of price (i.e., volume remains constant, regardless of the price of the
product). It would be more realistic for the demand to vary as price increased or decreased. For
our Western Clothing Company example from Chapter 1, let us suppose that the dependency of
demand on price is defined by the following linear function:
v = 1,500 - 24.6p
cv =
cf =
p =
v =
Z = vp - cf - vcv
478
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
Nonlinear
programming has the
same format as a 
linear programming
model, but the 
objective function or
constraints, or both,
are nonlinear
functions.

This linear relationship is illustrated in Figure 10.1. The figure illustrates the fact that as price
increases, demand decreases, up to a particular price level ($60.98) that will result in no sales
volume.
NONLINEAR PROFIT ANALYSIS
479
Now we will insert our new relationship for volume (v) into our original profit equation:
Substituting values for fixed cost 
and variable cost 
into this new
profit function results in the following equation:
Because of the squared term, this equation for profit is now a nonlinear, or quadratic, function
that relates profit to price, as shown in Figure 10.2.
= 1,696.8p - 24.6p2 - 22,000
Z = 1,500p - 24.6p2 - 10,000 - 1,500(8) + 24.6p(8)
(cv = +8)
(cf = +10,000)
= 1,500p - 24.6p2 - cf - 1,500cv + 24.6pcv
= (1,500 - 24.6p)p - cf - (1,500 - 24.6p) cv
Z = vp - cf - vcv
0
Volume (v)
$60.98
1,500
Slope = –24.6
Price (p)
FIGURE 10.1
Linear relationship 
of volume to price
0
Price (p)
Z = 1,696.8p – 24.6p2 – 22,000
–$22,000
Profit (Z)
FIGURE 10.2
The nonlinear
profit function

In Figure 10.2, the greatest profit will occur at the point where the profit curve is at its highest.
At that point the slope of the curve will equal zero, as shown in Figure 10.3.
480
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
The slope of a curve
at any point is equal
to the derivative of the
curve’s function.
The slope of a curve
at its highest point
equals zero.
0
Price (p)
Optimal
price
Maximum
profit
Z = 1,696.8p – 24.6p2 – 22,000
–$22,000
Profit (Z)
Slope = derivative = 0
FIGURE 10.3
Maximum profit
for the profit 
function
In calculus, the slope of a curve at any point is equal to the derivative of the mathematical
function that defines the curve. The derivative of our profit function is determined as follows:
Given this derivative, the slope of the profit curve at its highest point is defined by the fol-
lowing relationship:
Now we can solve this relationship for the optimal price, p, which will maximize total
profit:
The optimal volume of denim jeans to produce is computed by substituting this price into
our previously developed linear relationship for volume:
pairs of denim jeans
The maximum total profit is computed as follows:
The maximum profit, optimal price, and optimal volume are shown graphically in
Figure 10.4.
= +7,259.45
= +1,696.8(34.49) - 24.6 (34.49)2 - 22,000
Z = +1,696.8p - 24.6p2 - 22,000
= 651.6
= 1,500 - 24.6 (34.49)
v = 1,500 - 24.6p
= +34.49
p = 1,696.8>49.2
 49.2p = 1,696.8
 0 = 1,696.8 - 49.2p
0 = 1,696.8 - 49.2p
0Z
0p = 1.696.8 - 49.2p
Z = 1,696.8p - 24.6p2 - 22,000

An important concept we have yet to mention is that by extending the break-even model this
way, we have converted it into an optimization model. In other words, we are now able to maxi-
mize an objective function (profit) by determining the optimal value of a variable (price). This is
exactly what we did in linear programming when we determined the values of decision variables
that optimized an objective function. The use of calculus to find optimal values for variables is
often referred to as classical optimization.
Constrained Optimization
In the preceding section, the profit analysis model was developed as an extension of the break-
even model. Recall that the total profit function was
where
volume
price
fixed cost
variable cost
and the demand function (i.e., volume as a function of price) was
By substituting this demand function into our total profit equation, we developed a nonlinear
function:
Then, by substituting values for 
($10,000) and 
($8) into this function, we obtained
We then differentiated this function, set it equal to zero, and solved for the value of p
($34.49), which corresponded to the maximum point on the profit curve (where the slope
equaled zero).
This type of model is referred to as an unconstrained optimization model. It consists of a sin-
gle nonlinear objective function and no constraints. If we add one or more constraints to this model,
it becomes a constrained optimization model. A constrained optimization model is more com-
monly referred to as a nonlinear programming model. The reason this type of model is designated
Z = 1,696.8p - 24.6p2 - 22,000
cv
cf
Z = 1,500p - 24.6p2 - cf - 1,500cv + 24.6pcv
v = 1,500 - 24.6p
cv =
cf =
p =
v =
Z = vp - cf - vcv
CONSTRAINED OPTIMIZATION
481
Classical optimization
is the use of calculus to 
determine the optimal
value of a variable.
An unconstrained
optimization model
includes a nonlinear
objective function and
no constraints.
0
Price (p)
$34.49
$7,259.45
–$22,000
Profit (Z)
v = 651.6 pairs of jeans
FIGURE 10.4
Maximum profit,
optimal price, and
optimal volume
A constrained
optimization model
includes a nonlinear
objective function 
and one or more 
constraints.

as a form of mathematical programming is because all types of mathematical programming mod-
els are actually constrained optimization models. That is, they all have the general form of an ob-
jective function that is subject to one or more constraints. Linear programming has an objective
function and constraints that happen to be linear. A nonlinear programming model has the same
general form as a linear programming model, except that the objective function and/or the
constraint(s) are nonlinear.
Nonlinear programming differs from linear programming, however, in one other critical
aspect: The solution of nonlinear programming problems is much more complex. In linear
programming a particular procedure is guaranteed to lead to a solution if the problem
has been correctly formulated, whereas in nonlinear programming no guaranteed procedure
exists. The reason for this complexity can be illustrated by a graph of our profit analysis
model. Figure 10.5 shows the nonlinear profit curve for the example model.
482
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
0
Price (p)
$34.49
$7,259.45
Profit (Z)
FIGURE 10.5
Nonlinear profit
curve for the profit
analysis model
Price (p)
$20
Maximum
profit ($)
Profit (Z)
Feasible
solution
space
Optimal
solution
point
A
FIGURE 10.6
A constrained 
optimization
model
As stated previously, the solution is found by taking the derivative of the profit function,
setting it equal to zero, and solving for p (price). This results in an optimal value for p that
corresponds to the maximum profit, as shown in Figure 10.5.
Now we will transform this unconstrained optimization model into a nonlinear program-
ming model by adding the constraint
In other words, because of market conditions, we are restricting the price to a maximum of
$20. This constraint results in a feasible solution space, as shown in Figure 10.6.
p … +20

As in a linear programming problem, the solution is on the boundary of the feasible solu-
tion space formed by the constraint. Thus, in Figure 10.6, point A is the optimal solution. It cor-
responds to the maximum value of the portion of the objective function that is still feasible.
However, the difficulty with nonlinear programming is that the solution is not always on the
boundary of the feasible solution space formed by the constraint. For example, consider the addi-
tion of the following constraint to our original nonlinear objective function:
This constraint also creates a feasible solution space, as shown in Figure 10.7.
p … +40
SOLUTION OF NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL
483
See Web site Module
D for a chapter on
“Nonlinear Program-
ming Solution
Techniques.”
Price (p)
$40
Profit (Z)
Feasible
solution
space
Optimal
solution
point
B
C
FIGURE 10.7
A constrained 
optimization
model with a 
solution point not
on the constraint
boundary
But notice in Figure 10.7 that the solution is no longer on the boundary of the feasible solu-
tion space, as it would be in linear programming. Point C represents a greater profit than point B,
and it is also in the feasible solution space. This means that we cannot simply look at points on
the solution space boundary to find the solution; instead, we must also consider other points 
on the surface of the objective function. This greatly complicates the process of finding a solution
to a nonlinear programming problem, and this difficulty is aggravated by an increased number of
variables and constraints and by nonlinear functions of a higher order. You can imagine the diffi-
culties of finding a solution if you contemplate a model in space that is made up of intersecting
cones, ellipses, and undulating surfaces, as well as planes, and a solution that is not even on the
boundary of the solution space.
A number of different solution approaches to nonlinear programming problems are available.
As we have already indicated, they typically represent a convergence of the principles of calculus
and mathematical programming. However, as noted earlier, the solution techniques can be very
complex. Thus, we will confine our discussion of nonlinear programming solution methods to
several different model applications and the Excel solution.
Solution of Nonlinear Programming Problems with Excel
Excel can solve nonlinear programming problems by using “Solver” that we used previously in
this text to solve linear programming problems. Exhibit 10.1 shows an Excel spreadsheet set
up to solve our initial Western Clothing Company example. The demand function contained in
cell C4 is 
The formula for profit is contained in cell C3 and is shown on the
formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet.
150024.6*C5.

The Solver Parameters window for this problem is shown in Exhibit 10.2. It is important to
make sure that the “Nonlinear” option has been selected. Exhibit 10.3 shows the Excel solution
for the Western Clothing Company example.
484
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
Click on “GRG
Nonlinear.”
EXHIBIT 10.2
Formula for profit
=1500–24.6*C5
EXHIBIT 10.1
EXHIBIT 10.3

Exhibit 10.4 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to solve a nonlinear version of the Beaver
Creek Pottery Company example from Chapter 2 that is formulated as
subject to
hours (labor)
where
number of bowls produced
number of mugs produced
profit ($) per bowl
profit ($) per mug
5 - 0.2x2 =
4 - 0.1x1 =
x2 =
x1 =
x1 + 2x2 = 40
maximize Z = +(4 - 0.1x1)x1 + (5 - 0.2x2) x2
SOLUTION OF NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL
485
=SUMPRODUCT
(C5:C6,D5:D6)
=C5+2*C6
EXHIBIT 10.4
The numbers of bowls and mugs produced are contained in cells C5 and C6, respectively. The
profit formula for a bowl is contained in cell D5. The total profit contained in cell C11 is com-
puted using the formula SUMPRODUCT(C5:C6,D5:D6) and is shown on the formula bar at
the top of the spreadsheet. The formula for labor, C52*C6, is contained in cell C9. The
Solver Parameters window for this problem is shown in Exhibit 10.5, and the final solution is
shown in Exhibit 10.6.
Excel will also provide the value of the Lagrange multiplier, which provides the dual value
of the labor resource. To derive the Lagrange multiplier, after you click on “Solve” in Solver,
the Solver Results screen shown in Exhibit 10.7 will appear. On this screen, under “Reports,”
select “Sensitivity.” This will generate the sensitivity report shown in Exhibit 10.8. Note that in
addition to the problem solution, the value of the Lagrange multiplier is also provided for the
labor constraint.
The Lagrange multiplier value of .33 is analogous to the dual value in a linear programming
problem. It reflects the approximate change in the objective function resulting from a unit
change in the quantity (right-hand-side) value of the constraint equation. For this example, if the
quantity of labor hours is increased from 40 to 41 hours, the value of Z will increase by $0.33—
from $70.42 to $70.75.

486
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
EXHIBIT 10.6
Select
“Sensitivity.”
EXHIBIT 10.7
EXHIBIT 10.5

SOLUTION OF NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING PROBLEMS WITH EXCEL
487
Lagrange multiplier
for labor
EXHIBIT 10.8
Management Science Application
Making Supplier Decisions at Ford with 
Nonlinear Programming
In 2005, Ford took back a number of supplier component
operations (under the name Visteon) it spun off in 2000 in
order to sustain the viability of its supply chain. It created a
holding company for these businesses, called Automotive
Components Holdings, LLC (ACH), with a commitment to sell
or close all ACH businesses by 2009. 
A major ACH business with $1.5 billion in annual revenue
was Interiors, which produced instrument panels, consoles,
door-trim panels, and cockpit modules for Ford assembly
plants. Interiors manufactured these components at two un-
derutilized and unprofitable plants in Saline and Utica in south-
east Michigan; these plants consumed substantial amounts of
cash. However, despite improvements to these plants and a
concerted marketing effort, Ford was unable to sell the Interi-
ors business, and it needed to decide how to best resolve the
problem. Ford identified the following solution alternatives:
consolidate the entire ACH Interiors business into one plant,
thereby improving its utilization and enhancing its attractive-
ness to a potential buyer; shut down both plants and out-
source all of Ford’s Interiors business taking advantage of
unused capacity at outside suppliers; or use some combination
of plant consolidation and outsourcing. 
The problem Ford addressed with its management sci-
ence application was which of the three alternatives to se-
lect—that is, which plants to close and where to outsource
the components that would minimize the overall production,
distribution, and restructuring costs. Key to this problem for
Ford was identifying an optimal sourcing pattern for the in-
teriors components it needed, where the best sourcing pat-
tern would result in the minimum present value of the 5-year
cost to Ford. The model created by these sourcing patterns
related component parts pricing, fixed costs, and semi-fixed
costs to capacity utilization as nonlinear operational con-
straints and a nonlinear objective function, thus requiring a
nonlinear programming model for solution. The model had
to reflect millions of possible product-to-process-to-suppliers
allocations.
The model’s solution recommended outsourcing several
product lines to third-party suppliers, closing the plant at
Utica, and consolidating the remaining ACH business at the
Saline plant. This solution resulted in 5-year cost savings of
more than $50 million and up-front investment savings of
$45 million.
Source: Based on W. Klampfl,Y. Fradkin, C. McDaniel, and M. Wolcott,
“Ford Uses OR to Make Urgent Sourcing Decisions in a Distressed
Supplier Environment,” Interfaces 39, no. 5 (September–October 2009):
428–42.
Monty Rakusen/Cultura/Newscom

A Nonlinear Programming Model with Multiple Constraints
Now that we have shown how Excel can be used to solve nonlinear problems, we can look at
more complex problems—for example, a problem with more than one constraint. Consider the
Western Clothing Company example presented earlier, except now the company produces two
kinds of jeans, designer and straight-leg, and production is subject to resource constraints for
denim cloth, cutting time, and sewing time. The company sells its jeans to several upscale cloth-
ing store chains, and sales demand is dependent on the price at which the company sells the jeans.
The demand for designer jeans 
and the demand for straight-leg jeans 
are defined by the
following relationships:
where
price of designer jeans
price of straight-leg jeans
The cost of producing designer jeans is $12 per pair, and the cost of producing straight-leg
jeans is $9 per pair; thus, the objective function for profit is
The production of jeans is subject to the following resource constraints for available cloth,
cutting time, and sewing time:
The complete nonlinear programming model formulation is summarized as follows:
subject to
where
price of designer jeans
price of straight-leg jeans
Notice that the decision variables for this problem are 
and 
not 
and 
The demand vari-
ables,
and 
are functions of price and, thus, are dependent variables. Also notice that we
did not substitute the functional relationships for 
and 
into the objective function, creating a
quadratic function. The model is still nonlinear, but we can solve it directly with Excel in its
present form.
Exhibit 10.9 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to solve our Western Clothing 
Company example with constraints. The decision variables for price are contained in 
cells D5:D6. The formula for demand for designer jeans is contained in cell C5 and is 
shown on the formula bar at the top of the screen. The formula for total profit,
x2
x1
x2,
x1
x2.
x1
p2,
p1
p2 =
p1 =
x2 = 2,700 - 63.8p2
x1 = 1,500 - 24.6p1
7.2x1 + 8.5x2 … 15,000
3.6x1 + 2.9x2 … 8,500
2x1 + 2.7x2 … 6,000
maximize Z = ( p1 - 12) x1 + ( p2 - 9) x2
 sewing: 7.2x1 + 8.5x2 … 15,000 minutes
 cutting: 3.6x1 + 2.9x2 … 8,500 minutes
 cloth: 2x1 + 2.7x2 … 6,000 yards
maximize Z = (p1 - 12)x1 + 1p2 - 92x2
p2 =
p1 =
x2 = 2,700 - 63.8p2
x1 = 1,500 - 24.6p1
(x2)
(x1)
488
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING

A NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING MODEL WITH MULTIPLE CONSTRAINTS
489
=D512
=2*C5+2.7*C6
=SUMPRODUCT (C5:C6,E5:E6)
EXHIBIT 10.9
EXHIBIT 10.10
EXHIBIT 10.11

is contained in cell E7. The formulas for the resource
constraints are contained in cells C11, C12, and C13, and the resource availabilities for each
constraint are in cells D11:D13. The Solver Parameters window and solution are shown in
Exhibit 10.10 and Exhibit 10.11, respectively.
SUMPRODUCT(C5:C6,E5:E6),

Nonlinear Model Examples
In our previous profit analysis examples, the models followed the traditional mathematical (i.e.,
linear) programming formulation, with an objective function, decision variables, and con-
straints. However, many types of problems employ well-known nonlinear functions but are not
typically thought of in the traditional math programming model framework. In this section we
consider several additional examples that include familiar nonlinear functions—the facility lo-
cation model and the investment portfolio selection model.
Facility Location
In a facility location problem, the objective, in general, is to locate a centralized facility that serves
several customers or other facilities to minimize distance or miles traveled between the facility and
its customers. This problem uses as a measure of distance the formula for the straight-line distance
between two points on a set of x, y coordinates, which is also the hypotenuse of a right triangle:
where
coordinates of proposed facility
coordinates of customer or location facility, i
Consider, for example, the Clayton County Rescue Squad and Ambulance Service, which
serves five rural towns, Abbeville, Benton, Clayton, Dunning, and Eden. The rescue squad wants
to construct a centralized facility and garage to minimize its total annual travel mileage to the
towns. The locations of the five towns in terms of their graphical x, y coordinates, measured in
miles relative to the point 
and the expected number of annual trips the squad will
have to make to each town are as follows:
x = 0, y = 0,
(xi, yi) =
(x, y) =
d = 2(xi - x)2 + 1yi - y22
490
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
Coordinates
Town
x
y
Annual Trips
Abbeville
20
20
75
Benton
10
35
105
Clayton
25
9
135
Dunning
32
15
60
Eden
10
8
90
The objective of the problem is to determine a set of coordinates (x, y) for the rescue squad fa-
cility that minimizes the total miles traveled to the town, according to the following function:
where
distance to town i
annual trips to town i
The Excel solution to this problem is shown in Exhibit 10.12. The coordinates (x, y) for the
new rescue squad facility are in cells C14:C15. The formulas for the distances between the
rescue squad facility and each of the towns 
are in cells E6:E10. For example, the formula
for the distance,
between the rescue squad facility and Abbeville in cell E6 is 
dA,
(di)
ti =
di =
a
i
diti
SQRT((B6–C14)^2(C6–C15)^2). The formula for the total annual distance in cell D18
is SUMPRODUCT(E6:E10,D6:D10), which is also shown on the formula bar at the top of the
spreadsheet. In the Solver Parameters window for this problem, D18 is the target cell that is
minimized, and the changing cells (i.e., decision variables) are C14:C15. There are no constraints.

NONLINEAR MODEL EXAMPLES
491
45
x
45
y
Benton
Eden
Abbeville
Clayton
Rescue
Squad
Facility
(x = 21.72, y = 14.14)
Dunning
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5
FIGURE 10.8
Rescue squad 
facility location
=SQRT((B6–C14)^2+(C6–C15)^2)
EXHIBIT 10.12
The location of the rescue squad facility is shown graphically in Figure 10.8.
Investment Portfolio Selection
A classic example of nonlinear programming is the investment portfolio selection model de-
veloped by Harry Markowitz in 1959. This model is based on the assumption that most in-
vestors are concerned with two factors—return on investment and risk. Thus, the objective of
the portfolio selection model is to minimize some measure of portfolio risk while achieving a
minimum return on the total portfolio investment. Risk is reflected by the variability in the
value of the investment, and in this model, variance in the return on investment is the measure
of risk.
Covariance, which is a measure of correlation, is also used to reflect risk. Individual invest-
ment returns within a portfolio typically exhibit statistical dependence. Over time, the returns of
any two stocks may exhibit positive or negative correlation; that is, two stocks of the same gen-
eral type will go up or down together. To adjust for this possible correlation, investors often at-
tempt to diversify their portfolios. To reflect the risk associated with not diversifying, the model
includes covariance.

The minimization of portfolio risk, as measured by the portfolio variance, is the model ob-
jective. The variance, S, on the annual return from the portfolio is determined by the following
formula:
where
the proportion of money invested in investments i and j
the variance for investment i
the correlation between returns on investments i and j
the standard deviations of returns for investments i and j
In the preceding formula for S, the first part is a measure of variance, and the second part is a
measure of the covariance. In many cases, the parameters in this equation may be estimates or
sample values (the sample variance, sample covariance, etc.).
The general formulation of the portfolio selection model is as follows. The investor desires
to achieve a minimum expected annual return from the portfolio, which is formulated as a model
constraint as follows:
where
expected annual return on investment i
proportion (or fraction) of money invested in investment i
minimum desired annual return from the portfolio
A second constraint specifies that all the money is invested:
The following example and Excel solution will demonstrate how this model is applied. Jessica
Todd has identified four stocks she wants to include in her investment portfolio. She wants a total
annual return of at least .11. From historical data, she has estimated the average returns and variances
for the four investments as follows:
Stock (xi)
Annual Return (ri)
Variance (si)
1. Altacam
.08
.009
2. Bestco
.09
.015
3. Com.com
.16
.040
4. Delphi
.12
.023
She has also estimated the covariances between the stocks, as follows:
Stock Combination (i, j)
Covariances (rij)
A,B (1,2)
.4
A,C (1,3)
.3
A,D (1,4)
.6
B,C (2,3)
.2
B,D (2,4)
.7
C,D (3,4)
.4
x1 + x2 + .  .  . + xn = 1.0
rm =
xi =
ri =
rixi + r2x2 + .  .  . + rnxn  rm
si, sj =
rij =
s2
i =
xi, xj =
S = x2
1s2
1 + x2
2s2
2 + g+ x2
ns2
n + a
iZj
xixjrijsisj
492
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING

NONLINEAR MODEL EXAMPLES
493
The nonlinear programming model formulation for this problem is as follows:
subject to
The Excel spreadsheet for Jessica Todd’s portfolio is shown in Exhibit 10.13. The decision
variables representing the proportion of each stock in the portfolio 
are in cells E6:E9. The
formula for total return,
is in cell B19. The objective is to
minimize the total portfolio variance formula, which is shown on the formula bar at the top of
the spreadsheet. This is a complicated formula and difficult to type in. It has been shortened
slightly by doubling the covariance terms in the last part of the equation to reflect all the differ-
ent investment pairs that are included in B14:E17 (i.e., 2 times AB, AC, AD, BC, BD, and CD
will include BA, CA, DA, CB, DB, and DC). In other words, all the covariance terms to the right
of the diagonal in the matrix B14:E17 are doubled to include the same values to the left of the
diagonal.
SUMPRODUCT(B6:B9, E6:E9),
(xi)
xi Ú 0
x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 = 1.00
.08x1 + .09x2 + .16x3 + .12x4 Ú 0.11
+ x4x2(.7)(.023)1>2(.015)1>2 + x4x3(.4)(.023)1>21.04021>2
+ x4x1(.6)(.023)1>2(.009)1>2 + x3x2(.2)(.040)1>2(.015)1>2
+ x2x1(.4)(.015)1>2(.009)1>2 + x3x1(.3)(.040)1>2(.009)1>2
+ x2x4(.7)(.015)1>2(.023)1>2 + x3x4(.4)(.040)1>2(.023)1>2
+ x1x4(.6)(.009)1>2(.023)1>2 + x2x3(.2)(.015)1>2(.040)1>2
+ x1x2(.4)(.009)1>2(.015)1>2 + x1x3(.3)(.009)1>2(.040)1>2
 minimize Z = S = x1
2(.009) + x2
2(.015) + x3
2(.040) + x4
2(.230)
=SUM(E6:E9)
=SUMPRODUCT(B6:B9,E6:E9)
Doubling covariances will
include all investment pairs.
EXHIBIT 10.13
The Solver Parameters window is shown in Exhibit 10.14. Notice that nonnegativity
constraints for the variables are included—by clicking on “Options.” The model solution is shown
in Exhibit 10.15. It indicates that Jessica should invest 36.0% of her funds in Altacam 
27.2%
in Bestco 
31.5% in Com.com 
and 5.3% in Delphi 
This will result in her desired
(x4),
(x3),
(x2),
(x1),

494
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
EXHIBIT 10.15
Investment return
constraint
All money is invested
constraint
EXHIBIT 10.14
minimum portfolio annual return of .11 and a variance of .0104. What does this variance mean?
A variance of .0104 equals a standard deviation of .102. If returns are normally distributed
(which is likely), then there is a .95 probability that the annual portfolio return will be between
Summary
In this chapter, we presented an overview of nonlinear programming problems and solutions.
We have used relatively simple examples because of the complexity involved in formulating and
solving larger problems. A more in-depth understanding of this topic requires significant knowl-
edge of calculus and higher mathematics. Nevertheless, this chapter has provided a general un-
derstanding of the types of problems that require nonlinear solutions and the general format for
modeling nonlinear problems. It has also demonstrated the capability of Excel for solving non-
linear programming problems.
-.0899 [.11 - (1.96)(.102)] and .3099 [.11 + (1.96)1.1022].

PROBLEMS
495
The following example illustrates the use of the substitution method and the method of Lagrange
multipliers for solving a nonlinear programming problem.
Problem Statement
The Hickory Cabinet and Furniture Company makes chairs and tables. The company has devel-
oped the following nonlinear programming model to determine the optimal number of chairs
and tables 
to produce each day to maximize profit, given a constraint for available ma-
hogany wood:
subject to
bd. ft.
Determine the Excel solution to this model.
20x1 + 10x2 = 800
maximize Z = +280x1 - 6x1
2 + 160x2 - 3x2
2
(x2)
(x1)
Example Problem
Solution
Solution
Problems
1. The Hickory Cabinet and Furniture Company makes chairs. The fixed cost per month of making
chairs is $7,500, and the variable cost per chair is $40. Price is related to demand, according to
the following linear equation:
Develop the nonlinear profit function for this company and determine the price that will maxi-
mize profit, the optimal volume, and the maximum profit per month.
2. Graphically illustrate the profit curve developed in Problem 1. Indicate the optimal price and the
maximum profit per month.
3. The Rainwater Brewery produces beer. The annual fixed cost is $150,000, and the variable cost
per barrel is $16. Price is related to demand, according to the following linear equation:
Develop the nonlinear profit function for the brewery and determine the price that will maxi-
mize profit, the optimal volume, and the maximum profit per year.
4. The Rolling Creek Textile Mill makes denim. The monthly fixed cost is $8,000, and the variable
cost per yard of denim is $0.35. Price is related to demand, according to the following linear
equation:
v = 17,000 - 5,666p
v = 75,000 - 1,153.8p
v = 400 - 1.2p

Develop the nonlinear profit function for the textile mill and determine the optimal price, the
optimal volume, and the maximum profit per month.
5. The Grady Tire Company recaps tires. The weekly fixed cost is $2,500, and the variable cost per
tire is $9. Price is related to demand, according to the following linear equation:
Develop the nonlinear profit function for the tire company and determine the optimal price, the
optimal volume, and the maximum profit per week.
6. Andy Mendoza makes handcrafted dolls, which he sells at craft fairs. He is considering mass-
producing the dolls to sell in stores. He estimates that the initial investment for plant and equip-
ment will be $25,000, while labor, materials, packaging, and shipping will be about $10 per doll.
He has determined that sales volume is related to price, according to the following linear equation:
Develop the nonlinear profit function for Andy and determine the price that will maximize
profit, the optimal volume, and the maximum profit per month.
7. The Rainwater Brewery produces beer, which it sells to distributors in barrels. The brewery
incurs a monthly fixed cost of $12,000, and the variable cost per barrel is $17. The brewery has
developed the following profit function and demand constraint:
subject to
Solve this nonlinear programming model for the optimal price (p).
8. The Beaver Creek Pottery Company has developed the following nonlinear programming model
to determine the optimal number of bowls 
and mugs 
to produce each day:
subject to
hr.
Determine the optimal solution to this nonlinear programming model.
9. The Evergreen Fertilizer Company produces two types of fertilizers, Fastgro and Super Two. The
company has developed the following nonlinear programming model to determine the optimal
number of bags of Fastgro 
and Super Two 
that it must produce each day to maximize
profit, given a constraint for available potassium:
subject to
lb.
Determine the optimal solution to this nonlinear programming model.
10. The Rolling Creek Textile Mill produces denim and brushed cotton cloth. The company has
developed the following nonlinear programming model to determine the optimal number of
yards of denim 
and brushed cotton 
to produce each day in order to maximize profit,
subject to a labor constraint:
subject to
hr.
Determine the optimal solution to this nonlinear programming model.
0.2x1 + 0.1x2 = 40
maximize Z = +10x1 - 0.02x1
2 + 12x2 - 0.03x2
2
(x2)
(x1)
3x1 + 6x2 = 300
maximize Z = +30x1 - 2x1
2 + 25x2 - 0.5x2
2
(x2)
(x1)
4x1 + 5x2 = 100
maximize Z = +7x1 - 0.3x1
2 + 8x2 - 0.4x2
2
(x2)
(x1)
v = 1,800 - 15p
maximize Z = vp - +12,000 - 17v
v = 4,000 - 80p
v = 200 - 4.75p
496
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING

11. In the investment portfolio selection model in this chapter, what if Jessica Todd decided that she
wanted to maximize her return while incurring a portfolio variance of no more than 0.020?
Analyze this scenario by using the Excel spreadsheet in Exhibit 10.13 to determine what
Jessica’s portfolio and return would be.
12. The Riverwood Paneling Company makes two kinds of wood paneling: Colonial and Western.
The company has developed the following nonlinear programming model to determine the
optimal number of sheets of Colonial paneling 
and Western paneling 
to produce to
maximize profit, subject to a labor constraint:
subject to
hr.
Determine the optimal solution to this nonlinear programming model.
13. Interpret the meaning of the Lagrange multiplier in Problem 12.
14. Metro Telcom Systems develops, sells, and installs computer systems. The company has divided
its customer base into five regions, and it has 15 representatives who sell and install the com-
pany’s systems. The company wants to allocate salespeople to regions so that they maximize
daily sales revenue. However, whereas the sales increase as the number of salespeople allocated
to a region increases, they do so at a declining rate, according to the following nonlinear formula:
Following are the a and b parameters for daily sales in each region:
total sales = a - (b/x)
x1 + 2x2 = 40
maximize Z = +25x1 - 0.8x1
2 + 30x2 - 1.2x2
2
(x2)
(x1)
PROBLEMS
497
Region
1
2
3
4
5
a
$15,000
$24,000
$8,100
$12,000
$21,000
b
9,000
15,000
5,300
7,600
12,500
Because some of the regions are in urban areas and some are not, the representatives’ daily
expenses will differ among regions. The company has a daily expense budget of $6,500, and the
daily expenses (including travel costs) per representative for each region average $355 for region 1,
$540 for region 2, $290 for region 3, $275 for region 4, and $490 for region 5. Formulate and solve
a nonlinear programming model for this problem to determine the number of representatives to
allocate to each region to maximize daily sales.
15. Blue Ridge Power Company has a maximum capacity of 2.5 million kilowatt-hours (kWh) of
electric power available on a daily basis. The demand (in millions of kWh) for power from its
customers for high-demand (peak) hours and low-demand (off-peak) hours is determined by the
following formulas:
The variable 
equals the price per kilowatt-hour during low-demand hours, and 
is the price
per kilowatt-hour during high-demand (peak) hours.
Formulate and solve a nonlinear programming model to determine the price structure (per kWh)
that will maximize revenue.
16. The Metro Police Department has partitioned the city into four quadrants. The department has
20 police patrol cars available for each shift per day to assign to the quadrants. The depart-
ment wants to assign patrol cars to the quadrants during a shift so that the crime rate is mini-
mized while providing average response times to calls of less than 10 minutes. As patrol cars
ph
pl
low demand: 3.0 - 0.11pl + 0.008ph
high demand: 5.8 - 0.06ph + 0.005pl

are assigned to a quadrant, the crime rate and response time decrease, but at a decreasing rate
according to the following formula:
The a and b parameters for daily crime rate (expressed as crimes per 1,000 population) and
response time (in minutes) are provided in the following table:
y = a + (b/x)
498
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
Crime Rate
Response Time (min.)
Quadrant
a
b
a
b
1
0.24
0.15
4
11
2
0.37
0.21
8
8
3
0.21
0.12
6
10
4
0.48
0.30
3
9
Formulate and solve a nonlinear programming model to determine the number of police patrol
cars to assign to each quadrant that will result in the minimum overall crime rate.
17. The Burger Doodle restaurant chain purchases ingredients from four different food suppliers. The
company wants to construct a new central distribution center to process and package the ingredi-
ents it uses in its menu items before shipping them to their various restaurants. The suppliers
transport the food items in 40-foot tractor-trailer trucks. The coordinates of the four suppliers and
the annual number of truckloads that will be transported to the distribution center are as follows:
Coordinates
Supplier
x
y
Annual Truckloads
A
200
200
65
B
100
500
120
C
250
600
90
D
500
300
75
Determine the set of coordinates for the new distribution center that will minimize the total
miles traveled from the suppliers.
18. Home-Base, a home improvement and building supply chain, is going to build a new warehouse
facility to serve its stores in six North Carolina cities—Charlotte, Winston-Salem, Greensboro,
Durham, Raleigh, and Wilmington. The coordinates of these cities (in miles), using Columbia,
South Carolina, as the graphical origin (0, 0), and the annual truckload trips that supply each store
are as follows:
Coordinates
Store
x
y
Truckload
Charlotte
15
85
160
Winston-Salem
42
145
90
Greensboro
88
145
105
Durham
125
140
35
Raleigh
135
125
60
Wilmington
180
18
75
Determine the set of coordinates for the new warehouse that will minimize the total miles trav-
eled to the stores and identify on a map the closest town to these coordinates.

19. An investment adviser is helping a couple plan a retirement portfolio. The adviser has recom-
mended three stocks—Allied Electronics, Bank United, and Consolidated Computers. Following
are the annual return and variance for each stock and the covariance between stocks:
PROBLEMS
499
Stock
Annual Return
Variance
1. Internet
.18
.112
2. Software
.12
.061
3. Computer
.10
.045
4. Entertainment
.15
.088
Stock Combination (i, j)
Covariances
1, 2
.9
1, 3
.7
1, 4
.3
2, 3
.8
2, 4
.4
3, 4
.2
Determine the percentage of Mark’s total funds that he should invest in each stock to minimize
his overall risk.
21. The Accentuate Consulting Firm has eight projects for which it has contracted with clients to
develop computer systems and software. The firm has 35 team members it can assign to the
He has also estimated the covariances between stocks, as follows:
Stock
Annual Return
Covariance
Allied Electronics
.14
.10
Bank United
.10
.04
Consolidated Computers
.12
.08
Stock Combination (i, j)
Covariance
A, B
.4
A, C
.7
B, C
.3
The couple wants a total portfolio return of at least .11. Determine the proportion of each stock
to include in the portfolio to minimize the overall risk.
20. Mark Decker has identified four stocks for his portfolio, and he wants to determine the percent-
age of his total available funds he should invest in each stock. The alternative stocks include an
Internet company, a computer software company, a computer manufacturer, and an entertain-
ment conglomerate. He wants a total annual return of .12. From historical data, he has deter-
mined the average annual return and variance for each of the funds, as follows:

500
CHAPTER 10
NONLINEAR PROGRAMMING
Project
Profit
1
$250,000x1
0.50
2
370,000x2
0.30
3
140,000x3
0.70
4
500,000x4
0.25
5
230,000x5
0.33
6
170,000x6
0.60
7
280,000x7
0.45
8
315,000x8
0.40
projects. The firm has developed the following profit functions for each project, where 
equals
the number of team members assigned to a project:
xi
These functions take into account the project completion time, cost, and probability of success-
ful completion based on the number of team members assigned. The functions reflect the fact
that profit increases but at a decreasing rate as team members are assigned. Thus, as additional
team members are assigned to a project, the marginal effect decreases. Determine the optimal
number of team members to assign to each project in order to maximize profit.
Case Problem
Admissions at State University
State University has increased its tuition for in-state and
out-of-state students in each of the past 5 years to offset
cuts in its budget allocation from the state legislature. The
university administration always thought that the number
of applications received was independent of tuition; how-
ever, drops in applications and enrollments the past 2 years
have proved this theory to be wrong. University admis-
sions officials have developed the following relationships
between the number of applicants who accept admission
and enter State 
and the cost of tuition per semester 
(in-state)
(out-of-state)
The university would like to develop a planning model
that will indicate the in-state and out-of-state tuitions, as
well as the number of students that could be expected to
enroll in the freshman class. The university doesn’t have
enough classroom space for more than 1,400 freshmen,
and it needs at least 700 freshmen to meet all its class-size
x2 = 35,000 - 6t2
x1 = 21,000 - 12t1
(ti):
(xi)
objectives. The university knows from historical data that
approximately 55% of all in-state freshmen will want to
live in the school dormitories, 72% of all out-of-state 
students will want to live in the dormitories, and there will
be at most 800 dormitory rooms available for freshmen.
The university also wants to make sure that it main-
tains high academic standards in its admissions decisions.
It knows from historical data that the average SAT score
for an in-state student is 960 and the average SAT score for
an out-of-state student is 1,150. The university wants the
entering freshman class to have an average SAT score of
at least 1,000.
State University is a state-supported institution, so the
state legislature wants to make sure that the university
doesn’t enroll just out-of-state students because they pay
more tuition and they have better SAT scores. Thus, the
government has instituted a policy that no more than 55%
of the entering freshman class can be out-of-state students.
Develop and solve a nonlinear programming model
for State University to indicate the tuition the university
should charge, the total tuition, and the number of 
in-state and out-of-state students it can expect with
these tuition rates.

CASE PROBLEM
501
Case Problem
Selecting a European Distribution 
Center Site for American International 
Automotive Industries
American International Automotive Industries (AIAI)
manufactures engine, transmission, and chassis parts for
manufacturers and repair companies in the United States,
South America, Canada, Mexico, Asia, and Europe. The
company transports parts to its foreign markets by container
ships. To serve its customers in South America and Asia,
AIAI has large warehouse and distribution centers. In
Europe, it ships into Hamburg and Gdansk, where it has con-
tracted with independent distribution companies to deliver its
products to customers throughout Europe. However, AIAI
has been displeased with a recent history of late deliveries
and rough handling of its products. For a time AIAI was not
overly concerned because its European market wasn’t too
big, and its European customers didn’t complain. Plus, it had
more pressing problems elsewhere. However, in the past few
years, trade barriers have fallen in Europe, and Eastern Euro-
pean markets have opened up. AIAI’s European business has
expanded, as has new competition, and its customers have
become more demanding and quality conscious. As a result,
AIAI has initiated the selection process for the site of a new
European warehouse and distribution center. Although it
provides parts to a number of smaller truck and auto main-
tenance and service centers in Europe, it has seven major
customers—auto and truck manufacturers in Vienna,
Leipzig, Budapest, Prague, Krakow, Munich, and Frankfurt.
Its customers have adopted manufacturing processes requir-
ing continuous replenishment of parts and materials.
AIAI’s European headquarters is in Hamburg. The vice
president for construction and development in Dayton,
Ohio, has asked the Hamburg office to do a preliminary
site search based on proximity to customers and mileage.
Each container is converted to a single tractor-trailer
truckload. The number of containers shipped annually to
each customer is as follows: Vienna, 160; Leipzig, 100;
Budapest, 180; Prague, 210; Krakow, 90; Munich, 120;
and Frankfurt, 50. When the vice president of construction
in Dayton received this information, he pulled out his map
of Europe and began to look for possible sites.
Assist AIAI with its site selection process in Europe.
Recommend a city site that minimizes the total annual
delivery mileage.

Probability and Statistics
502
CHAPTER
11

TYPES OF PROBABILITY
503
The techniques presented in Chapters 2 through 10 are typically thought of as deterministic;
that is, they are not subject to uncertainty or variation. With deterministic techniques, the 
assumption is that conditions of complete certainty and perfect knowledge of the future exist. 
In the linear programming models presented in previous chapters, the various parameters of the
models and the model results were assumed to be known with certainty. In the model constraints,
we did not say that a bowl would require 4 pounds of clay “70% of the time.” We specifically
stated that each bowl would require exactly 4 pounds of clay (i.e., there was no uncertainty 
in our problem statement). Similarly, the solutions we derived for the linear programming 
models contained no variation or uncertainty. It was assumed that the results of the model would
occur in the future, without any degree of doubt or chance.
In contrast, many of the techniques in management science do reflect uncertain information
and result in uncertain solutions. These techniques are said to be probabilistic. This means that
there can be more than one outcome or result to a model and that there is some doubt about
which outcome will occur. The solutions generated by these techniques have a probability of 
occurrence. They may be in the form of averages; the actual values that occur will vary over time.
Many of the upcoming chapters in this text present probabilistic techniques. The presentation
of these techniques requires that the reader have a fundamental understanding of probability.
Thus, the purpose of this chapter is to provide an overview of the fundamentals, properties, and
terminology of probability and statistics.
Types of Probability
Two basic types of probability can be defined: objective probability and subjective probability.
First, we will consider what constitutes objective probability.
Objective Probability
Consider a referee’s flipping a coin before a football game to determine which team will kick
off and which team will receive. Before the referee tosses the coin, both team captains know that
they have a .50 (or 50%) probability (or chance) of winning the toss. None of the onlookers in
the stands or anywhere else would argue that the probability of a head or a tail was not .50. In
this example, the probability of .50 that either a head or a tail will occur when a coin is tossed is
called an objective probability. More specifically, it is referred to as a classical or a priori (prior
to the occurrence) probability, one of the two types of objective probabilities.
A classical, or a priori, probability can be defined as follows: Given a set of outcomes for an
activity (such as a head or a tail when a coin is tossed), the probability of a specific (desired) out-
come (such as a head) is the ratio of the number of specific outcomes to the total number of out-
comes. For example, in our coin-tossing example, the probability of a head is the ratio of the
number of specific outcomes (a head) to the total number of outcomes (a head and a tail), or 1/2.
Similarly, the probability of drawing an ace from a deck of 52 cards would be found by dividing
4 (the number of aces) by 52 (the total number of cards in a deck) to get 1/13. If we spin a roulette
wheel with 50 red numbers and 50 black numbers, the probability of the wheel’s landing on a red
number is 50 divided by 100, or 1/2.
These examples are referred to as a priori probabilities because we can state the probabili-
ties prior to the actual occurrence of the activity (i.e., ahead of time). This is because we know
(or assume we know) the number of specific outcomes and total outcomes prior to the occur-
rence of the activity. For example, we know that a deck of cards consists of 4 aces and 52 total
cards before we draw a card from the deck and that a coin contains one head and one tail before
we toss it. These probabilities are also known as classical probabilities because some of the ear-
liest references in history to probabilities were related to games of chance, to which (as the pre-
ceding examples show) these probabilities readily apply.
The second type of objective probability is referred to as relative frequency probability.
This type of objective probability indicates the relative frequency with which a specific outcome
Deterministic
techniques assume
that no uncertainty
exists in model
parameters.
Probabilistic
techniques include
uncertainty and
assume that there can
be more than one
model solution.
Objective probabilities
that can be stated
prior to the occurrence
of an event are
classical, or a priori,
probabilities.
Objective probabilities
that are stated after the
outcomes of an event
have been observed
are relative frequency
probabilities.

has been observed to occur in the long run. It is based on the observation of past occurrences.
For example, suppose that over the past 4 years, 3,000 business students have taken the intro-
ductory management science course at State University, and 300 of them have made an A in the
course. The relative frequency probability of making an A in management science would 
be 300/3,000 or .10. Whereas in the case of a classical probability we indicate a probability 
before an activity (such as tossing a coin) takes place, in the case of a relative frequency we deter-
mine the probability after observing, for example, what 3,000 students have done in the past.
The relative frequency definition of objective probability is more general and widely 
accepted than the classical definition. Actually, the relative frequency definition can encompass the
classical case. For example, if we flip a coin many times, in the long run the relative frequency of a
head’s occurring will be .50. If, however, you tossed a coin 10 times, it is conceivable that you would
get 10 consecutive heads. Thus, the relative frequency (probability) of a head would be 1.0. This il-
lustrates one of the key characteristics of a relative frequency probability: The relative frequency
probability becomes more accurate as the total number of observations of the activity increases. If a
coin were tossed about 350 times, the relative frequency would approach 1/2 (assuming a fair coin).
Subjective Probability
When relative frequencies are not available, a probability is often determined anyway. In these
cases a person must rely on personal belief, experience, and knowledge of the situation to de-
velop a probability estimate. A probability estimate that is not based on prior or past evidence is
a subjective probability. For example, when a meteorologist forecasts a “60% chance of rain
tomorrow,” the .60 probability is usually based on the meteorologist’s experience and expert
analysis of the weather conditions. In other words, the meteorologist is not saying that these 
exact weather conditions have occurred 1,000 times in the past and on 600 occasions it has rained,
thus there is a 60% probability of rain. Likewise, when a sportswriter says that a football team
has an 80% chance of winning, it is usually not because the team has won 8 of its 10 previous
games. The prediction is judgmental, based on the sportswriter’s knowledge of the teams in-
volved, the playing conditions, and so forth. If the sportswriter had based the probability esti-
mate solely on the team’s relative frequency of winning, then it would have been an objective
probability. However, once the relative frequency probability becomes colored by personal be-
lief, it is subjective.
Subjective probability estimates are frequently used in making business decisions. For exam-
ple, suppose the manager of Beaver Creek Pottery Company (referred to in Chapters 2 and 3) is
thinking about producing plates in addition to the bowls and mugs it already produces. In making
this decision, the manager will determine the chances of the new product’s being successful and
returning a profit. Although the manager can use personal knowledge of the market and judgment
to determine a probability of success, direct relative frequency evidence is not generally avail-
able. The manager cannot observe the frequency with which the introduction of this new product
was successful in the past. Thus, the manager must make a subjective probability estimate.
This type of subjective probability analysis is common in the business world. Decision makers
frequently must consider their chances for success or failure, the probability of achieving a certain
market share or profit, the probability of a level of demand, and the like without the benefit of rela-
tive frequency probabilities based on past observations. Although there may not be a consensus as
to the accuracy of a subjective estimate, as there is with an objective probability (e.g., everyone is
sure there is a .50 probability of getting a head when a coin is tossed), subjective probability analy-
sis is often the only means available for making probabilistic estimates, and it is frequently used.
A brief note of caution must be made regarding the use of subjective probabilities. Different
people will often arrive at different subjective probabilities, whereas everyone should arrive at
the same objective probability, given the same numbers and correct calculations. Therefore,
when a probabilistic analysis is to be made of a situation, the use of objective probability will
provide more consistent results. In the material on probability in the remainder of this chapter,
we will use objective probabilities unless the text indicates otherwise.
504
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
Subjective probability
is an estimate based
on personal belief,
experience, or knowl-
edge of a situation.
Relative frequency is
the more widely used
definition of objective
probability.

FUNDAMENTALS OF PROBABILITY
505
Fundamentals of Probability
Let us return to our example of a referee’s tossing a coin prior to a football game. In the termi-
nology of probability, the coin toss is referred to as an experiment. An experiment is an activity
(such as tossing a coin) that results in one of the several possible outcomes. Our coin-tossing 
experiment can result in either one of two outcomes, which are referred to as events: a head or a
tail. The probabilities associated with each event in our experiment follow:
Event
Probability
Head
.50
Tail
  .50
1.00
This simple example highlights two of the fundamental characteristics of probability. First,
the probability of an event is always greater than or equal to zero and less than or equal to one
[i.e.,
(event)
]. In our coin-tossing example, each event has a probability of .50,
which is in the range of 0 to 1.0. Second, the probability of all the events included in an experi-
ment must sum to one. Notice in our example that the probability of each of the two events is .50,
and the sum of these two probabilities is 1.0.
The specific example of tossing a coin also exhibits a third characteristic: The events in a
set of events are mutually exclusive. The events in an experiment are mutually exclusive if only
one of them can occur at a time. In the context of our experiment, the term mutually exclusive
means that any time the coin is tossed, only one of the two events can take place—either a head
or a tail can occur, but not both. Consider a customer who enters a store to shop for shoes. The
store manager estimates that there is a .60 probability that the customer will buy a pair of shoes
and a .40 probability that the customer will not buy a pair of shoes. These two events are mutu-
ally exclusive because it is impossible to buy shoes and not buy shoes at the same time. In gen-
eral, events are mutually exclusive if only one of the events can occur, but not both.
Because the events in our example of obtaining a head or tail are mutually exclusive, we
can infer that the probabilities of mutually exclusive events sum to 1.0. Also, the probabilities of
mutually exclusive events can be added. The following example will demonstrate these funda-
mental characteristics of probability.
The staff of the dean of the business school at State University has analyzed the records of
the 3,000 students who received a grade in management science during the past 4 years. The
dean wants to know the number of students who made each grade (A, B, C, D, or F) in the
course. The dean’s staff has developed the following table of information:
Event Grade
Number of Students
Relative Frequency
Probability
A
300
300/3,000
.10
B
600
600/3,000
.20
C
1,500
1,500/3,000
.50
D
450
450/3,000
.15
F
150
150/3,000
.05
3,000
1.00
This example demonstrates several of the characteristics of probability. First, the data (numer-
ical information) in the second column show how the students are distributed across the different
grades (events). The third column shows the relative frequency with which each event occurred for
the 3,000 observations. In other words, the relative frequency of a student’s making a C is
1,500/3,000, which also means that the probability of selecting a student who had obtained a C at
random from those students who took management science in the past 4 years is .50.
This information, organized according to the events in the experiment, is called a frequency
distribution. The list of the corresponding probabilities for each event in the last column is re-
ferred to as a probability distribution.
… 1.0
0 … P
An experiment is an
activity that results in
one of several possible
outcomes.
Two fundamentals of
probability:
(events)
and the
probabilities of all
events in an
experiment sum to one.
… 1.0,
0 … P
The events in an
experiment are
mutually exclusive if
only one can occur at
a time.
The probabilities of
mutually exclusive
events sum to one.
A frequency
distribution is an
organization of
numeric data about the
events in an
experiment.
A probability
distribution shows the
probability of occur-
rence of all events in
an experiment.

All the events in this example are mutually exclusive; it is not possible for two or more of
these events to occur at the same time. A student can make only one grade in the course, not two
or more grades. As indicated previously, mutually exclusive probabilities of an experiment can
be summed to equal one. There are five mutually exclusive events in this experiment, the proba-
bilities of which (.10, .20, .50, .15, and .05) sum to one.
This example exhibits another characteristic of probability: Because the five events in the exam-
ple are all that can occur (i.e., no other grade in the course is possible), the experiment is said to be
collectively exhaustive. Likewise, the coin-tossing experiment is collectively exhaustive because the
only two events that can occur are a head and a tail. In general, when a set of events includes all the
events that can possibly occur, the set is said to be collectively exhaustive.
The probability of a single event occurring, such as a student receiving an A in a course, is
represented symbolically as P(A). This probability is called the marginal probability in the ter-
minology of probability. For our example, the marginal probability of a student’s getting an A in
management science is
For mutually exclusive events, it is possible to determine the probability that one or the other
of several events will occur. This is done by summing the individual marginal probabilities of the
events. For example, the probability of a student receiving an A or a B is determined as follows:
In other words, 300 students received an A and 600 students received a B; thus, the number of
students who received an A or a B is 900. Dividing 900 students who received an A or a B by
the total number of students, 3,000, yields the probability of a student’s receiving an A or a B
[i.e.,
].
Mutually exclusive events can be shown pictorially with a Venn diagram. Figure 11.1
shows a Venn diagram for the mutually exclusive events A and B in our example.
P(A or B) = .30
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) = .10 + .20 = .30
P(A) = .10
506
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
A set of events is
collectively
exhaustive when it in-
cludes all the events
that can occur in an
experiment.
A Venn diagram visu-
ally displays mutually
exclusive and
non–mutually
exclusive events.
A marginal probabil-
ity is the probability
of a single event
occurring.
A
B
FIGURE 11.1
Venn diagram for
mutually exclusive
events
Now let us consider a case in which two events are not mutually exclusive. In this case the
probability that A or B or both will occur is expressed as
where the term P(AB), referred to as the joint probability of A and B, is the probability that
both A and B will occur. For mutually exclusive events, this term has to equal zero because both
events cannot occur together. Thus, for mutually exclusive events our formula becomes
which is the same formula we developed previously for mutually exclusive events.
The following example will illustrate the case in which two events are not mutually exclu-
sive. Suppose it has been determined that 40% of all students in the school of business are at
present taking management, and 30% of all the students are taking finance. Also, it has been 
determined that 10% take both subjects. Thus, our probabilities are
P(MF) = .10
P(F) = .30
P(M) = .40
= P(A) + P1B2
= P(A) + P(B) - 0
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(AB)
P(A or B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(AB)
A joint probability is
the probability that
two or more events
that are not mutually
exclusive can occur
simultaneously.

FUNDAMENTALS OF PROBABILITY
507
The probability of a student’s taking one or the other or both of the courses is determined as
follows:
Observing this formulation closely, we can see why the joint probability, P(MF), was 
subtracted out. The 40% of the students who were taking management also included those 
students taking both courses. Likewise, the 30% of the students taking finance also included 
those students taking both courses. Thus, if we add the two marginal probabilities, we are double-
counting the percentage of students taking both courses. By subtracting out one of these proba-
bilities (that we added in twice), we derive the correct probability.
Figure 11.2 contains a Venn diagram that shows the two events, M and F, that are not mutu-
ally exclusive, and the joint event, MF.
P(M or F) = P(M) + P(F) - P(MF) = .40 + .30 - .10 = .60
Management Science Application
Treasure Hunting with Probability 
and Statistics
In 1857, the SS Central America, a wooden-hulled steamship,
sank during a hurricane approximately 20 miles off the coast
of Charleston, South Carolina, in the Atlantic Ocean. A total
of 425 passengers and crew members lost their lives, and ap-
proximately $400 million in gold bars and coins sank to the
ocean bottom approximately 8,000 feet (i.e., 1.5 miles) below
the surface. This shipwreck was the most famous of its time,
causing a financial panic in the United States and a recom-
mendation from insurance investigators that new ships be
built with iron hulls and watertight compartments.
In 1985, the Columbus-America Discovery Group was
formed to locate and recover the remains of the SS Central
America. A search plan was developed, using statistical tech-
niques and Monte Carlo simulation. From the available historical
information about the wreck, three scenarios were con-
structed, describing different search areas based on different
accounts from nearby ships and witnesses. Using historical sta-
tistical data on weather, winds and currents in the area, and es-
timates of uncertainties in celestial navigation, probability
distributions were developed for different possible sites where
the ship might have sunk. Using Monte Carlo simulation, a
map was configured for each scenario, consisting of cells rep-
resenting locations. Each cell was assigned a probability that
the ship sank in that location. The probability maps for the
three scenarios were combined into a composite probability
map, which provided a guide for searching the ocean bottom
using sonar. The search consisted of long, straight paths that
concentrated on the high-probability areas. Based on the results
of the sonar search of 1989, the discovery group recovered 1 ton
of gold bars and coins from the wreck. In 1993 the total gold re-
covered from the wreck was valued at $21 million. However, be-
cause of the historical significance of all recovered items, they
were expected to bring a much higher return when sold.
Source: Based on L. D. Stone, “Search for the SS Central America:
Mathematical Treasure Hunting,” Interfaces 22, no. 1 (January– 
February 1992): 32–54.
Library of Congress, LC-USZ62-92066
M
F
MF
FIGURE 11.2
Venn diagram for
non–mutually
exclusive events
and the joint
event
An alternative way to construct a probability distribution is to add the probability of an
event to the sum of all previously listed probabilities in a probability distribution. Such a list is

508
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
In a cumulative prob-
ability distribution the
probability of an event
is added to the sum of
all previously listed
probabilities in a dis-
tribution.
referred to as a cumulative probability distribution. The cumulative probability distribution
for our management science grade example is as follows:
Event Grade
Probability
Cumulative Probability
A
.10
.10
B
.20
.30
C
.50
.80
D
.15
.95
F
.05
1.00
1.00
The value of a cumulative probability distribution is that it organizes the event probabilities
in a way that makes it easier to answer certain questions about the probabilities. For example, if
we want to know the probability that a student will get a grade of C or higher, we can add the
probabilities of the mutually exclusive events A, B, and C:
Or we can look directly at the cumulative probability distribution and see that the probabil-
ity of a C and the events preceding it in the distribution (A and B) equals .80. Alternatively, if
we want to know the probability of a grade lower than C, we can subtract the cumulative proba-
bility of a C from 1.00 (i.e.,
).
Statistical Independence and Dependence
Statistically, events are either independent or dependent. If the occurrence of one event does not
affect the probability of the occurrence of another event, the events are independent. Conversely,
if the occurrence of one event affects the probability of the occurrence of another event, the
events are dependent. We will first turn our attention to a discussion of independent events.
Independent Events
When we toss a coin, the two events—getting a head and getting a tail—are independent. If we
get a head on the first toss, this result has absolutely no effect on the probability of getting a head
or a tail on the next toss. The probability of getting either a head or a tail will still be .50, regard-
less of the outcomes of previous tosses. In other words, the two events are independent events.
When events are independent, it is possible to determine the probability that both events
will occur in succession by multiplying the probabilities of each event. For example, what is the
probability of getting a head on the first toss and a tail on the second toss? The answer is
P(HT) = P(H) • P(T)
where
probability of a head
probability of a tail
joint probability of a head and a tail
Therefore,
P(HT) = P(H) • P(T) = (.5)(.5) = .25
As we indicated previously, the probability of both events occurring, P(HT), is referred to as the
joint probability.
Another property of independent events relates to conditional probabilities. A conditional
probability is the probability that event A will occur given that event B has already occurred.
This relationship is expressed symbolically as
P1AB2
P(HT) =
P(T) =
P(H) =
1.00 - .80 = .20
P(A or B or C) = P(A) + P(B) + P(C) = .10 + .20 + .50 = .80
The probability that
independent events
will occur in
succession is
computed by
multiplying the
probabilities of each
event.
A succession of 
events that do not
affect each other are
independent events.
A conditional
probability is the
probability that an
event will occur, given
that another event has
already occurred.

STATISTICAL INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE
509
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
P(H) = .5
P(T) = .5
.125 (TTT)
.125 (THT)
.125 (TTH)
.125 (HTT)
.125 (THH)
.125 (HHT)
.125 (HTH)
.125 (HHH)
.25
.25
.25
.25
.5
.5
FIGURE 11.3
Probability tree 
for coin-tossing
example
The term in parentheses, “A slash B,” means “A, given the occurrence of B.” Thus, the entire
term 
is interpreted as the probability that A will occur, given that B has already occurred.
If A and B are independent events, then
In words, this result says that if A and B are independent, then the probability of A, given the
occurrence of event B, is simply equal to the probability of A. Because the events are independ-
ent of each other, the occurrence of event B will have no effect on the occurrence of A. There-
fore, the probability of A is in no way dependent on the occurrence of B.
In summary, if events A and B are independent, the following two properties hold:
1. P(AB) = P(A) • P(B)
2. P(A|B) = P(A)
Probability Trees
Consider an example in which a coin is tossed three consecutive times. The possible outcomes of
this example can be illustrated by using a probability tree, as shown in Figure 11.3.
P1A B2 = P(A)
P1AB2
A probability tree is a
diagram that shows
the joint probabilities
of the outcomes of an
experiment.
The probability tree in Figure 11.3 demonstrates the probabilities of the various occur-
rences, given three tosses of a coin. Notice that at each toss, the probability of either event’s oc-
curring remains the same:
Thus, the events are independent. Next, the joint
probabilities that events will occur in succession are computed by multiplying the probabilities
of all the events. For example, the probability of getting a head on the first toss, a tail on the sec-
ond, and a tail on the third is .125:
P(HTT) = P(H) • P(T) • P(T) = (.5)(.5)(.5) = .125
However, do not confuse the results in the probability tree with conditional probabilities.
The probability that a head and then two tails will occur on three consecutive tosses is computed
prior to any tosses. If the first two tosses have already occurred, the probability of getting a tail
on the third toss is still .5:
The Binomial Distribution
Some additional information can be drawn from the probability tree of our example. For in-
stance, what is the probability of achieving exactly two tails on three tosses? The answer can be
found by observing the instances in which two tails occurred. It can be seen that two tails in
three tosses occurred three times, each time with a probability of .125. Thus, the probability of
P1THT2 = P(T) = .5
P(H) = P(T) = .5.

getting exactly two tails in three tosses is the sum of these three probabilities, or .375. The use
of a probability tree can become very cumbersome, especially if we are considering an example
with 20 tosses. However, the example of tossing a coin exhibits certain properties that enable us
to define it as a Bernoulli process. The properties of a Bernoulli process follow:
1. There are two possible outcomes for each trial (i.e., each toss of a coin). Outcomes can be
success or failure, yes or no, heads or tails, good or bad, and so on.
2. The probability of the outcomes remains constant over time. In other words, the probability
of getting a head on a coin toss remains the same, regardless of the number of tosses.
3. The outcomes of the trials are independent. The fact that we get a head on the first toss
does not affect the probabilities on subsequent tosses.
4. The number of trials is discrete and an integer. The term discrete indicates values that are
countable and, thus, usually an integer—for example, 1 car or 2 people rather than 1.34
cars or 2.51 people. There are 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, . . . tosses of the coin, not 3.36 tosses.
Given the properties of a Bernoulli process, a binomial distribution function can be used
to determine the probability of a number of successes in n trials. The binomial distribution is an
example of a discrete distribution because the value of the distribution (the number of
successes) is discrete, as is the number of trials. The formula for the binomial distribution is
where
probability of a success
probability of a failure
number of trials
number of successes in n trials
The terms n!, (n – r)!, and r! are called factorials. Factorials are computed using the formula
m! = m(m - 1)(m - 2)(m - 3) . . . (2)(1)
The factorial 0! always equals one.
The binomial distribution formula may look complicated, but using it is not difficult. For
example, suppose we want to determine the probability of getting exactly two tails in three
tosses of a coin. For this example, getting a tail is a success because it is the object of the analy-
sis. The probability of a tail, p, equals .5; therefore,
The number of tosses, n,
is 3, and the number of tails, r, is 2. Substituting these values into the binomial formula will 
result in the probability of two tails in three coin tosses:
Notice that this is the same result achieved by using a probability tree in the previous section.
Now let us consider an example of more practical interest. An electrical manufacturer pro-
duces microchips. The microchips are inspected at the end of the production process at a quality
control station. Out of every batch of microchips, four are randomly selected and tested for de-
fects. Given that 20% of all transistors are defective, what is the probability that each batch of
microchips will contain exactly two defective microchips?
P1r = 22 = .375
= 6
2 (.125)
= (3	2	1)
(2	1)(1) (.25)(.5)
P(2 tails) = P(r = 2) =
3!
2!(3 - 2)! (.5)2(.5)3-2
q = 1 - .5 = .5.
r =
n =
q = 1 - p =
p =
P(r) =
n!
r!(n - r)! prqn-r
510
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
Properties of a
Bernoulli process.
A binomial distribu-
tion indicates the
probability of r
successes in n trials.

STATISTICAL INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE
511
The two possible outcomes in this example are a good microchip and a defective microchip.
Because defective microchips are the object of our analysis, a defective item is a success. The
probability of a success is the probability of a defective microchip, or 
The number of
trials, n, equals 4. Now let us substitute these values into the binomial formula:
Thus, the probability of getting exactly two defective items out of four microchips is .1536.
Now, let us alter this problem to make it even more realistic. The manager has determined
that four microchips from every large batch should be tested for quality. If two or more defective
microchips are found, the whole batch will be rejected. The manager wants to know the proba-
bility of rejecting an entire batch of microchips, if, in fact, the batch has 20% defective items.
From our previous use of the binomial distribution, we know that it gives us the probability
of an exact number of integer successes. Thus, if we want the probability of two or more defec-
tive items, it is necessary to compute the probability of two, three, and four defective items:
Substituting the values 
and 
and 4 into the binomial distri-
bution results in the probability of two or more defective items:
Thus, the probability that a batch of microchips will be rejected due to poor quality is .1808.
Notice that the collectively exhaustive set of events for this example is 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4 defective
transistors. Because the sum of the probabilities of a collectively exhaustive set of events equals 1.0,
Recall that the results of the immediately preceding example show that
Given this result, we can compute the probability of “less than two defectives” as follows:
Although our examples included very small values for n and r that enabled us to work out
the examples by hand, problems containing larger values for n and r can be solved easily by using
an electronic calculator.
Dependent Events
As stated earlier, if the occurrence of one event affects the probability of the occurrence of another
event, the events are dependent events. The following example illustrates dependent events.
= .8192
= 1.0 - .1808
= 1.0 - [P(r = 2) + P(r = 3) + P(r = 4)]
P(r 6 2) = P(r = 0) + P(r = 1)
P(r = 2) + P(r = 3) + P(r = 4) = .1808
P(r = 0, 1, 2, 3, 4) = P(r = 0) + P(r = 1) + P(r = 2) + P(r = 3) + P(r = 4) = 1.0
= .1808
= .1536 + .0256 + .0016
P(r Ú 2) =
4!
2!(4 - 2)!(.2)2(.8)2 +
4!
3!(4 - 3)!(.2)3(.8)1 +
4!
4!(4 - 4)!(.2)4(.8)0
r = 2, 3,
p = .2, n = 4, q = .8,
P(r Ú 2) = P(r = 2) + P(r = 3) + P(r = 4)
= .1536
= 24
4 (.0256)
= (4	3	2	1)
(2	1)(2	1)(.04)(.64)
P(r = defectives) =
4!
2!(4 - 2)!(.2)2(.8)2
p = .2.

In this example, the probability of drawing a blue ball is clearly dependent on whether a
head or a tail occurs on the coin toss. If a tail occurs, there is a 1/6 chance of drawing a blue ball
from bucket 2. However, if a head results, there is no possibility of drawing a blue ball from
bucket 1. In other words, the probability of the event “drawing a blue ball” is dependent on the
event “flipping a coin.”
Like statistically independent events, dependent events exhibit certain defining properties.
In order to describe these properties, we will alter our previous example slightly, so that bucket 2
contains one white ball and five red balls. Our new example is shown in Figure 11.5. The out-
comes that can result from the events illustrated in Figure 11.5 are shown in Figure 11.6. When
the coin is flipped, one of two outcomes is possible, a head or a tail. The probability of getting a
head is .50, and the probability of getting a tail is .50:
P(T) = .50
P(H) = .50
512
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
R
R
W
W
W
W
W
R
R
R
R
R
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
Flip a coin
Heads
Tails
FIGURE 11.5
Another set of 
dependent events
Red
Red
White
White
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
Head
Tail
Flip
a coin
FIGURE 11.6
Probability tree for
dependent events
R
R
W
W
W
W
B
R
R
R
R
R
Flip a coin
Heads
Tails
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
FIGURE 11.4
Dependent events
Two buckets contain a number of colored balls each. Bucket 1 contains two red balls and four
white balls, and bucket 2 contains one blue ball and five red balls. A coin is tossed. If a head re-
sults, a ball is drawn out of bucket 1. If a tail results, a ball is drawn from bucket 2. These events
are illustrated in Figure 11.4.
As indicated previously, these probabilities are referred to as marginal probabilities. They
are also unconditional probabilities because they are the probabilities of the occurrence of a sin-
gle event and are not conditional on the occurrence of any other event(s). They are the same as

STATISTICAL INDEPENDENCE AND DEPENDENCE
513
the probabilities of independent events defined earlier, and like those of independent events, the
marginal probabilities of a collectively exhaustive set of events sum to one.
Once the coin has been tossed and a head or tail has resulted, a ball is drawn from one of
the buckets. If a head results, a ball is drawn from bucket 1; there is a 2/6, or .33, probability
of drawing a red ball and a 4/6, or .67, probability of drawing a white ball. If a tail resulted,
a ball is drawn from bucket 2; there is a 5/6, or .83, probability of drawing a red ball and a
1/6, or .17, probability of drawing a white ball. These probabilities of drawing red or white
balls are called conditional probabilities because they are conditional on the outcome of the
event of tossing a coin. Symbolically, these conditional probabilities are expressed as 
follows:
The first term, which can be expressed verbally as “the probability of drawing a red ball, given
that a head results from the coin toss,” equals .33. The other conditional probabilities are
expressed similarly.
Conditional probabilities can also be defined by the following mathematical relationship.
Given two dependent events A and B,
the term P(AB) is the joint probability of the two events, as noted previously. This relationship
can be manipulated by multiplying both sides by P(B), to yield
Thus, the joint probability can be determined by multiplying the conditional probability of A by
the marginal probability of B.
Recall from our previous discussion of independent events that
Substituting this result into the relationship for a conditional probability yields
which is consistent with the property for independent events.
Returning to our example, the joint events are the occurrence of a head and a red ball, a head
and a white ball, a tail and a red ball, and a tail and a white ball. The probabilities of these joint
events are as follows:
The marginal, conditional, and joint probabilities for this example are summarized in 
Figure 11.7. Table 11.1 is a joint probability table, which summarizes the joint probabilities for
the example.
P(WT) = P(WT)	P(T) = (.17)(.5) = .085
P(RT) = P(R T)	P(T) = (.83)(.5) = .415
P(WH) = P(WH)	P(H) = (.67)(.5) = .335
P(RH) = P(R H)	P(H) = (.33)(.5) = .165
= P(A)
P(AB) = P(A)	(B)
P(B)
P(AB) = P(A)	P(B)
P(AB)	P(B) = P(AB)
P(AB) = P(AB)
P(B)
P(WT) = .17
P(R T) = .83
P(WH) = .67
P(R  H) = .33

Bayesian Analysis
The concept of conditional probability given statistical dependence forms the necessary
foundation for an area of probability known as Bayesian analysis. The technique is named
after Thomas Bayes, an eighteenth-century clergyman who pioneered this area of 
analysis.
The basic principle of Bayesian analysis is that additional information (if available) can
sometimes enable one to alter (improve) the marginal probabilities of the occurrence of an event.
The altered probabilities are referred to as revised, or posterior, probabilities.
The concept of posterior probabilities will be illustrated using an example. A production
manager for a manufacturing firm is supervising the machine setup for the production of a 
product. The machine operator sets up the machine. If the machine is set up correctly, there is a
10% chance that an item produced on the machine will be defective; if the machine is set up in-
correctly, there is a 40% chance that an item will be defective. The production manager knows
from past experience that there is a .50 probability that a machine will be set up correctly or in-
correctly by an operator. In order to reduce the chance that an item produced on the machine
will be defective, the manager has decided that the operator should produce a sample item. The
manager wants to know the probability that the machine has been set up incorrectly if the sam-
ple item turns out to be defective.
The probabilities given in this problem statement can be summarized as follows:
where
correct
incorrect
defective
The posterior probability for our example is the conditional probability that the machine
has been set up incorrectly, given that the sample item proves to be defective, or P(IC D).
 D =
 IC =
 C =
P(DIC) = .40
P(IC) = .50
P(DC) = .10
P(C) = .50
514
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
In Bayesian analysis,
additional
information is used to
alter the marginal
probability of the oc-
currence of an event.
A posterior probabil-
ity is the altered mar-
ginal probability of an
event, based on addi-
tional information.
Red
Red
White
White
Bucket 1
Bucket 2
Head
P(H) = .50
Flip a coin
Tail
P(T) = .50
P(RH) = .33
P(WT) = .17
P(WH) = .67
P(RT)  = .83
P(RH)
P(WH) = .335
P(RT)
P(WT)
= .165
= .415
= .085
Conditional
probabilities
Marginal
probabilities
Joint
probabilities
FIGURE 11.7
Probability tree
with marginal,
conditional, and
joint probabilities
TABLE 11.1
Joint probability
table
Draw a Ball
Marginal
Flip a Coin
Red
White
Probabilities
Head
P(RH) = .165
P(WH) = .335
P(H) = .50
Tail
P(RT) = .415
P(WT) = .085
P(T) = .50
Marginal
P(R) = .580
P(W) = .420
1.00 
probabilities

EXPECTED VALUE
515
Bayes’ rule is a
formula for computing
the posterior
probability given mar-
ginal and conditional
probabilities.
In Bayesian analysis, once we are given the initial marginal and conditional probabilities,
we can compute the posterior probability by using Bayes’ rule, as follows:
Previously, the manager knew that there was a 50% chance that the machine was set up in-
correctly. Now, after producing and testing a sample item, the manager knows that if it is defec-
tive, there is an .80 probability that the machine was set up incorrectly. Thus, by gathering some
additional information, the manager can revise the estimate of the probability that the machine
was set up correctly. This will obviously improve decision making by allowing the manager to
make a more informed decision about whether to have the machine set up again.
In general, given two events, A and B, and a third event, C, that is conditionally dependent
on A and B, Bayes’ rule can be written as
Expected Value
It is often possible to assign numeric values to the various outcomes that can result from an experi-
ment. When the values of the variables occur in no particular order or sequence, the variables are
referred to as random variables. Every possible value of a variable has a probability of occurrence
associated with it. For example, if a coin is tossed three times, the number of heads obtained is a
random variable. The possible values of the random variable are 0, 1, 2, and 3 heads. The values of
the variable are random because there is no way of predicting which value (0, 1, 2, or 3) will result
when the coin is tossed three times. If three tosses are made several times, the values (i.e., numbers
of heads) that will result will have no sequence or pattern; they will be random.
Like the variables defined in previous chapters in this text, random variables are typically
represented symbolically by a letter, such as x, y, or z. Consider a vendor who sells hot dogs 
outside a building every day. If the number of hot dogs the vendor sells is defined as the random
variable x, then x will equal 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, . . . hot dogs sold daily.
Although the exact values of the random variables in the foregoing examples are not
known prior to the event, it is possible to assign a probability to the occurrence of the possible
values that can result. Consider a production operation in which a machine breaks down peri-
odically. From experience it has been determined that the machine will break down 0, 1, 2, 3,
or 4 times per month. Although managers do not know the exact number of breakdowns (x)
that will occur each month, they can determine the relative frequency probability of each
number of breakdowns P(x). These probabilities are as follows:
X
P(X)
0
.10
1
.20
2
.30
3
.25
4
  .15
1.00
These probability values taken together form a probability distribution. That is, the proba-
bilities are distributed over the range of possible values of the random variable x.
P(AC) =
P(C A)P(A)
P(C A)P(A) + P(C  B) P(B)
= .80
=
(.40)(.50)
(.40)(.50) + (.10)(.50)
P(IC D) =
P(DIC)P(IC)
P(DIC)P(IC) + P(D C)P(C)

The expected value of the random variable (the number of breakdowns in any given month)
is computed by multiplying each value of the random variable by its probability of occurrence
and summing these products.
For our example, the expected number of breakdowns per month is computed as follows:
This means that, on average, management can expect 2.15 breakdowns every month.
The expected value is often referred to as the weighted average, or mean, of the probability
distribution and is a measure of central tendency of the distribution. In addition to knowing the
mean, it is often desirable to know how the values are dispersed (or scattered) around the mean.
A measure of dispersion is the variance, which is computed as follows:
1. Square the difference between each value and the expected value.
2. Multiply these resulting amounts by the probability of each value.
3. Sum the values compiled in step 2.
The general formula for computing the variance, which we will designate as 
is
s2 = a
n
i=1
3xi - E1xi2 42P1xi2
s2,
= 2.15 breakdowns
= 0 + .20 + .60 + .75 + .60
E1x2 = 1021.102 + 1121.202 + 1221.302 + 1321.252 + 1421.152
516
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
Management Science Application
A Probability Model for Analyzing Coast 
Guard Patrol Effectiveness
A primary responsibility of the U.S. Coast Guard is to moni-
tor and protect the maritime borders of the United States. One
measure of Coast Guard effectiveness in meeting this respon-
sibility is determined by a probability model that indicates the
probability that the Coast Guard will intercept a randomly se-
lected target vessel attempting to penetrate a Coast Guard
patrol perimeter. The probability P(I), the probability of inter-
cepting the target vessel, is computed according to the
formula
is the probability that a target vessel will be inter-
cepted (I), given that it is detected (D). It is a constant value es-
timated from Coast Guard historical data. 
is the
probability that a target vessel is detected, given that a Coast
Guard vessel is available (A). This value is computed using a
submodel based on the patrol area and speed of the Coast
Guard vessel and the speed of the target vessel. 
is
the probability that the Coast Guard vessel is available, given
that it is on the scene (O) in the patrol area. P(O) is the proba-
bility that a Coast Guard vessel is on the scene in the patrol
P1AO2
P1DA2
P1ID2
P1I2 = P1ID2P1D A2P1AO2P1O2
area, and currently it is assigned a constant value of one. The
Coast Guard used this model to perform sensitivity analysis
and analyze the effect of different parameter changes on ef-
fectiveness. An example might be testing the impact of a
change in the patrol area or vessel speed.
Source: Based on S. O. Kimbrough, J. R. Oliver, and C. W. Pritchett,
“On Post-Evaluation Analysis: Candle-Lighting and Surrogate 
Models,” Interfaces 23, no. 3 (May–June 1993): 17–28.
Simon Alvinge/iStockphoto
The expected value is
the mean of the prob-
ability distribution of
the random variable.
Variance is a measure
of the dispersion of
random variable 
values around the 
expected value,
or mean.
The expected value of
a random variable is
computed by multiply-
ing each possible
value of the variable
by its probability and
summing these 
products.

THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
517
The standard
deviation is computed
by taking the square
root of the variance.
A continuous random
variable can take on an
infinite number of val-
ues within an interval,
or range.
The variance 
for the machine breakdown example is computed as follows:
xi
P(xi)
xi – E(x)
[xi – E(x)]2
[xi – E(x)]2 • P(xi)
0
.10
–2.15
4.62
.462
1
.20
–1.15
1.32
.264
2
.30
–0.15
.02
.006
3
.25
0.85
.72
.180
4
  .15
1.85
3.42
  .513
1.00
1.425
The standard deviation is another widely recognized measure of dispersion. It is designated
symbolically as 
and is computed by taking the square root of the variance, as follows:
A small standard deviation or variance, relative to the expected value, or mean, indicates
that most of the values of the random variable distribution are bunched close to the expected
value. Conversely, a large relative value for the measures of dispersion indicates that the values
of the random variable are widely dispersed from the expected value.
The Normal Distribution
Previously, a discrete value was defined as a value that is countable (and usually an integer). 
A random variable is discrete if the values it can equal are finite and countable. The probability
distributions we have encountered thus far have been discrete distributions. In other words, the
values of the random variables that made up these discrete distributions were always finite (for
example, in the preceding example, there were five possible values of the random variable
breakdowns per month). Because every value of the random variable had a unique probability of
occurrence, the discrete probability distribution consisted of all the (finite) values of a random
variable and their associated probabilities.
In contrast, a continuous random variable can take on an infinite number of values within
some interval. This is because continuous random variables have values that are not specifically
countable and are often fractional. The distinction between discrete and continuous random vari-
ables is sometimes made by saying that discrete relates to things that can be counted and
continuous relates to things that are measured. For example, a load of oil being transported by
tanker may consist of not just 1 million or 2 million barrels but 1.35 million barrels. If the range
of the random variable is between 1 million and 2 million barrels, then there is an infinite num-
ber of possible (fractional) values between 1 million and 2 million barrels, even though the value
1.35 million corresponds to a discrete value of 1,350,000 barrels of oil. No matter how small an
interval exists between two values in the distribution, there is always at least one value—and, in
fact, an infinite number of values—between the two values.
Because a continuous random variable can take on an extremely large or infinite number of
values, assigning a unique probability to every value of the random variable would require an
infinite (or very large) number of probabilities, each of which would be infinitely small. There-
fore, we cannot assign a unique probability to each value of the continuous random variable, as
we did in a discrete probability distribution. In a continuous distribution, we can refer only to
the probability that a value of the random variable is within some range. For example, we can
determine the probability that between 1.35 million and 1.40 million barrels of oil are trans-
ported, or the probability that fewer than or more than 1.35 million barrels are shipped, but we
cannot determine the probability that exactly 1.35 million barrels of oil are transported.
One of the most frequently used continuous probability distributions is the normal
distribution, which is a continuous curve in the shape of a bell (i.e., it is symmetrical).
= 1.19 breakdowns per month
s = 21.425
s
s2 = 1.425 breakdowns per month
1s22
The normal distribution
is a continuous proba-
bility distribution that is
symmetrical on both
sides of the mean—that
is, it is shaped 
like a bell.
In a continuous
distribution, the 
random variables can
equal an infinite num-
ber of values within
an interval.

The normal distribution is a popular continuous distribution because it has certain mathe-
matical properties that make it easy to work with, and it is a reasonable approximation of
the continuous probability distributions of a number of natural phenomena. Figure 11.8 is
an illustration of the normal distribution.
518
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
The area under a nor-
mal curve is measured
by determining the
number of standard
deviations the value
of a random variable
is from the mean.
The fact that the normal distribution is a continuous curve reflects the fact that it consists of
an infinite or extremely large number of points (on the curve). The bell-shaped curve can be flat-
ter or taller, depending on the degree to which the values of the random variable are dispersed
from the center of the distribution. The center of the normal distribution is referred to as the
mean
and it is analogous to the average of the distribution.
Notice that the two ends (or tails) of the distribution in Figure 11.8 extend from 
to
. In reality, random variables do not often take on values over an infinite range. Therefore,
when the normal distribution is applied, it actually approximates the distribution of a random
variable with finite limits. The area under the normal curve represents probability. The entire
area under the curve equals 1.0 because the sum of the probabilities of all values of a random
variable in a probability distribution must equal 1.0. Fifty percent of the curve lies to the right of
the mean, and 50% lies to the left. Thus, the probability that a random variable x will have a
value greater (or less) than the mean is .50.
As an example of the application of the normal distribution, consider the Armor Carpet
Store, which sells Super Shag carpet. From several years of sales records, store management has
determined that the mean number of yards of Super Shag demanded by customers during a week
is 4,200 yards, and the standard deviation is 1,400 yards. It is necessary to know both the mean
and the standard deviation to perform a probabilistic analysis using the normal distribution. The
store management assumes that the continuous random variable, yards of carpet demanded per
week, is normally distributed (i.e., the values of the random variable have approximately the
shape of the normal curve). The mean of the normal distribution is represented by the symbol μ,
and the standard deviation is represented by the symbol :
The store manager wants to know the probability that the demand for Super Shag in the up-
coming week will exceed 6,000 yards. The normal curve for this example is shown in Figure 11.9.
The probability that x (the number of yards of carpet) will be equal to or greater than 6,000 is 
expressed as
which corresponds to the area under the normal curve to the right of the value 6,000 because 
the area under the curve (in Figure 11.9) represents probability. In a normal distribution, area 
or probability is measured by determining the number of standard deviations the value of the
random variable x is from the mean. The number of standard deviations a value is from the mean
is represented by Z and is computed using the formula
Z = x - m
s
P1x Ú 6,0002
s = 1,400 yd.
m = 4,200 yd.
s
+ 
- 
(m),
The center of a
normal distribution is
its mean, μ.
Area = .50
Area = .50
−∞ 
+ ∞ 
m = Mean
x
FIGURE 11.8
The normal curve
The area under the
normal curve
represents probability,
and the total area 
under the curve 
sums to one.

THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
519
m = 4,200
s = 1,400
x (yards)
0
6,000
FIGURE 11.9
The normal 
distribution for
carpet demand
The number of standard deviations a value is from the mean gives us a consistent standard
of measure for all normal distributions. In our example, the units of measure are yards; in other
problems, the units of measure may be pounds, hours, feet, or tons. By converting these various
units of measure into a common measure (number of standard deviations), we create a standard
that is the same for all normal distributions.
Actually, the standard form of the normal distribution has a mean of zero (μ = 0) and a stan-
dard deviation of one 
The value Z enables us to convert this scale of measure into
whatever scale our problem requires.
Figure 11.10 shows the standard normal distribution, with our example distribution of car-
pet demand above it. This illustrates the conversion of the scale of measure along the horizontal
axis from yards to number of standard deviations.
(s = 1).
0 1,400 2,800
8,400
7,000
5,600
m = 4,200
− 3s
− 2s
− 1s
1s
2s
3s
m = 0
x
x
68%
68%
FIGURE 11.10
The standard 
normal distribution
The horizontal axis along the bottom of Figure 11.10 corresponds to the standard normal
distribution. Notice that the area under the normal curve between 
and 
represents 68%
of the total area under the normal curve, or a probability of .68. Now look at the horizontal axis
corresponding to yards in our example. Given that the standard deviation is 1,400 yards, the area
between
(2,800 yards) and 
(5,600 yards) is also 68% of the total area under the curve.
Thus, if we measure distance along the horizontal axis in terms of the number of standard devia-
tions, we will determine the same probability, no matter what the units of measure are. The for-
mula for Z makes this conversion for us.
Returning to our example, recall that the manager of the carpet store wants to know the proba-
bility that the demand for Super Shag in the upcoming week will be 6,000 yards or more. Substitut-
ing the values 
and 
yards into our formula for Z, we can
determine the number of standard deviations the value 6,000 is from the mean:
= 1.29 standard deviations
= 6,000 - 4,200
1,400
Z = x - m
s
s = 1,400
x = 6,000, m = 4,200,
1s
-1s
1s
-1s

The value 
is 1.29 standard deviations from the mean, as shown in Figure 11.11.
The area under the standard normal curve for values of Z has been computed and is displayed
in easily accessible normal tables. Table A.1 in Appendix A is such a table. It shows that
standard deviations corresponds to an area, or probability, of .4015. However, this is
the area between 
and 
because what was measured was the area within 1.29
standard deviations of the mean. Recall, though, that 50% of the area under the curve lies to the
right of the mean. Thus, we can subtract .4015 from .5000 to get the area to the right of
This means that there is a .0985 (or 9.85%) probability that the demand for carpet next week
will be 6,000 yards or more.
Now suppose that the carpet store manager wishes to consider two additional questions:
(1) What is the probability that demand for carpet will be 5,000 yards or less? (2) What is the
probability that the demand for carpet will be between 3,000 yards and 5,000 yards? We will
consider each of these questions separately.
First, we want to determine 
The area representing this probability is shown
in Figure 11.12. The area to the left of the mean in Figure 11.12 equals .50. That leaves only the
area between 
and 
to be determined. The number of standard deviations
is from the mean is
= .57 standard deviation
=
800
1,400
= 5,000 - 4,200
1,400
Z = x - m
s
x = 5,000
x = 5,000
m = 4,200
P1x … 5,0002.
= .0985
P1x Ú 6,0002 = .5000 - .4015
x = 6,000:
x = 6,000
m = 4,200
Z = 1.29
x = 6,000
520
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
m = 4,200
s = 1,400
x (yards)
0
5,000
.2157
.5000
.57s
FIGURE 11.12
Normal distribution
for
yardsT
PSx " 5,000 yardsT
m = 4,200
s = 1,400
x (yards)
0
6,000
.0985
.4015
1.29s
FIGURE 11.11
Determination of
the Z value

THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
521
m = 4,200
s = 1,400
x (yards)
0
5,000
.2157
.3051
.86s
3,000
FIGURE 11.13
Normal
distribution with 
P(3,000 yards 
x
5,000 yards)
"
"
The value 
corresponds to a probability of .2157 in Table A.1 in Appendix A. Thus,
the area between 4,200 and 5,000 in Figure 11.12 is .2157. To find our desired probability, we
simply add this amount to .5000:
Next, we want to determine 
The area representing this probabil-
ity is shown in Figure 11.13. The shaded area in Figure 11.13 is computed by finding two
areas—the area between 
and 
and the area between 
and
—and summing them. We already computed the area between 4,200 and 5,000 in the
previous example and found it to be .2157. The area between 
and 
is found
by determining how many standard deviations x = 3,000 is from the mean:
= -.86
= -1,200
1,400
Z = 3,000 - 4,200
1,400
m = 4,200
x = 3,000
x = 5,000
m = 4,200
m = 4,200
x = 3,000
P13,000 … x … 5,0002.
P1x … 5,0002 = .5000 + .2157 = .7157
Z = .57
The population mean
and variance are for
the entire set of data
being analyzed.
A sample mean and
variance are derived
from a subset of the
population data and
are used to make
inferences about the
population.
The minus sign indicates the area is to the left of the mean when we find the area correspon-
ding to the Z value of .86 in Table A.1. This value is .3051. We now find our probability by
summing .2157 and .3051:
The normal distribution, although applied frequently in probability analysis, is just one of a
number of continuous probability distributions. In subsequent chapters, other continuous distri-
butions will be identified. Being acquainted with the normal distribution will make the use of
these other distributions much easier.
Sample Mean and Variance
The mean and variance we described in the previous section are actually more correctly referred
to as the population mean
and variance
The population mean is the mean of the entire
set of possible measurements or set of data being analyzed, and the population variance is defined
similarly. Although we provided numeric values of the population mean and variance (or stan-
dard deviation) in our examples in the previous section, it is more likely that a sample mean,
x–, would be used to estimate the population mean, and a sample variance,
would be used to
estimate the population variance. The computation of a true population mean and variance is usu-
ally too time-consuming and costly, or the entire population of data may not be available. Instead,
a sample, which is a smaller subset of the population, is used. The mean and variance of this sam-
ple can then be used as an estimate of the population mean and variance if the population is as-
sumed to be normally distributed. In other words, a smaller set of sample data is used to make
generalizations or estimates, referred to as inferences, about the whole (population) set of data.
s2,
(s2).
(m)
= .5208
P13,000 … x … 5,0002 = .2157 + .3051

For example, in the previous section we indicated that the mean weekly demand for Super
Shag carpet was 4,200 yards and the standard deviation was 1,400; thus 
and
However, we noted that the management of the Armor Carpet Store determined the
mean and standard deviation from “several years of sales records.” Thus, the mean and standard
deviation were actually a sample mean and standard deviation, based on several years of sample
data from a normal distribution. In other words, we used a sample mean and sample standard
deviation to estimate the population mean and standard deviation. The population mean and
standard deviation would have actually been computed from all weekly demand since the com-
pany started, for some extended period of time.
The sample mean, x–, is computed using the following formula:
The sample variance,
is computed as follows:
or, in shortcut form:
The sample standard deviation is simply the square root of the variance:
Let us consider our example for Armor Carpet Store again, except now we will use a sam-
ple of 10 weeks’ demand data for Super Shag carpet, as follows:
Week i
Demand xi
1
2,900
2
5,400
3
3,100
4
4,700
5
3,800
6
4,300
7
6,800
8
2,900
9
3,600
10
4,500
= 42,000
The sample mean is computed as
= 42,000
10
= 4,200 yd.
x =
a
n
i=1
xi
n
g
s = 2s2
s2 =
a
n
i=1
x2
i -
¢ a
n
i=1
xi≤
2
n
n - 1
s2 =
a
n
i=1
1xi - x22
n - 1
s2,
x =
a
n
i=1
xi
n
s = 1,400.
m = 4,200
522
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS

THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
523
The sample variance is computed as
The sample standard deviation, s, is
These values are very close to the mean and standard deviation we originally estimated in
this example in the previous section (i.e.,
yd.,
yd.). In general, the accu-
racy of the sample depends on two factors: the sample size (n) and the variation in the data. The
larger the sample, the more accurate the sample statistics will be in estimating the population
statistics. Also, the more variable the data are, the less accurate the sample statistics will be as
estimates of the population statistics.
The Chi-Square Test for Normality
Several of the quantitative techniques that are presented in the remainder of this text include
probabilistic data and parameters and statistical analysis. In many cases the problem data are
assumed (or stated) to be normally distributed, with a mean and standard deviation, which en-
able statistical analysis to be performed based on the normal distribution. However, in reality
it can never be simply assumed that data are normally distributed or in fact reflect any proba-
bility distribution. Frequently, a statistical test must be performed to determine the exact dis-
tribution (if any) to which the data conform.
The chi-square 
test is one such statistical test to see if observed data fit a 
particular probability distribution, including the normal distribution. The chi-square test com-
pares the actual frequency distribution for a set of data with a theoretical frequency distribution
that would be expected to occur for a specific distribution. This is also referred to as testing the
goodness-of-fit of a set of data to a specific probability distribution.
To perform a chi-square goodness-of-fit test, the actual number of frequencies in each class
or the range of a frequency distribution is compared to the theoretical frequencies that should oc-
cur in each class if the data followed a particular distribution. These numeric differences between
the actual and theoretical values in each class are used in a formula to compute a 
test statistic,
or number, which is then compared to a number from a chi-square table called a critical value. If
the computed 
test statistic is greater than the tabular critical value, then the data do not follow
the distribution being tested; if the critical value is greater than the computed test statistic, the dis-
tribution is presumed to exist. In statistical terminology this is referred to as testing the hypothe-
sis that the data are, for example, normally distributed. If the 
test statistic is greater than the
tabular critical value, the hypothesis 
that the data fits the hypothesized distribution is 
rejected, and the distribution is presumed to not exist; otherwise, it is accepted as existing.
To demonstrate how to apply the chi-square test for a normal distribution, we will use an
expanded version of our Armor Carpet Store example used in the previous section. To test the
distribution, we need a lot more data than the 10 weeks of demand we used previously.
Instead, we will now assume that we have collected a sample of 200 weeks of demand for 
(Ho)
x2
x2
x2
(x2)
s = 1,400
m = 4,200
= 1,232 yd.
= 21,517,777
s = 2s2
s2 = 1,517,777
=
(190,060,000) - (1,764,000,000)
10
9
s2 =
a
n
i=1
x2
i -
a a
n
i=1
xib
2
n
n - 1

Super Shag carpet and that these data have been grouped according to the following frequency
distribution:
Range, 
Frequency 
Weekly Demand (yd.)
(weeks)
0 6 1,000
2
1,000 6 2,000
5
2,000 6 3,000
22
3,000 6 4,000
50
4,000 6 5,000
62
5,000 6 6,000
40
6,000 6 7,000
15
7,000 6 8,000
3
8,000+
1
200
Because we haven’t provided the actual data, we are also going to assume that the sample mean
(x–) equals 4,200 yards and the sample standard deviation (s) equals 1,232 yards, although nor-
mally these values would be computed directly from the data as in the previous section.
The first step in performing the chi-square test is to determine the number of observations
that should be in each frequency range, if the distribution is normal. We start by determining
the area (or probability) that should be in each class, using the sample mean and standard de-
viation. Figure 11.14 shows the theoretical normal distribution, with the area in each range.
The area of probability for each range is computed using the normal probability table (Table A.1
in Appendix A), as demonstrated earlier in this chapter. For example, the area less than 1,000
yards is determined by computing the Z statistic for 
= -2.60
= 1,000 - 4,200
1,232
Z = x - x
1
s
x = 1,000:
524
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
.0636  .2422  .3058
.0047
1
.0320 .1293
.2704
.1857
.0605
.0106
.0010
2
3
4
x  4.2
5
6
7
8
(1,000 yd.)
FIGURE 11.14
The theoretical
normal
distribution
This corresponds to a normal table value of .4953. This is the area from 1,000 to the sample
mean (4,200). Subtracting this value from .5000 results in the area less than 1,000, or
The area in the range of 1,000 to 2,000 yards is computed by subtract-
ing the area from 2,000 to the mean (.4633) from the area from 1,000 to the mean (.4953), or
The Z values for these ranges and all the range areas in Figure 11.14
are shown in Table 11.2.
.4953 - .4633 = .0320.
.5000 - .4953 = .0047.

THE NORMAL DISTRIBUTION
525
TABLE 11.2
The determination
of the theoretical
range frequencies 
Area:
Range
Normal
Range
Z
x S x–
Area
Frequency (n  200)
0 6 1,000
—
.5000
.0047
0.94
1,000 6 2,000
-2.60
.4953
.0320
6.40
2,000 6 3,000
-1.79
.4633
.1293
25.86
3,000 6 4,000
-.97
.3340
.2704
54.08
4,000 6 5,000
-.16
.0636
.3058
61.16
.65
.2422
5,000 6 6,000
1.46
.4279
.1857
37.14
6,000 6 7,000
2.27
.4884
.0605
12.10
7,000 6 8,000
3.08
.4990
.0106
2.12
8,000+
—
.5000
.0010
0.20 
$%&
$%&
Notice that the area for the range that includes the mean between 4,000 and 5,000 yards is 
determined by adding the two areas to the immediate right and left of the mean,
The next step is to compute the theoretical frequency for each range by multiplying
the area in each range by 
For example, the frequency in the range from 0 to
1,000 is
and the frequency for the range from 1,000 to 2,000 is
These and the remaining theoretical frequencies are shown in the last
column in Table 11.2.
Next, we must compare these theoretical frequencies with the actual frequencies in each
range, using the following chi-square test statistic:
where
observed frequency
theoretical frequency
the number of classes or ranges
the number of estimated parameters
degrees of freedom
However, before we can apply this formula, we must make an important adjustment.
Before we can apply the chi-square test, each range must include at least five theoretical
observations. Thus, we need to combine some of the ranges so that they will contain at least
five theoretical observations. For our distribution we can accomplish this by combining
the two lower class ranges (0–1,000 and 1,000–2,000) and the three higher ranges 
. This results in a revised frequency distribution with six
frequency classes, as shown in Table 11.3.
7,000; 7,000- 8,000; and 8,000+ 2
16,000-
k - p - 1 =
p =
k =
ft =
fo =
2
1
2
k
p
o
t
t
k
f
f
f
1.0320212002 = 6.40.
1.0047212002 = 0.94,
n = 200.
.0636 + .2422 = .3058.
Range,
Observed
Theoretical
Weekly Demand
Frequency fo
Frequency ft
(fo  ft)2
(fo  ft)2/ft
0 6 2,000
7
7.34
.12
.016
2,000 6 3,000
22
25.86
14.90
.576
3,000 6 4,000
50
54.08
16.64
.308
4,000 6 5,000
62
61.16
.71
.012
5,000 6 6,000
40
37.14
8.18
.220
6,000+
19
14.42
21.00
1.456
2.588
TABLE 11.3
Computation of
X2 test statistic 

The completed chi-square test statistic is shown in the last column in Table 11.3 and is 
computed as follows:
Next, we must compare this test statistic with a critical value obtained from the chi-square table
(Table A.2) in Appendix A. The degrees of freedom for the critical value are =
where k
is the number of frequency classes, or 6; and p is the number of parameters that were estimated for
the distribution, which in this case is 2, the sample mean and the sample standard deviation. Thus,
degrees of freedom
Using a level of significance (degree of confidence) of .05 (i.e.,
), from Table A.2:
Because 7.815
2.588, we accept the hypothesis that the distribution is normal. If the x2value
of 7.815 were less than the computed x2 test statistic, the distribution would not be considered normal.
Statistical Analysis with Excel
QM for Windows does not have statistical program modules. Therefore, to perform statistical
analysis, and specifically to compute the mean and standard deviation from sample data, we
must rely on Excel. Exhibit 11.1 shows the Excel spreadsheet for our Armor Carpet Store exam-
ple. The average demand for the sample data (4,200) is computed in cell C16, using the formula
AVERAGE(C4:C13), which is also shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet.
Cell C17 contains the sample standard deviation (1,231.98), computed by using the formula
STDEV(C4:C13).
A statistical analysis of the sample data can also be obtained by using the “Data Analysis”
option from the “Data” tab at the top of the spreadsheet. (If this option is not available on your
7
x2
.05,3 = 7.815
a = .05
= 3
k - p - 1 = 6 - 2 - 1
k - p - 1,
2
2
6
2 588
f
f
f
o
t
t
.
526
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
=STDEV(C4:C13)
=AVERAGE(C4:C13)
Click on “Data” tab on toolbar;
then on “Data Analysis”; then select
“Descriptive Statistics.”
“Descriptive Statistics”
table
EXHIBIT 11.1

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
527
“Data” menu, select the “Add-Ins” option from the “Excel options” menu and then select the
“Analysis ToolPak” option. This will insert the “Data Analysis” option on your “Data” toolbar
when you return to it.) Selecting the “Data Analysis” option from the menu will result in the
“Data Analysis” window shown in Exhibit 11.1.
Select “Descriptive Statistics” from this window. This will result in the dialog window ti-
tled Descriptive Statistics shown in Exhibit 11.2. This window, as shown, results in summary
statistics for the demand data in our carpet store example. Notice that the input range we
entered, C3:C13, includes the “Demand” heading on the spreadsheet in cell C3, which we
acknowledge by checking the “Labels in first row” box. This will result in our statistical
summary being labeled “Demand” on the spreadsheet, as shown in cell E3 in Exhibit 11.1.
Notice that we indicated where we wanted to locate the summary statistics on our spreadsheet
by typing E3 in the “Output Range” window. We obtained the summary statistics by checking
the “Summary statistics” box at the bottom of the screen.
Specifies location of
statistical summary
on spreadsheet.
Indicates that the
first row of data
(in C3) is a label.
Cells with data
EXHIBIT 11.2
The following example will illustrate the solution of a problem involving a normal probability.
Problem Statement
The Radcliffe Chemical Company and Arsenal produces explosives for the U.S. Army. Because
of the nature of its products, the company devotes strict attention to safety, which is also scruti-
nized by the federal government. Historical records show that the annual number of property
damage and personal injury accidents is normally distributed, with a mean of 8.3 accidents and
a standard deviation of 1.8 accidents.
Example Problem
Solution
Summary
The field of probability and statistics is quite large and complex, and it contains much more than
has been presented in this chapter. This chapter presented the basic principles and fundamentals
of probability. The primary purpose of this brief overview was to prepare the reader for other ma-
terial in the book. The topics of decision analysis (Chapter 12), simulation (Chapter 14), proba-
bilistic inventory models (Chapter 16), and, to a certain extent, project management (Chapter 8)
are probabilistic in nature and require an understanding of the fundamentals of probability.

A. What is the probability that the company will have fewer than 5 accidents next year? more
than 10?
B. The government will fine the company $200,000 if the number of accidents exceeds 12 in
a 1-year period. What average annual fine can the company expect?
Solution
Step 1: Set Up the Normal Distribution
Step 2: Solve Part A
accidents)
From Table A.1 in Appendix A, we see that 
corresponds to a probability of .4664; thus,
accidents)
From Table A.1 in Appendix A, we see that 
corresponds to a probability of .3264; thus,
Step 3: Solve Part B
accidents)
From Table A.1 in Appendix A, we see that 
corresponds to a probability of .4803; thus,
= .0197
P1x Ú 122 = .5000 - .4803
Z = 2.06
= 2.06
= 12 - 8.3
1.8
Z = x - m
s
P(x Ú 12
= .1736
P1x Ú 102 = .5000 - .3264
Z = .94
= .94
= 10 - 8.3
1.8
Z = x - m
s
P (x Ú 10
= .0336
P(x … 5) = .5000 - .4664
Z = -1.83
= -1.83
= 5 - 8.3
1.8
Z = x - m
s
P (x … 5
x (accidents)
10
5 m = 8.3
s = 1.8
528
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS

PROBLEMS
529
Therefore, the company’s expected annual fine is
Problems
1. Indicate which of the following probabilities are objective and which are subjective. (Note that
in some cases, the probabilities may not be entirely one or the other.)
a. The probability of snow tomorrow
b. The probability of catching a fish
c. The probability of the prime interest rate rising in the coming year
d. The probability that the Cincinnati Reds will win the World Series
e. The probability that demand for a product will be a specific amount next month
f. The probability that a political candidate will win an election
g. The probability that a machine will break down
h. The probability of being dealt four aces in a poker hand
2. A gambler in Las Vegas is cutting a deck of cards for $1,000. What is the probability that the
card for the gambler will be the following?
a. A face card
b. A queen
c. A spade
d. A jack of spades
3. Downhill Ski Resort in Colorado has accumulated information from records of the past 30 win-
ters regarding the measurable snowfall. This information is as follows:
Snowfall (in.)
Frequency
0–19
2
20–29
7
30–39
8
40–49
8
50+
5
30
a. Determine the probability of each event in this frequency distribution.
b. Are all the events in this distribution mutually exclusive? Explain.
4. Employees in the textile industry can be segmented as follows:
Employees
Number
Female and union
12,000
Female and nonunion
25,000
Male and union
21,000
Male and nonunion
42,000
a. Determine the probability of each event in this distribution.
b. Are the events in this distribution mutually exclusive? Explain.
c. What is the probability that an employee is male?
d. Is this experiment collectively exhaustive? Explain.
5. The quality control process at a manufacturing plant requires that each lot of finished units be
sampled for defective items. Twenty units from each lot are inspected. If five or more defective
units are found, the lot is rejected. If a lot is known to contain 10% defective items, what is the
probability that the lot will be rejected? accepted?
= +3,940
+200,000 ~ P(x Ú 12) = (+200,000)1.01972

6. A manufacturing company has 10 machines in continuous operation during a workday. The
probability that an individual machine will break down during the day is .10. Determine the
probability that during any given day 3 machines will break down.
7. A polling firm is taking a survey regarding a proposed new law. Of the voters polled, 30% are in
favor of the law. If 10 people are surveyed, what is the probability that 4 will indicate that they
are opposed to the passage of the new law?
8. An automobile manufacturer has discovered that 20% of all the transmissions it installed in a
particular style of truck one year are defective. It has contacted the owners of these vehicles and
asked them to return their trucks to the dealer to check the transmission. The Friendly Auto Mart
sold seven of these trucks and has two of the new transmissions in stock. What is the probability
that the auto dealer will need to order more new transmissions?
9. A new county hospital is attempting to determine whether it needs to add a particular specialist
to its staff. Five percent of the general hospital population in the county contracts the illness the
specialist would treat. If 12 patients check into the hospital in a day, what is the probability that
4 or more will have the illness?
10. A large research hospital has accumulated statistical data on its patients for an extended period.
Researchers have determined that patients who are smokers have an 18% chance of contracting
a serious illness such as heart disease, cancer, or emphysema, whereas there is only a .06 proba-
bility that a nonsmoker will contract a serious illness. From hospital records, the researchers
know that 23% of all hospital patients are smokers, while 77% are nonsmokers. For planning
purposes, the hospital physician staff would like to know the probability that a given patient is a
smoker if the patient has a serious illness.
11. Two law firms in a community handle all the cases dealing with consumer suits against companies
in the area. The Abercrombie firm takes 40% of all suits, and the Olson firm handles the other 60%.
The Abercrombie firm wins 70% of its cases, and the Olson firm wins 60% of its cases.
a. Develop a probability tree showing all marginal, conditional, and joint probabilities.
b. Develop a joint probability table.
c. Using Bayes’ rule, determine the probability that the Olson firm handled a particular case,
given that the case was won.
12. The Senate consists of 100 senators, of whom 34 are Republicans and 66 are Democrats. A bill
to increase defense appropriations is before the Senate. Thirty-five percent of the Democrats and
70% of the Republicans favor the bill. The bill needs a simple majority to pass. Using a proba-
bility tree, determine the probability that the bill will pass.
13. A retail outlet receives radios from three electrical appliance companies. The outlet receives
20% of its radios from A, 40% from B, and 40% from C. The probability of receiving a defec-
tive radio from A is .01; from B, .02; and from C, .08.
a. Develop a probability tree showing all marginal, conditional, and joint probabilities.
b. Develop a joint probability table.
c. What is the probability that a defective radio returned to the retail store came from company B?
14. A metropolitan school system consists of three districts—north, south, and central. The north dis-
trict contains 25% of all students, the south district contains 40%, and the central district contains
35%. A minimum-competency test was given to all students; 10% of the north district students
failed, 15% of the south district students failed, and 5% of the central district students failed.
a. Develop a probability tree showing all marginal, conditional, and joint probabilities.
b. Develop a joint probability table.
c. What is the probability that a student selected at random failed the test?
15. A service station owner sells Goodroad tires, which are ordered from a local tire distributor. The
distributor receives tires from two plants, A and B. When the owner of the service station receives
530
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS

PROBLEMS
531
an order from the distributor, there is a .50 probability that the order consists of tires from plant A
or plant B. However, the distributor will not tell the owner which plant the tires come from. The
owner knows that 20% of all tires produced at plant A are defective, whereas only 10% of the tires
produced at plant B are defective. When an order arrives at the station, the owner is allowed to
inspect it briefly. The owner takes this opportunity to inspect one tire to see if it is defective. If
the owner believes the tire came from plant A, the order will be sent back. Using Bayes’ rule,
determine the posterior probability that a tire is from plant A, given that the owner finds that it is
defective.
16. A metropolitan school system consists of two districts, east and west. The east district contains
35% of all students, and the west district contains the other 65%. A vocational aptitude test was
given to all students; 10% of the east district students failed, and 25% of the west district stu-
dents failed. Given that a student failed the test, what is the posterior probability that the student
came from the east district?
17. The Ramshead Pub sells a large quantity of beer every Saturday. From past sales records, the
pub has determined the following probabilities for sales:
Barrels
Probability
6
.10
7
.20
8
.40
9
.25
10
 .05
1.00
Compute the expected number of barrels that will be sold on Saturday.
18. The following probabilities for grades in management science have been determined based on
past records:
Grade
Probability
A
.10
B
.30
C
.40
D
.10
F
.10
1.00
The grades are assigned on a 4.0 scale, where an A is a 4.0, a B a 3.0, and so on. Determine the
expected grade and variance for the course.
19. A market in Boston orders oranges from Florida. The oranges are shipped to Boston from
Florida by either railroad, truck, or airplane; an order can take 1, 2, 3, or 4 days to arrive in
Boston once it is placed. The following probabilities have been assigned to the number of days
it takes to receive an order once it is placed (referred to as lead time):
Lead Time
Probability
1
.20
2
.50
3
.20
4
.10
1.00
Compute the expected number of days it takes to receive an order and the standard deviation.
20. An investment firm is considering two alternative investments, A and B, under two possible
future sets of economic conditions, good and poor. There is a .60 probability of good eco-
nomic conditions occurring and a .40 probability of poor economic conditions occurring. The

expected gains and losses under each economic type of conditions are shown in the follow-
ing table:
Economic Conditions
Investment
Good
Poor
A
$900,000
–$800,000
B
120,000
70,000
Using the expected value of each investment alternative, determine which should be selected.
21. An investor is considering two investments, an office building and bonds. The possible returns
from each investment and their probabilities are as follows:
Office Building
Bonds
Return
Probability
Return
Probability
$50,000
.30
$30,000
.60
60,000
.20
40,000
  .40
80,000
.10
1.00
10,000
.30
0
  .10
1.00
Using expected value and standard deviation as a basis for comparison, discuss which of the two
investments should be selected.
22. The Jefferson High School Band Booster Club has organized a raffle. The prize is a $6,000 car.
Two thousand tickets to the raffle are to be sold at $1 apiece. If a person purchases four tickets,
what will be the expected value of the tickets?
23. The time interval between machine breakdowns in a manufacturing firm is defined according to
the following probability distribution:
Time Interval (hr.)
Probability
1
.15
2
.20
3
.40
4
 .25
1.00
Determine the cumulative probability distribution and compute the expected time between ma-
chine breakdowns.
24. The life of an electronic transistor is normally distributed, with a mean of 500 hours and a standard
deviation of 80 hours. Determine the probability that a transistor will last for more than 400 hours.
25. The grade point average of students at a university is normally distributed, with a mean of 2.6
and a standard deviation of 0.6. A recruiter for a company is interviewing students for sum-
mer employment. What percentage of the students will have a grade point average of 3.5 or
greater?
532
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS

PROBLEMS
533
26. The weight of bags of fertilizer is normally distributed, with a mean of 50 pounds and a standard
deviation of 6 pounds. What is the probability that a bag of fertilizer will weigh between 45 and 
55 pounds?
27. The monthly demand for a product is normally distributed, with a mean of 700 units and a stan-
dard deviation of 200 units. What is the probability that demand will be greater than 900 units in
a given month?
28. The Polo Development Firm is building a shopping center. It has informed renters that their
rental spaces will be ready for occupancy in 19 months. If the expected time until the shopping
center is completed is estimated to be 14 months, with a standard deviation of 4 months, what is
the probability that the renters will not be able to occupy in 19 months?
29. A warehouse distributor of carpet keeps 6,000 yards of deluxe shag carpet in stock during a
month. The average demand for carpet from the stores that purchase from the distributor is 4,500
yards per month, with a standard deviation of 900 yards. What is the probability that a cus-
tomer’s order will not be met during a month? (This situation is referred to as a stockout.)
30. The manager of the local National Video Store sells videocassette recorders at discount prices.
If the store does not have a video recorder in stock when a customer wants to buy one, it will
lose the sale because the customer will purchase a recorder from one of the many local com-
petitors. The problem is that the cost of renting warehouse space to keep enough recorders in
inventory to meet all demand is excessively high. The manager has determined that if 90% of
customer demand for recorders can be met, then the combined cost of lost sales and inventory
will be minimized. The manager has estimated that monthly demand for recorders is normally
distributed, with a mean of 180 recorders and a standard deviation of 60. Determine the num-
ber of recorders the manager should order each month to meet 90% of customer demand.
31. The owner of Western Clothing Company has determined that the company must sell 670 pairs
of denim jeans each month to break even (i.e., to reach the point where total revenue equals total
cost). The company’s marketing department has estimated that monthly demand is normally dis-
tributed, with a mean of 805 pairs of jeans and a standard deviation of 207 pairs. What is the
probability that the company will make a profit each month?
32. Lauren Moore, a professor in management science, is computing her final grades for her intro-
ductory management science class. The average final grade is a 63, with a standard deviation of 10.
Professor Moore wants to curve the final grades according to a normal distribution so that 10% of
the grades are Fs, 20% are Ds, 40% are Cs, 20% are Bs, and 10% are As. Determine the numeric
grades that conform to the curve Professor Moore wants to establish.
33. The SAT scores of all freshmen accepted at State University are normally distributed, with a
mean of 1,050 and a standard deviation of 120. The College of Business at State University has
accepted 620 of these freshmen into the college. All students in the college who score over 1,200
are eligible for merit scholarships. How many students can the college administration expect to
be eligible for merit scholarships?
34. Erin Richards is a junior at Central High School, and she has talked to her guidance counselor
about her chances of being admitted to Tech after her graduation. The guidance counselor has told
her that Tech generally accepts only those applicants who graduate in the top 10% of their high
school class. The average grade point average of the last four senior classes has been 2.67, with a
standard deviation of 0.58. What GPA will Erin have to achieve to be in the top 10% of her class?
35. The associate dean in the college of business at Tech is going to purchase a new copying ma-
chine for the college. One model he is considering is the Zerox X10. The sales representative
has told him that this model will make an average of 125,000 copies, with a standard deviation
of 40,000 copies, before breaking down. What is the probability that the copier will make
200,000 copies before breaking down?

36. The Palace Hotel believes its customers may be waiting too long for room service. The hotel op-
erations manager knows that the time for room service orders is normally distributed, and he
sampled 10 room service orders during a 3-day period and timed each (in minutes), as follows:
23
23
15
12
26
16
19
18
30
25
The operations manager believes that only 10% of the room service orders should take longer than
25 minutes if the hotel has good customer service. Does the hotel room service meet this goal?
37. Agnes Hammer is a senior majoring in management science. She has been interviewing with
several companies for a job when she graduates, and she is curious about what starting salary
offers she might receive. There are 140 seniors in the graduating class for her major, and more
than half have received job offers. She asked 12 of her classmates at random what their annual
starting salary offers were, and she received the following responses:
$28,500
$35,500
32,600
36,000
34,000
25,700
27,500
29,000
24,600
31,500
34,500
26,800
Assume that starting salaries are normally distributed. Compute the mean and standard deviation for
these data and determine the probability that Agnes will receive a salary offer of less than $27,000.
38. The owner of Gilley’s Ice Cream Parlor has noticed that she sells more ice cream on hotter days
during the summer, especially on days when the temperature is 85° or higher. To plan how much
ice cream to stock, she would like to know the average daily high temperature for the summer
months of July and August. Assuming that daily temperatures are normally distributed, she has
gathered the following data for the high temperature for 20 days from a local almanac:
86°
92°
85
94
78
83
91
81
90
84
92
76
83
78
80
78
69
85
74
90
Compute the mean and standard deviation for these data and determine the expected number of
days in July and August that the high temperature will be 85° or greater.
39. The state of Virginia has implemented a Standard of Learning (SOL) test that all public school
students must pass before they can graduate from high school. A passing grade is 75. Mont-
gomery County High School administrators want to gauge how well their students might do on
the SOL test, but they don’t want to take the time to test the whole student population. Instead,
they selected 20 students at random and gave them the test. The results are as follows:
83
79
56
93
48
92
37
45
72
71
92
71
66
83
81
80
58
95
67
78
534
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS

CASE PROBLEM
535
Assume that SOL test scores are normally distributed. Compute the mean and standard deviation
for these data and determine the probability that a student at the high school will pass the test.
40. The department of management science at Tech has sampled 250 of its majors and compiled the
following frequency distribution of grade point averages (on a 4.0 scale) for the previous semester:
GPA
Frequency
0 6 0.5
1
0.5 6 1.0
4
1.0 6 1.5
20
1.5 6 2.0
35
2.0 6 2.5
67
2.5 6 3.0
58
3.0 6 3.5
47
3.5 6 4.0
18
250
The sample mean (x–) for this distribution is 2.5, and the sample standard deviation (s) is 0.72.
Determine whether the student GPAs are normally distributed, using a .05 level of significance 
(i.e.,
).
41. Geo-net, a cellular phone company, has collected the following frequency distribution for the
length of calls outside its normal customer roaming area:
Length (min.)
Frequency
0 6 5
26
5 6 10
75
10 6 15
139
15 6 20
105
20 6 25
37
25+
18
400
The sample mean (x–) for this distribution is 14.3 minutes, and the sample standard deviation is 
3.7 minutes. Determine whether these data are normally distributed 1a = .052.
a = .05
Case Problem
Valley Swim Club
The Valley Swim Club has 300 stockholders, each
holding one share of stock in the club. A share of club
stock allows the shareholder’s family to use the club’s
heated outdoor pool during the summer, upon payment
of annual membership dues of $175. The club has not
issued any new stock in years, and only a few of the ex-
isting shares come up for sale each year. The board of di-
rectors administers the sale of all stock. When a
shareholder wants to sell, he or she turns the stock in to
the board, which sells it to the person at the top of the
waiting list. For the past few years, the length of the
waiting list has remained relatively steady, at approxi-
mately 20 names.

536
CHAPTER 11
PROBABILITY AND STATISTICS
However, during the past winter, two events occurred
that have increased the demand for shares in the club. The
winter was especially severe, and subzero weather and
heavy ice storms caused both the town and the county
pools to buckle and crack. The problems were not discov-
ered until maintenance crews began to ready the pools for
the summer, and repairs cannot be completed until the fall.
Also during the winter, the manager of the local country
club had an argument with her board of directors and one
night burned down the clubhouse. Although the pool itself
was not damaged, the dressing room facilities, showers,
and snack bar were destroyed. As a result of these two
events, the Valley Swim Club was inundated with applica-
tions to purchase shares. The waiting list suddenly grew to
250 people as the summer approached.
The board of directors of the swim club had refrained
from issuing new shares in the past because there was
never a very great demand, and the demand that did exist
was usually absorbed within a year by stock turnover. In
addition, the board has a real concern about overcrowding.
It seemed like the present membership was about right,
and there were very few complaints about overcrowding,
except on holidays like Memorial Day and the Fourth of
July. However, at a recent board meeting, a number of new
applicants had attended and asked the board to issue new
shares. In addition, a number of current shareholders sug-
gested that this might be an opportunity for the club to
raise some capital for needed repairs and to improve some
of the existing facilities. This was tempting to the board.
Although it had set the share price at $500 in the past, the
board could set it at a much higher level now. In addition,
any new shares sold would result in almost total profit be-
cause the manager, lifeguard, and maintenance costs had
already been budgeted for the summer and would not in-
crease with additional members.
Before the board of directors could make a decision on
whether to sell more shares and, if so, how many, the board
members felt they needed more information. Specifically,
they would like to know the average number of people (fam-
ily members, guests, etc.) that might use the pool each day
during the summer. They would also like to know the num-
ber of days they could expect more than 500 people to use
the pool from June through August, given the current num-
ber of shares.
The board of directors has the following daily atten-
dance records for June through August from the previous
summer; it thinks the figures would provide accurate esti-
mates for the upcoming summer:
139
380
193
399
177
238
273
367
378
197
161
224
172
359
461
273
308
368
275
463
242
213
256
541
337
578
177
303
391
235
402
287
245
262
400
218
487
247
390
447
224
271
198
356
284
399
239
259
310
322
417
275
274
232
347
419
474
241
205
317
393
516
194
190
361
369
421
478
207
243
411
361
595
303
215
277
419
497
223
304
241
258
341
315
331
384
130
291
258
407
246
195
The board has developed the following criteria for making
a decision on whether to issue new shares:
1. The expected number of days on which attendance would
exceed 500 should be no more than 5 with the current
membership.
2. The current average daily attendance should be no more
than 320.
3. The average daily weekend (Saturday and Sunday)
attendance should be no more than 500. (Weekend atten-
dance is every sixth and seventh column entry in each
progression of seven entries in the preceding data.)
If these criteria are met, the club will issue one new
share, at a price of $1,000, for every two average atten-
dees between the current daily average and an upper limit
of 400.
Should the club issue new shares? If so, how many will
it issue, and how much additional revenue will it realize?

CHAPTER
12
Decision Analysis
537

In the previous chapters dealing with linear programming, models were formulated and solved
in order to aid the manager in making a decision. The solutions to the models were represented
by values for decision variables. However, these linear programming models were all formu-
lated under the assumption that certainty existed. In other words, it was assumed that all the
model coefficients, constraint values, and solution values were known with certainty and did
not vary.
In actual practice, however, many decision-making situations occur under conditions of
uncertainty. For example, the demand for a product may be not 100 units next week, but 50 or
200 units, depending on the state of the market (which is uncertain). Several decision-making
techniques are available to aid the decision maker in dealing with this type of decision situation
in which there is uncertainty.
Decision situations can be categorized into two classes: situations in which probabilities
cannot be assigned to future occurrences and situations in which probabilities can be assigned.
In this chapter we will discuss each of these classes of decision situations separately and demon-
strate the decision-making criterion most commonly associated with each. Decision situations
in which there are two or more decision makers who are in competition with each other are the
subject of game theory, a topic included on the companion Web site that accompanies this text.
Components of Decision Making
A decision-making situation includes several components—the decisions themselves and the
actual events that may occur in the future, known as states of nature. At the time a decision is
made, the decision maker is uncertain which states of nature will occur in the future and has no
control over them.
Suppose a distribution company is considering purchasing a computer to increase the
number of orders it can process and thus increase its business. If economic conditions remain
good, the company will realize a large increase in profit; however, if the economy takes a
downturn, the company will lose money. In this decision situation, the possible decisions are
to purchase the computer and to not purchase the computer. The states of nature are good
economic conditions and bad economic conditions. The state of nature that occurs will deter-
mine the outcome of the decision, and it is obvious that the decision maker has no control over
which state will occur.
As another example, consider a concessions vendor who must decide whether to stock cof-
fee for the concession stands at a football game in November. If the weather is cold, most of the
coffee will be sold, but if the weather is warm, very little coffee will be sold. The decision is to
order or not to order coffee, and the states of nature are warm and cold weather.
To facilitate the analysis of these types of decision situations so that the best decisions re-
sult, they are organized into payoff tables. In general, a payoff table is a means of organizing
and illustrating the payoffs from the different decisions, given the various states of nature in a
decision problem. A payoff table is constructed as shown in Table 12.1.
538
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
The two categories of
decision situations
are probabilities that
can be assigned to fu-
ture occurrences and
probabilities that
cannot be assigned.
See Web site Module E
for a chapter on
“Game Theory” and
Module F for a 
chapter on “Markov
Analysis.”
A state of nature is an
actual event that may
occur in the future.
Using a payoff table
is a means of 
organizing a decision
situation, including
the payoffs from
different decisions,
given the various
states of nature.
State of Nature
Decision
a
b
1
Payoff 1a
Payoff 1b
2
Payoff 2a
Payoff 2b
TABLE 12.1
Payoff table 
Each decision, 1 or 2, in Table 12.1 will result in an outcome, or payoff, for the particular state
of nature that will occur in the future. Payoffs are typically expressed in terms of profit revenues,
or cost (although they can be expressed in terms of a variety of values). For example, if decision 1

is to purchase a computer and state of nature a is good economic conditions, payoff 1a could be
$100,000 in profit.
It is often possible to assign probabilities to the states of nature to aid the decision maker in
selecting the decision that has the best outcome. However, in some cases the decision maker 
is not able to assign probabilities, and it is this type of decision-making situation that we will
address first.
Decision Making Without Probabilities
The following example will illustrate the development of a payoff table without probabilities.
An investor is to purchase one of three types of real estate, as illustrated in Figure 12.1. The 
investor must decide among an apartment building, an office building, and a warehouse. The 
future states of nature that will determine how much profit the investor will make are good 
DECISION MAKING WITHOUT PROBABILITIES
539
Economic
report
Economic
report
?
Apartment
building
Office
building
Warehouse
FIGURE 12.1
Decision situation
with real estate 
investment
alternatives

Decision-Making Criteria
Once the decision situation has been organized into a payoff table, several criteria are available
for making the actual decision. These decision criteria, which will be presented in this section,
include maximax, maximin, minimax regret, Hurwicz, and equal likelihood. On occasion these
criteria will result in the same decision; however, often they will yield different decisions. The
decision maker must select the criterion or combination of criteria that best suits his or her
needs.
The Maximax Criterion
With the maximax criterion, the decision maker selects the decision that will result in the max-
imum of the maximum payoffs. (In fact, this is how this criterion derives its name—a maximum
of a maximum.) The maximax criterion is very optimistic. The decision maker assumes that the
most favorable state of nature for each decision alternative will occur. Thus, for example, using
this criterion, the investor would optimistically assume that good economic conditions will pre-
vail in the future.
The maximax criterion is applied in Table 12.3. The decision maker first selects the
maximum payoff for each decision. Notice that all three maximum payoffs occur under good
economic conditions. Of the three maximum payoffs—$50,000, $100,000, and $30,000—the
maximum is $100,000; thus, the corresponding decision is to purchase the office building.
540
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
State of Nature
Decision
Good Economic
Poor Economic
(purchase)
Conditions
Conditions
Apartment building
$ 50,000
$ 30,000
Office building
100,000
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000
10,000
TABLE 12.2
Payoff table for
the real estate 
investments
The maximax
criterion results in the
maximum of the 
maximum payoffs.
State of Nature
Decision
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
(purchase)
Conditions
Conditions
Apartment building
$ 50,000
$ 30,000
Office building
100,000
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000
10,000
Maximum payoff 
TABLE 12.3
Payoff table 
illustrating
a maximax
decision
economic conditions and poor economic conditions. The profits that will result from each
decision in the event of each state of nature are shown in Table 12.2.
Although the decision to purchase an office building will result in the largest payoff
($100,000), such a decision completely ignores the possibility of a potential loss of $40,000.
The decision maker who uses the maximax criterion assumes a very optimistic future with re-
spect to the state of nature.
Before the next criterion is presented, it should be pointed out that the maximax decision
rule as presented here deals with profit. However, if the payoff table consisted of costs, the op-
posite selection would be indicated: the minimum of the minimum costs, or a minimin criterion.
For the subsequent decision criteria we encounter, the same logic in the case of costs can 
be used.

The Maximin Criterion
In contrast with the maximax criterion, which is very optimistic, the maximin criterion is pes-
simistic. With the maximin criterion, the decision maker selects the decision that will reflect the
maximum of the minimum payoffs. For each decision alternative, the decision maker assumes
that the minimum payoff will occur. Of these minimum payoffs, the maximum is selected. The
maximin criterion for our investment example is demonstrated in Table 12.4.
DECISION MAKING WITHOUT PROBABILITIES
541
State of Nature
Decision
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
(purchase)
Conditions
Conditions
Apartment building
$ 50,000
$ 30,000
Office building
100,000
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000
10,000
The maximin
criterion results in the
maximum of the 
minimum payoff.
TABLE 12.4
Payoff table 
illustrating
a maximin 
decision
Maximum payoff 
The minimum payoffs for our example are 
and $10,000. The maximum
of these three payoffs is $30,000; thus, the decision arrived at by using the maximin criterion would
be to purchase the apartment building. This decision is relatively conservative because the alterna-
tives considered include only the worst outcomes that could occur. The decision to purchase the 
office building as determined by the maximax criterion includes the possibility of a large loss
The worst that can occur from the decision to purchase the apartment building, how-
ever, is a gain of $30,000. On the other hand, the largest possible gain from purchasing the apart-
ment building is much less than that of purchasing the office building (i.e., $50,000 vs. $100,000).
If Table 12.4 contained costs instead of profits as the payoffs, the conservative approach
would be to select the maximum cost for each decision. Then the decision that resulted in the
minimum, the minimax, of these costs would be selected.
The Minimax Regret Criterion
In our example, suppose the investor decided to purchase the warehouse, only to discover that
economic conditions in the future were better than expected. Naturally, the investor would be
disappointed that she had not purchased the office building because it would have resulted in the
largest payoff ($100,000) under good economic conditions. In fact, the investor would regret the
decision to purchase the warehouse, and the degree of regret would be $70,000, the difference
between the payoff for the investor’s choice and the best choice.
This brief example demonstrates the principle underlying the decision criterion known as
minimax regret criterion. With this decision criterion, the decision maker attempts to avoid re-
gret by selecting the decision alternative that minimizes the maximum regret.
To use the minimax regret criterion, a decision maker first selects the maximum payoff
under each state of nature. For our example, the maximum payoff under good economic condi-
tions is $100,000, and the maximum payoff under poor economic conditions is $30,000. All
other payoffs under the respective states of nature are subtracted from these amounts, as follows:
Good Economic Conditions
Poor Economic Conditions
$100,000 - 50,000 = $50,000
$30,000 - 30,000 = $0
$100,000 - 100,000 = $0
$30,000 - (-40,000) = $70,000
$100,000 - 30,000 = $70,000
$30,000 - 10,000 = $20,000
These values represent the regret that the decision maker would experience if a decision were
made that resulted in less than the maximum payoff. The values are summarized in a modified
version of the payoff table known as a regret table, shown in Table 12.5. (Such a table is 
sometimes referred to as an opportunity loss table, in which case the term opportunity loss is
synonymous with regret.)
(-+40,000).
+30,000, -+40,000,
Regret is the
difference between the
payoff from the best
decision and all other
decision payoffs.
The minimax regret
criterion minimizes
the maximum regret.

According to the minimax regret criterion, the decision should be to purchase the apartment
building rather than the office building or the warehouse. This particular decision is based on
the philosophy that the investor will experience the least amount of regret by purchasing the
apartment building. In other words, if the investor purchased either the office building or the
warehouse, $70,000 worth of regret could result; however, the purchase of the apartment build-
ing will result in, at most, $50,000 in regret.
The Hurwicz Criterion
The Hurwicz criterion strikes a compromise between the maximax and maximin criteria. The
principle underlying this decision criterion is that the decision maker is neither totally opti-
mistic (as the maximax criterion assumes) nor totally pessimistic (as the maximin criterion
assumes). With the Hurwicz criterion, the decision payoffs are weighted by a coefficient of
optimism, a measure of the decision maker’s optimism. The coefficient of optimism, which we
will define as 
is between zero and one (i.e.,
). If 
then the decision
maker is said to be completely optimistic; if 
then the decision maker is completely
pessimistic. (Given this definition, if 
is the coefficient of optimism,
is the coefficient
of pessimism.)
The Hurwicz criterion requires that for each decision alternative, the maximum payoff be
multiplied by 
and the minimum payoff be multiplied by 
For our investment example, if 
equals .4 (i.e., the investor is slightly pessimistic),
and the following values will result:
Decision
Values
Apartment building
$ 50,000(.4) + 30,000(.6) = $38,000
Office building
$100,000(.4) - 40,000(.6) = $16,000
Warehouse
$ 30,000(.4) + 10,000(.6) = $18,000
The Hurwicz criterion specifies selection of the decision alternative corresponding to the
maximum weighted value, which is $38,000 for this example. Thus, the decision would be to
purchase the apartment building.
It should be pointed out that when 
the Hurwicz criterion is actually the maximin cri-
terion; when 
it is the maximax criterion. A limitation of the Hurwicz criterion is the fact
a = 1.0,
a = 0,
1 - a = .6,
a
1 - a.
a
1 - a
a
a = 0,
a = 1.0,
0 … a … 1.0
a,
542
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
TABLE 12.5
Regret table 
TABLE 12.6
Regret table 
illustrating the
minimax regret 
decision
The Hurwicz
criterion is a compro-
mise between the
maximax and
maximin criteria.
The coefficient of 
optimism,
is a
measure of the
decision maker’s 
optimism.
a,
The Hurwicz
criterion multiplies
the best payoff by 
the coefficient of opti-
mism, and the worst
payoff by 
for
each decision, and the
best result is selected.
1 - a,
a,
State of Nature
Decision
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
(purchase)
Conditions
Conditions
Apartment building
$50,000
$       0
Office building
0
70,000
Warehouse
70,000
20,000
State of Nature
Decision
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
(purchase)
Conditions
Conditions
Apartment building
$50,000
$       0
Office building
0
70,000
Warehouse
70,000
20,000
The minimax regret value
To make the decision according to the minimax regret criterion, the maximum regret for
each decision must be determined. The decision corresponding to the minimum of these regret
values is then selected. This process is illustrated in Table 12.6.

DECISION MAKING WITHOUT PROBABILITIES
543
that 
must be determined by the decision maker. It can be quite difficult for a decision maker to
accurately determine his or her degree of optimism. Regardless of how the decision maker deter-
mines , it is still a completely subjective measure of the decision maker’s degree of optimism.
Therefore, the Hurwicz criterion is a completely subjective decision-making criterion.
The Equal Likelihood Criterion
When the maximax criterion is applied to a decision situation, the decision maker implicitly as-
sumes that the most favorable state of nature for each decision will occur. Alternatively, when
the maximin criterion is applied, the least favorable states of nature are assumed. The equal like-
lihood, or LaPlace, criterion weights each state of nature equally, thus assuming that the states
of nature are equally likely to occur.
Because there are two states of nature in our example, we assign a weight of .50 to each one.
Next, we multiply these weights by each payoff for each decision:
Decision
Values
Apartment building
$ 50,000(.50) + 30,000(.50) = $40,000
Office building
$100,000(.50) - 40,000(.50) = $30,000
Warehouse
$ 30,000(.50) + 10,000(.50) = $20,000
As with the Hurwicz criterion, we select the decision that has the maximum of these
weighted values. Because $40,000 is the highest weighted value, the investor’s decision would
be to purchase the apartment building.
In applying the equal likelihood criterion, we are assuming a 50% chance, or .50 probability,
that either state of nature will occur. Using this same basic logic, it is possible to weight the states
of nature differently (i.e., unequally) in many decision problems. In other words, different proba-
bilities can be assigned to each state of nature, indicating that one state is more likely to occur than
another. The application of different probabilities to the states of nature is the principle behind the
decision criteria to be presented in the section on expected value.
Summary of Criteria Results
The decisions indicated by the decision criteria examined so far can be summarized as follows:
Criterion
Decision (Purchase)
Maximax
Office building
Maximin
Apartment building
Minimax regret
Apartment building
Hurwicz
Apartment building
Equal likelihood
Apartment building
The decision to purchase the apartment building was designated most often by the various
decision criteria. Notice that the decision to purchase the warehouse was never indicated by any
criterion. This is because the payoffs for an apartment building, under either set of future eco-
nomic conditions, are always better than the payoffs for a warehouse. Thus, given any situation
with these two alternatives (and any other choice, such as purchasing the office building), the
decision to purchase an apartment building will always be made over the decision to purchase a
warehouse. In fact, the warehouse decision alternative could have been eliminated from consid-
eration under each of our criteria. The alternative of purchasing a warehouse is said to be
dominated by the alternative of purchasing an apartment building. In general, dominated deci-
sion alternatives can be removed from the payoff table and not considered when the various
decision-making criteria are applied. This reduces the complexity of the decision analysis some-
what. However, in our discussions throughout this chapter of the application of decision criteria,
we will leave the dominated alternative in the payoff table for demonstration purposes.
a
a
The equal likelihood,
or LaPlace,
criterion multiplies
the decision payoff for
each state of nature
by an equal weight.
A dominant decision
is one that has a 
better payoff than 
another decision 
under each state 
of nature.

The use of several decision criteria often results in a mix of decisions, with no one decision
being selected more than the others. The criterion or collection of criteria used and the resulting
decision depend on the characteristics and philosophy of the decision maker. For example, the
extremely optimistic decision maker might eschew the majority of the foregoing results and
make the decision to purchase the office building because the maximax criterion most closely
reflects his or her personal decision-making philosophy.
Solution of Decision-Making Problems Without Probabilities 
with QM for Windows
QM for Windows includes a module to solve decision analysis problems. QM for Windows will
be used to illustrate the use of the maximax, maximin, minimax regret, equal likelihood, and
Hurwicz criteria for the real estate problem considered in this section. The problem data are input
very easily. A summary of the input and solution output for the maximax, maximin, and Hurwicz
criteria is shown in Exhibit 12.1. The decision with the equal likelihood criterion can be deter-
mined by using an alpha value for the Hurwicz criterion equal to the equal likelihood weight,
which is .5 for our real estate investment example. The solution output with alpha equal to .5 is
shown in Exhibit 12.2. The decision with the minimax regret criterion is shown in Exhibit 12.3.
544
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
EXHIBIT 12.1
Equal likelihood weight
EXHIBIT 12.2
The appropriate crite-
rion is dependent on
the risk personality
and philosophy of
the decision maker.

Solution of Decision-Making Problems Without Probabilities with Excel
Excel can also be used to solve decision analysis problems using the decision-making crite-
ria presented in this section. Exhibit 12.4 illustrates the application of the maximax, mini-
max, minimax regret, Hurwicz, and equal likelihood criteria for our real estate investment
example.
DECISION MAKING WITHOUT PROBABILITIES
545
EXHIBIT 12.3
=MIN(C7,D7)
=C7*0.5+D7*0.5
=C7*C25+D7*C26
=MAX(C18,D18)
=MAX(E7,E9)
=MAX(C7:C9)–C9
=MAX(F7:F9)
EXHIBIT 12.4
In cell E7, the formula MAX(C7,D7) selects the maximum payoff outcome for the deci-
sion to purchase the apartment building. Next, in cell C11 the maximum of the maximum pay-
offs is determined with the formula MAX(E7:E9). The maximin decision is determined
similarly.
In the regret table in Exhibit 12.4, in cell C18, the formula MAX(C7:C9) – C7 computes
the regret for the apartment building decision under good economic conditions, and then the
maximum regret for the apartment building is determined in cell E18, using the formula
MAX(C18,D18). The minimax regret value is determined in cell C22 with the formula
MIN(E18:E20).
The Hurwicz and equal likelihood decisions are determined using their respective formulas
in cells C27:C29 and C32:C34.

Decision Making with Probabilities
The decision-making criteria just presented were based on the assumption that no information
regarding the likelihood of the states of nature was available. Thus, no probabilities of occur-
rence were assigned to the states of nature, except in the case of the equal likelihood criterion.
In that case, by assuming that each state of nature was equally likely and assigning a weight of
.50 to each state of nature in our example, we were implicitly assigning a probability of .50 to
the occurrence of each state of nature.
It is often possible for the decision maker to know enough about the future states of nature
to assign probabilities to their occurrence. Given that probabilities can be assigned, several deci-
sion criteria are available to aid the decision maker. We will consider two of these criteria:
expected value and expected opportunity loss (although several others, including the maximum
likelihood criterion, are available).
Expected Value
To apply the concept of expected value as a decision-making criterion, the decision maker must
first estimate the probability of occurrence of each state of nature. Once these estimates have
been made, the expected value for each decision alternative can be computed. The expected
546
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Expected value is
computed by multiply-
ing each decision out-
come under each state
of nature by the proba-
bility of its occurrence.
Management Science Application
Planning for Terrorist Attacks and Epidemics 
in Los Angeles County with Decision Analysis
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has
asked all state and local health departments in the United States
to develop plans to provide vaccines and antibiotics (referred to
as prophylaxis) to the general population in the event of a
bioterrorism attack or natural epidemic. Outbreaks of diseases
such as smallpox and influenza are very contagious, while dis-
eases such as anthrax have a very short incubation period, re-
sulting in deaths within 48 hours. Therefore, any preventive
agents need to be distributed within 48 hours. Distributing pro-
phylaxis to a locality such as Los Angeles County, with almost
10 million legal residents, 1 million tourists on any given day,
and several million illegal residents, is a complex task. 
The CDC requires that points of dispensing (PODs) be
used as the primary means for distributing prophylaxis drugs.
POD plans are funded by the CDC and have been tested and
proven effective in many places. However, an area as large as
Los Angeles would require 167 geographically dispersed PODs
staffed with 48,000 individuals, who would need to be gath-
ered at staging points, trained, and sent to the POD sites
within a few hours—with security maintained all the while.
A city such as Los Angeles will require supplemental modes of
dispensing vaccines and antibiotics beyond just PODs. 
In this management science application, researchers used
multicriteria decision analysis to assess alternative modes for
dispensing prophylaxis. Alternative distribution modes that
have been previously tested on a limited basis or used during
the normal flu season include delivery by the U.S. Postal Service
(USPS), dispensing through local pharmacies, and use of drive-
through PODs. Value measures for each alternative dispensing
mode include speed of distribution, staffing requirements, and
a subjective assessment of security requirements, which were
subsequently used to calculate a total measure of effectiveness
for each alternative. The decision analysis indicated that deliv-
ery by the USPS and the use of pharmacies were the two best
alternatives to supplement the PODs, and the drive-through al-
ternative, although popularly thought to be the best, was the
worst. Both of the preferred alternatives had a 100% staffing
reduction and were much faster dispensing modes than the
traditional POD. 
Source: Based on A. Richter and S. Khan, “Pilot Model: Judging 
Alternate Modes of Dispensing Prophylaxis in Los Angeles County,”
Interfaces 39, no. 3 (May–June 2009): 238–40.
AP Photo/Marcio Jose Sanchez

value is computed by multiplying each outcome (of a decision) by the probability of its occur-
rence and then summing these products. The expected value of a random variable x, written
symbolically as 
is computed as follows:
where
of values of the random variable x
Using our real estate investment example, let us suppose that, based on several economic
forecasts, the investor is able to estimate a .60 probability that good economic conditions will
prevail and a .40 probability that poor economic conditions will prevail. This new information is
shown in Table 12.7.
n = number
EV(x) = a
n
i=1
xi P(xi)
EV(x),
DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
547
Expected opportunity
loss is the expected
value of the regret for
each decision. 
State of Nature
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
Decision
Conditions
Conditions
(purchase)
.60
.40
Apartment building
$  50,000
$30,000
Office building
100,000 
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000 
10,000
TABLE 12.7
Payoff table with
probabilities for
states of nature 
The expected value (EV) for each decision is computed as follows:
The best decision is the one with the greatest expected value. Because the greatest expected
value is $44,000, the best decision is to purchase the office building. This does not mean that $44,000
will result if the investor purchases the office building; rather, it is assumed that one of the payoff val-
ues will result (either $100,000 or
). The expected value means that if this decision situa-
tion occurred a large number of times, an average payoff of $44,000 would result. Alternatively, if
the payoffs were in terms of costs, the best decision would be the one with the lowest expected value.
Expected Opportunity Loss
A decision criterion closely related to expected value is expected opportunity loss. To use this
criterion, we multiply the probabilities by the regret (i.e., opportunity loss) for each decision
outcome rather than multiplying the decision outcomes by the probabilities of their occurrence,
as we did for expected monetary value.
The concept of regret was introduced in our discussion of the minimax regret criterion. The re-
gret values for each decision outcome in our example were shown in Table 12.6. These values are
repeated in Table 12.8, with the addition of the probabilities of occurrence for each state of nature.
- +40,000
EV(warehouse) = +30,000(.60) + 10,000(.40) = +22,000
EV(office) = +100,000(.60) – 40,000(.40) = +44,000
EV(apartment) = +50,000(.60) + 30,000(.40) = +42,000
State of Nature
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
Decision
Conditions
Conditions
(purchase)
.60
.40
Apartment building
$50,000
$       0
Office building
0 
70,000
Warehouse
70,000 
20,000
TABLE 12.8
Regret (opportunity
loss) table with
probabilities for
states of nature 

The expected opportunity loss (EOL) for each decision is computed as follows:
As with the minimax regret criterion, the best decision results from minimizing the regret,
or, in this case, minimizing the expected regret or opportunity loss. Because $28,000 is the min-
imum expected regret, the decision is to purchase the office building.
Notice that the decisions recommended by the expected value and expected opportunity loss
criteria were the same—to purchase the office building. This is not a coincidence because these
two methods always result in the same decision. Thus, it is repetitious to apply both methods to
a decision situation when one of the two will suffice.
In addition, note that the decisions from the expected value and expected opportunity loss cri-
teria are totally dependent on the probability estimates determined by the decision maker. Thus, if
inaccurate probabilities are used, erroneous decisions will result. It is therefore important that the
decision maker be as accurate as possible in determining the probability of each state of nature.
Solution of Expected Value Problems with QM for Windows
QM for Windows not only solves decision analysis problems without probabilities but also has
the capability to solve problems using the expected value criterion. A summary of the input data
and the solution output for our real estate example is shown in Exhibit 12.5. Notice that the ex-
pected value results are included in the third column of this solution screen.
EOL(warehouse) = +70,000(.60) + 20,000(.40) = +50,000
EOL(office) = +0(.60) + 70,000(.40) = +28,000
EOL(apartment) = +50,000(.60) + 0(.40) = +30,000
548
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Expected values
EXHIBIT 12.5
The expected value
and expected opportu-
nity loss criteria
result in the same 
decision.
Expected value for
apartment building
EXHIBIT 12.6
Solution of Expected Value Problems with Excel and Excel QM
This type of expected value problem can also be solved by using an Excel spreadsheet. Exhibit 12.6
shows our real estate investment example set up in a spreadsheet format. Cells E7, E8, and E9

include the expected value formulas for this example. The expected value formula for the first deci-
sion, purchasing the apartment building, is embedded in cell E7 and is shown on the formula bar at
the top of the spreadsheet.
Excel QM is a set of spreadsheet macros that is included on the companion Web site that ac-
companies this text, and it has a macro to solve decision analysis problems. Once activated, click-
ing on “Decision Analysis” will result in a Spreadsheet Initialization window. After entering
several problem parameters, including the number of decisions and states of nature, and then click-
ing on “OK,” the spreadsheet shown in Exhibit 12.7 will result. Initially, this spreadsheet contains
example values in cells B8:C11. Exhibit 12.7 shows the spreadsheet with our problem data already
typed in. The results are computed automatically as the data are entered, using the cell formulas al-
ready embedded in the macro.
DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
549
Click on “Add-Ins” to
access the “Excel QM” menu.
EXHIBIT 12.7
Expected Value of Perfect Information
It is often possible to purchase additional information regarding future events and thus make a
better decision. For example, a real estate investor could hire an economic forecaster to per-
form an analysis of the economy to more accurately determine which economic condition will
occur in the future. However, the investor (or any decision maker) would be foolish to pay
more for this information than he or she stands to gain in extra profit from having the infor-
mation. That is, the information has some maximum value that represents the limit of what
the decision maker would be willing to spend. This value of information can be computed as
an expected value—hence its name, the expected value of perfect information (also referred
to as EVPI).
To compute the expected value of perfect information, we first look at the decisions 
under each state of nature. If we could obtain information that assured us which state of nature
was going to occur (i.e., perfect information), we could select the best decision for that state
of nature. For example, in our real estate investment example, if we know for sure that good
economic conditions will prevail, then we will decide to purchase the office building. Simi-
larly, if we know for sure that poor economic conditions will occur, then we will decide to
purchase the apartment building. These hypothetical “perfect” decisions are summarized in
Table 12.9.
The expected value of
perfect information
(EVPI) is the
maximum amount a
decision maker would
pay for additional in-
formation.

The probabilities of each state of nature (i.e., .60 and .40) tell us that good economic condi-
tions will prevail 60% of the time and poor economic conditions will prevail 40% of the time (if
this decision situation is repeated many times). In other words, even though perfect information
enables the investor to make the right decision, each state of nature will occur only a certain por-
tion of the time. Thus, each of the decision outcomes obtained using perfect information must
be weighted by its respective probability:
The amount $72,000 is the expected value of the decision, given perfect information, not the ex-
pected value of perfect information. The expected value of perfect information is the maximum
amount that would be paid to gain information that would result in a decision better than the one
made without perfect information. Recall that the expected value decision without perfect infor-
mation was to purchase an office building, and the expected value was computed as
The expected value of perfect information is computed by subtracting the expected value
without perfect information ($44,000) from the expected value given perfect information
($72,000):
The expected value of perfect information, $28,000, is the maximum amount that the in-
vestor would pay to purchase perfect information from some other source, such as an economic
forecaster. Of course, perfect information is rare and usually unobtainable. Typically, the deci-
sion maker would be willing to pay some amount less than $28,000, depending on how accurate
(i.e., close to perfection) the decision maker believed the information was.
It is interesting to note that the expected value of perfect information, $28,000 for our ex-
ample, is the same as the expected opportunity loss (EOL) for the decision selected, using this
later criterion:
This will always be the case, and logically so, because regret reflects the difference between
the best decision under a state of nature and the decision actually made. This is actually the
same thing determined by the expected value of perfect information.
Excel QM for decision analysis computes the expected value of perfect information, as
shown in cell E17 at the bottom of the spreadsheet in Exhibit 12.7. The expected value of per-
fect information can also be determined by using Excel. Exhibit 12.8 shows the EVPI for our
real estate investment example.
Decision Trees
Another useful technique for analyzing a decision situation is using a decision tree. A decision
tree is a graphical diagram consisting of nodes and branches. In a decision tree, the user com-
putes the expected value of each outcome and makes a decision based on these expected values.
EOL(office) = +0(.60) + 70,000(.40) = +28,000
EVPI = +72,000 - 44,000 = +28,000
EV(office) = +100,000(.60) - 40,000(.40) = +44,000
+100,000(.60) + 30,000(.40) = +72,000
550
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
EVPI equals the
expected value, given
perfect information,
minus the expected
value without perfect
information.
The expected value of
perfect information
equals the expected
opportunity loss for
the best decision.
A decision tree is a
diagram consisting of
square decision
nodes, circle
probability nodes, and
branches representing 
decision alternatives.
TABLE 12.9
Payoff table with
decisions, given
perfect information
State of Nature
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
Decision
Conditions
Conditions
(purchase)
.60
.40
Apartment building
$  50,000
$30,000
Office building
100,000 
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000 
10,000

The primary benefit of a decision tree is that it provides an illustration (or picture) of the
decision-making process. This makes it easier to correctly compute the necessary expected val-
ues and to understand the process of making the decision.
We will use our example of the real estate investor to demonstrate the fundamentals of
decision tree analysis. The various decisions, probabilities, and outcomes of this example,
initially presented in Table 12.7, are repeated in Table 12.10. The decision tree for this exam-
ple is shown in Figure 12.2.
The circles (●) and the square (■) in Figure 12.2 are referred to as nodes. The square is a de-
cision node, and the branches emanating from a decision node reflect the alternative decisions
DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
551
The expected value, given
perfect information, in Cell F12
=MAX(E7:E9)
=F12–F11
EXHIBIT 12.8
State of Nature
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
Decision
Conditions
Conditions
(purchase)
.60
.40
Apartment building
$ 50,000
$30,000
Office building
100,000 
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000 
10,000
TABLE 12.10
Payoff table for
real estate invest-
ment example 
2
3
4
1
$50,000
$30,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
$100,000
–$40,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
$30,000
$10,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
Apartment
building
Office building
Warehouse
Purchase
FIGURE 12.2
Decision tree for
real estate invest-
ment example

possible at that point. For example, in Figure 12.2, node 1 signifies a decision to purchase an
apartment building, an office building, or a warehouse. The circles are probability, or event,
nodes, and the branches emanating from them indicate the states of nature that can occur: good
economic conditions or poor economic conditions.
The decision tree represents the sequence of events in a decision situation. First, one of the
three decision choices is selected at node 1. Depending on the branch selected, the decision
maker arrives at probability node 2, 3, or 4, where one of the states of nature will prevail, result-
ing in one of six possible payoffs.
Determining the best decision by using a decision tree involves computing the expected value
at each probability node. This is accomplished by starting with the final outcomes (payoffs) and
working backward through the decision tree toward node 1. First, the expected value of the pay-
offs is computed at each probability node:
These values are now shown as the expected payoffs from each of the three branches emanat-
ing from node 1 in Figure 12.3. Each of these three expected values at nodes 2, 3, and 4 is the out-
come of a possible decision that can occur at node 1. Moving toward node 1, we select the branch
that comes from the probability node with the highest expected payoff. In Figure 12.3, the branch
corresponding to the highest payoff, $44,000, is from node 1 to node 3. This branch represents the
decision to purchase the office building. The decision to purchase the office building, with an
expected payoff of $44,000, is the same result we achieved earlier by using the expected value crite-
rion. In fact, when only one decision is to be made (i.e., there is not a series of decisions), the deci-
sion tree will always yield the same decision and expected payoff as the expected value criterion. As
a result, in these decision situations a decision tree is not very useful. However, when a sequence or
series of decisions is required, a decision tree can be very useful.
EV(node 4) = .60(+30,000) + .40(+10,000) = +22,000
EV(node 3) = .60(+100,000) + .40(-+40,000) = +44,000
EV(node 2) = .60(+50,000) + .40(+30,000) = +42,000
552
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
The expected value is
computed at each
probability node.
Branches with the
greatest expected
value are selected.
2
3
4
1
$50,000
$30,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
$42,000
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
$100,000
–$40,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
$44,000
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
$30,000
$10,000
Good economic
conditions (.60)
$22,000
Poor economic
conditions (.40)
Apartment
building
Office building
Warehouse
Purchase
FIGURE 12.3
Decision tree with
expected value at
probability nodes
Decision Trees with Excel QM
Both QM for Windows and Excel QM have modules for performing decision tree analysis. How-
ever, Excel QM has the capability to actually construct a decision tree, whereas QM for Windows
does not; it only performs the tree computations at the nodes. We will therefore demonstrate how
to use Excel QM to perform decision tree analysis using our real estate investment example.

Next, we use the Decision Tree Creation window to add 2 new “Event” branches from
nodes 2, 3, and 4. The resulting new window is shown in Exhibit 12.10. Notice that six new
DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
553
Add branches from
node 1 to 2, 3, and 4.
Number of branches
from node 1
Select node to add
from
EXHIBIT 12.9
After opening Excel QM, click on “Add-Ins” then on “Taylor,” and from the drop down menu
select “Decision Analysis,” then click on “Decision Trees.” A window like the one in Exhibit 12.9
will appear, with only node “1” in cell A10. A window titled Decision Tree Creation will also be
on your screen; this is the primary tool for developing the decision tree. The “Decision Tree
Creation” window automatically will show “1” as the “Selected node” and the “Number of
branches to add” as “2,” so the first step is to increase this to “3” and then click on “Add 3 DECI-
SIONS from node 1.” This will result in the three new branches connected to nodes 2, 3 and 4, as
shown in Exhibit 12.9.
EXHIBIT 12.10

branches have been created. The cells next to node 5 are initially empty, and we enter “0.6”
into cell F5 and “50,000” in cell F7. When we enter “0.6” in cell F5, “0.4” automatically
appears in cell F9. We repeat this process for the next 4 new event branches to re-create the
decision tree in Figure 12.3. Notice that the maximum expected value of $44,000 is shown in
cell A15, just above node 1, and in cell D15, above node 3, indicating that the office building is
the best decision.
Decision Trees with Excel and TreePlan (www.treeplan.com)
TreePlan is an Excel add-in program developed by Michael Middleton that can be obtained from
Decision Tool Works to construct and solve decision trees in an Excel spreadsheet format.
Although Excel has the graphical and computational capability to develop decision trees, it is a
difficult and slow process. TreePlan is basically a decision tree template that greatly simplifies
the process of setting up a decision tree in Excel.
The first step in using TreePlan is to gain access to it. The best way to go about this is to
copy the TreePlan add-in file, TreePlan.xla, from the companion Web site accompanying this
text onto your hard drive and then add it to the “Add-Ins” menu that you access at the top of your
spreadsheet screen. Once you have added TreePlan to the “Add-Ins” menu, you can invoke it by
clicking on the “Decision Trees” menu item.
We will demonstrate how to use TreePlan with our real estate investment example shown in
Figure 12.3. The first step in using TreePlan is to generate a new tree on which to begin work.
Exhibit 12.11 shows a new tree that we generated by invoking the “Add-ins” menu and clicking on
“Decision Trees.” This results in a menu from which we click on “New Tree,” which creates the
decision tree shown in Exhibit 12.11.
554
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Invoke TreePlan from
the “Add Ins” menu.
To create another branch, click “B5,”
then the “Decision Tree” menu, and
select “Add Branch.”
EXHIBIT 12.11
The decision tree in Exhibit 12.11 uses the normal nodal convention we used in creating the
decision trees in Figures 12.2 and 12.3—squares for decision nodes and circles for probability
nodes (which TreePlan calls event nodes). However, this decision tree is only a starting point or
template that we need to expand to replicate our example decision tree in Figure 12.3.
In Figure 12.3, three branches emanate from the first decision node, reflecting the three in-
vestment decisions in our example. To create a third branch using TreePlan, click on the decision
node in cell B5 in Exhibit 12.11 and then click on “Decision Tree”. A window will appear, with
several options, including “Add Branch”. Select this menu item and click on “OK.” This will cre-
ate a third branch on our decision tree, as shown in Exhibit 12.12.

DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
555
Select “Change to
Event Node” and add
two new branches.
Click on cell “F3,”
then “Decision Tree.”
EXHIBIT 12.12
Next, we need to expand our decision tree in Exhibit 12.12 by adding probability (event) nodes
(2, 3, and 4 in Figure 12.3) and branches from these nodes for our example. To add a new node, click
on the end node in cell F3 in Exhibit 12.12 and then “Decision Tree.” From the menu window that
appears, select “Change to Event Node” and then select “Two” Branches from the same window
and click on “OK.” This process must be repeated two more times for the other two end nodes to
create our three probability (event) nodes. The resulting decision tree is shown in Exhibit 12.13,
with the new probability nodes at cells F5, F15, and F25 and with accompanying branches.
These cells contain decision tree
formulas; do not type in these cells
in columns E and I.
Add numerical dollar and
probability values in these
cells in column H.
EXHIBIT 12.13
The next step is to edit the decision tree labels and add the numeric data from our exam-
ple. Generic descriptive labels are shown above each branch in Exhibit 12.13—for example,
“Alternative 1” in cell D4 and “Outcome 4” in cell H2. We edit the labels the same way we
would edit any spreadsheet. For example, if we click on cell D4, we can type in “Apartment

Building” in place of “Decision 1,” reflecting the decision corresponding to this branch in our
example, as shown in Figure 12.3. We can change the other labels on the other branches the
same way. The decision tree with the edited labels corresponding to our example is shown in
Exhibit 12.14.
556
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
A sequential decision
tree illustrates a 
situation requiring a 
series of decisions.
EXHIBIT 12.14
Looking back to Exhibit 12.13 for a moment, focus on the two 0 values below each
branch—for example, in cells D6 and E6 and in cells H9 and I4. The first 0 cell is where we type
in the numeric value (i.e., $ amount) for that branch. For our example, we would type in 50,000
in cell H4, 30,000 in H9, 100,000 in H14, and so on. These values are shown on the decision
tree in Exhibit 12.14. Likewise, we would type in the probabilities for the branches in the cells
just above the branch—H1, H6, H11, and so on. For example, we would type in 0.60 in cell H1
and 0.40 in cell H6. These probabilities are also shown in Exhibit 12.14. However, we need to
be very careful not to type anything into the second 0 branch cell—for example, E6, I4, I9, E16,
I14, I19, and so on. These cells automatically contain the decision tree formulas that compute
the expected values at each node and select the best decision branches, so we do not want to type
anything in these cells that would eliminate these formulas.
The expected value for this decision tree and our example, $44,000, is shown in cell A16 in
Exhibit 12.14.
Sequential Decision Trees
As noted earlier, when a decision situation requires only a single decision, an expected value
payoff table will yield the same result as a decision tree. However, a payoff table is usually lim-
ited to a single decision situation, as in our real estate investment example. If a decision situa-
tion requires a series of decisions, then a payoff table cannot be created, and a decision tree
becomes the best method for decision analysis.
To demonstrate the use of a decision tree for a sequence of decisions, we will alter our real es-
tate investment example to encompass a 10-year period during which several decisions must be
made. In this new example, the first decision facing the investor is whether to purchase an apart-
ment building or land. If the investor purchases the apartment building, two states of nature are pos-
sible: Either the population of the town will grow (with a probability of .60) or the population will

not grow (with a probability of .40). Either state of nature will result in a payoff. On the other hand,
if the investor chooses to purchase land, 3 years in the future another decision will have to be made
regarding the development of the land. The decision tree for this example, shown in Figure 12.4,
contains all the pertinent data, including decisions, states of nature, probabilities, and payoffs.
At decision node 1 in Figure 12.4, the decision choices are to purchase an apartment build-
ing or to purchase land. Notice that the cost of each venture ($800,000 and $200,000, respec-
tively) is shown in parentheses. If the apartment building is purchased, two states of nature are
possible at probability node 2: The town may exhibit population growth, with a probability of
.60, or there may be no population growth or a decline, with a probability of .40. If the popula-
tion grows, the investor will achieve a payoff of $2,000,000 over a 10-year period. (Note that
this whole decision situation encompasses a 10-year time span.) However, if no population
growth occurs, a payoff of only $225,000 will result.
If the decision is to purchase land, two states of nature are possible at probability node 3. These
two states of nature and their probabilities are identical to those at node 2; however, the payoffs are
different. If population growth occurs for a 3-year period, no payoff will occur, but the investor will
make another decision at node 4 regarding development of the land. At that point, either apartments
will be built, at a cost of $800,000, or the land will be sold, with a payoff of $450,000. Notice that
the decision situation at node 4 can occur only if population growth occurs first. If no population
growth occurs at node 3, there is no payoff, and another decision situation becomes necessary at
node 5: The land can be developed commercially at a cost of $600,000, or the land can be sold for
DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
557
Management Science Application
Evaluating Electric Generator Maintenance 
Schedules Using Decision Tree Analysis
Electric utility companies plan annual outage periods for
preventive maintenance on generators. The outages are
typically part of 5- to-20-year master schedules. However, at
Entergy Electric Systems these scheduled outages were tradi-
tionally based on averages that did not reflect short-term
fluctuations in demand due to breakdowns and bad weather
conditions. The master schedule had to be reviewed each week
by outage planners who relied on their experience to deter-
mine whether the schedule needed to be changed. A user-
friendly software system was developed to assist planners at
Entergy Electric Systems in making changes in their schedule.
The system is based on decision tree analysis.
Each week in the master schedule is represented by a
decision tree that is based on changes in customer demand,
unexpected generator breakdowns, and delays in returning
generators from planned outages. The numeric outcome of
the decision tree is the average reserve margin of megawatts
(MW) for a specific week. This value enables planners to de-
termine whether customer demand will be met and whether
the maintenance schedule planned for the week is acceptable.
The planner’s objective is to avoid negative power reserves by
making changes in the generators’ maintenance schedule.
The branches of the decision tree, their probabilities of occur-
rence, and the branch MW values are based on historical data.
The system has enabled Entergy Electric Systems to isolate
high-risk weeks and to develop timely maintenance schedules
on short notice. The new computerized system has reduced
the maintenance schedules review time for as many as 
260 weeks from several days to less than an hour.
Source: Based on H. A. Taha and H. M. Wolf, “Evaluation of Genera-
tor Maintenance Schedules at Entergy Electric Systems,” Interfaces
26, no. 4 (July–August 1996): 56–65.
© Corbis Flirt/Alamy

$210,000. (Notice that the sale of the land results in less profit if there is no population growth than
if there is population growth.)
If the decision at decision node 4 is to build apartments, two states of nature are possible:
The population may grow, with a conditional probability of .80, or there may be no population
growth, with a conditional probability of .20. The probability of population growth is higher
(and the probability of no growth is lower) than before because there has already been popula-
tion growth for the first 3 years, as shown by the branch from node 3 to node 4. The payoffs for
these two states of nature at the end of the 10-year period are $3,000,000 and $700,000, respec-
tively, as shown in Figure 12.4.
If the investor decides to develop the land commercially at node 5, then two states of nature
can occur: Population growth can occur, with a probability of .30 and an eventual payoff of
$2,300,000, or no population growth can occur, with a probability of .70 and a payoff of
$1,000,000. The probability of population growth is low (i.e., .30) because there has already
been no population growth, as shown by the branch from node 3 to node 5.
This decision situation encompasses several sequential decisions that can be analyzed by
using the decision tree approach outlined in our earlier (simpler) example. As before, we start at
the end of the decision tree and work backward toward a decision at node 1.
First, we must compute the expected values at nodes 6 and 7:
These expected values (and all other nodal values) are shown in boxes in Figure 12.5.
At decision nodes 4 and 5, we must make a decision. As with a normal payoff table, we
make the decision that results in the greatest expected value. At node 4 we have a choice be-
tween two values: $1,740,000, the value derived by subtracting the cost of building an apartment
building ($800,000) from the expected payoff of $2,540,000, or $450,000, the expected value of
selling the land computed with a probability of 1.0. The decision is to build the apartment build-
ing, and the value at node 4 is $1,740,000 ($2,540,000 −800,000).
This same process is repeated at node 5. The decisions at node 5 result in payoffs of $790,000
(i.e.,
) and $210,000. Because the value $790,000 is higher, the
decision is to develop the land commercially.
+1,390,000 - 600,000 = +790,000
EV(node 7) = .30(+2,300,000) + .70(+1,000,000) = +1,390,000
EV(node 6) = .80(+3,000,000) + .20(+700,000) = +2,540,000
558
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
2
6
7
4
5
3
1
$2,000,000
Population
growth
Build
apartments
(–$800,000)
$225,000
$450,000
$3,000,000
$700,000
Population
growth
.80
No population
growth
.20
Sell land
Population
growth
Develop
commercially
(–$600,000)
$210,000
$2,300,000
$1,000,000
.30
No population
growth
.70
Sell land
No population
growth (3 years,
$0 payoff)
Population
growth (3 years,
$0 payoff)
.60
.40
Purchase
land
(–$200,000)
Purchase
apartment
building
(–$800,000)
No population
growth
.60
.40
FIGURE 12.4
Sequential
decision tree

DECISION MAKING WITH PROBABILITIES
559
2
6
7
4
5
3
1
$2,000,000
Population
growth
Build
apartments
(–$800,000)
$225,000
$450,000
$3,000,000
$700,000
Population
growth
.80
No population
growth
.20
Sell land
Population
growth
Develop
commercially
(–$600,000)
$210,000
$2,300,000
$1,000,000
.30
No population
growth
.70
Sell land
No population
growth (3 years,
$0 payoff)
Population
growth (3 years,
$0 payoff)
.60
.40
Purchase
land
(–$200,000)
Purchase
apartment
building
(–$800,000)
$1,160,000
$1,290,000
$1,360,000
$790,000
$1,740,000
$2,540,000
$1,390,000
No population
growth
.60
.40
FIGURE 12.5
Sequential
decision tree 
with nodal
expected
values
Next, we must compute the expected values at nodes 2 and 3:
(Note that the expected value for node 3 is computed from the decision values previously deter-
mined at nodes 4 and 5.)
Now we must make the final decision for node 1. As before, we select the decision with the
greatest expected value after the cost of each decision is subtracted out:
Because the highest net expected value is $1,160,000, the decision is to purchase land, and the
payoff of the decision is $1,160,000.
This example demonstrates the usefulness of decision trees for decision analysis. A deci-
sion tree allows the decision maker to see the logic of decision making because it provides a pic-
ture of the decision process. Decision trees can be used for decision problems more complex
than the preceding example without too much difficulty.
Sequential Decision Tree Analysis with Excel QM
We have already demonstrated the capability of Excel QM to build decision trees (Exhibits 12.9
and 12.10). For the sequential decision tree example described in the preceding section and il-
lustrated in Figures 12.4 and 12.5, the Excel QM decision tree is shown in Exhibit 12.15. Notice
that the expected value for the decision tree (i.e., the investment decision), $1,160,000, is shown
in cell A17. You might notice that the node numbers are a little different in Exhibit 12.15 from
Figure 12.3; the reason is that Excel QM assigns node numbers sequentially for every node,
while the decision tree drawn in Figure 12.3 did not assign node numbers to end nodes. 
Sequential Decision Tree Analysis with Excel and TreePlan
The sequential decision tree example shown in Figure 12.5, developed and solved by using
TreePlan, is shown in Exhibit 12.16. Although this TreePlan decision tree is larger than the one
we previously developed in Exhibit 12.14, it was accomplished in exactly the same way.
 land: +1,360,000 - 200,000 = +1,160,000
 apartment building: +1,290,000 - 800,000 = +490,000
EV(node 3) = .60(+1,740,000) + .40(+790,000) = +1,360,000
EV(node 2) = .60(+2,000,000) + .40(+225,000) = +1,290,000

560
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
EXHIBIT 12.15
Decision Analysis with Additional Information
Earlier in this chapter, we discussed the concept of the expected value of perfect information. We
noted that if perfect information could be obtained regarding which state of nature would occur in
the future, the decision maker could obviously make better decisions. Although perfect information
EXHIBIT 12.16

about the future is rare, it is often possible to gain some amount of additional (imperfect) informa-
tion that will improve decisions.
In this section, we will present a process for using additional information in the decision-
making process by applying Bayesian analysis. We will demonstrate this process using the real
estate investment example employed throughout this chapter. Let’s review this example briefly:
A real estate investor is considering three alternative investments, which will occur under one of
the two possible economic conditions (states of nature) shown in Table 12.11.
DECISION ANALYSIS WITH ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
561
A conditional
probability is the prob-
ability that an event
will occur, given that
another event 
has already occurred.
State of Nature
Good Economic 
Poor Economic
Decision
Conditions
Conditions
(purchase)
.60
.40
Apartment building
$ 50,000
$30,000
Office building
100,000 
-40,000
Warehouse
30,000 
10,000
TABLE 12.11
Payoff table for
the real estate in-
vestment example
Recall that, using the expected value criterion, we found the best decision to be the purchase
of the office building, with an expected value of $44,000. We also computed the expected value
of perfect information to be $28,000. Therefore, the investor would be willing to pay up to
$28,000 for information about the states of nature, depending on how close to perfect the infor-
mation was.
Now suppose that the investor has decided to hire a professional economic analyst who
will provide additional information about future economic conditions. The analyst is con-
stantly researching the economy, and the results of this research are what the investor will be
purchasing.
The economic analyst will provide the investor with a report predicting one of two out-
comes. The report will be either positive, indicating that good economic conditions are most
likely to prevail in the future, or negative, indicating that poor economic conditions will proba-
bly occur. Based on the analyst’s past record in forecasting future economic conditions, the
investor has determined conditional probabilities of the different report outcomes, given the
occurrence of each state of nature in the future. We will use the following notations to express
these conditional probabilities:
good economic conditions
poor economic conditions
positive economic report
negative economic report
The conditional probability of each report outcome, given the occurrence of each state of
nature, follows:
For example, if the future economic conditions are, in fact, good (g), the probability that a posi-
tive report (P) will have been given by the analyst,
is .80. The other three conditional
probabilities can be interpreted similarly. Notice that these probabilities indicate that the analyst
is a relatively accurate forecaster of future economic conditions.
P(P g),
P(Np) = .90
P(Pp) = .10
P(Ng) = .20
P(Pg) = .80
 N =
 P =
 p =
 g =
In Bayesian analysis,
additional information
is used to alter the
marginal probability
of the occurrence of
an event.

562
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
A posterior probability
is the altered marginal
probability of an event,
based on additional 
information.
The investor now has quite a bit of probabilistic information available—not only the condi-
tional probabilities of the report but also the prior probabilities that each state of nature will occur.
These prior probabilities that good or poor economic conditions will occur in the future are
Given the conditional probabilities, the prior probabilities can be revised to form posterior
probabilities by means of Bayes’ rule. If we know the conditional probability that a positive re-
port was presented, given that good economic conditions prevail,
the posterior proba-
bility of good economic conditions, given a positive report,
can be determined using
Bayes’ rule, as follows:
The prior probability that good economic conditions will occur in the future is .60. How-
ever, by obtaining the additional information of a positive report from the analyst, the investor
can revise the prior probability of good conditions to a .923 probability that good economic con-
ditions will occur. The remaining posterior (revised) probabilities are
Decision Trees with Posterior Probabilities
The original decision tree analysis of the real estate investment example is shown in Figures 12.2
and 12.3. Using these decision trees, we determined that the appropriate decision was the purchase
of an office building, with an expected value of $44,000. However, if the investor hires an eco-
nomic analyst, the decision regarding which piece of real estate to invest in will not be made until
after the analyst presents the report. This creates an additional stage in the decision-making
process, which is shown in the decision tree in Figure 12.6. This decision tree differs in two re-
spects from the decision trees in Figures 12.2 and 12.3. The first difference is that there are two
new branches at the beginning of the decision tree that represent the two report outcomes. Notice,
however, that given either report outcome, the decision alternatives, the possible states of nature,
and the payoffs are the same as those in Figures 12.2 and 12.3.
The second difference is that the probabilities of each state of nature are no longer the prior
probabilities given in Figure 12.2; instead, they are the revised posterior probabilities computed
in the previous section, using Bayes’ rule. If the economic analyst issues a positive report, then
the upper branch in Figure 12.6 (from node 1 to node 2) will be taken. If an apartment building
is purchased (the branch from node 2 to node 4), the probability of good economic conditions
is .923, whereas the probability of poor conditions is .077. These are the revised posterior
probabilities of the economic conditions, given a positive report. However, before we can
perform an expected value analysis using this decision tree, one more piece of probabilistic in-
formation must be determined—the initial branch probabilities of positive and negative eco-
nomic reports.
The probability of a positive report, P(P), and of a negative report, P(N), can be determined ac-
cording to the following logic. The probability that two dependent events, A and B, will both occur is
P(AB) = P(AB)P(B)
P (pN) = .750
P(pP) = .077
P(gN) = .250
= .923
=
(.80)(.60)
(.80)(.60) + (.10)(.40)
P(gP) =
P(Pg)P(g)
P(Pg)P(g) + P(Pp)P(p)
P(g P),
P(P g),
P(p) = .40
P(g) = .60

DECISION ANALYSIS WITH ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
563
If event A is a positive report and event B is good economic conditions, then according to the
preceding formula,
We can also determine the probability of a positive report and poor economic conditions the
same way:
Next, we consider the two probabilities 
and 
also called joint probabilities. These
are, respectively, the probability of a positive report and good economic conditions and the proba-
bility of a positive report and poor economic conditions. These two sets of occurrences are mutually
exclusive because both good and poor economic conditions cannot occur simultaneously in the
immediate future. Conditions will be either good or poor, but not both. To determine the probability
of a positive report, we add the mutually exclusive probabilities of a positive report with good
economic conditions and a positive report with poor economic conditions, as follows:
Now, if we substitute into this formula the relationships for 
and 
determined earlier,
we have
You might notice that the right-hand side of this equation is the denominator of the
Bayesian formula we used to compute 
in the previous section. Using the conditional and
prior probabilities that have already been established, we can determine that the probability of a
positive report is
P(P) = P(Pg)P(g) + P(P p)P(p) = (.80)(.60) + (.10)1.402 = .52
P(g P)
P(P) = P(P g)P(g) + P(P p)P(p)
P(Pp)
P(Pg)
P(P) = P(Pg) + P(Pp)
P(Pp),
P(Pg)
P(Pp) = P(P p)P(p)
P(Pg) = P(P g)P(g)
Events are mutually
exclusive if only one
can occur at a time.
2
9
3
8
7
6
5
4
1
Warehouse
Office
building
Apartment
building
Positive
report
P(gN) = .250
$30,000
$10,000
Warehouse
P(pN) = .750
P(gN) = .250
$100,000
–$40,000
P(pN) = .750
P(gN) = .250
$50,000
$30,000
P(pN) = .750
P(gP) = .923
$30,000
$10,000
P(pP) = .077
P(gP) = .923
$100,000
–$40,000
P(pP) = .077
P(gP) = .923
$50,000
$30,000
P(pP) = .077
Office
building
Apartment
building
Negative
report
FIGURE 12.6
Decision tree 
with posterior
probabilities

Similarly, the probability of a negative report is
and 
are also referred to as marginal probabilities.
Now we have all the information needed to perform a decision tree analysis. The decision tree
analysis for our example is shown in Figure 12.7. To see how the decision tree analysis is con-
ducted, consider the result at node 4 first. The value $48,460 is the expected value of the purchase
of an apartment building, given both states of nature. This expected value is computed as follows:
EV(apartment building)
The expected values at nodes 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9 are computed similarly.
= +50,000(.923) + 30,000(.077) = +48,460
P(N)
P(P)
P(N) = P(Ng)P(g) + P(Np)P(p) = (.20)(.60) + (.90)(.40) = .48
564
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
2
9
3
8
7
6
5
4
1
Warehouse
Office
building
Apartment
building
$89,220
Positive
report
P(gN) = .250
$30,000
$10,000
Warehouse
P(pN) = .750
P(gN) = .250
$100,000
–$40,000
P(pN) = .750
P(gN) = .250
$50,000
$30,000
P(pN) = .750
P(gP) = .923
$30,000
$10,000
P(pP) = .077
P(gP) = .923
$100,000
–$40,000
P(pP) = .077
P(gP) = .923
$50,000
$30,000
–$5,000
$35,000
$28,460
$89,220
$48,460
$15,000
Office
building
Apartment
building
$35,000
Negative
report
P(P) = .52
P(N) = .48
$63,194
P(pP) = .077
FIGURE 12.7
Decision tree
analysis for real
estate investment
example
The investor will actually make the decision about the investment at nodes 2 and 3. It is as-
sumed that the investor will make the best decision in each case. Thus, the decision at node 2
will be to purchase an office building, with an expected value of $89,220; the decision at node 3
will be to purchase an apartment building, with an expected value of $35,000. These two results
at nodes 2 and 3 are referred to as decision strategies. They represent a plan of decisions to be
made, given either a positive or a negative report from the economic analyst.
The final step in the decision tree analysis is to compute the expected value of the decision
strategy, given that an economic analysis is performed. This expected value, shown as $63,194
at node 1 in Figure 12.7, is computed as follows:
This amount, $63,194, is the expected value of the investor’s decision strategy, given that a
report forecasting future economic condition is generated by the economic analyst.
= +63,194
EV(strategy) = +89,220(.52) + 35,000(.48)

DECISION ANALYSIS WITH ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
565
Computing Posterior Probabilities with Tables
One of the difficulties that can occur with decision analysis with additional information is
that as the size of the problem increases (i.e., as we add more decision alternatives and states
of nature), the application of Bayes’ rule to compute the posterior probabilities becomes
more complex. In such cases, the posterior probabilities can be computed by using tables.
This tabular approach will be demonstrated with our real estate investment example. The
table for computing posterior probabilities for a positive report and 
is initially set up as
shown in Table 12.12.
P(P)
(4)
Prior
Probability 
(5)
(1)
(2)
(3)
Conditional
Posterior
State
Prior
Conditional
Probability:
Probability:
of Nature
Probability
Probability
(2)  (3)
(4)
(4)
Good conditions
P(g) = .60
P(P|g) = .80
P(Pg) = .48
Poor conditions
P(p) = .40
P(P|p) = .10
P(pP) = .04
.52 = .077
P(Pp) = .04
a = P(P) = .52
P(g P) = .48
.52 = .923
g

TABLE 12.12
Computation
of posterior 
probabilities 
The posterior probabilities for either state of nature (good or poor economic conditions),
given a negative report, are computed similarly.
No matter how large the decision analysis, the steps of this tabular approach can be fol-
lowed the same way as in this relatively small problem. This approach is more systematic than
the direct application of Bayes’ “rule,” making it easier to compute the posterior probabilities
for larger problems.
Computing Posterior Probabilities with Excel
The posterior probabilities computed in Table 12.12 can also be computed by using Excel.
Exhibit 12.17 shows Table 12.12 set up in an Excel spreadsheet format, as well as the table for
computing P(N).
EXHIBIT 12.17

The Expected Value of Sample Information
Recall that we computed the expected value of our real estate investment example to be
$44,000 when we did not have any additional information. After obtaining the additional
information provided by the economic analyst, we computed an expected value of $63,194,
using the decision tree in Figure 12.7. The difference between these two expected values is
called the expected value of sample information (EVSI), and it is computed as follows:
For our example, the expected value of sample information is
EVSI = +63,194 - 44,000 = +19,194
EVSI = EVwith information - EVwithout information
566
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Management Science Application
Scheduling Refueling at the Indian 
Point 3 Nuclear Power Plant
The New York Power Authority (NYPA) owns and operates
12 power projects that provide roughly one-fourth of all the
electricity used in New York State. Approximately 20% of
NYPA’s electrical power (supplying Westchester County and
New York City) is generated by the Indian Point 3 (IP3) nuclear
power plant, located on the Hudson River. IP3 withdraws
840,000 gallons of water per minute from the river for cooling
steam and then returns it to the river. When water is with-
drawn from the river, fish, especially small fish and eggs, do
not always survive as they pass through the cooling system.
The NYPA can reduce the negative effects by scheduling plant
shutdowns to refuel IP3 when fish eggs and small fish are most
abundant in the Hudson River. In the past, NYPA developed a
refueling schedule according to a 10-year planning horizon, al-
though unforeseen events often altered this schedule. There is
uncertainty in the future about possible deregulation of the
electric utility industry and its effect on the price of replace-
ment power during refueling outages. The NYPA must consider
these uncertainties in its attempt to provide low-cost power
and minimize the environmental effects of refueling outages.
The NYPA developed a decision analysis model to compare al-
ternative strategies for refueling that balanced fish protection,
the cost of buying fuel, and the uncertainties of deregulation.
The key decisions of the model were the times of year that
refueling outages should occur, which affects the level of fish
protection, and the amount of fuel that should be ordered for
the nuclear reactor core that allows for operation for a target
number of days, which affects the cost of the operation. The
cost consideration comprises three objectives: minimizing the
cost of replacement electricity when IP3 is shut down, minimiz-
ing the amount of unused fuel at the end of an operating cycle,
and minimizing the time that IP3 would operate at less than full
power before refueling. The objective of fish protection was to
minimize the sum of the average percentage reduction in the
mortality rate caused by water removal at IP3 for five types of
fish over the 10-year planning horizon. The three major uncer-
tainties in the model were the cost of refueling, how long it
takes IP3 to refuel and how well it operates, and when New
York State is likely to deregulate the electric utility industry. The
decision analysis model considered five strategies based on dif-
ferent schedules that reflected different time windows when
fish were most vulnerable. The model showed that no strategy
simultaneously minimized refueling cost while minimizing fish
mortality rates. The strategy that was selected restricted the
starting date for refueling to the third week in May, when fish
protection would meet accepted standards, at a cost savings of
$10 million over the previous refueling schedule. The NYPA
used the decision analysis model to develop its refueling sched-
ule for the 10-year period from 1999 to 2008.
Source: Based on D. J. Dunning, S. Lockfort, Q. E. Ross, P. C. Beccue,
and J. S. Stonebraker, “New York Power Authority Uses Decision
Analysis to Schedule Refueling of Its Indian Point 3 Nuclear Power
Plant,” Interfaces 31, no. 5 (September–October 2001): 121–35.
AP Photo/Ed Bailey
The expected value of
sample information
(EVSI) is the
difference between the
expected value with
and without additional
information.

This means that the real estate investor would be willing to pay the economic analyst up to
$19,194 for an economic report that forecasted future economic conditions.
After we computed the expected value of the investment without additional information, we
computed the expected value of perfect information, which equaled $28,000. However, the ex-
pected value of the sample information was only $19,194. This is a logical result because it is rare
that absolutely perfect information can be determined. Because the additional information that is
obtained is less than perfect, it will be worth less to the decision maker. We can determine how
close to perfect our sample information is by computing the efficiency of sample information
as follows:
Thus, the analyst’s economic report is viewed by the investor to be 69% as efficient as per-
fect information. In general, a high efficiency rating indicates that the information is very good,
or close to being perfect information, and a low rating indicates that the additional information
is not very good. For our example, the efficiency of .69 is relatively high; thus, it is doubtful
that the investor would seek additional information from an alternative source. (However, this
is usually dependent on how much money the decision maker has available to purchase infor-
mation.) If the efficiency had been lower, however, the investor might seek additional informa-
tion elsewhere.
Utility
All the decision-making criteria presented so far in this chapter have been based on monetary
value. In other words, decisions have been based on the potential dollar payoffs of the alterna-
tives. However, there are certain decision situations in which individuals do not make decisions
based on the expected dollar gain or loss.
For example, consider an individual who purchases automobile insurance. The decisions are to
purchase and to not purchase, and the states of nature are an accident and no accident. The payoff
table for this decision situation, including probabilities, is shown in Table 12.13.
efficiency = EVSI  EVPI = +19,194 / 28,000 = .69
UTILITY
567
The efficiency of
sample information
is the ratio of 
the expected value of
sample information to
the expected value 
of perfect
information.
TABLE 12.13
Payoff table for 
auto insurance 
example
State of Nature
No Accident 
Accident
Decision
.992
.008
Purchase insurance
$500
$ 
500
Do not purchase insurance
0
10,000
The dollar outcomes in Table 12.13 are the costs associated with each outcome. The insur-
ance costs $500 whether there is an accident or no accident. If the insurance is not purchased
and there is no accident, then there is no cost at all. However, if an accident does occur, the indi-
vidual will incur a cost of $10,000.
The expected cost (EC) for each decision is
Because the lower expected cost is $80, the decision should be not to purchase insurance. How-
ever, people almost always purchase insurance (even when they are not legally required to do so).
This is true of all types of insurance, such as accident, life, or fire.
EC(no insurance) = .992(+0) + .008(+10,000) = +80
EC(insurance) = .992(+500) + .008(+500) = +500

568
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Why do people shun the greater expected dollar outcome in this type of situation? The an-
swer is that people want to avoid a ruinous or painful situation. When faced with a relatively
small dollar cost versus a disaster, people typically pay the small cost to avert the disaster.
People who display this characteristic are referred to as risk averters because they avoid risky
situations.
Alternatively, people who go to the track to wager on horse races, travel to Atlantic City to
play roulette, or speculate in the commodities market decide to take risks even though the great-
est expected value would occur if they simply held on to the money. These people shun the
greater expected value accruing from a sure thing (keeping their money) in order to take a
chance on receiving a “bonanza.” Such people are referred to as risk takers.
For both risk averters and risk takers (as well as those who are indifferent to risk), the deci-
sion criterion is something other than the expected dollar outcome. This alternative criterion is
known as utility. Utility is a measure of the satisfaction derived from money. In our examples of
risk averters and risk takers presented earlier, the utility derived from their decisions exceeded
the expected dollar value. For example, the utility to the average decision maker of having in-
surance is much greater than the utility of not having insurance.
As another example, consider two people, each of whom is offered $100,000 to perform
some particularly difficult and strenuous task. One individual has an annual income of $10,000;
the other individual is a multimillionaire. It is reasonable to assume that the average person with
an annual income of only $10,000 would leap at the opportunity to earn $100,000, whereas the
multimillionaire would reject the offer. Obviously, $100,000 has more utility (i.e., value) for one
individual than for the other.
In general, the same incremental amount of money does not have the same intrinsic value to
every person. For individuals with a great deal of wealth, more money does not usually have as
much intrinsic value as it does for individuals who have little money. In other words, although the
dollar value is the same, the value as measured by utility is different, depending on how much
wealth a person has. Thus, utility in this case is a measure of the pleasure or satisfaction an indi-
vidual would receive from an incremental increase in wealth.
In some decision situations, decision makers attempt to assign a subjective value to utility. This
value is typically measured in terms of units called utiles. For example, the $100,000 offered to the
two individuals may have a utility value of 100 utiles to the person with a low income and 0 utiles to
the multimillionaire.
In our automobile insurance example, the expected utility of purchasing insurance could be
1,000 utiles, and the expected utility of not purchasing insurance only 1 utile. These utility val-
ues are completely reversed from the expected monetary values computed from Table 12.13,
which explains the decision to purchase insurance.
As might be expected, it is usually very difficult to measure utility and the number of utiles
derived from a decision outcome. The process is a very subjective one in which the decision
maker’s psychological preferences must be determined. Thus, although the concept of utility is
realistic and often portrays actual decision-making criteria more accurately than does expected
monetary value, its application is difficult and, as such, somewhat limited.
Summary
The purpose of this chapter was to demonstrate the concepts and fundamentals of decision
making when uncertainty exists. Within this context, several decision-making criteria were pre-
sented. The maximax, maximin, minimax regret, equal likelihood, and Hurwicz decision crite-
ria were demonstrated for cases in which probabilities could not be attached to the occurrence
of outcomes. The expected value criterion and decision trees were discussed for cases in which
probabilities could be assigned to the states of nature of a decision situation.
People who forgo a
high expected value to
avoid a disaster with
a low probability are
risk averters.
People who take a
chance on a bonanza
with a very low prob-
ability of occurrence
in lieu of a sure thing
are risk takers.
Utility is a measure of
personal satisfaction
derived from money.
Utiles are units of
subjective measures
of utility.

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
569
The following example will illustrate the solution procedure for a decision analysis problem.
Problem Statement
T. Bone Puckett, a corporate raider, has acquired a textile company and is contemplating the
future of one of its major plants, located in South Carolina. Three alternative decisions are being
considered: (1) expand the plant and produce lightweight, durable materials for possible sales to
the military, a market with little foreign competition; (2) maintain the status quo at the plant,
continuing production of textile goods that are subject to heavy foreign competition; or (3) sell
the plant now. If one of the first two alternatives is chosen, the plant will still be sold at the end
of a year. The amount of profit that could be earned by selling the plant in a year depends on for-
eign market conditions, including the status of a trade embargo bill in Congress. The following
payoff table describes this decision situation:
State of Nature
Good Foreign
Poor Foreign 
Decision
Competitive Conditions
Competitive Conditions
Expand
$ 800,000
$ 500,000
Maintain status quo
1,300,000
-150,000
Sell now
320,000
320,000
A. Determine the best decision by using the following decision criteria:
1. Maximax
2. Maximin
3. Minimax regret
4. Hurwicz 
5. Equal likelihood
B. Assume that it is now possible to estimate a probability of .70 that good foreign com-
petitive conditions will exist and a probability of .30 that poor conditions will exist.
Determine the best decision by using expected value and expected opportunity loss.
C. Compute the expected value of perfect information.
D. Develop a decision tree, with expected values at the probability nodes.
E. T. Bone Puckett has hired a consulting firm to provide a report on future political and
market situations. The report will be positive (P) or negative (N), indicating either a
good (g) or poor (p) future foreign competitive situation. The conditional probability of
each report outcome, given each state of nature, is
(a = .3)
Example Problem
Solution
Determine the posterior probabilities by using Bayes’ rule.
F. Perform a decision tree analysis by using the posterior probability obtained in (E).
P(Np) = .80
P(P p) = .20
P(Ng) = .30
P(P g) = .70
All the decision criteria presented in this chapter were demonstrated by rather simplified
examples; actual decision-making situations are usually more complex. Nevertheless, the
process of analyzing decisions presented in this chapter is the logical method that most decision
makers follow to make a decision.

Solution
Step 1 (part A): Determine Decisions Without Probabilities
Maximax:
Expand
$ 800,000
Status quo
1,300,000
d
Maximum
Sell
320,000
Decision: Maintain status quo.
Maximin:
Expand
$ 500,000
d
Maximum
Status quo
-150,000
Sell
320,000
Decision: Expand.
Minimax regret:
Expand
$500,000
d
Minimum
Status quo
650,000
Sell
980,000
Decision: Expand.
Hurwicz
Expand
$800,000(.3) + 500,000(.7) = $590,000
Status quo
$1,300,000(.3) - 150,000(.7) = $285,000
Sell
$320,000(.3) + 320,000(.7) = $320,000
Decision: Expand.
Equal likelihood:
Expand
$800,000(.50) + 500,000(.50) = $650,000
Status quo
$1,300,000(.50) - 150,000(.50) = $575,000
Sell
$320,000(.50) + 320,000(.50) = $320,000
Decision: Expand.
Step 2 (part B): Determine Decisions with EV and EOL
Expected value:
Expand
$800,000(.70) + 500,000(.30) = $710,000
Status quo
$1,300,000(.70) - 150,000(.30) = $865,000
Sell
$320,000(.70) + 320,000(.30) = $320,000
Decision: Maintain status quo.
Expected opportunity loss:
Expand
$500,000(.70) + 0(.30) = $350,000
Status quo
$0(.70) + 650,000(.30) = $195,000
Sell
$980,000(.70) + 180,000(.30) = $740,000
Decision: Maintain status quo.
(a = .3):
570
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

Step 3 (part C): Compute EVPI
expected value given perfect information
expected value without perfect information
Step 4 (part D): Develop a Decision Tree
EVPI = +1,060,000 - 865,000 = +195,000
= +865,000
= +1,300,000(.70) - 150,000(.30)
= +1,060,000
= 1,300,000(.70) + 500,000(.30)
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
571
Expand
$800,000
$500,000
$1,300,000
$320,000
$320,000
–$150,000
Good
conditions (.7)
Poor
conditions (.3)
Good
conditions (.7)
Good
conditions (.7)
Poor
conditions (.3)
Poor
conditions (.3)
Maintain
status quo
Sell
$320,000
$865,000
$865,000
$710,000
1
4
3
2
Step 5 (part E): Determine Posterior Probabilities
P(pN) = .533
= .467
=
(.30)(.70)
(.30)(.70) + (.80)(.30)
P(gN) =
P(Ng)P(g)
P(Ng)P(g) + P(Np)P(p)
P(pP) = .109
= .891
=
(.70)(.70)
(.70)(.70) + (.20)(.30)
P(gP) =
P(Pg)P(g)
P(Pg)P(g) + P(Pp)P(p)

572
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Problems
1. A farmer in Iowa is considering either leasing some extra land or investing in savings certificates
at the local bank. If weather conditions are good next year, the extra land will give the farmer an
excellent harvest. However, if weather conditions are bad, the farmer will lose money. The savings
certificates will result in the same return, regardless of the weather conditions. The return for each
investment, given each type of weather condition, is shown in the following payoff table:
Weather
Decision
Good
Bad
Lease land
$90,000
$-40,000
Buy savings certificate
10,000
10,000
Select the best decision, using the following decision criteria:
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
2. The owner of the Burger Doodle Restaurant is considering two ways to expand operations: open
a drive-up window or serve breakfast. The increase in profits resulting from these proposed ex-
pansions depends on whether a competitor opens a franchise down the street. The possible profits
$767,300
$1,141,950
$1,141,950
$916,117.50
$320,000
$640,100
$527,150
$640,100
$320,000
1
3
2
4
5
6
7
8
9
Positive
report
Expand
Sell
Status quo
Expand
$800,000
$500,000
$1,300,000
$320,000
$320,000
–$150,000
P(g P) = .891
P(p P) = .109
P(p P) = .109
P(g N) = .467
P(p N) = .533
P(p N) = .533
P(g N) = .467
P(g N) = .467
P(p N) = .533
P(g P) = .891
P(g P) = .891
P(p P) = .109
Sell
Status quo
Negative
report
P(N) = .45
P(P) = .55
$800,000
$500,000
$1,300,000
$320,000
$320,000
–$150,000












Step 6 (part F): Perform Decision Tree Analysis with Posterior Probabilities

from each expansion in operations, given both future competitive situations, are shown in the fol-
lowing payoff table:
Competitor
Decision
Open
Not Open
Drive-up window
$-6,000
$20,000
Breakfast
4,000
8,000
Select the best decision, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
3. Stevie Stone, a bellhop at the Royal Sundown Hotel in Atlanta, has been offered a manage-
ment position. Although accepting the offer would assure him a job if there was a recession,
if good economic conditions prevailed, he would actually make less money as a manager
than as a bellhop (because of the large tips he gets as a bellhop). His salary during the next
5 years for each job, given each future economic condition, is shown in the following payoff
table:
Economic Conditions
Decision
Good
Recession
Bellhop
$120,000
$60,000
Manager
85,000
85,000
Select the best decision, using the following decision criteria.
a. Minimax regret
b. Hurwicz 
c. Equal likelihood
4. Brooke Bentley, a student in business administration, is trying to decide which management sci-
ence course to take next quarter—I, II, or III. “Steamboat” Fulton, “Death” Ray, and “Sadistic”
Scott are the three management science professors who teach the courses. Brooke does not know
who will teach what course. Brooke can expect a different grade in each of the courses, depend-
ing on who teaches it next quarter, as shown in the following payoff table:
Professor
Course
Fulton
Ray
Scott
I
B
D
D
II
C
B
F
III
F
A
C
Determine the best course to take next quarter, using the following criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
5. A farmer in Georgia must decide which crop to plant next year on his land: corn, peanuts, or
soybeans. The return from each crop will be determined by whether a new trade bill with Russia
(a = .4)
PROBLEMS
573

passes the Senate. The profit the farmer will realize from each crop, given the two possible re-
sults on the trade bill, is shown in the following payoff table:
Trade Bill
Crop
Pass
Fail
Corn
$35,000
$ 8,000
Peanuts
18,000
12,000
Soybeans
22,000
20,000
Determine the best crop to plant, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Minimax regret
d. Hurwicz 
e. Equal likelihood
6. A company must decide now which of three products to make next year to plan and order proper
materials. The cost per unit of producing each product will be determined by whether a new
union labor contract passes or fails. The cost per unit for each product, given each contract re-
sult, is shown in the following payoff table:
Contract Outcome
Product
Pass
Fail
1
$7.50
$6.00
2
4.00
7.00
3
6.50
3.00
Determine which product should be produced, using the following decision criteria.
a. Minimin
b. Minimax
7. The owner of the Columbia Construction Company must decide between building a housing
development, constructing a shopping center, and leasing all the company’s equipment to
another company. The profit that will result from each alternative will be determined by whether
material costs remain stable or increase. The profit from each alternative, given the two possibil-
ities for material costs, is shown in the following payoff table:
Material Costs
Decision
Stable
Increase
Houses
$70,000
$30,000
Shopping center
105,000
20,000
Leasing
40,000
40,000
Determine the best decision, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Minimax regret
d. Hurwicz 
e. Equal likelihood
(a = .2)
(a = .3)
574
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

8. A local real estate investor in Orlando is considering three alternative investments: a motel, a restau-
rant, or a theater. Profits from the motel or restaurant will be affected by the availability of gasoline
and the number of tourists; profits from the theater will be relatively stable under any conditions.
The following payoff table shows the profit or loss that could result from each investment:
Gasoline Availability
Investment
Shortage
Stable Supply
Surplus
Motel
$-8,000
$15,000
$20,000
Restaurant
2,000
8,000
6,000
Theater
6,000
6,000
5,000
Determine the best investment, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Minimax regret
d. Hurwicz 
e. Equal likelihood
9. A television network is attempting to decide during the summer which of the following three football
games to televise on the Saturday following Thanksgiving Day: Alabama versus Auburn, Georgia
versus Georgia Tech, or Army versus Navy. The estimated viewer ratings (millions of homes) for the
games depend on the win–loss records of the six teams, as shown in the following payoff table:
Number of Viewers (1,000,000s)
One Team Has
Both Teams
Winning Record;
Both Teams
Have Winning
One Team Has
Have Losing
Game
Records
Losing Record
Records
Alabama vs. Auburn
10.2
7.3
5.4
Georgia vs. Georgia Tech
9.6
8.1
4.8
Army vs. Navy
12.5
6.5
3.2
Determine the best game to televise, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
10. Ann Tyler has come into an inheritance from her grandparents. She is attempting to decide
among several investment alternatives. The return after 1 year is primarily dependent on the
interest rate during the next year. The rate is currently 7%, and Ann anticipates that it will stay
the same or go up or down by at most two points. The various investment alternatives plus
their returns ($10,000s), given the interest rate changes, are shown in the following table:
Interest Rate
Investment
5%
6%
7%
8%
9%
Money market fund
2
3.1
4
4.3
5
Stock growth fund
-3
-2
2.5
4
6
Bond fund
6
5
3
3
2
Government fund
4
3.6
3.2
3
2.8
Risk fund
-9
-4.5
1.2
8.3
14.7
Savings bonds
3
3
3.2
3.4
3.5
(a = .4)
PROBLEMS
575

Determine the best investment, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
11. The Tech football coaching staff has six basic offensive plays it runs every game. Tech has an
upcoming game against State on Saturday, and the Tech coaches know that State employs five
different defenses. The coaches have estimated the number of yards Tech will gain with each
play against each defense, as shown in the following payoff table:
Defense
Play
54
63
Wide Tackle
Nickel
Blitz
Off tackle
3
-2
9
7
-1
Option
-1
8
-2
9
12
Toss sweep
6
16
-5
3
14
Draw
-2
4
3
10
-3
Pass
8
20
12
-7
-8
Screen
-5
-2
8
3
16
a. If the coaches employ an offensive game plan, they will use the maximax criterion. What
will be their best play?
b. If the coaches employ a defensive plan, they will use the maximin criterion. What will be
their best play?
c. What will be their best offensive play if State is equally likely to use any of its five 
defenses?
12. Microcomp is a U.S.-based manufacturer of personal computers. It is planning to build a new
manufacturing and distribution facility in either South Korea, China, Taiwan, the Philippines,
or Mexico. It will take approximately 5 years to build the necessary infrastructure (roads, etc.),
construct the new facility, and put it into operation. The eventual cost of the facility will differ
between countries and will even vary within countries depending on the financial, labor, and
political climate, including monetary exchange rates. The company has estimated the facility
cost (in $1,000,000s) in each country under three different future economic and political cli-
mates, as follows:
Economic/Political Climate
Country
Decline
Same
Improve
South Korea
21.7
19.1
15.2
China
19.0
18.5
17.6
Taiwan
19.2
17.1
14.9
Philippines
22.5
16.8
13.8
Mexico
25.0
21.2
12.5
Determine the best decision, using the following decision criteria.
a. Minimin
b. Minimax
576
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

c. Hurwicz 
d. Equal likelihood
13. Place-Plus, a real estate development firm, is considering several alternative development proj-
ects. These include building and leasing an office park, purchasing a parcel of land and building
an office building to rent, buying and leasing a warehouse, building a strip mall, and building
and selling condominiums. The financial success of these projects depends on interest rate
movement in the next 5 years. The various development projects and their 5-year financial re-
turn (in $1,000,000s) given that interest rates will decline, remain stable, or increase, are shown
in the following payoff table:
Interest Rate
Project
Decline
Stable
Increase
Office park
$0.5
$1.7
$4.5
Office building
1.5
1.9
2.5
Warehouse
1.7
1.4
1.0
Mall
0.7
2.4
3.6
Condominiums
3.2
1.5
0.6
Determine the best investment, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
d. Hurwicz 
14. The Oakland Bombers professional basketball team just missed making the playoffs last sea-
son and believes it needs to sign only one very good free agent to make the playoffs next sea-
son. The team is considering four players: Barry Byrd, Rayneal O’Neil, Marvin Johnson, and
Michael Gordan. Each player differs according to position, ability, and attractiveness to fans.
The payoffs (in $1,000,000s) to the team for each player, based on the contract, profits from at-
tendance, and team product sales for several different season outcomes, are provided in the fol-
lowing table:
Season Outcome
Makes
Player
Loser
Competitive
Playoffs
Byrd
$-3.2
$ 1.3
4.4
O’Neil
-5.1
1.8
6.3
Johnson
-2.7
0.7
5.8
Gordan
-6.3
-1.6
9.6
Determine the best decision, using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Hurwicz 
d. Equal likelihood
15. A machine shop owner is attempting to decide whether to purchase a new drill press, a lathe, or
a grinder. The return from each will be determined by whether the company succeeds in getting
(a = .60)
(a = .3)
(a = .4)
PROBLEMS
577

a government military contract. The profit or loss from each purchase and the probabilities asso-
ciated with each contract outcome are shown in the following payoff table:
Contract
No Contract
Purchase
.40
.60
Drill press
$40,000
$-8,000
Lathe
20,000
4,000
Grinder
12,000
10,000
Compute the expected value for each purchase and select the best one.
16. A concessions manager at the Tech versus A&M football game must decide whether to have the
vendors sell sun visors or umbrellas. There is a 30% chance of rain, a 15% chance of overcast
skies, and a 55% chance of sunshine, according to the weather forecast in College Junction,
where the game is to be held. The manager estimates that the following profits will result from
each decision, given each set of weather conditions:
Weather Conditions
Rain
Overcast
Sunshine
Decision
.30
.15
.55
Sun visors
$ -500
$ -200
$1,500
Umbrellas
2,000
0
-900
a. Compute the expected value for each decision and select the best one.
b. Develop the opportunity loss table and compute the expected opportunity loss for each decision.
17. Allen Abbott has a wide-curving, uphill driveway leading to his garage. When there is a heavy
snow, Allen hires a local carpenter, who shovels snow on the side in the winter, to shovel his
driveway. The snow shoveler charges $30 to shovel the driveway. Following is a probability dis-
tribution of the number of heavy snows each winter:
Heavy Snows
Probability
1
.13
2
.18
3
.26
4
.23
5
.10
6
.07
7
  .03
1.00
Allen is considering purchasing a new self-propelled snowblower for $625 that would allow
him, his wife, or his children to clear the driveway after a snow. Discuss what you think Allen’s
decision should be and why.
18. The Miramar Company is going to introduce one of three new products: a widget, a hummer, or
a nimnot. The market conditions (favorable, stable, or unfavorable) will determine the profit or
loss the company realizes, as shown in the following payoff table:
578
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

Market Conditions
Favorable
Stable
Unfavorable
Product
.2
.7
.1
Widget
$120,000
$70,000
$ -30,000
Hummer
60,000
40,000
20,000
Nimnot
35,000
30,000
30,000
a. Compute the expected value for each decision and select the best one.
b. Develop the opportunity loss table and compute the expected opportunity loss for each product.
c. Determine how much the firm would be willing to pay to a market research firm to gain bet-
ter information about future market conditions.
19. The financial success of the Downhill Ski Resort in the Blue Ridge Mountains is dependent on
the amount of snowfall during the winter months. If the snowfall averages more than 40 inches,
the resort will be successful; if the snowfall is between 20 and 40 inches, the resort will receive
a moderate financial return; and if snowfall averages less than 20 inches, the resort will suffer a
financial loss. The financial return and probability, given each level of snowfall, follow:
Snowfall Level (in.)
Financial Return
7 40, .4
$ 120,000
20-40, .2
40,000
6 20, .4
-40,000
A large hotel chain has offered to lease the resort for the winter for $40,000. Compute the ex-
pected value to determine whether the resort should operate or lease. Explain your answer.
20. An investor must decide between two alternative investments—stocks and bonds. The return for
each investment, given two future economic conditions, is shown in the following payoff table:
Economic Conditions
Investment
Good
Bad
Stocks
$10,000
$-4,000
Bonds
7,000
2,000
What probability for each economic condition would make the investor indifferent to the choice
between stocks and bonds?
21. In Problem 10,Ann Tyler, with the help of a financial newsletter and some library research, has been
able to assign probabilities to each of the possible interest rates during the next year, as follows:
Interest Rate (%)
Probability
5
.2
6
.3
7
.3
8
.1
9
.1
Using expected value, determine her best investment decision.
PROBLEMS
579

22. In Problem 11, the Tech coaches have reviewed game films and have determined the following
probabilities that State will use each of its defenses:
Defense
Probability
54
.40
63
.10
Wide tackle
.20
Nickel
.20
Blitz
.10
a. Using expected value, rank Tech’s plays from best to worst.
b. During the actual game, a situation arises in which Tech has a third down and 10 yards
to go, and the coaches are 60% certain State will blitz, with a 10% chance of any of the
other four defenses. What play should Tech run? Is it likely the team will make the first
down?
23. A global economist hired by Microcomp, the U.S.-based computer manufacturer in Problem 12,
estimates that the probability that the economic and political climate overseas and in Mexico
will decline during the next 5 years is .40, the probability that it will remain approximately the
same is .50, and the probability that it will improve is .10. Determine the best country to con-
struct the new facility in and the expected value of perfect information.
24. In Problem 13, the Place-Plus real estate development firm has hired an economist to assign a
probability to each direction interest rates may take over the next 5 years. The economist has de-
termined that there is a .50 probability that interest rates will decline, a .40 probability that rates
will remain stable, and a .10 probability that rates will increase.
a. Using expected value, determine the best project.
b. Determine the expected value of perfect information.
25. Fenton and Farrah Friendly, husband-and-wife car dealers, are soon going to open a new deal-
ership. They have three offers: from a foreign compact car company, from a U.S.-producer
of full-sized cars, and from a truck company. The success of each type of dealership will
depend on how much gasoline is going to be available during the next few years. The profit
from each type of dealership, given the availability of gas, is shown in the following payoff
table:
Gasoline Availability
Shortage
Surplus
Dealership
.6
.4
Compact cars
$ 300,000
$150,000
Full-sized cars
-100,000
600,000
Trucks
120,000
170,000
Determine which type of dealership the couple should purchase.
26. The Steak and Chop Butcher Shop purchases steak from a local meatpacking house. The meat
is purchased on Monday at $2.00 per pound, and the shop sells the steak for $3.00 per pound.
Any steak left over at the end of the week is sold to a local zoo for $.50 per pound. The possi-
ble demands for steak and the probability of each are shown in the following table:
580
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

Demand (lb.)
Probability
20
.10
21
.20
22
.30
23
.30
24
  .10
1.00
The shop must decide how much steak to order in a week. Construct a payoff table for this deci-
sion situation and determine the amount of steak that should be ordered, using expected value.
27. The Loebuck Grocery must decide how many cases of milk to stock each week to meet demand.
The probability distribution of demand during a week is shown in the following table:
Demand (cases)
Probability
15
.20
16
.25
17
.40
18
.15
1.00
Each case costs the grocer $10 and sells for $12. Unsold cases are sold to a local farmer (who
mixes the milk with feed for livestock) for $2 per case. If there is a shortage, the grocer consid-
ers the cost of customer ill will and lost profit to be $4 per case. The grocer must decide how
many cases of milk to order each week.
a. Construct the payoff table for this decision situation.
b. Compute the expected value of each alternative amount of milk that could be stocked and se-
lect the best decision.
c. Construct the opportunity loss table and determine the best decision.
d. Compute the expected value of perfect information.
28. The manager of the greeting card section of Mazey’s department store is considering her or-
der for a particular line of Christmas cards. The cost of each box of cards is $3; each box will
be sold for $5 during the Christmas season. After Christmas, the cards will be sold for $2 a
box. The card section manager believes that all leftover cards can be sold at that price. The es-
timated demand during the Christmas season for the line of Christmas cards, with associated
probabilities, is as follows:
Demand (boxes)
Probability
25
.10
26
.15
27
.30
28
.20
29
.15
30
.10
a. Develop the payoff table for this decision situation.
b. Compute the expected value for each alternative and identify the best decision.
c. Compute the expected value of perfect information.
PROBLEMS
581

29. The Palm Garden Greenhouse specializes in raising carnations that are sold to florists. Carna-
tions are sold for $3.00 per dozen; the cost of growing the carnations and distributing them to
the florists is $2.00 per dozen. Any carnations left at the end of the day are sold to local restau-
rants and hotels for $0.75 per dozen. The estimated cost of customer ill will if demand is not met
is $1.00 per dozen. The expected daily demand (in dozens) for the carnations is as follows:
Daily Demand
Probability
20
.05
22
.10
24
.25
26
.30
28
.20
30
.10
1.00
a. Develop the payoff table for this decision situation.
b. Compute the expected value of each alternative number of (dozens of) carnations that could
be stocked and select the best decision.
c. Construct the opportunity loss table and determine the best decision.
d. Compute the expected value of perfect information.
30. Assume that the probabilities of demand in Problem 28 are no longer valid; the decision situa-
tion is now one without probabilities. Determine the best number of boxes of cards to stock,
using the following decision criteria.
a. Maximin
b. Maximax
c. Hurwicz 
d. Minimax regret
31. Federated Electronics, Ltd., manufactures display screens and monitors for computers and tele-
visions, which it sells to companies around the world. It wants to construct a new warehouse and
distribution center in Asia to serve emerging markets there. It has identified potential sites in the
port cities Shanghai, Singapore, Pusan, Kaohsiung, and Hong Kong, and it has estimated the
possible revenues for each (minus construction costs, which are higher in some cities, such as
Hong Kong). At each site the projected revenues are primarily based on two factors—the eco-
nomic conditions at the port, including the projected traffic, infrastructure, labor rates and avail-
ability, and expansion and modernization; and the future government situation, which inclues
the political stability, fees, tariffs, duties, and trade regulations. Following is a payoff table that
shows the projected revenues (in $billions) for 6 years, given the four possible combinations for
positive and negative port and government conditions:
(a = .4)
582
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Government Conditions
Port Negative/
Port Negative/
Port Positive/
Port Positive/
Government 
Government 
Government 
Government
Port
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Shanghai
–0.271
$0.437
$0.523
$1.08
Singapore
–0.164
0.329
0.441
0.873
Pusan
0.119
0.526
0.337
0.732
Kaoshiung
–0.235
0.522
0.226
1.116
Hong Kong
–0.317
0.256
0.285
1.653

PROBLEMS
583
Determine the port city Federated should select for its new distribution center using the follow-
ing decision criteria.
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
d. Hurwicz (a = .55)
32. In Problem 31, Federated Electronics, Ltd., has hired a Washington, DC–based global trade re-
search firm to assess the probabilities of each combination of port and government conditions
for the five ports. The research firm probability estimates for the five ports are as follows:
Government Conditions
Port Negative/
Port Negative/
Port Positive/
Port Positive/
Government
Government
Government
Government 
Port
Negative
Positive
Negative
Positive
Shanghai
0.09
0.27
0.32
0.32
Singapore
0.05
0.22
0.22
0.51
Pusan
0.08
0.36
0.27
0.29
Kaoshiung
0.11
0.12
0.46
0.31
Hong Kong
0.10
0.23
0.30
0.37
a. Using expected value, determine the best port to construct the distribution center.
b. Using any decision criteria, determine the port you think would be the best location for the
distribution center and justify your answer. 
33. In Problem 14, the Bombers’ management has determined the following probabilities of the
occurrence of each future season outcome for each player:
Probability
Player
Loser
Competitive
Makes Playoffs
Byrd
.15
.55
.30
O’Neil
.18
.26
.56
Johnson
.21
.32
.47
Gordan
.30
.25
.45
Compute the expected value for each player and indicate which player the team should try to sign.
34. The director of career advising at Orange Community College wants to use decision analysis to
provide information to help students decide which 2-year degree program they should pursue.
The director has set up the following payoff table for six of the most popular and successful de-
gree programs at OCC that shows the estimated 5-year gross income ($) from each degree for
four future economic conditions:
Economic Conditions
Degree Program
Recession
Average
Good
Robust
Graphic design 
145,000
175,000
220,000
260,000
Nursing
150,000
180,000
205,000
215,000
Real estate
115,000
165,000
220,000
320,000
Medical technology
130,000
180,000
210,000
280,000
Culinary technology
115,000
145,000
235,000
305,000
Computer information 
technology
125,000
150,000
190,000
250,000

Determine the best degree program in terms of projected income, using the following decision
criteria:
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
d. Hurwicz 
35. In Problem 34, the director of career advising at Orange Community College has paid a small
fee to a local investment firm to indicate a probability for each future economic condition over
the next 5 years. The firm estimates that there is a .20 probability of a recession, a .40 probabil-
ity that the economy will be average, a .30 probability that the economy will be good, and a .10
probability that it will be robust. Using expected value determine the best degree program in
terms of projected income. If you were the director of career advising, which degree program
would you recommend?
36. The Blue Sox American League baseball team is going to enter the free-agent market over the
winter to sign a new starting pitcher. They are considering five prospects who will enter the free-
agent market. All five pitchers are in their mid-20s, have been in the major leagues for approxi-
mately 5 years, and have been relatively successful. The team’s general manager has compiled a
lot of information about the pitchers from scouting reports and their playing histories since high
school. He has developed a chart projecting how many wins each pitcher will likely have during
the next 10 years given three possible future states of nature: the pitchers will be relatively in-
jury free, they will have a normal career with injuries, or they will have excessive injuries, as
shown in the following payoff table:
Physical Condition
Pitcher
No injuries
Normal
Excessive Injuries
Jose Diaz
153
122
76
Jerry Damon 
173
135
46
Frank Thompson
133
115
88
Derek Rodriguez
105
101
95
Ken Griffin
127
98
75
Determine the best pitcher to sign, using the following decision criteria:
a. Maximax
b. Maximin
c. Equal likelihood
d. Hurwicz 
37. In Problem 36, the Blue Sox general manager has asked a superscout to assign a probability to each
of the three states of nature for the pitchers during the next 10 years. The scout estimates there is a
.10 probability that these pitchers at this stage of their careers will have no injuries, a .60 probabil-
ity that they will have a career with the normal number of injuries, and a .30 probability that they
will have excessive injuries.
a. Using expected value, determine the best pitcher to sign.
b. Given the following 10-year contract price for each pitcher (in $millions), which would you
recommend signing?
Jose Diaz
$ 97.3
Jerry Damon
$121.5
Frank Thompson
$ 73.5
Derek Rodriguez
$103.4
Ken Griffin
$ 85.7
(a = .35)
(a = .50)
584
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

c. Suppose that the general manager asked the superscout to determine the probabilities of each
state of nature for each individual pitcher, and the results were as follows:
Physical Condition
Pitcher
No injuries
Normal
Excessive Injuries
Jose Diaz
0.30
0.45
0.25
Jerry Damon
0.13
0.47
0.40
Frank Thompson
0.45
0.35
0.20
Derek Rodriguez
0.50
0.40
0.10
Ken Griffin
0.15
0.60
0.25
Determine the expected number of wins for each pitcher, and combined with the contract price
in part b, indicate which pitcher you would recommend signing.
38. Construct a decision tree for the decision situation described in Problem 25 and indicate the best
decision.
39. Given the following sequential decision tree, determine which is the optimal investment, A or B:
PROBLEMS
585
4
7
2
1
5
8
6
9
3
.40
$300,000
$60,000
$45,000
$75,000
.60
(–$20,000)
.30
.70
.20
$200,000
$70,000
$60,000
.80
(–$17,000)
.35
$105,000
$40,000
$55,000
$80,000
.65
(–$9,000)
.55
.30
.15
Investment A
(–$70,000)
Investment B
(–$50,000)
40. The management of First American Bank was concerned about the potential loss that might
occur in the event of a physical catastrophe such as a power failure or a fire. The bank esti-
mated that the loss from one of these incidents could be as much as $100 million, including
losses due to interrupted service and customer relations. One project the bank is considering
is the installation of an emergency power generator at its operations headquarters. The cost
of the emergency generator is $800,000, and if it is installed, no losses from this type of inci-
dent will be incurred. However, if the generator is not installed, there is a 10% chance that a
power outage will occur during the next year. If there is an outage, there is a .05 probability
that the resulting losses will be very large, or approximately $80 million in lost earnings.
Alternatively, it is estimated that there is a .95 probability of only slight losses of around
$1 million. Using decision tree analysis, determine whether the bank should install the new
power generator.

586
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
41. The Americo Oil Company is considering making a bid for a shale oil development contract to
be awarded by the federal government. The company has decided to bid $112 million. The com-
pany estimates that it has a 60% chance of winning the contract with this bid. If the firm wins
the contract, it can choose one of three methods for getting the oil from the shale. It can develop
a new method for oil extraction, use an existing (inefficient) process, or subcontract the process-
ing to a number of smaller companies once the shale has been excavated. The results from these
alternatives are as follows:
Develop new process:
Outcomes
Probability
Profit ($1,000,000s)
Great success
.30
$ 600
Moderate success
.60
300
Failure
.10
-100
Use present process:
Outcomes
Probability
Profit ($1,000,000s)
Great success
.50
$ 300
Moderate success
.30
200
Failure
.20
-40
Subcontract:
Outcome
Probability
Profit ($1,000,000s)
Moderate success
1.00
250
The cost of preparing the contract proposal is $2 million. If the company does not make a bid,
it will invest in an alternative venture with a guaranteed profit of $30 million. Construct a se-
quential decision tree for this decision situation and determine whether the company should
make a bid.
42. The machine shop owner in Problem 15 is considering hiring a military consultant to ascertain
whether the shop will get the government contract. The consultant is a former military officer
who uses various personal contacts to find out such information. By talking to other shop own-
ers who have hired the consultant, the owner has estimated a .70 probability that the consultant
would present a favorable report, given that the contract is awarded to the shop, and a .80 proba-
bility that the consultant would present an unfavorable report, given that the contract is not
awarded. Using decision tree analysis, determine the decision strategy the owner should follow,
the expected value of this strategy, and the maximum fee the owner should pay the consultant.
43. The Miramar Company in Problem 18 is considering contracting with a market research firm to do
a survey to determine future market conditions. The results of the survey will indicate either posi-
tive or negative market conditions. There is a .60 probability of a positive report, given favorable
conditions; a .30 probability of a positive report, given stable conditions; and a .10 probability of a
positive report, given unfavorable conditions. There is a .90 probability of a negative report, given
unfavorable conditions; a .70 probability, given stable conditions; and a .40 probability, given
favorable conditions. Using decision tree analysis and posterior probability tables, determine the
decision strategy the company should follow, the expected value of the strategy, and the maximum
amount the company should pay the market research firm for the survey results.
44. The Friendlys in Problem 25 are considering hiring a petroleum analyst to determine the future
availability of gasoline. The analyst will report that either a shortage or a surplus will occur. The

probability that the analyst will indicate a shortage, given that a shortage actually occurs is .90;
the probability that the analyst will indicate a surplus, given that a surplus actually occurs is .70.
a. Determine the decision strategy the Friendlys should follow, the expected value of this strat-
egy, and the maximum amount the Friendlys should pay for the analyst’s services.
b. Compute the efficiency of the sample information for the Friendly car dealership.
45. Jeffrey Mogul is a Hollywood film producer, and he is currently evaluating a script by a new
screenwriter and director, Betty Jo Thurston. Jeffrey knows that the probability of a film by a
new director being a success is about .10 and that the probability it will flop is .90. The studio
accounting department estimates that if this film is a hit, it will make $25 million in profit,
whereas if it is a box office failure, it will lose $8 million. Jeffrey would like to hire noted film
critic Dick Roper to read the script and assess its chances of success. Roper is generally able to
correctly predict a successful film 70% of the time and correctly predict an unsuccessful film
80% of the time. Roper wants a fee of $1 million. Determine whether Roper should be hired, the
strategy Mogul should follow if Roper is hired, and the expected value.
46. Tech is playing State in the last conference game of the season. Tech is trailing State 21 to 14,
with 7 seconds left in the game, when Tech scores a touchdown. Still trailing 21 to 20, Tech can
either go for 2 points and win or go for 1 point to send the game into overtime. The conference
championship will be determined by the outcome of this game. If Tech wins, it will go to the
Sugar Bowl, with a payoff of $7.2 million; if it loses, it will go to the Gator Bowl, with a payoff
of $1.7 million. If Tech goes for 2 points, there is a 33% chance it will be successful and win
(and a 67% chance it will fail and lose). If it goes for 1 point, there is a 0.98 probability of suc-
cess and a tie and a 0.02 probability of failure. If the teams tie, they will play overtime, during
which Tech believes it has only a 20% chance of winning because of fatigue.
a. Use decision tree analysis to determine whether Tech should go for 1 or 2 points.
b. What would Tech’s probability of winning the game in overtime have to be to make Tech in-
different to going for either 1 or 2 points?
47. Jay Seago is suing the manufacturer of his car for $3.5 million because of a defect that he be-
lieves caused him to have an accident. The accident kept him out of work for a year. The com-
pany has offered him a settlement of $700,000, of which Jay would receive $600,000 after
attorneys’ fees. His attorney has advised him that he has a 50% chance of winning his case. If he
loses, he will incur attorneys’ fees and court costs of $75,000. If he wins, he is not guaranteed
his full requested settlement. His attorney believes that there is a 50% chance he could receive
the full settlement, in which case Jay would realize $2 million after his attorney takes her cut,
and a 50% chance that the jury will award him a lesser amount of $1 million, of which Jay
would get $500,000.
Using decision tree analysis, decide whether Jay should proceed with his lawsuit against the
manufacturer.
48. Tech has three health care plans for its faculty and staff to choose from, as follows:
Plan 1—monthly cost of $32, with a $500 deductible; the participants pay the first $500 of med-
ical costs for the year; the insurer pays 90% of all remaining expenses.
Plan 2—monthly cost of $5 but a deductible of $1,200, with the insurer paying 90% of medical
expenses after the insurer pays the first $1,200 in a year.
Plan 3—monthly cost of $24, with no deductible; the participants pay 30% of all expenses, with
the remainder paid by the insurer.
PROBLEMS
587

Tracy McCoy, an administrative assistant in the management science department, estimates that
her annual medical expenses are defined by the following probability distribution:
Annual Medical Expenses
Probability
$     100
.15
500
.30
1,500
.35
3,000
.10
5,000
.05
10,000
.05
Determine which medical plan Tracy should select.
49. The Valley Wine Company purchases grapes from one of two nearby growers each season to pro-
duce a particular red wine. It purchases enough grapes to produce 3,000 bottles of the wine. Each
grower supplies a certain portion of poor-quality grapes, resulting in a percentage of bottles being
used as fillers for cheaper table wines, according to the following probability distribution:
Probability of Percentage Defective
Defective (%)
Grower A
Grower B
2
.15
.30
4
.20
.30
6
.25
.20
8
.30
.10
10
.10
.10
The two growers charge different prices for their grapes and, because of differences in taste,
the company charges different prices for its wine, depending on which grapes it uses. Follow-
ing is the annual profit from the wine produced from each grower’s grapes for each percentage
defective:
Profit
Defective (%)
Grower A
Grower B
2
$44,200
$42,600
4
40,200
40,300
6
36,200
38,000
8
32,200
35,700
10
28,200
33,400
Use decision tree analysis to determine from which grower the company should purchase
grapes.
50. Kroft Food Products is attempting to decide whether it should introduce a new line of salad
dressings called Special Choices. The company can test market the salad dressings in selected
geographic areas or bypass the test market and introduce the product nationally. The cost of the
test market is $150,000. If the company conducts the test market, it must wait to see the results
before deciding whether to introduce the salad dressings nationally. The probability of a positive
test market result is estimated to be 0.6. Alternatively, the company can decide not to conduct
588
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS

the test market and go ahead and make the decision to introduce the dressings or not. If the salad
dressings are introduced nationally and are a success, the company estimates that it will realize
an annual profit of $1.6 million, whereas if the dressings fail, it will incur a loss of $700,000.
The company believes the probability of success for the salad dressings is 0.50 if they are intro-
duced without the test market. If the company does conduct the test market and it is positive,
then the probability of successfully introducing the salad dressings increases to 0.8. If the test
market is negative and the company introduces the salad dressings anyway, the probability of
success drops to 0.30.
Using decision tree analysis, determine whether the company should conduct the test market.
51. In Problem 50, determine the expected value of sample information (EVSI) (i.e., the test market
value) and the expected value of perfect information (EVPI).
52. Ellie Daniels has $200,000 and is considering three mutual funds for investment—a global fund,
an index fund, and an Internet stock fund. During the first year of investment, Ellie estimates
that there is a .70 probability that the market will go up and a .30 probability that the market will
go down. Following are the returns on her $200,000 investment at the end of the year under each
market condition:
Market Conditions
Fund
Up
Down
Global
$25,000
$ -8,000
Index
35,000
5,000
Internet
60,000
-35,000
At the end of the first year, Ellie will either reinvest the entire amount plus the return or sell
and take the profit or loss. If she reinvests, she estimates that there is a .60 probability the market
will go up and a .40 probability the market will go down. If Ellie reinvests in the global fund after
it has gone up, her return on her initial $200,000 investment plus her $25,000 return after 1 year
will be $45,000. If the market goes down, her loss will be $15,000. If she reinvests after the mar-
ket has gone down, her return will be $34,000, and her loss will be $17,000. If Ellie reinvests in
the index fund after the market has gone up, after 2 years her return will be $65,000 if the market
continues upward, but only $5,000 if the market goes down. Her return will be $55,000 if she
reinvests and the market reverses itself and goes up after initially going down, and it will be
$5,000 if the market continues to go down. If Ellie invests in the Internet fund, she will make
$60,000 if the market goes up, but she will lose $35,000 if it goes down. If she reinvests as the
market continues upward, she will make an additional $100,000; but if the market reverses and
goes down, she will lose $70,000. If she reinvests after the market has initially gone down, she
will make $65,000, but if the market continues to go down, she will lose an additional $75,000.
Using decision tree analysis, determine which fund Ellie should invest in and its expected value.
53. Blue Ridge Power and Light is an electric utility company with a large fleet of vehicles, includ-
ing automobiles, light trucks, and construction equipment. The company is evaluating four alter-
native strategies for maintaining its vehicles at the lowest cost: (1) do no preventive maintenance
at all and repair vehicle components when they fail; (2) take oil samples at regular intervals and
perform whatever preventive maintenance is indicated by the oil analysis; (3) change the vehicle
oil on a regular basis and perform repairs when needed; (4) change the oil at regular intervals,
take oil samples regularly, and perform maintenance repairs as indicated by the sample analysis.
For autos and light trucks, strategy 1 (no preventive maintenance) costs nothing to implement
and results in two possible outcomes: There is a .10 probability that a defective component will
PROBLEMS
589

occur, requiring emergency maintenance at a cost of $1,200, or there is a .90 probability that no
defects will occur and no maintenance will be necessary.
Strategy 2 (take oil samples) costs $20 to implement (i.e., take a sample), and there is a .10
probability that there will be a defective part and .90 probability that there will not be a de-
fect. If there is actually a defective part, there is a .70 probability that the sample will correctly
identify it, resulting in preventive maintenance at a cost of $500. However, there is a .30 prob-
ability that the sample will not identify the defect and indicate that everything is okay, result-
ing in emergency maintenance later at a cost of $1,200. On the other hand, if there are actually
no defects, there is a .20 probability that the sample will erroneously indicate that there is
a defect, resulting in unnecessary maintenance at a cost of $250. There is an .80 probability
that the sample will correctly indicate that there are no defects, resulting in no maintenance
and no costs.
Strategy 3 (changing the oil regularly) costs $14.80 to implement and has two outcomes: a
.04 probability of a defective component, which will require emergency maintenance at a cost of
$1,200, and a .96 probability that no defects will occur, resulting in no maintenance and no cost.
Strategy 4 (changing the oil and sampling) costs $34.80 to implement and results in the same
probabilities of defects and no defects as strategy 3. If there is a defective component, there is a
.70 probability that the sample will detect it and $500 in preventive maintenance costs will be
incurred. Alternatively, there is a .30 probability that the sample will not detect the defect,
resulting in emergency maintenance at a cost of $1,200. If there is no defect, there is a .20 prob-
ability that the sample will indicate that there is a defect, resulting in an unnecessary mainte-
nance cost of $250, and there is an .80 probability that the sample will correctly indicate no
defects, resulting in no cost.
Develop a decision strategy for Blue Ridge Power and Light and indicate the expected value of
this strategy.1
54. In Problem 53, the decision analysis is for automobiles and light trucks. Blue Ridge Power
and Light would like to reformulate the problem for its heavy construction equipment. Emer-
gency maintenance is much more expensive for heavy equipment, costing $15,000. Required
preventive maintenance costs $2,000, and unnecessary maintenance costs $1,200. The cost of
an oil change is $100, and the cost of taking an oil sample and analyzing it is $30. All the
probabilities remain the same. Determine the strategy Blue Ridge Power and Light should use
for its heavy equipment.
55. In Problem 14, the management of the Oakland Bombers is considering hiring superscout Jerry
McGuire to evaluate the team’s chances for the coming season. McGuire will evaluate the team,
assuming that it will sign one of the four free agents. The team’s management has determined
the probability that the team will have a losing record with any of the free agents to be .21 by
averaging the probabilities of losing for the four free agents in Problem 33. The probability that
the team will have a competitive season but not make the playoffs is developed similarly, and it
is .35. The probability that the team will make the playoffs is .44. The probability that McGuire
will correctly predict that the team will have a losing season is .75, whereas the probability that
he will predict a competitive season, given that it has a losing season, is .15, and the probability
that he will incorrectly predict a playoff season, given that the team has a losing season, is .10.
The probability that he will successfully predict a competitive season is .80, whereas the proba-
bility that he will incorrectly predict a losing season, given that the team is competitive, is .10,
and the probability that he will incorrectly predict a playoff season, given the team has a com-
petitive season, is .10. The probability that he will correctly predict a playoff season is .85,
whereas the probability that he will incorrectly predict a losing season, given that the team
590
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
1This problem is based on J. Mellichamp, D. Miller, and O.-J. Kwon, “The Southern Company Uses a Probability
Model for Cost Justification of Oil Sample Analysis,” Interfaces 23, no. 3 (May–June 1993): 118–24.

makes the playoffs, is .05, and the probability that he will predict a competitive season, given
the team makes the playoffs, is .10. Using decision tree analysis and posterior probabilities, de-
termine the decision strategy the team should follow, the expected value of the strategy, and the
maximum amount the team should pay for Jerry McGuire’s predictions.
56. The Place-Plus real estate development firm in Problem 24 is dissatisfied with the economist’s
estimate of the probabilities of future interest rate movement, so it is considering having a finan-
cial consulting firm provide a report on future interest rates. The consulting firm is able to cite a
track record which shows that 80% of the time when interest rates declined, it had predicted they
would, whereas 10% of the time when interest rates declined, the firm had predicted they would
remain stable and 10% of the time it had predicted they would increase. The firm has been cor-
rect 70% of the time when rates have remained stable, whereas 10% of the time it has incorrectly
predicted that rates would decrease, and 20% of the time it has incorrectly predicted that rates
would increase. The firm has correctly predicted that interest rates would increase 90% of the
time and incorrectly predicted rates would decrease 2% and remain stable 8% of the time. As-
suming that the consulting firm could supply an accurate report, determine how much Place-
Plus should be willing to pay the consulting firm and how efficient the information will be.
57. A young couple has $5,000 to invest in either savings bonds or a real estate deal. The expected
return on each investment, given good and bad economic conditions, is shown in the following
payoff table:
Economic Conditions
Good 
Bad 
Investment
.6
.4
Savings bonds
$ 1,000
$ 1,000
Real estate
10,000
-2,000
The expected value of investing in savings bonds is $1,000, and the expected value of the real
estate investment is $5,200. However, the couple decides to invest in savings bonds. Explain the
couple’s decision in terms of the utility they might associate with each investment.
58. Annie Hays recently sold a condominium she had bought and lived in while she was a college
student over 15 years ago. She received $150,000 for the condominium and is considering two
investment alternatives. Annie can invest the entire amount in a bank money market for 1 year at
8% interest and thus receive $162,000 at the end of a year, or she can invest in a speculative oil
exploration project with a 50–50 chance of doubling her investment at the end of the year or
losing everything.
a. Determine which alternative Annie should invest in, according to the expected value crite-
rion, and indicate whether that is the alternative you would also select.
b. Suppose Annie determined that the probability of success for the oil exploration investment
would have to be .80 before she would be indifferent between the two alternatives. In other
words, if the probability of success for the oil exploration investment was less than .80, An-
nie would invest in the money market, but if the probability of success was greater than .80,
she would invest in the oil exploration. In this case, .80 is the utility value of the $162,000
safe return. Determine the preferred alternative, according to the expected utility value.
59. Labran Jones has played for the Cleveland professional basketball team for the past eight sea-
sons and has established himself as one of the top players in the league. He has recently become
a free agent, meaning he can sign a new contract with Cleveland or sign a contract with any
other team in the league. Cleveland has never seriously contended for a championship, and
Labran is strongly considering moving to Miami, where he would have a better chance at a
PROBLEMS
591

championship, or to New York, which is a bigger media market and would give him more finan-
cial opportunities and endorsements. All three teams are offering Labran a 6-year contract, but
because of a salary cap rule, Miami can only offer Labran $110 million, while New York is of-
fering $120 million and Cleveland $125 million. Odds makers give Miami a 70% chance of win-
ning the championship with Labran, while they give Cleveland a 40% chance and New York
only a 10% chance. If Labran wins a championship, he will almost certainly finish his career
with the team he wins it with. If that team is New York, he will sign a new contract after 6 years
that with endorsements and financial deals is estimated to be worth around $500 million by the
end of his career. However, if New York doesn’t win a championship during his 6 years, he will
either stay with New York for a career total of $200 million, or sign a new 4-year contract with a
new team. If he signs with a new team, he assumes he will sign with a team good enough to give
him a 50–50 chance of winning a championship but, because of his likely diminished abilities,
he will have eventual earnings of only around $120 million if he wins a championship with his
new team. However, if he doesn’t win a championship, his eventual earnings would only be
about $65 million. If he signs with Miami and Miami wins the championship, he will stay with
the team and have eventual long-term earnings of $375 million, but if Miami doesn’t win a
championship, he will either stay with Miami for earnings of about $90 million or sign with a
new team, with the same expected outcomes if he signs with a new team after playing in New
York. If he re-signs with Cleveland and Cleveland wins a championship, his eventual earnings
are expected to be $300 million by the end of his playing career, but if Cleveland doesn’t win, he
can stay with the team and expect eventual possible earnings of around $145 million or sign with
a new team with the same expected outcomes if he signs with a new team after playing in New
York and Miami. Using decision tree analysis, determine which team Labran should sign a new
contract with and the expected value of his decision.
592
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Case Problem
Steeley Associates Versus Concord Falls
Steeley Associates, Inc., a property development firm,
purchased an old house near the town square in Concord
Falls, where State University is located. The old house
was built in the mid-1800s, and Steeley Associates re-
stored it. For almost a decade, Steeley has leased it to the
university for academic office space. The house is located
on a wide lawn and has become a town landmark.
However, in 2008, the lease with the university ex-
pired, and Steeley Associates decided to build high-density
student apartments on the site, using all the open space.
The community was outraged and objected to the town
council. The legal counsel for the town spoke with a repre-
sentative from Steeley and hinted that if Steeley requested
a permit, the town would probably reject it. Steeley had re-
viewed the town building code and felt confident that its
plan was within the guidelines, but that did not necessarily
mean that it could win a lawsuit against the town to force
the town to grant a permit.
The principals at Steeley Associates held a series of
meetings to review their alternatives. They decided that
they had three options: They could request the permit, they
could sell the property, or they could request a permit for a
low-density office building, which the town had indicated
it would not fight. Regarding the last two options, if
Steeley sells the house and property, it thinks it can get
$900,000. If it builds a new office building, its return will
depend on town business growth in the future. It feels that
there is a 70% chance of future growth, in which case
Steeley will see a return of $1.3 million (over a 10-year
planning horizon); if no growth (or erosion) occurs, it will
make only $200,000.
If Steeley requests a permit for the apartments, a host
of good and bad outcomes are possible. The immediate
good outcome is approval of its permit, which it estimates
will result in a return of $3 million. However, Steeley gives
that result only a 10% chance that it will occur. Alterna-
tively, Steeley thinks there is a 90% chance that the town
will reject its application, which will result in another set
of decisions.

CASE PROBLEM
593
Steeley can sell the property at that point. However, the
rejection of the permit will undoubtedly decrease the value
to potential buyers, and Steeley estimates that it will get
only $700,000. Alternatively, it can construct the office
building and face the same potential outcomes it did ear-
lier, namely, a 30% chance of no town growth and a
$200,000 return or a 70% chance of growth with a return
of $1.3 million. A third option is to sue the town. On the
surface, Steeley’s case looks good, but the town building
code is vague, and a sympathetic judge could throw out its
suit. Whether or not it wins, Steeley estimates its possible
legal fees to be $300,000, and it feels it has only a 40%
chance of winning. However, if Steeley does win, it esti-
mates that the award will be approximately $1 million, and
it will also get its $3 million return for building the apart-
ments. Steeley also estimates that there is a 10% chance
that the suit could linger on in the courts for such a long
time that any future return would be negated during its
planning horizon, and it would incur an additional
$200,000 in legal fees.
If Steeley loses the suit, it will then be faced with the
same options of selling the property or constructing an of-
fice building. However, if the suit is carried this far into the
future, it feels that the selling price it can ask will be some-
what dependent on the town’s growth prospects at that
time, which it feels it can estimate at only 50–50. If the
town is in a growth mode that far in the future, Steeley
thinks that $900,000 is a conservative estimate of the
potential sale price, whereas if the town is not growing, it
thinks $500,000 is a more likely estimate. Finally, if
Steeley constructs the office building, it feels that the
chance of town growth is 50%, in which case the return
will be only $1.2 million. If no growth occurs, it conserva-
tively estimates only a $100,000 return.
A. Perform a decision tree analysis of Steeley Associ-
ates’s decision situation, using expected value, and
indicate the appropriate decision with these criteria.
B. Indicate the decision you would make and explain
your reasons.
Case Problem
Transformer Replacement at Mountain
States Electric Service
Mountain States Electric Service is an electrical utility
company serving several states in the Rocky Mountains
region. It is considering replacing some of its equipment
at a generating substation and is attempting to decide
whether it should replace an older, existing PCB trans-
former. (PCB is a toxic chemical known formally as poly-
chlorinated biphenyl.) Even though the PCB generator
meets all current regulations, if an incident occurred, such
as a fire, and PCB contamination caused harm either to
neighboring businesses or farms or to the environment,
the company would be liable for damages. Recent court
cases have shown that simply meeting utility regulations
does not relieve a utility of liability if an incident causes
harm to others. Also, courts have been awarding large
damages to individuals and businesses harmed by haz-
ardous incidents.
If the utility replaces the PCB transformer, no PCB in-
cidents will occur, and the only cost will be the cost of the
transformer, $85,000. Alternatively, if the company de-
cides to keep the existing PCB transformer, then manage-
ment estimates that there is a 50–50 chance of there being
a high likelihood of an incident or a low likelihood of an
incident. For the case in which there is a high likelihood
that an incident will occur, there is a .004 probability that
a fire will occur sometime during the remaining life of the
transformer and a .996 probability that no fire will occur.
If a fire occurs, there is a .20 probability that it will be bad
and the utility will incur a very high cost of approximately
$90 million for the cleanup, whereas there is an .80 prob-
ability that the fire will be minor and cleanup can be ac-
complished at a low cost of approximately $8 million. If
no fire occurs, no cleanup costs will occur. For the case in
which there is a low likelihood that an incident will occur,
there is a .001 probability that a fire will occur during the
life of the existing transformer and a .999 probability that
a fire will not occur. If a fire does occur, the same proba-
bilities exist for the incidence of high and low cleanup
costs, as well as the same cleanup costs, as indicated for
the previous case. Similarly, if no fire occurs, there is no
cleanup cost.
Perform a decision tree analysis of this problem for
Mountain States Electric Service and indicate the recom-
mended solution. Is this the decision you believe the com-
pany should make? Explain your reasons.
This case is based on W. Balson, J. Welsh, and D. Wilson, “Using 
Decision Analysis and Risk Analysis to Manage Utility Environmental
Risk,” Interfaces 22, no. 6 (November–December 1992): 126–39.

594
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Case Problem
The Carolina Cougars
The Carolina Cougars is a major league baseball expan-
sion team beginning its third year of operation. The team
had losing records in each of its first 2 years and finished
near the bottom of its division. However, the team was
young and generally competitive. The team’s general man-
ager, Frank Lane, and manager, Biff Diamond, believe that
with a few additional good players, the Cougars can become
a contender for the division title and perhaps even for the
pennant. They have prepared several proposals for free-
agent acquisitions to present to the team’s owner, Bruce
Wayne.
Under one proposal the team would sign several good
available free agents, including two pitchers, a good fielding
shortstop, and two power-hitting outfielders for $52 million
in bonuses and annual salary. The second proposal is less
ambitious, costing $20 million to sign a relief pitcher, a
solid, good-hitting infielder, and one power-hitting out-
fielder. The final proposal would be to stand pat with the
current team and continue to develop.
General Manager Lane wants to lay out a possible sea-
son scenario for the owner so he can assess the long-run
ramifications of each decision strategy. Because the only
thing the owner understands is money, Frank wants this
analysis to be quantitative, indicating the money to be
made or lost from each strategy. To help develop this
analysis, Frank has hired his kids, Penny and Nathan, both
management science graduates from Tech.
Penny and Nathan analyzed league data for the previ-
ous five seasons for attendance trends, logo sales (i.e.,
clothing, souvenirs, hats, etc.), player sales and trades, and
revenues. In addition, they interviewed several other own-
ers, general managers, and league officials. They also ana-
lyzed the free agents that the team was considering
signing.
Based on their analysis, Penny and Nathan feel that if
the Cougars do not invest in any free agents, the team will
have a 25% chance of contending for the division title and
a 75% chance of being out of contention most of the sea-
son. If the team is a contender, there is a .70 probability that
attendance will increase as the season progresses and the
team will have high attendance levels (between 1.5 million
and 2.0 million) with profits of $170 million from ticket
sales, concessions, advertising sales, TV and radio sales,
and logo sales. They estimate a .25 probability that the
team’s attendance will be mediocre (between 1.0 million
and 1.5 million) with profits of $115 million and a .05 prob-
ability that the team will suffer low attendance (less than
1.0 million) with profit of $90 million. If the team is not
a contender, Penny and Nathan estimate that there is
.05 probability of high attendance with profits of $95 mil-
lion, a .20 probability of medium attendance with profits of
$55 million, and a .75 probability of low attendance with
profits of $30 million.
If the team marginally invests in free agents at a cost of
$20 million, there is a 50–50 chance it will be a contender.
If it is a contender, then later in the season it can either stand
pat with its existing roster or buy or trade for players that
could improve the team’s chances of winning the division.
If the team stands pat, there is a .75 probability that atten-
dance will be high and profits will be $195 million. There is
a .20 probability that attendance will be mediocre with prof-
its of $160 million and a .05 probability of low attendance
and profits of $120 million. Alternatively, if the team de-
cides to buy or trade for players, it will cost $8 million,
and the probability of high attendance with profits of
$200 million will be .80. The probability of mediocre at-
tendance with $170 million in profits will be .15, and
there will be a .05 probability of low attendance, with
profits of $125 million.
If the team is not in contention, then it will either
stand pat or sell some of its players, earning approxi-
mately $8 million in profit. If the team stands pat, there
is a .12 probability of high attendance, with profits of
$110 million; a .28 probability of mediocre attendance,
with profits of $65 million; and a .60 probability of low
attendance, with profits of $40 million. If the team sells
players, the fans will likely lose interest at an even faster
rate, and the probability of high attendance with profits of
$100 million will drop to .08, the probability of mediocre
attendance with profits of $60 million will be .22, and the
probability of low attendance with profits of $35 million
will be .70.
The most ambitious free-agent strategy will increase
the team’s chances of being a contender to 65%. This strat-
egy will also excite the fans most during the off-season and

CASE PROBLEM
595
boost ticket sales and advertising and logo sales early in
the year. If the team does contend for the division title,
then later in the season it will have to decide whether to
invest in more players. If the Cougars stand pat, the proba-
bility of high attendance with profits of $210 million will
be .80, the probability of mediocre attendance with profits
of $170 million will be .15, and the probability of low
attendance with profits of $125 million will be .05. If
the team buys players at a cost of $10 million, then the
probability of having high attendance with profits of
$220 million will increase to .83, the probability of
mediocre attendance with profits of $175 million will be
.12, and the probability of low attendance with profits of
$130 million will be .05.
If the team is not in contention, it will either sell some
players’ contracts later in the season for profits of around
$12 million or stand pat. If it stays with its roster, the prob-
ability of high attendance with profits of $110 million will
be .15, the probability of mediocre attendance with profits
of $70 million will be .30, and the probability of low atten-
dance with profits of $50 million will be .55. If the team
sells players late in the season, there will be a .10 probabil-
ity of high attendance with profits of $105 million, a .30
probability of mediocre attendance with profits of $65 mil-
lion, and a .60 probability of low attendance with profits of
$45 million.
Assist Penny and Nathan in determining the best strat-
egy to follow and its expected value.
Case Problem
Evaluating R&D Projects at WestCom 
Systems Products Company
WestCom Systems Products Company develops com-
puter systems and software products for commercial sale.
Each year it considers and evaluates a number of different
R&D projects to undertake. It develops a road map for each
project, in the form of a standardized decision tree that
identifies the different decision points in the R&D process
from the initial decision to invest in a project’s development
through the actual commercialization of the final product.
The first decision point in the R&D process is whether
to fund a proposed project for 1 year. If the decision is no,
then there is no resulting cost; if the decision is yes, then
the project proceeds at an incremental cost to the company.
The company establishes specific short-term, early techni-
cal milestones for its projects after 1 year. If the early mile-
stones are achieved, the project proceeds to the next phase
of project development; if the milestones are not achieved,
the project is abandoned. In its planning process, the com-
pany develops probability estimates of achieving and not
achieving the early milestones. If the early milestones are
achieved, the project is funded for further development
during an extended time frame specific to a project. At the
end of this time frame, a project is evaluated according to
a second set of (later) technical milestones. Again, the
company attaches probability estimates for achieving and
not achieving these later milestones. If the later milestones
are not achieved, the project is abandoned.
If the later milestones are achieved, technical uncertain-
ties and problems have been overcome, and the company next
assesses the project’s ability to meet its strategic business ob-
jectives. At this stage, the company wants to know if the even-
tual product coincides with the company’s competencies and
whether there appears to be an eventual, clear market for the
product. It invests in a product “prelaunch” to ascertain the
answers to these questions. The outcomes of the prelaunch are
that either there is a strategic fit or there is not, and the com-
pany assigns probability estimates to each of these two possi-
ble outcomes. If there is not a strategic fit at this point, the
project is abandoned and the company loses its investment in
the prelaunch process. If it is determined that there is a strate-
gic fit, then three possible decisions result: (1) The company
can invest in the product’s launch, and a successful or unsuc-
cessful outcome will result, each with an estimated probabil-
ity of occurrence; (2) the company can delay the product’s
launch and at a later date decide whether to launch or aban-
don; and (3) if it launches later, the outcomes are success or
failure, each with an estimated probability of occurrence.

596
CHAPTER 12
DECISION ANALYSIS
Project
Decision Outcomes/Event
1
2
3
4
5
Fund—1 year
$ 
200,000
$
350,000
$
170,000
$
230,000
$ 400,000
P(Early milestones—yes)
.70
.67
.82
.60
.75
P(Early milestones—no)
.30
.33
.18
.40
.25
Long-term funding
$
650,000
780,000
450,000
300,000
450,000
P(Late milestones—yes)
.60
.56
.65
.70
.72
P(Late milestones—no)
.40
.44
.35
.30
.28
Prelaunch funding
$ 
300,000
450,000
400,000
500,000
270,000
P(Strategic fit—yes)
.80
.75
.83
.67
.65
P(Strategic fit—no)
.20
.25
.17
.33
.35
P(Invest—success)
.60
.65
.70
.75
.80
P(Invest—failure)
.40
.35
.30
.25
.20
P(Delay—success)
.80
.70
.65
.80
.85
P(Delay—failure)
.20
.30
.35
.20
.15
Invest—success
$ 7,300,000
8,000,000
4,500,000
5,200,000
3,800,000
Invest—failure
-2,000,000
-3,500,000
-1,500,000
-2,100,000
-900,000
Delay—success
4,500,000
6,000,000
3,300,000
2,500,000
2,700,000
Delay—failure
-1,300,000
-4,000,000
-800,000
-1,100,000
-900,000
Determine the expected value for each project and
then rank the projects accordingly for the company to
consider.
Also, if the product launch is delayed, there is always a likeli-
hood that the technology will become obsolete or dated in the
near future, which tends to reduce the expected return.
The following table provides the various costs, event
probabilities, and investment outcomes for five projects the
company is considering:
This case is based on R. K. Perdue, W. J. McAllister, P. V. King,
and B. G. Berkey, “Valuation of R and D Projects Using Options Pricing
and Decision Analysis Models,” Interfaces 29, no. 6 (November–
December 1999): 57–74.

CHAPTER
13
Queuing Analysis
597

Waiting in queues—waiting lines—is one of the most common occurrences in everyone’s life.
Anyone who has gone shopping or to a movie has experienced the inconvenience of waiting in
line to make purchases or buy a ticket. Not only do people spend a significant portion of their
time waiting in lines, but products queue up in production plants, machinery waits in line to be
serviced, planes wait to take off and land, and so on. Because time is a valuable resource, the re-
duction of waiting time is an important topic of analysis.
The improvement of service with respect to waiting time has also become more impor-
tant in recent years because of the increased emphasis on quality, especially in service-related
operations. When customers go to a bank to take out a loan, cash a check, or make a deposit;
take their car to a dealer for service or repair; or shop at the grocery store; they increasingly
equate quality service with rapid service. Aware of this, more and more companies are focus-
ing on reducing waiting time as an important component of quality improvement. In general,
companies are able to reduce waiting time and provide faster service by increasing their serv-
ice capacity, which usually means adding more servers; such as more tellers at a bank, more
mechanics at a car dealership, or more checkout clerks at a grocery store. However, increas-
ing service capacity in this manner has a monetary cost, and therein lies the basis of waiting
line analysis: the trade-off between the cost of improved service and the cost of making 
customers wait.
Like decision analysis, queuing analysis is a probabilistic form of analysis, not a deter-
ministic technique. Thus, the results of queuing analysis, referred to as operating characteris-
tics, are probabilistic. These operating statistics (such as the average time a person must wait in
line to be served) are used by the manager of the operation containing the queue to make 
decisions.
A number of different queuing models exist to deal with different queuing systems. We will
eventually discuss many of these queuing variations, but we will concentrate on two of the most
common types of systems—the single-server system and the multiple-server system.
Elements of Waiting Line Analysis
Waiting lines form because people or things arrive at the servicing function, or server, faster
than they can be served. However, this does not mean that the service operation is under-
staffed or does not have the overall capacity to handle the influx of customers. In fact, most
businesses and organizations have sufficient serving capacity available to handle their cus-
tomers in the long run. Waiting lines result because customers do not arrive at a constant,
evenly paced rate, nor are they all served in an equal amount of time. Customers arrive at ran-
dom times, and the time required to serve them individually is not the same. Thus, a waiting
line is continually increasing and decreasing in length (and is sometimes empty), and it ap-
proaches an average rate of customer arrivals and an average time to serve the customer in the
long run. For example, the checkout counters at a grocery store may have enough clerks to
serve an average of 100 customers in an hour, and in any particular hour only 60 customers
might arrive. However, at specific points in time during the hour, waiting lines may form be-
cause more than an average number of customers arrive, and they make more than an average
number of purchases.
Decisions about waiting lines and the management of waiting lines are based on these aver-
ages for customer arrivals and service times. They are used in queuing formulas to compute
operating characteristics, such as the average number of customers waiting in line and the aver-
age time a customer must wait in line. Different sets of formulas are used, depending on the type
of waiting line system being investigated. For example, a bank drive-up teller window that has
one bank clerk serving a single line of customers in cars is different from a single line of passen-
gers at an airport ticket counter that is served by three or four airline agents. In the next section
we present the different elements and components that make up waiting lines before we look at
queuing formulas in the following sections.
598
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
Operating character-
istics are average val-
ues for characteristics
that describe the per-
formance of a waiting
line system.
Queuing analysis is
the probabilistic
analysis of waiting
lines.
Providing quick 
service is an
important aspect of
quality customer 
service.

The Single-Server Waiting Line System
A single server with a single waiting line is the simplest form of queuing system. As such, it will
be used to demonstrate the fundamentals of a queuing system. As an example of this kind of sys-
tem, consider Fast Shop Market.
Fast Shop Market has one checkout counter and one employee who operates the cash regis-
ter at the checkout counter. The combination of the cash register and the operator is the server
(or service facility) in this queuing system; the customers who line up at the counter to pay for
their selections form the waiting line, or queue. The configuration of this example queuing sys-
tem is shown in Figure 13.1.
The most important factors to consider in analyzing a queuing system such as the one in
Figure 13.1 are the following:
1. The queue discipline (in what order customers are served)
2. The nature of the calling population (where customers come from)
3. The arrival rate (how often customers arrive at the queue)
4. The service rate (how fast customers are served)
We will discuss each of these items as it relates to our example.
THE SINGLE-SERVER WAITING LINE SYSTEM
599
Components of a
waiting line system
include arrivals,
servers, and the wait-
ing line structure.
ICE
ICE
FAS
AST SHO
SHOP
MARKE
MARKET
Drinks
Drinks
Dairy
Dairy
FIGURE 13.1
The Fast Shop
Market
waiting line
system
A queue is a waiting
line.

The Queue Discipline
The queue discipline is the order in which waiting customers are served. Customers at Fast Shop
Market are served on a “first-come, first-served” basis. That is, the first person in line at the check-
out counter is served first. This is the most common type of queue discipline. However, other dis-
ciplines are possible. For example, a machine operator might stack in-process parts beside a
machine so that the last part is on top of the stack and will be selected first. This queue discipline
is referred to as “last-in, first-out.” Or the machine operator might simply reach into a box full of
parts and select one at random. In this case, the queue discipline is random. Often customers are
scheduled for service according to a predetermined appointment, such as patients at a doctor’s or
dentist’s office or diners at a restaurant where reservations are required. In this case, the customers
are taken according to a prearranged schedule, regardless of when they arrive at the facility. One
final example of the many types of queue disciplines is when customers are processed alphabeti-
cally according to their last names, such as at school registration or at job interviews.
The Calling Population
The calling population is the source of the customers to the market, which in this case is as-
sumed to be infinite. In other words, there is such a large number of possible customers in the
area where the store is located that the number of potential customers is assumed to be infinite.
Some queuing systems have finite calling populations. For example, the repair garage of a
trucking firm that has 20 trucks has a finite calling population. The queue is the number of
trucks waiting to be repaired, and the finite calling population is the 20 trucks. However, queu-
ing systems that have an assumed infinite calling population are more common.
The Arrival Rate
The arrival rate is the rate at which customers arrive at the service facility during a specified pe-
riod of time. This rate can be estimated from empirical data derived from studying the system or a
similar system, or it can be an average of these empirical data. For example, if 100 customers ar-
rive at a store checkout counter during a 10-hour day, we could say the arrival rate averages 10 cus-
tomers per hour. However, although we might be able to determine a rate for arrivals by counting
the number of paying customers at the market during a 10-hour day, we would not know exactly
when these customers would arrive on the premises. In other words, it might be that no customers
would arrive during one hour and 20 customers would arrive during another hour. In general, these
arrivals are assumed to be independent of each other and to vary randomly over time.
Given these assumptions, it is further assumed that arrivals at a service facility conform to
some probability distribution. Although arrivals could be described by any distribution, it has
been determined (through years of research and the practical experience of people in the field of
queuing) that the number of arrivals per unit of time at a service facility can frequently be 
defined by a Poisson distribution. (Appendix C at the end of this text contains a more detailed
presentation of the Poisson distribution.)
600
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
The queue discipline
is the order in which
waiting customers are
served.
The calling
population is the
source of customers;
it may be infinite or
finite.
The arrival rate is the
frequency at which
customers arrive at a
waiting line
according to a proba-
bility distribution.
The arrival rate 
is most frequently de-
scribed by a Poisson
distribution.
1l2
The origin of queuing theory is found in telephone net-
work congestion problems and the work of A. K. Erlang. 
Erlang (1878–1929), a Danish mathematician, was scientific
adviser for the Copenhagen Telephone Company. In 1917 
he published a paper outlining the development of tele-
phone traffic theory in which he was able to determine the 
probability of the different numbers of calls waiting and of
the waiting time when the system was in equilibrium. He as-
sumed Poisson inputs (arrivals) from unlimited sources and
exponential holding times. Erlang’s work provided the stimu-
lus and formed the basis for the subsequent development of
queuing theory.
Time Out
for Agner Krarup Erlang

The Service Rate
The service rate is the average number of customers who can be served during a specified pe-
riod of time. For our Fast Shop Market example, 30 customers can be checked out (served) in
1 hour. A service rate is similar to an arrival rate in that it is a random variable. In other words,
such factors as different sizes of customer purchases, the amount of change the cashier must
count out, and different forms of payment alter the number of persons that can be served over
time. Again, it is possible that only 10 customers might be checked out during one hour and
40 customers might be checked out during the following hour.
The description of arrivals in terms of a rate and of service, in terms of time is a convention
that has developed in queuing theory. Like arrival rate, service time is assumed to be defined by
a probability distribution. It has been determined by researchers in the field of queuing that serv-
ice times can frequently be defined by a negative exponential probability distribution. (Appen-
dix C contains a more detailed presentation of the exponential distribution.) However, to analyze
a queuing system, both arrivals and service must be in compatible units of measure. Thus, serv-
ice time must be expressed as a service rate to correspond with an arrival rate.
The Single-Server Model
The Fast Shop Market checkout counter is an example of a single-server queuing system with
the following characteristics:
1. An infinite calling population
2. A first-come, first-served queue discipline
3. Poisson arrival rate
4. Exponential service times
These assumptions have been used to develop a model of a single-server queuing system.
However, the analytical derivation of even this simplest queuing model is relatively complex and
lengthy. Thus, we will refrain from deriving the model in detail and will consider only the re-
sulting queuing formulas. The reader must keep in mind, however, that these formulas are appli-
cable only to queuing systems having the foregoing conditions.
Given that
and that 
(customers are served at a faster rate than they arrive), we can state the follow-
ing formulas for the operating characteristics of a single-server model.
The probability that no customers are in the queuing system (either in the queue or being
served) is
The probability that n customers are in the queuing system is
The average number of customers in the queuing system (i.e., the customers being serviced and
in the waiting line) is
The average number of customers in the waiting line is
Lq =
l2
m1m - l2
L =
l
m - l
Pn = a l
m b
n
	P0 = a l
m b
n
a1 - l
m b
P0 = a1 - l
m b
l 6 m
m = the service rate 1average number served per time period2
l = the arrival rate 1average number of arrivals per time period2
THE SINGLE-SERVER WAITING LINE SYSTEM
601
The service rate is the
average number of
customers who can be
served during a time
period.
The service time can
often be described by
the negative exponen-
tial distribution.
Assumptions of the
basic single-server
model.
mean arrival
rate; 
mean service
rate.
m =
l =
Customers must be
served faster than
they arrive, or an infi-
nitely large queue will
build up.
Basic single-server
queuing formulas.

The average time a customer spends in the total queuing system (i.e., waiting and being 
served) is
The average time a customer spends waiting in the queue to be served is
The probability that the server is busy (i.e., the probability that a customer has to wait), known
as the utilization factor, is
The probability that the server is idle (i.e., the probability that a customer can be served) is
This last term,
is also equal to 
That is, the probability of no customers in the
queuing system is the same as the probability that the server is idle.
We can compute these various operating characteristics for Fast Shop Market by simply sub-
stituting the average arrival and service rates into the foregoing formulas. For example, if
then
= 0.167 hr. 110 min.2 average time in the system per customer
=
1
30 - 24
W =
1
m - l
= 3.2 customers, on average, in the waiting line
=
12422
30130 - 242
Lq =
l2
m1m - l2
= 4 customers, on average, in the queuing system
=
24
30 - 24
L =
l
m - l
= .20 probability of no customers in the system
= 11 - 24/302
P0 = a1 - l
m b
m = 30 customers per hour can be checked out
l = 24 customers per hour arrive at checkout counter
P0.
1 - 1l>m2,
I = 1 - U = 1 - l
m
U = l
m
Wq =
l
m1m - l2
W =
1
m - l = L
l
602
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
A utilization factor is
the probability that a
server is busy.

Several important aspects of both the general model and this particular example will now
be discussed in greater detail.
First, the operating characteristics are averages. Also, they are assumed to be steady-state
averages. Steady state is a constant average level that a system realizes after a period of time.
For a queuing system, the steady state is represented by the average operating statistics, also de-
termined over a period of time.
Related to this condition is the fact that the utilization factor, U, must be less than one:
or
and
In other words, the ratio of the arrival rate to the service rate must be less than one, which
also means the service rate must be greater than the arrival rate if this model is to be used. The
server must be able to serve customers faster than they come into the store in the long run, or the
waiting line will grow to an infinite size, and the system will never reach a steady state.
The Effect of Operating Characteristics on Managerial Decisions
Now let us consider the operating characteristics of our example as they relate to management
decisions. The arrival rate of 24 customers per hour means that, on average, a customer arrives
every 2.5 minutes (i.e.,
minutes). This indicates that the store is very busy. Because
of the nature of the store, customers purchase few items and expect quick service. Customers
expect to spend a relatively large amount of time in a supermarket because typically they make
larger purchases. But customers who shop at a convenience market do so, at least in part, be-
cause it is quicker than a supermarket.
Given customers’ expectations, the store’s manager believes that it is unacceptable for a
customer to wait 8 minutes and spend a total of 10 minutes in the queuing system (not including
the actual shopping time). The manager wants to test several alternatives for reducing customer
1/24 * 60
l 6 m
l
m 6 1.0
U 6 1
 a customer can be served
= .20 probability that the server will be idle and
= 1 - .80
I = 1 - U
 the customer must wait
= .80 probability that the server will be busy and
= 24
30
U = l
m
= 0.133 hr. 18 min.2 average time in the waiting line per customer
=
24
30130 - 242
Wq =
l
m1m - l2
THE SINGLE-SERVER WAITING LINE SYSTEM
603
Queuing system oper-
ating statistics are
steady state, or
constant, over time.

waiting time: (1) the addition of another employee to pack up the purchases and (2) the addition
of a new checkout counter.
ALTERNATIVE I: THE ADDITION OF AN EMPLOYEE The addition of an extra employee will cost
the store manager $150 per week. With the help of the national office’s marketing research
group, the manager has determined that for each minute that average customer waiting time is
reduced, the store avoids a loss in sales of $75 per week. (That is, the store loses money when
customers leave prior to shopping because of the long line or when customers do not return.)
If a new employee is hired, customers can be served in less time. In other words, the service rate,
which is the number of customers served per time period, will increase. The previous service rate was
The addition of a new employee will increase the service rate to
It will be assumed that the arrival rate will remain the same (
per hour) because the
increased service rate will not increase arrivals but instead will minimize the loss of customers.
(However, it is not illogical to assume that an increase in service might increase arrivals in the
long run.)
Given the new and 
values, the operating characteristics can be recomputed as follows:
Remember that these operating characteristics are averages that result over a period of time;
they are not absolutes. In other words, customers who arrive at the Fast Shop Market checkout
counter will not find 0.90 customer in line. There could be no customers, or one, two, or three
customers, for example. The value 0.90 is simply an average that occurs over time, as do the
other operating characteristics.
= .40 probability that the server will be idle and a customer can be served
I = 1 - U = 1 - .60
= .60 probability that the customer must wait
U = l
m = 24
40
= 0.038 hr. 12.25 min.2 average time in the waiting line per customer
Wq =
l
m1m - l2 =
24
401162
= 0.063 hr. 13.75 min.2 average time in the system per customer
W =
1
m - l =
1
40 - 24
= 0.90 customer, on average, in the waiting line
Lq =
l2
m1m - l2 =
12422
401162
= 1.5 customers, or average, in the queuing system
L =
l
m - l =
24
40 - 24
= .40 probability of no customers in the system
P0 = a1 - l
m b = a1 - 24
40 b
m
l
l = 24
m = 40 customers served per hour
m = 30 customers served per hour
604
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

The average waiting time per customer has been reduced from 8 minutes to 2.25 minutes, a
significant amount. The savings (that is, the decrease in lost sales) is computed as follows:
Because the extra employee costs management $150 per week, the total savings will be
The store manager would probably welcome this savings and consider the preceding operating
statistics preferable to the previous ones for the condition where the store had only one employee.
ALTERNATIVE II: THE ADDITION OF A NEW CHECKOUT COUNTER Next we will consider the 
manager’s alternative of constructing a new checkout counter. The total cost of this project
would be $6,000, plus an extra $200 per week for an additional cashier.
The new checkout counter would be opposite the present counter (so that the servers would
have their backs to each other in an enclosed counter area). There would be several display cases
and racks between the two lines so that customers waiting in line would not move back and forth
between the lines. (Such movement, called jockeying, would invalidate the queuing formulas we
already developed.) We will assume that the customers would divide themselves equally be-
tween the two lines, so the arrival rate for each line would be half of the prior arrival rate for a
single checkout counter. Thus, the new arrival rate for each checkout counter is
and the service rate remains the same for each of the counters:
Substituting this new arrival rate and the service rate into our queuing formulas results in
the following operating characteristics:
Using the same sales savings of $75 per week for each minute’s reduction in waiting time,
we find that the store would save
Next we subtract the $200 per week cost for the new cashier from this amount saved:
Because the capital outlay of this project is $6,000, it would take 20 weeks 
20 weeks) to recoup the initial cost (ignoring the possibility of interest on the $6,000). Once the
cost has been recovered, the store would save $18.75 
more per week by
adding a new checkout counter rather than simply hiring an extra employee. However, we must
not disregard the fact that during the 20-week cost recovery period, the $281.25 savings incurred
by simply hiring a new employee would be lost.
1+300.00 - 281.252
1+6,000/+300 =
+500 - 200 = +300
 6.67 min. * +75>min. = +500.00 per week
 8.00 min. - 1.33 min. = 6.67 min.
I = .60 probability that a server will be idle and a customer can be served
U = .40 probability that a customer must wait
Wq = 0.022 hr. 11.33 min.2 per customer in the waiting line
W = 0.055 hr. 13.33 min.2 per customer in the system
Lq = 0.27 customer in the waiting line
L = 0.67 customer in the queuing system
P0 = .60 probability of no customers in the system
m = 30 customers served per hour
l = 12 customers per hour
+431.25 - +150 = +281.25 per week
5.75 min. * +75/min. = +431.25
8.00 min. - 2.25 min. = 5.75 min.
THE SINGLE-SERVER WAITING LINE SYSTEM
605

Table 13.1 presents a summary of the operating characteristics for each alternative. For the
store manager, both of these alternatives seem preferable to the original conditions, which re-
sulted in a lengthy waiting time of 8 minutes per customer. However, the manager might have a
difficult time selecting between the two alternatives. It might be appropriate to consider other fac-
tors besides waiting time. For example, employee idle time is .40 with the first alternative and .60
with the second, which seems to be a significant difference. An additional factor is the loss of
space resulting from a new checkout counter.
606
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
As the level of service
improves, the cost of
service increases.
TABLE 13.1
Operating charac-
teristics for each
alternative system
Operating
Characteristics
Present System
Alternative I
Alternative II
L
4.00 customers
1.50 customers
0.67 customer
Lq
3.20 customers
0.90 customer
0.27 customer
W
10.00 min.
3.75 min.
3.33 min.
Wq
8.00 min.
2.25 min.
1.33 min.
U
.80
.60
.40 
However, the final decision must be based on the manager’s own experience and perceived
needs. As we have noted previously, the results of queuing analysis provide information for deci-
sion making but do not result in an actual recommended decision, as an optimization model would.
Our two example alternatives illustrate the cost trade-offs associated with improved service. As
the level of service increases, the corresponding cost of this service also increases. For example,
when we added an extra employee in alternative I, the service was improved, and the cost of pro-
viding service also increased. But when the level of service was increased, the costs associated
with customer waiting decreased. Maintaining an appropriate level of service should minimize
the sum of these two costs as much as possible. This cost trade-off relationship is summarized in
Figure 13.2. As the level of service increases, the cost of service goes up and the waiting cost
goes down. The sum of these costs results in a total cost curve, and the level of service that
should be maintained is the level where this total cost curve is at a minimum. (However, this
does not mean we can determine an exact optimal minimum cost solution because the service
and waiting characteristics we can determine are averages and thus uncertain.)
Total cost
Cost of service
Cost of waiting
Service level
to maintain
Level of service
Minimum
cost
Total cost of the service facility
FIGURE 13.2
Cost trade-off for 
service levels
Computer Solution of the Single-Server Model with Excel and Excel QM
Excel spreadsheets can be used to solve queuing problems, although someone must enter all the
queuing formulas into spreadsheet cells. Exhibit 13.1 shows a spreadsheet set up to solve the single-
server model for the original Fast Shop Market example. Notice that the arrival rate is entered in
cell D3, the service rate is entered in cell D4, and our single-server model queuing formulas are

entered in cells D6 to D10. For example, cell D7 includes the formula for 
the average number
of customers in the queue, shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet.
Lq,
THE SINGLE-SERVER WAITING LINE SYSTEM
607
Formula for Lq, average
number in queue
=(1/(D4–D3))*60
=(D3/(D4*(D4–D3)))*60
EXHIBIT 13.1
Management Science Application
Reducing Perceived Waiting Time 
at Bank of America
In a market research study, Bank of America discovered that
when a customer stands in line, waiting for teller service for
more than about 3 minutes, a gap develops between the actual
waiting time and the customer’s perceived waiting time. For ex-
ample, if customers wait for 2 minutes, they feel like they’ve
been waiting for 2 minutes; however, if they have been waiting
for 5 minutes, it may seem more like 10 minutes to them. Bank
of America also learned from prior studies that long waits have a
direct relationship to customer satisfaction. Furthermore, the
bank knew from previous psychological studies that if people
were distracted with non-boring activities, time would seem to
pass more quickly. As a result, Bank of America undertook an ex-
periment to see if customers’ perceived waiting time could be re-
duced if it placed televisions above the tellers in a bank branch
lobby to entertain customers waiting in line. The bank installed
televisions tuned to CNN in a typical bank branch and meaured
actual versus perceived waiting times. The results showed that
the amount of waiting time customers overestimated dropped
from 32% to 15% when compared to a bank without televi-
sion. To measure the financial impact of these results, the bank
employed a customer satisfaction index (based on a customer
survey); every one-point improvement in the index results in
$1.40 in increased annual revenue per household customer. The
experimental results indicated that the projected reductions in
perceived waiting times would result in a 5.9-point increase in
the customer satisfaction index. As a result, a bank branch with
10,000 household customers could expect an increase in annual
revenue of $82,600, while a bank with only a few thousand
household customers could expect to recoup the estimated
$10,000 one-time cost of installing televisions in less than a year.
Source: Based on S. Thomke, “R&D Comes to Services: Bank of
America’s Pathbreaking Experiments,” Harvard Business Review 81
(April 4, 2003): 70–79.
AP Photo/Steven Senne 

608
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
Computer Solution of the Single-Server Model with QM for Windows
QM for Windows has a module that is capable of performing queuing analysis. As an illustra-
tion of the computerized analysis of the single-server queuing system, we will use QM for Win-
dows to analyze the Fast Shop Market example. The model input and solution output are shown
in Exhibit 13.3.
EXHIBIT 13.3
Constant service
times occur with 
machinery and 
automated equipment.
Excel QM includes a spreadsheet macro for waiting line (i.e., queuing) analysis. Excel QM
includes all the different queuing models that will be presented in this chapter. The queuing macro
in Excel QM is one of the more useful ones in this text because some of the queuing formulas,
which will be introduced are complex and often difficult to set up manually in spreadsheet cells.
After Excel QM has been activated, the “Waiting Line Analysis” menu is accessed from the
“Add-Ins” menu on the menu bar at the top of the spreadsheet. This will result in a Spreadsheet Ini-
tialization window, which will enable us to title the problem and specify some of the spreadsheet
output. Exhibit 13.2 shows the Excel QM spreadsheet for our Fast Shop Market single-server
model. When this spreadsheet first appears, cells B7:B8 contain example data values, and the re-
sults relate to these arrival and service rates. Thus, the first step is to enter the arrival and service
rates for our Fast Shop Market example in cells B7:B8. The results will be computed automati-
cally, using the queuing formulas already embedded in the macro.
Click on “Add-Ins” to access
the “Excel QM” menu.
EXHIBIT 13.2
Undefined and Constant Service Times
Sometimes it cannot be assumed that a waiting line system has an arrival rate that is Poisson dis-
tributed or service times that are exponentially distributed. For example, many manufacturing
operations use automated equipment or robots that have constant service times. Thus, the single-
server model with Poisson arrivals and constant service times is a queuing variation that is of
particular interest to manufacturing operations.

The constant service time model is actually a special case of a more general variation
of the single-server model in which service times cannot be assumed to be exponentially
distributed. As such, service times are said to be general, or undefined. The basic queuing
formulas for the operating characteristics of the undefined service time model are as
follows:
The key formula for undefined service times is for Lq, the number of customers in the waiting
line. In this formula,
and 
are the mean and standard deviation, respectively, for any general
probability distribution with independent service times.
For the Poisson distribution, the mean is equal to the variance. This same relationship is true
for Poisson service rates if service times are exponentially distributed. Thus, if we let 
in
the preceding formula for 
for undefined service times, it becomes the same as our basic for-
mula with exponential service times. In fact, all the queuing formulas become the same as in the
basic single-server model.
As an example of the single-server model with undefined service times, consider a business
firm with a single fax machine. Employees arrive randomly to use the fax machine, at an aver-
age rate of 20 per hour, according to a Poisson distribution. The time an employee spends using
the machine is not defined by any probability distribution but has a mean of 2 minutes and a
standard deviation of 4 minutes. The operating characteristics for this system are computed as
follows:
= 0.1665 hr. (10 min.) waiting in line
Wq =
Lq
l = 3.33
20
= 4.0 employees in line and using the machine
L = Lq + l
m = 3.33 + 120>302
= 3.33 employees waiting in line
Lq =
l2s2 + 1l>m22
211 - l>m2
=
1202211>1522 + 120>3022
211 - (20>302)
P0 = 1 - 20
30 = .33 probability that no one is using the machine
P0 = 1 - l
m
Lq
s = m
s
m
U = l
m
W = Wq + 1
m
Wq =
Lq
l
L = Lq + l
m
Lq =
l2s2 + 1l>m22
211 - l>m2
P0 = 1 - l
m
UNDEFINED AND CONSTANT SERVICE TIMES
609
Constant service times
are a special case of
the single-server
model with undefined
service times.

In the case of constant service times, there is no variability in service times (i.e., service
time is the same constant value for each customer); thus,
Substituting 
into the un-
defined service time formula for 
results in the following formula for 
with constant service
times:
Notice that this new formula for 
for constant service times is simply our basic single-server
formula for 
divided by two. All the remaining formulas for 
and W are the same as the
single-server formulas using this formula for 
The following example illustrates the single-server model with constant service times. The
Petroco Service Station has an automatic car wash, and motorists purchasing gas at the station
receive a discounted car wash, depending on the number of gallons of gas they buy. The car
wash can accommodate one car at a time, and it requires a constant time of 4.5 minutes for a
wash. Cars arrive at the car wash at an average rate of 10 per hour (Poisson distributed). The
service station manager wants to determine the average length of the waiting line and the aver-
age waiting time at the car wash.
First, determine 
and 
such that they are expressed as rates:
Substituting 
and 
into the queuing formulas for constant service time,
Computer Solution of the Constant Service Time Model with Excel
Exhibit 13.4 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to solve our Petroco Service Station example
with constant service times. As in Exhibit 13.1 for the Fast Shop Market example, the queu-
ing formulas are embedded in individual cells. For example, the formula for 
the average
number in the queue, is entered in cell D6 and is shown on the formula bar at the top of the
spreadsheet.
Lq,
= 0.114 hr. 16.84 min.2 waiting in line
Wq =
Lq
l = 1.14
10
= 1.14 cars waiting
Lq =
l2
2m1m - l2 =
11022
2113.32 113.3 - 102
m
l
m = 60>4.5 = 13.3 cars per hr.
l = 10 cars per hr.
m
l
Lq.
L, Wq,
Lq
Lq
Lq =
l2
2m1m - l2
=
1l>m22
211 - (l>m2)
=
l21022 + 1l>m22
211 - (l>m2)
Lq =
l2s2 + 1l>m22
211 - (l>m2)
Lq
Lq
s = 0
s = 0.
U = l>m = 20>30 = 67% machine utilization
= 0.1998 hr. 112 min.2 in the system
W = Wq + 1
m = 0.1665 + a 1
30 b
610
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
In the constant serv-
ice time model, there
is no variability in
service times; s = 0.

Computer Solution of the Undefined and Constant Service 
Time Models with QM for Windows
QM for Windows can be used to solve the single-server model with undefined (referred to as
“general”) and constant service times similarly to the single-server model in the previous sec-
tion. Exhibit 13.5 shows the QM for Windows solution output screen for our fax machine exam-
ple with undefined service times (on page 609).
FINITE QUEUE LENGTH
611
In a finite queue, the
length of the queue is
limited.
Average number
in the queue, Lq
=(D6/D3)*60
=D8+(1/D4)*60
EXHIBIT 13.4
EXHIBIT 13.5
Finite Queue Length
For some waiting line systems, the length of the queue may be limited by the physical area in
which the queue forms; space may permit only a limited number of customers to enter the
queue. Such a waiting line is referred to as a finite queue and results in another variation of the
single-phase, single-channel queuing model.
The basic single-server model must be modified to consider the finite queuing system. It
should be noted that for this case, the service rate does not have to exceed the arrival rate
(
) in order to obtain steady-state conditions. The resulting operating characteristics, where
M is the maximum number in the system, are as follows:
L =
l>m
1 - 1l>m2 -
1M + 12 1l>m2M+1
1 - 1l>m2M+1
Pn = 1P02 a l
m b
n
for n … M
P0 =
1 - 1l>m2
1 - 1l>m2M+1
m 7 l

Because 
is the probability of n units in the system, if we define M as the maximum number al-
lowed in the system, then 
(the value of 
for 
) is the probability that a customer will not
join the system. The remaining equations are
As an example of the single-server model with finite queue, consider Metro Quick Lube, a
one-bay service facility located next to a busy highway in an urban area. The facility has space
for only one vehicle in service and three vehicles lined up to wait for service. There is no space
for cars to line up on the busy adjacent highway, so if the waiting line is full (three cars),
prospective customers must drive on.
The mean time between arrivals for customers seeking lubrication service is 3 minutes.
The mean time required to perform the lube operation is 2 minutes. Both the interarrival
times and the service times are exponentially distributed. As stated previously, the maximum
number of vehicles in the system is four. The operating characteristics are computed as 
follows:
First, we will compute the probability that the system is full and the customer must drive on,
However, this first requires the determination of 
as follows:
Next, to compute the average queue length,
the average number of cars in the system, L, must
be computed, as follows:
= 0.62 car waiting
Lq = L -
l11 - PM2
m
= 1.24 -
2011 - .0762
30
= 1.24 cars in the system
L =
20>30
1 - 120>302 -
152 120>3025
1 - 120>3025
L =
l>m
1 - 1l>m2 -
1M + 12 1l>m2M+1
1 - 1l>m2M+1
Lq,
 and a customer must drive on
= .076 probability that four cars are in the system, it is full,
PM = 1P02 a l
m b
n=M
= 1.382 a 20
30 b
4
= .38 probability of no cars in the system
P0 =
1 - 1l>m2
1 - 1l>m2M+1 =
1 - 120>302
1 - 120>3025
P0,
PM.
M = 4
m = 30
l = 20
Wq = W - 1
m
W =
L
l11 - PM2
Lq = L -
l11 - PM2
m
n = M
Pn
PM
Pn
612
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

To compute the average waiting time,
the average time in the system, W, must be computed
first:
Computer Solution of the Finite Queue Model with Excel
The Excel spreadsheet solution to the Metro Quick Lube example problem with a finite queue is
shown in Exhibit 13.6. Notice that the formula for 
in cell D7 is shown on the formula bar at
the top of the spreadsheet. The formula for L in cell D9 is shown in the callout box.
Note that Excel QM also has a spreadsheet macro for the finite queue model that can be ac-
cessed similarly to the single-server model in Exhibit 13.2.
Computer Solution of the Finite Queue Model with QM for Windows
The single-server model with finite queue can be solved with QM for Windows. Exhibit 13.7
shows the model solution screen for our Metro Quick Lube example.
P0
= 0.033 hr. 12.03 min.2 waiting in line
= 0.067 - 1
30
Wq = W - 1
m
= 0.067 hr. 14.03 min.2 waiting in the system
W =
L
l11 - PM2 =
1.24
2011 - .0762
Wq,
FINITE QUEUE LENGTH
613
Management Science Application
Providing Telephone Order Service in the 
Retail Catalog Business
In the TIME OUT box for A. K. Erlang on page 600, it was
noted that the origin of queuing analysis was in telephone con-
gestion problems in the early 1900s. Today, queuing analysis is
still an important tool in analyzing telephone service in catalog
phone sales, one of the largest retail businesses in the United
States. In a recent year, one of the largest catalog sales compa-
nies, L.L.Bean, with over $1 billion in annual sales, received
more than 12 million customer calls. During the peak holiday
season, its 3,000 customer service representatives took more
than 140,000 customer calls on its busiest days. Lands’ End,
the 15th largest mail-order company in the United States, with
sales of over $1.3 billion, handles more than 15 million phone
calls each year. On an average day, its 300-plus phone lines
handle between 40,000 and 50,000 calls, and during the
weeks prior to Christmas, it expands to more than 1,100
phone lines, to handle more than 100,000 phone calls daily.
One of the key factors in maintaining a successful catalog
phone order system is to provide prompt service; if customers
have to wait too long before talking to a customer service rep-
resentative, they may hang up and not call back. Catalog com-
panies such as L.L.Bean and Lands’ End often use queuing
analysis to make a number of decisions related to order 
processing, including the number of telephone trunk lines and
customer service representatives they need during various
hours of the day and days of the year, the amount of comput-
ing capacity they need to handle call volume, the number of
workstations and the amount of equipment needed, and the
number of full-time and part-time customer service representa-
tives to hire and train.
© Image Source/Corbis

Finite Calling Population
For some waiting line systems there is a specific, limited number of potential customers that can
arrive at the service facility. This is referred to as a finite calling population. As an example of
this type of system, consider the Wheelco Manufacturing Company.
Wheelco Manufacturing operates a shop that includes 20 machines. Due to the type of work
performed in the shop, there is a lot of wear and tear on the machines, and they require frequent
repair. When a machine breaks down, it is tagged for repair, with the date of the breakdown
noted, and a repair person is called. The company has one senior repair person and an assistant.
They repair the machines in the same order in which they break down (a first-in, first-out queue
discipline). Machines break down according to a Poisson distribution, and the service times are
exponentially distributed.
The finite calling population for this example is the 20 machines in the shop, which we will
designate as N.
The single-server model with a Poisson arrival and exponential service times and a finite
calling population has the following set of formulas for determining operating characteristics. 
in this model is the arrival rate for each member of the population:
Lq = N - al + m
l
b 11 - P02
Pn =
N!
1N - n2!a l
m b
n
P0,  where n = 1, 2,..., N
P0 =
1
a
N
n=0
N!
1N - n2!a l
m b
n ,  where N = populationsize
l
614
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
With a finite calling
population the
customers from which
arrivals originate are
limited.
Formula for P0 in cell D7
=((D3/D4)/(1–(D3/D4))) – ((D5+1)*(D3 /D4)
  ^(D5+1))/(1–(D3/D4)^(D5+1))
EXHIBIT 13.6
EXHIBIT 13.7

The formulas for 
and 
are both relatively complex and can be cumbersome to compute
manually. As a result, tables are often used to compute these values, given 
and 
Alterna-
tively, the queuing module in QM for Windows has the capability to solve the finite calling pop-
ulation model, which we will demonstrate.
Returning to our example of the Wheelco Manufacturing Company, each machine operates
an average of 200 hours before breaking down and a repair person is called. The average time to
repair a machine is 3.6 hours. The breakdown rate is Poisson distributed, and the service time is
exponentially distributed. The company would like an analysis of machine idle time due to
breakdowns to determine whether the present repair staff is sufficient.
Using the formulas we developed for the single-server model with finite calling 
population, we can determine the operating characteristics for the machine repair system, as
follows:
These results show that the repair person and assistant are busy 35% of the time repairing
machines. Of the 20 machines, an average of .52, or 2.6%, are broken down, waiting for repair,
or under repair. Each broken-down machine is idle (broken down, waiting for repair, or under
repair) an average of 5.33 hours. Thus the system seems adequate.
= 5.33 hr. in the system
W = Wq = 1
m = 1.74 +
1
.2778
= 1.74 hr. waiting for repair
Wq =
Lq
1N - L2l =
.169
120 - .5202 1.0052
= .520 machine in the system
L = Lq + 11 - P02 = .169 + 11 - .6522
= .169 machine waiting
Lq = N - a l + m
l
b 11 - P02 = 20 - a .005 + .2778
.005
b 11 - .6522
P0 = .649
=
1
a
20
n=0
20!
120 - n2!a .005
.2778 b
n
P0 =
1
a
N
n=0
N!
1N - n2!a l
m b
n
N = 20 machines
m = 1>3.6 hr. = .2778 per hr.
l = 1>200 hr. = .005 per hr.
m.
l
Pn
P0
W = Wq + 1
m
Wq =
Lq
1N - L2l
L = Lq + 11 - P02
FINITE CALLING POPULATION
615

Computer Solution of the Finite Calling Population Model 
with Excel and Excel QM
The finite population queuing model can be tedious to solve by using an Excel spreadsheet be-
cause of the complexity of entering the formula for 
in the spreadsheet. An array must be cre-
ated for the N components required by the summation in the denominator of the formula for 
Exhibit 13.8 shows the Excel spreadsheet for the Wheelco Manufacturing Company example,
with this summation array in cells F4:G26.
P0.
P0
616
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
Summation
component for
n =1 in cell G6
Array with
summation
components for
P0 formula
P0 = 1/G26
EXHIBIT 13.8
This is a model in which the spreadsheet macro in Excel QM is especially useful. The finite
population model is accessed from the “Add-Ins” menu on the menu bar at the top of the spread-
sheet. After selecting “Spreadsheet Initialization,” the resulting spreadsheet for our Wheelco
Manufacturing Company example is shown in Exhibit 13.9. As in our other Excel QM exam-
ples, the spreadsheet initially includes example data values. The first step is to enter the parame-
ters for our own example in cells B7:B9 as shown in Exhibit 13.9.
Enter problem data
in cells B7:B9.
Click on “Add-Ins” to access the macro
for the finite population model.
EXHIBIT 13.9

Computer Solution of the Finite Calling Population Model 
with QM for Windows
QM for Windows is especially useful for solving the finite calling population model because the
formulas are complex and their manual solution can be tedious and time-consuming. Exhibit 13.10
includes the QM for Windows solution screen for the Wheelco Manufacturing Company example.
THE MULTIPLE-SERVER WAITING LINE
617
In multiple-server
models, two or more
independent servers
in parallel serve a
single waiting line.
EXHIBIT 13.10
The Multiple-Server Waiting Line
Slightly more complex than the single-server queuing system is the single waiting line being serv-
iced by more than one server (i.e., multiple servers). Examples of this type of waiting line include
an airline ticket and check-in counter where passengers line up in a single line, waiting for one of
several agents for service, and a post office line, where customers in a single line wait for service
from several postal clerks. Figure 13.3 illustrates this type of multiple-server queuing system.
United States Post Office
www.usps.com
FIGURE 13.3
A multiple-server
waiting line
As an example of this type of system, consider the customer service department of the
Biggs Department Store. The customer service department of the store has a waiting room in
which chairs are placed along the wall, in effect forming a single waiting line. Customers come
to this area with questions or complaints or to clarify matters regarding credit card bills. The

customers are served by three store representatives, each located in a partitioned stall. Cus-
tomers are served on a first-come, first-served basis.
The store management wants to analyze this queuing system because excessive waiting
times can make customers angry enough to shop at other stores. Typically, customers who come
to this area have some problem and thus are impatient anyway. Waiting a long time serves only
to increase their impatience.
First, the queuing formulas for a multiple-server queuing system will be presented.
These formulas, like single-server model formulas, have been developed on the assumption
of a first-come, first-served queue discipline, Poisson arrivals, exponential service times,
and an infinite calling population. The parameters of the multiple-server model are as 
follows:
The formulas for the operating characteristics of the multiple-server model are as follows.
The probability that there are no customers in the system (all servers are idle) is
The probability of n customers in the queuing system is
The average number of customers in the queuing system is
The average time a customer spends in the queuing system (waiting and being served) is
The average number of customers in the queue is
The average time a customer spends in the queue, waiting to be served, is
The probability that a customer arriving in the system must wait for service (i.e., the probability
that all the servers are busy) is
Notice in the foregoing formulas that if 
(i.e., if there is one server), then these formulas
become the single-server formulas presented previously in this chapter.
c = 1
Pw = 1
c!a l
m b
c
cm
cm - lP0
Wq = W - 1
m =
Lq
l
Lq = L - l
m
W = L
l
L =
lm1l>m2c
1c - 12!1cm - l22 P0 + l
m
Pn =
1
c!cn-c a l
m b
n
P0, for n 7 c; Pn = 1
n a l
m b
n
P0, for n … c
P0 =
1
C a
n=c-1
n=0
1
n!a l
m b
n
S + 1
c!a l
m b
c
a
cm
cm - lb
cm = the mean effective service rate for the system, which must exceed the arrival rate
c = the number of servers
m = the service rate 1average number served per time period2 per server 1channel2
l = the arrival rate 1average number of arrivals per time period2
618
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
The total
number of servers
must be able to serve
customers faster than
they arrive.
cm > l:

Returning to our example, let us assume that a survey of the customer service department
for a 12-month period shows that the arrival rate and service rate are as follows:
In addition, recall that this is a three-server queuing system; therefore,
Using the multiple-server model formulas, we can compute the following operating charac-
teristics for the service department:
 three or more customers in the system2
= .703 probability that a customer must wait for service 1i.e., that there are
= 1
3!a 10
4 b
3
3142
3142 - 10 1.0452
Pw = 1
c!a l
m b
c
cm
cm - l P0
= 0.35 hr. 121 min.2 average time waiting in line per customer
= 3.5
10
Wq =
Lq
l
= 3.5 customers, on average, waiting to be served
= 6 - 10
4
Lq = L - l
m
= 0.60 hr. 136 min.2 average time in the service department per customer
= 6
10
W = L
l
= 6 customers, on average, in the service department
=
1102 142 110>423
13 - 12!33142 - 1042 1.0452 + 10
4
L =
lm1l>m2c
1c - 12!1cm - l22P0 + l
m
= 0.045 probability that no customers are in the service department
=
1
C 1
0!a 10
4 b
0
+ 1
1!a 10
4 b
1
+ 1
2!a 10
4 b
2
S + 1
3!a10
4 b
3
3132
3142 - 10
P0 =
1
C a
n=c-1
n=0
1
n!a l
m b
n
S + 1
c!a l
m b
c
a
cm
cm - l b
c = 3 store representatives
m = 4 customers per hr. can be served by each store representative
l = 10 customers per hr. arrive at the service department
THE MULTIPLE-SERVER WAITING LINE
619

The department store’s management has observed that customers are frustrated by the rela-
tively long waiting time of 21 minutes and the .703 probability of waiting. To try to improve
matters, management has decided to consider the addition of an extra service representative. The
operating characteristics for this system must be recomputed with 
service representatives.
Substituting this value along with 
and 
into our queuing formulas results in the follow-
ing operating characteristics:
L = 3.0 customers, on average, in the service department
P0 = .073 probability that no customers are in the service department
m
l
c = 4
620
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
Management Science Application
Making Sure 911 Calls Get Through at AT&T
In 2001 AT&T received complaints from customers in one of
its service areas that they were not getting a dial tone at cer-
tain times of the day. AT&T considered this to be a very serious
problem, especially for customers making emergency 911
calls. Based on national statistics, the number of 911 calls re-
lated to life-threatening emergencies in this service area alone
would be around 90 per day. Initially it was suspected that the
problem was the result of maintenance activity related to 
the addition of new customer lines; however, this proved not
to be the case, since maintenance was performed during the
day and the dial-tone problems were occurring mainly in the
evening. Using queuing analysis it was subsequently discov-
ered that the problem was likely due to long Internet dial-up
calls, which typically last much longer than voice calls. An
analysis of data for 4.5 million residential calls in a service area
showed a distribution with a mean call of 297 seconds, which
is significantly longer than 3 minutes, the generally accepted
standard for average voice-call duration. It was also deter-
mined that only 6% of the calls were Internet calls. Thus, it
needed to be determined whether such a small fraction of In-
ternet calls could create the kind of congestion that would
block dial tones. Examining Internet calls in detail, analysts
found that calls to Internet service providers (ISPs) had a mean
of 1,956 seconds (i.e., over 30 minutes). It was ultimately con-
cluded that when congestion occurred and blocked dial tones,
many circuits were likely being held by ISP dial-up connections
that lasted for a long time. To ensure that customers calling
911 calls would get a dial tone AT&T developed a solution ap-
proach that encompassed automated controls so that under
congested conditions new ISP calls would not be admitted on
the circuit, and under extremely congested conditions, ongo-
ing ISP calls would be terminated to make room for voice calls.
The controls were developed such that the chances of termi-
nating an ongoing ISP call and repeatedly terminating the
same caller were small. The analysis also revealed that 
many Internet calls were being routed to ISPs through third-
party switches, and this discovery enabled AT&T to more 
efficiently route calls to other carriers, saving approximately
$15 million annually.
Source: Based on V. Ramaswami, D. Poole, S. Ahn, S. Byer, and 
A. Kaplan, “Ensuring Access to Emergency Services in the Presence of
Long Internet Dial-Up Calls,” Interfaces 35, no. 5 (September–October
2005): 411–22.
SIPA USA/SIPA/Newscom

THE MULTIPLE-SERVER WAITING LINE
621
=((((D3)*(D4)*((D3/D4)^D5)*(D7))/(FACT
(D5–1)*(((D5*D4)–D3)^2))))+(D3/D4)
=(1/FACT(D5))*((D3/D4)^D5)*((D5*D4*D7)/((D5)*(D4)–(D3)))
Formula for P0
EXHIBIT 13.11
As in our previous example of the single-server system, the queuing operating characteristics
provide input into the decision-making process, and the decision criteria are the waiting costs and
service costs. The department store management would have to consider the cost of the extra serv-
ice representative, as compared to the dramatic decrease in customer waiting time from 21 minutes
to 3 minutes, in making a decision.
Computer Solution of the Multiple-Server Model 
with Excel and Excel QM
The multiple-server model is somewhat cumbersome to set up in a spreadsheet format because
of the necessity to enter some of the complex queuing formulas for this model into spreadsheet
cells. Exhibit 13.11 shows a spreadsheet set up for our Biggs Department Store multiple-server
example.
Pw = .31 probability that a customer must wait for service
Wq = 0.05 hr. 13 min.2 average time waiting in line per customer
Lq = 0.5 customer, on average, waiting to be served
W = 0.30 hr. 118 min.2 average time in the service department per customer
The formula for 
in cell D7 is shown on the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. As
you can see, it is long and complex. The specific summation terms in 
for our example are
entered directly into the formula. Thus, for a larger problem with a larger number of servers,
additional summation terms would have to be entered. The term FACT() takes the factorial of a
number or numbers in a cell. For example, FACT(1) is 1!. Notice also that two of the other
more complex formulas in this model for 
and L are shown in callout boxes attached to
Exhibit 13.11.
Solution of the multiple-server model, as with some of the other more complex queuing
models, can be tedious using Excel spreadsheets. Excel QM is particularly useful for solv-
ing these more complex queuing models. Exhibit 13.12 shows the Excel QM spreadsheet
for our Biggs Department Store example. As with other queuing models we have solved
with an Excel QM queuing macro, all the formulas are already embedded in this spread-
sheet; all that is required in this case is that the arrival and service rates and number of
servers be entered in cells B7:B9; the operating characteristics in cells E7:E12 are com-
puted automatically.
Pw
P0
P0

622
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
EXHIBIT 13.12
Computer Solution of the Multiple-Server Model with QM for Windows
Exhibit 13.13 shows the QM for Windows solution screen for the Biggs Department Store
multiple-server model example.
EXHIBIT 13.13
Additional Types of Queuing Systems
The single queue with a single server and the single queue with multiple servers are two of
the most common types of queuing systems. However, there are two other general categories
of queuing systems: the single queue with single servers in sequence and the single queue
with multiple servers in sequence. Figure 13.4 presents a schematic of each of these two 
systems.
Servers
Queue
Single queue with single servers in sequence
Single queue with multiple servers in sequence
FIGURE 13.4
Single queues with
single and multiple
servers in
sequence
An example of a queuing system that has a single queue leading into a sequence of single
servers is the personnel office of a company where job applicants line up to apply for a 

specific job. All the applicants wait in one area and are called alphabetically. The application
process consists of moving from one interview to the next in a single sequence to take tests,
answer questions, fill out forms, and so on. Another example of this type of system is an 
assembly line, in which products are queued up prior to being worked on by a sequenced line
of machines.
If in the personnel office example an extra sequence of interviews were added, the result
would be a queuing system with a single queue and multiple servers in sequence. Likewise, if
products were lined up in a single queue prior to being worked on by machines in any one of
three assembly lines, the result would be a sequence of multiple servers.
These are four general categories of queuing systems. Other items that can contribute to the
variety of possible queuing systems include the following:
 Queuing systems in which customers balk from entering the system or leave the line if it is
too long (i.e., renege)
 Servers who provide service on some basis other than first-come, first-served (such as
alphabetical order or appointment, as in a doctor’s office)
 Service times that are not exponentially distributed or are undefined or constant
 Arrival rates that are not Poisson distributed
 Jockeying (i.e., movement between queues), which can often occur when there are multiple
servers, each preceded by a separate queue (such as in a bank with several tellers or in a
grocery store with several cash registers)
Summary
The various forms of queuing systems can make queuing a potentially complex field of analysis.
However, because queues are encountered often in our everyday life, the analysis of queues is
an important and widely explored area of management science. We have considered only the
fundamentals of a few basic types of queuing systems; a number of other analysis models have
been developed to analyze the more complex queuing systems.
Some queuing situations, however, are so complex that it is impossible to develop an ana-
lytical model. When these situations occur, an alternative form of analysis is simulation, in
which the real-life queuing system is simulated by a computerized mathematical model. The
operating characteristics are determined by observing the simulated queuing system. This alter-
native technique, simulation, is the subject of the next chapter.
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
623
Example Problem
Solution
The following example illustrates the analysis of both a single-server and a multiple-server
queuing system, including the determination of the operating characteristics for each system.
Problem Statement
The new accounts loan officer of the Citizens Northern Savings Bank interviews all customers
for new accounts. The customers desiring to open new accounts arrive at the rate of 4 per hour,
according to a Poisson distribution, and the accounts officer spends an average of 12 minutes
with each customer, setting up a new account.
A. Determine the operating characteristics 
for this system.
B. Add an additional accounts officer to the system described in this problem so that it is now
a multiple-server queuing system with two channels and determine the operating charac-
teristics required in part A.
1P0, L, Lq, W, Wq, and Pw2

Solution
Step 1: Determine Operating Characteristics for the Single-Server System
Step 2: Determine the Operating Characteristics for the Multiple-Server System
= .429 probability that no customers are in the system
=
1
C 1
0!a 4
5 b
0
+ 1
1!a 4
5 b
1
S + 1
2!a4
5 b
2
122 152
122 152 - 4
P0 =
1
C a
n=c-1
n=0
1
n!a l
m b
n
S + 1
c!a l
m b
c
a
cm
cm - lb
c = 2 servers
m = 5 customers per hr. are served
l = 4 customers per hr. arrive
 a customer must wait
= .80 probability that the new accounts officer is busy and
Pw = l
m = 4
5
= 0.80 hr. 148 min.2 average time in the waiting line
Wq =
l
m1m - l2 =
142
515 - 42
= 1 hr. on average, in the system
W =
1
m - l =
1
5 - 4
= 3.2 customers, on average, in the waiting line
Lq =
l2
m(m - l) =
(4)2
5(5 - 4)
= 4 customers, on average, in the queuing system
L =
l
m - l =
4
5 - 4
= .20 probability of no customers in the system
P0 = a1 - l
m b = a1 - 4
5 b
m = 5 customers per hr. are served
l = 4 customers per hr. arrive
624
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

Problems
1. For each of the following queuing systems, indicate whether it is a single- or multiple-server
model, the queue discipline, and whether its calling population is infinite or finite.
a. Hair salon
b. Bank
c. Laundromat
d. Doctor’s office
e. Adviser’s office
f. Airport runway
g. Service station
h. Copy center
i. Team trainer
j. Web site
2. In the Fast Shop Market example in this chapter, Alternative II was to add a new checkout
counter at the market. This alternative was analyzed using the single-server model. Why was the
multiple-server model not used?
3. a. Is the following statement true or false? “The single-phase, single-channel model with 
Poisson arrivals and undefined service times will always have larger (i.e., greater) operating
characteristic values (i.e.,
) than the same model with exponentially distributed
service times.” Explain your answer.
W, Wq, L, Lq
= .229 probability that a customer must wait for service
Pw = 1
c!a l
m b
c
cm
cm - l P0 = 1
2!a 4
5 b
2
122 152
122 152 - 41.4292
= 0.038 hr. 12.3 min.2 average time spent waiting in line
Wq =
Lq
l = .152
4
= 0.238 hr. 114.3 min.2 average time in the system
W = L
l = .952
4
= 0.152 customer, on average, waiting to be served
Lq = L - l
m = .952 - 4
5
= 0.952 customer, on average, in the system
=
142 152 a 4
5 b
2
1!3 122 152 - 142 42 1.4292 + 4
5
L =
lma l
m b
c
1c - 12!1cm - l22 P0 + l
m
PROBLEMS
625

b. Is the following statement true or false? “The single-phase, single-channel model with 
Poisson arrivals and constant service times will always have smaller (i.e., lower) operating
characteristic values (i.e.,
) than the same model with exponentially distributed
service times.” Explain your answer.
4. Why do waiting lines form at a service facility even though there may be more than enough serv-
ice capacity to meet normal demand in the long run?
5. Provide an example of when a first-in, first-out (FIFO) rule for queue discipline would not be
appropriate.
6. Under what conditions will the single-server queuing model with Poisson arrivals and undefined
service times provide the same operating characteristics as the basic model with exponentially
distributed service times?
7. A single-server queuing system with an infinite calling population and a first-come, first-served
queue discipline has the following arrival and service rates (poisson distributed):
Determine 
and U.
8. The ticket booth on the Tech campus is operated by one person, who is selling tickets for the 
annual Tech versus State football game on Saturday. The ticket seller can serve an average of 
12 customers per hour; on average, 10 customers arrive to purchase tickets each hour (poisson
distributed). Determine the average time a ticket buyer must wait and the portion of time the ticket
seller is busy.
9. The Petroco Service Station has one pump for regular unleaded gas, which (with an attendant) can
service 10 customers per hour. Cars arrive at the regular unleaded pump at a rate of 6 per hour. De-
termine the average queue length, the average time a car is in the system, and the average time a car
must wait. If the arrival rate increases to 12 cars per hour, what will be the effect on the average
queue length?
10. The Dynaco Manufacturing Company produces a particular product in an assembly line opera-
tion. One of the machines on the line is a drill press that has a single assembly line feeding into it.
A partially completed unit arrives at the press to be worked on every 7.5 minutes, on average.
The machine operator can process an average of 10 parts per hour. Determine the average num-
ber of parts waiting to be worked on, the percentage of time the operator is working, and the per-
centage of time the machine is idle.
11. The management of Dynaco Manufacturing Company (see Problem 10) likes to have its opera-
tors working 90% of the time. What must the assembly line arrival rate be for the operators to be
as busy as management would like?
12. The Peachtree Airport in Atlanta serves light aircraft. It has a single runway and one air traffic
controller to land planes. It takes an airplane 12 minutes to land and clear the runway. Planes ar-
rive at the airport at the rate of four per hour.
a. Determine the average number of planes that will stack up, waiting to land.
b. Find the average time a plane must wait in line before it can land.
c. Calculate the average time it takes a plane to clear the runway once it has notified the airport
that it is in the vicinity and wants to land.
d. The FAA has a rule that an air traffic controller can, on average, land planes a maximum of
45 minutes out of every hour. There must be 15 minutes of idle time available to relieve the
tension. Will this airport have to hire an extra air traffic controller?
13. The First American Bank of Rapid City has one outside drive-up teller. It takes the teller an av-
erage of 4 minutes to serve a bank customer. Customers arrive at the drive-up window at a rate
P0, P3, L, Lq, W, Wq,
m = 24 customers per hour
l = 16 customers per hour
W, Wq, L, Lq
626
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

of 12 per hour. The bank operations officer is currently analyzing the possibility of adding a sec-
ond drive-up window, at an annual cost of $20,000. It is assumed that arriving cars would be
equally divided between both windows. The operations officer estimates that each minute’s re-
duction in customer waiting time would increase the bank’s revenue by $2,000 annually. Should
the second drive-up window be installed?
14. During registration at State University every semester, students in the college of business must
have their courses approved by the college adviser. It takes the adviser an average of 2 minutes
to approve each schedule, and students arrive at the adviser’s office at the rate of 28 per hour.
a. Compute 
and U.
b. The dean of the college has received a number of complaints from students about the 
length of time they must wait to have their schedules approved. The dean feels that waiting
10.00 minutes to get a schedule approved is not unreasonable. Each assistant the dean 
assigns to the adviser’s office will reduce the average time required to approve a schedule by 
0.25 minute, down to a minimum time of 1.00 minute to approve a schedule. How many 
assistants should the dean assign to the adviser?
15. All trucks traveling on Interstate 40 between Albuquerque and Amarillo are required to stop at a
weigh station. Trucks arrive at the weigh station at a rate of 200 per 8-hour day, and the station
can weigh, on the average, 220 trucks per day.
a. Determine the average number of trucks waiting, the average time spent waiting and being
weighed at the weigh station by each truck, and the average waiting time before being
weighed for each truck.
b. If the truck drivers find out they must remain at the weigh station longer than 15 minutes, on
average, they will start taking a different route or traveling at night, thus depriving the state
of taxes. The state of New Mexico estimates that it loses $10,000 in taxes per year for each
extra minute trucks must remain at the weigh station. A new set of scales would have the
same service capacity as the present set of scales, and it is assumed that arriving trucks
would line up equally behind the two sets of scales. It would cost $50,000 per year to oper-
ate the new scales. Should the state install the new set of scales?
16. In Problem 15, suppose passing truck drivers look to see how many trucks are waiting to be
weighed at the weigh station. If they see four or more trucks in line, they will pass by the station
and risk being caught and ticketed. What is the probability that a truck will pass by the station?
17. In Problem 14, the dean of the college of business at State University is considering the addition
of a second adviser in the college advising office to serve students waiting to have their sched-
ules approved. This new adviser could serve the same number of students per hour as the pres-
ent adviser. Determine 
and 
for this altered advising system. As a student, would you
recommend adding the adviser?
18. The Dynaco Manufacturing Company has an assembly line that feeds two drill presses. As par-
tially completed products come off the line, they are lined up to be worked on as drill presses
become available. The units arrive at the workstation (containing both presses) at the rate of 100
per hour. Each press operator can process an average of 60 units per hour. Compute 
and
19. The Acme Machine Shop has five machines that periodically break down and require service.
The average time between breakdowns is 4 days, distributed according to an exponential distri-
bution. The average time to repair a machine is 1 day, distributed according to an exponential
distribution. One mechanic repairs the machines in the order in which they break down.
a. Determine the probability that the mechanic is idle.
b. Determine the mean number of machines waiting to be repaired.
c. Determine the mean time machines wait to be repaired.
d. Determine the probability that three machines are not operating (are being repaired or wait-
ing to be repaired).
Wq.
L, Lq, W,
Wq
L, Lq, W,
L, Lq, W, Wq,
PROBLEMS
627

20. McBurger’s fast-food restaurant has a drive-through window with a single server who takes 
orders from an intercom and also is the cashier. The window operator is assisted by other 
employees who prepare the orders. Customers arrive at the ordering station prior to the drive-
through window every 4.5 minutes (Poisson distributed), and the service time is 2.8 minutes 
(exponentially distributed). Determine the average length of the waiting line and the waiting
time. Discuss the quality of the service.
21. Game World, a video game arcade at Tanglewood Mall, has just installed a new virtual reality
battle game. It requires exactly 2.7 minutes to play. Customers arrive, on average, every 2.9 min-
utes (Poisson distributed) to play the game. How long will the line of customers waiting to play
the game be, and how long, on average, must a customer wait?
22. Drivers who come to get their licenses at the Department of Motor Vehicles have their photo-
graph taken by an automated machine that develops the photograph onto the license card and
laminates the complete license. The machine requires a constant time of 4.5 minutes to prepare
a completed license. If drivers arrive at the machine at the mean rate of 10 per hour (Poisson dis-
tributed), determine the average length of the waiting line and the average waiting time.
23. A vending machine at City Airport dispenses hot coffee, hot chocolate, or hot tea, in a constant
service time of 20 seconds. Customers arrive at the vending machine at a mean rate of 60 per
hour (Poisson distributed). Determine the average length of the waiting line and the average time
a customer must wait.
24. Norfolk, Virginia, a major seaport on the East Coast, has a ship coal-loading facility. Coal trucks
filled with coal arrive at the port facility at the mean rate of 149 per day (Poisson distributed). The
facility operates 24 hours a day. The coal trucks are unloaded one at a time, on a first-come, first-
served basis, by automated mechanical equipment that empties the trucks in a constant time of
8 minutes per truck, regardless of truck size. The port authority is negotiating with a coal company
for an additional 30 trucks per day. However, the coal company will not use this port facility unless
the port authority can assure it that its coal trucks will not have to wait to be unloaded at the port
facility for more than 12 hours per truck, on average. Can the port authority provide this assurance?
25. The Bay City Police Department has eight patrol cars that are on constant call 24 hours per day. 
A patrol car requires repairs every 20 days, on average, according to an exponential distribution.
When a patrol car is in need of repair, it is driven into the motor pool, which has a repair person on
duty at all times. The average time required to repair a patrol car is 18 hours (exponentially distrib-
uted). Determine the average time a patrol car is not available for use and the average number of
patrol cars out of service at any one time. Indicate whether the repair service seems adequate.
26. The Rowntown Cab Company has four cabs that are on duty during normal business hours. The
cab company dispatcher receives requests for service every 8 minutes, on average, according to
an exponential distribution. The average time to complete a trip is 20 minutes (exponentially dis-
tributed). Determine the average number of customers waiting for service and the average time a
customer must wait for a cab.
27. In Problem 14, in addition to course approvals, suppose that the advisor also answers questions
and provides course counseling, such that the service time can no longer be assumed to be expo-
nentially distributed. Instead, the service time distribution is undefined (i.e., general), with a
mean of 2 minutes and a standard deviation of 5 minutes. Compute L, Lq, W, and Wq and com-
pare these results with those in part (a) in Problem 14. 
28. The College Avenue Sub Shop is located in a small college town. Virtually all of its phone delivery
orders are in the evening, between 5:00 P.M. and 1:00 A.M., so the shop has a delivery person for
that time period. It receives an average of about 3 orders per hour (Poisson distributed). However,
because of the different distances the delivery person must travel, the service time is undefined,
with a mean of 15 minutes and a standard deviation of 6 minutes. Compute L, Lq, W, and Wq.
628
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

29. The Riverton Post Office has four stations for service. Customers line up in single file for service on
a FIFO basis. The mean arrival rate is 40 per hour, Poisson distributed, and the mean service time
per server is 4 minutes, exponentially distributed. Compute the operating characteristics for this op-
eration. Indicate whether the operation appears to be satisfactory in terms of the following: (a) postal
workers’ (servers’) idle time; (b) customer waiting time and/or the number waiting for service; and
(c) the percentage of the time a customer can walk in and get served without waiting at all.
30. In Problem 18, the Dynaco Company has found that if more than three units (average) are wait-
ing to be processed at any one workstation, then too much money is being tied up in work-in-
process inventory (i.e., units waiting to be processed). The company estimates that (on average)
each unit waiting to be processed costs $50 per day. Alternatively, operating a third press would
cost $150 per day. Should the company operate a third press at this workstation?
31. Cakes baked by the Freshfood Bakery are transported from the ovens to be packaged by one of
three wrappers. Each wrapper can wrap an average of 200 cakes per hour. The cakes are brought
to the wrappers at the rate of 500 per hour. If a cake sits longer than 5 minutes before being
wrapped, it will not be fresh enough to meet the bakery’s quality control standards. Does the
bakery need to hire another wrapper?
32. The associate dean of the college of business at Tech is determining which of two copiers he
should lease for the college’s administrative suite. A regular copier leases for $8 per hour, and
it takes an employee an average of 6 minutes (exponentially distributed) to complete a copying
job. A deluxe, high-speed copier leases for $16 per hour, and it requires an average of 3 min-
utes to complete a copying job. Employees arrive at the copying machine at a rate of 7 per hour
(Poisson distributed), and an employee’s time is valued at $10 per hour. Determine which
copier the college should lease.
33. The Quick Wash 24-hour Laundromat has 16 washing machines. A machine breaks down every
20 days (exponentially distributed). The repair service with which the Laundromat contracts
takes an average of 1 day to repair a machine (exponentially distributed). A washing machine
averages $5 per hour in revenue. The Laundromat is considering a new repair service that guar-
antees repairs in 0.50 day, but it charges $10 more per hour than the current repair service.
Should the Laundromat switch to the new repair service?
34. The Regency Hotel has enough space at its entrance for six taxicabs to line up, wait for guests,
and then load passengers. Cabs arrive at the hotel every 8 minutes; if a taxi drives by the hotel
and the line is full, it must drive on. Hotel guests require a taxi every 5 minutes, on average. It
takes a cab driver an average of 3.5 minutes to load passengers and luggage and leave the hotel
(exponentially distributed).
a. What is the average time a cab must wait for a fare?
b. What is the probability that the line will be full when a cab drives by, causing it to drive on?
35. The local Burger Doodle fast-food restaurant has a drive-through window. Customers in cars ar-
rive at the window at the rate of 10 per hour (Poisson distributed). It requires an average of 
4 minutes (exponentially distributed) to take and fill an order. The restaurant chain has a service
goal of an average waiting time of 3 minutes.
a. Will the current system meet the restaurant’s service goal?
b. If the restaurant is not meeting its service goal, it can add a second drive-through window
that will reduce the service time per customer to 2.5 minutes. Will the additional window en-
able the restaurant to meet its service goal?
c. During the 2-hour lunch period, the arrival rate of drive-in customers increases to 20 per
hour. Will the two-window system be able to achieve the restaurant’s service goal during this
rush period?
36. From 3:00 P.M. to 8:00 P.M. the local K-Star Supermarket has a steady stream of customers. Cus-
tomers finish shopping and arrive at the checkout area at a rate of 70 per hour (Poisson distributed).
PROBLEMS
629

It is assumed that when customers arrive at the cash registers, they will divide themselves relatively
evenly so that all the checkout lines contain an equal number. The average checkout time at a reg-
ister is 7 minutes (exponentially distributed). The store manager’s service goal is for customers to
be out of the store within 12 minutes (on average) after they complete their shopping and arrive at
a cash register. How many cash registers must the store have open to achieve the manager’s serv-
ice goal?
37. Customers arrive to check in at the exclusive and expensive Regency Hotel’s lobby at a rate of
40 per hour (Poisson distributed). The hotel normally has three clerks available at the desk to
check in guests. The average time for a clerk to check in a guest is 4 minutes (exponentially dis-
tributed). Clerks at the Regency are paid $24 per hour, and the hotel assigns a goodwill cost of
$2 per minute for the time a guest must wait in line. Determine whether the present check-in
system is cost-effective. If it is not, recommend what hotel management should do.
38. The Riverview Clinic has two general practitioners who see patients daily. An average of six pa-
tients arrive at the clinic per hour. Each doctor spends an average of 15 minutes with a patient.
The patients wait in a waiting area until one of the two doctors is able to see them. However, be-
cause patients typically do not feel well when they come to the clinic, the doctors do not believe
it is good practice to have a patient wait longer than an average of 15 minutes. Should this clinic
add a third doctor, and, if so, will this alleviate the waiting problem?
39. The Footrite Shoe Company is going to open a new branch at a mall, and company managers are
attempting to determine how many salespeople to hire. Based on an analysis of mall traffic, the
company estimates that customers will arrive at the store at a rate of 10 per hour, and from past
experience at its other branches, the company knows that salespeople can serve an average of 
6 customers per hour. How many salespeople should the company hire to uphold a company pol-
icy that on average the probability of a customer having to wait for service be no more than .30?
40. When customers arrive at Gilley’s Ice Cream Shop, they take a number and wait to be called to
purchase ice cream from one of the counter servers. From experience in past summers, the
store’s staff knows that customers arrive at a rate of 40 per hour on summer days between 3:00
P.M. and 10:00 P.M., and a server can serve 15 customers per hour on average. Gilley’s wants to
make sure that customers wait no longer than 10 minutes for service. Gilley’s is contemplating
keeping three servers behind the ice cream counter during the peak summer hours. Will this
number be adequate to meet the waiting time policy?
41. Moore’s television repair service receives an average of six TV sets per 8-hour day to be repaired.
The service manager would like to be able to tell customers that they can expect 1-day service.
What average repair time per set will the repair shop have to achieve to provide 1-day service, on
average? (Assume that the arrival rate is Poisson distributed and repair times are exponentially
distributed.)
42. In Problem 41, suppose that Moore’s television repair service cannot accommodate more than
30 TV sets at a time. What is the probability that the number of TV sets on hand (under repair
and waiting for service) will exceed the shop capacity?
43. Maggie Attaberry is a nurse on the evening shift from 10:00 P.M. to 6:00 A.M. at Community Hos-
pital. She has 15 patients for whom she is responsible in her area. She averages two calls from each
of her patients every evening, on average (Poisson distributed), and she must spend an average of
10 minutes (negative exponential distribution) with each patient who calls. Nurse Attaberry has in-
dicated to her shift supervisor that, although she has not kept records, she believes her patients
must wait about 10 minutes, on average, for her to respond, and she has requested that her supervi-
sor assign a second nurse to her area. The supervisor believes 10 minutes is too long for a patient
to wait, but she does not want her nurses to be idle more than 40% of the time. Determine what the
supervisor should do.
630
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

44. The Escargot is a small French restaurant with six waiters and waitresses. The average service
time at the restaurant for a table (of any size) is 85 minutes (Poisson distributed). The restaurant
does not take reservations, and parties arrive for dinner (and stay and wait) every 18 minutes
(negative exponential distribution). The restaurant owner is concerned that a lengthy waiting
time might hurt its business in the long run. What are the current waiting time and queue length
for the restaurant? Discuss the business implications of the current waiting time and any actions
the restaurant owner might take.
45. Hudson Valley Books is a small, independent publisher of fiction and nonfiction books. Each
week the publisher receives an average of seven unsolicited manuscripts to review (Poisson dis-
tributed). The publisher has 12 freelance reviewers in the area who read and evaluate manu-
scripts. It takes a reviewer an average of 10 days (exponentially distributed) to read a manuscript
and write a brief synopsis. (Reviewers work on their own, 7 days a week.) Determine how long
the publisher must wait, on average, to receive a reviewer’s manuscript evaluation, how many
manuscripts are waiting to be reviewed, and how busy the reviewers are.
46. Amanda Fall is starting up a new house painting business, Fall Colors. She has been advertising
in the local newspaper for several months. Based on inquiries and informal surveys of the local
housing market, she anticipates that she will get painting jobs at the rate of four per week 
(Poisson distributed). Amanda has also determined that it will take a four-person team of
painters an average of 0.7 week (exponentially distributed) for a typical painting job.
a. Determine the number of teams of painters Amanda needs to hire so that customers will have
to wait no longer than 2 weeks to get their houses painted.
b. If the average price for a painting job is $1,700 and Amanda pays a team of painters 
$500 per week, will she make any money?
47. Partially completed products arrive at a workstation in a manufacturing operation at a mean rate of
40 per hour (Poisson distributed). The processing time at the workstation averages 1.2 minutes per
unit (exponentially distributed). The manufacturing company estimates that each unit of work-in-
process inventory at the workstation costs $31 per day (on average). However, the company can add
extra employees and reduce the processing time to 0.90 minute per unit, at a cost of $52 per day.
Determine whether the company should continue the present operation or add extra employees.
48. The Atlantic Coast Shipping Company has a warehouse terminal in Spartanburg, South Carolina.
The capacity of each terminal dock is three trucks. As trucks enter the terminal, the drivers receive
numbers; and when one of the three dock spaces becomes available, the truck with the lowest
number enters the vacant dock. Truck arrivals are Poisson distributed, and the unloading and load-
ing times (service times) are exponentially distributed. The average arrival rate at the terminal is
five trucks per hour, and the average service rate per dock is two trucks per hour (30 minutes
per truck).
a. Compute 
and 
b. The management of the shipping company is considering adding extra employees and equip-
ment to improve the average service time per terminal dock to 25 minutes per truck. It would
cost the company $18,000 per year to achieve this improved service. Management estimates
that it will increase its profit by $750 per year for each minute it is able to reduce a truck’s
waiting time. Determine whether management should make the investment.
c. Now suppose that the managers of the shipping company have decided that truck waiting
time from part (a) is excessive and they want to reduce the waiting time. They have deter-
mined that there are two alternatives available for reducing the waiting time. They can add a
fourth dock, or they can add extra employees and equipment at the existing docks, which will
reduce the average service time per location from the original 30 minutes per truck to 23
minutes per truck. The costs of these alternatives are approximately equal. Management de-
sires to implement the alternative that reduces waiting time by the greatest amount. Which
alternative should be selected? (Computer solution is suggested.)
Wq.
L, Lq, W,
PROBLEMS
631

49. The Waterfall Buffet in the lower level of the National Art Gallery serves food cafeteria-style
daily to visitors and employees. The buffet is self-service. From 7:00 A.M. to 9:00 A.M. cus-
tomers arrive at the buffet at a rate of 10 per minute; from 9:00 A.M. to noon, at 4 per minute;
from noon to 2:00 P.M., at 14 per minute; and from 2:00 P.M. to closing at 5:00 P.M., at 8 per
minute. All the customers take about the same amount of time to serve themselves from the buf-
fet. Once a customer goes through the buffet, it takes 0.4 minute to pay the cashier. The gallery
does not want a customer to have to wait longer than 4 minutes to pay. How many cashiers
should be working at each of the four times during the day?
50. The Clip Joint is a hairstyling salon at University Mall. Four stylists are always available to
serve customers on a first-come, first-served basis. Customers arrive at an average rate of five
per hour, and the stylists spend an average of 35 minutes on each customer.
a. Determine the average number of customers in the salon, the average time a customer must
wait, and the average number waiting to be served.
b. The salon manager is considering adding a fifth stylist. Would this have a significant impact
on waiting time?
51. The Delacroix Inn in Alexandria is a small, exclusive hotel with 20 rooms. Guests can call
housekeeping from 8:00 A.M. to midnight for any of their service needs. Housekeeping keeps
one person on duty during this time to respond to guest calls. Each room averages 0.7 call per
day to housekeeping (Poisson distributed), and a guest request requires an average of 30 minutes
(exponentially distributed) for the staff person to respond to and take care of. Determine the por-
tion of time the staff person is busy and how long a guest must wait for his or her request to be
addressed. Does the housekeeping system seem adequate?
52. Jim Carter builds custom furniture, primarily cabinets, bookcases, small tables, and chairs. He
works on only one piece of furniture for a customer at a time. It takes him an average of 5 weeks
(exponentially distributed) to build a piece of furniture. An average of 14 customers approach
Jim to order pieces of furniture each year (Poisson distributed); however, Jim will take only a
maximum of 8 advance orders. Determine the average time a customer must wait to receive a
furniture order once it is placed and how busy Jim is. What is the probability that a customer
will be able to place an order with Jim?
53. Judith Lewis is a doctoral student at State University, and she also works full-time as an 
academic tutor for 10 scholarshiped student athletes. She took the job, hoping it would leave 
her free time between tutoring to devote to her own studies. An athlete visits her for tutoring an av-
erage of every 16 hours, and she spends an average of 1.5 hours (exponentially distributed) with
him or her. She is able to tutor only one athlete at a time, and athletes study while they are waiting.
a. Determine how long a player must wait to see her and the percentage of time Judith is busy.
Does the job seem to meet Judith’s expectations, and does the system seem adequate to meet
the athletes’ needs?
b. If the results in (a) indicate that the tutoring arrangement is ineffective, suggest an adjust-
ment that could improve it for both the athletes and Judith.
54. TSA security agents at the security gate at the Tri-Cities Regional Airport are able to check pas-
sengers and process them through the security gate at a rate of 50 per hour (Poisson distributed).
Passengers arrive at the gate throughout the day at a rate of 40 per hour (Poisson distributed).
Determine the average waiting time and waiting line.
55. Tech has a student population of 30,000 and is located in a small college town in Virginia. 
DirectCast Cable TV has a small service staff or three installation trucks and technicians that is
sufficient to handle service calls and installations for almost the entire year. However, for the
month-long period right before and during the beginning of fall semester in August, when all the
students return, the cable TV service is overwhelmed. During the normal year DirectCast aver-
ages about 15 service requests per day (Poisson distributed), and service calls average about
632
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS

50 minutes (exponentially distributed) during their 8-hour workday. However, during the month
before school starts, the demand for service calls triples, and almost all of these are requests for
installations, so the average service time increases to 80 minutes. During normal demand
periods, DirectCast guarantees service within a 24-hour period.
a. What will the cable service and customer waiting time be like during the month before the
semester starts? 
b. It is possible for DirectCast to “borrow” trucks and crews from other company offices. How
many extra trucks would it need to provide its normal service guarantee?
56. In Problem 55, as an alternative to borrowing trucks and crews from other offices (which can be
costly), DirectCast is considering extending the normal workday to 16 hours and paying its own
technicians overtime. Would this satisfy demand to the extent that additional trucks and crews
would not have to be borrowed from other offices? Discuss the financial information DirectCast
would likely have to consider in making these decisions. 
57. In Problem 28, when the students come back for fall semester, the Sub Shop experiences a large
increase in demand for about a month before it begins to level off again, such that the number of
phone orders increases to an average of 8 per hour (Poisson distributed). If the shop now as-
sumes that service times are exponentially distributed, with a mean of 20 minutes, how many
delivery people will it need to provide a reasonable service level?
58. In Problem 54 the passenger traffic arriving at the airport security gate varies significantly dur-
ing the day. At times close to flight takeoffs, the traffic is very heavy, while at other times there
is little or no passenger traffic through the security gate. At the times leading up to flight take-
offs, passengers arrive at a rate of 110 per hour (Poisson distributed). Suggest a waiting line sys-
tem that can accommodate this level of passenger traffic.
59. The inland port at Front Royal, Virginia, is a transportation hub that primarily transfers shipping
containers from trucks coming from eastern seaports to rail cars for shipment to inland destina-
tions. Containers arrive at the inland ports at a rate of eight per hour. It takes 28 minutes (expo-
nentially distributed) for a crane to unload a container from a truck, place it on a flatbed railcar,
and secure it. Suggest a waiting line system that will effectively handle this level of container
traffic at the inland port.
60. The Old Colony theme park has a new ride, the Double Cyclone. The ride holds 30 people in
double roller coaster cars, and it takes 3.8 minutes to complete the ride circuit. It also takes the
ride attendants another 3 minutes (with virtually no variation) to load and unload passengers.
Passengers arrive at the ride during peak park hours at a rate of 4 per minute (Poisson distrib-
uted). Determine the length of the waiting line for the ride.
CASE PROBLEM
633
Case Problem
The College of Business Copy Center
The copy center at the college of business at State Uni-
versity has become an increasingly contentious item
among the college administrators. The department heads
have complained to the associate dean about the long lines
and waiting times for their secretaries at the copy center.
They claim that it is a waste of scarce resources for the 
secretaries to stand in line talking when they could be 
doing more productive work in the office. Alternatively,
Handford Burris, the associate dean, says the limited oper-
ating budget will not allow the college to purchase a new
copier, or several copiers, to relieve the problem. This
standoff has been going on for several years.
To make her case for improved copying facilities,
Lauren Moore, the department head for management 
science, assigned students a class project to gather some
information about the copy center. The students were to
record the arrivals at the center and the length of time it

634
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
Case Problem
Northwoods Backpackers
Bob and Carol Packer operate a successful outdoor-wear
store in Vermont called Northwoods Backpackers. They
stock mostly cold weather outdoor items such as hiking and
backpacking clothes, gear, and accessories. They estab-
lished an excellent reputation throughout New England for
quality products and service. Eventually, Bob and Carol no-
ticed that more and more of their sales were to customers
who did not live in the immediate vicinity but were calling
in orders on the telephone. As a result, the Packers decided
to distribute a catalog and establish a phone-order service.
The order department consisted of five operators working 
8 hours per day from 10:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., Monday
through Friday. For a few years the mail-order service was
only moderately successful; the Packers just about broke
even on their investment. However, during the holiday sea-
son of the third year of the catalog-order service, they were
overwhelmed with phone orders. Although they made a
substantial profit, they were concerned about the large
number of lost sales they estimated they had incurred.
Based on information provided by the telephone company
regarding call volume and complaints from customers, the
Packers estimated that they lost sales of approximately
$100,000. Also, they felt they had lost a substantial number
of old and potentially new customers because of the poor
service of the catalog order department.
Prior to the next holiday season, the Packers explored
several alternatives for improving the catalog-order service.
The current system includes the five original operators with
computer terminals who work 8-hour days, 5 days per week.
The Packers hired a consultant to study this system, and she
reported that the time for an operator to take a customer or-
der is exponentially distributed, with a mean of 3.6 minutes.
Calls are expected to arrive at the telephone center during
the 6-week holiday season, according to a Poisson distribu-
tion, with a mean rate of 175 calls per hour. When all opera-
tors are busy, callers are put on hold, listening to music until
an operator can answer. Waiting calls are answered on a
FIFO basis. Based on her experience with other catalog 
telephone-order operations and data from Northwoods
Backpackers, the consultant has determined that if North-
woods Backpackers can reduce customer call-waiting time
to approximately 0.5 minute or less, the company will save
$135,000 in lost sales during the coming holiday season.
Therefore, the Packers have adopted this level of call
service as their goal. However, in addition to simply avoid-
ing lost sales, the Packers believe it is important to reduce
waiting time in order to maintain their reputation for good
customer service. Thus, they would like for about 70% of
their callers to receive immediate service.
The Packers can maintain the same number of worksta-
tions and computer terminals they currently have and increase
their service to 16 hours per day with two operator shifts run-
ning from 8:00 A.M. to midnight. The Packers believe when
took to do a copy job once the secretary actually reached a
copy machine. In addition, the students were to describe
how the copy center system worked.
When the students completed the project, they turned
in a report to Professor Moore. The report described the
copy center as containing two machines. When secretaries
arrived for a copy job, they joined a queue, which looked
more like milling around to the students. But they ac-
knowledged that the secretaries knew when it was their
turn, and, in effect, they formed a single queue for the first
available copy machine. Also, because copy jobs are as-
signed tasks, secretaries always stayed to do the job, no
matter how long the line was or how long they had to wait.
They never left the queue.
From the data the students gathered, Professor Moore
is able to determine that secretaries arrive every 8 minutes
for a copy job and that the arrival rate is Poisson distrib-
uted. Furthermore, she was able to determine that the 
average time it takes to complete a job is 12 minutes and
that this is exponentially distributed.
Using her own personnel records and some data from
the university’s personnel office, Dr. Moore determines that
a secretary’s average salary is $8.50 per hour. From her ac-
ademic calendar she adds up the actual days in the year
when the college and departmental offices are open and
finds there are 247. However, as she adds up working days,
it occurs to her that during the summer months, the work-
load is much lighter, and the copy center also probably gets
less traffic. The summer includes about 70 days, during
which she expects the copy center traffic to be about half of
what it is during the normal year, but she speculates that the
average time of a copying job remains about the same.
Professor Moore next calls a local office supply firm to
check the prices on copiers. A new copier of the type in the
copy center now would cost $36,000. It would also require
$8,000 per year for maintenance and would have a normal
useful life of 6 years.
Do you think Dr. Moore will be able to convince 
the associate dean that a new copier machine will be 
cost-effective?

CASE PROBLEM
635
customers become aware of their extended hours, the calls
will spread out uniformly, resulting in a new call average ar-
rival rate of 87.5 calls per hour (still Poisson distributed). This
schedule change would cost Northwoods Backpackers ap-
proximately $11,500 for the 6-week holiday season.
Another alternative for reducing customer waiting times
is to offer weekend service. However, the Packers believe
that if they offer weekend service, it must coincide with
whatever service they offer during the week. In other words,
if they have phone-order service 8 hours per day during the
week, they must have the same service during the weekend;
the same is true with 16-hours-per-day service. They feel
that if weekend hours differ from week-day hours, it will
confuse customers. If 8-hour service is offered 7 days per
week, the new call arrival rate will be reduced to 125 calls
per hour, at a cost of $3,600. If they offer 16-hour service,
the mean call arrival rate will be reduced to 62.5 calls per
hour, at a cost of $7,200.
Still another possibility is to add more operator sta-
tions. Each station includes a desk, an operator, a phone,
and a computer terminal. An additional station that is in
operation 5 days per week, 8 hours per day, will cost
$2,900 for the holiday season. For a 16-hour day the cost
per new station is $4,700. For 7-day service the cost of an
additional station for 8-hours-per-day service is $3,800;
for 16-hours-per-day service, the cost is $6,300.
The facility Northwoods Backpackers uses to house its
operators can accommodate a maximum of 10 stations.
Additional operators in excess of 10 would require the
Packers to lease, remodel, and wire a new facility, which is
a capital expenditure they do not want to undertake this
holiday season. Alternatively, the Packers do not want to
reduce their current number of operator stations.
Determine what order service configuration the 
Packers should use to achieve their goals and explain your
recommendation.
Case Problem
Analyzing Disaster Situations at Tech
Two area hospitals have jointly initiated several planning
projects to determine how effectively their emergency facil-
ities can handle disaster-related situations at nearby Tech
University. These disasters could be weather related, such
as a tornado, a fire, accidents (such as a gas main explosion
or a building collapse), or acts of terrorism. One of these
projects has focused on the transport of disaster victims
from the Tech campus to the two hospitals in the area,
Montgomery Regional and Radford Memorial. When a dis-
aster occurs at Tech, emergency vehicles are dispatched
from Tech police, local EMT units, hospitals, and local
county and city police departments. Victims are brought to
a staging area near the disaster scene and wait for transport
to one of the two area hospitals. Aspects of the project
analysis include the waiting times victims might experience
at the disaster scene for emergency vehicles to transport
them to the hospital, and waiting times for treatment once
victims arrive at the hospital. The project team is analyzing
various waiting line models, as follows. (Unless stated oth-
erwise, arrivals are Poisson distributed, and service times
are exponentially distributed.)
a. First, consider a single-server waiting line model in
which the available emergency vehicles are consid-
ered to be the server. Assume that victims arrive at
the staging area ready to be transported to a hospital
on average every 7 minutes and that emergency vehi-
cles are plentiful and available to pick up and trans-
port victims every 4.5 minutes. Compute the average
waiting time for victims. Next, assume that the distri-
bution of service times is undefined, with a mean of
4.5 minutes and a standard deviation of 5 minutes.
Compute the average waiting time for the victims.
b. Next, consider a multiple-server model in which
there are eight emergency vehicles available for
transporting victims to the hospitals, and the mean
time required for a vehicle to pick up and transport a
victim to a hospital is 20 minutes. (Assume the same
arrival rate as in part a.) Compute the average waiting
line, the average waiting time for a victim, and the
average time in the system for a victim (waiting and
being transported).
c. For the multiple-server model in part b now assume
that there are a finite number of victims, 18. Deter-
mine the average waiting line, the average waiting
time, and the average time in the system. (Note that a
finite calling population model with multiple servers
will require the use of the QM for Windows software.)
d. From the two hospitals’ perspectives, consider a 
multiple-server model in which the two hospitals are the
servers. The emergency vehicles at the disaster scene
constitute a single waiting line, and each driver calls
ahead to see which hospital is most likely to admit
the victim first, and travels to that hospital. Vehicles
arrive at a hospital every 8.5 minutes, on average, and

636
CHAPTER 13
QUEUING ANALYSIS
the average service time for the emergency staff to
admit and treat a victim is 12 minutes. Determine the
average waiting line for victims, the average waiting
time, and the average time in the system.
e. Next, consider a single hospital, Montgomery Re-
gional, which in an emergency disaster situation has
five physicians with supporting staff available. Vic-
tims arrive at the hospital on average every 8.5 min-
utes. It takes an emergency room team, on average,
21 minutes to treat a victim. Determine the average
waiting line, the average waiting time, and the aver-
age time in the system.
f. For the multiple-server model in part e now assume
that there are a finite number of victims, 23. Deter-
mine the average waiting line, the average waiting
time, and the average time in the system. (Note that a
finite calling population model with multiple servers
will require the use of the QM for Windows software.)
g. Which of these waiting line models do you think
would be the most useful in analyzing a disaster situa-
tion? How do you think some, or all, of the models
might be used together to analyze a disaster situation?
What other type(s) of waiting line model(s) do you
think might be useful in analyzing a disaster situation?
Case Problem
Forecasting Airport Passenger 
Arrivals—Continued
In the “Forecasting Airport Passenger Arrivals” case prob-
lem in Chapter 15 (Forecasting), the objective is to develop a
forecasting model to predict daily airline passenger arrivals
for 2-hour time segments from 4:00 A.M. to 10:00 P.M. for
July at Berry International Airport (BEI). Such a forecasting
model is necessary in order to determine how many security
gates will be needed at the South concourse during each of
the daily time segments for any day in July, the airport’s
busiest travel month. Use the forecast developed in the Chap-
ter 15 case to perform this type of waiting line analysis to de-
termine how many security checkpoints are needed during
each time segment. Assume that as passengers arrive at the
South concourse security gate they join a single line to have
their boarding pass and identification checked at one of sev-
eral stations. When passengers leave these stations they again
form a single line and are approximately equally distributed
among the security checkpoints by security personnel 
before going through the various detection machines. For
July the airport plans to staff six security checkpoints for
each 2-hour time segment from 4:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., and
then three checkpoints from 6:00 P.M. to 8:00 P.M., and two
checkpoints from 8:00 P.M. to 10:00 P.M. Assume that the 
arrival rate at this point in the security system is Poisson 
distributed, with the forecasted passenger arrivals developed
in the Chapter 15 case as the mean arrival rate. Further,
assume that service times are exponentially distributed with
a mean of 11.6 seconds. Determine whether the number of
security checkpoints the airport plans to use for each 2-hour
time segment is sufficient to keep passengers moving freely
through the security system without excessive delays. If the
current number of checkpoints is not sufficient, what is the
likely result? If the planned system is not likely to be suffi-
cient, determine the number of checkpoints that would be
needed for each 2-hour segment in order for passengers to
move quickly through the security checkpoints without 
excessive waiting times.

CHAPTER
14
Simulation
637

Simulation represents a major divergence from the topics presented in the previous chapters of
this text. Previous topics usually dealt with mathematical models and formulas that could be ap-
plied to certain types of problems. The solution approaches to these problems were, for the most
part, analytical. However, not all real-world problems can be solved by applying a specific type
of technique and then performing the calculations. Some problem situations are too complex to
be represented by the concise techniques presented so far in this text. In such cases, simulation
is an alternative form of analysis.
Analogue simulation is a form of simulation that is familiar to most people. In analogue
simulation, an original physical system is replaced by an analogous physical system that is easier
to manipulate. Much of the experimentation in staffed spaceflight was conducted using physical
simulation that re-created the conditions of space. For example, conditions of weightlessness
were simulated using rooms filled with water. Other examples include wind tunnels that simulate
the conditions of flight and treadmills that simulate automobile tire wear in a laboratory instead
of on the road.
This chapter is concerned with an alternative type of simulation, computer mathematical
simulation. In this form of simulation, systems are replicated with mathematical models, which
are analyzed using a computer. This form of simulation has become very popular and has been
applied to a wide variety of business problems. One reason for its popularity is that it offers a
means of analyzing very complex systems that cannot be analyzed by using the other manage-
ment science techniques in this text. However, because such complex systems are beyond the
scope of this text, we will not present actual simulation models; instead, we will present simpli-
fied simulation models of systems that can also be analyzed analytically. We will begin with one
of the simplest forms of simulation models, which encompasses the Monte Carlo process for sim-
ulating random variables.
The Monte Carlo Process
One characteristic of some systems that makes them difficult to solve analytically is that they
consist of random variables represented by probability distributions. Thus, a large proportion of
the applications of simulations are for probabilistic models.
The term Monte Carlo has become synonymous with probabilistic simulation in recent
years. However, the Monte Carlo technique can be more narrowly defined as a technique for se-
lecting numbers randomly from a probability distribution (i.e., “sampling”) for use in a trial
(computer) run of a simulation. The Monte Carlo technique is not a type of simulation model
but rather a mathematical process used within a simulation.
The name Monte Carlo is appropriate because the basic principle behind the process is the
same as in the operation of a gambling casino in Monaco. In Monaco such devices as roulette
wheels, dice, and playing cards are used. These devices produce numbered results at random
from well-defined populations. For example, a 7 resulting from a pair of thrown dice is a ran-
dom value from a population of 11 possible numbers (i.e., 2 through 12). This same process is
employed, in principle, in the Monte Carlo process used in simulation models.
The Use of Random Numbers
The Monte Carlo process of selecting random numbers according to a probability distribution
will be demonstrated using the following example. The manager of ComputerWorld, a store that
sells computers and related equipment, is attempting to determine how many laptop PCs the store
should order each week. A primary consideration in this decision is the average number of laptop
computers that the store will sell each week and the average weekly revenue generated from the
sale of laptop PCs. A laptop sells for $4,300. The number of laptops demanded each week is a
random variable (which we will define as x) that ranges from 0 to 4. From past sales records, the
manager has determined the frequency of demand for laptop PCs for the past 100 weeks. From
638
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Monte Carlo is a
technique for select-
ing numbers
randomly from a
probability
distribution.
The Monte Carlo
process is analogous
to gambling devices.
In computer
mathematical
simulation, a system
is replicated with a
mathematical model
that is analyzed by 
using the computer.
Analogue simulation
replaces a physical
system with an analo-
gous physical system
that is easier to
manipulate.

The purpose of the Monte Carlo process is to generate the random variable, demand, by
sampling from the probability distribution, P(x). The demand per week can be randomly gener-
ated according to the probability distribution by spinning a wheel that is partitioned into seg-
ments corresponding to the probabilities, as shown in Figure 14.1.
THE MONTE CARLO PROCESS
639
20%
40%
20%
10%
10%
Spin
x = 1
x = 4
x = 3
x = 2
x = 0
FIGURE 14.1
A roulette wheel
for demand
TABLE 14.1
Probability
distribution of 
demand for 
laptop PCs 
In the Monte Carlo
process, values for a
random variable are
generated by sampling
from a probability 
distribution.
A long period of real
time is represented by
a short period of
simulated time.
PCs Demanded 
Frequency
Probability
per Week
of Demand
of Demand, P(x)
0
20
.20
1
40
.40
2
20
.20
3
10
.10
4
10
  .10
100
1.00
this frequency distribution, a probability distribution of demand can be developed, as shown in
Table 14.1.
Because the surface area on the roulette wheel is partitioned according to the probability of
each weekly demand value, the wheel replicates the probability distribution for demand if the
values of demand occur in a random manner. To simulate demand for 1 week, the manager spins
the wheel; the segment at which the wheel stops indicates demand for 1 week. Over a period of
weeks (i.e., many spins of the wheel), the frequency with which demand values occur will ap-
proximate the probability distribution, P(x). This method of generating values of a variable, x,
by randomly selecting from the probability distribution—the wheel—is the Monte Carlo
process.
By spinning the wheel, the manager artificially reconstructs the purchase of PCs during a
week. In this reconstruction, a long period of real time (i.e., a number of weeks) is represented
by a short period of simulated time (i.e., several spins of the wheel).
Now let us slightly reconstruct the roulette wheel. In addition to partitioning the wheel into seg-
ments corresponding to the probability of demand, we will put numbers along the outer rim, as on a
real roulette wheel. This reconstructed roulette wheel is shown in Figure 14.2.
There are 100 numbers from 0 to 99 on the outer rim of the wheel, and they have been parti-
tioned according to the probability of each demand value. For example, 20 numbers from 0 to 19
(i.e., 20% of the total 100 numbers) correspond to a demand of no (0) PCs. Now we can deter-
mine the value of demand by seeing which number the wheel stops at as well as by looking at the
segment of the wheel.
When the manager spins this new wheel, the actual demand for PCs will be determined by
a number. For example, if the number 71 comes up on a spin, the demand is 2 PCs per week; the

number 30 indicates a demand of 1. Because the manager does not know which number will
come up prior to the spin and there is an equal chance that any of the 100 numbers will occur,
the numbers occur at random; that is, they are random numbers.
Obviously, it is not generally practical to generate weekly demand for PCs by spinning a
wheel. Alternatively, the process of spinning a wheel can be replicated by using random num-
bers alone.
First, we will transfer the ranges of random numbers for each demand value from the
roulette wheel to a table, as in Table 14.2. Next, instead of spinning the wheel to get a random
number, we will select a random number from Table 14.3, which is referred to as a random
number table. (These random numbers have been generated by computer so that they are all
equally likely to occur, just as if we had spun a wheel. The development of random numbers is
discussed in more detail later in this chapter.) As an example, let us select the number 39, the
first entry in Table 14.3. Looking again at Table 14.2, we can see that the random number 39
falls in the range 20–59, which corresponds to a weekly demand of 1 laptop PC.
640
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
96
95
94
93
92
24
23
22
21
20
19
18
17
16
15
14
0
99
98
97
59
58
57
56
55
54
53
52
51
50
49
48
47
46
45
44
43
42
41
40
39
38
37
36
35
34
33
32
31
30
29
28
27
26
25
78
77
76
75
74
73
72
71
70
69
68
67
66
65
64
63
62
61
60
91
90
89
88
87
86
85
84
83
82
81
80
79
13
12
11
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
x = 1
x = 0
x = 4
x = 3
x = 2
FIGURE 14.2
Numbered roulette
wheel
Demand, x
Ranges of Random Numbers, r
0
0–19
1
20–59
r = 39
2
60–79
3
80–89
4
90–99
TABLE 14.2
Generating
demand from 
random numbers 
Random numbers are
numbers equally
likely to be chosen
from a large popula-
tion of numbers.
Random numbers are
equally likely to
occur.
In a random number
table, the random
numbers are derived
from some artificial
process, like a
computer program.

By repeating this process of selecting random numbers from Table 14.3 (starting anywhere
in the table and moving in any direction but not repeating the same sequence) and then deter-
mining weekly demand from the random number, we can simulate demand for a period of time.
For example, Table 14.4 shows demand for a period of 15 consecutive weeks.
From Table 14.4 the manager can compute the estimated average weekly demand and 
revenue:
 estimated average revenue = +133,300
15
= +8,886.67
 estimated average demand = 31
15 = 2.07 laptop PCs per week
THE MONTE CARLO PROCESS
641
TABLE 14.3
Random number
table
39 65 76 45 45
19 90 69 64 61
20 26 36 31 62
58 24 97 14 97
95 06 70 99 00
73 71 23 70 90
65 97 60 12 11
31 56 34 19 19
47 83 75 51 33
30 62 38 20 46
72 18 47 33 84
51 67 47 97 19
98 40 07 17 66
23 05 09 51 80
59 78 11 52 49
75 12 25 69 17
17 95 21 78 58
24 33 45 77 48
69 81 84 09 29
93 22 70 45 80
37 17 79 88 74
63 52 06 34 30
01 31 60 10 27
35 07 79 71 53
28 99 52 01 41
02 48 08 16 94
85 53 83 29 95
56 27 09 24 43
21 78 55 09 82
72 61 88 73 61
87 89 15 70 07
37 79 49 12 38
48 13 93 55 96
41 92 45 71 51
09 18 25 58 94
98 18 71 70 15
89 09 39 59 24
00 06 41 41 20
14 36 59 25 47
54 45 17 24 89
10 83 58 07 04
76 62 16 48 68
58 76 17 14 86
59 53 11 52 21
66 04 18 72 87
47 08 56 37 31
71 82 13 50 41
27 55 10 24 92
28 04 67 53 44
95 23 00 84 47
93 90 31 03 07
34 18 04 52 35
74 13 39 35 22
68 95 23 92 35
36 63 70 35 33
21 05 11 47 99
11 20 99 45 18
76 51 94 84 86
13 79 93 37 55
98 16 04 41 67
95 89 94 06 97
27 37 83 28 71
79 57 95 13 91
09 61 87 25 21
56 20 11 32 44
97 18 31 55 73
10 65 81 92 59
77 31 61 95 46
20 44 90 32 64
26 99 76 75 63
69 08 88 86 13
59 71 74 17 32
48 38 75 93 29
73 37 32 04 05
60 82 29 20 25
41 26 10 25 03
87 63 93 95 17
81 83 83 04 49
77 45 85 50 51
79 88 01 97 30
91 47 14 63 62
08 61 74 51 69
92 79 43 89 79
29 18 94 51 23
14 85 11 47 23
80 94 54 18 47
08 52 85 08 40
48 40 35 94 22
72 65 71 08 86
50 03 42 99 36
67 06 77 63 99
89 85 84 46 06
64 71 06 21 66
89 37 20 70 01
61 65 70 22 12
59 72 24 13 75
42 29 72 23 19
06 94 76 10 08
81 30 15 39 14
81 33 17 16 33
63 62 06 34 41
79 53 36 02 95
94 61 09 43 62
20 21 14 68 86
84 95 48 46 45
78 47 23 53 90
79 93 96 38 63
34 85 52 05 09
85 43 01 72 73
14 93 87 81 40
87 68 62 15 43
97 48 72 66 48
53 16 71 13 81
59 97 50 99 52
24 62 20 42 31
47 60 92 10 77
26 97 05 73 51
88 46 38 03 58
72 68 49 29 31
75 70 16 08 24
56 88 87 59 41
06 87 37 78 48
65 88 69 58 39
88 02 84 27 83
85 81 56 39 38
22 17 68 65 84
87 02 22 57 51
68 69 80 95 44
11 29 01 95 80
49 34 35 36 47
19 36 27 59 46
39 77 32 77 09
79 57 92 36 59
89 74 39 82 15
08 58 94 34 74
16 77 23 02 77
28 06 24 25 93
22 45 44 84 11
87 80 61 65 31
09 71 91 74 25
78 43 76 71 61
97 67 63 99 61
30 45 67 93 82
59 73 19 85 23
53 33 65 97 21
03 28 28 26 08
69 30 16 09 05
53 58 47 70 93
66 56 45 65 79
45 56 20 19 47
04 31 17 21 56
33 73 99 19 87
26 72 39 27 67
53 77 57 68 93
60 61 97 22 61
61 06 98 03 91
87 14 77 43 96
43 00 65 98 50
45 60 33 01 07
98 99 46 50 47
23 68 35 26 00
99 53 93 61 28
52 70 05 48 34
56 65 05 61 86
90 92 10 70 80
15 39 25 70 99
93 86 52 77 65
15 33 59 05 28
22 87 26 07 47
86 96 98 29 06
58 71 96 30 24
18 46 23 34 27
85 13 99 24 44
49 18 09 79 49
74 16 32 23 02
93 22 53 64 39
07 10 63 76 35
87 03 04 79 88
08 13 13 85 51
55 34 57 72 69
78 76 58 54 74
92 38 70 96 92
52 06 79 79 45
82 63 18 27 44
69 66 92 19 09
61 81 31 96 82
00 57 25 60 59
46 72 60 18 77
55 66 12 62 11
08 99 55 64 57
42 88 07 10 05
24 98 65 63 21
47 21 61 88 32
27 80 30 21 60
10 92 35 36 12
77 94 30 05 39
28 10 99 00 27
12 73 73 99 12
49 99 57 94 82
96 88 57 17 91

The manager can then use this information to help determine the number of PCs to order each
week.
Although this example is convenient for illustrating how simulation works, the average de-
mand could have more appropriately been calculated analytically using the formula for expected
value. The expected value or average for weekly demand can be computed analytically from the
probability distribution, P(x):
where
demand value i
probability of demand
the number of different demand values
Therefore,
The analytical result of 1.5 PCs is close to the simulated result of 2.07 PCs, but clearly there
is some difference. The margin of difference (0.57 PC) between the simulated value and the an-
alytical value is a result of the number of periods over which the simulation was conducted. The
results of any simulation study are subject to the number of times the simulation occurred (i.e.,
the number of trials). Thus, the more periods for which the simulation is conducted, the more
accurate the result. For example, if demand was simulated for 1,000 weeks, in all likelihood an
average value exactly equal to the analytical value (1.5 laptop PCs per week) would result.
Once a simulation has been repeated enough times that it reaches an average result that re-
mains constant, this result is analogous to the steady-state result, a concept we discussed previ-
ously in our presentation of queuing. For this example, 1.5 PCs is the long-run average or
steady-state result, but we have seen that the simulation might have to be repeated more than 15
times (i.e., weeks) before this result is reached.
Comparing our simulated result with the analytical (expected value) result for this example
points out one of the problems that can occur with simulation. It is often difficult to validate the
results of a simulation model—that is, to make sure that the true steady-state average result has
= 1.5 PCs per week
EV(x) = (.20)(0) + (.40)(1) + (.20)(2) + (.10)(3) + (.10)(4)
n =
P(xi) =
xi =
EV(x) = a
n
i=1
P(xi)x
642
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Simulation results will
not equal analytical
results unless enough
trials of the
simulation have been
conducted to reach
steady state.
Week
r
Demand, x
Revenue
1
39
1
$
4,300
2
73
2
8,600
3
72
2
8,600
4
75
2
8,600
5
37
1
4,300
6
02
0
0
7
87
3
12,900
8
98
4
17,200
9
10
0
0
10
47
1
4,300
11
93
4
17,200
12
21
1
4,300
13
95
4
17,200
14
97
4
17,200
15
69
2
8,600

 = 31
$133,300
TABLE 14.4
Randomly
generated demand
for 15 weeks 
It is often difficult to
validate that the
results of a simulation
truly replicate reality.

been reached. In this case we were able to compare the simulated result with the expected value
(which is the true steady-state result), and we found there was a slight difference. We logically
deduced that the 15 trials of the simulation were not sufficient to determine the steady-state av-
erage. However, simulation most often is employed whenever analytical analysis is not possible
(this is one of the reasons that simulation is generally useful). In these cases, there is no analyti-
cal standard of comparison, and validation of the results becomes more difficult. We will dis-
cuss this problem of validation in more detail later in the chapter.
Computer Simulation with Excel Spreadsheets
The simulation we performed manually for the ComputerWorld example was not too difficult.
However, if we had performed the simulation for 1,000 weeks, it would have taken several hours.
On the other hand, this simulation could be done on a computer in several seconds. Also, our sim-
ulation example was not very complex. As simulation models get progressively more complex, it
becomes virtually impossible to perform them manually, thus making the computer a necessity.
Although we will not develop a simulation model in a computer language for this example, we
will demonstrate how a computerized simulation model is developed by using Excel spreadsheets.
The first step in developing a simulation model is to generate a random number, r. Numer-
ous subroutines that are available on practically every computer system generate random num-
bers. Most are quite easy to use and require the insertion of only a few statements in a program.
These random numbers are generated by mathematical processes as opposed to a physical
process, such as spinning a roulette wheel. For this reason, they are referred to as
pseudorandom numbers. It should be apparent from the previous discussion that random num-
bers play a very important part in a probabilistic simulation. Some of the random numbers we
used came from Table 14.3, a table of random numbers. However, random numbers do not come
just from tables, and their generation is not as simple as one might initially think. If random
numbers are not truly random, the validity of simulation results can be significantly affected.
The random numbers in Table 14.3 were generated by using a numerical technique. Thus,
they are not true random numbers but pseudorandom numbers. True random numbers can be
produced only by a physical process, such as spinning a roulette wheel over and over. However,
a physical process, such as spinning a roulette wheel, cannot be conveniently employed in a
computerized simulation model. Thus, there is a need for a numerical method that artificially
creates random numbers.
To truly reflect the system being simulated, the artificially created random numbers must
have the following characteristics:
1. The random numbers must be uniformly distributed. This means that each random number
in the interval of random numbers (i.e., 0 to 1 or 0 to 100) has an equal chance of being 
COMPUTER SIMULATION WITH EXCEL SPREADSHEETS
643
Simulations are 
normally done on the
computer.
The mathematics of the Monte Carlo method have been
known for years; the British mathematician Lord Kelvin used
the technique in a paper in 1901. However, it was formally
identified and given this name by the Hungarian mathemati-
cian John Von Neumann while working on the Los Alamos
atomic bomb project during World War II. During this project,
physicists confronted a problem in determining how far neu-
trons would travel through various materials (i.e., neutron
diffusion in fissile material). The Monte Carlo process was
suggested to Von Neumann by a colleague at Los Alamos,
Stanislas Ulam, as a means to solve this problem—that is, by
selecting random numbers to represent the random actions of
neutrons. However, the Monte Carlo method as used in simu-
lation did not gain widespread popularity until the develop-
ment of the modern electronic computer after the war.
Interestingly, this remarkable man, John Von Neumann, is
credited with being the key figure in the development of the
computer.
Time Out
for John Von Neumann
Random numbers
generated by a mathe-
matical process
instead of a physical
process are
pseudorandom
numbers.
Random numbers are
typically generated on
the computer by using
a numerical
technique.
A table of random
numbers must be uni-
form, efficiently gen-
erated, and absent of
patterns.

selected. If this condition is not met, then the simulation results will be biased by the ran-
dom numbers that have a more likely chance of being selected.
2. The numerical technique for generating random numbers should be efficient. This means
that the random numbers should not degenerate into constant values or recycle too fre-
quently.
3. The sequence of random numbers should not reflect any pattern. For example, the sequence
of numbers 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 0,
and so on, although uniform, is not random.
Random numbers between 0 and 1 can be generated in Excel by entering the formula 
in a cell. The random numbers generated by this formula include all the necessary
characteristics for randomness and uniformity that we discussed earlier. Exhibit 14.1 is an Excel
spreadsheet with 100 random numbers generated by entering the formula 
in cell A3
and copying to the cells in the range A3:J12. Recall that you can copy things in a range of cells
in two ways. You can first cover cells A3:J12 with the cursor and then type the formula 
into cell A3. Then you press the “Ctrl” and “Enter” keys simultaneously. Alterna-
tively, you can type 
in cell A3, copy this cell (using the right mouse button), then
cover cells A3:J12 with the cursor, and (again with the right mouse button) paste this formula in
these cells.
RAND()

RAND()

RAND()

RAND()

644
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
EXHIBIT 14.1
If you attempt to replicate this spreadsheet, you will generate different random numbers
from those shown in Exhibit 14.1. Every time you generate random numbers, they will be dif-
ferent. In fact, any time you recalculate anything on your spreadsheet, the random numbers will
change. You can see this by pressing the “F9” key and observing that all the random numbers
change. However, sometimes it is useful in a simulation model to be able to use the same set (or
stream) of random numbers over and over. You can freeze the random numbers you are using on
your spreadsheet by first covering the cells with random numbers in them with the cursor—for
example, cells A3:J12 in Exhibit 14.1. Next, you copy these cells (using the right mouse but-
ton); then you click on the “Edit” menu at the top of your spreadsheet and select “Paste Special”
from this menu. Next, you select the “Values” option and click on “OK.” This procedure pastes
a copy of the numbers in these cells over the same cells with 
formulas in them, thus
freezing the numbers in place.
Notice one more thing from Exhibit 14.1: The random numbers are all between 0 and 1,
whereas the random numbers in Table 14.3 are whole numbers between 0 and 100. We used
whole random numbers previously for illustrative purposes; however, computer programs such as
Excel generally provide random numbers between 0 and 1.
Now we are ready to duplicate our example simulation model for the ComputerWorld store
by using Excel. The spreadsheet in Exhibit 14.2 includes the simulation model originally devel-
oped in Table 14.4.
Note that the probability distribution for the weekly demand for laptops has been entered in
cells A6:C10. Also notice that we have entered a new set of cumulative probability values 
in column B. We generated these cumulative probabilities by first entering 0 in cell B6, then 
RAND()


entering the formula
in cell B7, and copying this formula to cells B8:B10. This cu-
mulative probability creates a range of random numbers for each demand value. For example,
any random number less than 0.20 will result in a demand value of 0, and any random number
greater than 0.20 but less than 0.60 will result in a demand value of 1, and so on. (Notice that
there is no value of 1.00 in cell B11; the last demand value, 4, will be selected for any random
number equal to or greater than .90.)
Random numbers are generated in cells F6:F20 by entering the formula
in cell
F6 and copying it to the range of cells in F7:F20.
Now we need to be able to generate demand values for each of these random numbers in
column F. We accomplish this by first covering the cumulative probabilities and the demand val-
ues in cells B6:C10 with the cursor. Then we give this range of cells the name “Lookup.” This
can be done by typing “Lookup” directly on the formula bar in place of B6 or by clicking on the
“Insert” button at the top of the spreadsheet and selecting “Name” and “Define” and then enter-
ing the name “Lookup.” This has the effect of creating a table called “Lookup” with the ranges
of random numbers and associated demand values in it. Next, we enter the formula 
in cell G6 and copy it to the cells in the range G7:G20. This for-
mula will compare the random numbers in column F with the cumulative probabilities in
B6:B10 and generate the correct demand value from cells C6:C10.
Once the demand values have been generated in column G, we can determine the weekly rev-
enue values by entering the formula 
in H6 and copying it to cells H7:H20.
Average weekly demand is computed in cell C13 by using the formula 
and the average weekly revenue is computed by entering a similar formula in
cell C14.
Notice that the average weekly demand value of 1.53 in Exhibit 14.2 is different from the
simulation result (2.07) we obtained from Table 14.4. This is because we used a different stream
of random numbers. As mentioned previously, to acquire an average closer to the true steady-
state value, the simulation probably needs to include more repetitions than 15 weeks. As an ex-
ample, Exhibit 14.3 simulates demand for 100 weeks. The window has been “frozen” at row 16
and scrolled up to show the first 10 weeks and the last 6 weeks on the screen in Exhibit 14.3.
(G6:G20),
AVERAGE

4300*G6

VLOOKUP(F6,Lookup,2)

RAND()

A6+B6

COMPUTER SIMULATION WITH EXCEL SPREADSHEETS
645
Enter =VLOOKUP(F6,Lookup,2)
in G6 and copy it to G7:G20.
Enter =4300*G6
in H6 and copy it
to H7:H20.
Generate random numbers for cells
F6:F20 with the formula =RAND() in
F6 and copy it to F7:F20.
= AVERAGE(G6:G20)
EXHIBIT 14.2

Decision Making with Simulation
In our previous example, the manager of ComputerWorld acquired some useful information
about the weekly demand and revenue for laptops that would be helpful in making a decision
about how many laptops would be needed each week to meet demand. However, this example
did not lead directly to a decision. Next, we will expand our ComputerWorld store example so
that a possible decision will result.
From the simulation in Exhibit 14.3 the manager of the store knows that the average weekly
demand for laptop PCs will be approximately 1.49; however, the manager cannot order 1.49 lap-
tops each week. Because fractional laptops are not possible, either one or two must be ordered.
Thus, the manager wants to repeat the earlier simulation with two possible order sizes, 1 and 2.
The manager also wants to include some additional information in the model that will affect the
decision.
If too few laptops are on hand to meet demand during the week, then not only will there be
a loss of revenue, but there will also be a shortage cost of $500 per unit incurred because the
customer will be unhappy. However, each laptop still in stock at the end of each week that has
not been sold will incur an inventory or storage cost of $50. Thus, it costs the store money to
have either too few or too many laptops on hand each week. Given this scenario, the manager
wants to order either one or two laptops, depending on which order size will result in the great-
est average weekly revenue.
Exhibit 14.4 shows the Excel spreadsheet for this revised example. The simulation is
for 100 weeks. The columns labeled “1,” “2,” and “4” for “Week,” “RN,” and “Demand” were
constructed similarly to the model in Exhibit 14.3. The array of cells B6:C10 was given the
name “Lookup,” and the formula 
was entered in cell H6 and
copied to cells H7:H105.
The simulation in Exhibit 14.4 is for an order size of one laptop each week. The “Inventory”
column (3) keeps track of the amount of inventory available each week—the one laptop that comes
in on order plus any laptops carried over from the previous week. The cumulative inventory is
computed each week by entering the formula 
in cell G7 and copying it to
cells G8:G105. This formula adds the one laptop on order to either the number left over from the
1+MAX(G6-H6,0)

VLOOKUP(F6,Lookup,2)

646
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Spreadsheet is “frozen” at row 16 to 
show first 10 weeks and last 6.
Click on the “View” tab,
then on “Freeze Panes.“
EXHIBIT 14.3

previous week (G6 H6) or 0, if there were not enough laptops on hand to meet demand. It does not
allow for negative inventory levels, called back orders. In other words, if a sale cannot be made
owing to a shortage, then it is gone. The inventory values in column 3 are eventually multiplied by
the inventory cost of $50 per unit in column 8, using the formula 
.
If there is a shortage, it is recorded in column 5, labeled “Shortage.” The shortage is com-
puted by entering the formula 
in cell I6 and copying it to cells I7:I105.
Shortage costs are computed in column 7 by multiplying the shortage values in column 5 by
$500 by entering the formula 
in cell K6 and copying it to cells K7:K105.
Weekly revenues are computed in column 6 by entering the formula 
in cell J6 and copying it to cells J7:J105. In other words, the revenue is determined by either the
inventory level in column 3 or the demand in column 4, whichever is smaller.
Total weekly revenue is computed in column 9 by subtracting shortage costs and inventory
costs from revenue by entering the formula 
J6-K6-L6 in cell M6 and copying it to cells
M7:M105.
The average weekly demand, 1.50, is shown in cell C13. The average weekly revenue,
$3,875, is computed in cell C14.
Next, we must repeat this same simulation for an order size of two laptops each week. The
spreadsheet for an order size of two is shown in Exhibit 14.5. Notice that the only actual differ-
ence is the use of a new formula to compute the weekly inventory level in column 3. This for-
mula,
, in cell G7, reflecting two laptops ordered each week, is shown on
the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet.
This second simulation, in Exhibit 14.5, results in an average weekly demand of 1.50 laptops
and an average weekly total revenue of $4,927.50. This is higher than the total weekly revenue of
$3,875 achieved in the first simulation run in Exhibit 14.4, even though the store would incur sig-
nificantly higher inventory costs. Thus, the correct decision—based on weekly revenue—would be
to order two laptops per week. However, there are probably additional aspects of this problem the
manager would want to consider in the decision-making process, such as the increasingly high in-
ventory levels as the simulation progresses. For example, there may not be enough storage space
2MAX(G6-H6,0)


MIN(H6,G6)
4300*

I6*500

MIN(G6-H6,0)

G6*50

-
COMPUTER SIMULATION WITH EXCEL SPREADSHEETS
647
 =1+MAX(G6–H6,0)
is entered in G7 and
copied to G8:G105.
Shortages are computed by
entering =MIN(G6H6,0) in
I6 and copying to I7:I105.
=G6*50 is entered in cell
L6 and copied to L7:L105.
=VLOOKUP(F6,Lookup,2) is entered
in H6 and copied to H7:H105.
EXHIBIT 14.4

to accommodate this much inventory. Such questions as this and others can also be analyzed with
simulation. In fact, one of the main attributes of simulation is its usefulness as a model for experi-
menting, called what-if? analysis.
This example briefly demonstrates how simulation can be used to make a decision (i.e., to
“optimize”). In this example we experimented with two order sizes and determined the one that
resulted in the greater revenue. The same basic modeling principles can be used to solve larger
problems with hundreds of possible order sizes and a probability distribution for demand with
many more values plus variable lead times (i.e., the time it takes to receive an order), the ability
to back-order, and other complicating factors. These factors make the simulation model larger
and more complex, but such models are frequently developed and used in business.
Simulation of a Queuing System
To demonstrate the simulation of a queuing system, we will use an example. Burlingham Mills
produces denim, and one of the main steps in the production process is dyeing the cotton yarn
that is subsequently woven into denim cloth. The yarn is dyed in a large concrete vat like a
narrow swimming pool. The yarn is strung over a series of rollers so that it passes through the
vat, up over a set of rollers, back down into the vat, back up and over another set of rollers, and
so on. Yarn is dyed in batches that arrive at the dyeing vat in 1-, 2-, 3-, or 4-day intervals,
according to the probability distribution shown in Table 14.5. Once a batch of yarn arrives at the
dyeing facility, it takes either 0.5, 1.0, or 2.0 days to complete the dyeing process, according to
the probability distribution shown in Table 14.6.
648
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
New formula for two laptops
ordered per week
EXHIBIT 14.5
What-if? analysis is a
form of model experi-
mentation using a
computer to ascertain
the results of making
changes in a model.
TABLE 14.5
Distribution of 
arrival intervals 
Arrival Interval
Probability,
Cumulative 
Random Number
(days), x
P(x)
Probability
Range, r1
1.0
.20
.20
1–20
2.0
.40
.60
21–60
3.0
.30
.90
61–90
4.0
.10
1.00
91–99, 00

Table 14.5 defines the interarrival time, or how often batches arrive at the dyeing facility. For
example, there is a .20 probability that a batch will arrive 1 day after the previous batch. Table 14.6
defines the service time for a batch. Notice that cumulative probabilities have been included in
Tables 14.5 and 14.6. The cumulative probability provides a means for determining the ranges of
random numbers associated with each probability, as we demonstrated with our Excel example
in the previous section. For example, in Table 14.5 the first random number range for r1 is from
1 to 20, which corresponds to the cumulative probability of .20. The second range of random
numbers is from 21 to 60, which corresponds to a cumulative probability of .60. Although the
cumulative probability goes up to 1.00, Table 14.3 contains only random number values from 0 to
99. Thus, the number 00 is used in place of 100 in the last random number range of each table.
Table 14.7 illustrates the simulation of 10 batch arrivals at the dyeing vat. 
SIMULATION OF A QUEUING SYSTEM
649
TABLE 14.6
Distribution of
service times 
Developing the cumu-
lative probability
distribution helps to
determine random
number ranges.
Service Time 
Probability,
Cumulative
Random Number
(days), y
P(y)
Probability
Range, r2
0.5
.20
.20
1–20
1.0
.50
.70
21–70
2.0
.30
1.00
71–99, 00
TABLE 14.7
Simulation at the Burlingham Mills Dyeing Facility 
Arrival 
Enter
Interval,
Arrival
Facility
Waiting
Service
Departure
Time in 
Batch
r1
x
Clock
Clock
Time
r2
Time, y
Clock
System
1
—
—
0.0
0.0
0.0
65
1.0
1.0
1.0
2
71
3.0
3.0
3.0
0.0
18
0.5
3.5
0.5
3
12
1.0
4.0
4.0
0.0
17
0.5
4.5
0.5
4
48
2.0
6.0
6.0
0.0
89
2.0
8.0
2.0
5
18
1.0
7.0
8.0
1.0
83
2.0
10.0
3.0
6
08
1.0
8.0
10.0
2.0
90
2.0
12.0
4.0
7
05
1.0
9.0
12.0
3.0
89
2.0
14.0
5.0
8
18
1.0
10.0
14.0
4.0
08
0.5
14.5
4.5
9
26
2.0
12.0
14.5
2.5
47
1.0
15.5
3.5
10
94
4.0
16.0
16.0
0.0
06
0.5
16.5
0.5
12.5
24.5 
The manual simulation process illustrated in Table 14.7 can be interpreted as follows:
1. Batch 1 arrives at time 0, which is recorded on an arrival clock. Because there are no
batches in the system, batch 1 approaches the dyeing facility immediately, also at time 0.
The waiting time is 0.
2. Next, a random number,
is selected from the second column in Table 14.3. From Table
14.6 we see that the random number 65 results in a service time, y, of 1 day. After leaving the
dyeing vat, the batch departs at time 1 day, having been in the queuing system a total of 1 day.
3. The next random number,
is selected from Table 14.3, which specifies that batch 2
arrives 3 days after batch 1, or at time 3.0, as shown on the arrival clock. Because batch 1 de-
parted the service facility at time 1.0, batch 2 can be served immediately and thus incurs no
waiting time.
4. The next random number,
is selected from Table 14.3, which indicates that batch 2
will spend 0.5 day being served and will depart at time 3.5.
This process of selecting random numbers and generating arrival intervals and service times
continues until 10 batch arrivals have been simulated, as shown in Table 14.7.
r2 = 18,
r1 = 71,
r2 = 65,

Once the simulation is complete, we can compute operating characteristics from the simu-
lation results, as follows:
However, as in our previous example, these results must be viewed with skepticism. Ten tri-
als of the system do not ensure steady-state results. In general, we can expect a considerable dif-
ference between the true average values and the values estimated from only 10 random draws.
One reason is that we cannot be sure that the random numbers we selected in this example repli-
cated the actual probability distributions because we used so few random numbers. The stream
of random numbers that was used might have had a preponderance of high or low values, thus
biasing the final model results. For example, of nine arrivals, five had interarrival times of 1 day.
This corresponds to a probability of .55 (i.e., 5/9); however, the actual probability of an arrival
interval of 1 day is .20 (from Table 14.5). This excessive number of short interarrival times
(caused by the sequence of random numbers) has probably artificially inflated the operating sta-
tistics of the system.
As the number of random trials is increased, the probabilities in the simulation will more
closely conform to the actual probability distributions. That is, if we simulated the queuing sys-
tem for 1,000 arrivals, we could more reasonably expect that 20% of the arrivals would have an
interarrival time of 1 day.
An additional factor that can affect simulation results is the starting conditions. If we start
our queuing system with no batches in the system, we must simulate a length of time before
the system replicates normal operating conditions. In this example, it is logical to start simu-
lating at the time the vat starts operating in the morning, especially if we simulate an entire
working day. Some queuing systems, however, start with items already in the system. For ex-
ample, the dyeing facility might logically start each day with partially completed batches from
the previous day. In this case, it is necessary to begin the simulation with batches already in
the system.
By adding a second random variable to a simulation model, such as the one just shown,
we increase the complexity and therefore the manual operations. To simulate the example in
Table 14.7 manually for 1,000 trials would require several hours. It would be far preferable to
perform this type of simulation on a computer. A number of mathematical computations
would be required to determine the various column values of Table 14.7, as we will demon-
strate in the Excel spreadsheet simulation of this example in the next section.
Computer Simulation of the Queuing Example with Excel
The simulation of the dyeing process at Burlingham Mills shown in Table 14.7 can also be done
in Excel. Exhibit 14.6 shows the spreadsheet simulation model for this example.
The stream of random numbers in column C is generated by the formula
used
in the ComputerWorld examples in Exhibits 14.2 through 14.5. (Notice that for this computer
simulation, we have changed our random numbers from whole numbers to numbers between
0.0 and 1.0.) The arrival times are generated from the cumulative probability distribution of ar-
rival intervals in cells B6:C9. This array of cells is named “Lookup1” because there are two
probability distributions in the model. The formula 
is entered
in cell D15 and copied to cells D16:D23 to generate the arrival times in column D. The arrival
clock times are computed by entering the formula 
in cell E15 and copying it to
cells E16:E23.
A batch of yarn can enter the dyeing facility as soon as it arrives (in column E) if there is
not another batch being dyed or as soon as any batches being dyed or waiting to be dyed have
E14+D15

VLOOKUP(C15, Lookup1,2)
RAND(),
 average time in the system = 24.5 days
10 batches = 2.45 days per batch
 average waiting time = 12.5 days
10 batches = 1.25 days per batch
650
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
A factor that can affect
simulation results is
the starting conditions.

SIMULATION OF A QUEUING SYSTEM
651
This formula is entered in D15
and copied to D16:D23.
=AVERAGE(G14:G23)
Arrival times are generated
by entering =E14+D15 in E15
and copying to E16:E23.
Copy =VLOOKUP(H14,Lookup2,2)
to I14:I23.
Clock time is generated by
entering =MAX(E15,J14) in
F15 and copying to F16:F23.
EXHIBIT 14.6
Management Science Application
Planning for Health Emergencies Created 
by Terrorist Attacks
In today’s world the threat of terrorist attacks cannot be un-
derestimated or discounted, especially in densely populated or
strategically important areas of the country, like Washington,
DC. Because such attacks could take the form of outbreaks of
contagious diseases, public health departments have been
prompted to plan how to respond to such health disasters. 
If terrorists released a lethal virus like smallpox into the gen-
eral population, everyone would have to be vaccinated within a
few days. This would require a massive response including the
mass-dispensing of vaccinations through clinics staffed with the
necessary people to perform the tasks. For example, Mont-
gomery County, Maryland, which borders the District of Colum-
bia, would need to vaccinate nearly a million people in just a
few days. To vaccinate such a large number of people would re-
quire mass-vaccination clinics throughout the county. Any type
of planning model would need to include the number of peo-
ple to train beforehand, the clinics’ capacities, and the time res-
idents would spend at a clinic (i.e., time in the system). 
A simulation study was used to evaluate alternative mass-
vaccination clinic designs—specifically, clinic operations, clinic
capacity, and resident time in the system. Model data for ar-
rivals, the time residents stayed at each station, and the total
time at the clinic was derived from a full-scale test exercise
at a mock-up clinic with actual workers and volunteers. The
simulation model included animation so that the user could vi-
sualize residents moving through the clinic. The simulation
study provided guidelines on how many staff members would
be required (fewer than estimated) and how to manage bus ar-
rivals. The simulation study provided input into additional
quantitative models for capacity planning, clinic layout, overall
clinic operations, and the flow of residents through the clinic.
Source: Based on K. Aaby, J. Herrmann, C. Jordan, M. Treadwell, and
K. Wood, “Montgomery County’s Public Health Service Uses Opera-
tions Research to Plan Emergency Mass Dispensing and Vaccination
Clinics,” Interfaces 36, no. 6 (November–December 2006): 569–79.
AP Photo/Brian Lawdermilk

departed the facility (column J). This clock time is computed by entering the formula 
in cell F15 and copying it to cells F16:F23. The waiting time is computed
with the formula 
copied in cells G14:G23.
A second set of random numbers is generated in column H by using the RAND() function.
The service times are generated in column I from the cumulative probability distribution in cells
H6:I8, using the “Lookup” function again. In this case the array of cells in H6:I8 is named
“Lookup2,” and the service times in column I are generated by copying the formula 
in cells I14:I23. The departure times in column J are deter-
mined by using the formula 
, copied in cells J14:J23, and the “Time in System” val-
ues are computed by using the formula
copied in cells K14:K23.
The operating statistic, average waiting time, is computed by using the formula 
in cell G26, and the average time in the system is computed with a
similar formula in cell L26. Notice that both the average waiting time of 0.4 day and the average
time in the system of 1.9 days are significantly lower than the simulation conducted in Table 14.7,
as we speculated they might be.
Continuous Probability Distributions
In the first example in this chapter, ComputerWorld’s store manager considered a probability
distribution of discrete demand values. In the queuing example, the probability distributions
were for discrete interarrival times and service times. However, applications of simulation
models reflecting continuous distributions are more common than those of models employing
discrete distributions.
We have concentrated on examples with discrete distributions because with a discrete
distribution, the ranges of random numbers can be explicitly determined and are thus easier to
illustrate. When random numbers are being selected according to a continuous probability
distribution, a continuous function must be used. For example, consider the following continu-
ous probability function, f(x), for time (minutes), x:
The area under the curve, f(x), represents the probability of the occurrence of the random
variable x. Therefore, the area under the curve must equal 1.0 because the sum of all proba-
bilities of the occurrence of a random variable must equal 1.0. By computing the area under
the curve from 0 to any value of the random variable x, we can determine the cumulative
probability of that value of x, as follows:
Cumulative probabilities are analogous to the discrete ranges of random numbers we used in
previous examples. Thus, we let this function, F(x), equal the random number r,
and solve for x,
x = 42r
r = x2
16
F(x) = x2
16
F(x) =
L
x
0
x
8 dx = 1
8 L
x
0
xdx = 1
8 a 1
2 x2bR
x
0
f(x) = x
8, 0 … x … 4
AVERAGE(G14:G23)

J14-E14,

F14+I14

VLOOKUP(H14, Lookup2,2)

F14-E14,

MAX(E15, J14)

652
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

By generating a random number, r, and substituting it into this function, we determine a
value for x, “time.” (However, for a continuous function, the range of random numbers must be
between zero and one to correspond to probabilities between 0.0 and 1.00.) For example, if
then
The purpose of briefly presenting this example is to demonstrate the difference between dis-
crete and continuous functions. This continuous function is relatively simple; as functions be-
come more complex, it becomes more difficult to develop the equation for determining the
random variable x from r. Even this simple example required some calculus, and developing
more complex models would require a higher level of mathematics.
Simulation of a Machine Breakdown and Maintenance System
In this example we will demonstrate the use of a continuous probability distribution. The
Bigelow Manufacturing Company produces a product on a number of machines. The elapsed
time between breakdowns of the machines is defined by the following continuous probability
distribution:
where
weeks between machine breakdowns
As indicated in the previous section on continuous probability distributions, the equation
for generating x, given the random number 
is
When a machine breaks down, it must be repaired, and it takes either 1, 2, or 3 days for the
repair to be completed, according to the discrete probability distribution shown in Table 14.8.
Every time a machine breaks down, the cost to the company is an estimated $2,000 per day in
lost production until the machine is repaired.
x = 42r1
r1,
x =
f(x) = x
8, 0 … x … 4 weeks
x = 42.25 = 2 min.
r = .25,
CONTINUOUS PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
653
A continuous proba-
bility distribution of
the time between
machine breakdowns.
TABLE 14.8
Probability
distribution of 
machine repair
time
Machine Repair
Probability of 
Cumulative 
Random Number 
Time, y (days)
Repair Time, P(y)
Probability
Range, r2
1
.15
.15
0.00–.15
2
.55
.70
.16–.70
3
.30
1.00
.71–1.00  
The company would like to know whether it should implement a machine maintenance pro-
gram at a cost of $20,000 per year that would reduce the frequency of breakdowns and thus the
time for repair. The maintenance program would result in the following continuous probability
function for time between breakdowns:
where
weeks between machine breakdowns
The equation for generating x, given the random number 
for this probability distribution is
x = 62r1
r1,
x =
f(x) = x>18,  0 … x … 6 weeks

The reduced repair time resulting from the maintenance program is defined by the discrete
probability distribution shown in Table 14.9.
654
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Time Between
Breakdowns,
Repair Time,
Cost,
Cumulative Time,
Breakdowns
r1
x (weeks)
r2
y (days)
$2,000y

x (weeks)
1
.45
2.68
.19
2
$4,000
2.68
2
.90
3.80
.65
2
4,000
6.48
3
.84
3.67
.51
2
4,000
10.15
4
.17
1.65
.17
2
4,000
11.80
5
.74
3.44
.63
2
4,000
15.24
6
.94
3.88
.85
3
6,000
19.12
7
.07
1.06
.37
2
4,000
20.18
8
.15
1.55
.89
3
6,000
21.73
9
.04
0.80
.76
3
6,000
22.53
10
.31
2.23
.71
3
6,000
24.76
11
.07
1.06
.34
2
4,000
25.82
12
.99
3.98
.11
1
2,000
29.80
13
.97
3.94
.27
2
4,000
33.74
14
.73
3.42
.10
1
2,000
37.16
15
.13
1.44
.59
2
4,000
38.60
16
.03
0.70
.87
3
6,000
39.30
17
.62
3.15
.08
1
2,000
42.45
18
.47
2.74
.08
1
2,000
45.19
19
.99
3.98
.89
3
6,000
49.17
20
.75
3.46
.42
2
    4,000
52.63
$84,000
TABLE 14.10
Simulation of 
machine
breakdowns 
and repair times 
TABLE 14.9
Revised probabil-
ity distribution of
machine repair
time with the
maintenance
program 
Machine Repair 
Probability of 
Cumulative 
Random Number
Time, y (days)
Repair Time, P(y)
Probability
Range, r2
1
.40
.40
0.00–.40
2
.50
.90
.41–.90
3
.10
1.00
.91–1.00 
To solve this problem, we must first simulate the existing system to determine an estimate of
the average annual repair costs. Then we must simulate the system with the maintenance program
installed to see what the average annual repair costs will be with the maintenance program. We will
then compare the average annual repair cost with and without the maintenance program and com-
pute the difference, which will be the average annual savings in repair costs with the maintenance
program. If this savings is more than the annual cost of the maintenance program ($20,000), we will
recommend that it be implemented; if it is less, we will recommend that it not be implemented.
First, we will manually simulate the existing breakdown and repair system without the
maintenance program, to see how the simulation model is developed. Table 14.10 illustrates the
simulation of machine breakdowns and repair for 20 breakdowns that occur over a period of ap-
proximately 1 year (i.e., 52 weeks).
The simulation in Table 14.10 results in a total annual repair cost of $84,000. However, this
is for only 1 year, and thus it is probably not very accurate.
The next step in our simulation analysis is to simulate the machine breakdown and repair sys-
tem with the maintenance program installed. We will use the revised continuous probability dis-
tribution for time between breakdowns and the revised discrete probability distribution for repair
time shown in Table 14.9. Table 14.11 illustrates the manual simulation of machine breakdowns
and repair for 1 year.

CONTINUOUS PROBABILITY DISTRIBUTIONS
655
TABLE 14.11
Simulation of 
machine
breakdowns 
and repair with
the maintenance
program 
Time Between
Breakdowns,
Repair Time,
Cost,
Cumulative Time,
Breakdowns
r1
x (weeks)
r2
y (days)
$2,000y

x (weeks)
1
.45
4.03
.19
1
$2,000
4.03
2
.90
5.69
.65
2
4,000
9.72
3
.84
5.50
.51
2
4,000
15.22
4
.17
2.47
.17
1
2,000
17.69
5
.74
5.16
.63
2
4,000
22.85
6
.94
5.82
.85
2
4,000
28.67
7
.07
1.59
.37
1
2,000
30.29
8
.15
2.32
.89
2
4,000
32.58
9
.04
1.20
.76
2
4,000
33.78
10
.31
3.34
.71
2
4,000
37.12
11
.07
1.59
.34
1
2,000
38.71
12
.99
5.97
.11
1
2,000
44.68
13
.97
5.91
.27
1
2,000
50.59
14
.73
5.12
.10
1
    2,000
55.71
$42,000
Table 14.11 shows that the annual repair cost with the maintenance program totals $42,000.
Recall that in the manual simulation shown in Table 14.10, the annual repair cost was $84,000 for
the system without the maintenance program. The difference between the two annual repair costs
is 
This figure represents the savings in average annual repair cost
with the maintenance program. Because the maintenance program will cost $20,000 per year, it
would seem that the recommended decision would be to implement the maintenance program and
generate an expected annual savings of $22,000 per year (i.e.,
).
However, let us now concern ourselves with the potential difficulties caused by the fact that
we simulated each system (the existing one and the system with the maintenance program) only
once. Because the time between breakdowns and the repair times are probabilistic, the simula-
tion results could exhibit significant variation. The only way to be sure of the accuracy of our re-
sults is to simulate each system many times and compute an average result. Performing these
many simulations manually would obviously require a great deal of time and effort. However,
Excel can be used to accomplish the required simulation analysis.
Computer Simulation of the Machine Breakdown Example Using Excel
Exhibit 14.7 shows the Excel spreadsheet model of the simulation of our original machine break-
down example simulated manually in Table 14.10. The Excel simulation is for 100 breakdowns.
The random numbers in C14:C113 are generated using the RAND() function, which was used in
our previous Excel examples. The “Time Between Breakdowns” values in column D are devel-
oped using the formula for the continuous cumulative probability function,
typed in cell D14 and copied in cells D15:D113.
The “Cumulative Time” in column E is computed by copying the formula 
in
cells E15:E113. The second stream of random numbers in column F is generated using the
RAND() function. The “Repair Time” values in column G are generated from the cumulative
probability distribution in the array of cells B6:C8. As in our previous examples, we name this
array “Lookup” and copy the formula 
in cells G14:G113. The
cost values in column H are computed by entering the formula 
in cell H14 and
copying it to cells H15:H113.
The “Average Annual Cost” in cell H7 is computed with the formula 
SUM(H14:H113)/
(E113/52). For this, the original problem, the annual cost is $82,397.35, which is not too different
from the manual simulation in Table 14.10.

2000*G14

VLOOKUP(F14,Lookup,2)

E14+D15

4*SQRT(C14),

+42,000 - 20,000 = +22,000
+84,000 - 42,000 = +42,000.
Manual simulation is
limited because of the
amount of real time
required to simulate
even one trial.

Exhibit 14.8 shows the Excel spreadsheet simulation for the modified breakdown system
with the new maintenance program, which was simulated manually in Table 14.11. The two
differences in this simulation model are the cumulative probability distribution formulas for
the time between breakdowns and the reduced repair time distributions from Table 14.9 in
cells A6:C8.
The average annual cost for this model, shown in cell H8, is $44,504.74. This annual cost is
only slightly higher than the $42,000 obtained from the manual simulation in Table 14.11. Thus,
as before, the decision should be to implement the new maintenance system.
656
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Copy =E14+D15 to
E15:E113.
Copy =VLOOKUP(F14,
Lookup,2) to G14:G113.
From Table 14.8
Spreadsheet frozen at
row 24 to show first 10
breakdowns and last 6.
EXHIBIT 14.7
Revised formula for time
between breakdowns
Probability
distribution or
repair time from
Table 14.9
EXHIBIT 14.8

Statistical Analysis of Simulation Results
In general, the outcomes of a simulation model are statistical measures such as averages, as in
the examples presented in this chapter. In our ComputerWorld example, we generated average
revenue as a measure of the system we simulated; in the Burlingham Mills queuing example, we
generated the average waiting time for batches to be dyed; and in the Bigelow Manufacturing
Company machine breakdown example, the system was measured in terms of average repair
costs. However, we also discussed the care that must be taken in accepting the accuracy of these
statistical results because they were frequently based on relatively few observations (i.e., simu-
lation replications). Thus, as part of the simulation process, these statistical results are typically
subjected to additional statistical analysis to determine their degree of accuracy.
One of the most frequently used tools for the analysis of the statistical validity of simula-
tions results is confidence limits. Confidence limits can be developed within Excel for the aver-
ages resulting from simulation models in several different ways. Recall that the statistical
formulas for 95% confidence limits are:
upper confidence limit
lower confidence limit
where is the mean and s is the sample standard deviation from a sample of size n from any
population. Although we cannot be sure that the sample mean will exactly equal the population
mean, we can be 95% confident that the true population mean will be between the upper confi-
dence limit (UCL) and lower confidence limit (LCL) computed using these formulas.
Exhibit 14.9 shows the Excel spreadsheet for our machine breakdown example (from Exhibit
14.8), with the upper and lower confidence limits for average repair cost in cells L13 and L14. Cell
L11 contains the average repair cost (for each incidence of a breakdown), computed by using the
formula 
Cell L12 contains the sample standard deviation, computed
by using the formula 
The upper confidence limit is computed in cell L13
by using the formula 
shown on the formula bar at the top of the
spreadsheet, and the lower control limit is computed similarly. Thus, we can be 95% confident that
the true average repair cost for the population is between $3,248.50 and $3,751.50.
L111.96*L12/SQRT(100),

STDEV(H14:H113).

AVERAGE(H14:H113).

x
= x - (1.96) (s> 2n)
= x + (1.96) (s> 2n)
STATISTICAL ANALYSIS OF SIMULATION RESULTS
657
Confidence limits
EXHIBIT 14.9
Confidence limits plus several additional statistics can also be obtained by using the “Data
Analysis” option from the “Data” menu. Select the “Data Analysis” option from the “Data” menu
at the top of the spreadsheet, and then from the resulting menu select “Descriptive Statistics.” This
will result in a Descriptive Statistics dialog box like the one shown on the right in Exhibit 14.10.

658
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Click on “Data Analysis.”
Statistical summary report
“Output Range” specifies the
location of the statistical
summary report on the
spreadsheet.
“Input Range” are the cost
($) values in column H
EXHIBIT 14.10
Management Science Application
A Monte Carlo Simulation Model for Managing 
Liquidity Risk at Merrill Lynch Bank USA
Merrill Lynch, founded in 1914 by Charles E. Merrill, has
two major divisions: Global Private Client Group, the retail
part of the company, and the Global Markets and Investment
Banking division, which serves major corporations by helping
them raise capital through new issues of equity and debt. The
Global Private Client Group that the public is most familiar
with provides brokerage, investment, and banking services to
about 3 million household clients through a sales force of
14,000 financial advisors in 500 offices around the world, and
it manages assets of $3 trillion. Merrill Lynch Bank USA, with
assets of over $60 billion, supports both of these divisions. 
The bank acts as an intermediary, receiving deposits from
retail customers and using these funds for loans and invest-
ments. One way the bank uses these assets is by providing a
revolving line of short-term credit to institutional borrowers,
much like credit cards and home equity loans work for individ-
uals; it has a portfolio of approximately $13 billion in credit-
line commitments with more than 100 institutions. A key risk
with credit lines is liquidity risk, where liquidity is the ability to
meet all cash obligations when due on short notice, and thus
liquidity risk is a bank’s potential inability to meet its cash obli-
gations. Merrill Lynch Bank USA wants to ensure liquidity at all
times through all kinds of financial cycles and conditions. 
In order to manage its liquidity risk, Merrill Lynch developed
a Monte Carlo simulation model that assesses the liquidity risk
with its current credit-line commitments, estimates liquidity
needs in extreme financial situations, identifies potential risk
exposure, such as concentrations of credit in specific industries,
and evaluates possible portfolios of credit line commitments for
potential growth in the future. The model simulates monthly
credit-line usage for each company and each type of security
over a 5-year time horizon; it also provides the bank with
monthly liquidity requirements for the total credit-line portfolio
by modeling each borrower’s timing and amount of credit use
as a function of its credit rating and previous month’s usage. The
model has allowed the bank to reduce its liquidity reserves from
50% of outstanding commitments to about 20%, making
available about $4 billion for other uses. During the first 21
months after the simulation model was implemented, the port-
folio was expanded by over 60%, from $8 billion and 80 com-
panies to $13 billion and 100 companies.
Source: Based on T. Duffy, M. Hatzakis, W. Hsu, R. Labe, B. Liao, X.
Luo, J. Oh, A. Setya, and L. Yang, “Merrill Lynch Improves Liquidity
Risk Management for Revolving Credit Lines,” Interfaces 35, no. 5 
(September–October 2005): 353–69.
© Steven Widoff / Alamy

This box, completed as shown, results in the summary statistics for repair costs shown in cells
J8:K23 in Exhibit 14.10. These summary statistics include the mean, standard deviation, and con-
fidence limits. 
Crystal Ball
So far in this chapter we have used simulation examples that included mostly discrete probability
distributions that we set up on an Excel spreadsheet. These are the easiest types of probability
distributions to work with in spreadsheets. However, many realistic problems contain more com-
plex probability distributions, like the normal distribution, which are not discrete but are continu-
ous, or they include discrete probability distributions that are more difficult to work with than the
simple ones we have used. However, there are several simulation add-ins for Excel that provide
the user with the capability to perform simulation analysis, using a variety of different probability
distributions in a spreadsheet environment. One of these add-ins is Crystal Ball, published by
Oracle; it is available for download from the Crystal Ball Web site, using the licensing instruc-
tions that accompany this text. Crystal Ball is a risk analysis and forecasting program that uses
Monte Carlo simulation to forecast a statistical range of results possible for a given situation. In
this section we will provide an overview of how to apply Crystal Ball to a simple example for
profit (break-even) analysis that we first introduced in Chapter 1.
Simulation of a Profit Analysis Model
In Chapter 1 we used a simple example for the Western Clothing Company to demonstrate
break-even and profit analysis. In that example, Western Clothing Company produced denim
jeans. The price (p) for jeans was $23, the variable cost 
was $8 per pair of jeans, and the
fixed cost 
was $10,000. Given these parameters, we formulated a profit (Z) function as
follows:
Our objective in that analysis was to determine the break-even volume, v, that would result in no
profit or loss. This was accomplished by setting 
and solving the profit function for v, as
follows:
Substituting the values for 
and 
into this formula resulted in the break-even volume:
To demonstrate the use of Crystal Ball, we will modify that example. First, we will assume
that volume is actually volume demanded and that it is a random variable defined by a normal
probability distribution, with a mean value of 1,050 pairs of jeans and a standard deviation of 410.
Furthermore, we will assume that the price is not fixed but is also uncertain and defined by
a uniform probability distribution (from $20 to $26) and that variable cost is not a constant value
but defined by a triangular probability distribution. Instead of seeking to determine the break-
even volume, we will simulate the profit model, given probabilistic demand, price, and variable
costs to determine average profit and the probability that Western Clothing will break even.
= 666.7 pairs of jeans
v = 10,000
23 - 8
cv
p, cf,
v =
cf
p - cv
Z = 0
Z = vp - cf - vcv
(cf)
(cv)
CRYSTAL BALL
659

660
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
=C4*C5C6(C4*C7)
1. Click on cell C4 to define
    normal distribution 
    parameters.
2. Click on “Define Assumption.”
EXHIBIT 14.11
1 This example in Exhibit 14.11 is located on the Web site accompanying this text, in the “Crystal Ball” folder.
The first thing we need to do is access Crystal Ball, which you can download according to
the instructions provided with this text.
Exhibit 14.11 shows the Excel spreadsheet for our example.1 We have described the pa-
rameters of each probability distribution in our profit model next to its corresponding cell. For
example, cell C4 contains the probability distribution for demand. We want to generate de-
mand values in this cell according to the probability distribution for demand (i.e., Monte
Carlo simulation). We also want to do this in cell C5 for price and in cell C7 for variable cost.
This is the same process we used in our earlier ComputerWorld example to generate demand
values from a discrete probability distribution, using random numbers. Notice that cell C9
contains our formula for profit,
This is the only cell formula in our
spreadsheet.
C4*C5-C6-(C4*C7).

To set up the normal probability distribution for demand, we first enter the mean value
1,050 in cell C4. Cells require some initial value to start with. Next we click on “Define As-
sumption” from the top of the spreadsheet, as shown in Exhibit 14.11, which will result in a
drop-down menu of distributions.
The distribution drop-down menu window includes several different probability
distributions we can use. Because we have indicated that demand is defined by a normal
distribution, click on it. This will result in the normal distribution window shown in 
Exhibit 14.12.
The “Name” value in the box at the top of the window in Exhibit 14.12 was automati-
cally pulled from the spreadsheet, where it is the heading “volume (v) ”; however, a new
or different name could be typed in. Next, we click on “Mean” or use the Tab key to toggle
down to the “Mean” display in the lower-left-hand corner of this window. Because we en-
tered the mean value of 1,050 in cell C4 on our spreadsheet, this value will already be
shown in this window. Next, we click on “Std. Dev.” or use the Tab key to move to the Std.
Dev. window and enter the standard deviation of 410. Then we click on the “Enter” button,
which will configure the normal distribution figure in the window, and then we click
on “OK.”
We will repeat this same process to enter the parameters for the uniform distribution for price
in cell C5. First, we enter the value for price, 23, in cell C5. Next (with cell C5 activated), we
click on “Define Assumption” at the top of the spreadsheet, as shown earlier in Exhibit 14.11.
=

The Distribution menu window will again appear, and this time we click on “Uniform Distribu-
tion.” This results in the Uniform Distribution window shown in Exhibit 14.13.
CRYSTAL BALL
661
Name pulled from
original spreadsheet
1. Enter mean and
standard deviation.
2. Click “Enter” to configure
distribution in window.
3. Click on “OK” to return
to the spreadsheet.
EXHIBIT 14.12
Enter minimum and
maximum values for
the distribution.
EXHIBIT 14.13
As before, the “Name” value, “price (p),” was pulled from the original spreadsheet in
Exhibit 14.11. Next, we click on “Minimum” or use the Tab key to move to the “Minimum” dis-
play at the bottom of the window and enter 20, the lower limit of the uniform distribution speci-
fied in the problem statement. Next, we activate the “Maximum” display window and enter 26.

Then we click on the “Enter” button to configure the distribution graph in the window. Finally,
we click on “OK” to exit this window.
We repeat the same process to enter the triangular distribution parameters in cell C7. A tri-
angular probability distribution is defined by three estimated values—a minimum, a most likely,
and a maximum. It is a very useful approximation when enough data points do not exist to allow
for the construction of a distribution, but the user can estimate what the endpoints and the mid-
point of the distribution might be. Clicking on “Define Assumption” and then selecting the trian-
gular distribution from the Distribution menu results in the window shown in Exhibit 14.14.
662
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Enter three
estimates.
EXHIBIT 14.14
1. Click on “Define Forecast.”
2. Type in units.
EXHIBIT 14.15
We enter the “Minimum” value of 6.75, the “Likeliest” value of 8.00, and the “Maximum”
value of 9.10. Clicking on “Enter” will configure the graph of the triangular distribution shown in
the window. We click on “OK” to exit this window and return to the spreadsheet.
Next, we click on cell C9 on our original spreadsheet. Recall that this is the cell in which
we entered our profit formula in Exhibit 14.11. The profit value of 5,750, computed from the
other cell values entered on the original spreadsheet, will be shown in cell C9. We click on
“Define Forecast” at the top of the spreadsheet as shown in Exhibit 14.15. This will result in the
“Define Forecast” window also shown in Exhibit 14.15. The heading “Profit(Z) ” will already
be entered from the spreadsheet. We click on the “Units” display and enter “dollars.” We then
click on “OK” to exit this window. This completes the process of entering our simulation
=

parameters and data. Exhibit 14.16 shows the spreadsheet with changes resulting from the
parameter inputs. The next step is to run the simulation.
CRYSTAL BALL
663
2. Click on “Start” to
begin the simulation.
1. Click on “Run Preferences”
to indicate the number of trials
and seed number.
EXHIBIT 14.16
1. Enter the number
of trials.
2. Go to the “Sampling”
screen to enter the
seed number.
EXHIBIT 14.17
The mechanics of the simulation are similar to those of our previous Excel spreadsheet
models. Using random numbers, we want to generate a value for demand in cell C4, then a value
for price in C5, and then a value for variable cost in C7. These three values are then substituted
into the profit formula in cell C9 to compute a profit value. This represents one repetition, or
trial, of the simulation. The simulation is run for many trials in order to develop a distribution
for profit.
To run the simulation, we click on “Run Preferences” at the top of the spreadsheet in
Exhibit 14.16. This activates the window shown in Exhibit 14.17. We then enter the number of
simulations for the simulation run. For this example we will run the simulation for 5,000 trials.
Next, we click on “Sampling” at the top of this window to activate the window shown in
Exhibit 14.18. In this window we must enter the seed value for a sequence of random numbers
for the simulation, which is always 999. We click on “OK” and then go back to the spreadsheet.
From the spreadsheet menu (Exhibit 14.19), we click on “Start,” which will run the simulation.
Exhibit 14.19 shows the simulation window with the simulation completed for 5,000 trials and
the frequency distribution for this simulation.

A statistical summary report for this simulation can be obtained by clicking on “View” at
the top of the “Forecast” window and then selecting “Statistics” from the drop-down menu.
This results in the window shown in Exhibit 14.20. You can return to the Forecast window by
selecting “Frequency” from the “View” menu at the top of the Statistics View window.
In our original example formulated in Chapter 1, we wanted to determine the break-even
volume. In this revised example, Western Clothing Company wants to know the average profit
and the probability that it will break even from this simulation analysis. The mean profit (from
the Statistics View window in Exhibit 14.20) is $5,860.50. The probability of breaking even is
determined by clicking on the arrow on the left side of the horizontal axis of the window shown
in Exhibit 14.21 and “grabbing” it and moving it to “0.00,” or by clicking on the lower limit,
currently set at “Infinity”; we change this to 0 and press the Enter key. This will shift the lower
limit to zero, the break-even point. The frequency chart that shows the location of the new lower
664
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Click here to repeat
the same simulation.
EXHIBIT 14.18
Click here to reset
the simulation and
run it again.
Set new run
preferences.
Click on “View”, then
“Statistics” to go to the
statistical summary
screen (Exhibit 14.20).
2. Click here to start
the simulation.
1. Click here to establish the
number of trials and the seed
number.
EXHIBIT 14.19

We have demonstrated using Crystal Ball with a straightforward example that was not very
complex or detailed. Crystal Ball has the capability to perform much more sophisticated simu-
lation analyses than what we have shown in this section. However, the demonstration of these
capabilities and other features of Crystal Ball would require more space and in-depth coverage
CRYSTAL BALL
665
Click on “View”
to return to the
Frequency window.
Mean profit value.
EXHIBIT 14.20
Probability (.8136) that the
company will break even
Move arrow
to “0.00” or
set lower
limit equal
to 0.00.
EXHIBIT 14.21
limit and the “Certainty” of zero profit is shown as 81.61% at the bottom of the window as
shown in Exhibit 14.21. Thus, there is a .8161 probability that the company will break even.

than is possible here. However, although using Crystal Ball to simulate more complex situa-
tions requires a greater degree of knowledge than we have provided, this basic introduction to
and demonstration of Crystal Ball provide a good starting point to understanding the basic fea-
tures of Crystal Ball and its use for simulation analysis.
Verification of the Simulation Model
Even though we may be able to verify the statistical results of a simulation model, we still may
not know whether the model actually replicates what is going on in the real world. The user of
simulation generally wants to be certain that the model is internally correct and that all the opera-
tions performed in the simulation are logical and mathematically correct. An old adage often
associated with computer simulation is “garbage in, garbage out.” To gain some assurances about
the validity of simulation results, there are several testing procedures that the user of a simulation
model can apply.
First, the simulation model can be run for short periods of time or for only a few simulation
trials. This allows the user to compare the results with manually derived solutions (as we did in
the examples in this chapter) to check for discrepancies. Another means of testing is to divide the
model into parts and simulate each part separately. This reduces the complexity of seeking out
errors in the model. Similarly, the mathematical relationships in the simulation model can be sim-
plified so that they can more easily be tested to see if the model is operating correctly.
To determine whether the model reliably represents the system being simulated, the simula-
tion results can sometimes be compared with actual real-world data. Several statistical tests are
available for performing this type of analysis. However, when a model is developed to simulate a
new or unique system, there is no realistic way to ensure that the results are valid.
An additional problem in determining whether a simulation model is a valid representation
of the system under analysis relates to starting conditions. Should the simulation be started with
the system empty (e.g., should we start by simulating a queuing system with no customers in
line), or should the simulation be started as close as possible to normal operating conditions?
Another problem, as we have already seen, is the determination of how long the simulation
should be run to reach true steady-state conditions, if indeed a steady state exists.
In general, a standard, foolproof procedure for validation is simply not possible. In many
cases, the user of a simulation model must rely on the expertise and experience of whoever de-
velops the model.
Areas of Simulation Application
Simulation is one of the most useful of all management science techniques. The reason for this
popularity is that simulation can be applied to a number of problems that are too difficult to
model and solve analytically. Some analysts feel that complex systems should be studied by
simulation whether or not they can be analyzed analytically because simulation provides such
an easy vehicle for experimenting on the system. As a result, simulation has been applied to a
wide range of problems. Surveys conducted during the 1990s indicated that a large majority of
major corporations use simulation in such functional areas as production, corporate planning,
engineering, financial analysis, research and development, marketing, information systems, and
personnel. Following are descriptions of some of the most common applications of simulation.
Queuing
A major application of simulation has been in the analysis of queuing systems. As indicated in
Chapter 13, the assumptions required to solve the operating characteristic formulas are relatively
restrictive. For the more complex queuing systems (which result from a relaxation of these as-
sumptions), it is not possible to develop analytical formulas, and simulation is often the only
available means of analysis.
666
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Simulation models
must be validated to
make sure they are ac-
curately replicating
the system being sim-
ulated.
Sometimes manual
simulation of several
trials is a good way to
validate a simulation.

Inventory Control
Most people are aware that product demand is an essential component in determining
the amount of inventory a commercial enterprise should keep. Most of the mathematical formu-
las used to analyze inventory systems make the assumption that this demand is certain (i.e., not
a random variable). In practice, however, demand is rarely known with certainty. Simulation is
one of the few means for analyzing inventory systems in which demand is a random variable,
reflecting demand uncertainty. Inventory control is discussed in Chapter 16.
Production and Manufacturing
Simulation is often applied to production problems, such as production scheduling, production
sequencing, assembly line balancing (of work-in-process inventory), plant layout, and plant
location analysis. It is surprising how often various production processes can be viewed as
queuing systems that can be analyzed only by using simulation. Because machine breakdowns
typically occur according to some probability distributions, maintenance problems are also
frequently analyzed using simulation.
Finance
Capital budgeting problems require estimates of cash flows, which are often a result of many
random variables. Simulation has been used to generate values of the various contributing fac-
tors to derive estimates of cash flows. Simulation has also been used to determine the inputs into
rate of return calculations in which the inputs are random variables, such as market size, selling
price, growth rate, and market share.
Marketing
Marketing problems typically include numerous random variables, such as market size and type,
and consumer preferences. Simulation can be used to ascertain how a particular market might
react to the introduction of a product or to an advertising campaign for an existing product. An-
other area in marketing where simulation is applied is the analysis of distribution channels to
determine the most efficient distribution system.
Public Service Operations
The operations of police departments, fire departments, post offices, hospitals, court systems,
airports, and other public systems have all been analyzed by using simulation. Typically, such
operations are so complex and contain so many random variables that no technique except sim-
ulation can be employed for analysis.
Environmental and Resource Analysis
Some of the more recent innovative applications of simulation have been directed at problems in
the environment. Simulation models have been developed to ascertain the impact on the envi-
ronment of projects such as nuclear power plants, reservoirs, highways, and dams. In many
cases, these models include measures to analyze the financial feasibility of such projects. Other
models have been developed to simulate pollution conditions. In the area of resource analysis,
numerous models have been developed in recent years to simulate energy systems and the feasi-
bility of alternative energy sources.
Summary
Simulation has become an increasingly important management science technique in recent years.
Various surveys have shown simulation to be one of the techniques most widely applied to real-
world problems. Evidence of this popularity is the number of specialized simulation languages that
have been developed by the computer industry and academia to deal with complex problem areas.
SUMMARY
667

The popularity of simulation is due in large part to the flexibility it allows in analyzing sys-
tems, compared to more confining analytical techniques. In other words, the problem does not
have to fit the model (or technique)—the simulation model can be constructed to fit the problem.
A primary benefit of simulation analysis is that it enables us to experiment with the model. For
example, in our queuing example we could expand the model to represent more service facili-
ties, more queues, and different arrival and service times; and we could observe their effects on
the results. In many analytical cases, such experimentation is limited by the availability of an
applicable formula. That is, by changing various parts of the problem, we may create a problem
for which we have no specific analytical formula. Simulation, however, is not subject to such
limitations. Simulation is limited only by one’s ability to develop a computer program.
Simulation is a management science technique that does not usually result in an optimal so-
lution. Generally, a simulation model reflects the operation of a system, and the results of the
model are in the form of operating statistics, such as averages. However, optimal solutions can
sometimes be obtained for simulation models by employing search techniques.
However, in spite of its versatility, simulation has limitations and must be used with cau-
tion. One limitation is that simulation models are typically unstructured and must be developed
for a system or problem that is also unstructured. Unlike some of the structured techniques pre-
sented in this text, they cannot simply be applied to a specific type of problem. As a result, de-
veloping simulation models often requires imagination and intuitiveness that are not required by
some of the more straightforward solution techniques we have presented. In addition, the valida-
tion of simulation models is an area of serious concern. It is often impossible realistically to val-
idate simulation results, to know if they accurately reflect the system under analysis. This
problem has become an area of such concern that “output analysis” of simulation results is de-
veloping into a new field of study. Another limiting factor in simulation is the cost in money and
time of model building. Because simulation models are developed for unstructured systems, they
often take large amounts of staff time, computer time, and money to develop and run. For many
business companies, these costs can be prohibitive.
668
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Simulation provides a
laboratory for experi-
mentation on a real
system.
Simulation does not
usually provide a
recommended
decision as does an
optimization model; it
provides operating
statistics.
Simulation has
certain limitations.
The following example problem demonstrates a manual simulation using discrete probability
distributions.
Problem Statement
Members of the Willow Creek Emergency Rescue Squad know from past experience that they
will receive between zero and six emergency calls each night, according to the following dis-
crete probability distribution:
Calls
Probability
0
.05
1
.12
2
.15
3
.25
4
.22
5
.15
6
.06
1.00
Example Problem
Solution
Simulation is one of
the most important
and widely used man-
agement science 
techniques.

EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTION
669
The rescue squad classifies each emergency call into one of three categories: minor, regular,
or major emergency. The probability that a particular call will be each type of emergency is as
follows:
Emergency Type
Probability
Minor
.30
Regular
.56
Major
.14
1.00
The type of emergency call determines the size of the crew sent in response. A minor emergency
requires a two-person crew, a regular call requires a three-person crew, and a major emergency re-
quires a five-person crew.
Simulate the emergency calls received by the rescue squad for 10 nights, compute the aver-
age number of each type of emergency call each night, and determine the maximum number of
crew members that might be needed on any given night.
Solution
Step 1: Develop Random Number Ranges for the Probability Distributions
Cumulative
Random Number
Calls
Probability
Probability
Range, r1
0
.05
.05
1–5
1
.12
.17
6–17
2
.15
.32
18–32
3
.25
.57
33–57
4
.22
.79
58–79
5
.15
.94
80–94
6
.06
1.00
95–99, 00
1.00
Emergency
Cumulative
Random Number
Type
Probability
Probability
Range, r2
Minor
.30
.30
1–30
Regular
.56
.86
31–86
Major
.14
1.00
87–99, 00
1.00

670
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
Step 2: Set Up a Tabular Simulation
Use the second column of random numbers in Table 14.3:
Number of
Emergency
Crew
Total per
Night
r1
Calls
r2
Type
Size
Night
1
65
4
71
Regular
3
18
Minor
2
12
Minor
2
17
Minor
2
9
2
48
3
89
Major
5
18
Minor
2
83
Regular
3
10
3
08
1
90
Major
5
5
4
05
0
—
—
—
—
5
89
5
18
Minor
2
08
Minor
2
26
Minor
2
47
Regular
3
94
Major
5
14
6
06
1
72
Regular
3
3
7
62
4
47
Regular
3
68
Regular
3
60
Regular
3
88
Major
5
14
8
17
1
36
Regular
3
3
9
77
4
43
Regular
3
28
Minor
2
31
Regular
3
06
Minor
2
10
10
68
4
39
Regular
3
71
Regular
3
22
Minor
2
76
Regular
3
11
Step 3: Compute Results
If all the calls came in at the same time, the maximum number of squad members required
during any 1 night would be 14.
 average number of major emergency calls per night = 4
10 = 0.40
 average number of regular emergency calls per night = 13
10 = 1.3
 average number of minor emergency calls per night = 10
10 = 1.0

Problems
1. The Hoylake Rescue Squad receives an emergency call every 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, or 6 hours, accord-
ing to the following probability distribution. The squad is on duty 24 hours per day, 7 days
per week:
Time Between 
Emergency Calls (hr.)
Probability
1
.05
2
.10
3
.30
4
.30
5
.20
6
.05
1.00
a. Simulate the emergency calls for 3 days (note that this will require a “running,” or cumula-
tive, hourly clock), using the random number table.
b. Compute the average time between calls and compare this value with the expected
value of the time between calls from the probability distribution. Why are the results
different?
c. How many calls were made during the 3-day period? Can you logically assume that this is
an average number of calls per 3-day period? If not, how could you simulate to determine
such an average?
2. The time between arrivals of cars at the Petroco Service Station is defined by the following prob-
ability distribution:
Time Between
Arrivals (min.)
Probability
1
.15
2
.30
3
.40
4
.15
1.00
a. Simulate the arrival of cars at the service station for 20 arrivals and compute the average time
between arrivals.
b. Simulate the arrival of cars at the service station for 1 hour, using a different stream of ran-
dom numbers from those used in (a) and compute the average time between arrivals.
c. Compare the results obtained in (a) and (b).
3. The Dynaco Manufacturing Company produces a product in a process consisting of operations
of five machines. The probability distribution of the number of machines that will break down in
a week follows:
PROBLEMS
671

Machine Breakdowns
per Week
Probability
0
.10
1
.10
2
.20
3
.25
4
.30
5
.05
1.00
a. Simulate the machine breakdowns per week for 20 weeks.
b. Compute the average number of machines that will break down per week.
4. Solve Problem 19 at the end of Chapter 12 by using simulation.
5. Simulate the decision situation described in Problem 16(a) at the end of Chapter 12 for 20
weeks, and recommend the best decision.
6. Every time a machine breaks down at the Dynaco Manufacturing Company (Problem 3), either
1, 2, or 3 hours are required to fix it, according to the following probability distribution:
Repair Time (hr.)
Probability
1
.30
2
.50
3
.20
1.00
a. Simulate the repair time for 20 weeks and then compute the average weekly repair time.
b. If the random numbers that are used to simulate breakdowns per week are also used to simu-
late repair time per breakdown, will the results be affected in any way? Explain.
c. If it costs $50 per hour to repair a machine when it breaks down (including lost productiv-
ity), determine the average weekly breakdown cost.
d. The Dynaco Company is considering a preventive maintenance program that would alter the
probabilities of machine breakdowns per week as shown in the following table:
Machine Breakdowns
per Week
Probability
0
.20
1
.30
2
.20
3
.15
4
.10
5
.05
1.00
The weekly cost of the preventive maintenance program is $150. Using simulation, determine
whether the company should institute the preventive maintenance program.
7. Sound Warehouse in Georgetown sells CD players (with speakers), which it orders from Fuji Elec-
tronics in Japan. Because of shipping and handling costs, each order must be for five CD players.
672
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

Because of the time it takes to receive an order, the warehouse outlet places an order every time
the present stock drops to five CD players. It costs $100 to place an order. It costs the warehouse
$400 in lost sales when a customer asks for a CD player and the warehouse is out of stock. It costs
$40 to keep each CD player stored in the warehouse. If a customer cannot purchase a CD player
when it is requested, the customer will not wait until one comes in but will go to a competitor. The
following probability distribution for demand for CD players has been determined:
Demand per Month
Probability
0
.04
1
.08
2
.28
3
.40
4
.16
5
.02
6
.02
1.00
The time required to receive an order once it is placed has the following probability distribution:
Time to Receive 
an Order (mo.)
Probability
1
.60
2
.30
3
.10
1.00
The warehouse has five CD players in stock. Orders are always received at the beginning of
the week. Simulate Sound Warehouse’s ordering and sales policy for 20 months, using the first
column of random numbers in Table 14.3. Compute the average monthly cost.
8. First American Bank is trying to determine whether it should install one or two drive-through
teller windows. The following probability distributions for arrival intervals and service times
have been developed from historical data:
Time Between 
Automobile Arrivals (min.)
Probability
1
.20
2
.60
3
.10
4
.10
1.00
Service Time (min.)
Probability
2
.10
3
.40
4
.20
5
.20
6
.10
1.00
PROBLEMS
673

Assume that in the two-server system, an arriving car will join the shorter queue. When the
queues are of equal length, there is a 50–50 chance the driver will enter the queue for either
window.
a. Simulate both the one- and two-teller systems. Compute the average queue length, waiting
time, and percentage utilization for each system.
b. Discuss your results in (a) and suggest the degree to which they could be used to make a de-
cision about which system to employ.
9. The time between arrivals of oil tankers at a loading dock at Prudhoe Bay is given by the follow-
ing probability distribution:
Time Between Ship Arrivals (days)
Probability
1
.05
2
.10
3
.20
4
.30
5
.20
6
.10
7
.05
1.00
The time required to fill a tanker with oil and prepare it for sea is given by the following
probability distribution:
Time to Fill and Prepare (days)
Probability
3
.10
4
.20
5
.40
6
.30
1.00
a. Simulate the movement of tankers to and from the single loading dock for the first 20 ar-
rivals. Compute the average time between arrivals, average waiting time to load, and average
number of tankers waiting to be loaded.
b. Discuss any hesitation you might have about using your results for decision making.
10. The Saki automobile dealer in the Minneapolis–St. Paul area orders the Saki sport compact,
which gets 50 miles per gallon of gasoline, from the manufacturer in Japan. However, the dealer
never knows for sure how many months it will take to receive an order once it is placed. It can
take 1, 2, or 3 months, with the following probabilities:
Months to Receive an Order
Probability
1
.50
2
.30
3
.20
1.00
674
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

The demand per month is given by the following distribution:
Demand per Month (cars)
Probability
1
.10
2
.30
3
.40
4
.20
1.00
The dealer orders when the number of cars on the lot gets down to a certain level. To deter-
mine the appropriate level of cars to use as an indicator of when to order, the dealer needs to
know how many cars will be demanded during the time required to receive an order. Simulate
the demand for 30 orders and compute the average number of cars demanded during the time
required to receive an order. At what level of cars in stock should the dealer place an order?
11. State University is playing Tech in their annual football game on Saturday. A sportswriter has
scouted each team all season and accumulated the following data: State runs four basic plays—a
sweep, a pass, a draw, and an off tackle; Tech uses three basic defenses—a wide tackle, an Okla-
homa, and a blitz. The number of yards State will gain for each play against each defense is
shown in the following table:
Tech Defense
State Play
Wide Tackle
Oklahoma
Blitz
Sweep
-3
5
12
Pass
12
4
-10
Draw
2
1
20
Off tackle
7
3
-3
The probability that State will run each of its four plays is shown in the following table:
Play
Probability
Sweep
.10
Pass
.20
Draw
.20
Off tackle
.50
The probability that Tech will use each of its defenses follows:
Defense
Probability
Wide tackle
.30
Oklahoma
.50
Blitz
.20
The sportswriter estimates that State will run 40 plays during the game. The sportswriter believes
that if State gains 300 or more yards, it will win; however, if Tech holds State to fewer than 300 yards,
it will win. Use simulation to determine which team the sportswriter will predict to win the game.
PROBLEMS
675

12. Each semester, the students in the college of business at State University must have their course
schedules approved by the college adviser. The students line up in the hallway outside the ad-
viser’s office. The students arrive at the office according to the following probability distribution:
Time Between Arrivals (min.)
Probability
4
.20
5
.30
6
.40
7
.10
1.00
The time required by the adviser to examine and approve a schedule corresponds to the fol-
lowing probability distribution:
Schedule Approval (min.)
Probability
6
.30
7
.50
8
.20
1.00
Simulate this course approval system for 90 minutes. Compute the average queue length and the
average time a student must wait. Discuss these results.
13. A city is served by two newspapers—the Tribune and the Daily News. Each Sunday readers pur-
chase one of the newspapers at a stand. The following matrix contains the probabilities of a cus-
tomer’s buying a particular newspaper in a week, given the newspaper purchased the previous
Sunday:
This Sunday
Next Sunday
Simulate a customer’s purchase of newspapers for 20 weeks to determine the steady-state prob-
abilities that a customer will buy each newspaper in the long run.
14. Loebuck Grocery orders milk from a dairy on a weekly basis. The manager of the store has
developed the following probability distribution for demand per week (in cases):
Demand (cases)
Probability
15
.20
16
.25
17
.40
18
.15
1.00
The milk costs the grocery $10 per case and sells for $16 per case. The carrying cost is $0.50 per
case per week, and the shortage cost is $1 per case per week. Simulate the ordering system for
Tribune
DailyNews
Tribune
Daily News
.
.
.
.
65
45
35
55
⎤
⎦
⎥
⎡
⎣
⎢
⎢
676
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

Loebuck Grocery for 20 weeks. Use a weekly order size of 16 cases of milk and compute the
average weekly profit for this order size. Explain how the complete simulation for determining or-
der size would be developed for this problem.
15. The Paymore Rental Car Agency rents cars in a small town. It wants to determine how many
rental cars it should maintain. Based on market projections and historical data, the manager has
determined probability distributions for the number of rentals per day and rental duration (in
days only) as shown in the following tables:
Number of Customers/Day
Probability
0
.20
1
.20
2
.50
3
.10
1.00
Rental Duration (days)
Probability
1
.10
2
.30
3
.40
4
.10
5
.10
1.00
Design a simulation experiment for the car agency and simulate using a fleet of four rental cars
for 10 days. Compute the probability that the agency will not have a car available upon demand.
Should the agency expand its fleet? Explain how a simulation experiment could be designed to
determine the optimal fleet size for the Paymore Agency.
16. A CPM/PERT project network has probabilistic activity times (x) as shown on each branch of
the network; for example, activity 1–3 has a .40 probability that it will be completed in 6 weeks
and a .60 probability it will be completed in 10 weeks:
1
2
4
3
x
6
10
.4
.6
x
5
9
.6
.4
x
2
6
8
.2
.7
.1
x
3
5
.5
.5
x
1
3
6
.3
.3
.4
5
6
x
1
2
.4
.6
x
3
5
7
.2
.5
.3
P(x)
P(x)
P(x)
P(x)
P(x)
P(x)
P(x)
PROBLEMS
677

Simulate the project network 10 times and determine the critical path each time. Compute the
average critical path time and the frequency at which each path is critical. How does this simula-
tion analysis of the critical path method compare with regular CPM/PERT analysis?
17. A robbery has just been committed at the Corner Market in the downtown area of the city. The
market owner was able to activate the alarm, and the robber fled on foot. Police officers arrived
a few minutes later and asked the owner, “How long ago did the robber leave?” “He left only a
few minutes ago,” the store owner responded. “He’s probably 10 blocks away by now,” one of
the officers said to the other. “Not likely,” said the store owner. “He was so stoned on drugs that
I bet even if he has run 10 blocks, he’s still only within a few blocks of here! He’s probably just
running in circles!”
Perform a simulation experiment that will test the store owner’s hypothesis. Assume that at each
corner of a city block there is an equal chance that the robber will go in any one of the four pos-
sible directions: north, south, east, or west. Simulate for five trials and then indicate in how
many of the trials the robber is within 2 blocks of the store.
18. Compcomm, Inc., is an international communications and information technology company that
has seen the value of its common stock appreciate substantially in recent years. A stock analyst
would like to use simulation to predict the stock prices of Compcomm for an extended period.
Based on historical data, the analyst has developed the following probability distribution for the
movement of Compcomm stock prices per day:
Stock Price Movement
Probability
Increase
.45
Same
.30
Decrease
.25
1.00
The analyst has also developed the following probability distributions for the amount of the
increases or decreases in the stock price per day:
Probability
Stock Price Change
Increase
Decrease
1/8
.40
.12
1/4
.17
.15
3/8
.12
.18
1/2
.10
.21
5/8
.08
.14
3/4
.07
.10
7/8
.04
.05
1
.02
.05
1.00
1.00
The price of the stock is currently 62.
Develop a Monte Carlo simulation model to track the stock price of Compcomm stock and sim-
ulate for 30 days. Indicate the new stock price at the end of the 30 days. How would this model
be expanded to conduct a complete simulation of 1 year’s stock price movement?
678
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

19. The emergency room of the community hospital in Farmburg has one receptionist, one doctor,
and one nurse. The emergency room opens at time zero, and patients begin to arrive some time
later. Patients arrive at the emergency room according to the following probability distribution:
Time Between 
Arrivals (min.)
Probability
5
.06
10
.10
15
.23
20
.29
25
.18
30
.14
1.00
The attention needed by a patient who comes to the emergency room is defined by the following
probability distribution:
Patient Needs 
to See
Probability
Doctor alone
.50
Nurse alone
.20
Both
.30
1.00
If a patient needs to see both the doctor and the nurse, he or she cannot see one before the
other—that is, the patient must wait to see both together.
The length of the patient’s visit (in minutes) is defined by the following probability
distributions:
Doctor
Probability
Nurse
Probability
Both
Probability
10
.22
5
.08
15
.07
15
.31
10
.24
20
.16
20
.25
15
.51
25
.21
25
.12
20
.17
30
.28
30
.10
1.00
35
.17
1.00
40
.11
1.00
Simulate the arrival of 20 patients to the emergency room and compute the probability that a pa-
tient must wait and the average waiting time. Based on this one simulation, does it appear that
this system provides adequate patient care?
20. The Western Outfitters Store specializes in denim jeans. The variable cost of the jeans varies accord-
ing to several factors, including the cost of the jeans from the distributor, labor costs, handling,
packaging, and so on. Price also is a random variable that varies according to competitors’ prices.
PROBLEMS
679

Sales volume also varies each month. The probability distributions for volume, price, and variable
costs each month are as follows:
Sales Volume
Probability
300
.12
400
.18
500
.20
600
.23
700
.17
800
.10
1.00
Price
Probability
$22
.07
23
.16
24
.24
25
.25
26
.18
27
.10
1.00
Variable Cost
Probability
$ 8
.17
9
.32
10
.29
11
.14
12
.08
1.00
Fixed costs are $9,000 per month for the store.
Simulate 20 months of store sales and compute the probability that the store will at least break
even and the average profit (or loss).
21. Randolph College and Salem College are within 20 miles of each other, and the students at each
college frequently date each other. The students at Randolph College are debating how good
their dates are at Salem College. The Randolph students have sampled several hundred of their
fellow students and asked them to rate their dates from 1 to 5 (in which 1 is excellent and 5 is
poor) according to physical attractiveness, intelligence, and personality. Following are the re-
sulting probability distributions for these three traits for students at Salem College:
Physical Attractiveness
Probability
1
.27
2
.35
3
.14
4
.09
5
.15
1.00
680
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

Intelligence
Probability
1
.10
2
.16
3
.45
4
.17
5
.12
1.00
Personality
Probability
1
.15
2
.30
3
.33
4
.07
5
.15
1.00
Simulate 20 dates and compute an average overall rating of the Salem students.
22. In Problem 21, discuss how you might assess the accuracy of the average rating for Salem Col-
lege students based on only 20 simulated dates.
23. Burlingham Mills produces denim cloth that it sells to jeans manufacturers. It is negotiating a
contract with Troy Clothing Company to provide denim cloth on a weekly basis. Burlingham
has established its monthly available production capacity for this contract to be between 0 and
600 yards, according to the following probability distribution:
Troy Clothing’s weekly demand for denim cloth varies according to the following probabil-
ity distribution:
Demand (yd.)
Probability
0
.03
100
.12
200
.20
300
.35
400
.20
500
.10
1.00
Simulate Troy Clothing’s cloth orders for 20 weeks and determine the average weekly capacity
and demand. Also determine the probability that Burlingham will have sufficient capacity to
meet demand.
f(x) =
x
180,000, 0 … x … 600 yd.
PROBLEMS
681

24. A baseball game consists of plays that can be described as follows:
Play
Description
No advance
An out where no runners can advance. This includes strikeouts,
pop-ups, short flies, and the like.
Groundout
Each runner can advance one base.
Possible double play
Double play if there is a runner on first base and fewer than two
outs. The lead runner who can be forced is out; runners not out 
advance one base. If there is no runner on first or there are two outs,
this play is treated as a “no advance.”
Long fly
A runner on third base can score.
Very long fly
Runners on second and third base advance one base.
Walk
Includes a hit batter.
Infield single
All runners advance one base.
Outfield single
A runner on first base advances one base, but a runner on second or
third base scores.
Long single
All runners can advance a maximum of two bases.
Double
Runners can advance a maximum of two bases.
Long double
All runners score.
Triple
Home run
Note: Singles also include a factor for errors, allowing the batter to reach first base.
Distributions for these plays for two teams, the White Sox (visitors) and the Yankees (home), are
as follows:
682
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
2This problem is based on R. E. Trueman, “A Computer Simulation Model of Baseball: With Particular Application to
Strategy Analysis,” in R. E. Machol, S. P. Ladany, and D. G. Morrison, eds., Management Science in Sports (New York:
North Holland Publishing Co., 1976), 1–14.
Team: White Sox
Play
Probability
No advance
.03
Groundout
.39
Possible double play
.06
Long fly
.09
Very long fly
.08
Walk
.06
Infield single
.02
Outfield single
.10
Long single
.03
Double
.04
Long double
.05
Triple
.02
Home run
.03
1.00
Team: Yankees
Play
Probability
No advance
.04
Groundout
.38
Possible double play
.04
Long fly
.10
Very long fly
.06
Walk
.07
Infield single
.04
Outfield single
.10
Long single
.04
Double
.05
Long double
.03
Triple
.01
Home run
.04
1.00
Simulate a nine-inning baseball game using the preceding information.2

25. For the ComputerWorld example in this chapter, recreate the simulation shown in Exhibit 14.2 using
Crystal Ball. Assume that demand is normally distributed with a mean of 1.5 laptops and a standard
deviation of 0.8. Using Crystal Ball determine average weekly demand and average weekly revenue.
26. Perform the Crystal Ball simulation in Problem 25, assuming that demand is normally distrib-
uted with a mean of 2.5 and a standard deviation of 1.2 laptops.
27. For the Bigelow Manufacturing example in this chapter, re-create the simulation shown in Table
14.10 and Exhibit 14.7 using Crystal Ball. Assume that the repair time is normally distributed with a
mean of 2.15 days and a standard deviation of 0.8 day. Assume that the time between breakdowns is
defined by the triangular distribution used in the example. Using Crystal Ball, determine the aver-
age annual number of breakdowns, average annual repair time, and average annual repair cost.
28. For the Bigelow Manufacturing example in this chapter, re-create the simulation for the improved
maintenance program shown in Table 14.11 and Exhibit 14.8 using Crystal Ball. For the improved
program assume that the repair time is normally distributed with a mean of 1.70 days and a stan-
dard deviation of 0.6 day. Assume that the time between breakdowns is defined by the triangular
distribution for the improved maintenance program used in the example. Using Crystal Ball, deter-
mine the average annual number of breakdowns, average annual repair time, and average annual
repair cost. Compare this improved maintenance system with the current one (Problem 27), and
indicate whether it should be adopted given the cost of improving the system (i.e., $20,000).
29. Tracy McCoy is shopping for a new car. She has identified a particular sports utility vehicle she
likes but has heard that it has high maintenance costs. Tracy has decided to develop a simulation
model to help her estimate maintenance costs for the life of the car. Tracy estimates that the pro-
jected life of the car with the first owner (before it is sold) is uniformly distributed with a mini-
mum of 2.0 years and a maximum of 8.0 years. Furthermore, she believes that the miles she will
drive the car each year can be defined by a triangular distribution with a minimum value of 3,700
miles, a maximum value of 14,500 miles, and a most likely value of 9,000 miles. She has deter-
mined from automobile association data that the maintenance cost per mile driven for the vehicle
she is interested in is normally distributed, with a mean of $0.08 per mile and a standard deviation
of $0.02 per mile. Using Crystal Ball, develop a simulation model (using 1,000 trials) and deter-
mine the average maintenance cost for the life of the car with Tracy and the probability that the
cost will be less than $3,000.
30. In Problem 20, assume that the sales volume for Western Outfitters Store is normally distrib-
uted, with a mean of 600 pairs of jeans and a standard deviation of 200; the price is uniformly
distributed, with a minimum of $22 and a maximum of $28; and the variable cost is defined by a
triangular distribution with a minimum value of $6, a maximum of $11, and a most likely value
of $9. Develop a simulation model by using Crystal Ball (with 1,000 trials) and determine the
average profit and the probability that Western Outfitters will break even.
31. In Problem 21, assume that the students at Randolph College have redefined the probability dis-
tributions of their dates at Salem College as follows: Physical attractiveness is uniformly distrib-
uted from 1 to 5; intelligence is defined by a triangular distribution with a minimum rating of 1,
a maximum of 5, and a most likely of 2; and personality is defined by a triangular distribution
with a minimum of 1, a maximum of 5, and a most likely rating of 3. Develop a simulation
model by using Crystal Ball and determine the average date rating (for 1,000 trials). Also com-
pute the probability that the rating will be “better” than 3.0.
32. In Problem 23, assume that production capacity at Burlingham Mills for the Troy Clothing Com-
pany contract is normally distributed, with a mean of 320 yards per month and a standard devia-
tion of 120 yards, and that Troy Clothing’s demand is uniformly distributed between 0 and 500
yards. Develop a simulation model by using Crystal Ball and determine the average monthly
shortage or surplus for denim cloth (for 1,000 trials). Also determine the probability that Burling-
ham will always have sufficient production capacity.
PROBLEMS
683

33. Erin Jones has $100,000 and, to diversify, she wants to invest equal amounts of $50,000 each in two
mutual funds selected from a list of four possible mutual funds. She wants to invest for a 3-year pe-
riod. She has used historical data from the four funds plus data from the market to determine the
mean and standard deviation (normally distributed) of the annual return for each fund, as follows:
Return (r)
Fund
m
s
1. Internet
.20
.09
2. Index
.12
.04
3. Entertainment
.16
.10
4. Growth
.14
.06
The possible combinations of two investment funds are (1,2), (1,3), (1,4), (2,3), (2,4), and (3,4).
a. Use Crystal Ball to simulate each of the investment combinations to determine the expected
return in 3 years. (Note that the formula for the future value, FV, of a current investment, P,
with return r for n years in the future is 
) Indicate which investment com-
bination has the highest expected return.
b. Erin wants to reduce her risk as much as possible. She knows that if she invests her $100,000
in a CD at the bank, she is guaranteed a return of $20,000 after 3 years. Using the frequency
charts for the simulation runs in Crystal Ball, determine which combination of investments
will result in the greatest probability of receiving a return of $120,000 or greater.
34. In Chapter 16, the formula for the optimal order quantity of an item, Q, given its demand, D,
ordering cost,
and the cost of holding, or carrying, an item in inventory,
is as follows:
The total inventory cost formula is
Ordering cost,
and carrying cost,
are generally values that the company is often able
to determine with certainty because they are internal costs, whereas demand, D, is usually not
known with certainty because it is external to the company. However, in the order quantity for-
mula given here, demand is treated as if it were certain. To consider the uncertainty of demand,
it must be simulated.
Using Crystal Ball, simulate the preceding formulas for Q and TC to determine their average
values for an item, with 
and demand, D, that is normally distributed
with a mean of 10,000 and a standard deviation of 4,000.
35. The Management Science Association (MSA) has arranged to hold its annual conference at the
Riverside Hotel in Orlando next year. Based on historical data, the MSA believes the number of
rooms it will need for its members attending the conference is normally distributed, with a mean of
800 and a standard deviation of 270. The MSA can reserve rooms now (1 year prior to the confer-
ence) for $80; however, for any rooms not reserved now, the cost will be at the hotel’s regular room
rate of $120. The MSA guarantees the room rate of $80 to its members. If its members reserve fewer
than the number of rooms it reserves, MSA must pay the hotel for the difference, at the $80 room
rate. If MSA does not reserve enough rooms, it must pay the extra cost—that is, $40 per room.
a. Using Crystal Ball, determine whether the MSA should reserve 600, 700, 800, 900, or 1,000
rooms in advance to realize the lowest total cost.
b. Can you determine a more exact value for the number of rooms to reserve to minimize cost?
Co = +150, Cc = +0.75,
Cc,
Co,
TC = CoD
Q
+ Cc
Q
2
Q = A
2C0D
Cc
Cc,
Co,
FVn = Pr(1 + r)n.
684
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION

36. In Chapter 8, Figure 8.6 shows a simplified project network for building a house, as follows:
There are four paths through this network:
Path A: 1–2–3–4–6–7
Path B: 1–2–3–4–5–6–7
Path C: 1–2–4–6–7
Path D: 1–2–4–5–6–7
The time parameters (in weeks) defining a triangular probability distribution for each activ-
ity are provided as follows:
Time Parameters
Activity
Minimum
Likeliest
Maximum
1–2
1
3
5
2–3
1
2
4
2–4
0.5
1
2
3–4
0
0
0
4–5
1
2
3
4–6
1
3
6
5–6
1
2
4
6–7
1
2
4
a. Using Crystal Ball, simulate each path in the network and identify the longest path (i.e., the
critical path).
b. Observing the simulation run frequency chart for path A, determine the probability that this
path will exceed the critical path time. What does this tell you about the simulation results
for a project network versus an analytical result?
1
2
3
5
4
6
7
Lay
foundation
Design
house and
obtain financing
Order and receive
materials
Select
paint
Select
carpet
Build
house
Finish
work
Dummy
CASE PROBLEM
685
Case Problem
JET Copies
James Banks was standing in line next to Robin Cole at
Klecko’s Copy Center, waiting to use one of the copy ma-
chines. “Gee, Robin, I hate this,” he said. “We have to
drive all the way over here from Southgate and then wait
in line to use these copy machines. I hate wasting time
like this.”
“I know what you mean,” said Robin. “And look who’s
here. A lot of these students are from Southgate Apartments
or one of the other apartments near us. It seems as though it
would be more logical if Klecko’s would move its opera-
tion over to us, instead of all of us coming over here.”

686
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
James looked around and noticed what Robin was
talking about. Robin and he were students at State Univer-
sity, and most of the customers at Klecko’s were also stu-
dents. As Robin suggested, a lot of the people waiting
were State students who lived at Southgate Apartments,
where James also lived with Ernie Moore. This gave
James an idea, which he shared with Ernie and their friend
Terri Jones when he got home later that evening.
“Look, you guys, I’ve got an idea to make some
money,” James started. “Let’s open a copy business! All we
have to do is buy a copier, put it in Terri’s duplex next door,
and sell copies. I know we can get customers because I’ve
just seen them all at Klecko’s. If we provide a copy service
right here in the Southgate complex, we’ll make a killing.”
Terri and Ernie liked the idea, so the three decided to
go into the copying business. They would call it JET
Copies, named for James, Ernie, and Terri. Their first step
was to purchase a copier. They bought one like the one
used in the college of business office at State for $18,000.
(Terri’s parents provided a loan.) The company that sold
them the copier touted the copier’s reliability, but after they
bought it, Ernie talked with someone in the dean’s office at
State, who told him that the University’s copier broke
down frequently and when it did, it often took between 1
and 4 days to get it repaired. When Ernie told this to Terri
and James, they became worried. If the copier broke down
frequently and was not in use for long periods while they
waited for a repair person to come fix it, they could lose a
lot of revenue. As a result, James, Ernie, and Terri thought
they might need to purchase a smaller backup copier for
$8,000 to use when the main copier broke down. However,
before they approached Terri’s parents for another loan,
they wanted to have an estimate of just how much money
they might lose if they did not have a backup copier. To
get this estimate, they decided to develop a simulation
model because they were studying simulation in one of
their classes at State.
To develop a simulation model, they first needed to
know how frequently the copier might break down—
specifically, the time between breakdowns. No one could
provide them with an exact probability distribution, but
from talking to staff members in the college of business,
James estimated that the time between breakdowns was
probably between 0 and 6 weeks, with the probability in-
creasing the longer the copier went without breaking
down. Thus, the probability distribution of breakdowns
generally looked like the following:
Next, they needed to know how long it would take to get
the copier repaired when it broke down. They had a service
contract with the dealer that “guaranteed” prompt repair
service. However, Terri gathered some data from the college
of business from which she developed the following proba-
bility distribution of repair times:
Repair Time (days)
Probability
1
.20
2
.45
3
.25
4
.10
1.00
Finally, they needed to estimate how much business they
would lose while the copier was waiting for repair. The three
of them had only a vague idea of how much business they
would do but finally estimated that they would sell between
2,000 and 8,000 copies per day at $0.10 per copy. However,
they had no idea about what kind of probability distribution
to use for this range of values. Therefore, they decided to
use a uniform probability distribution between 2,000 and
8,000 copies to estimate the number of copies they would
sell per day.
James, Ernie, and Terri decided that if their loss of rev-
enue due to machine downtime during 1 year was $12,000
or more, they should purchase a backup copier. Thus, they
needed to simulate the breakdown and repair process for a
number of years to obtain an average annual loss of revenue.
However, before programming the simulation model, they
decided to conduct a manual simulation of this process for 1
year to see if the model was working correctly. Perform this
manual simulation for JET Copies and determine the loss of
revenue for 1 year.
6
x, weeks
.33
f(x)
0

CASE PROBLEM
687
Case Problem
Benefit–Cost Analysis of the Spradlin
Bluff River Project
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has historically con-
structed dams on various rivers in the southeastern United
States. Its primary instrument for evaluating and selecting
among many projects under consideration is benefit–cost
analysis. The Corps estimates both the annual benefits de-
riving from a project in several different categories and
the annual costs and then divides the total benefits by the
total costs to develop a benefit–cost ratio. This ratio is
then used by the Corps and Congress to compare numer-
ous projects under consideration and select those for fund-
ing. A benefit–cost ratio greater than 1.0 indicates that the
benefits are greater than the costs; and the higher a pro-
ject’s benefit–cost ratio, the more likely it is to be selected
over projects with lower ratios.
The Corps is evaluating a project to construct a dam
over the Spradlin Bluff River in southwest Georgia. The
Corps has identified six traditional areas in which bene-
fits will accrue: flood control, hydroelectric power, im-
proved navigation, recreation, fish and wildlife, and area
commercial redevelopment. The Corps has made three
estimates (in dollars) for each benefit—a minimum pos-
sible value, a most likely value, and a maximum benefit
value. These benefit estimates are as follows:
Estimate
Benefit
Minimum
Most Likely
Maximum
Flood control
$ 1,695,200
$ 2,347,800
$ 3,570,600
Hydroelectric power
8,068,250
11,845,000
14,845,000
Navigation
50,400
64,000
109,500
Recreation
6,404,000
9,774,000
14,566,000
Fish and wildlife
104,300
255,000
455,300
Area redevelopment
0
1,630,000
2,385,000
There are two categories of costs associated with a
construction project of this type—the total capital cost, an-
nualized over 100 years (at a rate of interest specified by
the government), and annual operation and maintenance
costs. The cost estimates for this project are as follows:
Estimate
Cost
Minimum
Most Likely
Maximum
Annualized capital cost
$12,890,750
$14,150,500
$19,075,900
Operation and 
maintenance
3,483,500
4,890,000
7,350,800
Using Crystal Ball, determine a simulated mean
benefit–cost ratio and standard deviation.
What is the probability that this project will have a
benefit–cost ratio greater than 1.0?
Case Problem
Disaster Planning at Tech
Concerned about recent weather-related disasters, fires,
and other calamities at universities around the country, uni-
versity administrators at Tech have initiated several plan-
ning projects to determine how effectively local emergency
facilities can handle such situations. One of these projects
has focused on the transport of disaster victims from cam-
pus to the five major hospitals in the area: Montgomery
Regional, Raeford Memorial, County General, Lewis Galt,
and HGA Healthcare. The project team would like to deter-
mine how many victims each hospital might expect in a dis-
aster and how long it would take to transport victims to the
hospitals. However, one of the problems the project team
faces is the lack of data on disasters, since they occur so in-
frequently. The project team has looked at disasters at other
schools and has estimated that the minimum number of vic-
tims that would qualify an event as a disaster for the pur-
pose of initiating a disaster plan is 10. The team has further

688
CHAPTER 14
SIMULATION
estimated that the largest number of victims in any disaster
would be 200, and based on limited data from other
schools, they believe the most likely number of disaster vic-
tims is approximately 50. Because of the lack of data, it is
assumed that these parameters best define a triangular dis-
tribution. The emergency facilities and capabilities at the
five area hospitals vary. It has been estimated that in the
event of a disaster situation, the victims should be dispersed
to the hospitals on a percentage basis based on the hospi-
tals’ relative emergency capabilities, as follows: 25%
should be sent to Montgomery Regional, 30% to Raeford
Memorial, 15% to County General, 10% to Lewis Galt, and
20% to HGA Healthcare. The proximity of the hospitals to
Tech also varies. It is estimated that transport times to each
of the hospitals is exponentially distributed with an average
time of 5 minutes to Montgomery Regional, 10 minutes to
Raeford Memorial, 20 minutes to County General, 20 min-
utes to Lewis Galt, and 15 minutes to HGA Healthcare. 
(It is assumed that each hospital has two emergency vehi-
cles, so that one leaves Tech when the other leaves the hos-
pital, and consequently, one arrives at Tech when the other
arrives at the hospital. Thus, the total transport time will be
the sum of transporting each victim to a specific hospital.)
a. Perform a simulation analysis using Crystal Ball to
determine the average number of victims that can be
expected at each hospital and the average total time
required to transport victims to each hospital.
b. Suppose that the project team believes they cannot
confidently assume that the number of victims will
follow a triangular distribution using the parame-
ters they have estimated. Instead, they believe that
the number of victims is best estimated using a nor-
mal distribution with the following parameters for
each hospital: a mean of 6 minutes and a standard
deviation of 4 minutes for Montgomery Regional; a
mean of 11 minutes and a standard deviation of 
4 minutes for Raeford Memorial; a mean of 22 min-
utes and a standard deviation of 8 minutes for
County General; a mean of 22 minutes and a stan-
dard deviation of 9 minutes for Lewis Galt; and a
mean of 15 minutes and a standard deviation of 5
minutes for HGA Healthcare. Perform a simulation
analysis using this revised information.
c. Discuss how this information might be used for plan-
ning purposes. How might the simulation be altered
or changed to provide additional useful information?

CHAPTER
15
Forecasting
689

A forecast is a prediction of what will occur in the future. Meteorologists forecast the weather,
sportscasters predict the winners of football games, and managers of business firms attempt to
predict how much of their product will be demanded in the future. In fact, managers are con-
stantly trying to predict the future, making decisions in the present that will ensure the continued
success of their firms. Often a manager will use judgment, opinion, or past experiences to fore-
cast what will occur in the future. However, a number of mathematical methods are also available
to aid managers in making decisions. In this chapter, we present two of the traditional forecasting
methods: time series analysis and regression. Although no technique will result in a totally accu-
rate forecast (i.e., it is impossible to predict the future exactly), these forecasting methods can
provide reliable guidelines for decision making.
Forecasting Components
A variety of forecasting methods exist, and their applicability is dependent on the time frame of
the forecast (i.e., how far in the future we are forecasting), the existence of patterns in the fore-
cast (i.e., seasonal trends, peak periods), and the number of variables to which the forecast is re-
lated. We will discuss each of these factors separately.
In general, forecasts can be classified according to three time frames: short range,
medium range, and long range. Short-range forecasts typically encompass the immediate
future and are concerned with the daily operations of a business firm, such as daily demand
or resource requirements. A short-range forecast rarely goes beyond a couple of months into
the future. A medium-range forecast typically encompasses anywhere from 1 or 2 months
to 1 year. A forecast of this length is generally more closely related to a yearly production
plan and will reflect such items as peaks and valleys in demand and the necessity to secure
additional resources for the upcoming year. A long-range forecast typically encompasses a
period longer than 1 or 2 years. Long-range forecasts are related to management’s attempt to
plan new products for changing markets, build new facilities, or secure long-term financing.
In general, the farther into the future one seeks to predict, the more difficult forecasting
becomes.
These classifications should be viewed as generalizations. The line of demarcation between
medium- and long-range forecasts is often quite arbitrary and not always distinct. For some
firms a medium-range forecast could be several years, and for other firms a long-range forecast
could be in terms of months.
Forecasts often exhibit patterns, or trends. A trend is a long-term movement of the item
being forecast. For example, the demand for personal computers has shown an upward trend
during the past decade, without any long downward movement in the market. Trends are the
easiest patterns of demand behavior to detect and are often the starting point for developing a
forecast. Figure 15.1(a) illustrates a demand trend in which there is a general upward movement
or increase. Notice that Figure 15.1(a) also includes several random movements up and down.
Random variations are movements that are not predictable and follow no pattern (and thus are
virtually unpredictable).
A cycle is an undulating movement in demand, up and down, that repeats itself over
a lengthy time span (i.e., more than 1 year). For example, new housing starts and thus
construction-related products tend to follow cycles in the economy. Automobile sales tend to
follow cycles in the same fashion. The demand for winter sports equipment increases every
4 years, before and after the Winter Olympics. Figure 15.1(b) shows the general behavior of a
demand cycle.
A seasonal pattern is an oscillating movement in demand that occurs periodically (in the
short run) and is repetitive. Seasonality is often weather related. For example, every winter the
demand for snowblowers and skis increases dramatically, and retail sales in general increase
during the Christmas season. However, a seasonal pattern can occur on a daily or weekly basis.
For example, some restaurants are busier at lunch than at dinner, and shopping mall stores and
690
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Short-range forecasts
are daily operations.
A seasonal pattern
is an up-and-down,
repetitive movement
within a trend
occurring periodically.
Long-range forecasts
are more strategic
and for over a year.
A trend is a gradual,
long-term, up-or-down
movement of demand.
Medium-range
forecasts are usually
from a month up 
to a year.
Random variations
are unpredictable
movements in demand
that follow no pattern.
A cycle is an 
up-and-down repetitive
movement in demand.

theaters tend to have higher demand on weekends. Figure 15.1(c) illustrates a seasonal pattern
in which the same demand behavior is repeated each period at the same time.
Of course, demand behavior will frequently display several of these characteristics simulta-
neously. Although housing starts display cyclical behavior, there has been an upward trend in
new house construction over the years. As we noted, demand for skis is seasonal; however, there
has been a general upward trend in the demand for winter sports equipment during the past 2
decades. Figure 15.1(d) displays the combination of two demand patterns, a trend with a sea-
sonal pattern.
There are instances in which demand behavior exhibits no pattern. These are referred to as
irregular movements, or variations. For example, a local flood might cause a momentary in-
crease in carpet demand, or negative publicity resulting from a lawsuit might cause product de-
mand to drop for a period of time. Although this behavior is causal, and thus not totally random,
it still does not follow a pattern that can be reflected in a forecast.
Forecasting Methods
The factors discussed previously determine to a certain extent the type of forecasting method
that can or should be used. In this chapter we discuss the basic types of forecasting: time series,
regression methods, and qualitative methods. Time series is a category of statistical techniques
that uses historical data to predict future behavior. Regression (or causal) methods attempt to
develop a mathematical relationship (in the form of a regression model) between the item being
forecast and factors that cause it to behave the way it does. Most of the remainder of this chapter
is about time series and regression forecasting methods. In this section we focus our discussion
on qualitative forecasting.
Qualitative methods use management judgment, expertise, and opinion to make forecasts.
Often called “the jury of executive opinion,” they are the most common type of forecasting
method for the long-term strategic planning process. There are normally individuals or groups
within an organization whose judgments and opinions regarding the future are as valid or more
valid than those of outside experts or other structured approaches. Top managers are the key
FORECASTING COMPONENTS
691
Demand
Demand
Time
(a)
Time
(b)
Time
(c)
Time
(d)
Random
movement
Demand
Demand
FIGURE 15.1
Forms of forecast
movement: (a)
trend, (b) cycle, 
(c) seasonal
pattern, and 
(d) trend with 
seasonal pattern
Types of forecasting
methods are time
series, regression, and
qualitative.
Regression develops a
mathematical
relationship between
the forecasted item and
factors that cause it to
behave the way it does.
Time series forecasts
are statistical
techniques that use
historical data.
Qualitative methods
use judgment, expertise,
and opinion to make
forecasts.

group involved in the development of forecasts for strategic plans. They are generally most fa-
miliar with their firms’ own capabilities and resources and the markets for their products.
The sales force is a direct point of contact with the consumer. This contact provides an
awareness of consumer expectations in the future that others may not possess. Engineering per-
sonnel have an innate understanding of the technological aspects of the type of products that
might be feasible and likely in the future.
Consumer, or market, research is an organized approach that uses surveys and other re-
search techniques to determine what products and services customers want and will purchase,
and to identify new markets and sources of customers. Consumer and market research is nor-
mally conducted by the marketing department within an organization, by industry organizations
and groups, and by private marketing or consulting firms. Although market research can provide
692
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Management Science Application
Forecasting Advertising Demand at NBC
NBC Universal, a subsidiary of General Electric Company,
owns and operates the most profitable television network in
the United States, with revenues of over $14 billion. More
than 60% of these revenues are generated by on-air advertis-
ing time on its television networks and stations. The major tel-
evision networks announce their new programming schedules
for the upcoming season (which starts in late September) in
mid-May. NBC begins selling advertising time very soon after
the new schedule is announced in May, and 60% to 80% of
its airtime inventory is sold in the following 2- to 3-week
period (to approximately 400 advertisers), known as the
upfront market.
Immediately following the announcement of its new sea-
son schedule in May, NBC forecasts ratings and estimates mar-
ket demand for its shows. The ratings forecasts are estimates
of the number of people in several demographic groups who
are expected to watch each airing of the shows in the sched-
ule for the entire year, which are, in turn, based on such fac-
tors as a show’s strength, historical time-slot ratings, and the
ratings performance of adjacent shows. Total market demand
depends primarily on the strength of the economy and the ex-
pected performance of the network’s schedule. Based on this
ratings forecast and market demand, NBC develops pricing
strategies and sets the prices for commercials on its shows. 
Forecasting the upfront market has always been a chal-
lenging process for NBC. The network used to use historical
patterns, expert knowledge, and intuition to forecast demand,
then later it switched to time series forecasting models based
on historical demand. However, these models were unsatisfac-
tory because of the unique nature of NBC’s demand popula-
tion of advertisers. 
NBC ultimately developed a unique approach to forecasting
its upfront market for demand that includes a combination of
the Delphi technique and a “grassroots” forecasting approach.
The Delphi technique seeks to develop a consensus (or at least a
compromise) forecast from among a group of experts, whereas
a grassroots approach to forecasting asks the individuals closest
to the final customer, such as salespeople, about the customers’
purchasing plans. In this forecasting approach, NBC used its
(more than 100) account executives, who interact closely with
the network’s (more than 400) advertisers, to build a knowledge
base in order to estimate individual advertiser demand, aggre-
gate this demand into a total demand forecast, and then contin-
uously and iteratively update demand estimates based on the
account executives’ expertise. Previous forecasting methods had
resulted in forecast errors of 5% to 12%, whereas this new fore-
casting process resulted in a forecast error of only 2.8%, the
most accurate forecast NBC had ever achieved for its upfront
market.
Source: Based on S. Bollapragada, S. Gupta, B. Hurwitz, P. Miles,
and R. Tyagi, “NBC-Universal Uses a Novel Qualitative Forecasting
Technique to Predict Advertising Demand,” Interfaces 38, no. 2
(March–April 2008): 103–11.
© Richard Levine/Alamy

accurate and useful forecasts of product demand, it must be skillfully and correctly conducted,
and it can be expensive.
The Delphi method is a procedure for acquiring informed judgments and opinions from
knowledgeable individuals, using a series of questionnaires to develop a consensus forecast about
what will occur in the future. It was developed at the RAND Corporation shortly after World War II
to forecast the impact of a hypothetical nuclear attack on the United States. Although the Delphi
method has been used for a variety of applications, forecasting has been one of its primary uses.
It has been especially useful for forecasting technological change and advances.
Technological forecasting has become increasingly crucial for successful competition in
today’s global business environment. New enhanced computer technology, new production
methods, and advanced machinery and equipment are constantly being made available to com-
panies. These advances enable them to introduce more new products into the marketplace faster
than ever before. The companies that succeed do so by getting a technological jump on their
competitors through accurate prediction of future technology and its capabilities. What new
products and services will be technologically feasible, when they can be introduced, and what
their demand will be are questions about the future for which answers cannot be predicted from
historical data. Instead, the informed opinion and judgment of experts are necessary to make
these types of single, long-term forecasts.
Time Series Methods
Time series methods are statistical techniques that make use of historical data accumulated over
a period of time. Time series methods assume that what has occurred in the past will continue to
occur in the future. As the name time series suggests, these methods relate the forecast to only
one factor—time. Time series methods tend to be most useful for short-range forecasting,
although they can be used for longer-range forecasting. We will discuss two types of time series
methods: the moving average and exponential smoothing.
Moving Average
A time series forecast can be as simple as using demand in the current period to predict demand
in the next period. For example, if demand is 100 units this week, the forecast for next week’s
demand would be 100 units; if demand turned out to be 90 units instead, then the following
week’s demand would be 90 units, and so forth. This is sometimes referred to as naïve forecast-
ing. However, this type of forecasting method does not take into account any type of historical
demand behavior; it relies only on demand in the current period. As such, it reacts directly to the
normal, random up-and-down movements in demand.
Alternatively, the moving average method uses several values during the recent past to de-
velop a forecast. This tends to dampen, or smooth out, the random increases and decreases of a
forecast that uses only one period. As such, the simple moving average is particularly useful for
forecasting items that are relatively stable and do not display any pronounced behavior, such as
a trend or seasonal pattern.
Moving averages are computed for specific periods, such as 3 months or 5 months, depending
on how much the forecaster desires to smooth the data. The longer the moving average period, the
smoother the data will be. The formula for computing the simple moving average is as follows:
where
number of periods in the moving average
data in period i
Di =
n =
MAn =
a
n
i=1
Di
n
TIME SERIES METHODS
693
The moving average
method is good for
stable demand with
no pronounced
behavioral patterns.
The Delphi method
forecasts future using
informed judgment
and opinions from
knowledgeable
individuals.

To demonstrate the moving average forecasting method, we will use an example. The In-
stant Paper Clip Supply Company sells and delivers office supplies to various companies,
schools, and agencies within a 30-mile radius of its warehouse. The office supply business is ex-
tremely competitive, and the ability to deliver orders promptly is an important factor in getting
new customers and keeping old ones. (Offices typically order not when their inventory of sup-
plies is getting low but when they completely run out. As a result, they need their orders imme-
diately.) The manager of the company wants to be certain that enough drivers and delivery
vehicles are available so that orders can be delivered promptly. Therefore, the manager wants to
be able to forecast the number of orders that will occur during the next month (i.e., to forecast
the demand for deliveries).
From records of delivery orders, the manager has accumulated data for the past 10 months.
These data are shown in Table 15.1.
694
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Month
Orders Delivered per Month
January
120
February
90
March
100
April
75
May
110
June
50
July
75
August
130
September
110
October
90
TABLE 15.1
Orders for 
10-month period 
The moving average forecast is computed by dividing the sum of the values of the forecast
variable, orders per month for a sequence of months, by the number of months in the sequence.
Frequently, a moving average is calculated for three or five time periods. The forecast resulting
from either the 3- or the 5-month moving average is typically for the next month in the sequence,
which in this case is November. The moving average is computed from the demand for orders
for the last 3 months in the sequence, according to the following formula:
orders
The 5-month moving average is computed from the last 5 months of demand data, as
follows:
orders
The 3- and 5-month moving averages for all the months of demand data are shown in
Table 15.2. Notice that we have computed forecasts for all the months. Actually, only the fore-
cast for November, based on the most recent monthly demand, would be used by the manager.
However, the earlier forecasts for prior months allow us to compare the forecast with actual
demand to see how accurate the forecasting method is (i.e., how well it does).
MA5 =
a
5
i=1
Di
5
= 90 + 110 + 130 + 75 + 50
5
= 91
MA3 =
a
3
i=1
Di
3
= 90 + 110 + 130
3
= 110

Both moving average forecasts in Table 15.2 tend to smooth out the variability occurring in
the actual data. This smoothing effect can be observed in Figure 15.2, in which the 3-month and
5-month averages have been superimposed on a graph of the original data. The extremes in the
actual orders per month have been reduced. This is beneficial if these extremes simply reflect
random fluctuations in orders per month because our moving average forecast will not be
strongly influenced by them.
TIME SERIES METHODS
695
Orders
Jan.
150
125
100
75
50
25
0
Feb. Mar. Apr. May
Month
3-month
June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov.
Actual
5-month
FIGURE 15.2
Three- and 5-month
moving averages
Longer-period moving
averages react more
slowly to recent
demand changes than
do shorter-period
moving averages.
3-Month 
5-Month 
Month
Orders per Month
Moving Average
Moving Average
January
120
—
—
February
90
—
—
March
100
—
—
April
75
103.3
—
May
110
88.3
—
June
50
95.0
99.0
July
75
78.3
85.0
August
130
78.3
82.0
September
110
85.0
88.0
October
90
105.0
95.0
November
—
110.0
91.0
TABLE 15.2
Three- and 5-month
averages
Notice that the 5-month moving average in Figure 15.2 smoothes out fluctuations to a
greater extent than the 3-month moving average. However, the 3-month average more closely
reflects the most recent data available to the office supply manager. (The 5-month average fore-
cast considers data all the way back to June; the 3-month average does so only to August.) In
general, forecasts computed using the longer-period moving average are slower to react to re-
cent changes in demand than those made using shorter-period moving averages. The extra peri-
ods of data dampen the speed with which the forecast responds. Establishing the appropriate
number of periods to use in a moving average forecast often requires some amount of trial-and-
error experimentation.
One additional point to mention relates to the period of the forecast. Sometimes a forecaster
will need to forecast for a short planning horizon rather than just a single period. For both the 
3- and 5-month moving average forecasts computed in Table 15.2, the final forecast is for one
period only in the future. Because the moving average includes multiple periods of data for each
forecast, and it is most often used to forecast in a stable demand environment, it would be ap-
propriate to use the forecast for multiple periods in the future. It could then be updated as actual
demand data became available.

696
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
The major disadvantage of the moving average method is that it does not react well to vari-
ations that occur for a reason, such as trends and seasonal effects (although this method does re-
flect trends to a moderate extent). Those factors that cause changes are generally ignored. It is
basically a “mechanical” method that reflects historical data in a consistent fashion. However,
the moving average method does have the advantage of being easy to use, quick, and relatively
inexpensive, although moving averages for a substantial number of periods for many different
items can result in the accumulation and storage of a large amount of data. In general, this
method can provide a good forecast for the short run, but an attempt should not be made to push
the forecast too far into the distant future.
Weighted Moving Average
The moving average method can be adjusted to reflect more closely more recent fluctuations in
the data and seasonal effects. This adjusted method is referred to as a weighted moving average
method. In this method, weights are assigned to the most recent data according to the following
formula:
where
the weight for period i, between 0% and 100% (i.e., between 0 
and 1.0)
For example, if the Instant Paper Clip Supply Company wants to compute a 3-month
weighted moving average with a weight of 50% for the October data, a weight of 33% for the
September data, and a weight of 17% for August, it is computed as
orders
Notice that the forecast includes a fractional part, .4. Because .4 order would be impossible,
this appears to be unrealistic. In general, the fractional parts need to be included in the computa-
tion to achieve mathematical accuracy, but when the final forecast is achieved, it must be
rounded up or down.
Also notice that this forecast is slightly lower than our previously computed 3-month aver-
age forecast of 110 orders, reflecting the lower number of orders in October (the most recent
month in the sequence).
Determining the precise weights to use for each period of data frequently requires some
trial-and-error experimentation, as does determining the exact number of periods to include in
the moving average. If the most recent months are weighted too heavily, the forecast might
overreact to a random fluctuation in orders; if they are weighted too lightly, the forecast might
under react to an actual change in the pattern of orders.
Exponential Smoothing
The exponential smoothing forecast method is an averaging method that weights the most re-
cent past data more strongly than more distant past data. Thus, the forecast will react more
strongly to immediate changes in the data. This is very useful if the recent changes in the data
are the results of an actual change (e.g., a seasonal pattern) instead of just random fluctuations
(for which a simple moving average forecast would suffice).
We will consider two forms of exponential smoothing: simple exponential smoothing and
adjusted exponential smoothing (adjusted for trends, seasonal patterns, etc.). We will discuss the
simple exponential smoothing case first, followed by the adjusted form.
WMA3 = a
3
i=1
WiDi = (.50)(90) + (.33)(110) + (.17)(130) = 103.4

Wi = 1.00
Wi =
WMAn = a
n
i=1
WiDi
In a weighted moving
average, weights are
assigned to the most
recent data.
Exponential
smoothing is an
averaging method
that reacts more
strongly to recent
changes in demand
than to more distant
past data.

To demonstrate simple exponential smoothing, we will return to the Instant Paper Clip
Supply Company example. The simple exponential smoothing forecast is computed by using the
formula
where
the forecast for the next period
actual demand in the present period
the previously determined forecast for the present period
a weighting factor referred to as the smoothing constant
The smoothing constant,
is between zero and one. It reflects the weight given to the most
recent demand data. For example, if 
Ft+1 = .20Dt + .80Ft
a = .20,
a,
a =
Ft =
Dt =
Ft+1 =
Ft+1 = aDt + 11 - a2Ft
TIME SERIES METHODS
697
Management Science Application
Forecasting at Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company
Goodyear, with net sales of almost $20 billion, is one of
the world’s leading tire manufacturing companies and the
number one tire maker in North America. Forecasting customer
demand has always been recognized as an important part of
its production and distribution planning processes, and it has
historically used such forecasting techniques as time series
analysis and exponential smoothing. For example, in the early
1990s in the United States, Goodyear was experiencing large
errors in its 60-day advance planning forecasts, so it replaced
its linear regression models with a single exponential smooth-
ing model, which increased forecast accuracy by 20%. 
In the mid-1990s the company developed a forecast sys-
tem that analyzed the performance of more than 20 mathe-
matical forecasting models for different products using
historical demand data. It then picked the forecasting model
that resulted in the lowest mean absolute percent error
(MAPE).
In the late 1990s Goodyear upgraded its planning systems
and simultaneously consolidated all its forecasting systems in
North America (i.e., the United States and Canada) into a single
integrated system. However, as the complexity of its business in-
creased, so did its forecasting errors. To resolve this problem
Goodyear created forecasts based on products, customers, and
location to enhance its customer-specific forecasting capa-
bilities. This required a collaborative relationship between
Goodyear and its customers that included shared demand data
and forecasts. For example, Goodyear used EDI technology to
receive a customer’s forecast and incorporate it into its own
production planning process. By the mid-2000s Goodyear had
experienced a 10% improvement in the accuracy of its 60-day
forecast.
Source: Based on S. D. Miller and K. M. Liem, “Collaborative Fore-
casting: Goodyear Tire and Rubber Company’s Journey,” Journal of
Business Forecasting 22, no. 1 (Fall 2004): 23–27.
Landov Photo

698
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
which means that our forecast for the next period is based on 20% of recent demand 
and
80% of past demand (in the form of the forecast 
because 
is derived from previous demands
and forecasts). If we go to one extreme and let 
= 0.0, then
and the forecast for the next period is the same as for this period. In other words, the forecast
does not reflect the most recent demand at all.
On the other hand, if 
then
and we have considered only the most recent occurrence in our data (demand in the present
period) and nothing else. Thus, we can conclude that the higher 
is, the more sensitive the fore-
cast will be to changes in recent demand. Alternatively, the closer 
is to zero, the greater will
be the dampening or smoothing effect. As 
approaches zero, the forecast will react and adjust
more slowly to differences between the actual demand and the forecasted demand. The most
commonly used values of 
are in the range from .01 to .50. However, the determination of 
is
usually judgmental and subjective and will often be based on trial-and-error experimentation.
An inaccurate estimate of 
can limit the usefulness of this forecasting technique.
To demonstrate the computation of an exponentially smoothed forecast, we will use an ex-
ample. PM Computer Services assembles customized personal computers from generic parts.
The company was formed and is operated by two part-time State University students, Paulette
Tyler and Maureen Becker, and has had steady growth since it started. The company assembles
computers mostly at night, using other part-time students as labor. Paulette and Maureen pur-
chase generic computer parts in volume at a discount from a variety of sources whenever they
see a good deal. It is therefore important that they develop a good forecast of demand for their
computers so that they will know how many computer component parts to purchase and stock.
The company has accumulated the demand data in Table 15.3 for its computers for the past
12 months, from which it wants to compute exponential smoothing forecasts, using smoothing
constants 
equal to .30 and .50.
1a2
a
a
a
a
a
a
= Dt
Ft+1 = 1Dt + 0Ft
a = 1.0,
= Ft
Ft+1 = 0Dt + 1Ft
a
Ft
Ft
1Dt2
The closer 
is to one,
the greater the
reaction to the most
recent demand.
a
Period
Month
Demand
1
January
37
2
February
40
3
March
41
4
April
37
5
May
45
6
June
50
7
July
43
8
August
47
9
September
56
10
October
52
11
November
55
12
December
54
TABLE 15.3
Demand for
personal
computers
To develop the series of forecasts for the data in Table 15.3, we will start with period
1 (January) and compute the forecast for period 2 (February) by using 
The formula
for exponential smoothing also requires a forecast for period 1, which we do not have, so we
will use the demand for period 1 as both demand and the forecast for period 1. Other ways to
a = .30.

TIME SERIES METHODS
699
Forecast, Ft1
Period
Month
Demand
1
January
37
—
—
2
February
40
37.00
37.00
3
March
41
37.90
38.50
4
April
37
38.83
39.75
5
May
45
38.28
38.37
6
June
50
40.29
41.68
7
July
43
43.20
45.84
8
August
47
43.14
44.42
9
September
56
44.30
45.71
10
October
52
47.81
50.85
11
November
55
49.06
51.42
12
December
54
50.84
53.21
13
January
—
51.79
53.61 
A = .50
A = .30
TABLE 15.4
Exponential
smoothing
forecasts, 
and A = .50
A = .30
determine a starting forecast include averaging the first three or four periods and making a
subjective estimate. Thus, the forecast for February is
The forecast for period 3 is computed similarly:
The remaining monthly forecasts are shown in Table 15.4. The final forecast is for period 13,
January, and is the forecast of interest to PM Computer Services:
Table 15.4 also includes the forecast values by using 
= .50. Both exponential smoothing
forecasts are shown in Figure 15.3, together with the actual data.
In Figure 15.3, the forecast using the higher smoothing constant,
reacts more
strongly to changes in demand than does the forecast with 
although both smooth out
the random fluctuations in the forecast. Notice that both forecasts lag the actual demand. For
example, a pronounced downward change in demand in July is not reflected in the forecast until
August. If these changes mark a change in trend (i.e., a long-term upward or downward move-
ment) rather than just a random fluctuation, then the forecast will always lag this trend. We can
see a general upward trend in delivered orders throughout the year. Both forecasts tend to be
consistently lower than the actual demand; that is, the forecasts lag behind the trend.
a = .30,
a = .50,
a
F13 = aD12 + (1 - a)F12 = (.30)(54) + (.70)(50.84) = 51.79 units
F3 = aD2 + (1 - a)F2 = (.30)(40) + (.70)(37) = 37.9 units
F2 = aD1 + (1 - a)F1 = (.30)(37) + (.70)(37) = 37 units
1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Actual
α = .50
α = .30
FIGURE 15.3
Exponential
smoothing
forecasts

700
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Adjusted exponential
smoothing is the
exponential smoothing
forecast with an
adjustment for a trend
added to it.
The closer 
is to one,
the stronger a trend is
reflected.
b
Based on simple observation of the two forecasts in Figure 15.3,
seems to be the
more accurate of the two, in the sense that it seems to follow the actual data more closely. (Later
in this chapter we will discuss several quantitative methods for determining forecast accuracy.)
In general, when demand is relatively stable, without any trend, using a small value for 
is more
appropriate to simply smooth out the forecast. Alternatively, when actual demand displays an in-
creasing (or decreasing) trend, as is the case in Figure 15.3, a larger value of 
is generally better.
It will react more quickly to the more recent upward or downward movements in the actual data.
In some approaches to exponential smoothing, the accuracy of the forecast is monitored in terms
of the difference between the actual values and the forecasted values. If these differences become
larger, then 
is changed (higher or lower) in an attempt to adapt the forecast to the actual data.
However, the exponential smoothing forecast can also be adjusted for the effects of a trend.
As we noted with the moving average forecast, the forecaster sometimes needs a forecast for
more than one period into the future. In our PM Computer Services example, the final forecast
computed was for 1 month, January. A forecast for 2 or 3 months could have been computed by
grouping the demand data into the required number of periods and then using these values in the
exponential smoothing computations. For example, if a 3-month forecast was needed, demand for
January, February, and March could be summed and used to compute the forecast for the next 3-month
period, and so on, until a final 3-month forecast resulted. Alternatively, if a trend was present, the
final period forecast could be used for an extended forecast by adjusting it by a trend factor.
Adjusted Exponential Smoothing
The adjusted exponential smoothing forecast consists of the exponential smoothing forecast
with a trend adjustment factor added to it. The formula for the adjusted forecast is
where
an exponentially smoothed trend factor
The trend factor is computed much the same as the exponentially smoothed forecast. It is,
in effect, a forecast model for trend:
where
the last period trend factor
a smoothing constant for trend
Like 
is a value between zero and one. It reflects the weight given to the most recent trend
data. Also like 
is often determined subjectively, based on the judgment of the forecaster. A high
reflects trend changes more than a low 
It is not uncommon for 
to equal 
in this method.
Notice that this formula for the trend factor reflects a weighted measure of the increase (or
decrease) between the current forecast,
and the previous forecast,
As an example, PM Computer Services now wants to develop an adjusted exponentially
smoothed forecast, using the same 12 months of demand shown in Table 15.3. It will use the ex-
ponentially smoothed forecast with 
computed in Table 15.4 with a smoothing constant
for trend,
of .30.
The formula for the adjusted exponential smoothing forecast requires an initial value for 
to start the computational process. This initial trend factor is most often an estimate determined
subjectively or based on past data by the forecaster. In this case, because we have a relatively long se-
quence of demand data (i.e., 12 months), we will start with the trend,
equal to zero. By the time the
forecast value of interest,
is computed, we should have a relatively good value for the trend factor.
The adjusted forecast for February,
is the same as the exponentially smoothed forecast
because the trend computing factor will be zero (i.e.,
and 
are the same and 
). 
T2 = 0
F2
F1
AF2,
F13,
Tt,
Tt
b,
a = .50
Ft.
Ft+1,
a
b
b.
b
a, b
a, b
b =
Tt =
Tt+1 = b(Ft+1 - Ft) + 11 - b2Tt
T =
AFt+1 = Ft+1 + Tt+1
a
a
a
a = .50

Thus, we will compute the adjusted forecast for March,
as follows, starting with the deter-
mination of the trend factor,
and
This adjusted forecast value for period 3 is shown in Table 15.5, with all other adjusted forecast
values for the 12-month period plus the forecast for period 13, computed as follows:
T13 = b(F13 - F12) + (1 - b)T12 = (.30)(53.61 - 53.21) + (.70)(1.77) = 1.36
AF3 = F3 + T3 = 38.5 + 0.45 = 38.95
T3 = b(F3 - F2) + (1 - b)T2 = (.30)(38.5 - 37.0) + (.70)(0) = 0.45
T3:
AF3,
TIME SERIES METHODS
701
Forecast 
Adjusted Forecast
Period
Month
Demand
(Ft 1)
Trend (Tt 1)
(AFt 1)
1
January
37
37.00
—
—
2
February
40
37.00
0.00
37.00
3
March
41
38.50
0.45
38.95
4
April
37
39.75
0.69
40.44
5
May
45
38.37
0.07
38.44
6
June
50
41.68
1.04
42.73
7
July
43
45.84
1.97
47.82
8
August
47
44.42
0.95
45.37
9
September
56
45.71
1.05
46.76
10
October
52
50.85
2.28
53.13
11
November
55
51.42
1.76
53.19
12
December
54
53.21
1.77
54.98
13
January
—
53.61
1.36
54.96
TABLE 15.5
Adjusted
exponentially
smoothed
forecast values
Demand
1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
3
4
5
Period
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Actual
Forecast ( = .50)
Adjusted forecast ( = .30)
FIGURE 15.4
Adjusted,
exponentially
smoothed forecast
Notice that the adjusted forecast is consistently higher than the exponentially smoothed
forecast and is thus more reflective of the generally increasing trend of the actual data. However,
in general, the pattern, or degree of smoothing, is very similar for both forecasts.
and
The adjusted exponentially smoothed forecast values shown in Table 15.5 are compared
with the exponentially smoothed forecast values and the actual data in Figure 15.4.
AF13 = F13 + T13 = 53.61 + 1.36 = 54.96 units

Linear Trend Line
Linear regression is most often thought of as a causal method of forecasting in which a mathe-
matical relationship is developed between demand and some other factor that affects demand
behavior. However, when demand displays an obvious trend over time, a least squares regres-
sion line, or linear trend line, can be used to forecast demand.
A linear trend line relates a dependent variable, which for our purposes is demand, to one
independent variable, time, in the form of a linear equation, as follows:
where
intercept (at period 0)
slope of the line
the time period
forecast for demand for period x
y =
x =
b =
a =
y = a + bx
702
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
A linear trend line is a
linear regression model
that relates demand 
to time.
MANAGEMENT SCIENCE APPLICATION
Forecasting at Heineken USA
Heineken is an international brewer based in Amsterdam
with more than 200 brands of beer sold in more than 
100 countries. Its annual revenues are over €14,000 million.
Heineken brews, packages, and ships its Dutch brands, includ-
ing Heineken, Heineken Premium Light, and Amstel Light, to
Heineken USA on ocean carriers to seven U.S. ports (Miami,
Charleston, Norfolk, New York, Houston, Long Beach, and
Oakland), where it maintains warehouses and demand cen-
ters. Heineken thus operates a three-tier supply chain with a
brewer, distributors, and retailers. Heineken ships full con-
tainer loads directly from the ports to the warehouses of its
largest distributors; for smaller distributors, loads are shipped
from Heineken demand centers near the ports. 
A “depletion” forecast showing how much beer distribu-
tors are currently and historically selling to retailers is con-
verted to a sales demand forecast, which indicates the amount
of inventory the distributors will be buying from Heineken.
Promotions and seasonal sales are factored into this demand
forecast. The sales demand forecast is then used in Holland to
create a production/replenishment plan for product supply.
Distributors order beer over the Internet on a weekly basis, at
which time they also provide their 3-month depletion forecast,
which is a major input to the demand forecast that drives pro-
duction in Holland. One week later, they receive delivery from
a port or demand center. Retailers order directly from the dis-
tributors. Since lead times are long (4 to 6 weeks) and many
consumers will switch beers if a particular one is out of stock,
forecasting at Heineken is critical. Under-forecasting results in
lost sales; over-forecasting results in costly excess inventory,
which becomes obsolete and is destroyed if it sits in inventory
too long and is not absolutely fresh. However, there are no
negative effects for the distributor if it provides a bad forecast;
if it over-forecasts, Heineken absorbs the excess inventory; if it
under-forecasts, Heineken transfers products from other de-
mand centers to avoid stockouts. 
In the mid-2000s, because distributors suffered no ill effects
from bad forecasts, the forecasting process had deteriorated
badly in the southeastern region, so an incentive plan was de-
veloped to award American Express gift cards to individual dis-
tributor forecasters with the best monthly, quarterly, and yearly
forecast accuracy. The incentive program was a success; aver-
age monthly forecasts improved 10% in 1 year, which resulted
in dependable forecasts to drive Heineken’s supply chain. 
Source: Based on B. Dershem, “Financial Incentives Improve the 
Supply Chain: Heineken’s Journey,” Journal of Business Forecasting
26, no. 1 (Spring 2007): 32–37. 
© vario images GmbH & Co.KG/Alamy

These parameters of the linear trend line can be calculated by using the least squares formu-
las for linear regression:
where
number of periods
As an example, consider the demand data for PM Computer Services shown in Table 15.3.
They appear to follow an increasing linear trend. As such, the company wants to compute a lin-
ear trend line as an alternative to the exponential smoothing and adjusted exponential smoothing
forecasts shown in Tables 15.4 and 15.5. The values that are required for the least squares calcu-
lations are shown in Table 15.6.
y = 
y
n
x = 
x
n
n =
a = y - bx
b = 
xy - nxy

x2 - nx2
TIME SERIES METHODS
703
x (period)
y (demand)
xy
x2
1
37
37
1
2
40
80
4
3
41
123
9
4
37
148
16
5
45
225
25
6
50
300
36
7
43
301
49
8
47
376
64
9
56
504
81
10
52
520
100
11
55
605
121
12
54
 648
144
78
557
3,867
650
TABLE 15.6
Least squares 
calculations
Using these values for and and the values from Table 15.6, the parameters for the linear
trend line are computed as follows:
Therefore, the linear trend line is
To calculate a forecast for period 
would be substituted in the linear trend line:
y = 35.2 + 1.721132 = 57.56
13, x = 13
y = 35.2 + 1.72x
a = y - bx = 46.42 - (1.72)16.52 = 35.2
b = 
xy - nxy

x2 - nx2 = 3,867 - (12)(6.5)(46.42)
650 - 12(6.5)2
= 1.72
y = 557
12 = 46.42
x = 78
12 = 6.5
y
x

Figure 15.5 shows the linear trend line in comparison to the actual data. The trend line
visibly appears to closely reflect the actual data (i.e., to be a “good fit”) and would thus be a
good forecast model for this problem. However, a disadvantage of the linear trend line is that
it will not adjust to a change in the trend as the exponential smoothing forecast methods will
(i.e., it is assumed that all future forecasts will follow a straight line). This limits the use of
this method to a shorter time frame in which the forecaster is relatively certain that the trend
will not change.
704
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
A linear trend line
will not adjust to a
change in trend as
will exponential
smoothing.
Demand
1
70
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
2
3
4
5
Period
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
Linear trend line
Actual
FIGURE 15.5
Linear trend line
Seasonal Adjustments
As we mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, a seasonal pattern is a repetitive up-and-
down movement in demand. Many demand items exhibit seasonal behavior. Clothing sales
follow annual seasonal patterns, with demand for warm clothes increasing in the fall
and winter and declining in the spring and summer, as the demand for cooler clothing
increases. Demand for many retail items—including toys, sports equipment, clothing,
electronic appliances, hams, turkeys, wine, and fruit—increases during the Christmas sea-
son. Greeting card demand increases in conjunction with various special days, such as Valen-
tine’s Day and Mother’s Day. Seasonal patterns can also occur on a monthly, weekly, or even
daily basis. Some restaurants have higher demand in the evening than at lunch, or on
weekends as opposed to weekdays. Traffic and sales picks up at shopping malls on Friday
and Saturday.
There are several methods available for reflecting seasonal patterns in a time series forecast.
We will describe one of the simpler methods—using a seasonal factor, which is a numerical
value that is multiplied by the normal forecast to get a seasonally adjusted forecast.
One method for developing a demand for seasonal factors is dividing the actual demand for
each seasonal period by the total annual demand, according to the following formula:
The resulting seasonal factors between zero and one are, in effect, the portion of total an-
nual demand assigned to each season. These seasonal factors are thus multiplied by the annual
forecasted demand to yield seasonally adjusted forecasts for each period.
As an example, Wishbone Farms is a company that raises turkeys, which it sells to a meat-
processing company throughout the year. However, the peak season obviously occurs during the
fourth quarter of the year, October to December. Wishbone Farms has experienced a demand for
turkeys for the past 3 years as shown in Table 15.7.
Si = Di

D
It is possible to adjust
for seasonality by
multiplying the
normal forecast by a
seasonal factor.

Because we have 3 years of demand data, we can compute the seasonal factors by dividing
total quarterly demand for the 3 years by total demand across all 3 years:
Next, we want to multiply the forecasted demand for year 4 by each of the seasonal factors
to get the forecasted demand for each quarter. However, to accomplish this, we need a demand
forecast for year 4. In this case, because the demand data in Table 15.7 seem to exhibit a gener-
ally increasing trend, we compute a linear trend line for the 3 years of data in Table 15.7 to use
as a rough forecast estimate:
Thus, the forecast for year 4 is 58.17, or 58,170 turkeys.
Using this annual forecast of demand, the seasonally adjusted forecasts,
for year 4 are
as follows:
Comparing these quarterly forecasts with the actual demand values in Table 15.7 shows
them to be relatively good forecast estimates, reflecting both the seasonal variations in the data
and the general upward trend.
Forecast Accuracy
It is not probable that a forecast will be completely accurate; forecasts will always deviate from
the actual demand. This difference between the forecast and the actual demand is referred to as
the forecast error. Although some amount of forecast error is inevitable, the objective of fore-
casting is for the error to be as slight as possible. Of course, if the degree of error is not small,
this may indicate either that the forecasting technique being used is the wrong one or that the
technique needs to be adjusted by changing its parameters (for example,
in the exponential
smoothing forecast).
a
SF4 = (S4)(F5) = (.37)(58.17) = 21.53
SF3 = (S3)(F5) = (.15)(58.17) = 8.73
SF2 = (S2)(F5) = (.20)(58.17) = 11.63
SF1 = (S1)(F5) = (.28)(58.17) = 16.28
SFi,
y = 40.97 + 4.30x = 40.97 + 4.30142 = 58.17
S4 = D4

D = 55.3
148.7 = 0.37
S3 = D3

D = 21.9
148.7 = 0.15
S2 = D2

D = 29.5
148.7 = 0.20
S1 = D1

D = 42.0
148.7 = 0.28
FORECAST ACCURACY
705
Demand (1,000s)
Year
Quarter 1
Quarter 2
Quarter 3
Quarter 4
Total
1
12.6
8.6
6.3
17.5
45.0
2
14.1
10.3
7.5
18.2
50.1
3
15.3
10.6
8.1
19.6
53.6
Total
42.0
29.5
21.9
55.3
148.7 
TABLE 15.7
Demand for turkeys
at Wishbone Farms
The forecast error is
the difference between
the forecast and
actual demand.

There are a variety of different measures of forecast error, and in this section we dis-
cuss several of the most popular ones: mean absolute deviation (MAD), mean absolute per-
cent deviation (MAPD), cumulative error (E), average error or bias ( ), and mean squared
error (MSE).
Mean Absolute Deviation
The mean absolute deviation (MAD) is one of the most popular and simplest-to-use measures
of forecast error. MAD is an average of the difference between the forecast and actual demand,
as computed by the following formula:
where
the period number
demand in period t
the forecast for period t
the total number of periods
the absolute value
In our examples for PM Computer Services, forecasts were developed using exponential
smoothing (with 
and with 
), adjusted exponential smoothing 
and a linear trend line for the demand data. The company wants to compare the ac-
curacy of these different forecasts by using MAD.
We will compute MAD for all four forecasts; however, we will only present the computa-
tional detail for the exponential smoothing forecast with 
Table 15.8 shows the values
necessary to compute MAD for the exponential smoothing forecast.
a = .30.
b = .302,
1a = .50,
a = .50
a = .30
 =
n =
Ft =
Dt =
t =
MAD =

Dt - Ft
n
E
706
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
MAD is the average,
absolute difference
between the forecast
and the demand.
Demand,
Forecast, Ft
Error
Error2
Period
Dt
(  .30)
(Dt  Ft)
|Dt  Ft|
(Dt  Ft)2
1
37
37.00
—
—
—
2
40
37.00
3.00
3.00
9.00
3
41
37.90
3.10
3.10
9.61
4
37
38.83
-1.83
1.83
3.35
5
45
38.28
6.72
6.72
45.15
6
50
40.29
9.71
9.71
94.28
7
43
43.20
-0.20
0.20
0.04
8
47
43.14
3.86
3.86
14.90
9
56
44.30
11.70
11.70
136.89
10
52
47.81
4.19
4.19
17.56
11
55
49.06
5.94
5.94
35.28
12                     54
50.84
  3.16
  3.16
    9.98
520*
49.31
53.41
376.04
*Because the computation of MAD will be based on the 11 periods 2 through 12, ΣDt = 520, excluding the
demand value of 37. 
TABLE 15.8
Computational
values for MAD
and error 
Using the data in Table 15.8, we compute MAD as
MAD =

  Dt - Ft
n
= 53.41
11
= 4.85

In general, the smaller the value of MAD, the more accurate the forecast, although, viewed
alone, MAD is difficult to assess. In this example, the data values were relatively small, and the
MAD value of 4.85 should be judged accordingly. Overall, it would seem to be a “low” value
(i.e., the forecast appears to be relatively accurate). However, if the magnitude of the data values
were in the thousands or millions, then a MAD value of a similar magnitude might not be bad ei-
ther. The point is that you cannot compare a MAD value of 4.85 with a MAD value of 485 and
say the former is good and the latter is bad; they depend to a certain extent on the relative mag-
nitude of the data.
One benefit of MAD is being able to compare the accuracy of several different forecasting
techniques, as we are doing in this example. The MAD values for the remaining forecasts are:
 Exponential smoothing 
 Adjusted exponential smoothing 
 Linear trend line:
When we compare all four forecasts, the linear trend line has the lowest MAD value,
of 2.29. It would seem to be the most accurate, although it does not appear to be significantly
better than the adjusted exponential smoothing forecast. Furthermore, we can deduce from these
MAD values that increasing 
from .30 to .50 enhanced the accuracy of the exponentially
smoothed forecast. The adjusted forecast is even more accurate.
A variation of MAD is the mean absolute percent deviation (MAPD). It measures the ab-
solute error as a percentage of demand rather than per period. As a result, it eliminates the
problem of interpreting the measure of accuracy relative to the magnitude of the demand and
forecast values, as MAD does. MAPD is computed according to the following formula:
Using the data from Table 15.8 for the exponential smoothing forecast 
for PM
Computer Services, MAPD is computed as
A lower MAPD implies a more accurate forecast. The MAPD values for our other three
forecasts are:
 Exponential smoothing 
 Adjusted exponential smoothing 
 Linear trend line:
Cumulative Error
Cumulative error is computed simply by summing the forecast errors, as shown in the
following formula:
where
A relatively large positive value indicates that the forecast is probably consistently lower
than the actual demand or is biased low. A large negative value implies that the forecast is con-
sistently higher than actual demand or is biased high. Also, when the errors for each period are
scrutinized and there appears to be a preponderance of positive values, this shows that the fore-
cast is consistently less than actual, and vice versa.
ei = Dt - Ft
E = 
et
MAPD = 4.9%
(a = .50, b = .30): MAPD = 8.1%
(a = .50): MAPD = 8.5%
MAPD = 53.41
520
= .103, or 10.3%
(a = .30)
MAPD =

 Dt - Ft

Dt
a
MAD = 2.29
(a = .50, b = .30): MAD = 3.81
(a = .50): MAD = 4.04
FORECAST ACCURACY
707
MAPD is absolute
error as a percentage
of demand.
Cumulative error is
the sum of the forecast
errors.
The lower the value of
MAD relative to the
magnitude of the data,
the more accurate the
forecast.

The cumulative error for the exponential smoothing forecast 
for PM Computer 
Services can be read directly from Table 15.8; it is simply the sum of the values in the “Error”
column:
This relatively large-value positive error for cumulative error and the fact that the individual
errors for each period in Table 15.8 are positive indicate that this forecast is frequently below
the actual demand. A quick glance back at the plot of the exponential smoothing 
forecast in Figure 15.3 visually verifies this result.
The cumulative errors for the other forecasts are:
 Exponential smoothing 
 Adjusted exponential smoothing 
We did not show the cumulative error for the linear trend line. E will always be near zero for the
linear trend line; thus, it is not a good measure on which to base comparisons with other forecast
methods.
A measure closely related to cumulative error is the average error. It is computed by aver-
aging the cumulative error over the number of time periods:
For example, the average error for the exponential smoothing forecast 
is com-
puted as follows (notice that the value of 11 was used for n because we used actual demand for
the first-period forecast, resulting in no error, i.e.,
The average error is interpreted similarly to the cumulative error. A positive value indi-
cates low bias, and a negative value indicates high bias. A value close to zero implies a lack
of bias.
Another measure of forecast accuracy related to error is mean squared error (MSE). With
MSE, each individual error value is squared, and then these values are summed and averaged.
The last column in Table 15.8 shows the sum of the squared forecast errors (i.e., 376.04) for the
PM Computer example forecast 
The MSE is computed as
As with other measures of forecast accuracy, the smaller the MSE, the better.
Table 15.9 summarizes the measures of forecast accuracy we have discussed in this section
for the four example forecasts we developed in the previous section for PM Computer Services.
The results are consistent for all four forecasts, indicating that for the PM Computer Services ex-
ample data, a larger value of 
is preferable for the exponential smoothing forecast. The adjusted
forecast is more accurate than the exponential smoothing forecasts, and the linear trend is more
accurate than all the others. Although these results are example specific, they do indicate how
the different forecast measures for accuracy can be used to adjust a forecasting method or select
the best method.
a
MSE = 376.04
11
= 34.18
1a = 0.302.
E = 49.31
11
= 4.48
D1 = F1 = 37):
1a = .302
E = 
et
n
(a = .50, b = .30): E = 21.14
(a = .50): E = 33.21
(a = .30)
E = 
et = 49.31
708
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Average error is the
per-period average of
cumulative error.
Large +
indicates
that a forecast is
biased low; large -
indicates that a
forecast is biased high.
E
E
Mean squared error
individual error
values are squared
and then summed and
averaged.

Time Series Forecasting Using Excel
All the time series forecasts we have presented can also be developed with Excel spreadsheets.
Exhibit 15.1 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to compute the exponentially smoothed forecast
and adjusted exponentially smoothed forecast for the PM Computer Services example summa-
rized in Table 15.5. Notice that the formula for computing the trend factor in cell D10 is shown
on the formula bar on the top of the spreadsheet. The adjusted forecast in column E is computed
by typing the formula 
in cell E9 and copying it to cells E10:E20 (using the “Copy”
and “Paste” options that appear after clicking the right mouse button).
C9+D9
TIME SERIES FORECASTING USING EXCEL
709
Forecast
MAD
MAPD (%)
E
MSE
Exponential smoothing (a = .30)
4.85
10.3
49.31
4.48
34.18
Exponential smoothing (a = .50)
4.04
8.5
33.21
3.02
24.64
Adjusted exponential smoothing
3.81
8.1
21.14
1.92
21.58
(a = .50, b = .30)
Linear trend line
2.29
4.9
—
—
8.67
E
TABLE 15.9
Comparison of
forecasts for PM
Computer Services
Management Science Application
Forecasting at Bayer Consumer Care
Since its development of aspirin in 1899, The Bayer Group
has grown into a company with a global workforce of
110,000, more than 5,000 products, and annual sales exceed-
ing 27,380 million Euros. Bayer HealthCare, one of the three
operational subgroups of Bayer AG, researches, develops,
manufactures, and markets products for the prevention, diag-
nosis, and treatment of diseases. The Consumer Care Division
of Bayer HealthCare markets over-the-counter medications
such as aspirin, Aleve, Midol, Alka-Seltzer, milk of magnesia,
and One-A-Day and Flintstones vitamins. 
Forecasting is an important function at Bayer Consumer
Care because of the competitiveness in the over-the-counter
pharmaceutical market and the seasonality of its products. The
supply chain planning process at Bayer’s Consumer Care divi-
sion in the EU is based on each country customer’s forecasts of
its future sales for 18 months into the future, which they share
(along with inventory information) with Bayer. Bayer uses this
information to develop its production plans, generate customer
orders, and establish shipment schedules. This forecasting ap-
proach is necessary because the pharmaceutical industry has
long lead times for raw materials and ingredients, plus uncer-
tainty created by irregular product trends, seasonality, and pro-
motions. To remain competitive, Bayer guarantees its customers
close to a 100% service level, and thus it seeks an inventory
level that will meet this goal, which decreases as its forecast ac-
curacy increases. 
Initially, the company discovered that forecast errors resulted
from the number of different forecasts that were being used by
different supply chain members in each country. To resolve this
problem, monthly round-table meetings were established to de-
velop a consensus forecast in each EU country. To determine
forecast accuracy three performance measures were used: ab-
solute percent forecast error (for a 3-month horizon), percent
forecast error, and standard deviation of percent forecast error.
Forecast accuracy in most countries is around 80% and forecast-
ing bias approaches zero.
Source: Based on H. Petersen, “Integrating the Forecasting Process
with the Supply Chain: Bayer HealthCare’s Journey,” Journal of Busi-
ness Forecasting 22, no. 4 (Winter 2003–2004): 11–15.
Andy Kropa/Redux

710
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
=SUM(F9:F20)
=G21/11
=B9E9
=ABS(B9E9)
=B3*B8+(1B3)*C8
=C9+D9
EXHIBIT 15.1
To access this window,
click on "Data" on the
toolbar ribbon and then
the "Data Analysis"
add-in.
EXHIBIT 15.2
The exponential smoothing forecast can also be developed directly from Excel without
“customizing” a spreadsheet and entering our own formulas, as we did in Exhibit 15.1. From the
“Data” menu at the top of the spreadsheet, select the “Data Analysis” option. (If your “Data”
menu does not include this menu item, you should add it by accessing the “Add-Ins” option from the
“Data” menu or by loading from the original Excel or Office software.) Exhibit 15.2 shows
the Data Analysis window and the “Exponential Smoothing” menu item you should select and
then click on “OK.” The resulting Exponential Smoothing window is shown in Exhibit 15.3. The
input range includes the demand values in column B in Exhibit 15.1, the damping factor is alpha
( ), which in this case is 0.5, and the output should be placed in column C in Exhibit 15.1. Click-
ing on “OK” will result in the same forecast values in column C of Exhibit 15.1 that we computed
using our own exponential smoothing formula. Note that the “Data Analysis” group of analysis
tools does not have an adjusted exponential smoothing selection; that is the reason we developed
our own customized spreadsheet in Exhibit 15.1. The “Data Analysis” tools also have a “Moving
Average” menu item from which a moving average forecast can be computed.
a

TIME SERIES FORECASTING USING EXCEL
711
Demand values
 = 0.5
Cells in which the
forecasted values will
be placed
EXHIBIT 15.3
EXHIBIT 15.4
Excel can also be used to develop seasonally adjusted forecasts. Exhibit 15.4 shows an Excel
spreadsheet set up to develop the seasonally adjusted forecast for the demand for turkeys at Wish-
bone Farms. You will notice that the seasonally adjusted forecasts for each quarter are slightly
different from the forecasts computed manually (e.g.,
with Excel equals 16.43, whereas 
computed manually equals 16.28). This is due to the rounding done in the manual computations.
Computing the Exponential Smoothing Forecast with Excel QM
In Chapter 1 we introduced Excel QM, a set of spreadsheet macros that we also used in several
other chapters. Excel QM includes a spreadsheet macro for exponential smoothing. After it is
activated, the Excel QM menu is accessed by clicking on “Add-Ins” on the menu bar at the top
of the spreadsheet. Clicking on “Forecasting” from this menu results in a Spreadsheet Initializa-
tion window, in which you enter the problem title and the number of periods of past demand.
Clicking on “OK” will result in the spreadsheet shown in Exhibit 15.5. Initially, this spreadsheet
will have example values in the (shaded) data cells, B7 and B10:B21. Thus, the first step in us-
ing this macro is to type in the data for our PM Computer Services problem: alpha ( ) = 0.50 in
cell B7 and our demand values in cells B10:B21. The forecast results are computed automati-
cally from formulas already embedded in the spreadsheet. The resulting next-period forecast for
January is shown in cell B26, and the monthly forecasts are shown in cells D10:D21. (Do not
confuse this exponentially smoothed forecast and the values for MAD and the like with the
adjusted exponentially smoothed forecast and MAD value in Exhibit 15.1.)
a
SF1
SF1

Time Series Forecasting Using QM for Windows
QM for Windows has the capability to perform forecasting for all the time series methods we
have described so far. QM for Windows has modules for moving averages, exponential smooth-
ing and adjusted exponential smoothing, and linear regression.
To demonstrate the forecasting capability of QM for Windows, we will generate the exponen-
tial smoothing 
forecast computed manually for PM Computer Services (Table 15.4).
The solution output is shown in Exhibit 15.6.
(a = .30)
712
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
EXHIBIT 15.6
Input problem data in
cells B7 and B10:B21.
Click “Add-Ins” to access forecasting macros.
EXHIBIT 15.5

REGRESSION METHODS
713
EXHIBIT 15.7
Notice that the solution summary includes the forecast per period and the forecast for the
next period (13), as well as four measures of forecast accuracy: average error (bias), mean ab-
solute deviation (MAD), mean squared error (MSE), and mean absolute percent error (MAPE),
which we have also referred to as MAPD.
The least squares module or the simple linear regression module in QM for Windows can
be used to develop a linear trend line forecast. Using the least squares module, the solution sum-
mary for the linear trend line forecast we developed for PM Computer Services is shown in
Exhibit 15.7.
Regression Methods
The time series techniques of exponential smoothing and moving average relate a single variable 
being forecast (such as demand) to time. In contrast, regression is a forecasting technique that meas-
ures the relationship of one variable to one or more other variables. For example, if we know that
something has caused product demand to behave in a certain way in the past, we might like to iden-
tify that relationship. If the same thing happens again in the future, we can then predict what demand
will be. For example, there is a well-known relationship between increased demand in new housing
and lower interest rates. Correspondingly, a myriad of building products and services display 
increased demand if new housing starts increase. Similarly, an increase in sales of DVD players 
results in an increase in demand for DVDs.
The simplest form of regression is linear regression, which you will recall we used previ-
ously to develop a linear trend line for forecasting. In the following section we will show how to
develop a regression model for variables related to items other than time.
Linear Regression
Simple linear regression relates one dependent variable to one independent variable in the form
of a linear equation:
y = a + bx
dependent variable
independent variable
intercept slope
Linear regression
relates demand
(dependent variable)
to an independent
variable.

To develop the linear equation, the slope, b, and the intercept, a, must first be computed by
using the following least squares formulas:
where
mean of the x data
mean of the y data
We will consider regression within the context of an example. The State University athletic
department wants to develop its budget for the coming year, using a forecast for football
attendance. Football attendance accounts for the largest portion of its revenues, and the athletic
director believes attendance is directly related to the number of wins by the team. The business
manager has accumulated total annual attendance figures for the past 8 years:
Wins
Attendance
4
36,300
6
40,100
6
41,200
8
53,000
6
44,000
7
45,600
5
39,000
7
47,500
Given the number of returning starters and the strength of the schedule, the athletic director
believes the team will win at least seven games next year. He wants to develop a simple regres-
sion equation for these data to forecast attendance for this level of success.
The computations necessary to compute a and b, using the least squares formulas, are sum-
marized in Table 15.10. (Note that the magnitude of y has been reduced to make manual compu-
tation easier.)
y = 
y
n
=
x = 
x
n
=
b = 
xy - nxy

x2 - nx 2
a = y - bx
714
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
x (wins)
y (attendance, 1,000s)
xy
x2
4
36.3
145.2
16
6
40.1
240.6
36
6
41.2
247.2
36
8
53.0
424.0
64
6
44.0
264.0
36
7
45.6
319.2
49
5
39.0
195.0
25
7
47.5
332.5
49
49
346.7
2,167.7
311
TABLE 15.10
Least squares 
computations
y = 346.9
8
= 43.34
x = 49
8 = 6.125

Substituting these values for a and b into the linear equation line, we have
Thus, for 
(wins), the forecast for attendance is
The data points with the regression line are shown in Figure 15.6. Observing the regression
line relative to the data points, it would appear that the data follow a distinct upward linear trend,
which would indicate that the forecast should be relatively accurate. In fact, the MAD value for
this forecasting model is 1.41, which suggests an accurate forecast.
y = 18.46 + 4.06172 = 46.88 or 46,880
x = 7
y = 18.46 + 4.06x
a = y - bx = 43.34 - (4.06)16.1252 = 18.46
= (2,167.7) - (8)(6.125)(43.34)
(311) - (8)(6.125)2
= 4.06
b = 
xy - nx y

x2 - nx 2
REGRESSION METHODS
715
Correlation is a
measure of the
strength of the
relationship between
independent and
dependent variables.
Attendance, y
1
60,000
30,000
20,000
50,000
40,000
10,000
0
2
3
4
5
Wins, x
6
7
8
9
10
Linear regression line,
y = 18.46 + 4.06x
FIGURE 15.6
Linear regression
line
Correlation
Correlation in a linear regression equation is a measure of the strength of the relationship be-
tween the independent and dependent variables. The formula for the correlation coefficient is
The value of r varies between 
and 
with a value of ±1.00 indicating a strong lin-
ear relationship between the variables. If 
then an increase in the independent variable will
result in a corresponding linear increase in the dependent variable. If 
an increase in the
dependent variable will result in a linear decrease in the dependent variable. A value of r near zero
implies that there is little or no linear relationship between variables.
r = -1.00,
r = 1.00,
+1.00,
-1.00
r =
n
xy - 
x
y
23n
x2 - (
x)24 3n
y2 - 1
y224

We can determine the correlation coefficient for the linear regression equation determined
in our State University example by substituting most of the terms calculated for the least squares
formula (except for 
) into the formula for r:
This value for the correlation coefficient is very close to one, indicating a strong linear rela-
tionship between the number of wins and home attendance.
Another measure of the strength of the relationship between the variables in a linear regres-
sion equation is the coefficient of determination. It is computed by simply squaring the value
of r. It indicates the percentage of the variation in the dependent variable that is a result of the
behavior of the independent variable. For our example,
thus, the coefficient of deter-
mination is
This value for the coefficient of determination means that 89.9% of the amount of variation
in attendance can be attributed to the number of wins by the team (with the remaining 10.1%
due to other unexplained factors, such as weather, a good or poor start, publicity, etc.). A value
of one (or 100%) would indicate that attendance totally depends on wins. However, because
10.1% of the variation is a result of other factors, some amount of forecast error can be expected.
Regression Analysis with Excel
Exhibit 15.8 shows a spreadsheet set up to develop the linear regression forecast for
our State University athletic department example. Notice that Excel computes the slope 
directly with the formula 
entered in cell E7 and shown on
the formula bar at the top of the spreadsheet. The formula for the intercept in cell E6 is
. The values for the slope and intercept are subsequently
entered in cells E9 and G9 to form the linear regression equation. The correlation coeffi-
cient in cell E13 is computed by using the formula 
. 
Although it is not shown on the spreadsheet, the coefficient of determination (r 2) could be
computed by using the formula RSQ1B5:B12,A5:A122.
CORREL1B5:B12,A5:A122
INTERCEPT1B5:B12,A5:A122
SLOPE1B5:B12,A5:A122
= .899
r2 = (.948)2
r = .948;
= .948
r =
(8)(2,167.7) - (49)(346.7)
23(8)(311) - (49)24 3(8)(15,224.7) - 1346.7224

y2
716
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
=CORREL(B5:B12,A5:A12)
=INTERCEPT(B5:B12,A5:A12)
EXHIBIT 15.8
The same linear regression equation could be computed in Excel if we had developed and
entered the mathematical formulas for computing the slope and intercept we developed in the
previous section, although that would have been more time-consuming and tedious.
It is also possible to develop a scatter diagram of our example data similar to the chart
shown in Figure 15.6 by using Excel. First, cover the example data in cells A5:B12 on the
The coefficient of
determination is the
percentage of the
variation in 
the dependent
variable that results
from 
the independent
variable.

REGRESSION METHODS
717
Management Science Application
An Airline Passenger Forecasting Model
Following the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001,
Congress created the Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), which became part of the Department of Homeland
Security in March 2003. The TSA has responsibility for 
national transportation security and, specifically, U.S. commer-
cial aviation system security. The TSA put into effect a number
of procedures, processes, and regulations to safeguard against
terrorism, the unintended consequences of which were long
lines and waiting times at security checkpoints in airports. 
To address the problems created by the new security meas-
ures, the TSA joined with the commercial airlines to form the
U.S. Commercial Aviation Partnership (USCAP). The goal of this
partnership was to maintain the health of U.S. commercial avi-
ation while ensuring that security requirements were imple-
mented efficiently and effectively. To achieve this goal, USCAP
used its technical professionals to develop mathematical mod-
els to analyze, define, and predict the operational and
economic effects of air travel security measures. The key com-
ponent of this modeling effort was a model to forecast air
travel passenger demand. 
Previously most air travel forecasting models focused on
long-term trends with time horizons of 5 to 20 years, which
weren’t effective for making near-term tactical decisions and
reflecting the immediate impact of security policies. The model
developed by USCAP used multiple regression to forecast pas-
senger demand based on six causal factors including the econ-
omy (reflected by U.S. gross domestic product); ticket prices
(represented by the average fare for a 1,000-mile trip); travel
time (from door to door); fear (represented by the reduction in
plane boardings owing to an event causing fear); a hassle fac-
tor (created by the reduction in plane boardings owing to an
event causing hassle); and an operations factor (resulting from
a reduction in plane boardings owing to a reduction in opera-
tions caused by an event). 
A detailed regression analysis Solver tool with special ca-
pabilities was developed for this model. The forecasting model
was subsequently used as the basis for other analytical models
to explore numerous questions concerning airport security
procedures, such as staffing for security screening, the num-
ber of screening lanes at airports, security processing times,
security credentials for employees, and what-if? analyses of
proposed security measures such as passenger security fees.
The immediate financial savings of the models developed by
USCAP, in addition to improved security procedures, were in
the tens of billions of dollars with an estimated 20-year impact
of more than $100 billion.
Source: Based on R. Peterson, R. Bittel, C. Forgie, W. Lee, and J. Nestor,
“Using USCAP’s Analytical Models, the Transportation Security Admin-
istration Balances the Impacts of Aviation Security Policies on Passen-
gers and Airlines,” Interfaces 37, no. 1 (January–February 2007): 52–67.
Copyright © Bill Aron/Photo Edit
spreadsheet in Exhibit 15.8. Next click on the “Insert” tab on the toolbar at the top of the spreadsheet.
This will result in the toolbar menu shown in Exhibit 15.9.
On the “Charts” segment from this menu select the “Scatter” chart, as shown in Exhibit 15.9.
Exhibit 15.9 shows the spreadsheet with the scatter diagram chart for our example data.
A linear regression forecast can also be developed directly with Excel by using the
“Data Analysis” add-in option from the “Data” toolbar we accessed previously to develop
an exponentially smoothed forecast. Exhibit 15.10 shows the “Regression” selection from
the Data Analysis window, and Exhibit 15.11 shows the Regression window. We first enter
the cells from Exhibit 15.8 that include the y values (for attendance), B5:B12. Next, we
enter the x value cells, A5:A12. The output range is the location on the spreadsheet where
we want to put the output results. This range needs to be large (18 cells by 9 cells) and must
not overlap with anything else on the spreadsheet. Clicking on “OK” will result in the

718
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
EXHIBIT 15.11
EXHIBIT 15.10
Click on "Insert" to access "Charts."
Click on "Scatter."
EXHIBIT 15.9

spreadsheet shown in Exhibit 15.12. (Note that the “Summary Output” section has been
slightly edited—i.e., moved around—so that all the results could be included on the screen
in Exhibit 15.12.)
REGRESSION METHODS
719
EXHIBIT 15.12
The “Summary Output” section in Exhibit 15.12 provides a large amount of statistical in-
formation, the explanation and use of which are beyond the scope of this text. The essential
items that interest us are the intercept and slope (labeled “X Variable 1”) in the “Coefficients”
column at the bottom of the spreadsheet and the “Multiple R” (or correlation coefficient) value
shown under “Regression Statistics.”
Note that Excel QM also has a spreadsheet macro for regression analysis that can be ac-
cessed in much the same way as was the exponentially smoothed forecast in Exhibit 15.5.
Regression Analysis with QM for Windows
QM for Windows has the capability to perform linear regression, as demonstrated earlier. To
demonstrate this program module, we will use our State University athletic department exam-
ple. The program output, including the linear equation and correlation coefficient, is shown in
Exhibit 15.13.
Multiple Regression with Excel
Another causal method of forecasting is multiple regression, a more powerful extension of lin-
ear regression. Linear regression relates a dependent variable such as demand to one other inde-
pendent variable, whereas multiple regression reflects the relationship between a dependent
variable and two or more independent variables. A multiple regression model has the following
general form:
where
the intercept
parameters representing the contribution of the independent variables
independent variables
x1 . . . xk =
b1 . . . bk =
b0 =
y = b0 + b1x1 + b2x2 + g + bkxk
Multiple regression
relates demand to two
or more independent
variables.

For example, the demand for new housing (y) in a region or an urban area might be a func-
tion of several independent variables, including interest rates, population, housing prices, and
personal income. Development and computation of the multiple regression equation, including
the compilation of data, are quite a bit more complex than linear regression. Therefore, the only
viable means for forecasting using multiple regression problems is by using a computer.
To demonstrate the capability to solve multiple regression problems with Excel spread-
sheets, we will expand our State University athletic department example for forecasting atten-
dance at football games that we used to demonstrate linear regression. Instead of attempting to
predict attendance based on only one variable (wins), we will include a second variable for
advertising and promotional expenditures, as follows:
Wins
Promotion
Attendance
4
$29,500
36,300
6
55,700
40,100
6
71,300
41,200
8
87,000
53,000
6
75,000
44,000
7
72,000
45,600
5
55,300
39,000
7
81,600
47,500
We will use the “Data Analysis” option (add-in) from the “Data” menu at the top of the
spreadsheet that we used in the previous section to develop our linear regression equation, and
then we will use the “Regression” option from the “Data Analysis” menu. The resulting spread-
sheet, with the multiple regression statistics, is shown in Exhibit 15.14.
Note that the data need to be set up on the spreadsheet so that the x variables are in adjacent
columns (in this case, columns A and B). Then we enter the “Input X Range” as A4:B12, as
shown in Exhibit 15.15. Notice that we have also included cells A4, B4, and C4, which include
our variable headings (i.e., “wins,” “$ promotion,” and “attendance”), in the input ranges. By
clicking on “Labels,” headings can be placed on our spreadsheet in cells A27 and A28.
720
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
EXHIBIT 15.13

The regression coefficients for our x variables, wins and promotion, are shown in cells B27
and B28 in Exhibit 15.14. Thus, the multiple regression equation is formulated as
This equation can now be used to forecast attendance based on both projected football wins
and promotional expenditure. For example, if the athletic department expects the team to win seven
games and plans to spend $60,000 on promotion and advertising, the forecasted attendance is
= 46,229.35
y = 19,094.42 + 3,560.99(7) + .0368160,0002
y = 19,094.42 + 3,560.99x1 + .0368x2
REGRESSION METHODS
721
Regression equation
coefficients for x1 and x 2
r 2, the coefficient of determination
EXHIBIT 15.14
Includes x1 and x 2
columns
EXHIBIT 15.15

If the promotional expenditure is held constant, every win will increase attendance by
3,560.99, whereas if the wins are held constant, every $1,000 of advertising money spent will
increase attendance by 36.8 fans. This would seem to suggest that number of wins has a more
significant impact on attendance than promotional expenditures.
The coefficient of determination, r 2, shown in cell B19 in Exhibit 15.14, is .90, which sug-
gests that 90% of the amount of variation in attendance can be attributed to the number of wins
and the promotional expenditures. However, as we have already noted, the number of wins prob-
ably accounts for a larger part of the variation in attendance.
A problem often encountered in multiple regression is multicollinearity, or the amount of
“overlapping” information about the dependent variable that is provided by several independent
variables. This problem usually occurs when the independent variables are highly correlated, as in
this example, in which wins and promotional expenditures are both positively correlated; that is,
more wins coincide with higher promotional expenditures and vice versa. (Possibly the athletic de-
partment increased promotional expenditures when it thought it would have a better team that would
achieve more wins.) Multicollinearity and how to cope with it are beyond the scope of this text and
this brief section on multiple regression; however, most statistics texts discuss this topic in detail.
Summary
We have presented several methods of forecasting that are useful for different time frames. Time
series and regression methods can be used to develop forecasts encompassing horizons of any
length time, although they tend to be used most frequently for short- and medium-range fore-
casts. These quantitative forecasting techniques are generally easy to understand, simple to use,
and not especially costly, unless the data requirements are substantial. They also have exhibited
a good track record of performance for many companies that have used them. For these reasons,
regression methods, and especially times series, are widely popular.
When managers and students are first introduced to forecasting methods, they are some-
times surprised and disappointed at the lack of exactness of the forecasts. However, they soon
learn that forecasting is not easy and exactness is not possible. Forecasting is a lot like playing
horseshoes: It’s great to get a “ringer,” but you can win by just getting close, although those who
have the skill and experience to get ringers will beat those who just get close. Often forecasts
are used as inputs to other decision models—for example, in inventory models, the subject of
the next chapter. The primary factor in determining the amount of inventory a firm should order
(i.e., prepare to have on hand) is the demand that will occur in the future—forecasted demand.
722
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Example Problem
Solutions
The following problem provides an example of the computation of exponentially smoothed and
adjusted exponentially smoothed forecasts.
Problem Statement
A computer software firm has experienced the following demand for its Personal Finance soft-
ware package:
Period
Units
1
56
2
61
3
55
4
70
5
66
6
65
7
72
8
75

Develop an exponential smoothing forecast, using 
and an adjusted exponential
smoothing forecast, using 
and 
Compare the accuracy of the two forecasts, us-
ing MAD and cumulative error.
Solution
Step 1: Compute the Exponential Smoothing Forecast
For period 2 the forecast (assuming that 
) is
For period 3 the forecast is
The remaining forecasts are computed similarly and are shown in the table below.
Step 2: Compute the Adjusted Exponential Smoothing Forecast
Starting with the forecast for period 3 (because 
and we will assume that 
),
The remaining adjusted forecasts are computed similarly and are shown in the following table:
Period
Dt
Ft
AFt
Dt  Ft
Dt  AFt
1
56
—
—
—
—
2
61
56.00
56.00
5.00
5.00
3
55
58.00
58.40
-3.00
-3.40
4
70
56.80
56.88
13.20
13.12
5
66
62.08
63.20
3.92
2.80
6
65
63.65
64.86
1.35
0.14
7
72
64.18
65.26
7.81
6.73
8
75
67.31
68.80
7.68
6.20
9
—
70.39
72.19
—
—
35.97
30.60
Step 3: Compute the MAD Values
Step 4: Compute the Cumulative Error
Because both MAD and the cumulative error are less for the adjusted forecast, it would appear
to be the most accurate.
The following problem provides an example of the computation of a linear regression
forecast.
E(AFt) = 30.60
E(Ft) = 35.97
MAD(AFt) =

 Dt - AFt
n
= 37.39
7
= 5.34
MAD(Ft) =

 Dt - Ft
n
= 41.97
7
= 5.99
AF3 = F3 + T3 = 58 + .40 = 58.40
T3 = b(F3 - F2) + (1 - b)T2 = (.20)(58 - 56) + (.80)(0) = .40
T2 = 0
F1 = F2
Tt+1 = b(Ft+1 - Ft) + (1 - b)Tt
AFt+1 = Ft+1 + Tt+1
F3 = (.40)(61) + (.60)(56) = 58
F2 = aD1 + (1 - a)F1 = (.40)(56) + (.60)(56) = 56
F1 = 56
Ft+1 = aDt + (1 - a)Ft
b = .20.
a = .40
a = .40,
EXAMPLE PROBLEM SOLUTIONS
723

Problem Statement
A local building products store has accumulated sales data for two-by-four lumber (in board
feet) and the number of building permits in its area for the past 10 quarters:
Building Permits,
Lumber Sales
Quarter
x
(1,000s of bd. ft.), y
1
8
12.6
2
12
16.3
3
7
9.3
4
9
11.5
5
15
18.1
6
6
7.6
7
5
6.2
8
8
14.2
9
10
15.0
10
12
17.8
Develop a linear regression model for these data and determine the strength of the linear rela-
tionship by using correlation. If the model appears to be relatively strong, determine the forecast
for lumber, given 10 building permits in the next quarter.
Solution
Step 1: Compute the Components of the Linear Regression Equation
Step 2: Develop the Linear Regression Equation
Step 3: Compute the Correlation Coefficient
Thus, there appears to be a strong linear relationship.
= .925
=
(10)(1,290.3) - (92)(128.6)
23(10)(932) - (92)24 3(10)(1,810.48) - 1128.6224
r =
n
xy - 
x
y
23n
x2 - (
x)24 3n
y2 - (
y)24
y = 1.36 + 1.25x
y = a + bx
a = 1.36
a = y - bx = 12.86 - (1.25)19.22
b = 1.25
b = 
xy - nxy

x2 - nx 2 = (1,290.3) -(10)(9.2)(12.86)
(932) - (10)(9.2)2
y = 128.6
10
= 12.86
x = 92
10 = 9.2
724
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Step 4: Calculate the Forecast for 
Permits
Problems
1. The Saki motorcycle dealer in the Minneapolis–St. Paul area wants to make an accurate forecast of
demand for the Saki Super TXII motorcycle during the next month. Because the manufacturer is in
Japan, it is difficult to send motorcycles back or reorder if the proper number is not ordered a
month ahead. From sales records, the dealer has accumulated the following data for the past year:
Month
Motorcycle Sales
January
9
February
7
March
10
April
8
May
7
June
12
July
10
August
11
September
12
October
10
November
14
December
16
a. Compute a 3-month moving average forecast of demand for April through January (of the
next year).
b. Compute a 5-month moving average forecast for June through January.
c. Compare the two forecasts computed in (a) and (b), using MAD. Which one should the dealer
use for January of the next year?
2. The manager of the Carpet City outlet needs to make an accurate forecast of the demand for Soft
Shag carpet (its biggest seller). If the manager does not order enough carpet from the carpet mill,
customers will buy their carpet from one of Carpet City’s many competitors. The manager has
collected the following demand data for the past 8 months:
Demand for Soft Shag
Month
Carpet (1,000 yd.)
1
8
2
12
3
7
4
9
5
15
6
11
7
10
8
12
a. Compute a 3-month moving average forecast for months 4 through 9.
b. Compute a weighted 3-month moving average forecast for months 4 through 9. Assign
weights of .55, .33, and .12 to the months in sequence, starting with the most recent month.
c. Compare the two forecasts by using MAD. Which forecast appears to be more accurate?
= 13.86 or 1,386 bd. ft.
= 1.36 + 1.251102
y = a + bx
x = 10
PROBLEMS
725

3. The Fastgro Fertilizer Company distributes fertilizer to various lawn and garden shops. The com-
pany must base its quarterly production schedule on a forecast of how many tons of fertilizer will
be demanded from it. The company has gathered the following data for the past 3 years from its
sales records:
Year
Quarter
Demand for Fertilizer (tons)
1
1
105
2
150
3
93
4
121
2
5
140
6
170
7
105
8
150
3
9
150
10
170
11
110
12
130
a. Compute a three-quarter moving average forecast for quarters 4 through 13 and compute the
forecast error for each quarter.
b. Compute a five-quarter moving average forecast for quarters 6 through 13 and compute the
forecast error for each quarter.
c. Compute a weighted three-quarter moving average forecast, using weights of .50, .33, and .17
for the most recent, next most recent, and most distant data, respectively, and compute the
forecast error for each quarter.
d. Compare the forecasts developed in (a), (b), and (c), using cumulative error. Which forecast
appears to be most accurate? Do any of them exhibit any bias?
4. Graph the demand data in Problem 3. Can you identify any trends, cycles, or seasonal
patterns?
5. The chairperson of the department of management at State University wants to forecast the num-
ber of students who will enroll in production and operations management (POM) next semester,
in order to determine how many sections to schedule. The chair has accumulated the following
enrollment data for the past eight semesters:
Semester
Students Enrolled in POM
1
400
2
450
3
350
4
420
5
500
6
575
7
490
8
650
a. Compute a three-semester moving average forecast for semesters 4 through 9.
b. Compute the exponentially smoothed forecast (
= .20) for the enrollment data.
c. Compare the two forecasts by using MAD and indicate the more accurate of the two.
a
726
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

6. The manager of the Petroco Service Station wants to forecast the demand for unleaded gasoline next
month so that the proper number of gallons can be ordered from the distributor. The owner has accu-
mulated the following data on demand for unleaded gasoline from sales during the past 10 months:
Month
Gasoline Demanded (gal.)
October
800
November
725
December
630
January
500
February
645
March
690
April
730
May
810
June
1,200
July
980
a. Compute an exponentially smoothed forecast, using an a value of .30.
b. Compute an adjusted exponentially smoothed forecast (with a = .30 and 
).
c. Compare the two forecasts by using MAPD and indicate which seems to be more accurate.
7. The Victory Plus Mutual Fund of growth stocks has had the following average monthly price for
the past 10 months:
Month
Fund Price
1
62.7
2
63.9
3
68.0
4
66.4
5
67.2
6
65.8
7
68.2
8
69.3
9
67.2
10
70.1
Compute the exponentially smoothed forecast with a = .40 the adjusted exponential smoothing fore-
cast with a = .40 and 
and the linear trend line forecast. Compare the accuracy of the three
forecasts, using cumulative error and MAD, and indicate which forecast appears to be most accurate.
8. The Bayside Fountain Hotel is adjacent to County Coliseum, a 24,000-seat arena that is home to
the city’s professional basketball and ice hockey teams and that hosts a variety of concerts, trade
shows, and conventions throughout the year. The hotel has experienced the following occupancy
rates for the past 9 years, since the coliseum opened:
Year
Occupancy Rate (%)
1
83
2
78
3
75
4
81
5
86
6
85
7
89
8
90
9
86
b = .30,
b = .20
PROBLEMS
727

Compute an exponential smoothing forecast with a = .20, an adjusted exponential smoothing
forecast with a = .20 and 
and a linear trend line forecast. Compare the three forecasts,
using MAD and average error ( ), and indicate which seems to be most accurate.
9. Emily Andrews has invested in a science and technology mutual fund. Now she is considering
liquidating and investing in another fund. She would like to forecast the price of the science and
technology fund for the next month before making a decision. She has collected the following
data on the average price of the fund during the past 20 months:
Month
Fund Price
1
$ 63 1/4
2
60 1/8
3
61 3/4
4
64 1/4
5
59 3/8
6
57 7/8
7
62 1/4
8
65 1/8
9
68 1/4
10
65 1/2
11
68 1/8
12
63 1/4
13
64 3/8
14
68 5/8
15
70 1/8
16
72 3/4
17
74 1/8
18
71 3/4
19
75 1/2
20
76 3/4
a. Using a 3-month average, forecast the fund price for month 21.
b. Using a 3-month weighted average with the most recent month weighted 0.60, the next most
recent month weighted 0.30, and the third month weighted 0.10, forecast the fund price for
month 21.
c. Compute an exponentially smoothed forecast, using a = .40, and forecast the fund price for
month 21.
d. Compare the forecasts in (a), (b), and (c), using MAD, and indicate the most accurate.
10. Eurotronics manufactures components for use in small electronic products such as comput-
ers, CD players, and radios at plants in Belgium, Germany, and France. The parts are trans-
ported by truck to Hamburg, where they are shipped overseas to customers in Mexico, South
America, the United States, and the Pacific Rim. The company has to reserve space on ships
months and sometimes years in advance. This requires an accurate forecasting model. Fol-
lowing are the number of cubic feet of container space the company has used in each of the
past 18 months:
E
b = .20,
728
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Month
Space (1,000s ft.3)
1
10.6
2
12.7
3
9.8
4
11.3
5
13.6
6
14.4
7
12.2
8
16.7
9
18.1
10
19.2
11
16.3
12
14.7
13
18.2
14
19.6
15
21.4
16
22.8
17
20.6
18
18.7
Develop a forecasting model that you believe would provide the company with relatively accurate
forecasts for the next year and indicate the forecasted shipping space required for the next 3 months.
11. The Whistle Stop Cafe in Weems, Georgia, is well known for its popular homemade ice cream,
made in a small plant in back of the cafe. People drive all the way from Atlanta and Macon to
buy the ice cream. The two women who own the cafe want to develop a forecasting model so
they can plan their ice cream production operation and determine the number of employees they
need to sell ice cream in the cafe. They have accumulated the following sales records for their
ice cream for the past 12 quarters:
Year
Quarter
Ice Cream Sales (gal.)
1
1
350
2
510
3
750
4
420
2
5
370
6
480
7
860
8
500
3
9
450
10
550
11
820
12
570
Develop an adjusted exponential smoothing model with a = .50 and 
to forecast demand
and assess its accuracy using cumulative error (E) and average error ( ). Does there appear to
be any bias in the forecast?
E
b = .50
PROBLEMS
729

12. For the demand data in Problem 11, develop a seasonally adjusted forecast for year 4. (Use a linear
trend line model to develop a forecast estimate for year 4.) Which forecast model do you perceive to
be more accurate: the exponential smoothing model from Problem 11 or the seasonally adjusted
forecast?
13. Develop a seasonally adjusted forecast for the demand data for fertilizer found in Problem 3.
Then use a linear trend line model to compute a forecast estimate for demand in year 4.
14. Monaghan’s Pizza delivery service has randomly selected 8 weekdays during the past month and
recorded orders for pizza at four different time periods per day:
Day
Time Period
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10:00 A.M.–3:00 P.M.
62
49
53
35
43
48
56
43
3:00 P.M.–7:00 P.M.
73
55
81
77
60
66
85
70
7:00 P.M.–11:00 P.M.
42
38
45
50
29
37
35
44
11:00 P.M.–12:00 A.M.
35
40
36
39
26
25
36
31
Develop a seasonally adjusted forecasting model for daily pizza demand and forecast demand
for each of the time periods for a single upcoming day.
15. The Cat Creek Mining Company mines and ships coal. It has experienced the following demand
for coal during the past 8 years:
Year
Coal Sales (tons)
1
4,260
2
4,510
3
4,050
4
3,720
5
3,900
6
3,470
7
2,890
8
3,100
Develop an adjusted exponential smoothing model (a = .30, b = .20) and a linear trend line
model and compare the forecast accuracy of the two by using MAD. Indicate which forecast
seems to be more accurate.
16. The River is a literary magazine published by the English Department at Tech. It has a 70-year
history and enjoys an excellent reputation for providing a literary outlet for aspiring Ap-
palachian writers in particular. However, its sales, mostly through independent bookstores and
college libraries, have never been very large. Several years ago, the magazine’s advisory board
decided to create a Web site and post the bi-monthly issues online for free access. Due to poor
economic conditions and state budget cuts, Tech recently withdrew funding for the magazine,
and in order to make up for this financial loss, the magazine’s staff has decided to try to sell ad-
vertising (especially to local and regional businesses) on the magazine’s Web site. In order to
730
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

sell advertising, the magazine’s staff would like to be able to provide potential advertisers with
a forecast of the number of “visits” the Web site might receive in future months. Following is
the number of monthly visits the Web site has received for the 24 months that it has existed:
Month
Web Site Visits
Month
Web Site Visits
1
537
13
822
2
375
14
677
3
419
15
1,031
4
276
16
657
5
445
17
983
6
512
18
774
7
670
19
1,210
8
561
20
811
9
705
21
1,137
10
619
22
763
11
768
23
1,225
12
645
24
941
Develop a linear trend line forecast, an exponential smoothing forecast (a = 0.60), and a
3-month weighted moving average (with the most recent month weighted by 0.50, the next
closest month by 0.30, and the final month by 0.20). Indicate which one you believe is the most
accurate forecast model and the forecast for month 25. 
17. The Beaver Creek Pottery Company sells bowls and mugs, hand-made by Native American arti-
sans, at a craft store and through a Web site. Making these items requires a special type of clay
and a large amount of individual person-hours, so for planning purposes, the company would
like to forecast future demand, specifically through its Web site, which has increasingly become
the primary source of sales. Following is the company’s Web site demand (in items sold) for the
past 36 months:
Month
Sales
Month
Sales
Month
Sales
1
345
13
415
25
344
2
411
14
395
26
286
3
266
15
298
27
455
4
347
16
377
28
634
5
506
17
418
29
502
6
278
18
522
30
388
7
411
19
421
31
427
8
510
20
384
32
561
9
198
21
455
33
447
10
387
22
506
34
395
11
344
23
478
35
414
12
412
24
613
36
522
Develop a linear trend forecast model, an exponentially smoothed model (a = 0.20), and a
5-month moving average forecast model and indicate which one you think should be used to
forecast Web site demand. 
PROBLEMS
731

18. The Northwoods Outdoor Company is a catalog sales operation that specializes in outdoor recre-
ational clothing. Demand for its items is very seasonal, peaking during the Christmas season and
during the spring. It has accumulated the following data for orders per season (quarter) during
the past 5 years:
Orders (1,000s)/Year
Quarter
1
2
3
4
5
January–March
18.6
18.1
22.4
23.2
24.5
April–June
23.5
24.7
28.8
27.6
31.0
July–September
20.4
19.5
21.0
24.4
23.7
October–December
41.9
46.3
45.5
47.1
52.8
a. Develop a seasonally adjusted forecast model for these order data. Forecast demand for each
quarter for year 6 (using a linear trend line forecast estimate for orders in year 6).
b. Develop a separate linear trend line forecast for each of the four seasons and forecast each
season for year 6.
c. Which of the two approaches used in (a) and (b) appears to be the more accurate? Use MAD
to verify your selection.
19. Metro Food Vending operates vending machines in office buildings, the airport, bus stations,
colleges, and other businesses and agencies around town, and it operates vending trucks for
building and construction sites. The company believes its sandwich sales follow a seasonal
pattern. It has accumulated the following data for sandwich sales per season during the past
4 years:
Sandwich Sales (1,000s)/Year
Season
1
2
3
4
Fall
42.7
44.3
45.7
40.6
Winter
36.9
42.7
34.8
41.5
Spring
51.3
55.6
49.3
47.3
Summer
62.9
64.8
71.2
74.5
Develop a seasonally adjusted forecast model for these sandwich sales data. Forecast demand
for each season for year 5 by using a linear trend line estimate for sales in year 5. Do the data
appear to have a seasonal pattern?
20. The Hillsboro Aquatic Center has an indoor pool with lanes for lap swimming and an open area
for recreational swimming and various exercise and water aerobics programs. From June to mid-
August it operates on a summer schedule, and from mid-August to the end of May it operates
according to normal weekday and weekend schedules. The center’s policy for the pool is to have
a lifeguard-to-patron ratio of 1:40. The center director wants to develop a forecast of pool atten-
dance for the weekday schedule in order to determine the number of lifeguards to hire. The di-
rector believes pool attendance follows a seasonal pattern during the day and has accumulated
the following data for average daily attendance for each hour of the day that the pool is open to
the public (i.e., there are no swim team practices):
732
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Year
Time
1
2
3
4
5
6
7:00 A.M.
56
64
66
60
72
65
8:00
31
41
37
44
52
46
9:00
15
22
24
30
19
26
10:00
34
35
38
31
28
33
11:00
45
52
55
49
57
50
Noon
63
71
57
65
75
70
1:00 P.M.
35
30
41
42
33
45
2:00
24
28
32
30
35
33
3:00
27
19
24
23
25
27
6:00
31
47
36
45
40
46
7:00
25
35
41
43
39
45
8:00
14
20
18
17
23
27
9:00
10
8
16
14
15
18
Develop a seasonally adjusted forecast model for these data for hourly pool attendance. Forecast
attendance for each hour for year 7 by using a linear trend line estimate for pool attendance in
year 7. Do the data appear to have a seasonal pattern?
21. Develop an adjusted exponential smoothing forecast (a = .30, b = .20) for the annual pool at-
tendance data in Problem 20. Does this forecast appear to be more or less accurate than the lin-
ear trend line model for forecasting annual pool attendance developed in Problem 20?
22. The emergency room at the new Community Hospital selected every other week during the past
5 months to observe the number of patients during two parts of each week—the weekend (Fri-
day through Sunday) and weekdays (Monday through Thursday). They typically experience
greater patient traffic on weekends than during the week:
Number of Patients
Week
Weekend
Weekdays
1
116
83
2
126
92
3
125
97
4
132
91
5
128
103
6
139
88
7
145
96
8
137
106
9
151
95
10
148
102
Develop a seasonally adjusted forecasting model for the number of patients during each part of
the week for week 11.
PROBLEMS
733

23. Aztec Industries has developed a forecasting model that was used to forecast during a 10-month
period. The forecasts and actual demand were as follows:
Month
Actual Demand
Forecast Demand
1
160
170
2
150
165
3
175
157
4
200
166
5
190
183
6
220
186
7
205
203
8
210
204
9
200
207
10
220
203
Measure the accuracy of the forecast by using MAD, MAPD, and cumulative error. Does the
forecast method appear to be accurate?
24. RAP Computers assembles personal computers from generic parts it purchases at a discount,
and it sells the units by phone orders it receives from customers responding to the company’s
ads in trade journals. The business has developed an exponential smoothing forecast model to
forecast future computer demand. Actual demand for the company’s computers for the past 8
months as well as a forecast are shown in the following table:
Month
Demand
Forecast
March
120
—
April
110
120.0
May
150
116.0
June
130
129.6
July
160
129.7
August
165
141.8
September
140
151.1
October
155
146.7
November
—
150.0
a. Using a measure of forecast accuracy of your choice, ascertain whether the forecast appears
to be accurate.
b. Determine whether a 3-month moving average would provide a better forecast.
25. Develop an exponential smoothing forecast with a = .20 for the demand data in Problem 1. Com-
pare this forecast with the 3-month moving average computed in part (a) of Problem 1,
using MAD, and indicate which forecast seems to be more accurate.
26. The Jersey Dairy Products Company produces cheese, which it sells to supermarkets and food-
processing companies. Because of concerns about cholesterol and fat in cheese, the company has
seen demand for its products decline during the past decade. It is now considering introducing some
alternative low-fat dairy products and wants to determine how much available plant capacity it will
have next year. The company has developed an exponential smoothing forecast with a = .40 to fore-
cast cheese demand. The actual demand and the forecasts from the model are as follows:
734
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Year
Demand (1,000 lb.)
Forecast
1
16.8
—
2
14.1
16.8
3
15.3
15.7
4
12.7
15.5
5
11.9
14.4
6
12.3
13.4
7
11.5
12.9
8
10.8
12.4
Assess the accuracy of the forecast model by using MAD and cumulative error. If the exponen-
tial smoothing forecast model does not appear to be accurate, determine whether a linear trend
model would provide a more accurate forecast.
27. The manager of the Ramona Inn Hotel near Cloverleaf Stadium believes that how well the local
Blue Sox professional baseball team is playing has an impact on the occupancy rate at the
hotel during the summer months. Following are the number of victories for the Blue Sox (in a
162-game schedule) for the past 8 years and the hotel occupancy rates:
Year
Blue Sox Wins
Occupancy Rate (%)
1
75
83
2
70
78
3
85
86
4
91
85
5
87
89
6
90
93
7
87
92
8
67
91
Develop a linear regression model for these data and forecast the occupancy rate for next year if
the Blue Sox win 88 games.
28. Carpet City wants to develop a means to forecast its carpet sales. The store manager believes
that the store’s sales are directly related to the number of new housing starts in town. The man-
ager has gathered data from county records on monthly house construction permits and from
store records on monthly sales. These data are as follows:
Monthly Carpet 
Monthly Construction
Sales (1,000 yd.)
Permits
5
21
10
35
4
10
3
12
8
16
2
9
12
41
11
15
9
18
14
26
PROBLEMS
735

a. Develop a linear regression model for these data and forecast carpet sales if 30 construction
permits for new homes are filed.
b. Determine the strength of the causal relationship between monthly sales and new home con-
struction by using correlation.
29. The DirectCast cable TV company is a national chain that services the small college town that is
home to Tech, with a student population of almost 30,000. The company has generally been able to
handle service calls and installations in the past, but a growth trend in the town and occasional signif-
icant jumps in service requests, especially for new high-definition installations, have made it more
difficult for the company to determine the number of technicians and trucks it needs to maintain good
service to its customers. Following is the demand for service calls during the past 36 months:
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
Month
Service Calls
Service Calls
Service Calls
January
1,048
1155
1135
February
326
319
365
March
303
324
341
April
351
344
370
May
673
712
694
June
274
306
310
July
219
245
266
August 
1347
1455
1505
September
973
1056
981
October
536
545
555
November
312
298
317
December
577
481
562
Develop a monthly forecast for the upcoming year for DirectCast. Explain why you think there
are occasional increases and decreases in the monthly demand for service calls.
30. Bell Inc. is a computer company that gets most of its component parts from suppliers in Southeast
Asia, who ship to small warehouses called “revolvers” (for revolving inventory) near Bell’s main as-
sembly plants near Fort Worth, Texas. Bell withdraws inventory for these warehouses every few
hours, and most of Bell’s suppliers deliver to their revolvers every 3 or 4 days. One particular supplier
provides most of the workings for the Bell Intrepid laptop, including the screen and keyboard, and
the hard drive and mother board plus a few other parts are added at the assembly plant. These
revolvers allow Bell to carry little of its own inventory by pushing it down to its suppliers. However,
the supplier also wants to minimize its inventory, and one way it can do that is to develop an accurate
demand forecast. Following is the supplier’s demand data (units) from Bell for the past 24 months:
Year 1
Year 2
Month
Demand
Demand
January
2,447
2,561
February
1,826
1,733
March 
1,755
1,693
April
1,456
1,484
May 
1,529
1,501
June
1,633
1,655
July
2,346
2,412
August
3,784
4,017
September
4,106
3,886
October
3,006
2,844
November
2,257
2,107
December
3,212
3,410
736
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Closely observe the demand data and develop a forecast model for year 3 that you believe will
be accurate.
31. The manager of Gilley’s Ice Cream Parlor needs an accurate forecast of the demand for ice
cream. The store orders ice cream from a distributor a week ahead; if the store orders too little,
it loses business, and if it orders too much, the extra must be thrown away. The manager believes
that a major determinant of ice cream sales is temperature (i.e., the hotter the weather, the more
ice cream people buy). Using an almanac, the manager has determined the average daytime tem-
perature for 10 weeks, selected at random, and from store records he has determined the ice
cream consumption for the same 10 weeks. These data are summarized as follows:
Average Temperature
Ice Cream Sold
Week
(degrees)
(gal.)
1
73
110
2
65
95
3
81
135
4
90
160
5
75
97
6
77
105
7
82
120
8
93
175
9
86
140
10
79
121
a. Develop a linear regression model for these data and forecast the ice cream consumption if
the average weekly daytime temperature is expected to be 85 degrees.
b. Determine the strength of the linear relationship between temperature and ice cream con-
sumption by using correlation.
32. Compute the coefficient of determination for the data in Problem 31 and explain its meaning.
33. Administrators at State University believe that decreases in the number of freshman applications
that they have experienced are directly related to tuition increases. They have collected the fol-
lowing enrollment and tuition data for the past decade:
Freshman
Annual
Year
Applications
Tuition
1
6,050
$3,600
2
4,060
3,600
3
5,200
4,000
4
4,410
4,400
5
4,380
4,500
6
4,160
5,700
7
3,560
6,000
8
2,970
6,000
9
3,280
7,500
10
3,430
8,000
a. Develop a linear regression model for these data and forecast the number of applications
for State University if tuition increases to $9,000 per year and if tuition is lowered to
$7,000 per year.
b. Determine the strength of the linear relationship between freshman applications and tuition
by using correlation.
c. Describe the various planning decisions for State University that would be affected by the
forecast for freshman applications.
PROBLEMS
737

34. Develop a linear trend line model for the freshman applications data at State University in
Problem 33.
a. Does this forecast appear to be more or less accurate than the linear regression forecast
developed in Problem 33 Justify your answer.
b. Compute the correlation coefficient for the linear trend line forecast and explain its meaning.
35. Explain the numerical value of the slope of the linear regression equation in Problem 31.
36. Some members of management of the Fairface Cosmetics Firm believe that demand for its
products is related to the promotional activities of local department stores where the cosmetics
are sold. However, others in management believe that other factors, such as local demograph-
ics, are stronger determinants of demand behavior. The following data for local annual promo-
tional expenditures for Fairface products and local annual unit sales for Fairface lip gloss have
been collected from 20 stores selected at random from different localities:
Annual
Annual Promotional
Store
Unit Sales (1,000s)
Expenditures ($1,000s)
1
3.5
$12.6
2
7.2
15.5
3
3.1
10.8
4
1.6
8.7
5
8.9
20.3
6
5.7
21.9
7
6.3
25.6
8
9.1
14.3
9
10.2
15.1
10
7.3
18.7
11
2.5
9.6
12
4.6
12.7
13
8.1
16.3
14
2.5
8.1
15
3.0
7.5
16
4.8
12.4
17
10.2
17.3
18
5.1
11.2
19
11.3
18.5
20
10.4
16.7
Based on these data, does it appear that the strength of the relationship between sales and pro-
motional expenditures is sufficient to warrant using a linear regression forecasting model?
Explain your response.
37. Employees at Precision Engine Parts Company produce parts according to exact design specifi-
cations. The employees are paid according to a piece-rate system, wherein the faster they work
and the more parts they produce, the greater their chances for monthly bonuses. Management
suspects that this method of pay may contribute to an increased number of defective parts. A
specific part requires a normal, standard time of 23 minutes to produce. The quality control man-
ager has checked the actual average times to produce this part for 10 different employees during
20 days selected at random during the past month and determined the corresponding percentage
of defective parts, as follows:
738
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Average Time (min.)
Defective (%)
Average Time (min.)
Defective (%)
21.6
3.1
20.8
2.7
22.5
4.6
18.9
4.5
23.1
2.7
21.4
2.8
24.6
1.8
23.7
1.9
22.8
3.5
23.8
1.1
23.7
3.2
24.9
1.2
20.9
3.7
19.8
2.3
19.7
4.5
19.7
5.1
24.5
0.8
21.2
3.6
26.7
1.2
20.8
4.2
Develop a linear regression model relating average production time to percentage defects to de-
termine whether a relationship exists and the percentage of defective items that would be ex-
pected with a normal production time of 23 minutes.
38. Apperson and Fitz is a chain of clothing stores that caters to high school and college students. It
publishes a quarterly catalog and operates a Web site that features provocatively attired males
and females. The Web site is very expensive to maintain, and company executives are not sure
whether the number of hits at the site relate to sales (i.e., people may be looking at the site’s pic-
tures only). The Web master has accumulated the following data for hits per month and orders
placed at the Web site for the past 20 months:
Month
Hits (1,000s)
Orders (1,000s)
1
34.2
7.6
2
28.5
6.3
3
36.7
8.9
4
42.3
5.7
5
25.8
5.9
6
52.3
6.3
7
35.2
7.2
8
27.9
4.1
9
31.4
3.7
10
29.4
5.9
11
46.7
10.8
12
43.5
8.7
13
52.6
9.3
14
61.8
6.5
15
37.3
4.8
16
28.9
3.1
17
26.4
6.2
18
39.4
5.9
19
44.7
7.2
20
46.3
5.5
Develop a linear regression model for these data and indicate whether there appears to be a
strong relationship between Web site hits and orders. What would be the forecast for orders with
50,000 hits per month?
PROBLEMS
739

39. The Gametime Hat Company manufactures baseball caps that have various team logos in an as-
sortment of designs and colors. The company has had monthly sales for the past 24 months as
follows:
Month
Demand (1,000s)
1
8.2
2
7.5
3
8.1
4
9.3
5
9.1
6
9.5
7
10.4
8
9.7
9
10.2
10
10.6
11
8.2
12
9.9
13
10.3
14
10.5
15
11.7
16
9.8
17
10.8
18
11.3
19
12.6
20
11.5
21
10.8
22
11.7
23
12.5
24
12.8
Develop a forecast model using the method you believe best and justify your selection by using
a measure (or measures) of forecast accuracy.
40. Infoworks is a large computer discount store that sells computers and ancillary equipment and
software in the town where State University is located. Infoworks has collected historical data
on computer sales and printer sales for the past 10 years, as follows:
Year
Personal Computers Sold
Printers Sold
1
1,045
326
2
1,610
510
3
860
296
4
1,211
478
5
975
305
6
1,117
506
7
1,066
612
8
1,310
560
9
1,517
590
10
1,246
676
740
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

a. Develop a linear trend line forecast to forecast printer demand in year 11.
b. Develop a linear regression model relating printer sales to computer sales in order to forecast
printer demand in year 11 if 1,300 computers are sold.
c. Compare the forecasts developed in (a) and (b) and indicate which one appears to be more
accurate.
41. Develop an exponential smoothing model with a = .30 for the data in Problem 40 to forecast printer
demand in year 11 and compare its accuracy to the linear trend line forecast developed in (a).
42. Arrow Air is a regional East Coast airline that has collected data for the percentage available
seats occupied on its flights for four quarters—(1) January–March, (2) April–June, (3) July–
September, and (4) October–December—for the past 5 years. Arrow Air also has collected data
for the average percentage fare discount for each of these quarters, as follows:
Average 
Seat
Fare Discount
Occupancy
Year
Quarter
(%)
(%)
1
1
63
21
2
75
34
3
76
18
4
58
26
2
1
59
18
2
62
40
3
81
25
4
76
30
3
1
65
23
2
70
28
3
78
30
4
69
35
4
1
59
20
2
61
35
3
83
26
4
71
30
5
1
60
25
2
66
37
3
86
25
4
74
30
a. Develop a seasonally adjusted forecast model for seat occupancy. Forecast seat occupancy
for year 6 by using a linear trend line forecast estimate for seat occupancy in year 6.
b. Develop linear regression models relating seat occupancy to discount fares in order to fore-
cast seat occupancy for each quarter in year 6. Assume a fare discount of 20% for quarter 1,
36% for quarter 2, 25% for quarter 3, and 30% for quarter 4.
c. Compare the forecasts developed in (a) and (b) and indicate which one appears to be
the best.
43. Develop an adjusted exponential smoothing forecast model (a = .40 and b = .40) for the data in
Problem 42 to forecast seat occupancy, and compare its accuracy with the seasonally adjusted
model developed in (a).
PROBLEMS
741

44. The consumer loan department at Central Union Bank and Trust wants to develop a forecasting
model to help determine its potential loan application volume for the coming year. Because 
adjustable-rate home mortgages are based on government long-term treasury note rates, the de-
partment collected the following data for 3- to 5-year treasury note interest rates for the past
24 years:
Year
Rate
Year
Rate
Year
Rate
1
5.77
9
9.71
17
7.68
2
5.85
10
11.55
18
8.26
3
6.92
11
14.44
19
8.55
4
7.82
12
12.92
20
8.26
5
7.49
13
10.45
21
6.80
6
6.67
14
11.89
22
6.12
7
6.69
15
9.64
23
5.48
8
8.29
16
7.06
24
6.09
Develop an appropriate forecast model for the bank to use to forecast treasury note rates in the
future and indicate how accurate it appears to be compared to historical data.
45. The busiest time of the day at the Taco Town fast-food restaurant is between 11:00 A.M. and
2:00 P.M. Taco Town’s service is very labor dependent, and a critical factor for providing quick
service is the number of employees on hand during this 3-hour period. To determine the number
of employees it needs during each hour of the 3-hour lunch period, Taco Town requires an accu-
rate forecasting model. Following are the number of customers served at Taco Town during each
hour of the lunch period for the past 20 weekdays:
Hour
Day
11–12
12–1
1–2
1
90
125
87
2
76
131
93
3
87
112
99
4
83
149
78
5
71
156
83
6
94
178
89
7
56
101
124
8
63
91
66
9
73
146
119
10
101
104
96
11
57
114
106
12
68
125
95
13
75
206
102
14
94
117
118
15
103
145
122
16
67
121
93
17
94
113
76
18
83
166
94
19
79
124
87
20
81
118
115
742
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

Develop a forecast model that you believe will best forecast Taco Town’s customer demand for
the next day and explain why you selected this model.
46. In order to take advantage of the burgeoning public interest in sustainability, Klorax has devel-
oped a nonsynthetic line of natural cleaning products called GreenClean. One of the first sus-
tainable products Klorax introduced was a natural cold-water detergent. The company has now
gathered several years’ worth of sales data for this product in order to develop various forecast
models. The company’s marketing department believes that sales increase when there are sev-
eral major environmental (i.e., “green”) episodes in the national media, such as a government
energy report, an increase in gasoline or energy prices, an oil spill, a pollution episode, a com-
pany getting positive press for undertaking a major green project, etc. Therefore, the marketing
department wants to develop a linear regression forecasting model that relates the number of
green episodes reported monthly in the national media to monthly sales of the detergent. The
marketing department had several staff members go through various media sources for the past
2 years and count the number of major national green episodes reported on, which with monthly
sales, is shown in the following table:
Green
Green
Month
Sales
Episodes
Month
Sales
Episodes
1
34,175
3
13
55,732
7
2
28,366
2
14
26,004
4
3
41,819
4
15
49,188
5
4
27,666
1
16
40,005
2
5
31,299
1
17
38,912
2
6
37,456
4
18
31,777
1
7
52,444
5
19
30,367
0
8
46,712
3
20
34,566
1
9
37,222
2
21
29,078
1
10
44,981
2
22
45,876
3
11
40,006
2
23
48,556
4
12
47,321
4
24
51,022
6
Develop a linear regression model and determine the sales forecast if three green episodes are
reported in the media next month. Discuss the value and usefulness of this type of relational
forecast for Klorax.
47. In Problem 46, one of the new products in the GreenClean line that Klorax is ready to introduce
is an all-purpose cleaner, and Klorax is attempting to forecast what demand might be like 5 years
into the future. However, it has no historical demand data to use to develop a forecast model.
The marketing department has made its own estimate of first-year sales and has acquired esti-
mates for the new cleaner from four other sources—top management, the sales force, a cleaning
products trade association, and an independent marketing firm. Top management estimates first-
year sales to be 34,000 units; the marketing department’s estimate is 47,000 units; the sales force
suggests 41,000 units; the trade association estimates that first-year sales will be 28,000 units;
and the independent marketing firm estimates sales will be 51,000 units. Using these estimates
and the demand data and forecast model for the detergent in Problem 46, develop a forecast for
planning purposes for year 5 for the new cleaner.
PROBLEMS
743

48. The Wellton Fund is a balanced mutual fund that includes a mix of stocks and bonds. Following
are the year-end share prices of the fund and Dow Jones Industrial Average (DJIA) for a 20-year
period:
Year
Share Price
DJIA
1
$14.75
1,046
2
15.06
1,258
3
14.98
1,211
4
15.73
1,546
5
16.11
1,895
6
16.07
1,938
7
16.78
2,168
8
17.69
2,753
9
16.90
2,633
10
17.81
3,168
11
19.08
3,301
12
20.40
3,754
13
19.39
3,834
14
24.43
5,117
15
26.46
6,448
16
29.45
7,908
17
29.35
9,181
18
27.96
11,497
19
28.21
10,786
20
27.26
10,150
Develop a linear regression model for these data and forecast the fund share price for a DJIA of
12,000. Does there appear to be a strong relationship between the fund’s share price and the
DJIA?
49. The Valley United Soccer Club has boys’ and girls’ travel soccer teams at all age levels up to 18
years. The club has been successful and grown in popularity over the years; however, an obstacle
to its continued growth is a shortage of practice and game soccer fields in the area. The club has
tried to make a case to the town council and the parks and recreation committee that it needs more
soccer fields to accommodate the increasing number of kids who want to play on club teams. The
number of kids who have played soccer on club teams and the town’s population for the past 15
years are as follows:
Year
Club Soccer Players
Town Population
1
146
18,060
2
135
18,021
3
159
18,110
4
161
18,125
5
176
18,240
6
190
18,231
7
227
18,306
8
218
18,477
9
235
18,506
10
231
18,583
11
239
18,609
12
251
18,745
13
266
19,003
14
301
19,062
15
327
19,114
744
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

The soccer club wants to develop a forecasting model to demonstrate to the town council its ex-
pected growth in the future.
a. Develop a linear trend line forecast to predict the number of soccer players the club can ex-
pect next year.
b. The town planning department has told the soccer club that the town expects to grow to a
population of 19,300 by next year and to 20,000 in 5 years. Develop a linear regression
model, using the town’s population as a predictor of the number of club soccer players, and
compare this forecasting model to the one developed in part (a). Which forecasting model
should the club use to support its request for new fields?
50. The Port of Savannah is considering an expansion of its container terminal. The port has experi-
enced the following container throughput during the past 12 years, expressed as TEUs (i.e.,
20-foot equivalent units, a standard unit of measure for containers):
Year
TEUs (1,000s)
1
526.1
2
549.4
3
606.0
4
627.0
5
695.7
6
734.9
7
761.1
8
845.4
9
1,021.1
10
1,137.1
11
1,173.6
12
1,233.4
a. Develop a linear trend line forecast for these data and forecast the number of TEUs for
year 13.
b. How strong is the linear relationship for these data?
51. The admission data for freshmen at Tech during the past 10 years are as follows:
Year
Applicants
Offers
% Offers
Acceptances
% Acceptances
1
13,876
11,200
80.7
4,112
36.7
2
14,993
11,622
77.8
4,354
37.3
3
14,842
11,579
78.0
4,755
41.1
4
16,285
13,207
81.1
5,068
38.0
5
16,922
11,382
73.2
4,532
39.8
6
16,109
11,937
74.1
4,655
39.0
7
15,883
11,616
73.1
4,659
40.1
8
18,407
11,539
62.7
4,620
40.0
9
18,838
13,138
69.7
5,054
38.5
10
17,756
11,952
67.3
4,822
40.3
Tech’s admission objective is a class of 5,000 entering freshmen, and Tech wants to forecast
the percentage of offers it will likely have to make in order to achieve this objective.
a. Develop a linear trend line to forecast next year’s applicants and percentage of acceptances
and use these results to estimate the percentage of offers that Tech should expect to make.
b. Develop a linear trend line to forecast the percentage of offers that Tech should expect to make
and compare this result with the result in (a). Which forecast do you think is more accurate?
c. Assume that Tech receives 18,300 applicants in year 11. How many offers do you think it
should make to get 5,000 acceptances?
PROBLEMS
745

52. The State of Virginia has instituted a series of standards of learning (SOL) tests in math, history,
English, and science that all high school students must pass with a grade of 70 before they are
allowed to graduate and receive their diplomas. The school superintendent of Montgomery County
believes the tests are unfair because the test scores are closely related to teacher salary and tenure
(i.e., the years a teacher has been at a school). The superintendent has sampled 12 other county
school systems in the state and accumulated the following data for average teacher salary and aver-
age teacher tenure:
Average
Average
Average
School
SOL Score
Teacher Salary
Teacher Tenure (yr.)
1
81
$34,300
9.3
2
78
28,700
10.1
3
76
26,500
7.6
4
77
36,200
8.2
5
84
35,900
8.8
6
86
32,500
12.7
7
79
31,800
8.4
8
91
38,200
11.5
9
68
27,100
8.3
10
73
31,500
7.3
11
90
37,600
12.3
12
85
40,400
14.2
a. Using Excel or QM for Windows, develop the multiple regression equation for these data.
b. What is the coefficient of determination for this regression equation? Do you think the su-
perintendent is correct in his beliefs?
c. Montgomery County has an average SOL score of 74, with an average teacher salary of
$27,500 and an average teacher tenure of 7.8 years. The superintendent has proposed to the
school board a salary increase that would raise the average salary to $30,000 as well as a
benefits program, with the goal of increasing the average tenure to 9 years. He has suggested
that if the board passes his proposals, then the average SOL score will increase to 80. Is he
correct, according to the forecasting model?
53. Tech administrators believe their freshman applications are influenced by two variables: tuition
and the size of the applicant pool of eligible high school seniors in the state. The following data
for an 8-year period show the tuition rates (per semester) and the sizes of the applicant pool for
each year:
Tuition
Applicant Pool
Applicants
$ 900
76,200
11,060
1,250
78,050
10,900
1,375
67,420
8,670
1,400
70,390
9,050
1,550
62,550
7,400
1,625
59,230
7,100
1,750
57,900
6,300
1,930
60,080
6,100
746
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING

a. Using Excel, develop the multiple regression equation for these data.
b. What is the coefficient of determination for this regression equation?
c. Determine the forecast for freshman applicants for a tuition rate of $1,500 per semester, with
a pool of applicants of 60,000.
54. In Problem 40, Infoworks believes its printer sales are also related to the average price of its
printers. It has collected historical data on average printer prices for the past 10 years, as follows:
Average Printer
Year
Price
1
$475
2
490
3
520
4
420
5
410
6
370
7
350
8
300
9
280
10
250
a. Using Excel, develop the multiple regression equation for these data.
b. What is the coefficient of determination for this regression equation?
c. Determine the forecast for printer sales, based on personal computer sales of 1,500 units and
an average printer price of $300.
55. The manager of the Bayville police department motor pool wants to develop a forecast model
for annual maintenance on police cars, based on mileage in the past year and age of the cars. The
following data have been collected for eight different cars:
Miles
Car
Maintenance
Driven
Age (yr.)
Cost
16,320
7
$1,200
15,100
8
1,400
18,500
8
1,820
10,200
3
900
9,175
3
650
12,770
7
1,150
8,600
2
875
7,900
3
900
a. Using Excel, develop a multiple regression equation for these data.
b. What is the coefficient of determination for this regression equation?
c. Forecast the annual maintenance cost for a police car that is 5 years old and will be driven
10,000 miles in 1 year.
56. The dean of the college of business at Tech has initiated a fund-raising campaign. One of the
selling points he plans to use with potential donors is that increasing the college’s private en-
dowment will improve its ranking among all business schools, as published each year by the
magazine The Global News and Business Report. He would like to demonstrate that there is a
PROBLEMS
747

relationship between funding and the rankings. He has collected the following data, showing
the private endowments ($1,000,000s) and annual budgets ($1,000,000s) from state and pri-
vate sources for eight of Tech’s peer institutions plus Tech, and the ranking of each school:
Private Endowment
Annual Budget
($1,000,000s)
($1,000,000s)
Ranking
$ 2.5
$ 8.1
87
52.0
26.0
20
12.7
7.5
122
63.0
33.0
32
46.0
12.0
54
27.1
16.1
76
23.3
17.0
103
46.4
14.9
40
48.9
21.8
98
a. Using Excel, develop a linear regression model for the amount of the private endowment and
the ranking and forecast a ranking for a private endowment of $70 million. Does there ap-
pear to be a strong relationship between the endowment and the ranking?
b. Using Excel, develop a multiple regression equation for all these data, including private en-
dowment and annual budget, and forecast a ranking for a private endowment of $70 million
and an annual budget of $40 million. How does this forecast compare with the forecast in
part (a)?
748
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
Case Problem
Forecasting at State University
During the past few years, the legislature has severely
reduced funding for State University. In reaction, the ad-
ministration at State has significantly raised tuition each
year for the past 5 years. Perceived as a bargain 5 years ago,
State is now considered one of the more expensive state-
supported universities. This has led some parents and stu-
dents to question the value of a State education, and
applications for admission have declined. Because a portion
of state educational funding is based on a formula tied to
enrollments, State has maintained its enrollment levels by
going deeper into its applicant pool and accepting less-
qualified students.
On top of these problems, a substantial increase in the
college-age population is expected in the next decade. Key
members of the state legislature have told the university
administration that State will be expected to absorb addi-
tional students during the next decade. However, because
of the economic outlook and the budget situation, the uni-
versity should not expect any funding increases for addi-
tional facilities, classrooms, dormitory rooms, or faculty.
The university already has a classroom deficit in excess of
25%, and class sizes are above the averages of the peer in-
stitutions.
The president of the university, Alva McMahon, estab-
lished several task forces consisting of faculty and admin-
istrators to address these problems. These groups made
several wide-ranging general recommendations, including
the implementation of appropriate management practices
and more in-depth, focused planning.
Discuss in general terms how forecasting might be
used for university planning to address these specific prob-
lem areas. Include in your discussion the types of forecast-
ing methods that might be used.

CASE PROBLEM
749
Case Problem
The University Bookstore Student
Computer Purchase Program
The University Bookstore is owned and operated by State
University through an independent corporation with its own
board of directors. The bookstore has three locations on or
near the State University campus. It stocks a range of items,
including textbooks, trade books, logo apparel, drawing and
educational supplies, and computers and related products,
including printers, modems, and software. The bookstore
has a program to sell personal computers to incoming
freshmen and other students at a substantial educational
discount, partly passed on from computer manufacturers.
This means that the bookstore just covers computer costs,
with a very small profit margin remaining.
Each summer all incoming freshmen and their parents
come to the State campus for a 3-day orientation program.
The students come in groups of 100 throughout the summer.
During their visit the students and their parents are given de-
tails about the bookstore’s computer purchase program.
Some students place their computer orders for the fall se-
mester at this time, whereas others wait until later in the
summer. The bookstore also receives orders from returning
students throughout the summer. This program presents a
challenging management problem for the bookstore.
Orders come in throughout the summer, many only a
few weeks before school starts in the fall, and the computer
suppliers require at least 6 weeks for delivery. Thus, the
bookstore must forecast computer demand to build up in-
ventory to meet student demand in the fall. The student
computer program and the forecast of computer demand
have repercussions all along the bookstore supply chain.
The bookstore has a warehouse near campus where it must
store all computers because it has no storage space at its re-
tail locations. Ordering too many computers not only ties
up the bookstore’s cash reserves, it also takes up limited
storage space and limits inventories for other bookstore
products during the bookstore’s busiest sales period. Be-
cause the bookstore has such a low profit margin on com-
puters, its bottom line depends on these other products.
Because competition for good students has increased, the
university has become very quality conscious and insists
that all university facilities provide exemplary student serv-
ice, which for the bookstore means meeting all student de-
mands for computers when fall semester starts. The number
of computers ordered also affects the number of temporary
warehouse and bookstore workers who must be hired for
handling and assisting with PC installations. The number of
truck trips from the warehouse to the bookstore each day of
fall registration is also affected by computer sales.
The bookstore student computer purchase program has
been in place for 14 years. Although the student population
has remained stable during this period, computer sales
have been somewhat volatile. Following are the historical
sales data for computers during the first month of fall reg-
istration:
Year
Computers Sold
Year
Computers Sold
1
518
8
792
2
651
9
877
3
708
10
693
4
921
11
841
5
775
12
1,009
6
810
13
902
7
856
14
1,103
Develop an appropriate forecast model for bookstore
management to use to forecast computer demand for next
fall semester and indicate how accurate it appears to be.
What other forecasts might be useful to the bookstore?
Case Problem
Valley Swim Club
The Valley Swim Club has 300 stockholders, each hold-
ing one share of stock in the club. A share of club stock al-
lows the shareholder’s family to use the club’s heated
outdoor pool during the summer, upon payment of annual
membership dues of $175. The club has not issued any
stock in years, and only a few of the existing shares come
up for sale each year. The board of directors administers
the sale of all stock. When a shareholder wants to sell, he
or she turns the stock in to the board, which sells it to the

750
CHAPTER 15
FORECASTING
person at the top of the waiting list. For the past few years,
the length of the waiting list has remained relatively
steady, at approximately 20 names.
However, during the past winter two events occurred
that have suddenly increased the demand for shares in
the club. The winter was especially severe, and subzero
weather and heavy ice storms caused both the town and the
county pools to buckle and crack. The problems were not
discovered until maintenance crews began to prepare the
pools for the summer, and repairs cannot be completed un-
til the fall. Also during the winter, the manager of the local
country club had an argument with her board of directors
and one night burned down the clubhouse. Although the
pool itself was not damaged, the dressing room facilities,
showers, and snack bar were destroyed. As a result of these
two events, the Valley Swim Club was inundated with ap-
plications to purchase shares. The waiting list suddenly
grew to 250 people as the summer approached.
The board of directors of the swim club had refrained
from issuing new shares in the past because there never was
a very great demand, and the demand that did exist was
usually absorbed within a year by stock turnover. In addi-
tion, the board has a real concern about overcrowding. It
seemed like the present membership was about right, and
there were very few complaints about overcrowding, except
on holidays such as Memorial Day and the Fourth of July.
However, at a recent board meeting, a number of new appli-
cants had attended and asked the board to issue new shares.
In addition, a number of current shareholders suggested
that this might be an opportunity for the club to raise some
capital for needed repairs and to improve some of the exist-
ing facilities. This was tempting to the board. Although it
had set the share price at $500 in the past, the board could
set it at a much higher level now. In addition, an increase in
attendance could create a need for more lifeguards.
Before the board of directors could make a decision on
whether to sell more shares and, if so, how many, the board
members felt they needed more information. Specifically,
they would like a forecast of the average number of people
(family members, guests, etc.) who might attend the pool
each day during the summer, with the current number of
shares.
The board of directors has the following daily atten-
dance records for June through August from the previous
summer; it thinks the figures would provide accurate esti-
mates for the upcoming summer:
M-139
W-380
F-193
Su-399
T-177
Th-238
T-273
Th-367
Sa-378
M-197
W-161
F-224
W-172
F-359
Su-461
T-273
Th-308
Sa-368
Th-275
Sa-463
M-242
W-213
F-256
Su-541
F-337
Su-578
T-177
Th-303
Sa-391
M-235
Sa-402
M-287
W-245
F-262
Su-400
T-218
Su-487
T-247
Th-390
Sa-447
M-224
W-271
M-198
W-356
F-284
Su-399
T-239
Th-259
T-310
Th-322
Sa-417
M-275
W-274
F-232
W-347
F-419
Su-474
T-241
Th-205
Sa-317
Th-393
Sa-516
M-194
W-190
F-361
Su-369
F-421
Su-478
T-207
Th-243
Sa-411
M-361
Sa-595
M-303
W-215
F-277
Su-419
Su-497
T-223
Th-304
Sa-241
M-258
M-341
W-315
F-331
Su-384
T-130
T-291
Th-258
Sa-407
M-246
W-195
Develop a forecasting model to forecast daily demand
during the summer.
Case Problem
Forecasting Airport Passenger Arrivals
Since the terrorist attacks of 9/11 and because of the
ensuing measures to increase airline security, airports
have faced the problem of long waiting lines and waiting
times at security gates. Waiting lines can be as long as
hundreds of yards, and waiting times can sometimes be
hours. In their efforts to reduce waiting lines and times,
or at least to not have them become longer as airline de-
mand increases, airports have analyzed their existing se-
curity systems and sought quantitative solutions. One of
the key components of any effort to operationally im-
prove airport security procedures is forecasting passenger
arrivals at security checkpoints in order to determine how
many security checkpoints and staff are needed. At Berry
International Airport (BEI), security analysts would like
to forecast passenger arrivals for next July, the airport’s
busiest travel month of the year, for the purpose of deter-
mining how many security checkpoints they should staff
during the month so that waiting lines and times will not
be excessively long. Demand for airline travel has gener-
ally been increasing during the past 3 years. There are
two main concourses at BEI, North and South, each serv-
ing different airlines. The following table shows pas-
senger arrivals at the South concourse for 10 days
(selected randomly) in 2-hour segments from 4:00 A.M. to
10:00 P.M. for the month of July for the past 3 years.

CASE PROBLEM
751
Develop a forecast for daily passenger arrivals at the South
concourse at BEI for each time period for July of year 4.
Discuss the various forecast model variations that might be
used to develop this forecast.
Day
4–6 A.M.
6–8 A.M.
8–10 A.M.
10–Noon
Noon–2 P.M.
2–4 P.M.
4–6 P.M.
6–8 P.M.
8–10 P.M.
Year One
1
2400
2700
3200
1400
1700
1800
1600
800
200
2
1900
2500
3100
1600
1800
2000
1800
900
300
3
2300
3100
2500
1500
1500
1800
1900
1100
200
4
2200
3200
3100
2200
1900
2400
2100
1200
400
5
2400
3300
3400
1700
2200
2100
2000
1000
600
6
2600
2800
3500
1500
1700
1900
1500
1100
300
7
1900
2800
3100
1200
1500
2000
1400
900
400
8
2000
2700
2500
1500
2000
2300
1900
1000
200
9
2400
3200
3600
1600
2100
2500
1800
1400
200
10
2600
3300
3100
200
2500
2600
2400
1100
400
Year Two
11
3100
3900
4100
2200
2600
2300
2500
1100
300
12
2800
3400
3900
1900
2100
2500
2000
1200
300
13
2700
3800
4300
2100
2400
2400
2400
1200
400
14
2400
3500
4100
2400
3000
3200
2600
1200
700
15
3300
3700
4000
2600
2600
2700
2900
1000
300
16
3500
4000
3800
2300
2700
3100
3000
900
200
17
2900
4100
3900
2400
3000
3200
2500
1100
500
18
3400
3800
4200
2000
2500
3000
2200
1000
300
19
3600
3600
4000
2300
2600
2800
2600
1200
200
20
3700
3700
4000
2200
2600
2700
2400
1200
200
Year Three
21
4400
4400
4500
2600
3300
3400
3000
1200
400
22
4200
4500
4300
2500
3400
3600
3100
1400
300
23
4500
4500
4700
2700
3400
3500
2900
1200
300
24
4600
4600
4600
2500
3200
3500
2800
1300
300
25
4500
4300
4400
2900
3300
3300
3300
1500
400
26
4200
4300
4500
3000
4000
3400
3000
1500
600
27
4500
4500
5100
3300
4000
3700
3100
1200
300
28
4300
4200
4300
2800
3500
4000
3300
1100
400
29
4900
4100
4200
3100
3600
3900
3400
1400
500
30
4700
4500
4100
3000
4000
3700
3400
1200
500

Inventory Management
752
CHAPTER
16

Inventory analysis is one of the most popular topics in management science. One reason is that
almost all types of business organizations have inventory. Although we tend to think of inven-
tory only in terms of stock on a store shelf, it can take on a variety of forms, such as partially
finished products at different stages of a manufacturing process, raw materials, resources, labor,
or cash. In addition, the purpose of inventory is not always simply to meet customer demand.
For example, companies frequently stock large inventories of raw materials as a hedge against
strikes. Whatever form inventory takes or whatever its purpose, it often represents a significant
cost to a business firm. It is estimated that the average annual cost of manufactured goods inven-
tory in the United States is approximately 30% of the total value of the inventory. Thus, if a com-
pany has $10.0 million worth of products in inventory, the cost of holding the inventory
(including insurance, obsolescence, depreciation, interest, opportunity costs, storage costs, etc.)
would be approximately $3.0 million. If the amount of inventory could be reduced by half to
$5.0 million, then $1.5 million would be saved in inventory costs, a significant cost reduction.
In this chapter we describe the classic economic order quantity models, which represent the
most basic and fundamental form of inventory analysis. These models provide a means for de-
termining how much to order (the order quantity) and when to place an order so that inventory-
related costs are minimized. The underlying assumption of these models is that demand is
known with certainty and is constant. In addition, we will describe models for determining the
order size and reorder points (when to place an order) when demand is uncertain.
Elements of Inventory Management
Inventory is defined as a stock of items kept on hand by an organization to use to meet
customer demand. Virtually every type of organization maintains some form of inventory. A
department store carries inventories of all the retail items it sells; a nursery has inventories of
different plants, trees, and flowers; a rental car agency has inventories of cars; and a major
league baseball team maintains an inventory of players on its minor league teams. Even a fam-
ily household will maintain inventories of food, clothing, medical supplies, personal hygiene
products, and so on.
The Role of Inventory
A company or an organization keeps stocks of inventory for a variety of important reasons. The
most prominent is holding finished goods inventories to meet customer demand for a product, es-
pecially in a retail operation. However, customer demand can also be in the form of a secretary
going to a storage closet to get a printer cartridge or paper, or a carpenter getting a board or nail
from a storage shed. A level of inventory is normally maintained that will meet anticipated or ex-
pected customer demand. However, because demand is usually not known with certainty, addi-
tional amounts of inventory, called safety, or buffer, stocks, are often kept on hand to meet
unexpected variations in excess of expected demand.
Additional stocks of inventories are sometimes built up to meet seasonal or cyclical 
demand. Companies will produce items when demand is low to meet high seasonal demand for
which their production capacity is insufficient. For example, toy manufacturers produce large
inventories during the summer and fall to meet anticipated demand during the Christmas season.
Doing so enables them to maintain a relatively smooth production flow throughout the year.
They would not normally have the production capacity or logistical support to produce enough
to meet all of the Christmas demand during that season. Correspondingly, retailers might find it
necessary to keep large stocks of inventory on their shelves to meet peak seasonal demand, such
as at Christmas, or for display purposes to attract buyers.
A company will often purchase large amounts of inventory to take advantage of price dis-
counts, as a hedge against anticipated future price increases, or because it can get a lower price
by purchasing in volume. For example, Walmart has long been known to purchase an entire
manufacturer’s stock of soap powder or other retail items because it can get a very low price,
ELEMENTS OF INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
753
Safety stocks are
additional inventory
to compensate for
demand uncertainty.
Inventory is a stock of
items kept on hand to
meet demand.

754
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Inventory costs include
carrying, ordering,
and shortage costs.
Dependent demand
items are used
internally to produce 
a final product.
Independent demand
items are final
products demanded
by an external
customer.
Carrying costs are the
costs of holding
inventory in storage.
which it subsequently passes on to its customers. Companies will often purchase large stocks of
items when a supplier liquidates to get a low price. In some cases, large orders will be made sim-
ply because the cost of an order may be very high, and it is more cost-effective to have higher
inventories than to make a lot of orders.
Many companies find it necessary to maintain in-process inventories at different stages in a
manufacturing process to provide independence between operations and to avoid work stop-
pages or delays. Inventories of raw materials and purchased parts are kept on hand so that the
production process will not be delayed as a result of missed or late deliveries or shortages from
a supplier. Work-in-process inventories are kept between stages in the manufacturing process so
that production can continue smoothly if there are temporary machine breakdowns or other work
stoppages. Similarly, a stock of finished parts or products allows customer demand to be met in
the event of a work stoppage or problem with the production process.
Demand
A crucial component and the basic starting point for the management of inventory is customer
demand. Inventory exists for the purpose of meeting the demand of customers. Customers can
be inside the organization, such as a machine operator waiting for a part or a partially completed
product to work on, or outside the organization, such as an individual purchasing groceries or a
new stereo. As such, an essential determinant of effective inventory management is an accurate
forecast of demand. For this reason the topics of forecasting (Chapter 15) and inventory man-
agement are directly interrelated.
In general, the demand for items in inventory is classified as dependent or independent.
Dependent demand items are typically component parts, or materials, used in the process of
producing a final product. For example, if an automobile company plans to produce 1,000 new
cars, it will need 5,000 wheels and tires (including spares). In this case the demand for wheels is
dependent on the production of cars; that is, the demand for one item is a function of demand
for another item.
Alternatively, cars are an example of an independent demand item. In general, independ-
ent demand items are final or finished products that are not a function of, or dependent upon, in-
ternal production activity. Independent demand is usually external, and, thus, beyond the direct
control of the organization. In this chapter we will focus on the management of inventory for 
independent demand items.
Inventory Costs
There are three basic costs associated with inventory: carrying (or holding) costs, ordering costs,
and shortage costs. Carrying costs are the costs of holding items in storage. These vary with the
level of inventory and occasionally with the length of time an item is held; that is, the greater 
the level of inventory over time, the higher the carrying cost(s). Carrying costs can include the
cost of losing the use of funds tied up in inventory; direct storage costs, such as rent, heating,
cooling, lighting, security, refrigeration, record keeping, and logistics; interest on loans used to
purchase inventory; depreciation; obsolescence as markets for products in inventory diminish;
product deterioration and spoilage; breakage; taxes; and pilferage.
Carrying costs are normally specified in one of two ways. The most general form is to assign
total carrying costs, determined by summing all the individual costs mentioned previously, on a
per-unit basis per time period, such as a month or a year. In this form, carrying costs would com-
monly be expressed as a per-unit dollar amount on an annual basis (for example, $10 per year). Al-
ternatively, carrying costs are sometimes expressed as a percentage of the value of an item or as a
percentage of average inventory value. It is generally estimated that carrying costs range from 10%
to 40% of the value of a manufactured item.
Ordering costs are the costs associated with replenishing the stock of inventory being
held. These are normally expressed as a dollar amount per order and are independent of the
order size. Thus, ordering costs vary with the number of orders made (i.e., as the number of
Ordering costs are the
cost of replenishing
inventory.

orders increases, the ordering cost increases). Costs incurred each time an order is made can
include requisition costs, purchase orders, transportation and shipping, receiving, inspection,
handling and placing in storage, and accounting and auditing.
Ordering costs generally react inversely to carrying costs. As the size of orders increases,
fewer orders are required, thus reducing annual ordering costs. However, ordering larger
ELEMENTS OF INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
755
Management Science Application
Evaluating Inventory Costs at Hewlett-Packard
Hewlett-Packard, with annual revenues exceeding $90 billion
and 150,000 employees worldwide, is the Fortune 500 11th-
ranked company. Although demand for PCs increased by five-
fold in the 1990s, becoming a veritable household product,
many PC companies struggled to remain profitable. By the
end of the 1990s HP was struggling to make a profit in the
increasingly competitive global PC market because of 
price cuts throughout the decade. Because prices were not
really controllable, inventory costs became especially critical
in the PC profit equation. Rapid technological advancements
render new PC products obsolete in a few months, and, in
general, it’s believed that the value of a PC decreases at the
rate of 1% per week. Consequently, holding any excess 
inventory is very costly.
In the late 1990s, to return its PC business to more sus-
tainable profitability, HP undertook an extensive evaluation of
its inventory costs. It discovered that inventory-related costs
were the main determinants of overall PC cost, and, in fact, in
1 year alone inventory-related costs equaled the PC business’s
total operating margin. Further, HP determined that the tradi-
tional inventory carrying (or holding) costs (which encompass
capital costs plus storage, taxes, insurance, breakage, etc.) ac-
counted for less than 10% of the total inventory-related costs.
HP identified four additional inventory costs in their PC busi-
ness that were a major factor in overall supply chain costs. The
single biggest inventory cost was determined to be the “com-
ponent devaluation cost.” This is the penalty cost HP incurred
when the price dropped for excess components and parts (for
example, CPUs, memory, and chips) being held in inventory.
HP held inventories of parts and components in factories, in
distribution centers, and in transit and incurred a devaluation
cost at all these points in its supply chain whenever a price re-
duction occurred. Another inventory cost is the “price protec-
tion cost,” which occurs when the retail price of a product
drops after it has already been shipped to the sales outlet. HP
had to reimburse its sales partners for the difference in price
for any unsold units so its partners wouldn’t incur a loss. Given
how fast PC products lose their value, excess inventory can re-
sult in large protection costs. A third inventory-related cost in
the PC business is the “product return cost.” This is the cost
of a full refund HP paid its distributors when unsold products
were returned; essentially it is a 100% price protection cost.
In some cases sales partners and distributors returned excess
unsold inventory valued at more than 10% of a product’s rev-
enue. The fourth inventory cost is “obsolescence cost,” which
is the cost of writing-off unsold products in inventory after the
life of the product ends. Because PC products’ life cycles are
so short, there is the potential for large costs if excessive in-
ventories are held. Related costs include price discounts for
products that are about to be discontinued and the marketing
costs to quickly reduce inventory. The Mobile Computing Divi-
sion (which manufactures notebooks) was the first HP PC busi-
ness unit to focus on all these inventory-related costs in
redesigning its supply chain. The original supply chain con-
sisted of a central manufacturing facility with local product
configuration occurring at regional sites. (In this configuration
about 40% of the total supply chain cost was related to inven-
tory.) In the redesigned supply chain there is a central manu-
facturing facility, and products are air freighted directly to
customers around the world. Positive results were immediate;
in a 2-year period inventory-related costs dropped from almost
19% of total revenue to less than 4%, and the notebook divi-
sion became profitable. As a result, all other HP PC operations
began using these inventory costs to evaluate and redesign
their supply chains.
Source: Based on “Inventory Driven Costs,” by G. Callioni, X. de
Montgros, R. Slagmulder, L. N. Van Wassenove, and L. Wright. 
Harvard Business Review, March 2005.
HANDOUT/Newscom

amounts results in higher inventory levels and higher carrying costs. In general, as the order size
increases, annual ordering costs decrease and annual carrying costs increase.
Shortage costs, also referred to as stockout costs, occur when customer demand cannot be
met because of insufficient inventory on hand. If these shortages result in a permanent loss of
sales for items demanded but not provided, shortage costs include the loss of profits. Shortages
can also cause customer dissatisfaction and a loss of goodwill that can result in a permanent loss
of customers and future sales. In some instances the inability to meet customer demand or late-
ness in meeting demand results in specified penalties in the form of price discounts or rebates.
When demand is internal, a shortage can cause work stoppages in the production process and
create delays, resulting in downtime costs and the cost of lost production (including indirect and
direct production costs).
Costs resulting from immediate or future lost sales because demand could not be met are
more difficult to determine than carrying or ordering costs. As a result, shortage costs are fre-
quently subjective estimates and many times no more than educated guesses.
Shortages occur because it is costly to carry inventory in stock. As a result, shortage costs
have an inverse relationship to carrying costs; as the amount of inventory on hand increases, the
carrying cost increases, while shortage costs decrease.
The objective of inventory management is to employ an inventory control system that will
indicate how much should be ordered and when orders should take place to minimize the sum of
the three inventory costs described here. 
Inventory Control Systems
An inventory system is a structure for controlling the level of inventory by determining how
much to order (the level of replenishment) and when to order. There are two basic types of 
inventory systems: a continuous (or fixed–order quantity) system and a periodic (or fixed–time
period) system. The primary difference between the two systems is that in a continuous system,
an order is placed for the same constant amount whenever the inventory on hand decreases to 
a certain level, whereas in a periodic system, an order is placed for a variable amount after an
established passage of time.
Continuous Inventory Systems
In a continuous inventory system, alternatively referred to as a perpetual system or a fixed–order
quantity system, a continual record of the inventory level for every item is maintained. When-
ever the inventory on hand decreases to a predetermined level, referred to as the reorder point, a
new order is placed to replenish the stock of inventory. The order that is placed is for a “fixed”
amount that minimizes the total inventory carrying, ordering, and shortage costs. This fixed or-
der quantity is called the economic order quantity; its determination will be discussed in greater
detail in a later section.
A positive feature of a continuous system is that the inventory level is closely and 
continuously monitored so that management always knows the inventory status. This is espe-
cially advantageous for critical inventory items such as replacement parts or raw materials and
supplies. However, the cost of maintaining a continual record of the amount of inventory on
hand can also be a disadvantage of this type of system.
A simple example of a continuous inventory system is a ledger-style checkbook that many of
us use on a daily basis. Our checkbook comes with 300 checks; after the 200th check has been used
(and there are 100 left), there is an order form for a new batch of checks that has been inserted by
the printer. This form, when turned in at the bank, initiates an order for a new batch of 300 checks
from the printer. Many office inventory systems use “reorder” cards that are placed within stacks of
stationery or at the bottom of a case of pens or paper clips to signal when a new order should be
placed. If you look behind the items on a hanging rack in a Kmart store, you will see a card indicat-
ing that it is time to place an order for this item, for an amount indicated on the card.
756
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
In a continuous
inventory system, a
constant amount is
ordered when
inventory declines to
a predetermined level.
The purpose of
inventory
management is to
determine how much
and when to order.
Shortage costs are
incurred when
customer demand
cannot be met.

A more sophisticated example of a continuous inventory system is a computerized checkout
system with a laser scanner, used by many supermarkets and retail stores. In this system a laser
scanner reads the Universal Product Code (UPC), or bar code, off the product package, and the
transaction is instantly recorded and the inventory level updated. Such a system is not only quick
and accurate, but it also provides management with continuously updated information on the
status of inventory levels. Although not as publicly visible as supermarket systems, many manu-
facturing companies, suppliers, and distributors also use bar code systems and handheld laser
scanners to inventory materials, supplies, equipment, in-process parts, and finished goods.
Because continuous inventory systems are much more common than periodic systems,
models that determine fixed order quantities and the time to order will receive most of our atten-
tion in this chapter.
Periodic Inventory Systems
In a periodic inventory system, also referred to as a fixed–time period system or periodic
review system, the inventory on hand is counted at specific time intervals—for example, every
week or at the end of each month. After the amount of inventory in stock is determined, an or-
der is placed for an amount that will bring inventory back up to a desired level. In this system
the inventory level is not monitored at all during the time interval between orders, so it has
the advantage of requiring little or no record keeping. However, it has the disadvantage of less
direct control. This typically results in larger inventory levels for a periodic inventory system
than in a continuous system, to guard against unexpected stockouts early in the fixed period.
Such a system also requires that a new order quantity be determined each time a periodic 
order is made.
Periodic inventory systems are often found at a college or university bookstore. Text-
books are normally ordered according to a periodic system, wherein a count of textbooks
in stock (for every course) is made after the first few weeks or month during the semester
or quarter. An order for new textbooks for the next semester is then made according to esti-
mated course enrollments for the next term (i.e., demand) and the number remaining in
stock. Smaller retail stores, drugstores, grocery stores, and offices often use periodic sys-
tems; the stock level is checked every week or month, often by a vendor, to see how much
(if anything) should be ordered.
Economic Order Quantity Models
You will recall that in a continuous or fixed–order quantity system, when inventory reaches a
specific level, referred to as the reorder point, a fixed amount is ordered. The most widely used
and traditional means for determining how much to order in a continuous system is the
economic order quantity (EOQ) model, also referred to as the economic lot size model.
The function of the EOQ model is to determine the optimal order size that minimizes total
inventory costs. There are several variations of the EOQ model, depending on the assumptions
made about the inventory system. In this and following sections we will describe three model
versions: the basic EOQ model, the EOQ model with noninstantaneous receipt, and the EOQ
model with shortages.
ECONOMIC ORDER QUANTITY MODELS
757
In a periodic
inventory system, an
order is placed for a
variable amount after
a fixed passage 
of time.
The earliest published derivation of the classic economic lot
size model is credited to Ford Harris of Westinghouse Corpora-
tion in 1915. His equation determined a minimum sum of
inventory costs and setup costs, given demand that was known
and constant and a rate of production that was assumed to be
higher than demand.
Time Out
for Ford Harris
EOQ is a continuous
inventory system.

The Basic EOQ Model
The simplest form of the economic order quantity model on which all other model versions are
based is called the basic EOQ model. It is essentially a single formula for determining the opti-
mal order size that minimizes the sum of carrying costs and ordering costs. The model formula
is derived under a set of simplifying and restrictive assumptions, as follows:
 Demand is known with certainty and is relatively constant over time.
 No shortages are allowed.
 Lead time for the receipt of orders is constant.
 The order quantity is received all at once.
The graph in Figure 16.1 reflects these basic model assumptions.
758
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Lead
time
Order
placed
0
Order
quantity, Q
Reorder
point, R
Inventory level
Order
received
Time
Demand
rate
Lead
time
Order
placed
Order
received
FIGURE 16.1
The inventory 
order cycle
Assumptions of the
EOQ model include
constant demand, no
shortages, constant
lead time, and
instantaneous order
receipt.
EOQ is the optimal
order quantity that
will minimize total
inventory costs.
Figure 16.1 describes the continuous inventory order cycle system inherent in the EOQ
model. An order quantity, Q, is received and is used up over time at a constant rate. When the in-
ventory level decreases to the reorder point, R, a new order is placed, and a period of time, re-
ferred to as the lead time, is required for delivery. The order is received all at once, just at the
moment when demand depletes the entire stock of inventory (and the inventory level reaches
zero), thus allowing no shortages. This cycle is continuously repeated for the same order quan-
tity, reorder point, and lead time.
As we mentioned earlier, Q is the order size that minimizes the sum of carrying costs and
holding costs. These two costs react inversely to each other in response to an increase in the or-
der size. As the order size increases, fewer orders are required, causing the ordering cost to de-
cline, whereas the average amount of inventory on hand increases, resulting in an increase in
carrying costs. Thus, in effect, the optimal order quantity represents a compromise between
these two conflicting costs.
Carrying Cost
Carrying cost is usually expressed on a per-unit basis for some period of time (although it is
sometimes given as a percentage of average inventory). Traditionally, the carrying cost is re-
ferred to on an annual basis (i.e., per year).
The total carrying cost is determined by the amount of inventory on hand during the year.
The amount of inventory available during the year is illustrated in Figure 16.2.
In Figure 16.2, Q represents the size of the order needed to replenish inventory, which is
what a manager wants to determine. The line connecting Q to time, t, in our graph represents the
rate at which inventory is depleted, or demand, during the time period, t. Demand is assumed to
be known with certainty and is thus constant, which explains why the line representing demand

is straight. Also, notice that inventory never goes below zero; shortages do not exist. In addition,
when the inventory level does reach zero, it is assumed that an order arrives immediately after
an infinitely small passage of time, a condition referred to as instantaneous receipt. This is a
simplifying assumption that we will maintain for the moment.
Referring to Figure 16.2, we can see that the amount of inventory is Q, the size of the order,
for an infinitely small period of time because Q is always being depleted by demand. Similarly,
the amount of inventory is zero for an infinitely small period of time because the only time there
is no inventory is at the specific time t. Thus, the amount of inventory available is somewhere
between these two extremes. A logical deduction is that the amount of inventory available is 
the average inventory level, defined as
average inventory
To verify this relationship, we can specify any number of points—values of Q—over the
entire time period, t, and divide by the number of points. For example, if Q = 5,000, the six
points designated from 5,000 to 0, as shown in Figure 16.3, are summed and divided by 6:
average inventory
= 2,500
= 5,000 + 4,000 + 3,000 + 2,000 + 1,000 + 0
6
= Q
2
THE BASIC EOQ MODEL
759
Instantaneous receipt
means inventory is
received almost
immediately after it is
ordered.
Order
size, Q
t
2t
Time
Reorder
Inventory level
0
FIGURE 16.2
Inventory usage
t
0
Time
Inventory levels, Q
5,000
4,000
3,000
2,000
1,000
FIGURE 16.3
Levels of Q
Alternatively, we can sum just the two extreme points (which also encompass the range of
time, t) and divide by 2. This also equals 2,500. This computation is the same, in principle, as
adding Q and 0 and dividing by 2, which equals Q/2. This relationship for average inventory is
maintained, regardless of the size of the order, Q, or the frequency of orders (i.e., the time
period, t). Thus, the average inventory on an annual basis is also Q/2, as shown in Figure 16.4.

760
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 16.5
The EOQ cost
model
Q
t
2t
Time
Inventory level
Q/2
0
FIGURE 16.4
Annual average 
inventory
Slope = 0 
Minimum
total cost
Annual
cost ($)
Total cost
Optimal order,
Qopt
Order quantity, Q
Carrying cost = Cc
Ordering cost = CoD
Q
Q
2
Now that we know that the amount of inventory available on an annual basis is the average
inventory, Q/2, we can determine the total annual carrying cost by multiplying the average num-
ber of units in inventory by the carrying cost per unit per year,
annual carrying cost
Ordering Cost
The total annual ordering cost is computed by multiplying the cost per order, designated as 
by the number of orders per year. Because annual demand is assumed to be known and constant,
the number of orders will be D/Q, where Q is the order size:
annual ordering cost
The only variable in this equation is Q; both 
and D are constant parameters. In other words,
demand is known with certainty. Thus, the relative magnitude of the ordering cost is dependent
upon the order size.
Total Inventory Cost
The total annual inventory cost is simply the sum of the ordering and carrying costs:
These cost functions are shown in Figure 16.5. Notice the inverse relationship between ordering
cost and carrying cost, resulting in a convex total cost curve.
TC = Co
D
Q + Cc
Q
2
Co
= Co
D
Q
Co,
= Cc
Q
2
Cc:

Observe the general upward trend of the total carrying cost curve. As the order size Q
(shown on the horizontal axis) increases, the total carrying cost (shown on the vertical axis)
increases. This is logical because larger orders will result in more units carried in inventory.
Next, observe the ordering cost curve in Figure 16.5. As the order size, Q, increases, the order-
ing cost decreases (just the opposite of what occurred with the carrying cost). This is logical,
because an increase in the size of the orders will result in fewer orders being placed each year.
Because one cost increases as the other decreases, the result of summing the two costs is a
convex total cost curve.
The optimal order quantity occurs at the point in Figure 16.5 where the total cost curve is at
a minimum, which also coincides exactly with the point where the ordering cost curve intersects
with the carrying cost curve. This enables us to determine the optimal value of Q by equating
the two cost functions and solving for Q, as follows:
Alternatively, the optimal value of Q can be determined by differentiating the total cost curve
with respect to Q, setting the resulting function equal to zero (the slope at the minimum point on
the total cost curve), and solving for Q, as follows:
The total minimum cost is determined by substituting the value for the optimal order size,
into the total cost equation:
We will use the following example to demonstrate how the optimal value of Q is computed. The
I-75 Carpet Discount Store in north Georgia stocks carpet in its warehouse and sells it through
an adjoining showroom. The store keeps several brands and styles of carpet in stock; however,
its biggest seller is Super Shag carpet. The store wants to determine the optimal order size and
total inventory cost for this brand of carpet, given an estimated annual demand of 10,000 yards
of carpet, an annual carrying cost of $0.75 per yard, and an ordering cost of $150. The store
would also like to know the number of orders that will be made annually and the time between
orders (i.e., the order cycle), given that the store is open every day except Sunday, Thanksgiving
Day, and Christmas Day (that is not on a Sunday).
We can summarize the model parameters as follows:
D = 10,000 yd.
Co = +150
Cc = +0.75
TCmin = Co
D
Qopt
+ Co
Qopt
2
Qopt,
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
0 = - CoD
Q2
+ Cc
2
dTC
dQ = - CoD
Q2
+ Cc
2
TC = Co
D
Q + Cc
Q
2
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
Q2 = 2CoD
Cc
Co
D
Q = Cc
Q
2
THE BASIC EOQ MODEL
761
The optimal value of
Q corresponds to the
lowest point on the
total cost curve.

The optimal order size is computed as follows:
The total annual inventory cost is determined by substituting 
into the total cost formula,
as follows:
The number of orders per year is computed as follows:
number of orders per year
Given that the store is open 311 days annually (365 days minus 52 Sundays, plus Thanksgiving
and Christmas), the order cycle is determined as follows:
order cycle time
store days
It should be noted that the optimal order quantity determined in this example, and in general, is an
approximate value because it is based on estimates of carrying and ordering costs as well as uncer-
tain demand (although all these parameters are treated as known, certain values in the EOQ model).
Thus, in practice it is acceptable to round off the Q values to the nearest whole number. The preci-
sion of a decimal place generally is neither necessary nor appropriate. In addition, because the opti-
mal order quantity is computed from a square root, errors or variations in the cost parameters and
demand tend to be dampened. For instance, if the order cost had actually been a third higher, or
$200, the resulting optimal order size would have varied by about 15% (i.e., 2,390 yards instead of
2,000 yards). In addition, variations in both inventory costs will tend to offset each other because
they have an inverse relationship. As a result, the EOQ model is relatively robust, or resilient to
errors in the cost estimates and demand, which has tended to enhance its popularity.
EOQ Analysis Over Time
One aspect of inventory analysis that can be confusing is the time frame encompassed by the
analysis. Therefore, we will digress for just a moment to discuss this aspect of EOQ analysis.
Recall that previously we developed the EOQ model “regardless of order size, Q, and time, t.”
Now we will verify this condition. We will do so by developing our EOQ model on a monthly
basis. First, demand is equal to 833.3 yards per month (which we determined by dividing the
annual demand of 10,000 yards by 12 months). Next, by dividing the annual carrying cost,
of
$0.75 by 12, we get the monthly (per-unit) carrying cost:
(The ordering cost of
$150 is not related to time.) We thus have the values
Co = +150 per order
Cc = +0.0625 per yd. per month
D = 833.3 yd. per month
Cc = +0.0625.
Cc,
= 311 days
D>Qopt
= 311
5
= 62.2
=
D
Qopt
= 10,000
2,000 = 5
TCmin = +1,500
= +750 + 750
= (150)10,000
2,000 + (0.75) (2,000)
2
TCmin = Co
D
Qopt
+ Cc
Qopt
2
Qopt
Qopt = 2,000 yd.
= A
2(150)(10,000)
(0.75)
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
762
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The EOQ model is
robust; because Q is a
square root, errors in
the estimation of
and 
are
dampened.
Co
D, Cc,

which we can substitute into our EOQ formula:
This is the same optimal order size that we determined on an annual basis. Now we will
compute total monthly inventory cost:
To convert this monthly total cost to an annual cost, we multiply it by 12 (months):
This brief example demonstrates that regardless of the time period encompassed by EOQ
analysis, the economic order quantity
is the same.
The EOQ Model with Noninstantaneous Receipt
A variation of the basic EOQ model is achieved when the assumption that orders are received
all at once is relaxed. This version of the EOQ model is known as the noninstantaneous receipt
model, also referred to as the gradual usage, or production lot size, model. In this EOQ varia-
tion, the order quantity is received gradually over time and the inventory level is depleted at the
same time it is being replenished. This is a situation most commonly found when the inventory
user is also the producer, as, for example, in a manufacturing operation where a part is produced
to use in a larger assembly. This situation can also occur when orders are delivered gradually
over time or the retailer and producer of a product are one and the same. The noninstantaneous
receipt model is illustrated graphically in Figure 16.6, which highlights the difference between
this variation and the basic EOQ model.
(Qopt)
total annual inventory cost = (+125)(12) = +1,500
= +125 per month
= (+0.0625) (2,000)
2
+ (+150) (833.3)
(2,000)
 total monthly inventory cost = Cc
Qopt
2
+ Co
D
Qopt
= A
2(150)(833.3)
(0.0625)
= 2,000 yd.
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
THE EOQ MODEL WITH NONINSTANTANEOUS RECEIPT
763
Begin
order
receipt
End
order
receipt
Order
receipt
period
0
Maximum
inventory level
Average
inventory level
Inventory level
Time
Inventory
depleted
Inventory
replenished
Q
—2 (1 –    )
Q (1 –    )
d—p
d—p
FIGURE 16.6
The EOQ model
with noninstanta-
neous order
receipt
The noninstantaneous
receipt model relaxes
the assumption that
Q is received all
at once.

The ordering cost component of the basic EOQ model does not change as a result of the
gradual replenishment of the inventory level because it is dependent only on the number of an-
nual orders. However, the carrying cost component is not the same for this model variation be-
cause average inventory is different. In the basic EOQ model, average inventory was half the
maximum inventory level, or Q/2, but in this variation, the maximum inventory level is not sim-
ply Q; it is an amount somewhat lower than Q, adjusted for the fact that the order quantity is de-
pleted during the order receipt period.
To determine the average inventory level, we define the following parameters that are
unique to this model:
daily rate at which the order is received over time, also known as the production rate
the daily rate at which inventory is demanded
The demand rate cannot exceed the production rate because we are still assuming that no 
shortages are possible, and if 
then there is no order size because items are used as fast as
they are produced. Thus, for this model, the production rate must exceed the demand rate, or
Figure 16.6 shows that the time required to receive an order is the order quantity divided
by the rate at which the order is received, or Q/p. For example, if the order size is 100 units and
the production rate, p, is 20 units per day, the order will be received in 5 days. The amount of
inventory that will be depleted or used up during this time period is determined by multiplying
by the demand rate, or (Q/p)d. For example, if it takes 5 days to receive the order and during
this time inventory is depleted at the rate of 2 units per day, then a total of 10 units is used. As a
result, the maximum amount of inventory that is on hand is the order size minus the amount
depleted during the receipt period, computed as follows and shown earlier in Figure 16.6:
maximum inventory level
Because this is the maximum inventory level, the average inventory level is determined by di-
viding this amount by 2, as follows:
average inventory level
The total carrying cost, using this function for average inventory, is
total carrying cost
Thus, the total annual inventory cost is determined according to the following formula:
The total inventory cost is a function of two other costs, just as in our previous EOQ model.
Thus, the minimum inventory cost occurs when the total cost curve is lowest and where the 
TC = Co
D
Q + Cc
Q
2 a1 - d
p b
= Cc
Q
2 a1 - d
p b
= Q
2 a1 - d
p b
= 1
2 C Qa1 - d
p b S
= Qa1 - d
p b
= Q - Q
p d
p 7 d.
d = p,
d =
p =
764
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

carrying cost curve and ordering cost curve intersect (see Figure 16.5). Therefore, to find optimal
we equate total carrying cost with total ordering cost:
For our previous example we will now assume that the I-75 Carpet Discount Store has its
own manufacturing facility, in which it produces Super Shag carpet. We will further assume that
the ordering cost,
is the cost of setting up the production process to make Super Shag carpet.
Recall that 
per yard and 
yards per year. The manufacturing facility op-
erates the same days the store is open (i.e., 311 days) and produces 150 yards of the carpet per
day. The optimal order size, the total inventory cost, the length of time to receive an order, the
number of orders per year, and the maximum inventory level are computed as follows:
The optimal order size is determined as follows:
This value is substituted into the following formula to determine total minimum annual inven-
tory cost:
The length of time to receive an order for this type of manufacturing operation is commonly
called the length of the production run. It is computed as follows:
production run length = Q
p = 2,256.8
150
= 15.05 days
= +1,329
= (150) (10,000)
(2,256.8) + (0.75)(2,256.8)
2
a1 - 32.2
150 b
TC min = Co
D
Q + Cc
Q
2 a1 - d
p b
Qopt = 2,256.8 yd.
=
Q
2(150)(10,000)
0.75a1 - 32.2
150 b
Qopt =
Q
2CoD
Cca1 - d
p b
p = 150 yd. per day
d = 10,000
311
= 32.2 yd. per day
D = 10,000 yd.
Cc = +0.75 per unit
Co = +150
D = 10,000
Cc = +0.75
Co,
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc(1 - d>p)
Cc
Q2
2 a1 - d
p b = CoD
Cc
Q
2 a1 - d
p b = Co
D
Q
Qopt,
THE EOQ MODEL WITH NONINSTANTANEOUS RECEIPT
765

The number of orders per year is actually the number of production runs that will be made, com-
puted as follows:
number of production runs
Finally, the maximum inventory level is computed as follows:
maximum inventory level
The EOQ Model with Shortages
One of the assumptions of our basic EOQ model is that shortages and back ordering are not al-
lowed. The third model variation that we will describe, the EOQ model with shortages, relaxes
this assumption. However, it will be assumed that all demand not met because of inventory
shortage can be back-ordered and delivered to the customer later. Thus, all demand is eventually
met. The EOQ model with shortages is illustrated in Figure 16.7.
= 1,755 yd.
= 2,256.8a1 - 32.2
150 b
= Qa1 - d
p b
= 4.43 runs
= 10,000
2,256.8
= D
Q
766
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The EOQ model with
shortages relaxes the
assumption that
shortages cannot
exist.
t
0
Inventory level
Time
t1
Q – S
S
Q
t2
FIGURE 16.7
The EOQ model
with shortages
Because back-ordered demand, or shortages, S, are filled when inventory is replenished, the
maximum inventory level does not reach Q, but instead a level equal to 
It can be seen
from Figure 16.7 that the amount of inventory on hand 
decreases as the amount of the
shortage increases, and vice versa. Therefore, the cost associated with shortages, which we de-
scribed earlier in this chapter as primarily the cost of lost sales and lost customer goodwill, has
an inverse relationship to carrying costs. As the order size, Q, increases, the carrying cost in-
creases and the shortage cost declines. This relationship between carrying and shortage cost as
well as ordering cost is shown in Figure 16.8.
We will forgo the lengthy derivation of the individual cost components of the EOQ model
with shortages, which requires the application of plane geometry to the graph in Figure 16.8.
(Q - S)
Q - S.

The individual cost functions are provided as follows, where S equals the shortage level and Cs
equals the annual per-unit cost of shortages:
total shortage cost
total carrying cost
total ordering cost
Combining these individual cost components results in the total inventory cost formula:
You will notice in Figure 16.8 that the three cost component curves do not intersect at a
common point, as was the case in the basic EOQ model. As a result, the only way to determine
the optimal order size and the optimal shortage level, S, is to differentiate the total cost function
with respect to Q and S, set the two resulting equations equal to zero, and solve them simultane-
ously. Doing so results in the following formulas for the optimal order quantity and shortage
level:
For example, we will now assume that the I-75 Carpet Discount Store allows shortages and
the shortage cost,
is $2 per yard per year. All other costs and demand remain the same
(
and 
yd.). The optimal order size and shortage level and
total minimum annual inventory cost are computed as follows:
D = 10,000 yd.
Cs = +2 per yd.
Cc = +0.75 per yd.
Co = +150
D = 10,000
Cc = +0.75, Co = +150,
Cs,
Sopt = Qopta
Cc
Cc + Cs
b
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
a Cs + Cc
Cs
b
TC = Cs
S2
2Q + Cc
(Q - S)2
2Q
+ Co
D
Q
= Co
D
Q
= Cc
(Q - S)2
2Q
= Cs
S2
2Q
THE EOQ MODEL WITH SHORTAGES
767
FIGURE 16.8
Cost model with
shortages
$
Q
Cost
0
Total cost
Shortage cost
Ordering cost
Minimum
cost
Slope = 0
Carrying cost
Qopt

Several additional parameters of the EOQ model with shortages can be computed for this example,
as follows:
number of orders
orders per year
maximum inventory level
The time between orders, identified as t in Figure 16.7, is computed as follows:
The time during which inventory is on hand,
in Figure 16.7, and the time during which
there is a shortage,
in Figure 16.7, during each order cycle can be computed using the follow-
ing formulas:
= 0.064 year, or 19.9 days
= 639.6
10,000
t2 = S
D
= 0.171 year, or 53.2 days
= 2,345.2 - 639.6
10,000
t1 = Q - S
D
t2
t1
t =
days per year
number of orders = 311
4.26 = 73.0 days between orders
= Q - S = 2,345.2 - 639.6 = 1,705.6 yd.
= D
Q = 10,000
2,345.2 = 4.26
= +1,279.20
= +174.44 + 465.16 + 639.60
= (2)(639.6)2
2(2,345.2) + (0.75)(1,705.6)2
2(2,345.2)
+ (150)(10,000)
2,345.2
TCmin = CsS2
2Q + Cc(Q - S)2
2Q
+ Co
D
Q
= 639.6 yd.
= 2,345.2a
0.75
2  0.75 b
Sopt = Qopta
Cc
Cc + Cs
b
= 2,345.2 yd.
= A
2(150)(10,000)
0.75
a
2 + 0.75
2
b
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
a
Cs + Cc
Cs
b
768
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

EOQ Analysis with QM for Windows
QM for Windows has modules for all the EOQ models we have presented, including the basic
model, the noninstantaneous receipt model, and the model with shortages. To demonstrate the
capabilities of this program, we will use our basic EOQ example, for which the solution output
summary is shown in Exhibit 16.1.
EOQ ANALYSIS WITH QM FOR WINDOWS
769
Management Science Application
Determining Inventory Ordering Policy at Dell
Dell Inc., the world’s largest computer-systems company,
bypasses retailers and sells directly to customers via phone or
the Internet. After an order is processed, it is sent to one of its
assembly plants in Austin, Texas, where the product is built,
tested, and packaged within 8 hours.
Dell carries very little components inventory itself. Technol-
ogy changes occur so fast that holding inventory can be a huge
liability; some components lose 0.5% to 2.0% of their value per
week. In addition, many of Dell’s suppliers are located in South-
east Asia, and their shipping times to Austin range from 7 days
for air transport to 30 days for water and ground transport. To
compensate for these factors, Dell’s suppliers keep inventory in
small warehouses called “revolvers” (for revolving inventory),
which are a few miles from Dell’s assembly plants. Dell keeps
very little inventory at its own plants, so it withdraws inventory
from the revolvers every few hours, and most of Dell’s suppliers
deliver to their revolvers three times per week.
The cost of carrying inventory by Dell’s suppliers is ulti-
mately reflected in the final price of a computer. Thus, in order
to maintain a competitive price advantage in the market, Dell
strives to help its suppliers reduce inventory costs. Dell has a
vendor-managed inventory (VMI) arrangement with its suppliers,
who decide how much to order and when to send their orders
to the revolvers. Dell’s suppliers order in batches (to offset 
ordering costs), using a continuous ordering system with a
batch order size, Q, and a reorder point, R, where R is the sum
of the inventory on order and a safety stock. The order size esti-
mate, based on long-term data and forecasts, is held constant.
Dell sets target inventory levels for its suppliers—typically 
10 days of inventory—and keeps track of how much suppliers
deviate from these targets and reports this information back to
suppliers so that they can make adjustments accordingly.
Source: Based on R. Kapuscinski, R. Zhang, P. Carbonneau,
R. Moore, and B. Reeves, “Inventory Decisions in Dell’s Supply
Chain,” Interfaces 34, no. 3 (May–June 2004): 191–205.
© Richard Levine/Alamy
EXHIBIT 16.1

EOQ Analysis with Excel and Excel QM
Exhibit 16.2 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to perform EOQ analysis for our noninstanta-
neous receipt model example. The parameters of the model have been input in cells D3:D8, and
all the formulas for optimal Q, total cost, and so on have been embedded in cells D10:D14. No-
tice that the formula for computing optimal Q in cell D10 is shown on the formula bar at the top
of the screen.
770
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
EXHIBIT 16.2
=D10*(1D7/D8)
=(D4*D5/D10)+(D3*D10/2)*(1(D7/D8))
Optimal Q
In Chapter 1, we introduced Excel QM, a set of spreadsheet macros that we also used in
several other chapters. Excel QM includes a set of spreadsheet macros for “Inventory” that in-
cludes EOQ analysis. After Excel QM is activated, the “Excel QM” menu is accessed by click-
ing on “Add-Ins” on the menu bar at the top of the spreadsheet. Clicking on “Inventory” from
this menu results in a Spreadsheet Initialization window, in which you enter the problem title
and the form of holding (or carrying) cost. Clicking on “OK” will result in the spreadsheet
shown in Exhibit 16.3. Initially, this spreadsheet will have example values in the data cells
B8:B13. Thus, the first step in using this macro is to type in cells B8:B13 the data for the non-
instantaneous receipt model for our I-75 Carpet Discount Store problem. The model results are
computed automatically in cells B16:B26 from formulas already embedded in the spreadsheet.
EXHIBIT 16.3
Click on “Add-Ins” to access “Inventory” macro.
Input model parameters in cells B8: B13.

Quantity Discounts
It is often possible for a customer to receive a price discount on an item if a predetermined num-
ber of units are ordered. For example, occasionally in the back of a magazine you might see an
advertisement for a firm that will produce a coffee mug (or hat) with a company or organiza-
tional logo on it, and the price will be $5 per mug if you purchase 100, $4 per mug if you pur-
chase 200, or $3 per mug if you purchase 500 or more. Many manufacturing companies receive
price discounts for ordering materials and supplies in high volume, and retail stores receive price
discounts for ordering merchandise in large quantities.
The basic EOQ model can be used to determine the optimal order size with quantity dis-
counts; however, the application of the model is slightly altered. The total inventory cost func-
tion must now include the purchase price for the order, as follows:
where
per unit price of the item
annual demand
Purchase price was not considered as part of our basic EOQ formulation earlier because it had no
real impact on the optimal order size. PD in the foregoing formula is a constant value that would
not alter the basic shape of the total cost curve (i.e., the minimum point on the cost curve would
still be at the same location, corresponding to the same value of Q). Thus, the optimal order size
will be the same, no matter what the purchase price. However, when a discount price is available,
it is associated with a specific order size that may be different from the optimal order size, and
the customer must evaluate the trade-off between possibly higher carrying costs with the discount
quantity versus EOQ cost. As a result, the purchase price does influence the order size decision
when a discount is available.
Quantity discounts can be evaluated using the basic EOQ model under two different
scenarios—with constant carrying costs and with carrying costs as a percentage of the purchase
price. It is not uncommon for carrying costs to be determined as a percentage of purchase price,
although it was not considered as such in our previous basic EOQ model. Carrying cost very well
could have been a percentage of purchase price, but it was reflected as a constant value,
in the
basic EOQ model because the purchase price was not part of the EOQ formula. However, in the
case of a quantity discount, carrying cost will vary with the change in price if it is computed as a
percentage of purchase price.
Quantity Discounts with Constant Carrying Costs
In the EOQ cost model with constant carrying costs, the optimal order size,
is the same, re-
gardless of the discount price. Although total cost decreases with each discount in price because
ordering and carrying cost are constant, the optimal order size,
does not change. The total
cost with 
must be compared with any lower total cost with a discount price to see which is
the minimum.
The following example will illustrate the evaluation of an EOQ model with a quantity dis-
count when the carrying cost is a constant value. Comptek Computers wants to reduce a large
stock of personal computers it is discontinuing. It has offered the University Bookstore at Tech a
quantity discount pricing schedule if the store will purchase the personal computers in volume, as
follows:
Quantity
Price
1–49
$1,400
50–89
1,100
90+
900
Qopt
Qopt,
Qopt,
Cc,
D =
P =
TC = Co
D
Q + Cc
Q
2 + PD
QUANTITY DISCOUNTS
771
Determining whether
an order size with 
a discount is more
cost-effective than
optimal Q.
Quantity discounts
are evaluated with
constant 
and as a
percentage of price.
Cc

The annual carrying cost for the bookstore for a computer is $190, the ordering cost is $2,500,
and annual demand for this particular model is estimated to be 200 units. The bookstore wants
to determine whether it should take advantage of this discount or order the basic EOQ order size.
First, determine both the optimal order size and the total cost by using the basic EOQ
model:
This order size is eligible for the first discount of $1,100; therefore, this price is used to compute
total cost, as follows:
Because there is a discount for an order size larger than 72.5, this total cost of $233,784 must be
compared with total cost with an order size of 90 and a price of $900, as follows:
Because this total cost is lower 
the maximum discount price should be
taken and 90 units ordered.
Quantity Discounts with Constant Carrying Costs as a Percentage of Price
The difference between the model in the previous section and the quantity discount model with
carrying cost as a percentage of price is that there is a different optimal order size,
for each
price discount. This requires that the optimal order size with a discount be determined a little
differently from the case for a constant carrying cost.
The optimal order size and total cost are determined by using the basic EOQ model for the
case with no quantity discount. This total cost value is then compared with the various discount
quantity order sizes to determine the minimum cost order size. However, once this minimum
cost order size is determined, it must be compared with the EOQ-determined order size for the
specific discount price because the EOQ order size,
will change for every discount level.
Reconsider our previous example, except now assume that the annual carrying cost for a
computer at the University Bookstore is 15% of the purchase price. Using the same discount
pricing schedule, determine the optimal order size.
Qopt,
Qopt,
(+194,105 6 +233,784),
= +194,105
= (2,500)(200)
(90)
+ (190)(90)
2
+ (900)(200)
TC = CoD
Q
+ Cc
Q
2 + PD
TCmin = +233,784
= (2,500)(200)
(72.5)
+ (190)(72.5)
2
+ (1,100) (200)
TC = CoD
Qopt
+ Cc
Qopt
2
+ PD
Qopt = 72.5
= A
2(2,500)(200)
190
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
D = 200
Cc = +190 per unit
Co = +2,500
772
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

The annual carrying cost is determined as follows:
Quantity
Price
Carrying Cost
1–49
$1,400
1,400(.15) = $210
50–89
1,100
1,100(.15) = 165
90+
900
900(.15) = 135
First, compute the optimal order size for the purchase price without a discount and with
as follows:
Because this order size exceeds 49 units, it is not feasible for this price, and a lower total cost
will automatically be achieved with the first price discount of $1,100. However, the optimal or-
der size will be different for this price discount because carrying cost is no longer constant.
Thus, the new order size is computed as follows:
This order size is the true optimum for this price discount instead of the 50 units required to receive
the discount price; thus, it will result in the minimum total cost, computed as follows:
This cost must still be compared with the total cost for lowest discount price ($900) and order
quantity (90 units), computed as follows:
Because this total cost is lower 
the maximum discount price should be
taken and 90 units ordered. However, as before, we still must check to see whether there is a new
optimal order size for this discount that will result in an even lower cost. The optimal order size
with 
is computed as follows:
Because this order size is less than the 90 units required to receive the discount, it is not feasi-
ble; thus, the optimal order size is 90 units.
Qopt = A
2(2,500)(200)
135
= 86.1
Cc = +135
(+191,630 6 +232,845),
= +191,630
TC = (2,500)(200)
90
+ (135)(90)
2
+ (900)(200)
= +232,845
= (2,500)(200)
77.8
+ 165(77.8)
2
+ (1,100)(200)
TC = Co D
Q
+ Cc
Q
2 + PD
Qopt = A
2(2,500)(200)
165
= 77.8
Qopt = 69
= A
2(2,500)(200)
210
Qopt = A
2CoD
Cc
Cc = +210,
D = 200 computers per year
Co = +2,500
QUANTITY DISCOUNTS
773

Quantity Discount Model Solution with QM for Windows
QM for Windows has the capability to perform EOQ analysis with quantity discounts when carrying
costs are constant. Exhibit 16.4 shows the solution summary for our University Bookstore example.
774
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Management Science Application
Quantity Discount Orders at Mars
Mars is one of the world’s largest privately owned compa-
nies, with over $14 billion in annual sales. It has grown from
making and selling buttercream candies door-to-door to a
global business spanning 100 countries that includes food, pet
care, beverage vending, and electronic payment systems. It
produces such well-known products as Mars candies, M&M’s,
Snickers, and Uncle Ben’s rice.
Mars relies on a small number of suppliers for each of the
huge number of materials it uses in its products. One way that
Mars purchases materials from its suppliers is through online
electronic auctions, in which Mars buyers negotiate bids for
orders from suppliers. The most important purchases are those
of high value and large volume, for which the suppliers pro-
vide quantity discounts. The suppliers provide a pricing sched-
ule that includes quantity ranges associated with each price
level. Such quantity-discount auctions are tailored (by online
brokers) for industries in which volume discounts are com-
mon, such as bulk chemicals and agricultural commodities.
A Mars buyer selects the bids that minimize total purchas-
ing costs, subject to several rules: There must be a minimum
and maximum number of suppliers so that Mars is not depend-
ent on too few suppliers nor loses quality control by having too
many; there must be a maximum amount purchased from each
supplier to limit the influence of any one supplier; and a mini-
mum amount must be ordered to avoid economically ineffi-
cient orders (i.e., less than a full truckload).
Source: Based on G. Hohner, J. Rich, E. Ng, A. Davenport,
J. Kalagnanam, H. Lee, and C. An, “Combinatorial and Quantity-
Discount Procurement Auctions Benefit Mars, Incorporated and Its
Suppliers,” Interfaces 33, no. 1 (January–February 2003): 23–35.
© Eric Carr/Alamy
EXHIBIT 16.4
Quantity Discount Model Solution with Excel
It is also possible to use Excel to solve the quantity discount model with constant carrying costs.
Exhibit 16.5 shows the Excel solution screen for the University Bookstore example. Notice that the
selection of the appropriate order size, Q, that results in the minimum total cost for each discount
range is determined by the formulas embedded in cells E8, E9, and E10. For example, the formula
for the first quantity discount range, 1–49, is embedded in cell E8 and shown on the formula bar at

the top of the screen,
This means that if the discount order size in cell
D8 (i.e.,
) is greater than or equal to the quantity in cell B8 (i.e., 1), the quantity in 
cell D8 (72.55) is selected; otherwise, the amount in cell B8 is selected. The formulas in cells E9
and E10 are constructed similarly. The result is that the order quantity for the final discount range,
is selected.
Reorder Point
In our presentation of the basic EOQ model in the previous section, we addressed one of the two
primary questions related to inventory management: How much should be ordered? In this sec-
tion we will discuss the other aspect of inventory management: When to order? The determinant
of when to order in a continuous inventory system is the reorder point, the inventory level at
which a new order is placed.
The concept of lead time is illustrated graphically in Figure 16.9. Notice that the 
order must be made prior to the time when the level of inventory falls to zero. Because demand is
consuming the inventory while the order is being shipped, the order must be made while there 
is enough inventory in stock to meet demand during the lead-time period. This level of inventory
is referred to as the reorder point and is so designated in Figure 16.9.
Q = 90,
Q = 72.55
IF1D8+B8,D8,B82.
REORDER POINT
775
EXHIBIT 16.5
=IF(D10>=B10,D10,B10)
=(D4*D5/E10)+(D3*E10/2)+C10*D5
FIGURE 16.9
Reorder point and
lead time
Q
t
2t
Time
Lead time
Inventory level
Reorder
point
Lead time
The reorder point for our basic EOQ model with constant demand and a constant lead time
to receive an order is relatively straightforward. It is simply equal to the amount demanded dur-
ing the lead-time period, computed using the following formula:
where
demand rate per time period (e.g., daily)
lead time
L =
d =
R = dL
The reorder point is
the level of inventory
at which a new order
is placed. 

Consider the I-75 Carpet Discount Store example described previously. The store is open
311 days per year. If annual demand is 10,000 yards of Super Shag carpet and the lead time to
receive an order is 10 days, the reorder point for carpet is determined as follows:
Thus, when the inventory level falls to approximately 321 yards of carpet, a new order is placed.
Notice that the reorder point is not related to the optimal order quantity or any of the inventory costs.
Safety Stocks
In our previous example for determining the reorder point, an order is made when the inventory
level reaches the reorder point. During the lead time, the remaining inventory in stock is de-
pleted as a constant demand rate, such that the new order quantity arrives at exactly the same
moment as the inventory level reaches zero in Figure 16.9. Realistically, however, demand—and
to a lesser extent lead time—is uncertain. The inventory level might be depleted at a slower or
faster rate during lead time. This is depicted in Figure 16.10 for uncertain demand and a con-
stant lead time.
= 321.54 yd.
= a10,000
311 b(10)
R = dL
776
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
FIGURE 16.10
Inventory model
with uncertain 
demand
0
Time
Inventory level
Reorder
point, R
Q
Notice in the second order cycle that a stockout occurs when demand exceeds the available
inventory in stock. As a hedge against stockouts when demand is uncertain, a safety (or buffer)
stock of inventory is frequently added to the demand during lead time. The addition of a safety
stock is shown in Figure 16.11.
FIGURE 16.11
Inventory model
with safety stock
0
Time
Inventory level
Reorder
point, R
Safety stock
Q

Determining Safety Stock by Using Service Levels
There are several approaches to determining the amount of the safety stock needed. One of
the most popular methods is to establish a safety stock that will meet a specified service level.
The service level is the probability that the amount of inventory on hand during the lead time
is sufficient to meet expected demand (i.e., the probability that a stockout will not occur). 
The word service is used because the higher the probability that inventory will be on hand, the
more likely that customer demand will be met (i.e., the customer can be served). For example,
a service level of 90% means that there is a .90 probability that demand will be met during the
lead time period and a .10 probability that a stockout will occur. The specification of the serv-
ice level is typically a policy decision based on a number of factors, including costs for the 
“extra” safety stock and present and future lost sales if customer demand cannot be met.
Reorder Point with Variable Demand
To compute the reorder point with a safety stock that will meet a specific service level, we will as-
sume that the individual demands during each day of lead time are uncertain and independent and
can be described by a normal probability distribution. The average demand for the lead-time pe-
riod is the sum of the average daily demands for the days of the lead time, which is also the prod-
uct of the average daily demand multiplied by the lead time. Likewise, the variance of the
distribution is the sum of the daily variances for the number of days in the lead-time period. Using
these parameters, the reorder point to meet a specific service level can be computed as follows:
where
average daily demand
lead time
the standard deviation of daily demand
number of standard deviations corresponding to the service level probability
safety stock
The term 
in this formula for reorder point is the square root of the sum of the daily vari-
ances during lead time:
variance
(daily variances)
(number of days of lead time)
standard deviation
The reorder point relative to the service level is shown in Figure 16.12. The service level is
the shaded area, or probability, to the left of the reorder point, R.
= 2s2
dL = sd2L
= s2
dL
*
=
sd2L
Zsd2L =
Z =
sd =
L =
d =
R = dL + Zsd2L
DETERMINING SAFETY STOCK BY USING SERVICE LEVELS
777
The service level is
the probability that
the inventory
available during the
lead time will meet
demand.
FIGURE 16.12
Reorder point 
for a service level
Probability of meeting demand
during lead time = service level
R
Probability of
a stockout
Safety stock
Zsd
dL
Demand
–
L
2
The I-75 Carpet Discount Store sells Super Shag carpet. The average daily customer de-
mand for the carpet stocked by the store is normally distributed, with a mean daily demand of
30 yards and a standard deviation of 5 yards of carpet per day. The lead time for receiving a new

order of carpet is 10 days. The store wants a reorder point and safety stock for a service level of
95%, with the probability of a stockout equal to 5%:
For a 95% service level, the value of Z (from Table A.1 in Appendix A) is 1.65. The reorder point
is computed as follows:
The safety stock is the second term in the reorder point formula:
Determining the Reorder Point Using Excel
Excel can be used to determine the reorder point with variable demand. Exhibit 16.6 shows an
Excel spreadsheet set up to compute the reorder point for our I-75 Carpet Discount Store exam-
ple. Notice that the formula for computing the reorder point in cell E7 is shown on the formula
bar at the top of the spreadsheet.
safety stock = Zsd2L = (1.65)(5)(210 ) = 26.1 yd.
R = d L + Zsd2L = 30(10) + (1.65)(5)(210 ) = 300 + 26.1 = 326.1yd.
d = 30 yd. per day, L = 10 days, sd = 5 yd. per day
778
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
EXHIBIT 16.6
Reorder Point with Variable Lead Time
In the model in the previous section for determining the reorder point, we assumed a variable
demand rate and a constant lead time. In the case where demand is constant and the lead time
varies, we can use a similar formula, as follows:
where
constant daily demand
average lead time
standard deviation of lead time
standard deviation of demand during lead time
safety stock
For our previous example of the I-75 Carpet Discount Store, we will now assume that daily de-
mand for Super Shag carpet is a constant 30 yards. Lead time is normally distributed, with a
mean of 10 days and a standard deviation of 3 days. The reorder point and safety stock corre-
sponding to a 95% service level are computed as follows:
R = dL + ZdsL = (30)(10)+ (1.65)(30)(3) = 300 + 148.5 = 448.5 yd.
Z = 1.65 for a 95% service level
sL = 3 days
L = 10 days
d = 30 yd. per day
ZdsL =
dsL =
sL =
L =
d =
R = dL + ZdsL

Reorder Point with Variable Demand and Lead Time
The final reorder point case we will consider is the case in which both demand and lead time are
variables. The reorder point formula for this model is as follows:
where
average daily demand
average lead time
standard deviation of demand during lead time
safety stock
Again we will consider the I-75 Carpet Discount Store example, used previously. In this case,
daily demand is normally distributed, with a mean of 30 yards and a standard deviation of 5 yards.
Lead time is also assumed to be normally distributed, with a mean of 10 days and a standard devia-
tion of 3 days. The reorder point and safety stock for a 95% service level are computed as follows:
R = 450.8 yd.
= 300 + 150.8
= (30)(10)+ (1.65)2(5)2(10) +(3)2(30)2
R = d L + Z2s2
dL + s2
Ld2
Z = 1.65 for a 95% service level
sL = 3 days
L = 10 days
sd = 5 yd.>day
d = 30 yd.>day
Z2s2
dL + s2
Ld2 =
2s2
dL + s2
Ld2 =
L =
d =
R = d L + Z2s2
dL + s2
Ld2
DETERMINING SAFETY STOCK BY USING SERVICE LEVELS
779
Management Science Application
Establishing Inventory Safety Stocks 
at Kellogg’s
Kellogg’s is the world’s largest cereal producer and a leading
maker of convenience foods. The company started with a sin-
gle product, Kellogg’s Corn Flakes, in 1906, and over the years
has developed a product line of other cereals, including Rice
Krispies and Corn Pops, as well as convenience foods, such as
Pop-Tarts and Nutri-Grain cereal bars. Kellogg’s operates five
plants in the United States and Canada and seven distribution
centers, and it contracts with 15 co-packers to produce or pack
some Kellogg’s products. Kellogg’s must coordinate the pro-
duction, packaging, inventory, and distribution of roughly 80
cereal products alone at these various facilities.
Kellogg’s uses a model called the Kellogg Planning System
(KPS) to plan its weekly production, inventory, and distribution
decisions. The data used in the model are subject to much un-
certainty, and the greatest uncertainty is in product demand. De-
mand in the first few weeks of a planning horizon is based on
customer orders and is fairly accurate; however, demand in the
third and fourth weeks may be significantly different from
marketing forecasts. However, Kellogg’s primary goal is to meet
customer demand, and in order to achieve this goal, Kellogg’s
employs safety stocks as a buffer against uncertain demand. The
safety stock for a product at a specific production facility in 
week t is the sum of demands for weeks t and 
However,
for a product that is being promoted in an advertising campaign,
the safety stock is the sum of forecasted demand for a 4-week
horizon or longer. KPS has saved Kellogg’s many millions of dol-
lars since the mid-1990s. The tactical version of KPS recently
helped the company consolidate production capacity, with esti-
mated projected savings of almost $40 million.
Source: Based on G. Brown, J. Keegan, B. Vigus, and K. Wood, “The
Kellogg Company Optimizes Production, Inventory, and Distribution,”
Interfaces 31, no. 6 (November–December 2001): 1–15.
t + 1.
© Richard Levine/Alamy

Thus, the reorder point is 450.8 yards, with a safety stock of 150.8 yards. Notice that this
reorder point encompasses the largest safety stock of our three reorder point examples,
which would be anticipated, given the increased variability resulting from variable demand
and lead time.
Order Quantity for a Periodic Inventory System
Previously we defined a continuous, or fixed–order quantity, inventory system as one in which
the order quantity was constant and the time between orders varied. So far, this type of inven-
tory system has been the primary focus of our discussion. The less common periodic, or
fixed–time period, inventory system is one in which the time between orders is constant and the
order size varies. A drugstore is one example of a business that sometimes uses a fixed-period
inventory system. Drugstores stock a number of personal hygiene and health-related products,
such as shampoo, toothpaste, soap, bandages, cough medicine, and aspirin. Normally, the ven-
dors that provide these items to the store will make periodic visits—for example, every few
weeks or every month—and count the stock of inventory on hand for their products. If the in-
ventory is exhausted or at some predetermined reorder point, a new order will be placed for an
amount that will bring the inventory level back up to the desired level. The drugstore managers
will generally not monitor the inventory level between vendor visits but instead rely on the ven-
dor to take inventory at the time of the scheduled visit.
A limitation of this type of inventory system is that inventory can be exhausted early in
the time period between visits, resulting in a stockout that will not be remedied until the next
scheduled order. Alternatively, in a fixed–order quantity system, when inventory reaches a
reorder point, an order is made that minimizes the time during which a stockout might exist.
As a result of this drawback, a larger safety stock is normally required for the fixed-interval
system.
Order Quantity with Variable Demand
If the demand rate and lead time are constant, then the fixed-period model will have a fixed or-
der quantity that will be made at specified time intervals, which is the same as the fixed quantity
(EOQ) model under similar conditions. However, as we have already explained, the fixed-period
model reacts significantly differently from the fixed–order quantity model when demand is a
variable.
The order size for a fixed-period model, given variable daily demand that is normally dis-
tributed, is determined by the following formula:
where
average demand rate
the fixed time between orders
lead time
standard deviation of demand
safety stock
inventory in stock
The first term in the preceding formula,
is the average demand during the order
cycle time plus the lead time. It reflects the amount of inventory that will be needed to protect
against shortages during the entire time from this order to the next and the lead time, until the
order is received. The second term,
is the safety stock for a specific service
level, determined in much the same way as previously described for a reorder point. The final
Zsd2tb + L,
d1tb + L2,
I =
Zsd2tb + L =
sd =
L =
tb =
d =
Q = d(tb + L) + Zsd2tb + L - I
780
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
A periodic inventory
system uses variable
order sizes at fixed
time intervals.
A periodic 
inventory system
normally requires a 
larger safety stock.

term, I, is the amount of inventory on hand when the inventory level is checked and an order
is made. We will demonstrate the computation of Q with an example.
The Corner Drug Store stocks a popular brand of sunscreen. The average demand for the
sunscreen is 6 bottles per day, with a standard deviation of 1.2 bottles. A vendor for the sun-
screen producer checks the drugstore stock every 60 days, and during a particular visit the
drugstore had 8 bottles in stock. The lead time to receive an order is 5 days. The order size
for this order period that will enable the drugstore to maintain a 95% service level is com-
puted as follows:
Determining the Order Quantity for the Fixed-Period Model with Excel
Exhibit 16.7 shows an Excel spreadsheet set up to compute the order quantity for the fixed-
period model with variable demand for our Corner Drug Store example. Notice that the for-
mula for the order quantity in cell D10 is shown on the formula bar at the top of the
spreadsheet.
= 398 bottles
= (6)(60 + 5) + (1.65)(1.2)260 + 5 - 8
Q = d(tb + L) + Zsd2tb + L - I
Z = 1.65 for 95% service level
I = 8 bottles
L = 5 days
tb = 60 days
sd = 1.2 bottles
d = 6 bottles per day
SUMMARY
781
EXHIBIT 16.7
Order quantity
Summary
In this chapter the classical economic order quantity model was presented. The basic form of the
EOQ model we discussed included simplifying assumptions regarding order receipt, no short-
ages, and constant demand known with certainty. By relaxing some of these assumptions, we
were able to create increasingly complex but realistic models. These EOQ variations included
the reorder point model, the noninstantaneous receipt model, the model with shortages, and
models with safety stocks. The techniques for inventory analysis presented in this chapter are
not widely used to analyze other types of problems. Conversely, however, many of the tech-
niques presented in this text are used for inventory analysis (in addition to the methods presented
in these chapters). The wide use of management science techniques for inventory analysis at-
tests to the importance of inventory to all types of organizations.

782
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
The following example will demonstrate EOQ analysis for the classical model and the model
with shortages and back ordering.
Problem Statement
Electronic Village stocks and sells a particular brand of personal computer. It costs the store
$450 each time it places an order with the manufacturer for the personal computers. The annual
cost of carrying the PCs in inventory is $170. The store manager estimates the annual demand
for the PCs will be 1,200 units.
a. Determine the optimal order quantity and the total minimum inventory cost.
b. Assume that shortages are allowed and that the shortage cost is $600 per unit per year.
Compute the optimal order quantity and the total minimum inventory cost.
Solution
Step 1: (part a): Determine the Optimal Order Quantity
Step 2: (part b): Compute the EOQ with Shortages
= +11,960.98
= +1,315.65 + 4,665.27 + 5,980.07
= (600)(19.9)2
2(90.3)
+ 170 (90.3 - 19.9)2
2(90.3)
+ 450 a 1,200
90.3 b
 total cost = CsS2
2Q + Cc
(Q - S)2
2Q
+ CoD
Q
= 19.9 personal computers
= 90.3a
170
170 + 600 b
S = Qa
Cc
Cc + Cs
b
= 90.3 personal computers
= A
2(450)(1,200)
170
a
600 + 170
600
b
Q = A
2CoD
Cc a
Cs + Cc
Cs
b
Cs = +600
= +13,549.91
= 170a 79.7
2 b + 450a 1,200
79.7 b
 total cost = Cc
Q
2 + Co
D
Q
= 79.7 personal computers
= A
2(450)(1,200)
170
Q = A
2CoD
Cc
Co = +450
Cc = +170
D = 1,200 personal computers
Example Problem
Solutions

Problem Statement
A computer products store stocks color graphics monitors, and the daily demand is normally
distributed, with a mean of 1.6 monitors and a standard deviation of 0.4 monitor. The lead time
to receive an order from the manufacturer is 15 days. Determine the reorder point that will
achieve a 98% service level.
Solution
Step 1: Identify Parameters
Step 2: Solve for R
Problems
1. Hayes Electronics stocks and sells a particular brand of personal computer. It costs the firm
$450 each time it places an order with the manufacturer for the personal computers. The cost
of carrying one PC in inventory for a year is $170. The store manager estimates that total an-
nual demand for the computers will be 1,200 units, with a constant demand rate throughout the
year. Orders are received within minutes after placement from a local warehouse maintained
by the manufacturer. The store policy is never to have stockouts of the PCs. The store is open
for business every day of the year except Christmas Day. Determine the following:
a. The optimal order quantity per order
b. The minimum total annual inventory costs
c. The optimal number of orders per year
d. The optimal time between orders (in working days)
2. Hayes Electronics in Problem 1 assumed with certainty that the ordering cost is $450 per order
and the inventory carrying cost is $170 per unit per year. However, the inventory model parame-
ters are frequently only estimates that are subject to some degree of uncertainty. Consider four
cases of variation in the model parameters: (a) Both ordering cost and carrying cost are 10% less
than originally estimated, (b) both ordering cost and carrying cost are 10% higher than origi-
nally estimated, (c) ordering cost is 10% higher and carrying cost is 10% lower than originally
estimated, and (d) ordering cost is 10% lower and carrying cost is 10% higher than originally
estimated. Determine the optimal order quantity and total inventory cost for each of the four
cases. Prepare a table with values from all four cases and compare the sensitivity of the model
solution to changes in parameter values.
3. A firm is faced with the attractive situation in which it can obtain immediate delivery of an item
it stocks for retail sale. The firm has therefore not bothered to order the item in any systematic
way. Recently, however, profits have been squeezed due to increasing competitive pressures, and
the firm has retained a management consultant to study its inventory management. The consult-
ant has determined that the various costs associated with making an order for the item stocked
are approximately $30 per order. She has also determined that the costs of carrying the item in
inventory amount to approximately $20 per unit per year (primarily direct storage costs and fore-
gone profit on investment in inventory). Demand for the item is reasonably constant over time,
R = dL + Zsd2L = (1.6)(15) + (2.05)(0.4)215 = 24 + 3.18 = 27.18 monitors
Z = 2.05 (for a 98% service level)
sd = 0.4 monitor per day
L = 15 days
d = 1.6 monitors per day
PROBLEMS
783

and the forecast is for 19,200 units per year. When an order is placed for the item, the entire or-
der is immediately delivered to the firm by the supplier. The firm operates 6 days a week plus a
few Sundays, or approximately 320 days per year. Determine the following:
a. The optimal order quantity per order
b. The total annual inventory costs
c. The optimal number of orders to place per year
d. The number of operating days between orders, based on the optimal number of orders
4. The Western Jeans Company purchases denim from Cumberland Textile Mills. The Western
Jeans Company uses 35,000 yards of denim per year to make jeans. The cost of ordering denim
from the textile company is $500 per order. It costs Western $0.35 per yard annually to hold a
yard of denim in inventory. Determine the optimal number of yards of denim the Western Jeans
Company should order, the minimum total annual inventory cost, the optimal number of orders
per year, and the optimal time between orders.
5. The Metropolitan Book Company purchases paper from the Atlantic Paper Company. Metropol-
itan produces magazines and paperbacks that require 1,215,000 pounds of paper per year. The
cost per order for the company is $1,200; the cost of holding 1 pound of paper in inventory is
$0.08 per year. Determine the following:
a. The economic order quantity
b. The minimum total annual cost
c. The optimal number of orders per year
d. The optimal time between orders
6. The Simple Simon Bakery produces fruit pies for freezing and subsequent sale. The bakery,
which operates 5 days per week, 52 weeks per year, can produce pies at the rate of 64 pies per
day. The bakery sets up the pie production operation and produces until a predetermined number
(Q) of pies has been produced. When not producing pies, the bakery uses its personnel and facil-
ities for producing other bakery items. The setup cost for a production run of fruit pies is $500.
The cost of holding frozen pies in storage is $5 per pie per year. The annual demand for frozen
fruit pies, which is constant over time, is 5,000 pies. Determine the following:
a. The optimal production run quantity (Q)
b. The total annual inventory costs
c. The optimal number of production runs per year
d. The optimal cycle time (time between run starts)
e. The run length, in working days
7. The Pedal Pusher Bicycle Shop operates 7 days per week, closing only on Christmas Day. The
shop pays $300 for a particular bicycle purchased from the manufacturer. The annual holding
cost per bicycle is estimated to be 25% of the dollar value of inventory. The shop sells an aver-
age of 25 bikes per week. Frequently, the dealer does not have a bike in stock when a customer
purchases it, and the bike is back-ordered. The dealer estimates his shortage cost per unit back-
ordered, on an annual basis, to be $250 due to lost future sales (and profits). The ordering cost
for each order is $100. Determine the optimal order quantity and shortage level and the total
minimum cost.
8. The Petroco Company uses a highly toxic chemical in one of its manufacturing processes. It
must have the product delivered by special cargo trucks designed for safe shipment of chemi-
cals. As such, ordering (and delivery) costs are relatively high, at $2,600 per order. The chemical
product is packaged in 1-gallon plastic containers. The cost of holding the chemical in storage is
$50 per gallon per year. The annual demand for the chemical, which is constant over time, is
2,000 gallons per year. The lead time from time of order placement until receipt is 10 days. The
company operates 310 working days per year. Compute the optimal order quantity, the total min-
imum inventory cost, and the reorder point.
784
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

9. The Big Buy Supermarket stocks Munchies Cereal. Demand for Munchies is 4,000 boxes per
year (365 days). It costs the store $60 per order of Munchies, and it costs $0.80 per box per year
to keep the cereal in stock. Once an order for Munchies is placed, it takes 4 days to receive the
order from a food distributor. Determine the following:
a. The optimal order size
b. The minimum total annual inventory cost
c. The reorder point
10. The Wood Valley Dairy makes cheese to supply to stores in its area. The dairy can make 
250 pounds of cheese per day (365 days per year), and the demand at area stores is 180 pounds
per day. Each time the dairy makes cheese, it costs $125 to set up the production process. The
annual cost of carrying a pound of cheese in a refrigerated storage area is $12. Determine the
optimal order size and the minimum total annual inventory cost.
11. The Rainwater Brewery produces Rainwater Light Beer, which it stores in barrels in its ware-
house and supplies to its distributors on demand. The demand for Rainwater is 1,500 barrels of
beer per day (365 days per year). The brewery can produce 2,000 barrels of Rainwater per day.
It costs $6,500 to set up a production run for Rainwater. Once it is brewed, the beer is stored in a
refrigerated warehouse at an annual cost of $50 per barrel. Determine the economic order quan-
tity and the minimum total annual inventory cost.
12. The purchasing manager for the Atlantic Steel Company must determine a policy for ordering
coal to operate 12 converters. Each converter requires exactly 5 tons of coal per day to operate,
and the firm operates 360 days per year. The purchasing manager has determined that the order-
ing cost is $80 per order and the cost of holding coal is 20% of the average dollar value of inven-
tory held. The purchasing manager has negotiated a contract to obtain the coal for $12 per ton for
the coming year.
a. Determine the optimal quantity of coal to receive in each order.
b. Determine the total inventory-related costs associated with the optimal ordering policy (do
not include the cost of the coal).
c. If 5 days of lead time are required to receive an order of coal, how much coal should be on
hand when an order is placed?
13. In Problem 1 in Chapter 15, the Saki motorcycle dealer in Minneapolis–St. Paul orders the Saki
Super TXII motorcycle it sells from the manufacturer in Japan. Using the 3-month moving aver-
age forecast of demand for January as the monthly forecast for the next year, an annual carrying
cost of $375, an ordering cost of $3,200, and a lead time for receiving an order of 1 month,
determine the optimal order size, the minimum total annual inventory cost, the optimal time 
between orders, the number of orders, and the reorder point.
14. In Problem 2 in Chapter 15, Carpet City orders Soft Shag carpet from its own mill. Using the
3-month moving average forecast of demand for month 9 as the monthly forecasts for all of next
year, a production rate at the mill of 1,200 yards per day (with the mill operating 260 days per
year), an annual carrying cost of $0.63, a $425 cost for setting up a production run and deliver-
ing the carpet to the store, and a lead time for receiving an order of 7 days, determine the opti-
mal order size, the minimum total annual inventory cost, and the reorder point (given that Carpet
City is open 360 days per year).
15. In Problem 30 in Chapter 15, the supplier receives shipments of partially completed laptops
from its manufacturing facility in Southeast Asia, which has maximum production rate of
200 units per day. Using the forecast of annual demand developed in that problem, an annual
carrying cost of $115.75 (which includes an average obsolescence cost), a shipping cost from
Asia of $6,500 per shipment, and a lead time for receiving an order of 25 days, determine the
optimal order size, the minimum total annual inventory cost, the maximum inventory level,
and the reorder point (given that the Bell assembly operation operates 365 days per year).
PROBLEMS
785

16. Craftwood Furniture Company is a U.S.–based furniture manufacturer that offshored all of its
actual manufacturing operations to China about a decade ago. It set up a distribution center in
Hong Kong, from which the company ships its items to the United States on container ships.
The company learned early on that it could not rely on local Chinese freight forwarders to
arrange for sufficient containers for the company’s shipments, so it contracted to purchase
containers from a Taiwanese manufacturer and then sell them to shipping companies at the
U.S. ports the containers are shipped to. Craftwood needs 715 containers each year. It costs
$265 to hold a container at its distribution center, and it costs $6,000 to process and receive an
order for the containers. The cost of not having sufficient containers and delaying a shipment
is $14,000 per container. Determine the optimal order size, minimum total annual inventory
cost, and maximum shortage level. 
17. The Pacific Lumber Company and Mill processes 10,000 logs annually, operating 250 days per
year. Immediately upon receiving an order, the logging company’s supplier begins delivery to
the lumber mill, at a rate of 60 logs per day. The lumber mill has determined that the ordering
cost is $1,600 per order and the cost of carrying logs in inventory before they are processed is
$15 per log on an annual basis. Determine the following:
a. The optimal order size
b. The total inventory cost associated with the optimal order quantity
c. The number of operating days between orders
d. The number of operating days required to receive an order
18. The Roadking Tire Store sells a brand of tires called the Roadrunner. The annual demand from
the store’s customers for Roadrunner tires is 3,700. The cost to order tires from the tire manu-
facturer is $420 per order. The annual carrying cost is $1.75 per tire. The store allows shortages,
and the annual shortage cost per tire is $4. Determine the optimal order size, maximum shortage
level, and minimum total annual inventory cost.
19. The Laurel Creek Lawn Shop sells Fastgro Fertilizer. The annual demand for the fertilizer is
270,000 pounds. The cost to order the fertilizer from the Fastgro Company is $105 per order.
The annual carrying cost is $0.25 per pound. The store operates with shortages, and the annual
shortage cost is $0.70 per pound. Compute the optimal order size, minimum total annual inven-
tory cost, and maximum shortage level.
20. Videoworld is a discount store that sells color televisions. The annual demand for color televi-
sion sets is 400. The cost per order from the manufacturer is $650. The carrying cost is $45 per
set each year. The store has an inventory policy that allows shortages. The shortage cost per set
is estimated at $60. Determine the following:
a. The optimal order size
b. The maximum shortage level
c. The minimum total annual inventory cost
21. The University Bookstore at Tech stocks the required textbook for Management Science 2405.
The demand for this text is 1,200 copies per year. The cost of placing an order is $350, and the
annual carrying cost is $2.75 per book. If a student requests the book and it is not in stock, the
student will likely go to the privately owned Tech Bookstore. It is likely that the student will not
buy books at the University Bookstore in the future; thus the shortage cost to the University
Bookstore is estimated to be $45 per book. Determine the optimal order size, the maximum
shortage level, and the total inventory cost.
22. The A-to-Z Office Supply Company is open from 8:00 A.M. to 6:00 P.M., and it receives 200 calls
per day for delivery orders. It costs A-to-Z $20 to send out its trucks to make deliveries. The
company estimates that each minute a customer spends waiting for an order costs A-to-Z $0.20
in lost sales.
786
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

a. How frequently should A-to-Z send out its delivery trucks each day? Indicate the total daily
cost of deliveries.
b. If a truck could carry only six orders, how often would deliveries be made, and what would
be the cost?
23. The Union Street Microbrewery makes 1220 Union beer, which it bottles and sells in its adjoin-
ing restaurant and by the case. It costs $1,700 to set up, brew, and bottle a batch of the beer. The
annual cost to store the beer in inventory is $1.25 per bottle. The annual demand for the beer is
18,000 bottles, and the brewery has the capacity to produce 30,000 bottles annually.
a. Determine the optimal order quantity, the total annual inventory cost, the number of produc-
tion runs per year, and the maximum inventory level.
b. If the microbrewery has only enough storage space to hold a maximum of 2,500 bottles of
beer in inventory, how will that affect total inventory costs?
24. Eurotronics is a European manufacturer of electronic components. During the course of a year,
it requires container cargo space on ships leaving Hamburg bound for the United States,
Mexico, South America, and Canada. Annually, the company needs 160,000 cubic feet of cargo
space. The cost of reserving cargo space is $7,000, and the cost of holding cargo space is $0.80
per cubic foot. Determine how much storage space Eurotronics should optimally order, the total
cost, and how many times per year it should place orders to reserve space.
25. The Summer Outdoor Furniture Company produces wooden lawn chairs. The annual demand
from its store customers is 17,400 chairs per year. The transport and handling costs are $2,600
each time a shipment of chairs is delivered to stores from its warehouse. The annual carrying
cost is $3.75 per chair.
a. Determine the optimal order quantity and minimum total annual cost.
b. The company is thinking about relocating its warehouse closer to its customers, which would
reduce transport and handling costs to $1,900 per order but increase carrying costs to $4.50
per chair per year. Should the company relocate based on inventory costs?
26. The Spruce Creek Vegetable Farm produces organically grown greenhouse tomatoes that are
sold to area grocery stores. The annual demand for Spruce Creek’s tomatoes is 270,000 pounds.
The farm is able to produce 305,000 pounds annually. The cost to transport the tomatoes from
the farm to the stores is $620 per load. The annual carrying cost is $0.12 per pound.
a. Compute the optimal order size, the maximum inventory level, and the total minimum cost.
b. If Spruce Creek can increase production capacity to 360,000 tomatoes per year, will it re-
duce total inventory cost?
27. The Uptown Kiln is an importer of ceramics from overseas. It has arranged to purchase a particu-
lar type of ceramic pottery from a Korean artisan. The artisan makes the pottery in 120-unit
batches and will ship only that exact number of units. The transportation and handling cost of a
shipment is $7,600 (not including the unit cost). The Uptown Kiln estimates its annual demand
to be 900 units. What storage and handling cost per unit does it need to achieve in order to mini-
mize its inventory cost?
28. The I-75 Carpet Discount Store has an annual demand of 10,000 yards of Super Shag carpet. The
annual carrying cost for a yard of this carpet is $0.75, and the ordering cost is $150. The carpet
manufacturer normally charges the store $8 per yard for the carpet; however, the manufacturer
has offered a discount price of $6.50 per yard if the store will order 5,000 yards. How much
should the store order, and what will be the total annual inventory cost for that order quantity?
29. The Fifth Quarter Bar buys Old World draft beer by the barrel from a local distributor. The bar
has an annual demand of 900 barrels, which it purchases at a price of $205 per barrel. The an-
nual carrying cost is 12% of the price, and the cost per order is $160. The distributor has offered
PROBLEMS
787

the bar a reduced price of $190 per barrel if it will order a minimum of 300 barrels. Should the
bar take the discount?
30. The bookstore at State University purchases from a vendor sweatshirts emblazoned with the
school name and logo. The vendor sells the sweatshirts to the store for $38 apiece. The cost to
the bookstore for placing an order is $120, and the carrying cost is 25% of the average annual
inventory value. The bookstore manager estimates that 1,700 sweatshirts will be sold during the
year. The vendor has offered the bookstore the following volume discount schedule:
Order Size
Discount %
1–299
0
300–499
2
500–799
4
800+
5
The bookstore manager wants to determine the bookstore’s optimal order quantity, given the
foregoing quantity discount information.
31. Determine the optimal order quantity of sweatshirts and total annual cost in Problem 30 if the
carrying cost is a constant $8 per sweatshirt per year.
32. The office manager for the Gotham Life Insurance Company orders letterhead stationery from
an office products firm in boxes of 500 sheets. The company uses 6,500 boxes per year. Annual
carrying costs are $3 per box, and ordering costs are $28. The following discount price schedule
is provided by the office supply company:
Order Quantity (boxes)
Price per Box
200–999
$16
1,000–2,999
14
3,000–5,999
13
6,000+
12
Determine the optimal order quantity and the total annual inventory cost.
33. Determine the optimal order quantity and total annual inventory cost for boxes of stationery in
Problem 32 if the carrying cost is 20% of the price of a box of stationery.
34. The 23,000-seat City Coliseum houses the local professional ice hockey, basketball, indoor soc-
cer, and arena football teams, as well as various trade shows, wrestling and boxing matches,
tractor pulls, and circuses. Coliseum vending annually sells large quantities of soft drinks and
beer in plastic cups, with the name of the coliseum and the various team logos on them. The lo-
cal container cup manufacturer that supplies the cups in boxes of 100 has offered coliseum man-
agement the following discount price schedule for cups:
Order Quantity (boxes)
Price per Box
2,000–6,999
$47
7,000–11,999
43
12,000–19,999
41
20,000+
38
788
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

The annual demand for cups is 2.3 million, the annual carrying cost per box of cups is $1.90,
and the ordering cost is $320. Determine the optimal order quantity and total annual inventory
cost.
35. Community Hospital orders latex sanitary gloves from a hospital supply firm. The hospital ex-
pects to use 40,000 pairs of gloves per year. The cost to order and to have the gloves delivered is
$180. The annual carrying cost is $0.18 per pair of gloves. The hospital supply firm offers the
following quantity discount pricing schedule:
Quantity
Price
0–9,999
$0.34
10,000–19,999
0.32
20,000–29,999
0.30
30,000–39,999
0.28
40,000–49,999
0.26
50,000+
0.24
Determine the optimal order size for the hospital.
36. Tracy McCoy is the office administrator for the department of management science at Tech. The
faculty uses a lot of printer paper, and although Tracy is constantly reordering, paper frequently
runs out. She orders the paper from the university central stores. Several faculty members have
determined that the lead time to receive an order is normally distributed, with a mean of 2 days
and a standard deviation of 0.5 day. The faculty has also determined that daily demand for the
paper is normally distributed, with a mean of 2 packages and a standard deviation of 0.8 pack-
age. What reorder point should Tracy use in order not to run out 99% of the time?
37. Determine the optimal order quantity and total annual inventory cost for cups in Problem 34 if
the carrying cost is 5% of the price of a box of cups.
38. The amount of denim used daily by the Western Jeans Company in its manufacturing process to
make jeans is normally distributed, with an average of 3,000 yards of denim and a standard de-
viation of 600 yards. The lead time required to receive an order of denim from the textile mill is
a constant 6 days. Determine the safety stock and reorder point if the Western Jeans Company
wants to limit the probability of a stockout and work stoppage to 5%.
39. In Problem 38, what level of service would a safety stock of 2,000 yards provide?
40. The Atlantic Paper Company produces paper from wood pulp ordered from a lumber products
firm. The paper company’s daily demand for wood pulp is a constant 8,000 pounds. Lead time is
normally distributed, with an average of 7 days and a standard deviation of 1.6 days. Determine
the reorder point if the paper company wants to limit the probability of a stockout and work stop-
page to 2%.
41. The Uptown Bar and Grill serves Rainwater draft beer to its customers. The daily demand for
beer is normally distributed, with an average of 18 gallons and a standard deviation of 4 gallons.
The lead time required to receive an order of beer from the local distributor is normally distrib-
uted, with a mean of 3 days and a standard deviation of 0.8 day. Determine the safety stock and
reorder point if the restaurant wants to maintain a 90% service level. What would be the increase
in the safety stock if a 95% service level were desired?
42. In Problem 41, the manager of the Uptown Bar and Grill has negotiated with the beer distributor
for the lead time to receive orders to be a constant 3 days. What effect does this have on the 
reorder point developed in Problem 41 for a 90% service level?
PROBLEMS
789

43. The daily demand for Sunlight paint at the Rainbow Paint Store in East Ridge is normally dis-
tributed, with a mean of 26 gallons and a standard deviation of 10 gallons. The lead time for re-
ceiving an order of paint from the Sunlight distributor is 9 days. Because this is the only paint
store in East Ridge, the manager is interested in maintaining only a 75% service level. What re-
order point should be used to meet this service level? The manager subsequently has learned that
a new paint store will open soon in East Ridge, which has prompted her to increase the service
level to 95%. What reorder point will maintain this service level?
44. PM Computers assembles personal computers from generic components. It purchases its
color monitors from a manufacturer in Taiwan; thus, there is a long and uncertain lead time for
receiving orders. Lead time is normally distributed, with a mean of 25 days and a standard devia-
tion of 10 days. Daily demand is also normally distributed, with a mean of 2.5 monitors and a
standard deviation of 1.2 monitors. Determine the safety stock and reorder point corresponding to
a 90% service level.
45. PM Computers in Problem 44 is considering purchasing monitors from an American manufacturer
that would guarantee a lead time of 8 days, instead of the Taiwanese company. Determine the
new reorder point, given this lead time, and identify the factors that would enter into the deci-
sion to change manufacturers.
46. The Corner Drug Store fills prescriptions for a popular children’s antibiotic, amoxicillin. The
daily demand for amoxicillin is normally distributed, with a mean of 200 ounces and a stan-
dard deviation of 80 ounces. The vendor for the pharmaceutical firm that supplies the drug calls
the drugstore pharmacist every 30 days to check the inventory of amoxicillin. During a call, the
druggist indicated that the store had 60 ounces of the antibiotic in stock. The lead time to re-
ceive an order is 4 days. Determine the order size that will enable the drugstore to maintain a
95% service level.
47. The Fast Service Food Mart stocks frozen pizzas in a refrigerated display case. The average
daily demand for the pizzas is normally distributed, with a mean of 8 pizzas and a standard devi-
ation of 2.5 pizzas. A vendor for a packaged food distributor checks the market’s inventory of
frozen foods every 10 days, and during a particular visit, there were no pizzas in stock. The lead
time to receive an order is 3 days. Determine the order size for this order period that will result
in a 99% service level. During the vendor’s following visit, there were 5 frozen pizzas in stock.
What is the order size for the next order period?
48. The Impanema Restaurant stocks a red Brazilian table wine it purchases from a wine merchant
in a nearby city. The daily demand for the wine at the restaurant is normally distributed, with a
mean of 18 bottles and a standard deviation of 4 bottles. The wine merchant sends a represen-
tative to check the restaurant’s wine cellar every 30 days, and during a recent visit, there were
25 bottles in stock. The lead time to receive an order is 2 days. The restaurant manager has re-
quested an order size that will enable him to limit the probability of a stockout to 2%. Deter-
mine the order size.
49. The concession stand at the Blacksburg High School stadium sells slices of pizza during soccer
games. Concession stand sales are a primary source of revenue for high school athletic pro-
grams, so the athletic director wants to sell as much food as possible. However, any pizza not
sold is given away to the players, coaches, and referees, or it is thrown away. The athletic direc-
tor wants to determine a reorder point that will meet, not exceed, the demand for pizza. Pizza
sales are normally distributed, with a mean of 6 pizzas per hour and a standard deviation of 
2.5 pizzas. The pizzas are ordered from Pizza Town restaurant, and the mean delivery time is 
30 minutes, with a standard deviation of 8 minutes.
a. Currently, the concession stand places an order when it has 1 pizza left. What level of 
service does this result in?
b. What should the reorder point be to have a 98% service level?
790
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT

CASE PROBLEM
791
The Northwoods General Store
The Northwoods General Store in Vermont sells a variety of
outdoor clothing items and equipment and several food prod-
ucts at its modern but rustic-looking retail store. Its food prod-
ucts include salmon and maple syrup. The store also runs a
lucrative catalog operation. One of its most popular products
is maple syrup, which is sold in metal half-gallon cans with a
picture of the store on the front.
Maple syrup was one of the first products the store
produced and sold, and it continues to do so. Setting up
the syrup-making equipment to produce a batch of syrup
costs $450. Storing the syrup for sales throughout the
year is a tricky process because the syrup must be kept
in a temperature-controlled facility. The annual cost of
carrying a gallon of the syrup is $15. Based on past sales
data, the store has forecasted a demand of 7,500 gallons
of maple syrup for the coming year. The store can pro-
duce approximately 100 gallons of syrup per day during
the maple syrup season, which runs from February
through May.
Because of the short season when the store can actu-
ally get sap out of trees, it obviously must produce
enough during this 4-month season to meet demand for
the whole year. Specifically, store management would
like a production and inventory schedule that minimizes
costs and indicates when during the year they need to
start operating the syrup-making facility full time on a
daily basis to meet demand for the remaining 8 months.
Develop a syrup production and inventory schedule for
the Northwoods General Store.
Case Problem
The Texans Stadium Store
The Fort Worth Texans have won three Super Bowls in the
past 5 years, including two in a row the past 2 years. As a
result, sportswear such as hats, sweatshirts, sweatpants, and
jackets with the Texans logo are particularly popular in
Texas. The Texans operate a stadium store outside the foot-
ball stadium where they play. It is near a busy highway, so
the store has heavy customer traffic throughout the year, not
just on game days. In addition, the stadium holds high
school or college football and soccer games almost every
week in the fall, and it holds baseball games in the spring
and summer. The most popular single item the stadium
store sells is a blue and silver baseball cap with the Texans
logo embroidered on it in a special and very attractive man-
ner. The cap has an elastic headband inside it, which auto-
matically conforms to different head sizes. However, the
store has had a difficult time keeping the cap in stock, espe-
cially during the time between the placement and receipt of
an order. Often customers come to the store just for the hat;
when it is not in stock, customers are visibly upset, and the
store management believes they tend to go to competing
stores to purchase their Texans clothing. To rectify this
problem, the store manager, Jenny Jones, would like to
develop an inventory control policy that would ensure that
customers would be able to purchase the cap 99% of the
time they asked for it. Jenny has accumulated the following
demand data for the cap for a 30-week period:
Week
Demand
Week
Demand
Week
Demand
1
38
11
28
21
52
2
51
12
41
22
38
3
25
13
37
23
49
4
60
14
44
24
46
5
35
15
45
25
47
Week
Demand
Week
Demand
Week
Demand
6
42
16
56
26
41
7
29
17
62
27
39
8
46
18
53
28
50
9
55
19
46
29
28
10
19
20
41
30
34
(Demand includes actual sales plus a record of the times a
cap has been requested but not available and an estimate of
the number of times a customer wanted a cap when it was
not available but did not ask for it.)
The store purchases the hats from a small manufactur-
ing company in Jamaica. The shipments from Jamaica
are somewhat erratic, with a lead time anywhere between
Case Problem

792
CHAPTER 16
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
10 days and 1 month. The following lead time data (in days)
were accumulated during approximately a 1-year period:
Order
Lead Time
Order
Lead Time
1
12
11
14
2
16
12
16
3
25
13
23
4
18
14
18
5
10
15
21
6
30
16
19
7
24
17
17
8
19
18
16
9
17
19
22
10
15
20
18
In the past, Jenny placed an order whenever the stock
got down to 150 caps. To what level of service does this re-
order point correspond? What would the reorder point and
safety stock need to be to attain the desired service level?
Discuss how Jenny might determine the order size for caps
and what additional, if any, information would be needed
to determine the order size.
Case Problem
The A-to-Z Office Supply Company
Christine Yamaguchi is the manager of the A-to-Z 
Office Supply Company in Charlotte. The company at-
tempts to gain an advantage over its competitors by provid-
ing quality customer service, which includes prompt
delivery of orders by truck or van and always being able to
meet customer demand from its stock. In order to achieve
this degree of customer service, A-to-Z must stock a large
volume of items on a daily basis at a central warehouse and
at three retail stores in the city and suburbs. Christine
maintains these inventory levels by borrowing cash on a
daily basis from the First Piedmont Bank. She estimates
that for the coming fiscal year, the company’s demand for
cash to pay for inventory will be $17,000 per day for 305
working days. Any money she borrows during the year
must be repaid with interest by the end of the year. The an-
nual interest rate currently charged by the bank is 9%. Any
time Christine takes out a loan to purchase inventory, the
bank charges the company a loan origination fee of $1,200
plus 2 1⁄4 points (2.25% of the amount borrowed).
Christine often uses EOQ analysis to determine opti-
mal amounts of inventory to order for different office sup-
plies. Now she is wondering if she can use the same type
of analysis to determine an optimal borrowing policy. De-
termine the amount of the loan Christine should secure
from the bank, the total annual cost of the company’s bor-
rowing policy, and the number of loans the company
should obtain during the year. Also determine the level of
cash on hand at which the company should apply for a new
loan, given that it takes 15 days for a loan to be processed
by the bank.
Suppose the bank offers Christine a discount, as follows:
On any loan amount equal to or greater than $500,000, the
bank will lower the number of points charged on the loan
origination fee from 2.25% to 2.00%. What would the com-
pany’s optimal loan amount be?
Case Problem
Diamant Foods Company
Diamant Foods Company produces a variety of food
products, including a line of candies. One of its most
popular candy items is Divine Diamonds, a bag of a dozen
individually wrapped diamond-shaped candies made
primarily from a blend of dark and milk chocolates,
macadamia nuts, and a blend of heavy cream fillings. The
item is relatively expensive, so Diamant Foods produces it
only for its eastern market, encompassing urban areas such
as New York, Atlanta, Philadelphia, and Boston. The item
is not sold in grocery or discount stores but mainly in spe-
cialty shops and specialty groceries, candy stores, and de-
partment stores. Diamant Foods supplies the candy to a
single food distributor, which has several warehouses on
the East Coast. The candy is shipped in cases of 60 bags of
the candy per case. Diamonds sell well, despite the fact

CASE PROBLEM
793
that they are expensive, at $9.85 per bag (wholesale). Dia-
mant uses high-quality, fresh ingredients and does not
store large stocks of the candy in inventory for very long
periods of time.
Diamant’s distributor believes that demand for the
candy follows a seasonal pattern. It has collected demand
data (i.e., cases sold) for Diamonds from its warehouses
and the stores it supplies for the past 3 years, as follows:
Demand (cases)
Month
Year 1
Year 2
Year 3
January
192
212
228
February
210
223
231
March
205
216
226
April
260
252
293
May
228
235
246
June
172
220
229
July
160
209
217
August
147
231
226
September
256
263
302
October
342
370
411
November
251
260
279
December
273
277
293
The distributor must hold the candy inventory in cli-
mate-controlled warehouses and be careful in handling it.
The annual carrying cost is $116 per case. Diamonds must
be shipped a long distance from the manufacturer to the dis-
tributor, and in order to keep the candy as fresh as possible,
trucks must be air-conditioned, shipments must be direct,
and shipments are often less than a truckload. As a result,
the ordering cost is $4,700.
Diamant Foods makes Diamonds from three primary
ingredients it orders from different suppliers: dark and
milk chocolate, macadamia nuts, and a special heavy
cream filling. Except for its unique shape, a Diamond is al-
most like a chocolate truffle. Each Diamond weighs 1.2
ounces and requires 0.70 ounce of blended chocolates,
0.50 ounce of macadamia nuts, and 0.40 ounce of filling to
produce (including spillage and waste). Diamant Foods or-
ders chocolate, nuts, and filling from its suppliers by the
pound. The annual ordering cost is $5,700 for chocolate,
and the annual carrying cost is $0.45 per pound. The order-
ing cost for macadamia nuts is $6,300, and the annual car-
rying cost is $0.63 per pound. The ordering cost for filling
is $4,500, and the annual carrying cost is $0.55 per pound.
Each of the suppliers offers the candy manufacturer a
quantity discount price schedule for the ingredients, as
follows:
Chocolate
Macadamia Nuts
Filling
Price Quantity (lb.)
Price Quantity (lb.)
Price Quantity (lb.)
$3.05
0–50,000
$6.50
0–30,000
$1.50
0–40,000
2.90
50,001–100,000
6.25
30,001–70,000
1.35
40,001–80,000
2.75
100,001–150,000
5.95
70,001+
1.25
80,001+
2.60
150,001+
Determine the inventory order quantity for Diamant’s
distributor. Compare the optimal order quantity with a
seasonally adjusted forecast for demand. Does the order
quantity seem adequate to meet the seasonal demand pat-
tern for Diamonds (i.e., is it likely that shortages or ex-
cessive inventories will occur)? Can you identify the
causes of the seasonal demand pattern for Diamonds?
Determine the inventory order quantity for each of the
three primary ingredients that Diamant Foods orders
from its suppliers.

Z
.00
.01
.02
.03
.04
.05
.06
.07
.08
.09
0.0
.0000
.0040
.0080
.0120
.0160
.0199
.0239
.0279
.0319
.0359
0.1
.0398
.0438
.0478
.0517
.0557
.0596
.0636
.0675
.0714
.0753
0.2
.0793
.0832
.0871
.0910
.0948
.0987
.1026
.1064
.1103
.1141
0.3
.1179
.1217
.1255
.1293
.1331
.1368
.1406
.1443
.1480
.1517
0.4
.1554
.1591
.1628
.1664
.1700
.1736
.1772
.1808
.1844
.1879
0.5
.1915
.1950
.1985
.2019
.2054
.2088
.2123
.2157
.2190
.2224
0.6
.2257
.2291
.2324
.2357
.2389
.2422
.2454
.2486
.2517
.2549
0.7
.2580
.2611
.2642
.2673
.2704
.2734
.2764
.2794
.2823
.2852
0.8
.2881
.2910
.2939
.2967
.2995
.3023
.3051
.3078
.3106
.3133
0.9
.3159
.3186
.3212
.3238
.3264
.3289
.3315
.3340
.3365
.3389
1.0
.3413
.3438
.3461
.3485
.3508
.3531
.3554
.3577
.3599
.3621
1.1
.3643
.3665
.3686
.3708
.3729
.3749
.3770
.3790
.3810
.3830
1.2
.3849
.3869
.3888
.3907
.3925
.3944
.3962
.3980
.3997
.4015
1.3
.4032
.4049
.4066
.4082
.4099
.4115
.4131
.4147
.4162
.4177
1.4
.4192
.4207
.4222
.4236
.4251
.4265
.4279
.4292
.4306
.4319
1.5
.4332
.4345
.4357
.4370
.4382
.4394
.4406
.4418
.4429
.4441
1.6
.4452
.4463
.4474
.4484
.4495
.4505
.4515
.4525
.4535
.4545
1.7
.4554
.4564
.4573
.4582
.4591
.4599
.4608
.4616
.4625
.4633
1.8
.4641
.4649
.4656
.4664
.4671
.4678
.4686
.4693
.4699
.4706
1.9
.4713
.4719
.4726
.4732
.4738
.4744
.4750
.4756
.4761
.4767
2.0
.4772
.4778
.4783
.4788
.4793
.4798
.4803
.4808
.4812
.4817
2.1
.4821
.4826
.4830
.4834
.4838
.4842
.4846
.4850
.4854
.4857
2.2
.4861
.4864
.4868
.4871
.4875
.4878
.4881
.4884
.4887
.4890
2.3
.4893
.4896
.4898
.4901
.4904
.4906
.4909
.4911
.4913
.4916
2.4
.4918
.4920
.4922
.4925
.4927
.4929
.4931
.4932
.4934
.4936
2.5
.4938
.4940
.4941
.4943
.4945
.4946
.4948
.4949
.4951
.4952
2.6
.4953
.4955
.4956
.4957
.4959
.4960
.4961
.4962
.4963
.4964
2.7
.4965
.4966
.4967
.4968
.4969
.4970
.4971
.4972
.4973
.4974
2.8
.4974
.4975
.4976
.4977
.4977
.4978
.4979
.4979
.4980
.4981
2.9
.4981
.4982
.4982
.4983
.4984
.4984
.4985
.4985
.4986
.4986
3.0
.4987
.4987
.4987
.4988
.4988
.4989
.4989
.4989
.4990
.4990
TABLE A.1
The normal table
Normal curve areas
Appendix A
Normal and Chi-Square Tables
Z =
x
x – 

794

APPENDIX A
NORMAL AND CHI-SQUARE TABLES
795
TABLE A.2
Chi-square table
For a particular number of degrees of freedom, an entry
represents the critical value of 2 corresponding to 
a specified upper tail area ()
Upper Tail Areas ()
Degrees of Freedom
.995
.99
.975
.95
.90
.75
.25
.10
.05
.025
.01
.005
1
0.001
0.004
0.016
0.102
1.323
2.706
3.841
5.024
6.635
7.879
2
0.010
0.020
0.051
0.103
0.211
0.575
2.773
4.605
5.991
7.378
9.210
10.597
3
0.072
0.115
0.216
0.352
0.584
1.213
4.108
6.251
7.815
9.348
11.345
12.838
4
0.207
0.297
0.484
0.711
1.064
1.923
5.385
7.779
9.488
11.143
13.277
14.860
5
0.412
0.554
0.831
1.145
1.610
2.675
6.626
9.236
11.071
12.833
15.086
16.750
6
0.676
0.872
1.237
1.635
2.204
3.455
7.841
10.645
12.592
14.449
16.812
18.548
7
0.989
1.239
1.690
2.167
2.833
4.255
9.037
12.017
14.067
16.013
18.475
20.278
8
1.344
1.646
2.180
2.733
3.490
5.071
10.219
13.362
15.507
17.535
20.090
21.955
9
1.735
2.088
2.700
3.325
4.168
5.899
11.389
14.684
16.919
19.023
21.666
23.589
10
2.156
2.558
3.247
3.940
4.865
6.737
12.549
15.987
18.307
20.483
23.209
25.188
11
2.603
3.053
3.816
4.575
5.578
7.584
13.701
17.275
19.675
21.920
24.725
26.757
12
3.074
3.571
4.404
5.226
6.304
8.438
14.845
18.549
21.026
23.337
26.217
28.299
13
3.565
4.107
5.009
5.892
7.042
9.299
15.984
19.812
22.362
24.736
27.688
29.819
14
4.075
4.660
5.629
6.571
7.790
10.165
17.117
21.064
23.685
26.119
29.141
31.319
15
4.601
5.229
6.262
7.261
8.547
11.037
18.245
22.307
24.996
27.488
30.578
32.801
16
5.142
5.812
6.908
7.962
9.312
11.912
19.369
23.542
26.296
28.845
32.000
34.267
17
5.697
6.408
7.564
8.672
10.085
12.792
20.489
24.769
27.587
30.191
33.409
35.718
18
6.265
7.015
8.231
9.390
10.865
13.675
21.605
25.989
28.869
31.526
34.805
37.156
19
6.844
7.633
8.907
10.117
11.651
14.562
22.718
27.204
30.144
32.852
36.191
38.582
20
7.434
8.260
9.591
10.851
12.443
15.452
23.828
28.412
31.410
34.170
37.566
39.997
21
8.034
8.897
10.283
11.591
13.240
16.344
24.935
29.615
32.671
35.479
38.932
41.401
22
8.643
9.542
10.982
12.338
14.042
17.240
26.039
30.813
33.924
36.781
40.289
42.796
23
9.260
10.196
11.689
13.091
14.848
18.137
27.141
32.007
35.172
38.076
41.638
44.181
24
9.886
10.856
12.401
13.848
15.659
19.037
28.241
33.196
36.415
39.364
42.980
45.559
25
10.520
11.524
13.120
14.611
16.473
19.939
29.339
34.382
37.652
40.646
44.314
46.928
26
11.160
12.198
13.844
15.379
17.292
20.843
30.435
35.563
38.885
41.923
45.642
48.290
27
11.808
12.879
14.573
16.151
18.114
21.749
31.528
36.741
40.113
43.194
46.963
49.645
28
12.461
13.565
15.308
16.928
18.939
22.657
32.620
37.916
41.337
44.461
48.278
50.993
29
13.121
14.257
16.047
17.708
19.768
23.567
33.711
39.087
42.557
45.722
49.588
52.336
30
13.787
14.954
16.791
18.493
20.599
24.478
34.800
40.256
43.773
46.979
50.892
53.672
0
(  , df)
2
2
1

Appendix B
Setting Up and Editing 
a Spreadsheet
796
One of the benefits of using Excel spreadsheets to solve management science problems is that
spreadsheets provide a nice medium for visual presentation. They enable the user to customize
the problem presentation in any manner or format desired. However, problems and models do not
just “appear” on spreadsheets as they do in this book without some careful editing. The purpose
of this brief appendix is to review some of the steps required to set up and edit spreadsheets like
the ones shown in this book.
Virtually all the spreadsheet editing functions and tools can be accessed directly from the tool-
bars at the top of the spreadsheet window. Exhibit B.1 shows our Excel spreadsheet originally
Click on “View,” then
select ”Zoom” to reduce
or increase the size of the
spreadsheet screen.
Click on “File” and
then “New” to set
up a spreadsheet.
Bold type
Italic type
Click on the “Borders”
button to create borders.
Centers headings
over columns.
Increases and 
decreases decimal
places.
Centers items in columns.
Add and delete
rows and columns.
The formula entered in cell B12
is =C4*B10+D4*B11, which is
also shown on the formula bar.
EXHIBIT B.1

APPENDIX B
SETTING UP AND EDITING A SPREADSHEET
797
shown in Exhibit 3.4 in Chapter 3 with the solution to the Beaver Creek Pottery Company linear
programming example. We will describe the Excel editing features as they apply to this example
spreadsheet. If you have not read Chapter 3 yet, don’t worry; it’s not necessary to know how to
solve a linear programming problem in order to understand the spreadsheet editing tools.
Titles and Headings
The title “The Beaver Creek Pottery Company” was typed in cell A1. The bold type for this
heading was created by activating the bold type button, “B,” on the toolbar. Note that we could
have centered this heading across the top of the spreadsheet by covering row 1 with the cursor
and clicking on the button with an “a” with arrows on both sides of it (Merge & Center). Italic
type for headings such as the “Products” heading in cell A3 is created by using the italic button,
“I,” on the toolbar.
Borders
You will notice that all the data and headings in Exhibit B.1 are enclosed by boxes created by
black line borders. These borders are created by clicking on the “Borders” button on the toolbar
at the top of the spreadsheet. Clicking on this button will bring down a selection of different line
locations and line intensities for borders. Activate the border you want, cover the area on your
spreadsheet where you want to include this border, and then click on the activated border that
you selected. Most of the borders in Exhibit B.1 were created by using a border that results in a
closed box. For example, the border that surrounds the headings and numbers in cells A3:D7 was
created by covering this area with the cursor and clicking on the “Borders” button at the top of
the spreadsheet.
Column Centering
Headings and numbers can be centered in the cells (or moved to the right or left side of the 
cells) by using the “Merge & Center” button on the toolbar. To center a column of values,
such as column C in Exhibit B.1, cover cells C3:C7 with the cursor and then click on the “Center”
button.
Deleting and Inserting Rows and Columns
Rows and columns can be inserted in your spreadsheet by clicking the cursor at the row or col-
umn you want a new row or column to appear next to; then click on “Insert” at the top of the
spreadsheet window and select to insert either rows or columns from the menu. Rows and
columns can be deleted by clicking the cursor on the row or column you want to delete and then
selecting “Delete” at the top of the spreadsheet window.
Decimal Places
The number of decimal places in a numeral can be reduced, increased, or eliminated by using the
“Decimal” buttons on the toolbar. Notice that there is one button to increase the number of deci-
mal places and one button to decrease the number of decimal places.
Increasing or Decreasing the Spreadsheet Area
The spreadsheet in Exhibit B.1 has 14 columns (A through R) and 19 rows, which are less than
the numbers of rows and columns that are present when a new spreadsheet is activated. Click
on the “View” tab on the toolbar at the top of the spreadsheet, then on the “Zoom” button. Notice
that the “Magnification” is 140%, which indicates that the spreadsheet is 140% its normal

798
APPENDIX B
SETTING UP AND EDITING A SPREADSHEET
(100%) size, thus reducing the number of rows and columns visible on the screen. For this exam-
ple the spreadsheet was blown up a little, strictly for presentation purposes, so the typed material
in the spreadsheet would be easier to read. To increase or reduce the visible spreadsheet, click on
“View” at the top of the window, then click on “Zoom,” and this will display a window in which
you can alter the size of the spreadsheet. Increasing the size above 100% will reduce the number
of rows and columns, and decreasing the spreadsheet size below 100% will increase the number
of rows and columns that will appear on the spreadsheet screen.
Expanding or Reducing Column and Row Widths
Sometimes it is desirable to expand the width of a column so that you can see a longer heading
or a larger number, or to reduce the width to reflect a smaller number. To accomplish this, click
and hold the left mouse button at the very top of the column between the two column letters on
the line separating the column you want to expand and the column next to it. This should result
in a set of “crossed arrows,” which you can move left or right to expand or reduce the width of
the column by the amount you want. The same procedure can be followed to expand row widths.
Inserting an Equation or a Formula into a Cell
To insert a number or word in a cell, you normally position the cursor on the target cell and type the
word or number, then press Enter or click the cursor on another cell. To type a formula or an equa-
tion into a cell, you click the cursor on the target cell and then an = sign, then your formula (for
example, the formula in cell B12 in Exhibit B.1). The formula is shown on the formula bar at the
top of the spreadsheet. Be aware that Excel is very sensitive to the order of mathematical opera-
tions, so your formulas must be very clearly stated. In general, you use an asterisk (*) to show mul-
tiplication, a slash (/) to show division, and “ˆ2” for squaring.
Printing a Spreadsheet
The spreadsheets shown in the various exhibits in this book were developed by using a “screen
capture” program, which allows the entire screen to be printed just as you would see it on the
screen. However, unless your computer has a screen capture program, you should not expect
your spreadsheets to look exactly like the ones in this book when you print them out. Instead,
you will print your spreadsheet out by using the normal Excel and Windows print routines. To set
up your spreadsheet document for printing, click on the “File” button located in the top-left-hand
corner of the window and then click on “Print,” then “Page Setup.” This will result in the
window shown in Exhibit B.2. This screen enables you to reduce or increase the spreadsheet
size as well as position the spreadsheet on the page in portrait or landscape format.
Notice the “Header/Footer” tab at the top of this window. By clicking on this tab, you can delete
the page numbers and other spreadsheet information, called headers and footers, that normally
appears at the top and bottom of a printed spreadsheet, or you can customize your own header
and footer. By clicking on the “Sheet” tab at the top of the “Page Setup” window, you can remove
the grid lines that separate the cells on every spreadsheet. When you do so, only the borders that
you have created will show up. You can preview what your spreadsheet will look like by select-
ing “Print Preview.”

APPENDIX B
SETTING UP AND EDITING A SPREADSHEET
799
Click here to eliminate
or alter headers and
footers.
Access the “Page Setup”
window from the “File”
button and “Print” menu.
Click on the “Sheet”
tab to eliminate
grid lines.
EXHIBIT B.2
The editing features just described are the most basic and are provided to help you get started
in setting up and solving problems by using Excel spreadsheets. More sophisticated Excel func-
tions that can be used to solve problems are located in specific chapters where they are applied
and can be located by using the book’s index.

Appendix C
The Poisson and Exponential
Distributions
800
The Poisson Distribution
The formula for a Poisson distribution is
where
average arrival rate (i.e., arrivals during a specified period of time)
number of arrivals during the specified time period
the factorial of a value x
As an example of this distribution, consider a service facility that has an average arrival rate of
five customers per hour 
The probability that exactly two customers will arrive at the
service facility is found by letting 
in the preceding Poisson formula:
The value .084 is the probability of exactly two customers arriving at the service facility.
By substituting values of x into the Poisson formula, we can develop a distribution of customer
arrivals during a 1-hour period, as shown in Figure C.1. However, remember that this distribution
is for an arrival rate of five customers per hour. Other values of will result in distributions differ-
ent from the one in Figure C.1.
l
P(x = 2) = 52e-5
2!
= 25(.007)
(2)(1)
= .084
x = 2
(l = 5).
[i.e., x! = x(x - 1)(x - 2). . . (3)(2)(1)]
x! =
e = 2.71828
x =
l =
P(x) = lxe-l
x !
.40
.30
.20
.10
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Arrivals, x
P(x)
FIGURE C.1
Poisson
distribution
for 
5
L 

APPENDIX C
THE POISSON AND EXPONENTIAL DISTRIBUTIONS
801
The Exponential Distribution
The formula for the exponential distribution is
where
average number of customers served during a specified period of time
service time
The probability that a customer will be served within a specified time period can be deter-
mined by using the exponential distribution, in the following form:
If, for example, the service rate is six customers per hour, then the probability that a customer
will be served within 10 minutes (.17 hour) is determined as follows:
Thus, the probability of a customer’s being served within 10 minutes is .632. Figure C.2 is the
exponential probability distribution for this service rate 
.
(m = 6)
= .632
= 1 - .368
= 1 - e-1.0
P(T … .17) = 1 - e-6(.17)
P(T … t) = 1 - e-mt
e = 2.71828
t =
m =
f (t) = m e-mt, t  0
1.00
.80
.60
.40
.20
0
.10
.20 .30 .40 .50 .60
.70 .80
Time, t (hours)
P(t ≥T )
FIGURE C.2
Exponential
distribution
for 
6
M 

Solutions to Selected 
Odd-Numbered Problems
802
Chapter 1
1.
(a) TC = $27,500; TR = $54,000; Z = $26,500; (b) v = 69.56 tables
3.
(a) TC = $29,100; TR = $23,400; Z = -$5,700; (b) v = 24,705.88
yd./month
7.
(a) v = 1,250 dolls
9.
98.8%
11.
reduces v to 2,727.3 tires
13.
increases v to 65,789.47 lb.
15.
do not raise price
17.
yes, v will be reduced
19.
(a) executive plan; (b) 937.5 min. per month
21.
(a) v = 26.9 pupils; (b) v = 106.3 pupils; (c) p = $123.67
23.
v = 209.2 teams
25.
Z = $138,725; p = $6.25; v = 47,125
27.
(a) v = 31.25; (b) Z = $1,804; (c) Z = $1,612; no
29.
x = 0, y = 50
31.
bowls = 2, mugs = 2, Z = 1,100
33.
34,500 visits
35.
4 registers
Chapter 2
1.
x1 = 4, x2 = 0, Z = 40
3.
(a) min. Z = .05x1 + .03x2; s.t. 8x1 + 6x2 Ú 48, x1 + 2x2 Ú 12,
xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 0, x2 = 8, Z = 0.24
5.
(a) min. Z = 3x1 + 5x2; s.t. 10x1 + 2x2 Ú 20, 6x1 + 6x2 Ú 36, x2 Ú 2,
xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 4, x2 = 2, Z = 22
7.
No labor, 4.8 wood
9.
(a) max. Z = x1 + 5x2; s.t. 5x1 + 5x2 … 25, 2x1 + 4x2 … 16, x1 … 5,
x1, x2 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 0, x2 = 4, Z = 20
11.
x1 = 0, x2 = 9, Z = 54
13.
(a) max. Z = 300x1 + 400x2; s.t. 3x1 + 2x2 … 18, 2x1 + 4x2 … 20,
x2 … 4, x1, x2 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 4, x2 = 3, Z = 2,400
15.
(a) maximum demand is not achieved by one bracelet; (b) $600
17.
x1 = 15.8, x2 = 20.5, Z = 1,610
19.
(a) no; (b) x1 = 55, x2 = 16.25, Z = 1,851; (c) Z = 2,435; (d) Z = 2,073.
21.
A: s1 = 4, s2 = 1, s3 = 0; B: s1 = 0, s2 = 5, s3 = 0; C: s1 = 0, s2 = 6,
s3 = 1
23.
A: s1 = 0, s2 = 0, s3 = 8, s4 = 0; B: s1 = 0, s2 = 3.2, s3 = 0, s4 = 4.8;
C: s1 = 26, s2 = 24, s3 = 0, s4 = 10
25.
changes the optimal solution
27.
x1 = 28.125, x2 = 0, Z = $1,671.95; no effect
29.
infeasible solution
31.
x1 = 4, x2 = 1, Z = 18
33.
x1 = 4.8, x2 = 2.4, Z = 26.4
35.
x1 = 3.2, x2 = 6, Z = 37.6
37.
no additional profit
39.
(a) max. Z = 800x1 + 900x2; s.t. 2x1 + 4x2 … 30, 4x1 + 2x2 … 30,
x1 + x2 Ú 9, xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 5, x2 = 5, Z = 8,500
41.
x1 = 5.3, x2 = 4.7, Z = 806
43.
(a) 12 hr.; (b) new solution: x1 = 5.09, x2 = 5.45, Z = 111.27
45.
x1 = 38.4, x2 = 57.6, Z = 19.78; profit reduced
47.
(a) min. Z = .09x1 + .18x2, s.t. .46x1 + .35x2 … 2,000, x1 Ú 1,000,
x2 Ú 1,000, .91x1 - .82x2 = 3,500, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0; (b) 32 fewer 
defects
49.
x1 = 160, x2 = 106.67, Z = 568
51.
x1 = 25.71, x2 = 14.29, Z = 14,571
53.
(a) min. Z = (.05)(8)x1 + (.10)(.75)x2; s.t. 5x1 + 8x2 Ú 800,
(5x1/x2) = 1.5, 8x1 + .75x2
1200; (b) x1 = 96, x2 = 320, Z = 62.40
55.
(a) min. Z = 3700x1 + 5100x2; s.t. x1 + x2 = 45, (32x1 + 14x2)/
(x1 + x2)
21, .10x1 + .04x2
6, x1/(x1 + x2) Ú .25,
x2/(x2 + x2) Ú .25; (b) x1 = 18.67; x2 = 26.3; Z = 203,367
57.
(a) max. Z = .18x1 + .06x2, s.t. x1 + x2 ≤720,000, x1/(x1 + x2) … .65,
.22x1 + .05x2 … 100,000, x1, x2 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 376,470.59,
x2 = 343,526.41, Z = 88,376.47
59.
one more hour for Sarah would reduce the regraded exams from
10 to 9.8; another hour for Brad has no effect
61.
only more Colombian would affect the solution; 1 lb of Colombian
would increase sales to $463.20; increasing the brewing capacity
has no effect; extra advertising increases sales
63.
infeasible
Chapter 3
3.
Cells: B10:B12; Constraints: B10:B12 Ú 0, G6 … F6, G7 … F7;
Profit: = B10*C4+B11*D4+B12*E4; Target cell = B13.
5.
F6
C6*B12
D6*B13, F7
C7*B12
D7*B13,
G6
E6 - F6 G7 E7 - F7,B14
C4*B12
D4*B13,
7.
(a and b) max. Z = 12x1 + 16x2 + 0s1 + 0s2; s.t. 3x1 + 2x2 +
s1 = 500, 4x1 + 5x2 + s2 = 800, xi Ú 0, si Ú 0
9.
(a and b) 
… c1 … 12.8, 15 … c2 … 
320 … q1 … 
0 … q2 … 1,250; (c) $0, $3.20
,
,
- 
x1 = 8, x2 = 5.2, Z = 81.6
+
=
=
+
=
+
=
…
…
…

SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
803
11.
(a) x1 = 4, x2 = 3, Z = 57, A: s1 = 40, s2 = 0, B: s1 = 0, s2 = 0,
C: s1 = 0, s2 = 20; (b) x1 = 2, x2 = 4; (c) solution point same for
profit = $15, new solution x1 = 0, x2 = 5, Z = 100 for profit = $20
13.
(a and b) max. Z = 2.25x1 + 3.10x2 + 0s1 + 0s2 + 0s3; s.t. 
5.0x1 + 7.5x2 + s1 = 6,500, 3.0x1 + 3.2x2 + s2 = 3,000,
x2 + s3 = 510, xi Ú 0, sj Ú 0
15.
(a) Additional processing time, $0.75/hr.; (b) 0 … c1 … 2.906, 2.4 …
c2 …
, 6,015 … q1 …
, 1,632 … q2 … 3,237, 0 … q3 … 692.308
17.
(a) x1 = 4, x2 = 0, s1 = 12, s2 = 0, s3 = 11, Z = 24,000; (b) x1 = 1,
x2 = 3, Z = 28,500; (c) C still optimal
19.
(a and b) max. Z = 300x1 + 520x2; s.t. x1 + x2 = 410, 105x1 +
210x2 = 52,500, x2 = 100, xi Ú 0
21.
(a) no, max. price = $80; (b) $2.095
23.
(a) x1 = 300, x2 = 100, s1 = 0 lb., s2 = 15 lb., s4 = 0.6 hr., Z = 230;
(b) c1 = $0.60, x1 = 257, x2 = 143, Z = 240; (c) x1 = 300, x2 = 125,
Z = 242.50
25.
(a and b) min. Z = 50x1 + 70x2; s.t. 80x1 + 40x2 = 3,000,
80x1 = 1,000, 40x2 = 800, xi
27.
(a) personal interviews, $0.625/interview; (b) 25 … c2 …
,
1,800 … q1 …
29.
(a) x1 = 333.3, x2 = 166.7, s1 = 100 gal., s2 = 133.3 gal., s3 = 83.3
gal., s4 = 100 gal., Z = 1,666; (b) any values of c
31.
(a) max. Z = 8.65x1 + 10.95x2; s.t. x1 + x2
250, x1 + x2
120,
x1 - 2x2
0, - x1 + 1.2x2
0, x1
150, x2
110, xi
0;
(b) x1 = 140, x2 = 110, Z = 2,415.50
33.
min. Z = 11x1 + 16x2; s.t. x1 + x2 = 500, 0.7x1 + .02x2
25,
x1/(x1 + x2)
.20, x2/(x1 + x2)
.20, xi
0
35.
max. Z = 1.20x1 + 1.30x2; s.t. x1 + x2 … 95,000, .18x1 +
.30x2 … 20,000, xi Ú 0
37.
(a) 5%, $16,111.11; (b) x1 = 0, x2 = 66,666.7, Z = 86,666.67
39.
(a and b) min. Z = 400x1 + 180x2 + 90x3; s.t. x1 Ú 200, x2 Ú 300,
x3 Ú 100, 4x3 - x1 - x2 … 0, x1 + x2 + x3 = 1,000, xi Ú 0;
(c) x1 = 200, x2 = 600, x3 = 200, Z = 206,000
41.
max. Z = 0.50x1 + 0.75x2; s.t. 0.17x1 + 0.25x2 … 4,000, x1 + x2 …
18,000, x1 Ú 8,000, x2 Ú 8,000, x1, x2 Ú 0; (b) max. Z = 0.50x1 +
0.75x2; 0.17x1 + 0.25x2 = 4,000, x1 + x2 = 18,000, x1 = 8,000,
x2 = 8,000, xi Ú 0
43.
x1 = 8,000, x2 = 10,000, Z = 11,500; (a) $375; increase, x1 = 8,000,
x2 = 10,500, Z = $11,875; x1 = 8,000, x2 = 10,560, Z = $11,920
45.
(a) purchase land; (b) not purchase land
47.
(a) $0.78, 360 cartons; (b) $0; (c) x1 = 108, x2 = 54, x3 = 162,
Z = 249.48, no discount
49.
x1 = 3, x3 = 6, Z = 3,600; (a) more assembly hr.; (b) additional
profit = $600; (c) no effect
51.
x1 = 1,000, x2 = 800, x3 = 200, Z = 760; (a) increase by 100, $38 in
additional profit; (b) x1 = 1,000, x2 = 1,000, Z = 770; (c) Z = 810;
x1 = 1,600, x2 = 200, x3 = 200
53.
x1 = 20, x2 = 33.33, x3 = 26.67, Z = $703,333.4
55.
x13 = 350, x21 = 158.33, x22 = 296.67, x23 = 75, x31 = 610,
x42 = 240, Z = $77,910
57.
max. Z = 12x1 + 8x2 + 10x3 + 6x4; s.t. 2x1 + 9x2 + 1.3x3 + 2.5x4 …
74; 2x1 + .25x2 + x3 + x4 … 24; 2x1 + 5x3 + 2x4 … 36; 45x1 + 35x2 +
50x3 + 16x4 … 480, xi Ú 0
59.
max. 
s.t.
7,200, 6x1 + 4x2 + 10x3 + 1x4 … 18,000
8x1 + 12x2 + 32x3 + 80x4 … 80,000, 55x1
4
+
15x2
2
…
Z = +5x1 + 3x2 + 7x3 + 16x4;



…

…
…
…
…

…




61.
(a) max. 
s.t. 
(b)
Chapter 4
1.
Model must be resolved; Z = 43,310, do not implement; no; 
x1 = x2 = x3 = x4 = 112.5
3.
No effect; $740; x1 = 22,363.636, x3 = 43,636.364, x4 = 14,000
5.
Add slack variables for 3 warehouses … constraints; coefficients in
objective function—$9 for s1, $6 for s2, $7 for s3, solution does not
change
7.
(a) max. Z = 190x1 + 170x2 + 155x3; s.t. 3.5x1 + 5.2x2 + 2.8x3 …
500, 1.2x1 + 0.8x2 + 1.5x3 … 240, 40x1 + 55x2 + 20x3 … 6,500,
xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 41.27, x2 = 0, x3 = 126.98, Z = 27,523.81
9.
(a) min. Z = 4x1 + 3x2 + 2x3; s.t. 2x1 + 4x2 + x3 Ú 16, 3x1 + 2x2 +
x3 Ú 12, xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 2, x2 = 3, Z = $0.17
11.
(a) max. Z = 8x1 + 10x2 + 7x3; s.t. 7x1 + 10x2 + 5x3 … 2,000, 2x1 +
3x2 + 2x3 … 660, x1 … 200, x2 … 300, x3 … 150, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0,
x3 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 178.57, x3 = 150, Z = 2,478.57
13.
(a) max. Z = 7x1 + 5x2 + 5x3 + 4x4; s.t. 2x1 + 4x2 + 2x3 + 3x4 …
45,000, x1 + x2 … 6,000, x3 + x4 … 7,000, x1 + x3 … 5,000, x2 + x4 …
6,000, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0, x4 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 5,000, x2 = 1,000,
x4 = 5,000, Z = 60,000
15.
(a) max. Z = 1,800x1a + 2,100x1b + 1,600x1c + 1,000x2a + 700x2b +
900x2c + 1,400x3a + 800x3b + 2,200x3c; s.t. x1a + x1b + x1c = 30,
x2a + x2b + x2c = 30, x3a + x3b + x3c = 30, x1a + x2a + x3a … 40, x1b +
x2b + x3b … 60, x1c + x2c + x3c … 50, xij Ú 0; (b) x1b = 30, x2a = 30,
x3c = 30, Z = 159,000
17.
(a) min. Z = 1.7(xt1 + xt2 + xt3) + 2.8(xm1 + xm2 + xm3) + 3.25(xb1 +
xb2 + xb3); s.t. .50xt1 - .50xm1 - .50xb1 … 0, -.20xt1 + .80xm1 - .20xb1
Ú 0, -.30xt2 - .30xm2 + .70xb2 Ú 0, -.30xt2 + .70xm2 - .30xb2 Ú 0,
.80xt2 - .20xm2 - .20xb2 … 0, .50xt3 - .50xm3 - .50xb3 Ú 0, .30xt3 -
.70xm3 - .70xb3 … 0, -.10xt3 - .10xm3 + .90xb3 Ú 0, xt1 + xm1 + xb1 Ú
1,200, xt2 + xm2 + xb2 Ú 900, xt3 + xm3 + xb3 Ú 2,400; xij Ú 0; (b) xt1 =
600, xt2 = 180, xt3 = 1,680, xm1 = 600, xm2 = 450, xm3 = 480, xb1 = 0,
xb2 = 270, xb3 = 240, Z = 10,123.50
19.
(a) max. Z = .02x1 + .09x2 + .06x3 + .04x4; s.t. x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 =
4,000,000, x1 … 1,600,000, x2 … 1,600,000, x3 … 1,600,000, x4 …
1,600,000, x2 - x3 - x4 … 0, x1 - x3 Ú 0, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0,
x4 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 800,000, x2 = 1,600,000, x3 = 800,000,
x4 = 800,000, Z = 240,000
21.
(a) max. Z = 7.8x11 + 7.8x12 + 8.2x13 + 7.9x14 + 6.7x21 + 8.9x22 +
9.2x23 + 6.3x24 + 8.4x31 + 8.1x32 + 9.0x33 + 5.8x34; s.t. 35x11 +
40x21 + 38x31 … 9,000, 41x12 + 36x22 + 37x32 … 14,400, 34x13 +
32x23 + 33x33 … 12,000, 39x14 + 43x24 + 40x34 … 15,000, x11 + x12 +
x13 + x14 = 400, x21 + x22 + x23 + x24 = 570, x31 + x32 + x33 + x34 =
320, xij Ú 0; (b) x11 = 15.385, x14 = 384.615, x22 = 400, x23 = 170,
x31 = 121.212, x33 = 198.788, Z = 11,089.73
23.
(a) min. Z = 1.7x11 + 1.4x12 + 1.2x13 + 1.1x14 + 1.05x15 + 1.0x16 +
1.7x21 + 1.4x22 + 1.2x23 + 1.1x24 + 1.05x25 + 1.7x31 + 1.4x32 + 1.2x33 +
1.1x34 + 1.7x41 + 1.4x42 + 1.2x43 + 1.7x51 + 1.4x52 + 1.7x61; s.t. x11 +
x12 + x13 + x14 + x15 + x16 = 47,000, x12 + x13 + x14 + x15 + x16 + x21 +
x22 + x23 + x24 + x25 = 35,000, x13 + x14 + x15 + x16 + x22 + x23 + x24 +
x25 + x31 + x32 + x33 + x34 = 52,000, x14 + x15 + x16 + x23 + x24 + x25 +
x32 + x33 + x34 + x41 + x42 + x43 = 27,000, x15 + x16 + x24 + x25 + x33 +
x34 + x42 + x43 + x51 + x52 = 19,000, x16 + x25 + x34 + x43 + x52 + x61 =
15,000; (b) x11 = 12,000, x13 = 25,000, x14 = 8,000, x15 = 2,000,
x33 = 2,000, x34 = 15,000, Z = $80,200; (c) x16 = 52,000,
Z = $52,000
x1 = 43.89, x2 = 8.67, Z = +1,538.11
20 x2 … 700, x1 … 50, x2 … 15;
1.2x1 + 5x2 … 96, 12x1 +
Z = +23x1 + 61x2;

804
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
25.
(a) add xss … 150, xww … 300, xcc … 250; xnc = 700, xnw = 0, xsw = 150,
xss = 150, xes = 900, xwc = 250, xww = 300, xcc = 250, xcw = 250,
xws = 50, Z = 20,400; (b) changes demand constraints 
from … 1,200 to = 1,000; xnc = 400, xnw = 300, xsw = 150, xss = 150,
xec = 50, xes = 850, xwc = 300, xww = 300, xcc = 250, xcw = 250,
Z = 21,200
27.
(a) max. Z = 2x1 + 4x2 + 3x3 + 7x4; s.t. x2 + x4 … 300, 6x1 +
15x2 … 1,200, 5x3 + 12x4 … 2,400, xi Ú 0; (b) x1 = 200, x3 = 480,
Z = 1,840
29.
(a) max. Z = 35x1 + 20x2 + 58x3; s.t. 14x1 + 12x2 + 35x3 … 35,000,
6x1 + 3x2 + 12x3 … 20,000, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 2,500,
Z = 87,500
31.
(a) min. Z = 15,000x1 + 4,000x2 + 6,000x3; s.t. x3/x2 Ú 2/1, 25,000x1
+ 10,000x2 + 15,000x3 Ú 100,000, (15,000x1 + 3,000x2 + 12,000x3)/
(10,000x1 + 7,000x2 + 3,000x3) Ú 2/1, (15,000x1 + 4,000x2 +
9,000x3)/(25,000x1 + 10,000x2 + 15,000x3) Ú .30, x2 … 7, x1 Ú 0,
x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0; (b) x2 = 2.5, x3 = 5.0, Z = 40,000; (c) x4, no effect
33.
(a) min. Z = .11x1 + .05
yi; s.t. x1 + y1 + 20,000 - c1 = 60,000,
c1 + y2 + 30,000 - c2 = 60,000 + y1, c2 + y3 + 40,000 - c3 =
80,000 + y2, c3 + y4 + 50,000 - c4 = 30,000 + y3, c4 + y5 +
80,000 - c5 = 30,000 + y4, c5 + y6 + 100,000 - c6 = 20,000 + y5,
x1 + y6 … c6, x1, yi, ci Ú 0; (b) x1 = 70,000, y3 = 40,000,
y4 = 20,000, y1 = y2 = y5 = y6 = 0, c1 = 30,000, c5 = 30,000,
c6 = 110,000, Z = $10,700; (c) x1 = 90,000, y3 = 20,000,
c1 = 50,000, c2 = 20,000, c5 = 50,000, c6 = 130,000, Z = $9,100
35.
(a) max. Z = .7xcr + .6xbr + .4xpr + .85xar + 1.05xcb + .95xbb + .75xpb
+ 1.20xab + 1.55xcm + 1.45xbm + 1.25xpm + 1.70xam; s.t. xcr + xcb +
xcm … 200, xbr + xbb + xbm … 300, xpr + xpb + xpm … 150, xar + xab +
xam … 400, .90xbr + .90xpr - .10xcr - .10xar … 0, .80xcr - .20xbr -
.20xpr - .20xar Ú 0, .25xbb + .75xcb - .75xpb - .75xab Ú 0, xam = 0,
.5xbm + .5xpm - .5xcm - .5xam … 0, xij Ú 0; (b) xcm = 125, xar = 300,
xcr = 75, xbb = 300, xpm = 125, xab = 100, Z = 1,602.50
37.
(a) min. Z = 40x1 + 65x2 + 70x3 + 30x4; s.t. x1 + x2 = 250, x3 + x4
= 400, x1 + x3 = 300, x2 + x4 = 350, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0, x4 Ú 0;
(b) x1 = 250, x3 = 50, x4 = 350, Z = 24,000
39.
(a) max. Z = 175 (7x1); s.t. 8x1 + 5x2 + 6.5x3 … 3,000, x1 + x2 + x3
… 120, 90(7x1) … 10,000, 7x1 - 12x2 = 0, 12x2 - 10x3 = 0, 7x1 -
10x3 = 0, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, x3 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 15.9, x2 = 9.3, x3 = 11.1,
Z = 19,444.44
41.
(a) min. Z = 3x13 + 4x14 + 5x12 + 2x34 + 7x45 + 8x25; s.t. x13 + x14 +
x12 = 5, x45 + x25 = 5, x13 = x34, x14 + x34 = x45, x12 = x25, xij Ú 0;
(b) x14 = 5, x45 = 5, Z = 55,000
43.
(a) max. Z = 0.30x1 + 0.20x2 + 0.05x3 + 0.10x4  0.15x5; s.t. 
0.3x1 + 0.2x2 + 0.05x3 + 0.1x4  0.15x5
4.0, x1 + x2 + x3 + x4
+ x5
24, x1
4, x2
8, x3
10, x4
3, x4
2, x5
10,
x5
3, xi
0
45.
(a) min. Z = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6; s.t. 3x1 + 2x2 + 2x3 + x4 =
700, x3 + 2x4 + x5 = 1,200, x2 + x5 + 2x6 = 300, xi Ú 0; (b) x2 = 50,
x4 = 600, x6 = 125, Z = 775; (c) min. Z = 4x1 + x2 + 2x3 + 0x4 + 6x5
+ 5x6; s.t. 3x1 + 2x2 + 2x3 + x4 Ú 700, x3 + 2x4 + x5 Ú 1,200, x2 +
x5 + 2x6 Ú 300, xi Ú 0; x2 = 300, x4 = 600, Z = 300
47.
(a) max. Z = 4x1 + 8x2 + 6x3 + 7x4 - 5y1 - 6y2 - 7y3; s.t. s0 = 2,000,
x1 … s0, s1 = s0 - x1 + y1, s1 … 10,000, x2 … s1, s2 = s1 - x2 + y2,
s2 … 10,000, x3 … s2, s3 = s2 - x3 + y3, s3 … 10,000, x4 … s3, xi Ú 0,
yi Ú 0, si Ú 0; (b) x1 = 0, x2 = 10,000, x4 = 10,000, y1 = 8,000,
y2 = 10,000, s0 = 2,000, s1 = s2 = s3 = 10,000, Z = 50,000
49.
(a) max. Z = 130x1a + 150x1b + 90x1c + 275x2a + 300x2b + 100x2c
+ 180x3a + 225x3b + 140x3c + 200x4a + 120x4b + 160x4c; s.t. x1a +
x1b + x1c = 1, x2a + x2b + x2c = 1, x3a + x3b + x3c = 1, x4a + x4b + x4c
= 1, 1 … x1a + x2a + x3a + x4a … 2, 1 … x1b + x2b + x3b + x4b … 2,


…

…
…
…
…
…
…

6
1
1 … x1c + x2c + x3c + x4c … 2, xij Ú 0; (b) x1a = 1, x2b = 1, x3b = 1,
x4c = 1, Z = 815; (c) max. Z = 130x1a + 150x1b + 90x1c + 275x2a +
300x2b + 100x2c + 180x3a + 225x3b + 140x3c + 200x4a + 120x4b +
160x4c; s.t. x1a + x1b + x1c … 1, x2a + x2b + x2c … 1, x3a + x3b +
x3c … 1, x4a + x4b + x4c … 1, x1a + x2a + x3a + x4a = 1, x1b + x2b +
x3b + x4b = 1, x1c + x2c + x3c + x4c = 1, xij Ú 0; x2a = 1, x3b = 1,
x4c = 1, Z = 660
51.
Z values: A = 1.000, B = 1.000, C = 1.000; all three efficient
53.
(a) min. Z = x; s.t. 150x = 650 + y1, 150x + y1 = 450 + y2, 150x + y2
= 600 + y3, 150x + y3 = 500 + y4, 150x + y4 = 700 + y5, 150x + y5
= 650 + y6, 150x + y6 = 750 + y7, 150x + y7 = 900 + y8, 150x + y8
= 800 + y9, 150x + y9 = 650 + y10, 150x + y10 = 700 + y11, 150x +
y11 Ú 500; (b) Z = x = 4.45, y1 = 18.18, y2 = 236.36, y3 = 304.54,
y4 = 472.72, y5 = 440.91, y6 = 459.09, y7 = 377.27, y8 = 145.45,
y9 = 13.63, y10 = 31.81, y11 = 0
55.
(a) max. Z = y; s.t. y - x1 = 0, y - x2 = 0, y - x3 = 0, 10x1 + 8x2 +
6x3 … 960, 9x1 + 21x2 + 15x3 … 1,440, 2x1 - 3x2 - 2x3 … 60, - 2x1 +
3x2 + 2x3 … 60, xi Ú 0, y Ú 0; (b) x1 = x2 = x3 = y = 20; (c) remove
balancing requirement, x1 = x2 = x3 = y = 32
57.
max. Z = 850x1 + 600xn + 750xs + 1,000xw; s.t. x1 + xn + xs + xw =
18, x1 + xn + xs + xw + y1 + yn + ys + yw = 60, 400y1 + 100yn +
175ys + 90yw … 9,000, 10 … y1 … 25, 5 … yn … 10, 5 … ys … 10, 5 …
yw … 10, x1 … 6, xn … 6, xs … 6, xw … 6, xi Ú 0, yi Ú 0; x1 = 6, xn = 0,
xs = 6, xw = 6, y1 = 14.44, yn = 10, ys = 7.56, yw = 10, Z = 15,600
(multiple optimal)
59.
(a) max. Z = .85x1 + .90x2 - y1 - y2; s.t. x1 … 5,000 + 3y1, x2 … 4,000 +
5y2, .60x1 + .85x2 + y1 + y2 … 16,000, x1 Ú .3(x1 + x2), x1 … .6(x1 +
x2), x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0, y1 Ú 0, y2 Ú 0; (b) x1 = 5,458.128, x2 =
12,735.63, y1 = 152.709, y2 = 1,747.126, Z = 14,201.64
61.
(a) min. Z =
(ranking)• xij, s.t. xij … hr.,
xij = project hr.,
(hourly rate)• xij … budget; (b) xA3 = 400, xA4 = 50, xB4 = 250,
xB5 = 350, xC4 = 175, xC7 = 274.1, xC8 = 50.93, xD2 = 131.7,
xD7 = 15.93, xE1 = 208.33, xE8 = 149.07, xF1 = 291.67, xF2 = 108.3,
xF6 = 460, Z = $12,853.33
63.
x1 = 0, x2 = 4, x3 = 18.4, x4 = 6.4, x5 = 24.8, y1 = 72.22, y2 = 72.44,
y3 = 64.95, y4 = 62.34, y5 = 52.24, y6 = 38.9, y7 = 28.53, y8 =
43.35, Z = $360,196
65.
min. Z =
xij (priority ij); s.t. 
12
Σ
j=1xij = 1,
16
Σ
i=1xij … available slots j,
U11B: 3-5M, U11G: 3-5T, U12B: 3-5T, U12G: 3-5M, U13B:
3-5T, U13G: 3-5M, U14B: 5-7M, U14G: 3-5M, U15B: 5-7T,
U15G: 3-5M, U16B: 5-7T, U16G: 5-7T, U17B: 5-7M, U17G:
5-7T, U18B: 3-5T, U18G: 5-7M, Z = 27
67.
1-D (1 hr.), 2-E (1 hr.), 3-F (2 hr.), 3-H (6 hr.), 4-I (1 hr.),
5-J (1 hr.), A-5 (8 hr.), B-4 (5 hr.), C-6 (8 hr.), G-7 (2 hr.),
Z = 35 hr.; 6 crews originate in Pittsburgh, 4 in Orlando
69.
min. Z = .41x14 + .57x15 + .37x24 + .48x25 + .51x34 +
.60x35 + .22x46 + .10x47 + .20x48 + .15x56 + .16x57 + .18x58;
s.t. x14 + x15 … 24,000, x24 + x25 … 18,000, x34 + x35 … 32,000,
x14 + x24 + x34 … 48,000, x15 + x25 + x35 … 35,000 (x14 + x24 +
x34)/2 = x46 + x47 + x48, (x15 + x25 + x35)/2 = x56 + x57 + x58,
x46 + x56 = 9,000, x47 + x57 = 12,000, x47 + x58 = 15,000,
xij Ú 0; x14 = 24,000, x24 = 18,000, x34 = 6,000, x35 = 24,000, x47 =
12,000, x48 = 12,000, x56 = 9,000, x58 = 3,000, Z = $39,450
Chapter 5
1.
x1 = 3, x2 = 0, Z = 15
3.
(a) max. Z = 50x1 + 40x2; s.t. 3x1 + 5x2 … 150, 10x1 + 4x2 … 200,
xi Ú 0 and integer; (b) x1 = 10, x2 = 24, Z = 1,460









SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
805
5.
(a) max. Z = 50x1 + 10x2; s.t. x1 + x2 … 15, 4x1 + x2 … 25, xi Ú 0
and integer; (b) x1 = 6, x2 = 1, Z = 310
7.
(a) max. Z = 50x1 + 40x2; s.t. 2x1 + 5x2 … 35, 3x1 + 2x2 … 20, xi Ú 0
and integer; (b) x1 = 4, x2 = 4, Z = 360
9.
x1 = 1, x2 = 0, x3 = 1, Z = 1,800
11.
min. Z = 81x1 + 50x2; s.t. 76x1 + 53x2 Ú 600, x1 + x2 … 10, 1.3x1 +
4.1x2 … 24, x1, x2 Ú 0 and integer; x1 = 6, x2 = 3, Z = 636
13.
(a) max. Z = 85,000x1 + 60,000x2 - 18,000y1; s.t. x1 + x2 …
10, 10,000x1 + 7,000x2 … 72,000, x1 - 10y1 … 0, x1 and x2 Ú 0 and
integer, y1 = 0 or 1; (b) x1 = 0, x2 = 10, Z = 600,000
15.
min. Z = x1 + x2 + x3 + x4 + x5 + x6; s.t. x6 + x1 Ú 90, x1 + x2 Ú 215,
x2 + x3 Ú 250, x3 + x4 Ú 65, x4 + x5 Ú 300, x5 + x6 Ú 125, xi Ú 0;
x1 = 90, x2 = 250, x4 = 175, x5 = 125, Z = 640
17.
(a) min. Z = 25,000x1 + 7,000x2 + 9,000x3; s.t. 53,000x1 + 30,000x2
+ 41,000x3 Ú 200,000, (32,000x1 + 20,000x2 + 18,000x3)/
(21,000x1 + 10,000x2 + 23,000x3) Ú 1.5, (34,000x1 + 12,000x2 +
24,000 x3)/ (53,000x1 + 30,000x2 + 41,000x3) Ú 0.60, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú
0, x3 Ú 0 and integer; x1 = 4, Z = $99,999.99; (b) x1 = 2.9275, x2 =
.9713, x3 = .383, Z = $83,433.65
19.
max. Z = 25,000x1 + 18,000x2 + 31,000x3; s.t. x1 + x2 + x3 = 100,
5,000x1 + 11,000x2 + 7,000x3 … 700,000, x1 Ú 10, x2 Ú 10,
x3 Ú 10, x1, x2, x3 Ú 0 and integer; x1 = 20, x2 = 10, x3 = 70,
Z = 2,850,000
21.
max. Z = 12,100x1 + 8,700x2 + 10,500x3; s.t. 360x1 + 375x2 + 410x3
… 30,000, x1 + x2 + x3 … 67, 14x1 + 10x2 + 18x3 … 2,200, x1/x3 Ú 2,
x2/x1 Ú 1.5, x1 Ú 0, x2 Ú 0 and integer, x3 Ú 0; x1 = 22, x2 = 33,
x3 = 11, Z = $668,800
23.
(a) max. Z = 1,650x1 + 850x2 + 790x3; s.t. 6.3x1 + 3.9x2 + 3.1x3 … 125,
17x1 + 10x2 + 7x3 … 320, xi Ú 0 and integer; (b) x1 = 10, x3 = 20,
Z = 32,300; rounded-down solution: x1 = 13, x3 = 12, Z = 30,930
25.
max. Z = 575x1 + 120x2 + 65x3; s.t. 40x1 + 15x2 + 4x3 … 600,
30x1 + 18x2 + 5x3 … 480, 4x1 - x2 … 0, x3 = 20y1, x1, x2, x3 Ú 0 and
integer, y1 = 0 or 1; x1 = 3, x2 = 16, x3 = 20, y1 = 1, Z = $4,945
27.
(b) x1C = 1, x3D = 1, x4B = 1, x5A = 1, Z = 83 parts
29.
min. Z = 120x1 + 75x2 + 4.5x3; s.t. 220x1 + 140x2 + 12x3 Ú 6,300,
8x1 + 8x2 + x3 … 256, .4x1 + .9x2 + .16x3 … 15, x1, x2 Ú 0 and inte-
ger, x3 Ú 0; x1 = 28, x2 = 0, x3 = 11.67, Z = $3,412.50
31.
y2 = 1, y3 = 1, x2 = 29, x3 = 64, Z = 5,289,000
33.
Z = 667 miles
35.
x13 = 1, x22 = 1, x32 = 1, x43 = 1, x53 = 1, x61 = 1, Z = $125 million
37.
max. Z = 127x1 + 83x2 + 165x3 + 96x4 + 112x5 + 88x6 + 135x7 +
141x8 + 117x9 + 94x10; s.t. x1 + x3 … 1, x1 + x2 + x4 … 1, x4 + x5 +
x6 … 1, x6 + x7 + x8 … 1, x6 + x9 … 1, x8 + x10 … 1, x9 + x10 … 1,
xi = 0 or 1; x2 = 1, x3 = 1, x5 = 1, x8 = 1, x9 = 1, Z = 618,000
39.
A(1,2,3), B(1,2,3), C(4,5,6), D(5,6,7), E(4,5,6), F(1,2,3), G(5,6,7),
H(4,5,6), Z = 100 hr.
41.
max. Z = .9(3600)xA1 + .5(7200)xA2 + .9(2400)xB1 + .7(3600)xB2 +
.95(3000)xC1 + .4(6000)xC2 + .95(3300)xD1 + .6(5400)xD2;
s.t. xA1 + xA2 = 1, xB1 + xB2 = 1, xC1 + xC2 = 1, xD1 + xD2 = 1,
.9xA1 + .5xA2 + .9xB1 + .7xB2 + .95xC1 + .4xC2 + .95xD1 +
.6xD2 Ú 3, xij Ú 0, xA2 = 1, xB2 = 1, xC1 = 1, xD1 = 1, Z = $4,035
per month
43.
max. 
(profit)i
s.t.
(load, lb.
lb,
(load, ft.3
ft.3,
(time
x11C = 1, Z = +78,000
xij … 1; x1B = 1, x2A = 1, x3A = 1, x4B = 1, x7C = 1,

j
)i 	 xij … 90,

i
)i 	 xij … 5,500

i
)i 	 xij … 80,000

i
	 xij;

ij
Z =
45.
(a) max. 
(annual usage
s.t. 
(acreage
(cost
(priority
(
solution: football fields, playground, walking/running trails, and 
softball fields; 
(b) min. 
(priority)i; s.t.
(acreage
(cost
(expected 
usage
solution: soccer fields, playground,
walking/running trails,
or 1.33 average priority; (c) max.
(acreage
; s.t.
(acreage
(cost)i
(priority
solution:
rugby fields, soccer fields, walking/running trails,
acres,
expected annual usage 
Chapter 6
1.
St. Louis–Chicago = 250, Richmond–Chicago = 50,
Richmond–Atlanta = 350, Z = 24,000
3.
A3 = 100, B1 = 135, B2 = 45, C2 = 130, C3 = 70, Z = 2,350
5.
x11 = 70, x13 = 20, x22 = 10, x23 = 20, x32 = 100, Z = 1,240
7.
min. Z = 14xA1 + 9xA2 + 16xA3 + 18xA4 + 11xB1 + 8xB2 + 100xB3 +
16xB4 + 16xC1 + 12xC2 + 10xC3 + 22xC4; s.t. xA1 + xA2 + xA3 + xA4 …
150, xB1 + xB2 + xB3 + xB4 … 210, xC1 + xC2 + xC3 + xC4 … 320, xA1 +
xB1 + xC1 = 130, xA2 + xB2 + xC2 = 70, xA3 + xB3 + xC3 = 180, xA4 +
xB4 + xC4 = 240, xij Ú 0; xA2 = 70, xA4 = 80, xB1 = 50, xB4 = 160,
xC1 = 80, xC3 = 180, Z = 8,260
9.
A3 = 90, B1 = 30, B3 = 20, C2 = 80, D1 = 40, D2 = 20, Z = 1,590
11.
1C = 5, 2C = 10, 3B = 20, 4A = 10, Z = $195; min. Z = 7x1A +
8x1B + 5x1C + 6x2A + 100x2B + 6x2C + 10x3A + 4x3B + 5x3C +
3x4A + 9x4B + 100x4C; s.t. x1A + x1B + x1C … 5, x2A + x2B + x2C … 25,
x3A + x3B + x3C … 20, x4A + x4B + x4C … 25, x1A + x2A + x3A + x4A = 10,
x1B + x2B + x3B + x4B = 20, x1C + x2C + x3C + x4C = 15, xij Ú 0
13.
A2 = 1,800, A4 = 950, A6 = 750, B1 = 1,600, B3 = 1,500, B5 =
1,250, B6 = 650, Z = 3,292.50
15.
1B = 250, 1D = 170, 2A = 520, 2C = 90, 3C = 130, 3D = 210,
Z = 21,930
17.
1B = 250, 1D = 170, 2A = 520, 2C = 90, 3C = 130, 3D = 210,
4C = 180, Z = $26,430; transportation cost = $21,930, shortage 
cost = $4,500
19.
1B = 60, 2A = 45, 2B = 25, 2C = 35, 3B = 5, Z = 1,605
21.
NA = 250, SB = 300, SC = 40, EA = 150, EC = 160, WD = 210,
CB = 100, CD = 190, Z = 20,700 (multiple optimal)
23.
A3 = 8, A4 = 18, B3 = 13, B5 = 27, D3 = 5, D6 = 35, E1 = 25,
E2 = 15, E3 = 4, Z = 1,528 (multiple optimal)
25.
17 cases from Albany; $51
27.
1C = 2, 1E = 5, 2C = 10, 3E = 5, 4D = 8, 5A = 9, 6B = 6,
Z = 1,275 hr.
29.
RJ – Jan = 300, OJ – Jan = 110, RF – Feb = 300, OF – Feb = 20,
OF – March = 120, RM – March = 180, RM – April = 120,
OM – March = 200, RA – April = 300, OA – April = 200, RM –
May = 300, OM – May = 130, RJ – June = 300, OJ – June = 80,
Z = 3,010,040
31.
Increasing supply at Sacramento, Jacksonville, and Ocala has little
effect; increasing supply at San Antonio and Montgomery reduces
cost to $242,500
33.
Total cost = $1,198,500
35.
Al—Eagles and Bengals, Barbara—Saints and Jets, Carol—
Cowboys and Packers, Dave—Redskins and Cardinals, Z = 24,
multiple optional solutions
= 83,700
Z = 52
)i 	 xi - ( 
 xi 	 1.75) … 0;

i
xi … +550,000,
	

i
)i 	 xi … 55,

i
)i 	 xi

i
Z =
Z = 4.0
)i 	 xi  120,000;

i
)i 	 xi … +550,000,

i
)i 	 xi … 55,

i
Z = 
i xi
Z = 123,500;

 xi 	 1.75) … 0;
)i 	 xi -

i
)i 	 xi … +550,000,

i
)i 	 xi … 55,

i
)i 	 xi;

i
Z =

806
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
37.
Mexico–Houston
Puerto Rico–Miami
Haiti–
Miami
Miami–NY
Miami–St. Louis
Miami–LA
Houston–LA
39.
41.
43.
(a) 
(b)
45.
Antwerp
1, Bremen
1, Valencia
1, Hong Kong–
Antwerp
235, Shanghai–Bremen
170, Busan–Valencia
165, Mumbai–Antwerp
285, Mumbai–Valencia
40,
Kaoshiung–Bremen
300, Kaoshiung–Valencia
105,
Antwerp–Miami
190, Antwerp–New Orleans
330,
Bremen–New York
165, Bremen–Savannah
305,
Valencia–New York
275, Valencia–New Orleans = 35;
Z
$47,986,050; shipping cost
$6,215,050
47.
1–1, 2–4, 3–2, 5–3, Z = 78
49.
1–B, 2–D, 3–C, 4–A, Z = 32
51.
1–B, 2–E, 3–A, 4–C, 5–D, 6–F, Z = 36
53.
1–C, 2–F, 3–E, 4–A, 5–D, 6–B, Z = 85 defects
55.
1, 4, and 7—Columbia; 2, 6, and 8—Atlanta; 3, 5, and 
9—Nashville; Z = 985
57.
A1’s—parents’ brunch; Bon Apetit—post game party; Bon
Apetit—lettermen’s dinner; Divine—booster club; Epicurean—
contributors’ dinner; University—alumni brunch; Z = $103,800
59.
Annie—backstroke; Debbie—breaststroke; Erin—freestyle;
Fay—butterfly; Z = 10.61 min.
61.
A–2, C–1, D–1, E–3, F–3, G–2, H–1, Z = $1,070
63.
A–NJ, B–PA, C–NY, D–FL, E–GA, F–FL, G–VA, Z = 498; suc-
cess rate = 71.1%
65.
xA2 = 1, xJ2 = 1, xB1 = 1, xK1 = 1, xC1 = 1, xL3 = 1, xD2 = 1, xE1 = 1,
xF1 = 1, xG2 = 1, xH3 = 1, Z = 104
67.
Mileage difference = 160 additional miles
69.
Jackets-1 = 1, Panthers-1 = 1, Big Red-2 = 1, Lions-2 = 1,
Bulldogs-3 = 1, Beavers-3 = 1, Tigers-4 = 1, Bears-4 = 1, Blue
Devils-5 = 1, Cavaliers-5 = 1, Blue Jays-6 = 1, Rams-6 = 1,
Knights-7 = 1, Hawks-7 = 1, Wasps-8 = 1, Eagles-8 = 1,
Z = 3,168 miles
Chapter 7
1.
1–2 = 21, 1–2–5 = 46, 1–3 = 17, 1–3–4 = 29, 1–3–4–6 = 39,
1–3–4–7 = 38
3.
1–2 = 85, 1–3 = 53, 1–4 = 88, 1–3–5 = 114, 1–3–7 = 170,
1–3–7–6 = 194
5.
1–2 = 25, 1–2–3 = 60, 1–2–4 = 43, 1–5 = 48, 1–6 = 50, 1–7 = 32,
1–7–8 = 72, 1–7–9 = 61, 1–5–10 = 72
7.
1–2 = 7, 1–3 = 10, 1–4 = 8, 1–3–5 = 13, 1–3–5–8 = 21,
1–4–6 = 13, 1–4–6–9 = 20, 1–4–7 = 16, 1–4–6–9–10 = 29
9.
1–7–6–10–12 = 18
11.
1–4–7–8 = 42 miles
13.
1–3–11–14 = 13 days
15.
Kotzebue: 1–2–8–11–15 = 10 hr.; Nome: 1–2–8–12–13 = 9 hr.; 
Stebbins: 1–2–7–10 = 8.5 hr.
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
=
Z = 154
x1015 = 1,
x911 = 1, x913 = 1, x1012 = 1, x1014 = 1,
x410 = 3,
x14 = 2, x24 = 3, x49 = 2,
x1014 = 1, x1015 = 1, Z = 144;
x24 = 5, x49 = 2, x410 = 3, x911 = 1, x913 = 1, x1012 = 1,
Z = 25,192
x510 = 500, x68 = 1,200, x610 = 600, x611 = 400, x711 = 1,100,
x16 = 1,600, x27 = 1,100, x35 = 1,400, x46 = 600, x59 = 900,
x1C = 70, x2B = 80, x3A = 50, xBA = 10, xCB = 30, Z = 14,900
Z = 479,000
= 18,
= 2,
= 12,
= 20,
= 23,
= 11,
= 18,
17.
1–4–7; $64,500
19.
1–3 = 4.1, 1–4 = 4.8, 2–3 = 3.6, 4–8 = 5.5, 5–6 = 2.1, 6–7 = 2.8,
7–8 = 2.7, 7–9 = 2.7, 9–10 = 4.6; 32,900 ft.
21.
1–3–4–6–5–8, 3–2, 6–7; 320 yd.
23.
1–4–2–6–3, 6–7–5, 7–8; 1,160 yd.
25.
1–2–5–6–8–9, 2–4–3, 4–7; 22 miles
27.
1–2, 1–4–6–3, 6–9–8–5, 9–11, 9–10–7, 10–13, 10–12–14; 1,086 ft.
29.
1–2 = 6, 1–4 = 5, 1–3 = 5, 2–5 = 6, 2–4 = 0, 3–4 = 0, 3–6 = 5,
4–5 = 0, 4–6 = 5, 5–6 = 6, maximum flow = 16
31.
1–2 = 15, 1–4 = 20, 1–3 = 12, 2–5 = 11, 2–4 = 4, 3–4 = 3,
3–6 = 9, 4–6 = 27, 5–6 = 11, maximum flow = 47
33.
1–2 = 7, 1–4 = 7, 1–3 = 4, 2–6 = 6, 2–4 = 1, 3–4 = 3, 3–5 = 1,
4–6 = 0, 4–8 = 4, 4–7 = 7, 5–7 = 1, 6–8 = 6, 7–8 = 8, maximum =
18 flights
35.
1–2 = 4, 1–3 = 4, 1–4 = 4, 2–3 = 0, 2–5 = 4, 3–4 = 0, 3–5 = 2,
3–6 = 2, 4–6 = 4, 5–6 = 0, 5–7 = 6, 6–8 = 6, 7–8 = 0, 7–9 = 6,
8–9 = 6; 12,000 cars
37.
1–2 = 6, 1–3 = 2, 1–4 = 8, 2–5 = 0, 2–6 = 6, 3–5 = 0, 3–6 = 2,
4–5 = 8, 5–7 = 3, 5–8 = 4, 5–9 = 1, 6–8 = 2, 6–9 = 6, 7–10 = 3,
8–10 = 6, 9–10 = 7; 16
39.
1–2 = 70, 1–3 = 50, 1–4 = 60, 1–5 = 70, 2–6 = 25, 2–9 = 45,
3–6 = 30, 3–7 = 20, 4–7 = 35, 4–8 = 25, 5–8 = 40, 5–11 = 30,
6–10 = 65, 6–12 = 5, 7–10 = 40, 7–6 = 15, 8–13 = 60, 8–14 = 5,
9–12 = 45, 10–12 = 55, 10–13 = 50, 11–14 = 30, 12–13 = 60,
12–15 = 45, 13–15 = 170, 14–15 = 35; 250
41.
Gdansk–Galveston = 125, Hamburg–Jacksonville = 110,
Hamburg–New Orleans = 95, Hamburg–Galveston = 5,
Lisbon–Norfolk = 85, Norfolk–KC = 75, Norfolk–Dallas = 10,
Jacksonville–FR = 70, Jacksonville–KC = 40, NO–FR = 95,
Galveston–Dallas = 130, FR–Denver = 105, FR–Pittsburgh = 60,
KC–Cleveland = 65, KC–Nashville = 50, Dallas–Tucson = 85,
Dallas–Cleveland = 55
Chapter 8
1.
1–3–4 = 10
3.
1–3–6–8 = 23
5.
1: ES = 0, EF = 7, LS = 2, LF = 9, S = 2; 2: ES = 0, EF = 10,
LS = 0, LF = 10, S = 0; 3: ES = 7, EF = 13, LS = 9, LF = 15,
S = 2;
4: ES = 10, EF = 15, LS = 10, LF = 15, S = 0; 5: ES = 10,
EF = 14, LS = 14, LF = 18, S = 4; 6: ES = 15, EF = 18, LS = 15,
LF = 18, S = 0; 7: ES = 18, EF = 20, LS = 18, LF = 20, S = 0;
2–4–6–7 = 20
7.
1: ES = 0, EF = 10, LS = 0, LF = 10, S = 0; 2: ES = 0, EF = 7,
LS = 5, LF = 12, S = 5; 4: ES = 10, EF = 14, LS = 14, LF = 18,
S = 4; 3: ES = 10, EF = 25, LS = 10, LF = 25, S = 0; 5: ES = 7,
EF = 13, LS = 12, LF = 18, S = 5; 6: ES = 7, EF = 19, LS = 13,
LF = 25, S = 6; 7: ES = 14, EF = 21, LS = 18, LF = 25,
S = 4; 8: ES = 25, EF = 34, LS = 25, LF = 34, S = 0;
1–3–8 = 34
9.
2–4–10–13–14–17 = 78 wk.
11.
1–5–9 = 40.33, s = 5.95
13.
(e) 2–6–9–11–12; (f) m = 46 mo., s = 5 mo.
15.
a–b–e–g–i–j–k–l–m–n = 71.167; P(x … 52) = 0, P(x … 78) = .9744
17.
P(x Ú 50) = .2119
19.
c–d–f–g–j–k–o–r = 160.83 min.; P(x … 180) = .9875

SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
807
21.
P(x … 15) = .0643
23.
a–d–j–n–o, m = 42.3 wk., s = 4.10 wk., 47.59 wk.
25.
a–c–d–f = 14 days
27.
a–e–f–g–j–o–p = 91.67 days, s = 3.308, P(x … 101) = .9976
29.
a–h–l–m–n–o–s–w = 126.67 days; P(x … 150) = .9979
31.
(c) min. Z = x6; s.t. x2 - x1 Ú 16, x3 - x1 Ú 14, x4 - x2 Ú 8,
x5 - x2 Ú 5, x5 - x3 Ú 4, x6 - x3 Ú 6, x6 - x4 Ú 10, x6 - x5 Ú 15,
xi, xj Ú 0
33.
min. Z = x9; s.t. x2 - x1 Ú 8, x3 - x1 Ú 6, x4 - x1 Ú 3, x5 - x2 Ú 0,
x6 - x2 Ú 5, x5 - x3 Ú 3, x5 - x4 Ú 4, x7 - x5 Ú 7, x7 - x8 Ú 0,
x8 - x5 Ú 4, x8 - x4 Ú 2, x9 - x6 Ú 4, x9 - x7 Ú 9, xi, xj Ú 0; x1 = 0,
x2 = 9, x3 = 6, x4 = 3, x5 = 9, x6 = 14, x7 = 16, x8 = 16, x9 = 25
35.
a–d–g–k; crash cost = $5,100; total network cost = $33,900
Chapter 9
1.
min. P1d1
–, P2d2
–, P3d1
+, P4d3
+, s.t. 5x1 + 2x2 + 4x3 + d1
– - d1
+ =
240, 3x1 + 5x2 + 2x3 + d2
– - d2
+ = 500, 4x1 + 6x2 + 3x3 + d3
– - d3
+
= 400
3.
min. P1d1
–, P2d2
–, P3d3
+, 3P4d4
– + 6P4d5
– + P4d6
– + 2P4d7
–, s.t.
80,000x1 + 24,000x2 + 15,000x3 + 40,000x4 + d1
– = 600,000,
1,500x1 + 3,000x2 + 500x3 + 1,000x4 + d2
– - d2
+ = 20,000, 4x1 +
8x2 + 3x3 + 5x4 + d3
– - d3
+ = 50, x1 + d4
– - d4
+ = 7, x2 + d5
– - d5
+
= 10, x3 + d6
– - d6
+ = 8, x4 + d7
– - d7
+ = 12
5.
(a) min. P1d2
+, P2d7
+, 4P3d4
– + 2P3d5
– + P3d6
–, P4d1
–, P5d3
–; s.t. 
x1 + x2 + x3 + d1
– = 2,000, 800x1 + 1,500x2 + 500x3 + d2
– - d2
+ =
20,000, 10x1 + 12x2 + 18x3 + d3
– - d3
+ = 800, x1 + d4
– - d4
+ = 800,
x2 + d5
– - d5
+ = 900, x3 + d6
– - d6
+ = 1,100, d3
+ + d7
– -
d7
+ = 100; (b) x1 = 25, d1
– = 1,975, d3
– = 550, d4
– = 775, d5
– = 900,
d6
– = 1,100, d7
– = 650
7.
x1 = 20, d2
– = 10, d3
– = 50
9.
x1 = 15, d1
+ = 12, d2
+ = 10, d4
– = 6; not satisfied
11.
(a) min. Z = P1d1
–, P2d4
+, 3P3d2
– + 2P3d3
–, P4d1
+; s.t. x1 + x2 +
d1
– - d1
+ = 80, x1 + d2
– = 60, x2 + d3
– = 35, d1
+ + d4
– – d4
+= 10;
(b) x1 = 60, x2 = 30, d1
+ = 10, d3
– = 5
13.
(a) min. P1d1
–, P2d2
+, P3d3
–, P4d4
–; s.t. x1 + d1
– - d1
+ = 30,
20x1 + 40x2 + 150x3 + d2
– - d2
+ = 1,200, x2 + x3 + d3
– - d3
+ = 20,
x3 + d4
– - d4
+ = 6; (b) x1 = 30, x2 = 15, d3
– = 5, d4
– = 6
15.
(b) x1 (Sunday) = 0, x2 (Monday) = 7, x3 (Tuesday) = 0, x4
(Wednesday) = 27, x5 (Thursday) = 0, x6 (Friday) = 25, x7
(Saturday) = 1
17.
(b) x1 = 1, x2 = 24, x3 = 5, x4 = 1, x5 = 8, p1, p2, p3, p4 achieved
19.
Profitability – CI/RI = 0.07; Growth – CI/RI = 0.003.
21.
CI/RI = .003
23.
Global = $17,225.50; BlueChip = $43,014.50; Bond = $24,760.
25.
Pawlie = .4575, Cooric = .4243, Brokenaw = .1182
27.
Arrington = .2906, Barton =.3817, Claiborne = .3277
29.
A = .4937, B = .1781, C = .3282
31.
Gym = .215, Field = .539, Tennis = .104, Pool = .142
33.
Weather Consistent; Cost-CI/RI = .003; Fun-CI/RI = .14/inconsistent
Criteria-CI/RI = .13/inconsistent
39.
1 = .3120, 2 = .3398, 3 = .2772, 4 = .0709
41.
A = .2838, B = .4317, C = .2844
45.
CI/RI = .0558(consistent)
47.
Cleveland = .1529, Miami = .4486, NY = .2192, Chicago = .1794
49.
5(A) = 77.5, 5(B) = 75.5, 5(C) = 74.25, 5(D) = 78.75; select D
53.
5(1) = 77.5, 5(2) = 80.8, 5(3) = 82.
55.
5(South) = 73.8, 5(West A) = 74.5, 5(West B) = 67.25, 5(East) =
76.75, East
57.
5(C) = 76, 5(E) = 75, 5(D) = 74, 5(B) = 70, 5(A) = 69
59.
5(Roanoke) = 84.74, 5(Richmond) = 83.79, 5(Greensboro) = 82.61,
5(Charlotte) = 81.10, 5(Bristol) = 79.02, 5(knoxville) = 76.93
Chapter 10
1.
p = $186.67, v = 176 chairs, Z = $18,313.33
3.
p = $40.50, v = 28,269.6, Z = $542,641.95
5.
p = $25.55, v = 78.63, Z = -$1,198
7.
p = $35.16, Z = $10,257.57
9.
x1 = 10, x2 = 45, Z = $212.50
11.
x1 = 0.09, x3 = 0.497, x4 = 0.413; total return = 0.136
13.
Lagrange multiplier = 0.27
15.
max. Z = (5.8 - .06ph + .005pl) ph + (3.0 - .11p1 + .008ph) p1; s.t.
5.8 - .06ph + .005p1 … 2.5, 3.0 - .11p1 + .008ph … 2.5, pl, ph Ú 0;
ph = $56.40, pl = $16.70, Z = $167.94
17.
x = 151.2, y = 484.08, Z = 52,684.29
19.
xA = .250, xB = .750, Z = .0382, total return = 0.11
21.
x1 = 5, x2 = 3, x3 = 8, x4 = 3, x5 = 2, x6 = 5, x7 = 5, x8 = 4,
Z = $4,193,450.37
Chapter 11
1.
(a) subjective, (b) subjective, (c) both, (d) subjective, (e) objective,
(f) subjective, (g) objective (h) objective
3.
(a) 0–19, .066; 20–29, .233; 30–39, .266; 40–49, .266; 50 +, .166; 
(b) yes, only one of the events can take place each winter
5.
P(r Ú 5) = .0433 rejected, P(r < 5) = .9567 accepted
7.
P(r = 4) = .0367
9.
P(r Ú 4) = .0024
11.
(a and b) P(WA) = .28, P(LA) = .12, P(WO) = .36, P(LO) = .24;
(c) P(O|W) = .563
13.
(a and b) P(GA) = .198, P(DA) = .002, P(GB) = .392, P(DB) = .008,
P(GC) = .368, P(DC) = .032; (c) P(B|D) = .19
15.
P(A|D) = .667
17.
E(bbl.) = 7.95
19.
E(lead time) = 2.2 days,
= 0.87
21.
E(building) = $38,000,
= 26,381, E(bonds) = 34,000,
= 4,899;
probably bonds, less variation
23.
E(time between breakdowns) = 2.75 hr.
25.
P(x Ú 3.5) = .0668
27.
P(x Ú 900) = .1587
29.
P(x Ú 6,000) = .0475
31.
P(x Ú 670) = .7422
33.
P(x Ú 1,200) = .1056, 65.5
35.
P(x Ú 200,000) = .9699
37.
P(x … 27,000) = .1894
39.
P(x Ú 75) = .4364
41.
not normal
s
s
s

808
SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
Chapter 12
1.
(a) lease land; (b) savings certificate
3.
(a) bellhop; (b) management; (c) bellhop
5.
(a) corn; (b) soybeans; (c) corn; (d) soybeans; (e) corn
7.
(a) build shopping center; (b) lease equipment; (c) build shopping
center; (d) lease equipment; (e) build shopping center
9.
(a) Army vs. Navy; (b) Alabama vs. Auburn; (c) Alabama vs. 
Auburn
11.
(a) pass; (b) off tackle or option; (c) toss sweep
13.
(a) office park; (b) office building; (c) office park or shopping 
center; (d) office building
15.
press
17.
EV (shoveler) = $99.6
19.
EV (operate) same as leasing; conservative decision is to lease
21.
bond fund
23.
Taiwan, EVPI = $0.47 million
25.
compact car dealership
27.
(b) Stock 16 cases; (c) stock 16 cases; (d) $5.80
29.
(b) Stock 26 dozen; (c) stock 26 dozen; (d) $3.10
31.
(a) Pusan; (b) Pusan; (c) Hong Kong; (d) Shanghai
33.
O’Neil
35.
EV (graphic design) 
37.
(a) EV(Damon) 
(c) EV(Diaz)
39.
A, EV(A) = $23,300
41.
make bid, EV = $142
43.
produce widget, EV = $69,966
45.
hire Roper, EVSI = $5.01M
47.
Jay should settle; EV = 600,000
49.
grower B, EV = 39,380
51.
EVSI = $234,000, EVPI = $350,000
53.
oil change, EV = $62.80
55.
EV = $3.75 million, EVSI = $670,000
57.
risk averters
59.
Miami, EV = $400.3
Chapter 13
1.
(a) multiple server, FCFS, finite or infinite;
(b) multiple server, FCFS, infinite;
(c) multiple server, FCFS, infinite;
(d) single or multiple, appt., finite;
(e) single server, FCFS or appt., finite;
(f) single server, FCFS, finite;
(g) multiple server, FCFS, infinite;
(h) single or multiple, FCFS, infinite;
(i) single server, FCFS or appt., finite
3.
(a) false; (b) true
5.
customers served according to a schedule or alphabetically, or at
random
7.
P0 = .33, P3 = .099, L = 2, Lq = 1.33, W = .125, Wq = .083, U = .67
9.
Lq = .9, W = .25, Wq = .15; an infinite queue would form
11.
λ = 9
= 119.8
= 121.5,
= 191,000
13.
yes, install the second window
15.
(a) Lq = 9.09, W = 24 min., Wq = 21.6 min; (b) W = 4 min., the
state should install scales
17.
Wq = .56 min., add an advisor
19.
(a) P0 = .20; (b) Lq = 1; (c) Wq = 1.25 days; (d) P3 = .1825
21.
Lq = 6.34, Wq = 18.39 min
23.
Lq = .083, Wq = .083 min
25.
W = 23.67 hr.
27.
Lq = 47.97, Lq = 47.04, W = 1.71 hr., Wq = 1.68 hr.,
29.
(a) 33%; (b) Wq = 1.13 min, Lq = .756; (c) P0 = .061
31.
Wq = .007 hr.; no
33.
current service = $312; new service = $212.27; new service is 
better
35.
(a) no, Wq = 8 min.; (b) yes, Wq = 0.11 min.; (c) yes, Wq = .53 min.
37.
hire clerks, 5
39.
Pw = .29976, three salespeople sufficient
41.
1.14 hr.
43.
Wq = 10.27 min., P0 = .423
45.
Lq = 2.25, L = 12.25, Wq = .321 wk., W = 1.75 wk., U = .833
47.
add extra employees
49.
7–9 A.M. = 5, 9–noon = 2, noon–2 P.M. = 6, 2–5 P.M. = 4
51.
adequate; Wq = 19.1 min.
53.
(a) Wq = 2.33 hr., P0 = .24; (b) Wq = .89 hr., P0 = .51
55.
(a) L = 1.81, Lq = .25, W = .97 hr, Wq = .16 hr., (b) 8 trucks
required
57.
c = 4, W = .43 hr., Wq = .09 hr.
59.
c = 4 cranes, W = 2 hr., Wq = 1.53 hours
Chapter 14
1.
(a and b) m ≈3.48, EV = 3.65, the results differ because not
enough simulations were done in part a; (c) approximately 
21 calls; no; repeat simulations to get enough observations
3.
(a and b) m ≈2.95
5.
sun visors
7.
(a) m = $256
9.
(a) average time between arrivals
4.3 days, average waiting
time
6.25 days, average number of tankers waiting
1.16;
(b) system has not reached steady state
11.
total yardage ≈155 yd.; the sportswriter will predict Tech 
will win
13.
[Tribune Daily News] = [.50 .50]; too few iterations to approach a
steady state
15.
expansion is probably warranted
17.
two of five trials (depended on random number stream)
19.
system inadequate
21.
avg. Salem dates = 2.92
23.
P(capacity > demand) = .75
25.
mean weekly demand 
laptops, mean weekly revenue =
27.
mean annual breakdowns 
mean annual repair time =
days, mean repair cost 
29.
avg. maintenance cost = $3,594.73; P(cost … $3,000) = .435
31.
avg. rating = 2.91; P (x Ú 3.0) = .531
= +108,389
54.2
= 24.84,
$6,516.71
= 1.52




SOLUTIONS TO SELECTED ODD-NUMBERED PROBLEMS
809
33.
(a) P(1,2) = .974, P(1,3) = .959, P(1,4) = .981, P(2,3) = .911,
P(2,4) = .980, P(3,4) = .653; (b) (1,4) and (2,4)
35.
(a) 700 rooms; (b) 690 rooms
Chapter 15
1.
(a) Apr = 8.67, May = 8.33, Jun = 8.33, Jul = 9.00, Aug = 9.67,
Sep = 11.00, Oct = 11.00, Nov = 11.00, Dec = 12.00, Jan = 13.33;
(b) Jun = 8.20, Jul = 8.80, Aug = 9.40, Sep = 9.60, Oct = 10.40,
Nov = 11.00, Dec = 11.40, Jan = 12.60; (c) MAD(3) = 1.89,
MAD(5) = 2.43
3.
(a) F4 = 116.00, F5 = 121.33, F6 = 118.00, F7 = 143.67, F8 =
138.33, F9 = 141.67, F10 = 135.00, F11 = 156.67, F12 = 143.33,
F13 = 136.67; (b) F6 = 121.80, F7 = 134.80, F8 = 125.80,
F9 = 137.20, F10 = 143.00, F11 = 149.00, F12 = 137.00, F13 = 142.00;
(c) F4 = 113.85, F5 = 116.69, F6 = 125.74, F7 = 151.77, F8 = 132.4,
F9 = 138.55, F10 = 142.35, F11 = 160.0, F12 = 136.69,
F13 = 130.20; (d) 3–qtr MA: E = 32.0, 5–qtr MA: E = 36.4,
weighted MA: E = 28.09
5.
(a) F4 = 400.000, F5 = 406.67, F6 = 423.33, F7 = 498.33, F8 =
521.67, F9 = 571.67; (b) F2 = 400.00, F3 = 410.00, F4 = 398.00,
F5 = 402.40, F6 = 421.92, F7 = 452.53, F8 = 460.00, F9 = 498.02; 
(c) 3-sem. MAD = 80.33, exp. smooth. MAD = 87.16
7.
F11 (exp. smooth) = 68.6, F11 (adjusted) = 69.17, F11 (linear trend) =
70.22; exp. smooth: E = 14.75, MAD = 1.89; adjusted: E = 10.73,
MAD = 1.72; linear trend: MAD = 1.09
9.
(a) F21 = 74.67, MAD = 3.12; (b) F21 = 75.875, MAD = 2.98; 
(c) F21 = 74.60, MAD = 2.87; (d) 3-mo. moving average and expo-
nentially smoothed
11.
F13 = 631.22,
= 26.30, E = 289.33, biased low
13.
F1 = 155.6, F2 = 192.9, F3 = 118.2, F4 = 155.6
15.
F04 (adjusted) = 3,313.19, F04 (linear trend) = 2,785.00; adjusted:
MAD = 431.71; linear trend: MAD = 166.25
17.
Linear trend line -F(37) = 347.33; exponential smoothing 
(a = .20) -F(37) = 460.56; 5-mo. moving avg. -F(37) = 467.80
19.
fall = 44.61, winter = 40.08, spring = 52.29, summer = 70.34; yes
21.
(exp. smooth) 
(adjusted) 
23.
E = 86.00,
= 8.60, MAD = 15.00, MAPD = 0.08
25.
MAD: MA = 1.89, exp. smooth = 2.16; 3-mo. moving average
27.
y = 0.67 + .223x, 88.58%
31.
(a) y = -113.4 + 2.986x, 140.43 gal.; (b) .929
33.
(a) y = 6,541.66 - .448x; y($9,000) = 2,503.2, y($7,000) =
3,400.6; (b) -.754
35.
b = 2.98, the number of gallons sold per each degree increase
37.
y = 13.476 - 0.4741x, r = -0.76, r2 = 0.58; yes, relationship; 
y = 2.57% defects
E
= 503.27
= 492.31, F9
F9
E
39.
linear trend line, 3-mo. MA and adj. exp. smooth all are relatively
accurate
41.
exponential smoothing appears to be less accurate than linear
trend line
43.
F6 (adj.) = 74.19 seat occupancy,
= 1.08, MAD = 8.6
45.
student choice of model
49.
(a) y = 119.27 + 12.28x, y (lb.) = 315.67; (b) y = -2504.18 +
.147x, r2 = .966
51.
(a) y = 13,803.07 + 470.55x, 65.15%; (b) y = 83 -1.68x; 64.5%
53.
(a) y = 745.91 - 2.226x1 + .163x2; (b) r2 = .992; (c) y = 7,186.91
55.
(a) y = 117.128 + .072x1 + 19.148x2; (b) r2 = .822; (c) y = $940.60
Chapter 16
1.
(a) Q = 79.7; (b) $13,550; (c) 15.05 orders; (d) 24.18 days
3.
(a) Q = 240; (b) $4,800; (c) 80 orders; (d) 4 days
5.
(a) Q = 190,918.8 yd.; (b) $15,273.51; (c) 6.36 orders; (d) 57.4 days
7.
Q = 67.13, S = 15.49, TC = $3,872.98
9.
(a) Q = 774.6 boxes, TC = $619.68, R = 43.84 boxes
11.
Q = 23,862, TC = $298,276
13.
Q = 52.3, TC = $19.5 95.92, orders = 3.06, R = 13.33
15.
Q = 2,346.63, TC = $162,484.59, R = 2008.9
17.
(a) Q = 2,529.8 logs; (b) TC = $12,649.11; (c) Tb = 63.3 days;
(d) 42.16 days
19.
Q = 17,544.2; S = 4,616.84; TC = $3,231.84
21.
Q = 569.32, S = 32.79, TC = $1,475.45
23.
(a) Q = 11,062.62, TC = $5,532.14, runs = 1.63, max. level =
4,425.7; (b) Q = 6,250, TC = $6,458.50
25.
(a) Q = 4,912.03, TC = $18,420.11; (b) Q = 3,833.19,
TC = $17,249.36; select new location
27.
Cc = $950
29.
take discount, Q = 300
31.
Q = 500, TC = $64,424
33.
Q = 6,000, TC = $85,230.33
35.
Q = 30,000, TC = $14,140
37.
Q = 20,000, TC = $893,368
39.
91%
41.
R(90%) = 74.61 gal; increase safety stock to 26.37 gal.
43.
254.4 gal.
45.
R = 24.38
47.
120 pizzas
49.
(a) 15.15%; (b) R = 6.977 pizzas
E

Glossary
810
A
activities in a CPM/PERT project network,
the branches reflecting project operations
activity slack in a CPM/PERT network, the
amount of time that the start of an activity can
be delayed without exceeding the critical path
project time
adjusted exponential smoothing the
exponential smoothing forecasting technique
adjusted for trend changes and seasonal
patterns
analogue simulation replacement of an
original physical system with an analogous
physical system that is easier to test and
manipulate
analytical containing or pertaining to
mathematical analysis using formulas or
equations
a priori probability one of the two types of
objective probabilities; given a set of
outcomes for an activity, the ratio of the
number of desired outcomes to the total
number of outcomes
arrival rate the number of arrivals at a service
facility (within a queuing system) during a
specified period of time
artificial variable a variable that is added to
an or 
constraint so that initial solutions in
a linear programming problem can be
obtained at the origin
assignment model a type of linear program-
ming model similar to a transportation model,
except that the supply at each source is limited
to one unit and the demand at each destination
is limited to one unit
average error the cumulative error, averaged
over the number of time periods
B
back order a customer order that cannot be
filled from existing inventory but will be filled
when inventory is replenished
backward pass a means of determining 
the latest event times in a CPM/PERT 
network

=
balanced transportation model a model in
which supply equals demand
basic feasible solution any solution in linear
programming that satisfies the model
constraints
basic variables in a linear programming
problem, variables that have values (other than
zero) at a basic feasible solution point
Bayesian analysis a method for altering
marginal probabilities, given additional
information; the altered probabilities
are referred to as revised or posterior
probabilities
Bernoulli process a probability experiment
that has the following properties: (1) each 
trial has two outcomes, (2) the probabilities
remain constant, (3) the outcomes are
independent, and (4) the number of trials is
discrete
beta distribution a probability distribution
used in network analysis for determining
activity times
binomial distribution a probability distribu-
tion for experiments for which the Bernoulli
properties hold
branch in a network diagram, a line that
represents the flow of items from one point
(i.e., node) to another
branch and bound method a solution
approach whereby a total set of feasible
solutions is partitioned into smaller subsets,
which are then evaluated systematically; this
technique is used extensively to solve integer
programming problems
break-even analysis the determination of 
the number of units that must be produced 
and sold to equate total revenue with total 
cost
break-even point the volume of units that
equates total revenue with total cost
C
calculus a branch of mathematics that is con-
cerned with the rate of change of functions;
the two basic forms of calculus are differential
calculus and integral calculus
calling population the source of customers to
a waiting line
carrying cost the cost incurred by a business
for holding items in inventory
causal forecasting methods a class of
mathematical techniques that relate 
variables to other factors that cause forecast
behavior
classical optimization the use of calculus to
find optimal values for variables
classical probability an a priori probability
coefficient of determination a measure of the
strength of the relationship between the variables
in a regression equation
coefficient of optimism a measure of a
decision maker’s optimism
collectively exhaustive events all the possible
events of an experiment
concave curve a curve shaped like an inverted
bowl
conditional probability the probability that
one event will occur, given that another event
has already occurred
constrained optimization model a model that
has a single objective function and one or
more constraints
constraint a mathematical relationship that
represents limited resources or minimum levels
of activity in a mathematical programming
model
continuous distribution a probability
distribution in which the random variables can
equal an infinite number of values within an
interval
continuous random variable a variable that
can take on an infinite number of values
within some interval
convex curve a curve shaped like an upright
bowl
correlation a measure of the strength of the
causal relationship between the independent
and dependent variables in a linear regression
equation
critical path the longest path through a CPM/
PERT network; it indicates the minimum time
in which a project can be completed

GLOSSARY
811
critical path method (CPM) a network
technique that uses deterministic activity times
for project planning and scheduling
cumulative error a sum of the forecasted 
errors
cumulative probability distribution a
probability distribution in which the
probability of an event is added to the sum of
the probabilities of the previously listed events
cycle movement up or down during a trend in
a forecast
D
data pieces of information
database an organized collection of numeric
information
decision analysis the analysis of decision
situations in which certainty cannot be
assumed
decision support system (DSS) a computer-
based information system that a manager can
use to assist in and support decision making
decision tree a graphical diagram for
analyzing a decision situation
decision variable a variable whose value
represents a potential decision on the part of
the manager
Delphi method a procedure for acquiring
informal judgments and opinions from
knowledgeable individuals to use as a
subjective forecast
dependent demand typically, component parts
used internally to produce a final product
dependent events events for which the
probability of one event is affected by the
probability of occurrence of other events
derivative in calculus, a transformed form of
a mathematical function that defines the slope
of the function
deterministic characterized by the assumption
that there is no uncertainty
deviational variables in a goal programming
model constraint, variables that reflect the
possible deviation from a goal level
differential the derivative of a function
directed branch a branch in a network in
which flow is possible in only one direction
discrete distribution a probability
distribution that consists of values for the
random variable that are countable and usually
integer
dual an alternative form of a linear
programming model that contains useful
information regarding the value of resources,
which form the constraints of the model
dummy activity a branch in a CPM/PERT
network that reflects a precedence relationship
but does not represent any passage of time
E
earliest activity times in a CPM/PERT
network, the earliest start and earliest finish
times at which an activity can be started
without exceeding the critical path project
time
economic forecast a prediction of the state of
the economy in the future
economic order quantity (EOQ) the optimal
order size that corresponds to total minimum
inventory cost
efficiency of sample information an indicator
of how close to perfection sample information
is; it is computed by dividing the expected
value of sample information by the expected
value of perfect information
empirical consisting of (or based on) data or
information gained from experiment and
observation
equal likelihood criterion a decision-making
method in which all states of nature are weighted
equally (also known as the LaPlace criterion)
equilibrium point the outcome of a game that
results from a pure strategy
event the possible result of a probability
experiment
events in a CPM/PERT project network, the
nodes that reflect the beginning and termina-
tion of activities
expected monetary value the expected
(average) monetary outcome of a decision,
computed by multiplying the outcomes by
their probabilities of occurrence and summing
these products
expected opportunity loss the expected cost
of the loss of opportunity resulting from an
incorrect decision by the decision maker
expected value an average value computed by
multiplying each value of a random variable
by its probability of occurrence
expected value of perfect information
(EVPI) the value of information expressed as
the amount of money that a decision maker
would be willing to pay to make a better
decision
expected value of sample information
(EVSI) the difference between the expected
value of a decision situation with and without
additional information
experiment in probability, a particular action,
such as tossing a coin
exponential distribution a probability
distribution often used to define the service
times in a queuing system
exponential smoothing a time series
forecasting method similar to a moving
average in which more recent data are
weighted more heavily than past data
extreme points the maximum and minimum
points on a curve (also known as relative
extreme points); in a linear programming
problem, a protrusion in the feasible solution
space
F
factorial for a value of 
feasible solution a solution that does not
violate any of the restrictions or constraints in
a model
feedback decision results that are fed back
into a management information system to be
used as data
finite calling population a source of
customers for a queuing system limited to a
finite number
finite queue a queue with a limited (maximum)
size
fixed costs costs that are independent of the
volume of units produced
forecast a prediction of what will occur in the
future
forecast error the difference between actual
and forecasted demand
forecast reliability a measure of how closely
a forecast reflects reality
forecast time frame how far in the future a
forecast projects
forward pass a method for determining earli-
est activity times in a CPM/PERT network
frequency distribution the organization of
events into classes, which shows the frequency
with which the events occur
functional relationship an equation that
relates a dependent variable to one or more
independent variables
G
Gantt chart a graph or bar chart with a bar 
for each activity in a project, showing the
passage of time.
goal constraint a constraint in a goal pro-
gramming model that contains deviational
variables
goal programming a linear programming
technique that considers more than one
objective in the model
goals the alternative objectives in a goal
programming model
H
Hurwicz criterion a method for making a
decision in a decision analysis problem; the
decision is a compromise between total
optimism and total pessimism
(n-2) . . . (2)(1)
n, n! = n(n - 1)

812
GLOSSARY
I
identity matrix a matrix containing ones
along the diagonal and zeros elsewhere
implementation the use of model results
implicit enumeration a method for solving
integer programming problems in which
obviously infeasible solutions are eliminated
and the remaining solutions are systematically
evaluated to see which one is best
independent demand final product demanded
by an external customer
independent events events for which the
probability of occurrence of one event does
not affect the probability of occurrence of the
other events
inequality a mathematical relationship
containing a
or
sign
infeasible problem a linear programming
problem with no feasible solution area and
thus no solution
instantaneous receipt the assumption that
once inventory level reaches zero, an order is
received after the passage of an infinitely
small amount of time
integer programming a form of linear pro-
gramming that generates only integer solution
values for the model variables
inventory a stock of items kept on hand by an
organization to use to meet customer demand
inventory analysis the analysis of the problems
of inventory planning and control, with the
objective of minimizing inventory-related costs
J
joint probability the probability of several
events occurring jointly in an experiment
L
LaPlace criterion a decision-making method
in which all states of nature are weighted
equally (more commonly known as the equal
likelihood criterion)
latest activity times in a CPM/PERT network,
the latest start and latest finish times at which
an activity can be started without exceeding
the critical path project time
linear programming a management science
technique used to determine the optimal way
to achieve an objective, subject to restrictions,
in cases in which all the mathematical relation-
ships are linear
linear (simple) regression a form of regression
that relates a dependent variable to one
independent variable
linear trend line a forecast that uses the linear
regression equation to relate demand to time
long-range forecast a forecast that typically
encompasses a period of time longer than 1 or
2 years
…

M
management science the application of
mathematical techniques and scientific
principles to management problems to help
managers make better decisions
marginal probability the probability that a
single event will occur
maximal flow problem a network problem 
in which the objective is to maximize the 
total amount of flow from a source to a
destination
maximax criterion a method for making a
decision in a decision analysis problem; the
decision will result in the maximum of the
maximum payoffs
maximin criterion a method for making a
decision in a decision analysis problem; the
decision will result in the maximum of the
minimum payoffs
maximization problem a linear programming
problem in which an objective, such as profit,
is maximized
mean absolute deviation (MAD) a measure 
of the difference between a forecast and what
actually occurs
mean absolute percent deviation (MAPD)
the absolute forecast error, measured as a
percentage of demand
mean squared error (MSE) the average of
the squared forecast errors
medium-range forecast a forecast that encom-
passes anywhere from 1 month to 1 year
minimal spanning tree problem a network
problem in which the objective is to connect
all the nodes in a network so that the total
branch lengths are minimized
minimax regret criterion a method for making
a decision in a decision analysis problem; the
decision will minimize the maximum regret
minimization problem a linear programming
problem in which an objective, such as cost, is
minimized
minimum cell cost method a method for
determining the initial solution to a trans-
portation model
mixed constraint problem a linear 
programming problem with a mixture of
constraints
mixed integer model an integer linear program-
ming model that can generate a solution with
both integer and non-integer values
model an abstract (mathematical) representa-
tion of a problem
Monte Carlo process a technique used in
simulation for selecting numbers randomly
from a probability distribution
most likely time one of three time estimates used
in a beta distribution to determine an activity
time; the time that would occur most frequently if
the activity was repeated many times
… ,  =,  and Ú
moving average a time series forecasting
method that involves dividing values of a
forecast variable by a sequence of time 
periods
multiple optimum solutions alternative solu-
tions to a linear programming problem, all of
which achieve the same objective function
value
multiple regression a form of regression that
relates a dependent variable to two or more
independent variables 
multiple-server queuing system a system in
which a single waiting line feeds into two or
more servers in parallel
mutually exclusive events in a probability
experiment, events that can occur only one at a
time
N
network an arrangement of paths connected at
various points (drawn as a diagram), through
which an item or items move from one point
to another
network flow models a model that represents
the flow of items through a system
node in a network diagram, a point that
represents a junction or an intersection; it is
represented by a circle
noninstantaneous receipt the gradual receipt
of inventory over time
nonlinear programming a form of mathe-
matical programming in which the objective
function or constraints (or both) are nonlinear
functions
normal distribution a continuous probability
distribution that has the shape of a bell
O
objective function a mathematical relation-
ship that represents the objective of a problem
solution
objective probability the relative frequency
with which a specific outcome in an
experiment has been observed to occur in the
long run
operating characteristics average values for
characteristics that describe a waiting line
opportunity cost table a table derived in the
solution to an assignment problem
optimal solution the best solution to a problem
optimistic time one of three time estimates
used in a beta distribution to determine an
activity time; the shortest possible time it
would take to complete an activity if
everything went right
order cycle the time period during which a
maximum inventory level is depleted and a
new order is received to bring inventory back
to its maximum level

GLOSSARY
813
ordering cost the cost a business incurs when
it makes an order to replenish its inventory
P
parameter a constant value that is generally a
coefficient of a variable in a mathematical
equation
payoff table a table used to show the payoffs
that can result from decisions under various
states of nature
penalty cost the penalty (or regret) suffered
by a decision maker when a wrong decision is
made
periodic inventory system a system in which
an order is placed for a variable amount at
fixed time intervals
permanent set in a shortest route network
problem, a set of nodes to which the shortest
route from the start node has been determined
pessimistic time one of three time estimates
used in a beta distribution to determine an
activity time; the longest possible time it
would take to complete an activity if
everything went wrong
pivot column the column corresponding to
the entering variable
Poisson distribution a probability distribution
that describes the occurrence of a relatively
rare event in a fixed period of time; often used
to define arrivals at a service facility in a
queuing system
political/social forecast a prediction of
political and social changes that may occur in
the future
population mean the mean of an entire set of
data being analyzed
posterior probability the altered marginal
probability of an event based on additional
information
precedence relationship the relationship
exhibited by events that must occur in
sequence; such events can be represented by a
CPM/PERT network
primal the original form of a linear program-
ming model
priority the importance of a goal relative to
other goals in a goal programming model
probabilistic techniques management science
techniques that take into account uncertain
information and give probabilistic solutions
probability distribution a distribution
showing the probability of occurrence of all
events in an experiment
probability tree a diagram showing the
probabilities of the various outcomes of an
experiment
production lot size model an inventory model
for a business that produces its own inventory
at a gradual rate (also known as the
noninstantaneous receipt model)
prohibited route in a transportation model, a
route (i.e., variable) to which no allocation can
be made
project crashing a method for reducing the
duration of a CPM/PERT project network by
reducing one or more critical path activities
and incurring a cost
project evaluation and review technique
(PERT) a network technique, designed for
project planning and scheduling, that uses
probabilistic activity times
pseudorandom numbers random numbers
generated by a mathematical process rather
than by a physical process
Q
qualitative forecast methods nonquantitative,
subjective forecasts based on judgment,
opinion, experience, and expert opinion
quantitative forecast methods forecasts
derived from a mathematical formula
quantity discount model an inventory model
in which a discount is received for large orders
queue a waiting line
queue discipline the order in which customers
waiting in line are served
queuing analysis the probabilistic analysis of
waiting lines
R
random number table a table containing
random numbers derived from some artificial
process, such as a computer program
random numbers numbers that are equally
likely to be drawn from a large population of
numbers
random variable a variable that can be
assigned numeric values reflecting the
outcomes of an event; because these values
occur in no particular order, they are said to be
random
random variations movements in a 
forecast that are not predictable and follow no
pattern
regression a statistical technique for measur-
ing the relationship of one variable to one or
more other variables; this method is used
extensively in forecasting
regression equation an equation derived from
historical data that is used to forecast
regret a value representing the regret the
decision maker suffers when a wrong decision
is made
relative frequency probability another name
for an objective (a posteriori) probability; it
represents the relative frequency with which a
specific outcome has been observed to occur
in the long run
reorder lead time the time between the
placement of an order and its receipt into
inventory
reorder point the inventory level at which an
order is placed
rim requirements the supply and demand
values along the outer row and column of a
transportation tableau
risk averter a person who avoids taking risks
risk taker a person who takes risks in the
hope of achieving a large return
row operations method used to solve
simultaneous equations in which equations are
multiplied by constants and added or subtracted
from each other
run a sequence of sample values that displays
the same tendency in a control chart
S
safety stock a buffer of extra inventory used 
as protection against a stockout (i.e., running
out of inventory)
sample a portion of the items produced used
for inspection
sample mean the mean of a subset of the
population data
satisfactory solution in a goal programming
model, a solution that satisfies the goals in the
best way possible
scatter diagram a diagram used in
forecasting that shows historical data points
scientific method a method for solving
problems that includes the following steps:
(1) observation, (2) problem definition,
(3) model construction, (4) model solution,
and (5) implementation
search techniques methods for searching
through the solutions generated by a
simulation model to find the best one
seasonal factor a numeric value that is
multiplied by a normal forecast to get a
seasonally adjusted forecast
seasonal pattern in a forecast, a movement
that occurs periodically and is repetitive
seed value a number selected arbitrarily from
a range of numbers to begin a stream of
random numbers generated by a computerized
random number generator
sensitivity analysis the analysis of changes in
the parameters of a linear programming
problem
sequential decision tree a decision tree that
analyzes a series of sequential decisions
service level the percentage of orders a busi-
ness is able to fill from inventory in stock during
the reorder period
service rate the average number of customers
that can be served from a queue in a specified
period of time

814
GLOSSARY
shadow price the price one would be willing
to pay to obtain one more unit of a resource in
a linear programming problem
shared slack in a CPM/PERT network, slack
that is shared among several adjacent activities
shortest route problem a network problem 
in which the objective is to determine the
shortest distance between an originating point
and several destination points
short-range forecast a forecast of the imme-
diate future that is concerned with daily
operations
simple regression a form of regression that
relates a dependent variable to one
independent variable
simplex method a tabular approach to solving
linear programming problems
simplex tableau the table in which the steps
of the simplex method are conducted; each
tableau represents a solution
simulated time the representation of real time
in a simulation model
simulation the replication of a real system
with a mathematical model that can be
analyzed with a computer
simulation language a computer program-
ming language developed specifically for
performing simulation
single-server waiting line a waiting line that
contains only one service facility at which
customers can be served
slack variable a variable representing unused
resources that is added to a
inequality
constraint to make the constraint an equation
slope the rate of change in a linear
mathematical function
smoothing constant a weighting factor used in
the exponential smoothing forecasting technique
standard deviation a measure of dispersion
around the mean of a probability distribution
states of nature in a decision situation, the
possible events that may occur in the future
steady state a constant value achieved by a
system after an extended period of time
steady-state probability a constant
probability that a system will end up in a
particular state after a large number of
transition periods
…
stockout running out of inventory
subjective probability a probability that is
based on personal experience, knowledge of a
situation, or intuition rather than on a priori or
a posteriori evidence
substitution method a method for solving
nonlinear programming problems that contain
only one equality constraint; the constraint is
solved for one variable in terms of another and
is substituted into the objective function
surplus variable a variable that reflects the
excess above a minimum resource
requirement level; it is subtracted from a
inequality constraint in a linear programming
problem
system a set or an arrangement of related
items that forms an organic whole
T
technological forecast a prediction of what types
of technology may be available in the future
time series methods statistical forecasting
techniques that are based solely on historical
data accumulated over a period of time
total revenue the volume of units produced
multiplied by price per unit
transportation model a type of linear 
programming problem in which a product 
is to be transported from a number of sources
to a number of destinations at the minimum
cost
transshipment model an extension of the
transportation model that includes
intermediate points between sources and
destinations
trend a long-term movement of an item being
forecasted
U
unbalanced transportation model a trans-
portation model in which supply exceeds
demand or demand exceeds supply
unbounded problem a linear programming
problem in which there is no completely
closed-in feasible solution area and therefore
the objective function can increase infinitely

unconstrained optimization model a model
with a single objective function and no
constraints
undirected branch a branch in a network that
allows flow in both directions
utiles the units in which utility is measured
utility a numeric measure of the satisfaction a
person derives from money
utilization factor the probability that a server
in a queuing system will be busy
V
validation the process of making sure model
solution results are correct (valid)
variable within a model, a mathematical
symbol that can take on different values
variable costs costs that are determined on a
per-unit basis
variance a measure of how much the values 
in a probability distribution vary from the
mean
Venn diagram a pictorial representation of
mutually exclusive or nonmutually exclusive
events
W
weighted moving average a time series
forecasting method in which the most recent
data are weighted
what-if? analysis a form of interactive
decision analysis in which a computer is used
to determine the results of making various
changes in a model
work breakdown structure a structure that
breaks down a project into its major sub-
components, components, activities, and 
tasks
Z
zero–one integer model an integer program-
ming model that can have solution values of
only zero or one

A
A priori probability, 503
Absorbing state, F13
Activities, 349
Activity-on-Arrow (AOA) networks, 349–351
Activity-on-Node (AON) networks, 351–352
Activity scheduling, 353–356
backward pass, 355
earliest finish time, 353
earliest start time, 353
forward pass, 353, 355
latest finish time, 354
latest start time, 354
shared slack, 357
slack, 356–357
Activity slack, 356–357
Adjusted exponential smoothing, 705–708
Alternate optimal solution, 54
Amazon.com, 47
American Red Cross, 14, 144
Analogue simulation, 638
Analytical hierarchy process (AHP), 422–433
consistency index, 429
Excel, 431–433
normalized matrix, 425
pairwise comparisons, 423–424
preference scale, 423
preference vector, 425
random index, 430
Saaty, Thomas, 422
summary steps, 427–428
synthesization, 424
AOA (Activity-on-Arrow) networks, 349–351
AON (Activity-on-Node) networks, 351–352
Arrival rate, 599, 600
Poisson distribution, 600
Artificial variable, A18, A22
Assignment model, 247
balanced model, 247
Excel, 247–248
Excel QM, 248–249
QM for Windows, 250–251
unbalanced model, 247
Assignment solution method, B22–B25
column reductions, B23
dummy column, B24
dummy row, B25
multiple optimal solutions, B24
opportunity cost table, B22
optimal solution, B24
prohibited assignment, B25
row reductions, B23
summary steps, B25
unbalanced, B24
ASSO.LA.C, 302
AT&T, 620
Average error (bias), 708
B
Backward pass, 355
Bad debt example (see debt example), F13–F16
Balanced transportation problem, B3, 236
Bank of America, 607
Bar chart, 346
Basic feasible solution, A4, A6, B9
Basic variables, A6
Battle of Britain, 5
Bayer, 709
Bayes, Thomas, 514
Bayes’s rule, 515, 562, 565
Bayesian analysis, 514–515
Beer, Stafford, 5
Bernoulli process, 510
Beta distribution, 358
mean, 358
variance, 358
Bias (see average error), 708
Binomial distribution, 509–511
Blackett, P.M. S., 5
Blackett’s Circus, 5
Blend example (linear programming),
133–137
Booz, Allen, Hamilton, 350
Branch and bound method, C2–C9, 190
Branches, 290, 349, 350
Brand-switching problem, F2
Break-even analysis, 7–12
Excel, 12
Excel QM, 12
fixed costs, 7, 8
graphical solution, 9–12
profit, 8
profit analysis, 7
QM for Windows, 12
sensitivity analysis, 10–12
simulation, 659–666
total cost, 8
variable costs, 7, 8, 9
volume, 7, 8, 9
Break-even point, 7, 8
Break-even volume, 7, 8, 9
Buffer stock, 753
Bush, Vannevar, 5
C
Calling population, 599, 600
Canadian Army, 14
Capacity-planning problem, 140
Capital budgeting example (0–1 integer 
programming), 200–201
Carrying costs, 754, 758–760
Causal forecasting methods, 691
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 14, 546
Charnes, Abraham, 419
China, 342
Chi-square table, 525, 795
Chi-square test, 523–526
Classical optimization, 481–483
Classical probability, 503
Coefficient of determination, 716
Coefficient of optimism, 542
Coefficient of pessimism, 542
Collectively exhaustive (events), 506
Complete enumeration, C11
Conant, James B., 5
Concurrent activities, 351
Conditional constraint, 187
Conditional probability, 508, 513
Confidence limits, 657
Conservation of flow (networks), 296
Consistency index, 429
Constant service times, 608–610
Constrained optimization, 481–483
Constraints, 4, 31, 33
Constraints (in linear programming), 31,
33, 114, 118, 121, 127, 131, 134,
139, 143
Contingency constraint, 186, C10
Continuous inventory system, 756
Continuous probability distribution, 517,
652–655
Continuous random variable, 517
Cook County Hospital, 19
Index
815

816
INDEX
Cooper, William W., 419
Corequisite constraint, 187
Correlation, 715–716
Cost variance, 347
Covariance, 491
CPM (critical path method), 290, 340, 346,
347, 349–357
CPM/PERT, 18, 290, 340, 349–365
activity scheduling, 353–357
backward pass, 355
beta distribution, 358
branches, 348, 349
concurrent activities, 350
crashing, 369–372, 377–380
critical path, 352–353
dummy activities, 350
earliest finish time, 353
earliest start time, 353
Excel QM, 363–365
forward pass, 353
latest finish time, 354
latest start time, 354
linear programming formulation, 374–375,
378–379
Microsoft Project, 365–368
most likely time estimate, 358
nodes, 349, 350
optimistic time estimate, 358
pessimistic time estimate, 358
precedence relationships, 349
probabilistic activity times, 349, 357–363
probability analysis, 362–363
project variance, 360
QM for Windows, 363–364
shared slack, 357
slack, 346, 356–357
Crash cost, 369, 370
Crash time, 369, 370
Crashing, 369–372, 377–380
crash costs, 369
crash times, 369
Excel, 379–381
linear programming, 377–379
normal activity costs, 369
normal activity times, 369
QM for Windows, 372
Criteria preference matrix, 426
Critical path, 352–353, 356
Critical path method (CPM), 340, 349
Crystal Ball, 659–666
CSX Transportation, 306
Cumulative error, 706–708
Cumulative probability distribution, 508
Cycles (in forecasting), 690, 691
Cyclic (transition) matrix, F13
D
Dantzig, George B., 32, 117, 138
Dar Al-Hekma, 422
Data, 4, 21
Data envelopment analysis (DEA) example
(linear programming), 142–146
DEA (data envelopment analysis) example
(linear programming), 142–146
Debt example, F13
Decision analysis, 537–569
criteria, 540–544
dominant decision, 543
Excel, 545, 548, 551, 565
Excel QM, 549, 553, 559, 560
expected opportunity loss, 547–548
expected value, 546–547
payoff, 538
payoff table, 538
QM for Windows, 544–545
states of nature, 538
Treeplan, 554–556, 559–560
with additional information, 560–562
with probabilities, 546–560
without probabilities, 539–545
Decision-making criteria, 540–545
equal likelihood, 543
expected opportunity loss, 547–548
expected value, 546–547
Hurwicz, 542
maximax, 540
maximin, 541
minimax regret, 541–542
minimin, 540
Decision sciences, 2
Decision strategies, 564
Decision support systems (DSS), 20–21
Decision trees, 550–554
Excel, 554
Excel QM, 559, 560
sequential, 556–559
TreePlan, 554–556
with posterior probabilities, 562–564
Decision variables, 4, 9, 31, 33, 113, 118, 121,
126, 130, 133, 138, 143
Degeneracy (in linear programming), A4,
A27–A29
Degeneracy (in transportation problem),
B20–B22
Dell, 769
Delphi method, 693
Demand, 754
Dependent demand, 754
Dependent events, 511–514
Dependent variable, 3
Descriptive results, 5
Deterministic techniques, 17
Deviational variables, 409
Diet example (linear programming),
117–120
Dijkstra, E.W., 304
Directed branch, 303
Discrete probability distribution, 510
Discrete values, 517
Doig, A.C., 191
Dominant decisions, 543
Dominant strategies, E5–E6
Dual, 78
Dual value, 78
Dummy activities, 350
E
Earliest event times, 374
Earliest finish time, 353
Earliest start time, 353
Earned value analysis (EVA), 341, 349
East Carolina University Student Health
Service, 19
Economic order quantity (EOQ), 756,
757–763
assumptions of, 758
basic model, 758–762
carrying costs, 758–760
Excel, 770, 774–775, 781
Excel QM, 770
gradual usage model, 763
lead time, 758
noninstantaneous receipt model, 763–766
ordering cost, 760
production lot size model, 763
QM for Windows, 769, 774
reorder point, 775–776, 777–780
robustness, 762
with safety stocks, 776, 777–780
service level, 777–780
with shortages, 766–768
time, 762–763
total cost, 760–762, 764, 765, 767, 768,
771, 772, 773
Efficiency of sample information, 567
Electronic data interchange (EDI), 21
Employee scheduling, 140
Entergy Electric Systems, 557
Entering nonbasic variable, B13
Enterprise resource planning (ERP), 20
EOQ (economic order quantity), 756, 757–763
assumptions of, 758
basic model, 758–762
carrying costs, 758–760
Excel, 770, 774–775, 781
Excel QM, 770
gradual usage model, 763
lead time, 758
noninstantaneous receipt model, 763–766
ordering cost, 760
production lot size model, 763
QM for Windows, 769, 774
reorder point, 775–776, 777–780
robustness, 762
with safety stocks, 776, 777–780
service level, 777–780
with shortages, 766–768
time, 762–763
total cost, 760–762, 764, 765, 767, 768,
771, 772, 773
Equal likelihood criterion, 543
Equation of a line, 43
Equilibrium point, E5
Erlang, A.K., 600
EVA (earned value analysis), 341, 349
Events, 505
collectively exhaustive, 506
dependent, 511–514

INDEX
817
independent, 508–509
mutually exclusive, 505
EVPI (expected value of perfect information),
549–550
EVSI (expected value of sample information),
566–567
Excel, 12, 13, 14, 73–76, 84–85, 87, 88, 89,
90, 114–115, 114–115, 119, 122–123,
124, 127, 128–129, 131–132, 135–136,
137, 140–141, 145–146, 189, 190–193,
195–198, 200–201, 203–204, 206–207,
237–239, 242, 244–245, 247–248,
296–298, 305–310, 375–377, 379–381,
431–433, 415, 417–421, 483–487,
488–489, 490–491, 493–494, 526–527,
545, 548, 551, 565, 606–607, 610–611,
613, 614, 616, 621, 643–648, 650–652,
655–659, 709–711, 716–719, 770,
774–775, 781
analytical hierarchy process (AHP), 431–433
assignment problem, 247–248
break-even analysis, 13–14
CPM/PERT, 375–377
crashing, 379–381
decision analysis, 545, 548, 551, 565
EOQ analysis, 770, 774–775, 781
expected value, 548
forecasting, 709–711, 716–719
goal programming, 415, 417–421
integer programming, 128, 189, 190–193,
195–198, 200–201, 203–204, 206–207
inventory management, 770, 774–775, 781
linear programming, 73–76, 84–85, 87, 88,
89, 90, 114–115, 114–115, 119, 122–123,
124, 127, 128–129, 131–132, 135–136,
137, 140–141, 145–146, 375–377, 379–381
linear regression, 716–719
Markov analysis, F16
maximal flow problem, 305–310
multiple regression, 719–722
nonlinear programming, 483–487, 488–489,
490–491, 493–494
posterior probabilities, 565
queuing analysis, 606–607, 610–611, 613,
614, 616, 621
scoring model, 434
sensitivity analysis, 84–85, 87, 88, 89, 90
shortest route problem, 296–298
shadow price, 89–91
simulation, 643–648, 650–652, 655–659
Solver, 74
statistical analysis, 526–527
time series forecasting, 709–711
total integer programming problem, 195–198
transportation problem, 131–132,
237–239, 242
transshipment problem, 244–245
TreePlan, 554–556
tutorial on, 796–799
Excel QM, 12, 13–14, 239–240, 248–249,
363–365, 552–554, 559, 560, 606, 608,
616, 621–622, 711–712, 770
Expected gain and loss method, E8
Expected opportunity loss, 547–548, 550
Expected value, 515–517, 546–547
Expected value given perfect information, 550
Expected value of perfect information (EVPI),
549–550
Expected value of sample information (EVSI),
566–567
Expected value without perfect information, 550
Experiment (in probability), 505
Expert Choice, 20
Exponential distribution, 601
Exponential service times, 601
Exponential smoothing, 696–700
smoothing constant, 697, 700
Extranet, 21
Extreme points (in linear programming), 41
F
Facility location problem 
0–1 integer programming, 202–205
nonlinear programming, 490–491
Factorials, 510
Feasible solution (in linear programming),
34, 38
Finite calling population, 614–615
Finite queue, 611–613
Fixed charge problem (0–1 integer 
programming), 202–205
Fixed costs, 7, 8
Fixed-order quantity system, 756
Fixed-time period system, 756, 757, 780
Ford, 487
Ford, L.R., Jr., 304
Forecast accuracy, 705–708
Forecast error, 706, 707, 708
Forecasting, 689–722
accuracy, 705–708
adjusted exponential smoothing, 696,
700–701
average error (bias), 708
coefficient of determination, 716
correlation, 715–716
cumulative error, 707–708
cycles, 690, 691
Delphi method, 693
error, 705
Excel, 709–711, 716–719, 719–722
Excel QM, 711–712
exponential smoothing, 696–700
linear regression, 713–715
linear trend line, 702–704
long-range forecasts, 690
mean absolute deviation (MAD), 706–707
mean absolute percentage deviation
(MAPD), 707
mean squared error (MSE), 708
medium-range forecasts, 690
moving averages, 693–696
multiple regression, 719–722
QM for Windows, 712–713, 719, 720
qualitative methods, 691
random variations, 690, 691
regression methods, 691, 713–719
seasonal adjustments, 704–705
seasonal factor, 704
seasonal patterns, 690, 691
short-range forecasts, 690
simple exponential smoothing, 696
smoothing constant, 697, 700
time series methods, 691, 693–705
trend, 690, 691
weighted moving averages, 696
Forward pass, 353, 355
Frequency distribution, 505
Fulkerson, D.R., 304
Functional relationship, 4
Fundamental matrix, F15
G
Game theory, E2–E10
closed loop, E8
dominant strategies, E5–E6
equilibrium point, E6
expected gain and loss method, E8–E10
maximin strategy, E4
minimax strategy, E4
mixed strategy game, E6–E8
n-person game, E2
optimal strategy, E3
payoff table, E3
pure strategy game, E3
QM for Windows, E5, E10
saddle point, E5
strategies, E3
two-person game, E2–E3
value of the game, E3
zero-sum game, E2
Gantt, Henry, 346
Gantt chart, 341, 346–347, 365, 366, 367
GE asset Management, 125
GE Plastics, 77
Global optimal, 478
Goal constraint, 409
Goal programming, 408–421
deviational variables, 409
Excel, 415, 417–421
goals, 409
graphical solution, 412–415
model formulation, 408–412
objective function, 410
priorities, 410
QM for Windows, 415
satisfactory solution, 414, 415
Gomory, Ralph E., 191
Goodness-of-fit, 523
Goodyear, 697
Gradual usage model, 763
Graphical solution, 9–12, 35–47, 49–53,
188–190, 412–415
break-even analysis, 9–12
goal programming, 412–415
infeasible problem, 54
integer programming model, 188–190
linear programming, 36–47, 49–53

818
INDEX
Graphical solution, (continued)
maximization model, 35–47
minimization model, 49–52
multiple optimal solutions, 53–54
nonlinear programming, 479–481, 482–483
sensitivity analysis, 10–12
slack variable, 46
surplus variables, 53
summary steps, 46
unbounded problem, 55
H
Harris, Ford, 757
Heathrow Airport, 364
Heineken USA, 702
Hewlett-Packard, 14, 755
Hitchcock, Frank L., 236
Hurwicz criterion, 542
Hypo real Estate, 14
I
Identity matrix, F15
Implementation, 7
Implicit enumeration, C11
Independent demand, 754
Independent events, 508–509
Independent variable, 3
Indian Railways, 35
Indiana University, 199
Infeasible problem (in linear programming),
34, 54
Instantaneous receipt, 759
Institute for Operations Research and
Management Sciences (INFORMS), 18
Integer programming, C1–C11, 128, 184–209
branch and bound method, C2–C9, 190
capital budgeting example, 200–201
complete enumeration, C11
conditional constraint, 187
contingency constraint, 186, C10
corequisite constraint, 187
Excel, 189, 190–193, 195–198, 200–201,
203–204, 206–207
facility location example, 202–205
fixed charge problem, 202–205
graphical solution, 188–190
mixed integer model, 187–188
multiple-choice constraint, 186
mutually exclusive constraint, 186
optimal solution, 190
QM for Windows, 192–194, 209
relaxed solution, C3
rounded down solution, 189
set covering problem, 205–207
total integer model, 185–186, 195
0–1 integer model, 186–187, 190–194
Interfaces, 18
Internet, 21
Intranet, 21
Inventory, 753
average level, 759
buffer stock, 753
carrying costs, 754, 758–760
costs, 754–756, 758–762
definition of, 753
ordering costs, 754–756, 760
role of, 753
safety stock, 753
shortage costs, 754, 756, 766, 767
total cost, 760–762
Inventory control, 667, 756–757
Inventory management, 752–781
certain demand, 758
control systems, 756–757
continuous system, 756
costs, 754–756
dependent demand, 754
elements of, 753–756
economic order quantity (EOQ), 756,
757–763
Excel, 770, 774–775, 781
Excel QM, 770
fixed-order quantity system, 756
fixed-time period system, 756, 757, 780
gradual usage, 763
independent demand, 754
instantaneous receipt, 759
noninstantaneous receipt, 763–766
periodic system, 756, 757, 780–781
production lot size, 763
QM for Windows, 769, 774
quantity discounts, 771–774
reorder point, 775–776, 777–780
role of, 753, 756
safety stocks, 753, 776, 777–780
shortages, 766–768
simulation, 638–648, 667
Inverse (of a matrix), F15
Investment example (linear programming),
120–125
Investment portfolio selection example 
(nonlinear programming), 7
Irregular types of linear programming 
problems, 53–56
J
Joint probability, 506–507
Joint probability table, 513–514
K
Kelley, James E., Jr., 350
Kellogg, D., 140
Kellogg’s, 779
Koopmans, T.C., 236
L
Lagrange multipliers method, 485, D4–D6
Lagrangian function, D5
Land, A.H., 191
Lands’ End, 613
LaPlace criterion, 543
Latest finish time, 354
Latest start time, 354
Lead time, 758, 775, 778, 779
Least squares formula, 703
Linear equation, 35
Linear programming, 16, 31–60, 73–91,
111–149
assignment problem, 247
basic feasible solution, A6
basic variables, A6
blend example, 133–135
characteristics, 56
computer solution, 73–79, 114–115,
114–115, 119, 122–123, 127–129,
131–132, 135–136, 140–141, 145–146
constraints, 31, 33, 49, 114
CPM/PERT, 374–375
crashing, 377–379
data envelopment analysis (DEA) example,
142–146
decision variables, 31, 33, 48, 113
degeneracy, A27
diet example, 117–120
dual, 78
dual value (see also shadow price), 78, 89,
116, 124, 136
Excel, 73–76, 84–85, 87, 88, 114–115,
114–115, 119, 122–123, 124, 127,
128–129, 131–132, 135–136, 137,
140–141, 145–146, 305–310, 375–377,
379–381
extreme points, 41
feasible solution, 34
feasible solution area, 38, 50
graphical solution, 35–47, 49–53
infeasible problem, 34, 54
integer solutions, 128, 184–208
investment example, 120–125
irregular types of problems, 53–56
marginal value, 78
marketing example, 126–129
maximal flow problem, 305–310
maximization model, 31–35
minimization model, 47–53
mixed constraint problem, A21
model formulation, 31, 33, 47, 112–114
modeling examples, 111–146
multiple optimal solutions, 44, 53
multiperiod scheduling example,
137–142
objective function, 31, 33, 49, 114
optimal solution, 39–40
parameters, 31
project crashing, 377–379
primal, A30, A32
product mix example, 31, 112–117
properties, 56
QM for Windows, 73, 76–79, 85, 87, 88,
115, 116
sensitivity analysis, 44, 80–91, 116, 120,
123–125, 136–137, 142

INDEX
819
shadow price (see also dual value),
89–91, 136
shortest route problem, 296–297
simplex method, 73, 234, A1
simplex tableau, A5
slack variables, 44–46
standard model form, 46, 121
summary steps (graphical solution), 46
summary steps (model formulation), 33, 113
surplus variables, 52–53
transportation problem, 130–137
transshipment problem, 243–244
unbounded problem, 55
Linear regression, 713–715
Linear trend line, 702–704
L.L. Bean, 613
Local optimal, 478
Long-range forecasts, 690
M
MAD (mean absolute deviation), 706–707
Malcolm, D.G., 350
Management science, 2
definition, 2
“Management Science Application” (box), 6,
14, 19, 35, 47, 51, 77, 79, 125, 138, 140,
144, 188, 194, 199, 208, 237, 242, 246,
250, 251, 302, 306, 342, 348, 364, 373,
415, 422, 428, 430, 435, 487, 507, 546,
557, 566, 607, 613, 620, 651, 658, 692,
697, 702, 709, 717, 755, 769, 779
Amazon.com, 47
American Red Cross, 14, 144
ASSO.LA.C, 302
AT&T, 620
Bank of America, 607
Bayer, 709
Canadian Army, 14
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
(CDC), 14, 546
China, 342
Cooke County Hospital, 19
CSX Transportation, 306
Dar Al-Hekma, 422
Dell, 769
East Carolina University Student Health
Services, 19
employee scheduling, 140
Entergy Electric Systems, 557
Ford, 487
GE Asset Management, 125
GE Plastics, 77
Goodyear, 697
Heathrow Airport, 364
Heineken USA, 702
Hewlett-Packard, 14, 755
Hypo Real Estate Bank, 14
Indian Railways, 35
Indiana University, 199
Kellogg, 779
Lands’ End, 613
L.L. Bean, 613
Lockheed Martin Space Systems, 14
Marriott, 6
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer 
Center, 19
Merrill Lynch Bank USA, 658
Microsoft Excel, 14
Mount Sinai Hospital (Toronto), 188
NASA, 428
NBC, 415, 692
New York Power Authority, 566
Norske Skog (Norway), 79
Nu-kote International, 237
Ohio University, 194
Pentagon, 373
petroleum industry, 138
Proctor & Gamble, 14
Soquimich (SA), 51
S.S. Central America, 507
Transportation Security Administration
(TSA), 717
Union Pacific Railroad, 250
University of Toronto, 14
UPS, 208
U.S. Army, 430, 435
U.S. Coast Guard, 516
U.S. Postal Service, 246
Virginia Department of Transportation
(VDOT), 348
World War II generals, 430
Management scientist, 3
MAPD (mean absolute percentage 
deviation), 707
Marginal probability, 506
Marginal value, 78
Marketing example (linear programming),
126–129
Markov analysis, F1–F17
absorbing state, F13
cyclic (transition) matrix, F13
debt example, F13–F16
Excel, F16
properties, F3
QM for Windows, F11
steady-state probabilities, F8
system state, F3
transient state, F13
transition matrix, F5–F8
transition probabilities, F3
Markov, Andrey A., F4
Markov process, F3
Markowitz, Harry, 491
Marriott, 6
Matrix algebra, F5
Maximal flow problem, 303–310
directed branch, 303
Excel, 307–310
linear programming formulation,
307–308
net flow, 304
QM for Windows, 307
solution steps, 306
undirected branch, 303
Maximax criterion, 540
Maximin criterion, 541
Maximin strategy, E4
Maximization model (in linear prorgmming),
31–35
Mean, 516, 518, 521
Mean absolute deviation (MAD), 706–707
Mean absolute percentage deviation (MAPD),
707
Mean squared error (MSE), 708
Medium-range forecasts, 690
Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, 19
Merrill Lynch Bank USA, 658
Microsoft Excel, 14
Microsoft Project, 365–368
Middleton, Michael, 554
Minimal spanning tree problem, 298–302
QM for Windows, 301–302
solution steps, 301
Minimin criterion, 540
Minimax regret criterion, 541–542
Minimax strategy, E4
Minimization model (linear programming),
47–53
Minimum cell cost method, B5–B6
Mixed constraint problem, A20, A21–A23
Mixed integer model, 187–188
Mixed strategy game, E3, E6
Model, 3, 4, 31
constraints, 4, 31
construction, 3
formulation, 30, 31
implementation, 7
linear programming, 31
parameters, 3, 31
variables, 3
solution, 4
Modified distribution method (MODI),
B15–B19
summary steps, B19
Monte Carlo process, 638–643
Monte Carlo simulation, 638–643
Morgenstern, Oskar, E7
Most likely time estimate, 358
Mount Sinai Hospital (Toronto), 188
Moving averages, 693–696
MSE (mean squared error), 708
Multicollinearity, 722
Multicriteria decision making, 407–435
analytical hierarchy process (AHP),
422–433
goal programming, 408–421
scoring model, 433–435
Multiperiod scheduling example (linear 
programming), 137–142
Multiple-choice constraint, 186
Multiple optimal solutions 
assignment problem, B24
linear programming, 44, 53–54
transportation problem, 240, B15
Multiple regression, 719–722
Multiple-server waiting line, 617–621
Mutually exclusive constraint, 186
Mutually exclusive events, 505

820
INDEX
N
Naïve forecasting, 693
NASA, 428
NBC, 415, 692
Net (branch) flow, 304
Network, 17, 234, 349, 350
Network flow models, 17, 234, 289–310
components, 290–291
Excel, 296–298, 305–310
maximal flow, 303–310
minimal spanning tree, 298–302
QM for Windows, 295–296, 301–303,
307
shortest route, 291–298
New York Power Authority, 566
Nodes, 290, 349, 350
Nonbasic variable, A9
Noninstantaneous receipt model, 763–766
Nonlinear profit analysis, 478–481
Nonlinear programming, 477–494, D1
constrained optimization, 481–483
Excel, 483–487, 488–489, 490–491,
493–494
Lagrange multipliers, 485, D6
substitution method, D2–D4
Nonnegativity constraints, 34, 36
Non-zero-sum game, E2
Normal activity costs, 369
Normal activity times, 369
Normal distribution, 362–363, 517–521
CPM/PERT network, 362–363
mean, 521
reorder point, 777
standard deviation, 363, 518
table, 794
Normal table, 520, 794
Normalized matrix (AHP), 425
Norske Skog (Norway), 79
Northwest corner method, B4–B5
N-person game, E2
Nu-kote International, 237
O
Objective function, 4, 31, 33, 114, 118, 121,
126, 130, 133, 139, 143, 410
Objective probability, 503
OBS (organizational breakdown 
structure), 345
Ohio University, 194
Online analytical processing 
(OLAP), 20
Operating characteristics (queuing), 598
Operations research, 2, 5
Opportunity loss, 541
Opportunity loss table, 541, 542
Optimal solution (in linear programming),
39–40, 190
Optimistic time estimate, 358
Ordering cost, 754, 760
Organizational breakdown structure 
(OBS), 345
P
Pairwise comparisons, 423–424
Parameters, 3, 31
Payoff, 538
Payoff table, 538
Penalty cost (VAM), B6
Pentagon, 373
Performance management, 348
Periodic inventory system, 756, 757, 780–781
with variable demand, 777
Permanent set, 292
PERT (project evaluation and review 
technique), 290, 340, 346, 349–365
Pessimistic time estimate, 358
Pivot column, A10
Pivot column tie, A27
Pivot number, A12
Pivot row, A12
Pivot row tie (degeneracy), A27–A29
Poisson arrival rate, 600
Poisson distribution, 600
Polaris missile project, 350
Population mean, 521
Population variance, 521
Posterior probability, 514
table, 565
Precedence relationships, 349, 350
Preference scale, 423
Preference vector, 425
Primal, A30, A32
Prior probability, 503
Priorities (in goal programming), 410
Probabilistic activity times, 358–360
Probabilistic techniques, 16
Probability, 502–527
a priori, 503
binomial distribution, 509–511
chi-square test, 523–526
classical, 503
collectively exhaustive events, 506
conditional, 508, 513
continuous distribution, 517
cumulative distribution, 508
dependent events, 511–514
discrete distribution, 510
distribution, 505
events, 505
Excel, 526–527
expected value, 515–517
experiment, 505
frequency distribution, 505
fundamentals of, 505–508
goodness-of-fit, 523
independent events, 508–509
joint, 506–507
joint probability table, 513–514
marginal, 506
mean, 516, 518, 521
mutually exclusive events, 505
normal distribution, 517–521
objective, 503
posterior, 514
prior, 503
probability distribution, 505
relative frequency, 503
revised, 514
standard deviation, 517, 518
subjective, 504
tree, 509
unconditional, 512
variance, 516
Venn diagram, 506
Problem definition, 2, 3
Proctor & Gamble, 14
Product mix (linear programming) model, 31,
112–117
Production lot size model, 763
Profit, 8
Profit analysis (see break-even analysis), 7
Prohibited assignment, B25
Prohibited transportation route, B22, 236
Project control, 340, 341, 347–349
Project crashing (see crashing), 369–372,
377–380
Project evaluation and review technique
(PERT), 290, 340, 346, 349–365
Project management, 17, 339–381
control, 340, 341, 347–349
cost management, 348
CPM, 290, 340, 346, 347, 349–357
crashing, 369–372, 377–380
critical path, 352–353, 356
earned value analysis (EVA), 341, 349
elements of, 340–349
Gantt chart, 341, 346–347, 365, 366, 367
organizational breakdown structure 
(OBS), 345
performance management, 348
PERT, 290, 340, 346, 349–365
planning, 340, 341
project manager, 341, 343
project network, 349–353
project return, 341
project team, 341, 342–343
responsibility assignment matrix (RAM),
341, 345
return on investment (ROI), 341
scope statement, 341, 343
statement of work, 343
time management, 347
work breakdown structure (WBS), 343–345
Project manager, 341, 343
Project planning, 340, 341
Project team, 341, 342–343
Project variance, 360, 362
Properties (of linear programming), 56
Proportionality, 56
Pseudorandom numbers, 643
Pure strategy game, E3
Q
QM for Windows, 12, 14–15, 76–79,
192–194, 209, 241, 250–251, 295–296,
301–302, 307, 363–364, 372, 415,

INDEX
821
544–545, 548, 608, 611, 613, 614, 617,
622, 712–713, 719, 720, 769, 774
assignment problem, 250–251
break-even analysis, 12, 14–15
CPM/PERT, 363–364
crashing, 372
decision analysis, 544–545
EOQ analysis, 769
EOQ with quantity discounts, 774
expected value, 548
forecasting, 712–719, 720
game theory, E5, E10
goal programming, 415
integer programming, 192–194, 209
inventory, 769, 774
linear programming, 76–79
linear regression, 719, 720
Markov analysis, F11
maximal flow problem, 307
minimal spanning tree problem, 301–302
mixed strategy game, E10
quantity discounts, 774
queuing analysis, 608, 611, 613, 614,
617, 622
sensitivity analysis, 85, 87, 88
shortest route problem, 295–296
time series forecasting, 712–713
transportation problem, 241
0–1 integer programming problem,
192–194
Qualitative forecasting methods, 691
Quantitative analysis, 2
Quantitative methods, 2
Quantity discounts, 771–774
carrying costs as a percentage of price,
772–773
constant carrying costs, 771–772
Queue, 599
Queue discipline, 600
Queuing analysis, 597–623
arrival rate, 599, 600
calling population, 599, 600
constant service times, 608–610
cost trade-off, 606
Excel, 606–607, 610–611, 613, 614, 616, 621
Excel QM, 606, 608, 616, 621–622
exponential distribution, 601
finite calling population, 614–615
finite queue, 611–613
multiple-server waiting line, 617–621
operating characteristics, 598
Poisson distribution, 600
QM for Windows, 608, 611, 613, 614,
617, 622
queue, 599
queue discipline, 600
service rate, 601
simulation, 623, 648–650
single-server waiting line, 599–603
steady-state, 603
undefined service times, 608–610
utilization factor, 602
Queuing theory, 600
R
RAM (responsibility assignment matrix),
341, 345
RAND, 5
Random index, 430
Random numbers, 638–641
Random number table, 640
Random variations (in forecasts),
690, 691
Regression methods, 691, 713–719
Regret, 541
Regret table, 541, 542
Relative frequency, 503
Relaxed solution (integer programming), C3
Reorder point, 775–776, 777–780
with variable demand, 777–778
with variable demand and lead time,
779–780
with variable lead time, 778
Responsibility assignment matrix (RAM),
341, 345
Return on investment (ROI), 341
Revised probability, 514
Rim requirements, B3
Risk averters, 568
Risk takers, 568
ROI (return on investment), 341
Rounded down solution (in integer 
programming), 189
Row operations, A5
S
Saaty, Thomas, 422
Saddle point, E5
Safety stocks, 753, 776, 777–780
Sample mean, 521
Sample variance, 521
Satisfactory solution (goal programming),
414, 415
Scheduling (LP) example, 137–142
Scientific method, 2
Scope statement, 341, 343
Scoring models, 433–435
Seasonal adjustments, 704–705
Seasonal factor, 704
Seasonal patterns, 690, 691
Sensitivity analysis, 10–12
Sensitivity analysis (in linear programming),
44, 80–91
blend example, 136–137
changes in constraint quantity values, 85–87
changes in objective function coefficients,
80–84
computer analysis, 84–85, 87, 88, 89, 90
diet example, 120
Excel, 84–85, 87, 88, 89, 90
graphical analysis, 80–84, 85–87
investment example, 123–125
multiperiod scheduling example, 142
product mix example, 116–117
QM for Windows, 85, 88
Sensitivity analysis (in transportation 
problem), 241–242
Sequential decision trees, 556–560
Server, 599
Service level, 606
Service rate, 601
Service times, 601
exponential distribution, 601
Set covering problem (0–1 integer 
programming), 205–207
Shadow price (see also dual value), 89–91, 136
Shared slack, 357
Shortage costs, 754, 756, 766, 767
Shortest route problem, 291–298
Excel, 296–298
linear programming formulation, 296–297
permanent set, 292
QM for Windows, 295–296
solution steps, 293
Short-range forecasts, 690
Simple exponential smoothing, 696
Simplex method, A1, A5–A30
artificial variable, A18, A22
basic variables, A6
degeneracy, A27–A29
entering nonbasic variable, A9
infeasible problem, A25–A26
leaving basic variable, A10
maximization problem, A5
minimization problem, A16
mixed constraint problem, A20, A21–A23
multiple optimal solutions, A24–A25
negative quantity values, A29–A30
nonbasic variables, A9
optimal solution, A14–A15
pivot column, A10
pivot column tie, A27
pivot number, A12
pivot row, A12
pivot row tie (degeneracy), A27–A29
sensitivity analysis, A34
summary steps, A16
tableau, A5
unbounded problem, A26–A27
Simplex tableau, A5
Simulated time, 639
Simulation, 623, 637–668
applications, 666–667
continuous probability distributions,
652–655
Crystal Ball, 659–666
environmental and resource analysis, 667
Excel, 643–648, 650–652, 655–659
finance, 667
inventory control, 667
marketing, 667
Monte Carlo process, 638–643
production and manufacturing, 667
public service operations, 667
pseudorandom numbers, 643
of a queuing system, 648–650
random numbers, 638–641
statistical analysis, 657–659

822
INDEX
Simulation, (continued)
trials, 642
verification, 666
Simultaneous solution (of linear equations), 42
Single-server waiting line system, 59–603
formulas, 601–602
Slack, 356–357
Slack variables, 44–46
Slope of a line, 43
Smoothing constant, 697, 700
Solver (Excel), 74
Soquimich (SA), 51
Spanning tree, 299
S.S. Central America, 507
Standard deviation, 362, 363, 517, 518
Standard model form (in linear programming),
46, 121
Standard normal distribution, 517–521
State (of a system), F3
Statement of work (SOW), 343
States of nature, 538
Statistical dependence, 508–515
Statistical independence, 508–515
Statistics, 502–527, 657–659
Steady-state, 603
Stepping stone method, B9–B15
closed path, B11
iteration, B13
summary steps, B15
Stigler, George, 117
Strategies (in game theory), E3–E4
Subjective probability, 504
Suboptimal solution, 188
Substitution method (in nonlinear 
programming), D2–D4
Surplus variables, 53
Symmonds, George, 138
Synthesization (AHP), 424
T
Time management (in project management),
347
“Time Out” (box), E7, F4, 5, 32, 117, 191,
236, 304, 346, 350, 419, 600, 643, 757
Beer, Stafford, 5
Blackett, P.M.S., 5
Bush, Vannevar, 5
Charnes, Abraham, 419
Conant, James B., 5
Cooper, William W., 419
Dantzig, George B., 32, 117
Dijkstra, E.W., 304
Doig, A.C., 191
Erlang, Agner Krarup, 600
Ford, L.R., Jr., 304
Fulkerson, D.R., 304
Gantt, Henry, 346
Gomory, Ralph E., 191
Harris, Ford, 757
Hitchcock, Frank L., 236
Ijiri, Yuji, 419
Kelley, James E., Jr., 350
Koopmans, T.C., 236
Land, A.H., 191
Malcolm, D.G., 350
Markov, Andrey A., F4
Morgenstern, Oskar, E7
pioneers in management science, 5
Ulam, Stanislas, 643
Von Neumann, John, 643
Walker, Morgan R., 350
Time series methods, 691, 693–705
adjusted exponential smoothing, 696,
700–701
exponential smoothing, 696–700
linear trend line, 702–704
moving averages, 693–696
seasonal adjustments, 704–705
weighted moving averages, 696
Total integer model, 185–186, 195
Total revenue, 8
Transient state, F13
Transition matrix, F5–F8
Transition probability, F3
Transportation problem, B1–B22, 130–137,
233–252
balanced, B3, 236
degeneracy, B20–B22
entering nonbasic variable, B13
Excel, 135–136, 237–239, 242
Excel QM, 239–240
minimum cell cost method, B5–B6
modified distribution method (MODI),
B15–B19
multiple optimal solutions, 240, B15
northwest corner method, B4–B5
optimal solution, B13, 238
prohibited route, 236, B22
QM for Windows, 241
sensitivity analysis, 136–137, 241–242
stepping stone method, B9–B15
tableau, B3
unbalanced transportation problem,
B19, 236
Vogel’s approximation method (VAM),
B6–B9
Transportation Security Administration 
(TSA), 717
Transportation tableau, B3
Transshipment model, 243–246
TreePlan, 554–556, 559–560
Trend factor, 700
Trends (in forecasting), 690, 691
Trials, 642
Two-person game, E2
U
Ulam, Stanislaw, 643
Unbalanced assignment problem, 247
Unbalanced transportation problem, 236, B19
Unbounded problem (in linear 
programming), 55
Unconditional probability, 512
Unconstrained optimization, 481
Undefined service times, 608–610
Undirected branch, 303
Uniform distribution, 659, 661
Union Pacific Railroad, 250
Universal product code (UPC), 757
University of Toronto, 14
UPS, 208
U.S. Army, 435
U.S. Coast Guard, 516
U.S. Postal Service, 246
Utiles, 568
Utility, 567–568
Utilization factor, 602
V
Value of the game, E3
Variable, 3
artificial, A18
decision, 31, 33
dependent, 3
deviational, 407
independent, 3
slack, 44
surplus, 52
Variable costs, 7, 8
Variance, 516
Venn diagram, 506
Verification (of simulation), 666
Virgnia department of Transportation
(VDOT), 348
Vogel’s approximation method (VAM),
B6–B9
Volume (break-even analysis), 7, 8
Von Neumann, John, 643
W
Waiting lines (see queuing analysis),
597–623
Walker, Morgan R., 350
WBS (work breakdown structure), 343–345
Weighted moving average, 696
Weiss, Howard, 12
Work breakdown structure (WBS),
343–345
World War II, 5
World War II generals, 430
Z
0–1 integer model, 186–187, 190–194
capital budgeting problem, 200–201
Excel, 190–192
facility location problem, 202–205
fixed charge problem, 202–205
QM for Windows, 192–194
set covering problem, 205–207
Zero-sum game, E2
Uploaded by [StormRG]

