
INVENTORY
MANAGEMENT
Non-Classical Views
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Industrial Innovation Series
Series Editor
Adedeji B. Badiru
Department of Systems and Engineering Management
Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT) – Dayton, Ohio
PUBLISHED TITLES
Computational Economic Analysis for Engineering and Industry
Adedeji B. Badiru & Olufemi A. Omitaomu
Conveyors: Applications, Selection, and Integration
Patrick M. McGuire
Knowledge Discovery from Sensor Data
Auroop R. Ganguly, João Gama, Olufemi A. Omitaomu, Mohamed Medhat Gaber,
and Ranga Raju Vatsavai
Handbook of Industrial and Systems Engineering
Adedeji B. Badiru
Handbook of Military Industrial Engineering
Adedeji B.Badiru & Marlin U. Thomas
Industrial Project Management: Concepts, Tools, and Techniques
Adedeji B. Badiru, Abidemi Badiru, and Adetokunboh Badiru
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Mohamad Y. Jaber
STEP Project Management: Guide for Science, Technology, and Engineering Projects
Adedeji B. Badiru
Systems Thinking: Coping with 21st Century Problems
John Turner Boardman & Brian J. Sauser
Techonomics: The Theory of Industrial Evolution
H. Lee Martin
Triple C Model of Project Management: Communication, Cooperation, Coordination
Adedeji B. Badiru
FORTHCOMING TITLES
Beyond Lean: Elements of a Successful Implementation
Rupy (Rapinder) Sawhney
Essentials of Engineering Leadership and Innovation
Pamela McCauley-Bush & Lesia L. Crumpton-Young
Handbook of Industrial Engineering Calculations and Practice
Adedeji B. Badiru & Olufemi A. Omitaomu
Industrial Control Systems: Mathematical and Statistical Models and Techniques
Adedeji B. Badiru, Oye Ibidapo-Obe, & Babatunde J. Ayeni
Innovations of Kansei Engineering
Mitsuo Nagamachi & Anitawani Mohd Lokmanr
Learning Curves: Theory, Models, and Applications
Mohamad Y. Jaber
Modern Construction: Productive and Lean Practices
Lincoln Harding Forbes
Project Management: Systems, Principles, and Applications
Adedeji B. Badiru
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Research Project Management
Adedeji B. Badiru
Social Responsibility: Failure Mode Effects and Analysis
Holly Alison Duckworth & Rosemond Ann Moore
Statistical Techniques for Project Control
Adedeji B. Badiru
Technology Transfer and Commercialization of Environmental Remediation Technology
Mark N. Goltz
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

CRC Press is an imprint of the
Taylor & Francis Group, an informa business
Boca Raton   London   New York
INVENTORY
MANAGEMENT
Non-Classical Views
Edited by
MOHAMAD Y. JABER
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

CRC Press
Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed in the United States of America on acid-free paper
10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
International Standard Book Number: 978-1-4200-7997-5 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts 
have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume 
responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers 
have attempted to trace the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to 
copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has 
not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmit-
ted, or utilized in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, 
including photocopying, microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, 
without written permission from the publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.
com (http://www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood 
Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and 
registration for a variety of users. For organizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, 
a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used 
only for identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Jaber, Mohamad Y.
Inventory management : non-classical views / Mohamad Y. Jaber.
p. cm. -- (Industrial innovation ; 11)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4200-7997-5
1. Inventory control. I. Title. II. Series.
TS160.J33 2009
658.7’87--dc22 
2009006450
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Dedication
To the soul of my father, and to my wife and sons
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

ix
Contents
Preface.......................................................................................................................xi
Editor..................................................................................................................... xiii
Contributors............................................................................................................xv
1
Chapter .
A New Inventory Paradigm 
Conceptual Basis and Survey Results...................................................1
Attilla Chikán
2
Chapter .
Inventory Management 
Some Surprising News about Classical Views on Inventory 
and Some Nonclassical Responses to Traditional Practice...............25
Linda G. Sprague and Marc J. Sardy
3
Chapter .
Inventory Planning to Help the Environment.....................................43
Maurice Bonney
4
Chapter .
Energy and Inventories........................................................................75
Lucio Zavanella and Simone Zanoni
5
Chapter .
Healthcare Supply Chain Management...............................................99
Peter Kelle, Helmut Schneider, Sonja Wiley-Patton, 
and John Woosley
6
Chapter .
Inventory Modeling for Complex 
Emergencies in Humanitarian Relief Operations.............................129
Benita M. Beamon and Stephen A. Kotleba
7
Chapter .
Seeing Inventory as a Queue............................................................. 151
Gerry Frizelle
8
Chapter .
Fuzzy Inventory Models.................................................................... 173
Alfred L. Guiffrida
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

x	
Contents
9
Chapter .
Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems 
A Thermodynamic Approach............................................................199
Mohamad Y. Jaber
Index....................................................................................................................... 219
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

xi
Preface
Inventory is perhaps the most interesting and most researched topic of produc-
tion and operations management. Inventory is important since it affects our lives; 
it is everywhere as household inventory, social inventory, and business inventory. 
Inventory provides flexibility, but it comes at a cost. Fortunes are tied up in inventory 
and managing it properly is vital for the success of an enterprise.
The earliest scientific inventory management approach dates back to the second 
decade of the past century (F. W. Harris. 1913. How many parts to make at once? 
Factory: The Magazine of Management 10(2), 136–152), with its golden era in the 
1950s and 1960s. The models and concepts viewed inventory as an asset, one that can 
be converted to cash. This is the view of the classical  school of thought. The classi-
cal paradigm aims to minimize the total cost of inventory. As markets become more 
dynamic and competitive, companies are pressured to remain responsive and effi-
cient. In response to these pressures, companies have been making changes to their 
production and inventory systems. This includes the introduction of new technolo-
gies and philosophies, such as just-in-time (JIT), that advocates inventory is a waste 
and must be reduced. This is the view of the modern school of thought. Despite the 
differences between the two schools of thought, they both try to answer the two fun-
damental questions, which are how much to order and when to order. These inven-
tory decisions are usually based on cost parameters that are misleading. Although 
the classical paradigm, which characterizes both schools of thought, has been suc-
cessful for years, the question of whether its assumptions are still valid has yet to be 
answered. In addition, the classical paradigm focused on developing and analyzing 
inventory models with no regard to the confluence of managerial factors that may 
affect it directly or indirectly. Furthermore, the emergence of supply chain manage-
ment and reverse logistics as tools that provide sustainable competitive advantages 
for companies, and changes in the economy and business activities, require research-
ers to think outside the classical box of inventory management.
The dire need for a new paradigm has been noted by Professor Attila Chikán, the 
first vice president and secretary general of the International Society for Inventory 
Research (ISIR); as well as by other researchers (e.g., Professors M. Bonney and L. 
G. Sprague). In a recently published paper based on 20 years of ISIR symposium 
papers, Chikán (2007. The new role of inventories in business: Real world changes and 
research consequences. International Journal of Production Economics, 108(1–2), 
54–62) concluded that inventory cannot be managed independently of other com-
pany functions, nor can it serve as a buffer between functions and processes, and that 
cost alone is a misleading performance measure. Recently, the eighth ISIR Summer 
School organized by Professor Lucio Zavanella and held at the University of Brescia, 
Italy, had the general theme: “New and Classic Views in Inventory Management: 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

xii	
Preface
Advances in Research and Opening Frontiers.” The aim was to encourage contribu-
tions focusing on emerging trends in inventory studies. The idea to have an edited 
book on nonclassical views in inventory management, therefore, comes at an appro-
priate time to feed this emerging interest.
This edited book is unique in collecting emerging works on nonclassical inven-
tory management that feed into the new paradigm. It makes a suitable reference for 
graduate students and researchers in the areas of inventory theory and management, 
and supply chain and logistics management.
This book consists of nine chapters.
Chapter 1 introduces and tests a new paradigm of the role of inventories in the 
operation of business enterprises.
Chapter 2 examines the coverage of inventory issues and concepts in the most 
popular finance/financial management textbooks.
Chapter 3 examines the relationships between inventory and the environment and 
discusses how inventory planning could help to alleviate some of these environmen-
tal effects.
Chapter 4 aims at showing how energy is related to stocks (and vice versa) and 
how it may influence them.
Chapter 5 focuses on supply chain management issues from the perspective of 
the hospital.
Chapter 6 focuses on developing an inventory management strategy for a ware-
house supporting a complex emergency relief operation.
Chapter 7 explains how viewing inventories as queues provides a new cause and 
effect analysis of what creates excessive inventories in industrial systems.
Chapter 8 provides a review of the application of fuzzy set theory in inventory 
management.
Chapter 9 reviews and discusses the models that use thermodynamic reasoning to 
model inventory systems.
 Mohamad Y. Jaber
Ryerson University
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

xiii
Editor
Mohamad Y. Jaber is a full professor of industrial engineering at Ryerson University, 
Toronto, Canada. He obtained his Ph.D. in manufacturing and operations manage-
ment from the University of Nottingham, United Kingdom. His research expertise 
includes modeling human learning and forgetting curves, workforce flexibility and 
productivity, inventory management, supply chain management, reverse logistics, and 
thermodynamic analysis of inventory systems. His research has been supported by the 
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the Social Sciences 
and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) of Canada. He has published more than 
60 articles in internationally refereed journals, including Applied Mathematical 
Modeling, Computers & Industrial Engineering, Computers & Operations Research, 
European Journal of Operational Research, Journal of Operational Research Society, 
International Journal of Production Economics, International Journal of Production 
Research, and Production Planning & Control. His industrial experience is in con-
struction management. He is an area editor for Computers & Industrial Engineering 
and is on the editorial boards of the Journal of Operations and Logistics, Journal of 
Engineering and Applied Sciences, and Research Journal of Applied Sciences. He 
continues to serve as a member of the program/advisory committees for the Annual 
International Symposium on Supply Chain Management and the International 
Symposium on Logistics. He is a member of the European Operations Management 
Association, Decision Sciences Institute, International Institute of Innovation, 
Industrial Engineering and Entrepreneurship, International Society for Inventory 
Research, Production & Operations Management Society, and Professional Engineers 
Ontario.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

xv
Benita M. Beamon
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
Maurice Bonney
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Attilla Chikán
Corvinus University of Budapest
Budapest, Hungary
Gerry Frizelle
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Alfred L. Guiffrida
Kent State University
Kent, Ohio
Mohamad Y. Jaber
Ryerson University
Toronto, Ontario
Peter Kelle
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Marc J. Sardy
Rollins College
Winter Park, Florida
Helmut Schneider
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Linda G. Sprague
Rollins College
Winter Park, Florida
Sonja Wiley-Patton
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
John Woosley
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Simone Zanoni
Università degli Studi di Brescia
Brescia, Italy
Lucio Zavanella
Università degli Studi di Brescia
Brescia, Italy
Contributors
Stephen A. Kotleba
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

1
1 A New Inventory Paradigm
Conceptual Basis and 
Survey Results*
Attilla Chikán
Corvinus University of Budapest
Budapest, Hungary
*	 This article is an integrated, extended, and advanced version of three earlier papers by the author: 
Chikán (2007), Chikán (2008), and Chikán (2009). Parts of the text of these papers are used here with 
permission of the editor of International Journal of Production Economics.
Contents
1.1	
Overview............................................................................................................2
1.2	
Introduction.......................................................................................................2
1.3	
The Traditional Paradigm of Inventory Research.............................................3
1.3.1	 Pillars of the Traditional Paradigm.......................................................3
1.3.2	 Evaluation of the Traditional Paradigm.................................................4
1.3.3	 Conceptualization and Incorporation of Business Changes 
by Academic Research..........................................................................6
1.3.4	 Emergence of the Need of a New Paradigm..........................................7
1.4	
Fundamental Changes in the Global Economy.................................................9
1.4.1	 Today’s Economy...................................................................................9
1.4.2	 New Characteristics of the Business Enterprise..................................10
1.5	
New Roles of Inventories: The New Paradigm................................................ 11
1.5.1	 Inventories as Contributors to Value Creation.....................................12
1.5.2	 Inventories as Means of Flexibility.....................................................13
1.5.3	 Inventories as Means of Control.......................................................... 14
1.6	
Managers’ View of the New Paradigm Survey Results...................................15
1.6.1	 Methodology........................................................................................15
1.6.2	 Managers’ Opinion about the Role of Inventories............................... 16
1.6.3	 The Logistics Questionnaire................................................................ 17
1.6.3.1	 Main Reasons behind Inventory Tendencies........................ 17
1.6.3.2	 Business Trends Influencing Inventories.............................. 17
1.6.3.3	 Some Further Insights........................................................... 18
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

2	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
1.1	 Overview
This chapter introduces and tests a new paradigm of the role of inventories in the 
operation of business enterprises. It starts out from the fundamental research results 
of the 1950s, and analyzes the traditional paradigm formulated in this period, called 
the golden age of inventory research. However, changes in the economic and business 
environment led to the emergence of the need of a different approach. The proposed 
new paradigm is introduced and its relation to the traditional one is outlined. Two 
surveys were conducted among Hungarian managers to test the validity of the new 
paradigm—one survey among manufacturing managers and another among logis-
tics managers. The results are supportive, showing that managers’ thinking mostly 
corresponds to the logic of the new paradigm. There are a lot of further research 
opportunities stemming from the paradigm proposition.
1.2	 Introduction
History of researching inventories shows a very interesting pattern. There are peaks 
and drops both in time and by functional areas, and one can meet extreme stand-
points about their importance in the economy and in business.
This chapter puts down the foundations of a new paradigm for researching inven-
tories. We have enough information about the turn of the century changes in enter-
prise management to put business inventories in a new perspective, getting them 
out of the passive role assigned to them for decades and including them as an active 
part of company strategy. The increasing interest in practical inventory management 
(measured for example by the number of downloads of inventory-related items on 
the Internet) and in inventory research (see the growing number of participants at 
inventory conferences and sessions) clearly express the importance of a revival of the 
best traditions when some of the best minds of economics and management research 
focused at least part of their interest on inventories.
Our starting point is the golden age of inventory research in the 1950s. We will 
discuss the paradigm that served as a foundation of research in this era. This tra-
ditional paradigm was based on the characteristics of economic and managerial 
thinking of the time, and served its function very well for decades. However, as 
the economic and business environment changed, the need for a new paradigm has 
emerged. This chapter describes the changes in the environment and introduces the 
elements of a proposed new paradigm.
1.6.4	 The Manufacturing Questionnaire...................................................... 18
1.6.4.1	 Correlation between Opinions on Inventory Roles...............19
1.6.4.2	 Connection between Performance and Inventory 
Role Perception.....................................................................20
1.6.4.3	 Characteristics of Respondents Choosing Different 
Roles of Inventories..............................................................20
1.7	
Conclusions......................................................................................................22
References.................................................................................................................22
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
3
It is explicitly stated in the exposition of the new paradigm that it has to be 
validated in practice. Managers’ views are tested in two surveys, results of which 
are summarized in the second part of the chapter. One of the surveys was com-
pleted among manufacturing managers, the other one among logistics managers. 
The survey results support the new paradigm, but further research is necessary for 
its full elaboration.
1.3	 The Traditional Paradigm of Inventory Research
I think everyone agrees that the golden age of inventory research was in the 1950s. 
This was the time when both conceptual and mathematical models of inventories 
were first formulated, following the sometimes interesting but basically very simple 
approach of earlier decades (Sprague 2000). Whitin (1957) had a truly classic con-
ceptualization of inventory management, but even operations research (OR) hard-
liners contributed to conceptual clarification (the article most referred to is probably 
Ackoff [1956]). The fact that some of the best minds in economics and OR joined 
inventory researchers helped both conceptualization and mathematical formula-
tion of the inventory problem, with the most important contributions coming from 
Stanford University (Arrow, Karlin, and Scarf 1958; Scarf, Gilford, and Shelley 
1963). A summary and analysis of this age is in Girlich and Chikán (2001). A rich 
collection and analysis of the classical models can be found in Chikán (1990). The 
most quoted book on managerial applications is Silver and Peterson (1979 and fur-
ther editions).
It is interesting that economists contributed to development of models that we 
would now call OR models; very little attention to inventories is attributed to main-
stream economics. Perhaps there are understandable reasons for this continuing 
negligence of inventories in economic research. However, attempting discovery 
of these reasons is beyond the scope of this chapter. Here I concentrate only on 
business-level approaches, with reference to some cross-effects between the two 
study fields.
1.3.1	 Pillars of the Traditional Paradigm
The traditional paradigm of inventory research is based on three pillars:
	
1.	 Inventories can be handled and optimized independently of other mana-
gerial circumstances (such as logistics, operations, or financial resources). 
This assumption made it possible to treat inventories as a single, controlled 
variable of a feedback control system, where demand is the diverting vari-
able and the order placed is the regulating variable. All are within the inven-
tory system and independent of other fields of company operation. Classical 
inventory models are mostly based on these control principles. It is worth 
mentioning that even though models were interpreted mostly on the SKU 
(stock-keeping unit, i.e., “item”) level, this concept can be extended to the 
company level, handling total inventories of the company as an unstruc-
tured volume.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

4	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
	
2.	 The main role of inventories is to serve as a buffer to be used to
	
a.	 smooth business processes, most of all production and sales; and
	
b.	 maintain a flexible connection between the various organizational units 
(e.g., shops, factories, depots, etc.) of the company.
The first role is connected to the actual physical processes going on within 
the company, whereas the second role refers mainly to the managerial 
(control) processes. These two roles are obviously connected, but they can 
be clearly distinguished.
	
3.	 The performance measure of operation of the inventory system is the level 
of total cost associated with the sum of holding and replenishing invento-
ries and to handling shortages. In this concept the independency paradigm 
is reflected, based on the ceteris paribus principle. It is assumed that all 
other things being equal (which assumption can be valid in the case of 
the subsystems), inventory management can contribute to the increase of 
profit (the objective of the company as a whole) if it keeps its costs as low 
as possible. This approach is justified by defining holding cost so that it 
includes the opportunity cost of inventory investment, for example, by cal-
culating with the average (or, depending on company policy, the marginal) 
return-on-investment ratio of the company.
1.3.2	 Evaluation of the Traditional Paradigm
The traditional inventory paradigm was a consequence of some fundamental 
assumptions about the operation of the business enterprise. These assumptions came 
primarily from the economics literature. The most important ones are:
The profit maximizing company, which made the cost-based decisions 
• 
justified and did not allow the use of noncost measures
The economies of scale principle, which made use of the independency 
• 
principle possible by considering inventory decisions as solely volume-
dependent and not seeking economies of scope
The conventional linear organization structure (the existence of functional 
• 
silos), which again supported the independency principle by making coor-
dination with other functional areas possible and necessary only at the 
highest level of the hierarchy
The traditional paradigm played a key role in inventory research of several decades 
after the 1950s. Some of the most important consequences of its application are:
We learned a lot about item-level inventory systems; by the 1970s we 
• 
knew practically all we know today about their operation, management, 
and decision problems.
There were only few attempts to synthesize this knowledge. Two books of 
• 
the 1960s must be mentioned: Analysis of Inventory Systems (Hadley and 
Whitin 1963) and Inventory Systems (Naddor 1966) are probably the most 
often cited works. Both are excellent books, but they deal with special 
classes of inventory models.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
5
The new management concepts of the period were very negative toward 
• 
inventories; they handled them only as residua, that is, consequences of 
managerial decisions focusing on other issues like sales, production, or 
distribution. Both material requirements planning (MRP) and just-in-time 
(JIT)—in the extreme—led to the zero inventory illusion or at least to 
a business atmosphere where inventories were considered as a (not so) 
necessary evil.
The diffuse character of inventory research and the lack of synthesis are well 
reflected in the survey made by the International Society for Inventory Research 
(ISIR; see Chikán [2002a, 2002b]), where respondents were asked to name the most 
influential papers or books in their research area. There were fourteen items listed 
by the respondents to this question, and no work was mentioned twice.
A large number of mathematical models was published in this period, but dur-
ing this time there were very few notable publications about actual managerial 
issues and business approaches. This led to a situation in the 1970s–1980s when 
there was a growing and gradually more deeply perceived gap between theory and 
practice.
Studies of the golden age of inventory research almost totally neglected inventory 
problems beyond item-level optimization. The ruling paradigm, and especially the 
assumption that inventory can be managed independently of other functions, did not 
make it necessary to examine cross-effects of item-level decisions and their relation-
ship with other decisions regarding production, marketing, and so forth; it seemed 
to be enough to refer to the ceteris paribus principle. Classical works of the time did 
not even refer to the overall inventory problem of the company; adding the item-level 
optimums was considered to fulfill the job of company-level optimization. However, 
this common understanding was more or less implicit. The literature barely referred 
to the potential problems caused by cross-effects of inventories. (The logic used in 
the OR literature was analogous to the one used by economists who assumed that the 
model-company’s behavior can be extended to the economy as a whole. This logic is 
reflected in Carzo [1958]). Researchers accepted that item level models express com-
pany behavior, however it has not been shown to be an optimal aggregate inventory 
management rule (Whybark 1994).
It should be noted that the business framework for analyzing the role of inven-
tories was also missing. In the 1970s there were few new results in the “theory of 
the firm,” and even less in something that could be called the “theory of business.” 
However, many of the classical works that we consider fundamental for understand-
ing the general theoretical background of business were published in the period being 
discussed. Readers may refer to Putterman (1986) and Foss (1997) for a review.
In the same period, several new management concepts and methods were intro-
duced. The most important ones were MRP and JIT, of which at least a side effect 
should have been reductions in inventories. However, studying inventory data of the 
period shows that although these methodologies proved successful in many individ-
ual company cases, they did not reduce inventories at the level of national economies 
(Chikán 1994; Bivin 2006). This indirectly suggests that there had been processes 
going on in the economy since the 1980s–1990s that counterbalanced inventory 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

6	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
reduction efforts. This can be considered as a sign of a need for a new business para-
digm of inventories, which takes over the old cost-minimizing, inventory-reducing 
approach.
1.3.3	 Conceptualization and Incorporation 
of Business Changes by Academic Research
It necessarily took some time before the research community could have conceptu-
alized these changes. There is a special relationship between business practice and 
research, which is not common in most areas of academic studies. The essence of 
this relationship is that new, innovative business practices mainly come from actual 
business life—they precede and not follow research results. The reason for this is 
that business is under so much pressure to innovate that practitioners are far faster in 
seeking and introducing new ways of doing things than any other segment of society. 
The common order of events is:
	
1.	 A company introduces a new approach, some innovation that corresponds 
to the requirement of the changing environment. The need to fit the envi-
ronment is a fundamental thesis of organization theory (for the contin-
gency approach, see Lawrence and Lorsch [1967]).
	
2.	 The new ideas spread rather fast; companies learn from one another in their 
everyday connections, at business conferences, and so forth. Companies 
jump on copying the innovations (frequently with the help of consultants, 
who are among the first to notice new developments and trigger changes). 
Further developments may follow one of three ways, depending on the 
actual success of the new approach in practice:
	
a.	 After some time it may turn out that the new idea is a fad, not leading 
to serious results.
	
b.	 The overall results may be mixed: a new approach can result in good 
practice at some companies and may prove useless or even harmful at 
other companies. This is because very frequently the initial application 
of a new approach is not connected to a prudent analysis of the actual 
conditions under which a new approach can be successful.
	
c.	 The third case is when a new approach proves to be so successful in 
such a wide range of cases that business accepts it practically as part of 
common knowledge.
	
3.	 Academic research explains and generalizes empirical research: in case 
of a fad or a full success it explains why they happened; in case of mixed 
results it identifies the conditions of successful application.
This approach can be argued. Even though it is supported by long-term observa-
tion of business developments, I am sure that there are a lot of exceptions. To illus-
trate: From among innovations widely known by people dealing with inventories, I 
would consider BPR in the first, JIT in the second, and MRP in the third category 
(see a, b, and c above) calling attention again to possible exceptions.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
7
In the aforementioned process, there is an accumulation of knowledge that indi-
cates two things:
	 a)	 As the application of new approaches spreads over a given field of man-
agement (like marketing, human resources [HR], and inventory manage-
ment), after some phases, the new approaches may integrate into a new 
paradigm. A new paradigm for me means a fundamentally new way of 
thinking about the given management field, which includes different 
actual principles and practices as well. (The classical reference to para-
digm shifts is Kuhn [1996].)
	 b)	 Academics have a special role in the process. Compared to businesspeo-
ple, they are certainly slow-moving individuals. In business research, aca-
demics are more followers than path breakers. However, academics still 
play a crucial role in business innovation in two respects:
They actually explain the developments, help to find the answer to 
• 
whether a given new idea is a fad or a really useful new idea, and 
whether the idea is generically beneficial or its usefulness is connected 
to some special conditions or circumstances.
Academic research is indispensable in carrying out the integration of 
• 
new knowledge into a new paradigm. It does the job of conceptual anal-
ysis and generalization; and tests views via empirical studies. Without 
these two steps no meaningful statement about paradigm changes can 
be formulated.
1.3.4	 Emergence of the Need of a New Paradigm
As mentioned, the positive effect of the existence of the “old” paradigm was that for 
the end of the 1960s–beginning the 1970s we knew a lot about the nature and struc-
ture of the item-level problems as negative feedback control systems; just in time to 
give way to a new era that was made necessary by the appearance of MRP systems, 
with explicit reference to the dependent demand inventories and company-level (or at 
least product-line-level) optimization. Of course, research on the item-level problems 
did not disappear, especially since MRP systems actually were in need of models to 
support lot-sizing decisions.
The appearance and success of MRP systems was mainly a result of the develop-
ment of information technology and information systems (for the roots and devel-
opment of MRP systems, see Chikán and Sprague [2008]). MRP was followed by 
MRP II and distribution requirements planning (DRP), making it even clearer that 
inventories do not just stand alone but are closely and complexly connected to other 
company functions. (This idea has already been analyzed by the duly famous Holt 
et al. book [1960], which was a forerunner of the new approach. A recent exposition of 
the interfaces between inventories and other functions is given in Stenger [2008].)
The emergence and spread of the JIT concept was a final nail in the coffin of 
the dominance of the item-level approach in management of inventories. Since JIT 
simply questioned the fundamental common understanding that inventories are 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

8	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
valuable assets of the company, it became explicit that inventories are dependent 
on the organization of the company as a total entity, and that they can be reduced 
by the efficient organization of interaction of purchasing, logistics, production, and 
distribution—practically the whole “real sphere” or “material sphere” of the com-
pany. It is common that some authors of that time (e.g., Babbar and Prasad [1998]) 
practically identified the inventory problem with JIT issues. This seemed to sup-
port the practice-based view already known from earlier times that inventories are 
not managed at all; they are simply residuals of managerial decisions in other fields 
(mainly in sales and production). There is a lot of anecdotal evidence to support 
this view, which is 180 degrees different from the classical paradigm of inventory 
decisions. However, I could not find any research that should have proven that. 
Instead I believe that Sprague and Wacker (1994) and Whybark (1994) had it right: 
calling attention to the difference in hierarchy of those who make company-level 
strategic decisions and those who control actual inventories at a much lower hier-
archical level. This duality leads to the appearance of two different approaches: a 
rather definite inventory reduction approach at the executive level, and a more bal-
anced view at the tactical control level. The former bases its approach mainly on 
financial return considerations and because inventories, at least at first glance, slow 
return on investments (since they mean inactive tying up of capital), it is a natural 
policy requirement to keep them low. However, the interest of low-level manag-
ers is completely different. They do not care much about company-level financial 
return; they are concerned about service levels, production disruptions, shortages 
of supply, and so forth, and they are actually accountable for these. Therefore, 
their concept of “optimal” level of inventories is very different than that of their 
high-level bosses.
Of course there is a trade-off between the two approaches, which can be expressed 
by balancing the advantages and disadvantages of holding inventories at the two lev-
els described—the strange thing is that there was little, if any, said about that in the 
inventory literature. Instead there appeared numerous articles and books on “zero 
inventory,” which is a nonsense concept even if the authors in most cases do not 
mean it literally.
The above reasoning supports the need of a new inventory paradigm that takes 
into account the built-in duality of inventory management and makes it necessary 
to examine both levels and their interactions. There must be room in this new para-
digm for both quantitative, mathematical models and approaches, and qualitative, 
organizations-oriented research.
The traditional paradigm provides a sound basis for the former; unfortunately, 
we have much less historical background for conducting organizational studies of 
inventory management.
Most companies cannot afford the talent of sophisticated inventory control sys-
tems: neither the well-researched and -developed forecasting techniques, nor the 
performance measures, which would connect the company level and the tactical 
management level, are affordable at an average company. As Bonney (1994) puts 
it: “But successful inventory reduction appears likely to be limited to the relatively 
small number of organizations which can provide the commitment to improving 
their whole systems.” Also, despite the development of information technology 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
9
(IT) companies use unsophisticated inventory accounting, which prevents the 
meaningful connection between the physical and monetary approach to invento-
ries. (I think this is an important component of the macroeconomic “mystery” that 
interest rates do not influence inventories; see Blinder and Maccini [1991].) Lean 
inventory management is a nice slogan. Unfortunately, this approach far too often 
loses sight of the fact that anybody can reduce inventories. The question is the 
price of this reduction, the often hidden costs of not having inventory on hand. 
As Sprague and Wacker (1994) put it: “firms do not want inventories ‘per se’ but 
want the benefits that inventories can bring.” That is why I strongly agree with the 
practitioner’s view: “smart, not lean inventory management will define leaders” 
(Lawton 2003). It is exactly this smart management that needs the support of a 
new inventory paradigm. Indeed there are more and more signs of the appear-
ance of this need. This is expressed quite clearly by Miller and Deis (2007). They 
are consultants with extensive practitioner experience who conclude their paper 
on aggregate inventory management by saying: “Inventory can be systematically 
managed.” Similarly, Barry (2007) starts his paper with the sentence: “Inventory 
management and forecasting are strategic issues.” These practitioners and consul-
tants clearly indicate the need of a new inventory paradigm. Indeed, the elements 
of this can be already found in their communication. What is needed is a system-
atic, scholarly formulation of this paradigm. This is explicitly requested in Invatol 
(2008): “Despite the many changes that companies go through, the basic principles 
of Inventory Management and Inventory Control remain the same. Some of the 
new approaches and techniques are wrapped in new terminology but the underly-
ing principles for accomplishing good inventory management and inventory activi-
ties have not changed.”
The new paradigm formulated in this chapter may put down the foundations of an 
appropriate approach. The interest of practitioners can be clearly seen by the huge 
number (sometimes thousands) of clicks on the inventory management sites of the 
Internet.
1.4	 Fundamental Changes in the Global Economy
There is very rich literature on changes in the global economy over the past several 
decades; it is not the purpose of this chapter to discuss this in detail. I only sum-
marize those dimensions of changes that, according to my view, have had the most 
important influence—directly or indirectly—on inventory management.
1.4.1	 Today’s Economy
The following characteristics of today’s economy are useful for discussion of the new 
inventory paradigm:
Service economy
• 
: The requirements of today’s customers are not simply 
to buy some products and services, but to obtain “solutions” to their prob-
lems. This means that companies must offer a combination of products and 
services.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

10	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
E-economy
• 
: By the use of up-to-date IT, a greater level of integration 
of the activities of various actors of the economy can be achieved. Also, 
IT increases the need and availability of speed of action and reaction by 
actors within the economy.
Network economy
• 
: Competition in the market goes on not only among 
individual actors but also between their networks. Thus, competition and 
cooperation go on not only in parallel but interlinked, making the whole 
operation of the economy more complex. Further, network elements and 
positions are changing constantly, making company relations less predict-
able and more dynamic. At the same time, this leads to the establishment 
of long-term relations and strategic alliances as a reaction for safeguard-
ing against impracticable changes.
Knowledge-based economy
• 
: Knowledge is now an increasingly important 
resource, a basis for obtaining competitive advantage. Companies need 
(and get) more and better-based information and use more sophisticated 
decision processes.
Responsible economy
• 
: Actors within the economy are forced to consider 
not only their own interests but also those of other stakeholders, including 
the human and natural environments.
Global economy
• 
: Decision makers must consider the whole world econ-
omy when making investment, purchasing, or sales decisions, because 
potential competitors and partners can and will come from anywhere.
The emergence of these characteristics of the economy have led to important 
changes both in the characteristics of various actors within the economy and (directly 
or indirectly) in the role of inventories. Since this chapter is focused on the new role 
of inventories in business, let us now consider changes in business enterprises first 
and then turn to the new inventory paradigm.
1.4.2	 New Characteristics of the Business Enterprise
Observations of real-life business and examination of the literature lead to the 
conclusion that the purpose and characteristics of the business enterprise have 
substantially changed in the past few decades. Both declared and actually followed 
goals seem to be moving beyond simple profit maximization. Fierce competition 
has caused companies to raise their attention to customers’ needs and to define 
the purpose of the business enterprise as “satisfying customer needs at profit.” 
This does not mean a diminishing importance of profit, but does make life more 
complex for the enterprise: It has to consider customers’ interests with at least the 
same intensity as its own interests. This means that the company is under a double 
pressure: It has to create value in one and the same processes for both customers 
and itself.
I cannot go into full detail here regarding the new objectives and characteristics 
of the business enterprise. But to understand the new role of inventories, I list those 
characteristics that I consider most important for this current study. These new char-
acteristics of the business enterprise are:
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
11
	
1.	 Focus on competitiveness, which results in an approach to creating and 
implementing strategy based on consideration of not what we can do well, 
but what we can do better than our competitors. This comparative view is 
essential in both strategic and operational decision making.
	
2.	 Functional integration, which leads to a different view of the connec-
tion among functions (sales, logistics, innovation, production, etc.) of the 
enterprise. Cross-connections are considered not only in the results but 
right at the outset of processes. Integrated operation is ensured “in pro-
cess” by coordination of the various functions at a much lower level of 
hierarchy than within traditional “silo” systems. This approach is often 
expressed in both formal and informal organizations, for example, in the 
form of operational cross-functional teams.
	
3.	 Process orientation, which means a focus on flows within the com-
pany (and beyond its borders), considering complex connections among 
material, financial, and information flows. The main attention of man-
agement is now turning to the process of value creation and all ele-
ments of operation are judged by their contribution to this process. The 
value creation process (sometimes called the value chain; see Porter 
[1985]) crosses traditional functional boundaries, becoming the main 
carrier of functional integration.
	
4.	 Network (chain) view, which means that competition goes on in the global 
economy, not only between companies but among networks of them. 
Beyond that, the approach is that we talk about customer value creation 
as a set of a number of business activities comprising a network, within 
which organizational boundaries sometimes change rather rapidly (i.e., 
creation of a product requires given activities, which can be carried out in 
many different kinds of distribution of work, in different organizational 
and company forms). This approach reflects the fading boundaries of the 
firm, and provides a framework for understanding outsourcing and strate-
gic alliances.
These four significant characteristics of today’s business enterprise ensure its 
effective and flexible role in society. This is the main reason why (historically speak-
ing) the ever-increasing needs of people are satisfied to an increasing extent, by busi-
ness as opposed to self-support or governmental activity.
Let us see now how we can determine the roles of inventories under the aforemen-
tioned economic and business conditions.
1.5	 New Roles of Inventories: The New Paradigm
This section analyzes how the emergence of new economic characteristics has 
changed the role of inventories and how this role fits into the new enterprise. The 
new role leads to the need of a new research approach as well that considers the two 
levels of inventory decisions as described in Section 1.3.4, and provides a framework 
for their joint integration into the new enterprise.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

12	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
The main idea is that the classical inventory paradigm must be enriched to fit 
the new situation: the new paradigm must reflect changes in the business and eco-
nomic environment. It must be made clear that the new research paradigm for 
inventories should be nested in practice; it has to be validated against actual mana-
gerial behavior.
The essence of the change is that we have to move our perception of inventories 
from a passive to an active role in company strategy. The new situation does not 
allow us to view inventories as residua; they have to be considered as an active con-
tributor to a company’s success. The definition of the active contributor is that, for 
this role, strategic decisions must be directly focused on inventories, and inventory 
policies must influence general strategy formulation and implementation throughout 
the firm. I believe (and will show some supporting trains of thought) that inventories 
can have this strategic role—not isolated, of course, but in a complex relationship 
with other strategic components.
A few remarks must be made before introducing the new paradigm:
	
1.	 The traditional paradigm should be made part of the new one since its 
validity and relevance to item-level decisions can be considered proven.
	
2.	 The new paradigm was not born all of a sudden. The path has been pre-
pared by improvement processes within company operations, with the 
introduction of MRP, JIT, supply chain management (SCM), and so forth; 
that is, by the development of business activity.
	
3.	 The actual role of inventories that corresponds to the new paradigm can and 
will differ by company, depending on the character of its strategy. However, 
there is enough ground for generalization to permit fundamental research 
analyses.
Considering these, I hereby formulate a new inventory research paradigm that I believe 
corresponds with the current state of real-life economic and business developments.
According to the new paradigm, inventories have strategic importance for compa-
nies in three interconnected dimensions: value creation, flexibility, and control.
1.5.1	 Inventories as Contributors to Value Creation
If we consider the new concepts of the changed economy, and the purpose and char-
acteristics of the business enterprise, it becomes clear that the emergence of the ser-
vice economy and, in connection with that, the emphasis on customer satisfaction 
in company operations lead to a basic question: Can inventories actively contribute 
to customer value creation? The answer is a definite yes, with reference to some 
evidence:
Providing “solutions” to customer needs requires the offering of a mix 
• 
of physical products and services in practically all business cases. This 
means a far more complex task than simply deciding on finished goods 
inventories. The decision on the composition of the “mixture” offered 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
13
is a key strategic decision—for example, what kind of products and 
services should be provided by a gas station. There are a number of 
inventory considerations in such a decision that influence what sorts of 
customer needs will be met, how, at what level and probability, costs, 
and so forth.
In the service economy, the main order-winning factor is often the service 
• 
provided together with the product—guarantees, maintenance, develop-
ment support, and so forth. The quality of these “solutions” can hardly 
be measured by cost parameters only, making some traditional inventory 
decision rules obsolete.
In the network economy, a new kind of inventory emerges, which I call 
• 
relationship inventory. This is an element of the total inventory of two com-
panies, being in partnership and not only at arm’s length with each other. 
The level and distribution of this inventory between the two companies 
depend on the actual relationship of the two companies, their individual 
and joint interests, strategies, and operational decisions. Characterizing 
factors of relationship inventories are, therefore, dependent on the features 
of the partnership itself and not just of the individual companies.
1.5.2	 Inventories as Means of Flexibility
It has been emphasized already in the traditional paradigm that inventories are buf-
fers for meeting requirements of outside environments and inside organizations. Now 
this role has been greatly enriched, leading to its far greater importance. Inventories 
are not simply passive buffers sitting there waiting for usage, but are understood as 
living elements actively used in pursuing strategic objectives.
Increased vertical integration and process orientation cause much stron-
• 
ger relationships between subsequent stages both within companies and 
with their partners. This leads to, for example, closer connections between 
inventories in various stages of fabrication: they become more dependent 
on one another and on the policies of customer service. Depending on at 
which level of fabrication policy-directed stocks are kept, lead times for 
meeting customer demand can be made shorter or longer.
The locations of inventories in intercompany supply chains influence the 
• 
smoothness of relations and can be used for optimizing joint profitability 
of supplier and vendor companies—for example, by utilizing differences 
in taxation of various countries or some local savings possibilities in shap-
ing a complex distribution system.
It is often said that in modern logistics systems, information is traveling 
• 
instead of materials. However, there are many examples that show that the 
flexibility and speed of an electronic commerce system can be utilized 
only if it is supported by high-quality logistics systems, which include 
appropriately sized and located inventories (the prerequisites of flexible 
customer service).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

14	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
As economies of scope have become a strategic issue, the importance of the 
• 
mix of inventory positions has increased, closely connected to the horizon-
tal integration of intra- and intercompany activities. More market access 
decisions must rely on a comprehensive horizontal inventory policy.
1.5.3	 Inventories as Means of Control
Inventories have been considered important indicators of macro- and microeco-
nomic phenomena for a long time. They play a key role as business cycle indicators. 
Also—less often but importantly—the ratio of input and output inventories in manu-
facturing is used as an indicator of the relation of overall demand and supply in the 
market (Chikán 1981; Kornai 1992). In countries or markets where this ratio is low 
(i.e., where companies generally tend to hold inventories on the output side), econo-
mists talk about general oversupply, which goes together with a stronger economic 
position of buyers (customers). In the opposite case (where the input/output inventory 
ratio is high), it is easy to sell but hard to buy: high input inventories indicate the fear 
of not being able to buy goods when needed.
This indicator role of inventories and the possibility of controlling business pro-
cesses by inventory decisions have been seldom used in the past. Recently we have 
seen examples under the new economic conditions that these can be expected to 
increase in number and scope. An interesting means of controlling processes in sup-
ply chains are vendor managed inventories (VMIs).
A new feature of business is the growing importance of the CSR (corporate social 
responsibility) concept. As a part of this development, a new branch of company 
operation has emerged—reverse logistics, which typically includes keeping inven-
tories of items waiting for remanufacturing, reparation, or recycling. Many mod-
els show that reverse logistics activity can be controlled through inventory holding 
policies.
In general we can summarize that—according to this new view and based on the 
aforementioned reasoning—inventories may be becoming a more active element of 
companies’ strategic decisions and activities. A summary of the paradigm shift can 
be seen in Table 1.1.
Table 1.1
Comparison of the Traditional and the New Paradigm
Traditional
New
Inventories can be managed independently 
of other company functions.
Inventories are an integrated part of the value chain in 
close relationships with other company functions.
Inventories serve as buffers between 
functions and processes.
Inventories serve as strategic tools in achieving customer 
satisfaction and profit simultaneously.
Cost is the performance measure.
Performance measures are based on the contribution of 
inventories to finding better solutions to customer needs 
than competitors are able to.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
15
1.6	 Managers’ View of the New Paradigm Survey Results
To examine the existence of the new paradigm, two surveys were conducted among 
Hungarian managers.
1.6.1	 Methodology
The first survey was carried out in the winter of 2005–2006 and used the follow-
ing methodology:
Nine questions were formulated directly oriented to the managers’ per-
• 
ception and approach to inventories.
These questions were connected to a questionnaire used for survey-
• 
ing manufacturing strategies and practices in the framework of IMSS 
(International Manufacturing Strategy Survey) and the GMRG (Global 
Manufacturing Research Group). Both surveys had been conducted sev-
eral times in many parts of the world (including Hungary) and both con-
tain a number of questions related to inventories.
As a result, there are nine questions directly related to our research focus and a set 
of complementary questions that could be used in the analysis and discussion.
The survey was originally sent to 245 companies. The companies were asked by 
phone if they were willing to contribute and in case of a positive answer, a student, 
appropriately prepared, provided the questionnaire to the companies and explained 
what was necessary. Fifty-one questionnaires were returned, representing a response 
rate of 21 percent. The research methodology was repeated with basically the same 
questions for the fourth time in Hungary, therefore there was no need for a pilot study.
The second survey followed exactly two years later in November and December 
of 2007. For the development of the questionnaire, the experiences of the survey 
reported in Chikán (2009) were used for a pilot study.
The questionnaire contained fifteen sets of questions: four on the characteristics 
of the respondent and his/her company, three on the inventory performance of the 
company, six on the principles and approaches actually applied in the company, and 
two on the trends influencing their inventory behavior. The philosophy behind the 
composition of the questions was to ask the managers about their personal experi-
ences and views, and not about general perceptions. I believe that this is the most 
reliable approach available in similar empirical surveys: generalization is the job 
of the researcher and should be based on the addition and integration of individual 
opinions.
The questionnaire was placed on the Web site of the Hungarian Association of 
Logistics, Purchasing and Inventory Management. A total of 138 responses were 
received in a roughly six-week period. The sample was random in the sense that 
we had not chosen any particular segments of the readers of the Web site. However, 
because the survey was based on the membership of a professional association, it can 
be expected that the respondents are more informed and at a higher professional level 
than the average managers in the country.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

16	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
1.6.2	 Managers’ Opinion about the Role of Inventories
There was one common set of questions in the two surveys asking managers about 
their view on the role of inventories. There were the same eight questions in both 
questionnaires, which had to be answered using a 7-point Likert scale. Table 1.2 con-
tains the results of the two surveys combined. From now on we shall refer to the first 
survey as “Manufacturing,” and to the second as “Logistics,” referring to the main 
functional orientations of the managers involved in the two phases.
For both manufacturing and logistics managers, the same two questions were on 
top: question B had the highest score, F the second highest. These are the crucial ques-
tions regarding the new paradigm, which appears to be accepted by managers. The last 
place is occupied in both cases by the question most explicitly related to the old para-
digm. The difference in the order of the other questions can be explained by the profes-
sional orientation of the two sets of respondents. It is obvious that the buffering role 
(question C) does not disappear; it scores high in both groups. The explicit reference to 
the strategic role of inventories (question D) is better accepted by logistics managers. 
The analyses of the two samples show that respondents in the logistics group are higher 
in the organizational hierarchy than those in the manufacturing group.
A brief discussion of the two surveys follows. The logistics questionnaire focused 
on the managers’ opinion on the environment leading to changes in the role of 
Table 1.2
Managers’ View on the Role of Inventories in Company Operation
Average Scores
Question
Manufacturing
Logistics
A. Inventory management is an independent company function; the 
main inventory decisions have to be made independent of other 
functional areas.
2.86
2.90
B. Inventories can be efficiently managed only as parts of the 
supply chain, jointly with other company functions.
6.22
5.70
C. Inventories serve as buffers among various functions and 
processes of a business unit, protecting against consequences 
of contradictory interests.
4.38
3.70
D. Inventories are strategic tools of company management serving 
profitability and customer satisfaction.
4.18
4.82
E. The best performance measure of inventory management is total 
inventory related costs.
4.16
4.01
F. Performance of inventory management can be measured by its 
effect on the business unit’s competitiveness.
4.67
4.85
G. Inventory considerations play a crucial role in forming product-
line policy.
3.63
4.12
H. Inventory considerations play a key role in the preparation of 
manufacturing programs of subsequent vertically integrated units.
4.66
4.00
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
17
inventories, whereas the manufacturing survey went into details of the internal 
issues of the new paradigm.
1.6.3	 The Logistics Questionnaire
We’ll start with the logistics questionnaire, which deals more with the reasons for the 
emergence of the new paradigm.
1.6.3.1	 Main Reasons behind Inventory Tendencies
Table 1.3 shows the results of a set of questions about the influencing factors of inven-
tory efficiency, in the order of importance attributed by the respondents (respondents 
evaluated each option on a 7-point Likert scale).
A factor analysis provided practically the same results, connecting aspects a, b, g, 
h, and i into factor 1; d, j, and f into factor 2; and c and e into factor 3. The order of 
reasons surprisingly creates four groups of reasons, among which efficiency require-
ments play the key role leading to higher profitability. Market orientation is in second 
place, while the two further groups serve as means to achieve efficiency and market 
goals.
From the point of view of our analysis this means that the average company man-
ager basically agrees with the approach to the influencing factors of inventory man-
agement, which was advanced in the previous half of this chapter.
1.6.3.2	 Business Trends Influencing Inventories
With the set of questions regarding business trends, it was desired to learn to what 
extent managers identify with the causes of the changing role of inventories—what 
they consider as the most important developments influencing inventories. Table 1.4 
summarizes the results.
Table 1.3
Factors Influencing Inventory Efficiency
Reason
Average Score
Orientation
Efforts to reduce costs (a)
5.18
Efficiency
General operational effectiveness of the company (b)
5.10
Buyer relationship development (c)
4.96
Market
Increase in market competition (d)
4.88
Supplier relationship development (e)
4.80
Improved IT systems (f)
4.53
Systems
Logistics system improvement (g)
4.50
Increased customer requirements (h)
4.65
Responsiveness
Improved management methods (i)
4.40
Wider product portfolio (j)
4.22
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

18	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
If one compares the results with the main trends identified in Chikán (2009), then 
it can be seen that three of the four factors given there occupy the first three places in 
Table 1.4. Only one (network economy) received a somewhat smaller average score. 
This shows a rather good correspondence between the theoretical considerations and 
the view of the managers.
1.6.3.3	 Some Further Insights
We have examined the correlation between the choice of principles (Table 1.2) and 
the trend scores (Table 1.4). Three methods were used and all of them supported a 
strong connection between the general “world view” of the managers and the inven-
tory principles applied in their practice.
There was also an attempt to find connections between inventory principles and 
performance. This branch of analysis led to somewhat disappointing results: No 
significant correlation was found between the “modernity” of inventory principles 
and the effectivity of managing inventories. This result may lead to speculation 
about the actual relevance of the new view on inventories. It may be that since our 
respondents were mostly top managers, their view may differ from those at the 
tactical level, which may divert the everyday practice from the principles suggested 
on top. To determine the real reasons of this feature, further research in the area 
will follow.
1.6.4	 The Manufacturing Questionnaire
This section analyzes the results summarized in Table 1.2, mirroring a number of 
questions in the IMSS–GMRG questionnaire. We would like to identify the charac-
teristics of the respondents who gave different answers to the main inventory ques-
tions. Simple correlation coefficients and cross-tables were used for the analysis.
First we describe some general conclusions drawn from the analysis, and then 
review the inventory questions one by one to see the characteristics of different 
Table 1.4
Business Trends Influencing Inventories
Business Trend
Average Score
Focus on competitiveness
5.65
Pressure for complex customer service
5.31
Process view, value chain management
4.87
Internal integration of company functions
4.54
Globalization
4.28
Network economy
4.12
Knowledge economy
3.89
E-economy
3.85
Corporate social responsibility
3.51
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
19
respondents. Before starting the detailed analysis, it should be said that there is 
no significant connection between the respondents’ manufacturing sectors and the 
answers; from this point of view our sample is homogeneous.
1.6.4.1	 Correlation between Opinions on Inventory Roles
The connection between the responses given to the different inventory questions 
(from now on they will be referred to as A–H) was examined. The following results 
were obtained.
From Table 1.5 it can be seen that there are only a few pairs of opinions (6 out 
of 28) where there are significant correlations. However, these can be quite well 
interpreted:
A–E: Those who tend to consider inventories as independent functions prob-
ably consider costs as performance measures. These are the traditional 
thinkers.
D–F: Those who consider inventories as strategic tools (performance mea-
sured by competitiveness). These are the most dynamic thinkers, assign-
ing an active role to inventories (characteristic representatives of the new 
paradigm).
D–G and F–G: These correlations are consistent with D–F. Strategy and com-
petitiveness are supported with active product assortment policy.
F–H and G–H: These combinations connect competitiveness and product pol-
icy with internal vertical cooperation (consider that these are manufactur-
ing companies where this concept is rather logical).
Interestingly, questions B and C are not in significant correlation with any other 
opinions. In the case of B, this can be the consequence of the equally high score 
given by practically all respondents (see the very low relative standard deviation in 
Table 1.2). For missing Cs, I have found no explanation.
Table 1.5
Correlation Coefficients of Opinions of Inventory Roles
Question
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
A
1
−0.123
0.278
0.139
0.307*
−0.106
−0.062
−0.053
B
1
−0.034
0.021
0.078
  0.100
−0.126
−0.017
C
1
0.197
−0.160
−0.024
  0.211
0.186
D
1
0.069
  0.493**
  0.344**
0.154
E
1
–0.096
  0.054
0.032
F
  1
  0.508**
0.518**
G
  1
0.416*
H
1
* Correlation is significant at the .05 level; ** Correlation is significant at the .01 level.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

20	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
1.6.4.2	 Connection between Performance and Inventory Role Perception
There is only a very loose connection between the performance of the individual 
companies and the perception of inventory roles of their managers. There was a ques-
tion in the survey asking about the changes in the last three years of the company’s:
Sales revenue
• 
Market share
• 
ROS (return on sales)
• 
ROI (return on investment)
• 
We have found no significant connection between these variables and any of the 
opinions on the A–H inventory questions. There is only one exception: the correla-
tion is significant at the .05 level between ROS and question B, which means that 
companies with higher ROS tend to give a larger score to the statement that invento-
ries can be efficiently managed in the supply chains.
1.6.4.3	 Characteristics of Respondents Choosing 
Different Roles of Inventories
We analyzed in detail the characteristics of the respondents with the eight different 
approaches to inventories. The following was obtained for the eight options:
	 A.	 Inventory management is an independent company function. When ana-
lyzing the respondents’ characteristics, we found that mainly those man-
agers who gave a higher score to this question, where both external and 
internal cooperation focuses on the physical rather than the value sub-
stance of inventories. These managers attribute a significant role to collab-
orative planning, consignment, or vendor managed inventory, as well as 
the physical integration with both the supplier and the buyer. Also, there is 
a significant correlation between the importance of price in the competi-
tive strategy and giving a high score to A. There are several other answers 
of these managers that suggest that those who place a higher value on 
security of operation are more willing to give a higher score to A.
	 B.	 Inventories can be efficiently managed as integrated components of the 
supply chain. Not surprisingly, those who gave a higher score to this ques-
tion are those companies that are actually closely integrated in their sup-
ply chain. This conclusion is drawn on the basis of several questions that 
clarify this relationship in the questionnaire. They feel more competitive 
than the average regarding their ROS and ROI, but not by their sales rev-
enue and market share. Regarding their strategic development goals, they 
advance quality and reliability of their products, customization, and flex-
ibility in changing quantity and assortment.
	 C.	 Inventories serve as buffers among various functions and processes. 
Giving a higher score to C is significantly correlated with several per-
formance measures, which may mean that better-performing companies 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
21
put more emphasis on smooth operation than the average companies. 
These companies, similarly to those in B, consider quality and reliability 
improvement very important (many of them do not perform well in qual-
ity measures). There is a significant correlation also between advancing C 
and the speed of delivery plus high-quality customer service.
	 D.	 Inventories are strategic tools. Interestingly there are hardly any meaning-
ful characteristics of the correlation between emphasizing D, the strategic 
role of inventories, and any other important questions of the questionnaire. 
It seems that those who consider D important form a very mixed group.
	 E.	 Inventory performance is best measured by costs. Cost is especially impor-
tant for those who are competing on prices. These companies have a higher 
performance measure than the average (which, in fact, shows that the cost 
reduction approach to inventories is not at all obsolete). They do not put 
great emphasis on flexibility but want to improve unit production costs and 
productivity.
	
F.	 Inventory performance is to be measured by contribution to competitive-
ness. Interestingly, there is no significant correlation between the F percep-
tion of inventories’ role and the actual competitiveness of the company. 
The correlation is significant between emphasizing F and sales revenue and 
market share, but the connections with ROS and ROI are not significant. 
This can be interpreted to mean that these companies are more interested 
in growth than in improving intensive efficiency measures. The companies 
whose managers are in this group put emphasis on capacity utilization and 
automation, that is, the physical background of increasing manufacturing 
performance.
	 G.	 Inventory considerations play a crucial role in forming product-line 
(assortment) policy. This statement received the second lowest average 
score, which means that managers do not really rely on inventories in their 
“horizontal” policy. However, those who gave a high score to this ques-
tion, showed the most consistent approach to other questions as well: they 
gave high scores to all product line (assortment) or economics of scale 
questions. They want to widen their product scale, increase customization, 
improve assortment flexibility, and improve product quality—they are all 
related to the main question.
	 H.	 Inventories in vertically integrated manufacturing units. This question 
was more or less customized to the sample of respondents, who were man-
ufacturing managers. On the other hand, while statement G was about 
horizontal policy, it was logical to put this question about the vertical 
policy of the company. Interestingly there is a significant negative cor-
relation between placing  more emphasis on H and the companies’ effi-
ciency in material cost management; perhaps managers hope to improve 
cost efficiency by better inventory management in vertical integration. 
Otherwise the significant correlations were found mostly where they could 
be expected: with product quantity and assortment flexibility, with close 
connection to customers in following order fulfillment, customization, 
productivity improvement, and throughput time.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

22	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
1.7	 Conclusions
We have derived a new paradigm of inventory research from the
traditional paradigm, which originates from the 1950s and served as an 
• 
excellent basis for research for decades, and
the changes in economic and business environment of company operation, 
• 
experienced progressively in the last two to three decades.
The new paradigm is based on the recognition that there is a gap between the interest 
of higher- and lower-level managers when handling inventories. The former is inter-
ested in the contribution of inventories to the fulfillment of the purpose of the com-
pany: meeting customers’ needs at a profit. For the latter, inventories serve mostly 
the requirements for smooth operation and avoiding disturbances. This gap could be 
bridged under the circumstances of the first part of the last century, when optimiz-
ing inventories independently of other company functions on the basis of the ceteris 
paribus principle was acceptable. However, in new developments of the economy 
and business made company operation far too complex for the traditional handling. 
This results in the need for a new paradigm.
The new paradigm is based on three components of the new role of inventories in 
business enterprises:
Inventories are contributors to value creation.
• 
Inventories are a means of flexibility.
• 
Inventories are a means of control.
• 
The validity of the new paradigm as a conceptual construct was tested in two sepa-
rate surveys: one among manufacturing managers (mostly in middle levels of the 
hierarchy), and the other among logistics managers (mostly in high levels of the 
hierarchy). Results of both surveys supported the new paradigm; managers seem to 
think in accordance with it.
The new paradigm looks promising after the tests. However, limitations in some 
specificities of the conceptual background and of the surveys make further work nec-
essary on a more detailed and better-founded elaboration of the paradigm. It should 
be explained, for example, why no correlation could be found between efficiency and 
the views on inventories in either survey. More detailed questionnaires with a more 
sophisticated methodology should be applied. Also, other approaches, mainly case 
studies examining the relationship between inventory decisions at various levels of 
enterprises, may be useful in strengthening the foundations of the new paradigm.
References
Ackoff, R. L. 1956. The development of operations research as a science. Oper Res 4(3): 
271–273.
Arrow, K. J., S. Karlin, and H. Scarf. 1958. Studies in the mathematical theory of inventory 
and production. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

A New Inventory Paradigm	
23
Babbar, S., and S. Prasad. 1998. International purchasing inventory management and logistics 
research: An assessment and agenda. Int J Oper Prod Manag 18(1):6–36.
Barry, C. 2007. The best of inventory. http://multichannelmerchant.com/opsandfulfillment/
best_inventory_012007/
Bivin, D. G. 2006. Industry evidence of enhanced production stability since 1984. Int J Prod 
Econ 103(1):438–448.
Blinder, A. S., and L. J. Maccini. 1991. The resurgence of inventory research: What have we 
learned? J Econ Surv 5(4):291–328.
Bonney, M. C. 1994. Trends in inventory management. Int J Prod Econ 35(1-3):107–114.
Carzo, R. Jr. 1958. The theory of inventory (mis) management. Bus Horiz 1(4):103–110.
Chikán, A. 1981. Market disequilibrium and the volume of stocks. In The economics and man-
agement of inventories, edited by A. Chikán. Amsterdam: Elsevier.
Chikán, A., ed. 1990. Inventory models. Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
Chikán, A. 1994. Some micro explanations of global inventory trends. In Reflections on firm 
and national inventories (Workshop on Micro Foundations of Macroeconomic Analysis 
of Inventories), edited by A. Chikán, A. Milne, and L.G. Sprague. Budapest: ISIR.
Chikán, A. 2002a. Inventory research in the last two decades—As reflected in the ISIR Symposia, 
In 20 years of ISIR, edited by A. Chikán and A. Kőhegyi, 29–36. Budapest: ISIR.
Chikán, A. 2002b. Status and dynamics of inventory research (Comments on survey results). 
In 20 years of ISIR, edited by A. Chikán and A. Kőhegyi, 37–62. Budapest: ISIR.
Chikán, A. 2007. The new role of inventories in business: Real world changes and research 
consequences. Int J Prod Econ 108(1-2):54–62.
Chikán, A. 2008. Managers’ view of a new inventory paradigm. Paper presented at 15th 
International Symposium on Inventories, Budapest, Hungary.
Chikán, A. 2009. An empirical analysis of managerial approaches to the role of inventories. Int 
J Prod Econ, 118(1):131–135.
Chikán, A., and L. G. Sprague. 2008. Operations management fads and fashions: A product 
life cycle approach to seeking truth. Paper presented at 3rd World Conference on 
Production and Operations Management, Tokyo, Japan.
Foss, N. J., ed. 1997. Resources, firms and strategies. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Girlich, H. J., and A. Chikán. 2001. The origins of dynamic inventory modelling under uncer-
tainty (the men, their work and connection with the Stanford Studies). Int J Prod Econ 
71(1-3):351–363.
Hadley, G., and T. M. Whitin. 1963. Analysis of inventory systems. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice-Hall.
Holt, C., F. Modigliani, J. Muth, and H. Simon. 1960. Planning production, inventories and 
work force. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Invatol. 2008. Inventory management inventory control. http://www.invatol.com (accessed 
October 18, 2008).
Kornai. J. 1992. The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism Princeton NJ: 
Princeton University Press.
Kuhn, T. 1996. The structure of scientific revolutions, 3rd ed. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press.
Lawrence, P., and J. Lorsch. 1967. Differentiation and integration in complex organizations. 
Admin Sci Q 12(1):1–47.
Lawton, J. 2003. Not your father’s inventory strategy. http://www.eknowtion.org/pdf/
Inventory_Strategy.pdf (accessed October 18, 2008).
Miller, G., and P. Deis. 2007. Aggregate inventory management. http://www.proaction.net/
WhitePaper-AggregateInventoryMgmt.htm (accessed October 18, 2008).
Naddor, E. 1966. Inventory systems. New York: Wiley.
Porter, M. E. 1985. Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. 
New York: The Free Press.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

24	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Putterman, L., ed. 1986. The economic nature of the firm. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press.
Scarf, H. E., D. M. Gilford, and M. W. Shelly. 1963. Multistage inventory models and tech-
niques. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Silver, E. A., and R. Peterson. 1979. Decision systems for inventory management and produc-
tion planning. New York: Wiley.
Sprague, L. G. 2000. Lot sizing principles and practice. 11th Int Symp Inventories, 
Budapest, Hungary.
Sprague, L. G., and J. G. Wacker. 1994. Microeconomic underpinnings of macroeconomic 
analyses of inventories. In Reflections on firm and national inventories (Workshop on 
Micro Foundations of Macroeconomic Analysis of Inventories), edited by A. Chikán, 
A. Milne, and L. G. Sprague, 109–123. Budapest: ISIR.
Stenger, A. 2008. Researching and implementing inventory management systems in commer-
cial firms: 40 years of experience. Paper presented at 15th International Symposium 
on Inventories, Budapest, Hungary.
Whitin, T. M. 1957. The theory of inventory management. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press.
Whybark, D. C. 1994. A management perspective of inventories. In Reflections on firm and 
national inventories (Workshop on Micro Foundations of Macroeconomic Analysis of 
Inventories), edited by A. Chikán, A. Milne, and L. G. Sprague, 95–108. Budapest: 
ISIR. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

25
2 Inventory Management
Some Surprising News 
about Classical Views 
on Inventory and Some 
Nonclassical Responses 
to Traditional Practice
Linda G. Sprague and Marc J. Sardy
Rollins College
Winter Park, Florida
2.1	 Overview
Management of an organization’s inventories would seem to be at (or at least near) the 
top of the agenda for a firm’s financial managers. On the balance sheet, inventories 
are close to the top of the list of a company’s assets and are often the largest number 
on the list. (Plant and equipment dominate primarily in capital-intensive industries.) 
For small- to medium-sized manufacturers (SMMs), inventory is too often a cause of 
bankruptcy, giving false claim to the notion of inventory as an “asset.”
Contents
2.1	
Overview..........................................................................................................25
2.2	
Inventory: What Does the Typical Student Business Major Learn?................26
2.3	
A “Policy Variable”.........................................................................................27
2.4	
An Accidental Finding....................................................................................29
2.5	
Inventory: The Abandoned Asset?..................................................................29
2.6	
Results..............................................................................................................30
2.7	
Concluding Remarks....................................................................................... 31
Appendix................................................................................................................... 31
The Database...................................................................................................32
Analysis...........................................................................................................33
References................................................................................................................38
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

26	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
This work finds otherwise. Students of business are likely to receive only a cur-
sory introduction to inventory management during their academic studies, and this 
most likely only at the microlevel. Examination of the most popular finance/financial 
management textbooks shows a surprising lack of coverage of inventory issues and 
concepts, particularly at the strategic level. Hope is expressed that the current empha-
sis on supply chain management (with its surrounding issues) will help to remedy 
this dangerous gap in knowledge about a firm’s structure and operation.
2.2	 Inventory: What Does the Typical 
Student Business Major Learn?
Business schools’ standard undergraduate and MBA/Executive MBA curricula 
include introductions to the basic themes and topics relevant to the study of 
business and its operations. The typical curriculum includes required courses in 
statistics/quantitative methods, financial and managerial accounting, micro- and 
macroeconomics, marketing, organizational behavior, finance and financial man-
agement, operations management, and strategy/strategic management—the  basic 
core of all business school programs. Inventory and its management are most 
likely to be covered in an operations management course, particularly the micro 
aspects of inventory control: how much and when to order, safety stocks, and 
perhaps the details and importance of inventory accuracy.
A typical operations management (OM) course will introduce economic order 
quantity (EOQ) and safety stocks. All of the best-selling OM textbooks have at 
least one chapter devoted to inventory—its objectives, definitions, control systems, 
and order quantities (usually led by derivation of the EOQ). Recent OM textbooks 
include chapters on supply chain management (SCM), with some emphasizing the 
role of inventories within these systems. See for example, Operations Management 
for Competitive Advantage (Chase, Jacobs, and Aquilano 2004) and Operations and 
Supply Management (Chase, Jacobs, and Aquilano 2009).
Derivation of the EOQ through the total cost equation is the usual first serious 
step in development of the student business major’s introduction to inventory man-
agement and control. This starts with a statement of the numbers needed for such an 
analysis where:
	D = forecast annual demand or usage (see marketing or purchasing)
	 S = cost of one set-up or order charge (see production supervisor or purchasing)
	 c = the cost of one item (call accounting)
	 i = the cost of carrying one item in inventory for one year (call finance)
	Q = the order quantity
The total annual cost (TAC) equation is:
	
TAC
Q c i
D S
Q
=
⋅⋅+
⋅
2
	
(2.1)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
27
Applying the magic of calculus (Harris [1913] referred to this as “higher math-
ematics”), the EOQ is:
	
Q
D S
c i
=
⋅
⋅
⋅
2
	
(2.2)
The first half of the TAC equation is a number that should be of interest to the 
financial management folks: when summed across all of the inventory items for which 
this calculation is used, this is the resulting number which will appear as part of the 
typical third line of the firm’s balance sheet—inventory. It is also worth noting that 
the TAC of any “order policy” (“lot for lot,” EOQ, customer order requirement, etc.) 
can be calculated regardless of how the order size decision is made. The second half 
of this expression is a number of considerable concern to the shop floor (for firms that 
do manufacturing and/or assembly), since it is the basis for determining how much of 
the firm’s capacity will be spent on setups or changeovers. In an environment where 
one-time-per-order costs are incurred (setup or changeovers, shipment fees, quality 
procedures, etc.), this second part in the equation sums up how much will be spent 
on costs that occur with each batch produced or purchased.
2.3	 A “Policy Variable”
The firm’s operations people are not in charge of any of the four pieces of required 
data: while the data may be readily available through the firm’s ERP system, its 
actual sources lie elsewhere within the organization. The c is accounting’s number 
for the combined materials/labor/overhead cost incurred and which will be recog-
nized when the item accounting transaction recognizes the transfer to the intended 
next inventory location. Of particular interest here is i—the cost, as a percentage of 
the item cost, of carrying an item in inventory.
Technically, the cost of carrying an item in inventory should be reasonably straight-
forward: it’s the sum of any taxes, insurance, storage fees, and so forth incurred 
when holding an item in stock anywhere in the inventory system. For example, all 
warehousing costs (including overheads) should be summed and then distributed in 
some sensible fashion across the entire inventory holding. This, as well as any inter-
nal transportation costs, is typically judged to be approximately 5 to 7 percent of the 
cost of the item per year.
But this relatively low number may be missing the point. At a higher level within 
the organization, the question is to what other uses could this money have been allo-
cated. In other words, what is the opportunity cost of having the cash tied up in inven-
tory (hardly as “liquid” an asset)? Basically, the higher the percent that the operations 
people use, the lower will be the resulting inventory positions as the calculations are 
executed.
Table 2.1 shows recommended values of this percentage over the years. As the 
source line suggests, these “inventory carrying cost” estimates are from the logis-
tics folks, not the finance people. Typically, a selected percentage will be applied 
across the board for all inventories in the system, and so is often requested by the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

28	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
information systems group as part of bringing up, for example, a new ERP system. 
The source may be the “legacy” system or a representative of the operations group.
In operations management courses, we tell students that i—this “carrying charge 
percentage”—is a policy variable, which is a polite way of saying that the percent-
age is made up to take into account the fact that “inventory is cash that is not flow-
ing” and we need some easy way to help keep inventory positions down. Since even 
a medium-sized manufacturing company with a standard information system will 
calculate several thousand lot sizes every month or so, it is at least some help in 
keeping inventories low. The numbers shown in Table 2.1, which are in common use 
in manufacturing organizations, are certainly too high to be normally achievable 
“hurdle rates” for most companies. Hence, the phrase “policy variable” for these 
expressions of opportunity costs.
The first known publication describing the EOQ and its derivation appeared in 
Factory: The Magazine of Management in February 1913. The author, Ford W. 
Harris, said:
Carrying a large stock means a lot of money tied up and a heavy depreciation. It will 
here be assumed that a charge of ten percent on stock is fair to cover both interest 
and depreciation. It is probable that double this would be fairer in many instances. 
(1913/1990, 947)
Given that overall interest rates at the time were in the low single digits, Harris’s 
recommendation of a 20 percent charge is consistent with the recommended policy 
variable numbers shown in Table 2.1.
Table 2.1
Reported Estimates of Inventory Carrying Charges
Year of Publication
Author
Charge as Percent of Item Cost
1951
Melnitzky
25%
1955
Alford and Bangs
25%
1957
Whitin
25%
1958
Aljian
12%–34%
1962
Ammer
20%–25%
1962
Crook
25%
1973
Heskett et al.
28.70%
1974
Hall
20.40%
1984
Cavinato
25%
1986
Bowersox et al.
20%
1988
Coyle et al.
25%–27%
1990
Johnson and Wood
25%
Source: Lambert, D. M., and Stock, J. R. 1993. Strategic Logistics Management, 3rd ed., 
Homewood, IL: Irwin, p. 366.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
29
2.4	 An Accidental Finding
While waiting in my coauthor’s office while a phone call was in process, I 
(L. G. Sprague) picked up a copy of Brealey, Myers, and Marcus’s Fundamentals 
of Corporate Finance and flipped through to the section on inventory manage-
ment, finding the following paragraph in the introduction to the “Working Capital 
Management” chapter:
The second major short-term asset is inventory. To do business, firms need reserves 
of raw materials, work in progress, and finished goods. But these inventories can 
be expensive to store, and they tie up capital. Inventory management involves a 
trade-off between these costs and benefits. In manufacturing companies, the pro-
duction manager is most likely to make this judgment without direct input from 
the financial manager. Therefore, we spend less time on this topic than on the 
management of the other components of working capital. (Brealey et al. 2007, 543; 
emphasis added)
So much for our advice to students to “call finance” to set this important value for 
all inventory decisions.
Pulling several other finance/financial management texts from the shelves revealed 
an oddity. Other standard finance/financial management texts have similar state-
ments (exact copies for other texts with Brealey as an author). But at least Brealey’s 
text has inventory in the index! From the sample of finance/financial management 
texts on the shelves, one could conclude that there is little interest in the study of 
inventories and their strategic management within business schools’ curricula—at 
least within the required finance/financial management courses. This suggested the 
need for a small research project to see if our classical views on what’s going on with 
respect to the strategic management of inventories within business schools’ financial 
courses are correct.
2.5	 Inventory: The Abandoned Asset?
The question was: Did our first simple sample of textbooks reflect the overall situ-
ation within the academic community’s handling of the topic of inventory with the 
next generations of business school graduates? If so, this could have an impact on 
where and how inventory and its management belongs in a business school curricu-
lum. Alternatively, should inventory and its management be ignored as a topic for 
future business practitioners?
In the United States and the United Kingdom there are sources of education 
about inventories and their management outside the business schools. The American 
Production and Inventory Control Society (now known as APICS: The Association 
for Operations Management), and the Institute for Operations Management (IOM) 
in the United Kingdom both offer certification programs in inventory management 
through professional seminars and courses through universities and colleges. APICS 
supports education and testing for CPIM (Certified in Production and Inventory 
Management) and CSCP (Certified Supply Chain Professional) programs. Education 
for these is provided through university-based courses, society-offered courses 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

30	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
focused specifically on the examinations, and internet-based courses. These pro-
grams tend to place more emphasis on inventory control (including information 
systems issues) than on the financial procedures and processes involved in corpo-
rate-level decision making with respect to inventory.
If there is little consideration of how inventories are deployed and financed, and 
of their financial impact on the firm’s overall performance, there will be a poor 
understanding of the firm’s financial structure. Our suspicion is that inventory and 
its management have been largely ignored in the financial literature—most danger-
ously in the business textbooks in common use. To investigate this possibility, we 
examined the situation by analyzing the contents of the best-selling finance/financial 
management textbooks. Details are described in the Appendix.
2.6	 Results
See the Appendix for details of our analysis of inventory coverage in finance/finan-
cial management textbooks in the United States. The results support our suspicion 
that business school graduates in the United States receive little instruction regard-
ing the strategic management of inventories. Since OM faculties tend to focus on 
inventory control, the overall result is a substantial gap in knowledge about the stra-
tegic management of inventories.
Our personal experiences with inventory and its management suggest that there 
is some truth to the idea that inventory and its management are left to the production 
managers of the world. This considerable “asset” is in fact controlled item by item 
and, therefore, lies below the radar screen of the firm’s strategic decision makers. 
This can be described as an inventory control dominant scheme rather than an inven-
tory management dominant system. The equivalent for cash management would be 
strict emphasis on the necessary minutiae of physical control of the bills and coins 
with little to no attention to the issues of medium- and long-term flows and locations 
of cash.
The good news on the horizon could be the rise of supply chain management as 
a topic being studied in business schools’ programs, particularly in OM courses and 
occasionally in partnership with a marketing course or exercise. It is quickly obvious 
that when complex systems of inventories are being designed, developed, managed, 
and controlled, everyone needs to be on board—finance, operations, logistics, mar-
keting, and information systems, to name only the most obvious players. Deployment 
of millions of dollars of assets in a global marketplace involves serious trade-offs 
that should not be made “without direct input from the financial manager” (Brealey 
et al. 2007, 543). Perhaps it is time for operations managers to be recognized as nec-
essary participants in the strategic management of this important asset along with 
their colleagues in marketing and especially finance.
There is a straightforward way to display the relationship between a firm’s inven-
tory management and control, and its overall financial health: the Dupont model 
(see, for example, Skousen et al. 1999, 3–10; Ross, Westerfield, and Jordan 2006, 
68–71). This model is more likely to appear in an accounting textbook than a finance/
financial management text.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
31
2.7	 Concluding Remarks
For most assets, firms attempt to maximize their holdings to achieve a reasonable 
balance among the set of assets. Cash balances, investments in marketable securi-
ties, plant and equipment, and so forth are all assets whose holdings increase the 
firm’s ability to respond more nimbly to changes in the economic environment. 
Inventory does not work the same way: it is best kept in motion, moving from sup-
pliers to the firm and on to customers with value being added throughout its entire 
journey. Too little inventory and the firm may find dissatisfied customers improving 
the sales of their better-stocked competitors, or an expensive shutdown if manu-
facturing goes from “lean” to “anorexic.” Too much inventory and the firm could 
drown in a sea of red ink as an economic downturn squeezes the firm between 
rising payables and short-term debt, shrinking margins and collapsing inventory 
valuations.
Inventory control is well established as a business field, and education for the 
basics is generally available through business schools and professional associations. 
Between required accounting and operations management courses, business students 
are primarily provided with procedural and operational aspects of inventory control. 
Strategic management of inventories has not been an important feature in the most 
widely used finance/financial management textbooks. However, growing interest in 
supply chains, which inevitably require attention to serious consideration of “place” 
of product from raw materials through to retail shelves, is beginning to focus on 
issues that have apparently fallen between the cracks.
There is no need to wrest control of the strategic aspects of inventory management 
from the finance folks: they appear to have abandoned the field. For the future, we 
urge those in the expanding supply chain management business to add serious atten-
tion to the balance sheet implications of inventory systems and their dynamics (see 
The Beer Game [http:// beergame.mit.edu] as an attractive and accessible example). 
Integrating materials from colleagues in systems dynamics should be encouraged.
There are few industrial marketing experts, but this is a field that could be devel-
oped within operations management rather than a marketing department, which is 
typically focused on consumer behavior where the consumed good is not an indus-
trial product. And those of us in operations management should widen our perspec-
tive enough to encompass strategic inventory planning and management, perhaps 
creating links with our marketing and finance colleagues. Inventory—the abandoned 
asset—needs a new home.
Appendix
Attention paid to inventory and inventory management: an investigation of the inven-
tory content of the best-selling finance/financial management business school text-
books in the United States.
Hypothesis: Inventory and its management, as a subject of study, has been largely 
ignored in the finance/financial management textbooks used in business schools in 
the United States.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

32	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
The Database
To establish the degree of support for this assertion, a sample bibliographic data-
base of finance/financial management was created from publications contained in 
the Rollins College library, our personal academic libraries, and the Orange County 
Public Library, in Orlando Florida. E-books in finance (books available online) were 
later added to the search. Although this was clearly not a random sample of text-
books or of representative libraries, it is our judgment that libraries tend to maintain 
their textbook holdings based on instructor use and requests. There is no reason for 
us to conclude that instructor use of textbooks at Rollins is very different from those 
in use at U.S. business schools, particularly since these are primarily among the most 
popular in terms of sales in the United States.
When sales representatives from numerous publishing houses were consulted 
regarding texts most often ordered by finance faculty members, they confirmed that 
in the past ten years, most instructors in finance did indeed use the most popular 
textbooks in their courses.
As an example, the following list summarizes the ranking of publisher McGraw-
Hill’s leading financial management texts for 2007, as supplied by the marketing 
department. All but two were included in our database and all of the authors listed 
were represented by at least one textbook in our database. The list gives us reason-
able confidence that our database is indeed representative of the universe of finance/
financial management textbooks in general use. It is important to note that we are 
using textbooks as a proxy variable for “finance literature.” Trade books and journal 
articles were not examined, therefore limiting this study. However, textbooks are a 
significant source of information about the topics for both undergraduate and gradu-
ate business students.
U.S. Rankings of Financial Management Textbooks
Undergraduate
1.  Fundamentals of Financial Management by S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan
2.  Fundamentals of Financial Management, Concise Edition by E. F. Brigham and J. F. Houston
3.  Essentials of Corporate Finance by S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan
4.  Foundations of Financial Management by S. B. Block and G. A. Hirt
5.  Fundamentals of Financial Management by E. F. Brigham and J. F. Houston
6.  Fundamentals of Corporate Finance by R. A. Brealey, S. C. Myers, and A. J. Marcus
7.  Principles of Managerial Finance by L. J. Gitman
8.  Foundations of Finance: The Logic and Practice of Financial Management by A. Keown, J. D. 
Martin, J. W. Petty, and D. F. Scott
9.  Principles of Managerial Finance Brief by L. J. Gitman
Graduate
1.  Financial Management Theory & Practice by E. F. Brigham and M. C. Ehrhardt
2.  Principles of Corporate Finance by R. A. Brealey, S. C. Myers, and F. Allen
3.  Fundamentals of Corporate Finance by S. A. Ross, R. W. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan
Source: McGraw-Hill.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
33
The next question addressed was which elements from these books should be part 
of the database. We thought strongly that a key to our study would be the presence or 
absence of the mention of inventory in each book’s index.
There were 91 titles that we judged to be texts in finance/financial management. 
Our study consisted of the following database elements for each text:
	
1.	 Each textbook was given a number.
	
2.	 The library call information was recorded unless it was an e-book or col-
lected from the Orange County Public Library in Orlando, Florida.
	
3.	 The year of copyright was noted.
	
4.	 The title was listed.
	
5.	 The author(s) were identified.
	
6.	 Whether the word inventory appeared in the index (a yes or no response).
	
7.	 If it appeared, we recorded the page numbers in which discussion of inven-
tory appeared.
	
8.	 The number of pages on which the subject of inventory was covered.
	
9.	 In a section labeled “notes” we identified the focus of the discussion (e.g., 
LIFO [last in, first out], FIFO [first in, first out], valuation, policies, reor-
der point, etc.)
Analysis
Since most of the database consisted of nominal or qualitative variables, an intricate 
quantitative statistical analysis of our judgment sample would have been inappropri-
ate. Therefore we used a simple analytical design. A sort was done on a key variable 
(e.g., notes) and then a sort on year. This gave us the ability to determine whether 
there had been changes over time in the notes section of our database. To examine 
some hypotheses we held about the appearance of inventory in the database, the fol-
lowing sorts were examined:
	
1.	 A sort by author, then notes
	
2.	 A sort by library, then notes, then year
	
3.	 A sort by number of pages, then notes, then year
	
4.	 A sort by pages, then notes, then year
	
5.	 A sort of notes, then number, then year
	
6.	 A sort by year, then notes
	
7.	 A sort by title, then notes, then year
	
8.	 A sort by notes
The texts examined were published between 1960 and 2008. The number of texts 
by decade before 2000 and by year after 2000 is shown in Table A.2.1. The sample is 
heavily skewed toward recent books (after the year 2000) because old textbooks tend 
to be removed from libraries as more recent editions are purchased and shelved. The 
sort by the number of titles by author disclosed that authors had at most two titles in 
the database. This occurred eight times, perhaps because older texts were culled in 
the libraries. This is a conjecture we were not in a position to examine because culled 
texts do not appear in our database.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

34	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
A sort of the database by author, then notes indicated the variety of topics covered 
in the notes. The five categories in our taxonomic scheme are:
	
1.	 From a balance sheet viewpoint
	
a.	 Working capital
	
b.	 Current assets
	
c.	 Acid test ratio
	
d.	 Inventory as a fixed asset
	
e.	 Cash flow
	
f.	 Effect on financial statements
	
2.	 From a valuation standpoint
	
a.	 Average of cost or market value
	
b.	 LIFO
	
c.	 FIFO
	
d.	 Replacement costs
	
3.	 From an inventory costs standpoint
	
a.	 Inventory in process
	
b.	 Finished goods
	
c.	 Turnover
	
d.	 Carrying costs
	
e.	 Ordering costs
	
f.	 Storage costs
	
g.	 Overstocking
	
4.	 From a financial management standpoint
	
a.	 Effect on stock volatility
	
b.	 As collateral
Table A.2.1
Number of Texts by Decade or Year
Decade
Number of Texts
Year
Number of Texts
1960s
11
2000
13
1970s
7
2001
6
1980s
9
2002
6
1990s
10
2003
7
2004
5
2005
10
2006
3
2007
2
2008
2
Total
37
54
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
35
	
c.	 Risk
	
d.	 Spreading inventory across the yield curve
	
e.	 Reducing risk
	
5.	 From an inventory management standpoint
	
a.	 EOQ for cash, inventory, etc.
	
b.	 MRP (material requirements planning)
	
c.	 JIT (just-in-time)
	
d.	 Inventory levels
	
e.	 Stockout cost
	
f.	 Seasonal fluctuations
	
g.	 GNP (gross national product) effects
The sources of the texts examined in this study are listed in Table A.2.2. The 
largest number of books came from the personal academic libraries of the author 
who teaches finance on a regular basis. It is interesting to note that the library does 
not own as many texts as the author has in his office. The campus library—with both 
cost and shelving limitations—acquires texts on a limited basis, usually when the 
books are in use by course instructors. After a year or two with no borrowing, such 
texts are typically discarded to make space for newer editions.
The number of e-books was a surprise. Usually a computer screen is the media 
display, and scrolling and highlighting are not necessarily familiar mechanisms 
associated with texts. E-books are a more recent phenomena. The earliest copyright 
was 2003; most were copyrighted after 2005. Because these are more recent texts, 
we speculated that a fairly high percentage would discuss the concept of financial 
management in relation to inventory. This conjecture was also tested.
Most library copies had Library of Congress call numbers beginning HG4011 
(n = 17) or HG173, 174 (n = 7). Other call numbers were scattered, although they 
had titles like The Theory and Practice of International Finance or The Theory of 
Finance, which were books essentially written for instructional purposes in finance 
classes.
Table A.2.2
Source of Sampled Texts
Source
Number
Percent
Books/e-books
16
17.6
Personal library
45
49.5
Orange County library
  2
2.2
Rollins library
28
30.7
Total
91
100
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

36	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
We examined whether the work contained an index. Fifty-four of the texts did 
(59.3 percent) and thirty-seven did not (40.7 percent). E-books contain no index, 
although as they are being read on a computer, searches for a term can be easily 
launched from the keyboard. Of the seventy-three books in the Rollins library and 
our personal academic libraries, only fifty-four had indices. Texts lacking indices 
included such finance texts as Macro Finance, Strategic Financial Planning, and 
Barron’s Financial Management. As more e-books become available, it is possible 
that the index may become a relic of the past.
Eighty percent of the ninety-one sample texts had no index citation for financ-
ing inventories or anything having to do with financing inventories. In eleven of the 
books with index citations, the reference occurred early in the text (i.e., before page 
100; n = 6) or late in the book (after page 100; n = 4). Since the average textbook 
size was 467 pages, this finding was also a surprise. Placement within a textbook 
is a function of the intended sequence of the introduction of the text’s material. If a 
citation occurred early in the book it was usually for inventory valuation or the use 
of inventory as collateral (category 2 in our taxonomy). If the citation occurred later 
in the book it was usually for category 3 (a cost explanation) or category 5 (an inven-
tory management point of view). Materials at the end of a text are typically deemed 
of less importance in the context of the whole course; that is, it is material of less 
importance than material presented earlier so is more likely to be omitted.
When we examined the number of pages devoted to inventories we found fewer 
than eleven pages in 70 percent of the books. Fewer than 10 percent of the texts 
devoted twenty-five pages or more to an exploration of inventories as a subject for dis-
cussion. This amounted to an average of 5.3 percent of the textbook pages addressed 
to inventories; hardly what can be called exhaustive treatments. Not a single book 
devoted fifty or more pages to the topic of inventories and their management. In most 
of the books where a larger number of pages appeared, the topic of inventories was 
focused primarily on showing an example of a calculation, such as an inventory valu-
ation problem or an EOQ exercise with cash as the inventory. Table A.2.3 presents 
the number of books with or without an index, by year.
The thirty-seven books with a copyright before 2000 contained a mention of the 
topic of inventories eighteen times. The remaining nineteen indices did not include 
the topic. In texts with a copyright after 1999, there were thirty-six with index cita-
tions and eighteen that ignored the topic. However, despite listing inventories in the 
Table A.2.3
Appearance of an Index Mention of 
Inventories in the Text by Copyright Year
Index
Before 2000
After 1999
Total
Yes
18
36
  54
No
19
18
  37
Total
37
54
  91
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
37
index, we found that eleven of the books published before 2000 did not appear to 
discuss anything on the topic in the actual text. Table A.2.4 presents the notes by 
year and category of mention, the percentage in each category, and the rank of that 
category (highest being one).
Before the year 2000, seventy different topics were mentioned in the indices, with 
categories 3 (costs) and 4 (financial management) receiving the most attention and 
ranking 1 and 2, respectively. Categories 1 (balance sheet) and 2 (valuation) received 
the least attention, ranking 6 and 5, respectively. In short, costs and financial man-
agement were the hot topics, and valuation and balance sheet were the most ignored. 
After 1999, costs were still hot (ranking first), but now inventory management ranked 
second, ahead of financial management of inventory, which now ranked third. The 
previously ignored categories, valuation and balance sheet, were still ranked lowest. 
The major change in notes was that the omitted category (category 6) was found in 
14.3 percent of the books copyrighted before 2000. In those copyrighted after 1999 
the number in that category was reduced to 6 percent. It appears that finance books 
are no longer ignoring inventory as frequently as in the past.
Earlier in this study we indicated we would examine the hypothesis that e-books 
would ignore the financing of inventories less frequently because they were writ-
ten more recently. Appendix Table A.2.5 provides data to test this hypothesis.
Table A.2.4
Notes Categories Mentioned by Years Excluding Unmentioned
Category
Before 
Year 2000
Percent
Rank
After 
1999
Percent
Rank
1. Balance sheet
  8
11
6
16
13
4
2. Valuation
  2
3
5
15
12
5
3. Costs
20
28
1
35
29
1
4. Financial management
17
24
2
21
17
3
5. Inventory management
13
18
4
28
23
2
6. No mention
11
16
3
  7
6
6
Note: Total Mentioned    [as a % of … 71 mentioned]    [as a % of 122 mentioned]
Table A.2.5
Number of Texts with a Citation for Financing Inventory
Type of Text
Citation
Yes
No
Total
E-book
  7
  9
16
Others
45
30
75
Total
52
39
91
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

38	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Table A.2.5 shows that e-books did not appear to mention financing inventories signif-
icantly more than other books. This was tested by x2 with one degree of freedom.
In general the overall conjecture of this research was that the finance literature 
seems to give short shrift to the role of inventory and its management. Though 
we used texts as a proxy for the overall finance literature and a judgment sample 
of finance books, we feel confident that the empirical evidence presented sup-
ports our conjecture, which is focused on what finance/financial management 
courses in U.S. business schools are covering with respect to inventories and their 
management.
Our general conclusion is that business school students in the United States learn 
little about inventories within their required finance/financial management courses. 
In particular, students learn little to nothing about the role and impact of inventories 
within complex supply chains. They are likely to have some introduction to EOQ 
but primarily as a procedure for inventory control. This particular approach fails to 
emphasize the insight that a doubling of sales is best not accompanied by a doubling 
of the supporting inventory level; inventory should increase by the square root of 
the sales growth. Nor is there attention to the fact that when used within fabrication 
operations, the second half of the TAC equation directly focuses on an element of 
shop capacity through its inclusion of setup times (a nonproductive use of capacity). 
Much of this material is covered in most operations management courses and some-
times in a quantitative analysis course that uses the EOQ model as an illustration 
of effective analyses for inventory control. This leaves a gap in the conveyance of 
knowledge about inventories and their management. The most important loss is an 
understanding of the impact on the firm’s asset mix from a combination of strategic 
inventory positioning decisions. This is probably equaled by the impact of a lack of 
understanding that inventory control systems may be inadvertently driving inventories 
unnecessarily high because they are focused on detailed control without reference to 
overall strategic implications.
We had assumed that the required finance/financial management courses in busi-
ness schools were conveying some sense of the strategic importance of robust inven-
tory decision making at the corporate level. Our analysis suggests that teachers of 
finance/financial management in business schools—led by the authors of the best-
selling textbooks in the field—have abandoned oversight of this critical asset.
References
Abu-Mostafa, Y. S. 2000. Computational finance 1999. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Agar, C. 2005. Capital investment & financing: A practical guide to financial evaluation. 
Oxford: Butterworth-Heinemann.
Anderson, W. H. L. 1964. Corporate finance and fixed investment, division of research, gradu-
ate school of business administration. Boston: Harvard University.
Baker, J. C. 1998. International finance: Management, markets, and institutions. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ball, D. A. 2002. International business: The challenge of global competition, 8th ed. 
Boston: McGraw-Hill.
Besley, S., and E. F. Brigham. 2005. Essentials of managerial finance, 13th ed. Mason, OH: 
Thomson South-Western.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
39
Besley, S., and E. F. Brigham. 2008. Essentials of managerial finance, 14th ed. Mason, OH: 
Thomson South-Western.
Bhar, R., and S. Hamori. 2005. Empirical techniques in finance. Berlin: Springer Heidelberg.
Bierman, H. 1980. Strategic financial planning: A manager’s guide to improving profit perfor-
mance. New York: Free Press.
Block, S. B., and G. A. Hirt. 2005. Foundations of financial management, 11th ed. Boston: 
McGraw-Hill.
Brealey, R. A., and S. C. Myers. 2003. Principles of corporate finance, 7th ed. Boston: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Brealey, R. A., S. C. Myers, and A. J. Marcus. 2004. Fundamentals of corporate finance, 4th 
ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Brealey, R. A., S. C. Myers, and A. J. Marcus. 2007. Fundamentals of corporate finance, 5th 
ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Brigham, E. F., and M. C. Ehrhardt. 2002. Financial management: Theory and practice, 10th 
ed. Fort Worth, TX: Harcourt College Publishers.
Brigham, E. F., and M. C. Ehrhardt. 2005. Financial management: Theory and practice, 11th 
ed. Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.
Brigham, E. F., and J. F. Houston. 2007. Fundamentals of financial management, 11th ed. 
Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.
Bryant, J. W. 1982. Financial modelling in corporate management. Chichester, UK: Wiley.
Buljevich, E. C., and Y. S. Park. 1999. Project financing and the international financial mar-
kets. Boston: Kluwer Academic.
Cain, P. J. 2002. Hobson and imperialism: Radicalism, new liberalism, and finance 1887–
1938. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Carrada-Bravo, F. 2003. Managing global finance in the digital economy. Westport, CT: Praeger.
Chase, R. B., F. R. Jacobs, and N. J. Aquilano. 2004. Operations management for competitive 
advantage, 10th ed. Boston: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Chase, R. B., F. R. Jacobs, and N. J. Aquilano. 2009. Operations and supply management, 10th 
ed. Boston: McGraw Hill/Irwin.
Click, R. W., and J. Coval. 2002. The theory and practice of international financial manage-
ment. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Cochrane, J. H., and National Bureau of Economic Research. 2005. Financial markets and the 
real economy. Cambridge: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Collins Compact English Dictionary. 1994. England: Harper-Collins.
Copeland, L. S. 2005. Exchange rates and international finance, 4th ed. Harlow, UK: Financial 
Times Prentice Hall.
Copeland, T. E., Koller, T. and J. Murrin. 2000. Valuation: Measuring and managing the value 
of companies, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley.
Coyle, B. 2000a. Cash flow control. AMACOM, Chicago: Glenlake.
Coyle, B. 2000b. Cash flow forecasting and liquidity. Chicago: Glenlake.
Coyle, B. 2000c. Framework for credit risk management. Chicago: Glenlake.
Coyle, B. 2000d. Mergers and acquisitions, library ed. Chicago: Glenlake.
Crouhy, M., D. Galai, and R. Mark. 2001. Risk management. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Crum, R. L., E. F. Brigham, and J. F. Houston. 2005. Fundamentals of international finance, 
1st ed. Mason, OH: Thomson/South-Western.
Damodaran, A. 2001. Investment valuation: Tools and techniques for determining the value of 
any asset, 2nd ed. New York: Wiley.
De Pamphilis, D. M. 2005. Mergers, acquisitions, and other restructuring activities: An integrated 
approach to process, tools, cases, and solutions, 3rd ed. Boston: Elsevier Academic 
Press.
Downes, J., and J. E. Goodman. 2003a. Dictionary of finance and investment terms, 6th ed. 
Hauppauge: Barron’s Educational Series.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

40	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Downes, J., and J. E. Goodman. 2003b. Finance and investment handbook, 6th ed. Hauppauge, 
NY: Barron’s.
Eiteman, D. K., A. I. Stonehill, M. H. Moffett, and D. K. Eiteman. 2004. Multinational busi-
ness finance, 10th ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Eun, C. S., and B. G. Resnick. 2004. International financial management, 3rd ed. Boston: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Financial Times Limited. 1998. The complete finance companion: Mastering finance. Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Ganguin, B., and J. Bilardello. 2005. Fundamentals of corporate credit analysis. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Gitman, L. J., and J. Madura. 2001. Introduction to finance, 1st ed. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Goldsmith, R. W. 1969. Financial structure and development. New Haven, CT: Yale 
University Press.
Gough, L. 2002. Global finance. Oxford: Capstone.
Graduate School of Management. 1987. Recent developments in international banking and 
finance. Riverside: University of California.
Grabbe, J. O. 1996. International financial markets, 3rd ed. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Gup, B. E. 1980. Guide to strategic planning. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Gurley, J. G., and E. S. Shaw. 1960. Money in a theory of finance. Washington: Brookings 
Institution.
Guthmann, H. G., and H. E. Dougall. 1962. Corporate financial policy, 4th ed. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Harrington, D. R. 2004. Corporate financial analysis: In a global environment, 7th ed. Mason, 
OH: Thomson/South-Western.
Harris, F. W. 1913. How many parts to make at once? Factory: The Magazine of Management, 
10(2):135–136. (Reprinted in Operations Research 38(6):947–950, 1990.)
Helfert, E. A. 1977. Techniques of financial analysis, 4th ed. Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin.
Helfert, E. A., and E. A. Helfert. 2001. Financial analysis tools and techniques: A guide for 
managers. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Husband, W. H., and J. C. Dockeray. 1972. Modern corporation finance, 7th ed. Homewood, 
IL: R.D. Irwin.
Ingersoll, J. E. 1987. Theory of financial decision making. Totowa, NJ: Rowan & Littlefield.
Jones, F. J. 1978. Macro finance: The financial system and the economy. Cambridge: 
Winthrop.
Jorion, P. 2001. Value at risk: The new benchmark for managing financial risk, 2nd ed. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Kent, R. P. 1969. Corporate financial management. Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin.
Khoury, S. J., and A. Ghosh. 1988. Recent developments in international banking and finance. 
Lexington, MA: Lexington Books.
Lajoux, A. R., and J. F. Weston. 1999. The art of M&A financing and refinancing: A guide to 
sources and instruments for external growth. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Lambert, D. M., and J. R. Stock. 1993. Strategic logistics management, 3rd ed. Homewood, 
IL: R.D. Irwin.
Lee, C. F., J. E. Finnerty, and E. Norton. 1997. Foundations of financial management. 
Minneapolis/St. Paul, MN: West Pub.
Levich, R. M. 2001. International financial market: Prices and policies, 2nd ed. Boston: 
McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Lindsay, R., and A. W. Sametz. 1967. Financial management: An analytical approach, Rev. 
ed. Homewood, IL: R.D. Irwin.
Madura, J. 2003. International financial management, 7th ed. Mason, OH: Thomson/
South-Western.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Management	
41
Madura, J. 2006. International financial management: Abridged, 8th ed. Eagan, MN: Thomson/
South-Western.
Martin, J. D., S. H. Cox, and R. D. MacMinn. 1988. The theory of finance: Evidence and 
applications. Chicago: Dryden Press.
Mayo, H. B. 1989. Finance: An introduction, 3rd ed. Chicago: Dryden Press.
Megginson, W. L., and S. B. Smart. 2006. Introduction to corporate finance. Mason, OH: 
Thomson/South-Western.
Melvin, M. 2000. International money and finance, 6th ed. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.
Moffett, M. H., A. I. Stonehill, and D. K. Eiteman. 2003. Fundamentals of multinational 
finance. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Moore, B. J. 1968. An introduction to the theory of finance: Asset holder behavior under 
uncertainty. New York: Free Press.
Moscato, D. R. 1980. Building financial decision-making models: An introduction to prin-
ciples and procedures. New York: Amacom.
Mossin, J. 1972. Theory of financial markets. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Mumey, G. A. 1969. Theory of financial structure. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston.
Paxson, D., and D. Wood. 1998. The Blackwell encyclopedic dictionary of finance. 
Malden: Blackwell.
Perry, P. R., and R. A. Brealey. 1996. Principles of corporate finance. New York: McGraw-Hill.
Reilly, R. F., and R. P. Schweihs. 1999. Handbook of advanced business valuation. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Riahi-Belkaoui, A. 2001. Evaluating capital projects. Westport, CT: Quorum.
Ronen, J., and S. Sadan. 1975. Corporate financial information for government decision mak-
ing: A research study and report prepared for the financial executives research foun-
dation. New York: Financial Executives Research Foundation.
Ross, S. A., R. Westerfield, and B. D. Jordan. 2006. Fundamentals of corporate finance, 7th 
ed. Boston: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Schwartz, E. 1962. Corporation finance. New York: St Martin’s Press.
Schwartzman, S. D., and R. E. Ball. 1977. Elements of financial analysis. New York: Van 
Nostrand Reinhold.
Shapiro, A. C. 2003. Multinational financial management, 7th ed. New York: Wiley.
Shefrin, H. 2005. A behavioral approach to asset pricing. Amsterdam: Elsevier Academic Press.
Shim, J. K., and J. G. Siegel. 1988. Handbook of financial analysis, forecasting & modeling. 
Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Shim, J. K., and J. G. Siegel. 2000. Financial management, 2nd ed. Hauppauge, NY: Barron’s.
Skousen, K. F., W. S. Albrecht, J. D. Stice, E. K. Stice, and M. R. Swain. 1999. Management 
accounting, 1st ed. Cincinnati, OH: South-Western.
Standfield, K. 2005. Intangible finance standards: Advances in fundamental analysis & tech-
nical analysis. Boston: Elsevier Academic Press.
Sutton, T. 2000. Corporate financial accounting and reporting. Harlow/Essex, UK: Prentice 
Hall/Financial Times.
Terry, B. J. 2000. The international handbook of corporate finance, 3rd ed. Chicago: Glenlake.
Thygerson, K. J. 1993. Financial markets and institutions: A managerial approach. New York: 
HarperCollins College Publishers.
Van Horne, J. C. 1966. Foundations for financial management; a book of readings. Homewood, 
IL: R.D. Irwin.
Viscione, J. A. 1977. Financial analysis: Principles and procedures. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
Walter, I. 2004. Mergers and acquisitions in banking and finance: What works, what fails, and 
why. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Weston, J. F., and S. C. Weaver. 2001. Mergers and acquisitions. New York: McGraw-Hill.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

43
3 Inventory Planning to 
Help the Environment
Maurice Bonney
University of Nottingham
Nottingham, United Kingdom
Contents
3.1	
Introduction, Context, and Problem Statement................................................44
3.1.1	 Introduction.........................................................................................44
3.1.2	 Context and Problem Statement..........................................................45
3.1.3	 The Structure of the Rest of This Chapter..........................................46
3.2	
A Conventional Inventory Context..................................................................47
3.2.1	 Reasons for Holding and Not Holding Inventory................................47
3.2.2	 The Logistics Chain.............................................................................49
3.2.3	 Conventional Inventory Analysis That Does Not Consider 
Environmental Factors.........................................................................50
3.2.4	 Designing an Inventory Control System.............................................. 51
3.2.5	 Summary.............................................................................................52
3.3	
An Environmental Context for Inventory........................................................53
3.3.1	 Inventory Systems Factors with Environmental Implications.............53
3.3.2	 The Inventory System Factors.............................................................54
3.3.2.1	 Product Design......................................................................54
3.3.2.2	 Process Design......................................................................54
3.3.2.3	 Product Manufacture............................................................54
3.3.2.4	 Relationship between Inventory and Transport....................55
3.3.2.5	 Alternative Products.............................................................56
3.3.2.6	 Relationship between Inventory and Obsolescence..............57
3.3.2.7	 Relationship between Inventory and Waste..........................58
3.3.2.8	 Relationship between Inventory and Packaging...................58
3.3.2.9	 Relationship between Inventory Systems 
and System-Induced Effects.................................................59
3.3.2.10	 Inventory and Its Storage......................................................60
3.3.3	 Major Risks Facing the Inventory Planning System...........................60
3.3.4	 Assessing the Environmental Effects of Inventory............................. 61
3.3.4.1	 Problem Avoidance and Problem Measurement................... 61
3.3.4.2	 Comparative Analysis...........................................................62
3.3.4.3	 Consequential Analysis.........................................................62
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

44	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
3.1	 Introduction, Context, and Problem Statement
3.1.1	 Introduction
Many people are concerned about the use of carbon-based energy sources, particu-
larly oil, and how this is affecting the world. They are also concerned about popula-
tion growth, people’s lifestyles, and the use and frequent misuse of limited resources 
by organizations. Creating energy by burning oil, coal, or gas releases greenhouse 
gases that are thought by most scientists to be a major cause of global warming that, 
among other things, could melt the polar ice cap, raise sea levels, and increase flood-
ing in many parts of the world. Disputes and wars arising from consequent shortages 
of land and water will probably increase.
Product design and packaging design are often environmentally poor. This can 
lead to excessive use of resources in manufacturing and might produce a product 
that uses too much packaging that ends up as landfill. Unsatisfactory production 
processes that produce waste and pollution are common.
In the light of energy shortages and the way that financial relationships are chang-
ing around the world, most current industrial and business policies will need to be 
regularly reexamined from a financial, environmental, and human point of view. 
Given the vast scale of the problems of global warming, resource shortages, and 
pollution, it is often asked how individuals and organizations can do something that 
is environmentally useful. The more focused questions that are asked in this chapter 
are whether and how inventory policies can help alleviate environmental problems. 
Can we create usable inventory systems that provide a good service but that are envi-
ronmentally better than current methods?
So far the effects of inventory planning on the environment have been little stud-
ied. As a result, much of the content of the chapter is conjectural. The conjectures 
are based on examining the relationships between inventory and the environment. 
3.3.4.4	 Adverse Effect Analysis (Modeling)....................................62
3.3.4.5	 Modeling...............................................................................63
3.3.5	 Metrics.................................................................................................63
3.4	
Amalgamating Inventory and Environmental Considerations........................64
3.4.1	 Dealing with Inventory and Environmental Interactions....................64
3.4.2	 Categories of Players Involved............................................................64
3.4.3	 Principles upon Which to Base Responsible Inventory Decisions......65
3.4.4	 Procedures for Choosing Actions........................................................66
3.4.5	 Could Metrics Be Used to Encourage Environmentally 
Better Actions?.....................................................................................67
3.4.6	 Examining and Improving Environmental Performance....................67
3.5	
Implications: Where Do We Go from Here?...................................................68
3.5.1	 General Discussion..............................................................................68
3.5.2	 Questions to Ask about Inventory.......................................................70
3.5.3	 Summary and Conclusions..................................................................71
References.................................................................................................................73
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
45
Then, how inventory planning could help to alleviate some of these environmental 
effects is considered. The proposals will be improved with experience in their use.
3.1.2	 Context and Problem Statement
Inventory is synonymous with stock, which is normally something tangible that can be 
physically stored. Properly managed stocks can satisfy many needs. They can provide 
organizational flexibility; they can act as a buffer between different input and output 
rates; and they can help to overcome or alleviate many problems and situations.
Inventory is generally part of a multiechelon supply chain. The dynamic response 
of an inventory system to the demand for its stock items is determined by the inven-
tory rules that are used together with the time that it takes to organize, manufac-
ture and transport items so as to replenish the stock. The consequent fluctuations in 
stocks and their flows, particularly in a multiechelon system, can be surprisingly dif-
ferent from what might be expected intuitively. However, although holding stock can 
have advantages, there are frequently disadvantages. Understandably, most inven-
tory analyses aim to choose inventory ordering rules that balance these advantages 
and disadvantages. Cost is the metric that is most used to analyze inventory prob-
lems, and traditional inventory analysis aims to minimize the total cost that arises 
from three sources: the cost of holding stock (surplus cost), the cost of ordering or 
getting ready to manufacture stock (ordering or setup cost), and the cost of running 
out of stock (shortage cost). It may be difficult to obtain realistic cost figures in many 
practical situations.
The potential environmental advantages and disadvantages associated with dif-
ferent inventory policies are examined later in this chapter. Unfortunately, it is 
usually even more difficult to associate a realistic cost to environmental conse-
quences than it is to assess the financial costs of inventory surpluses, ordering, and 
shortages that are used by the classical analysis. A realistic environmental analy-
sis, therefore, requires environmental metrics that may be used to assess, analyze, 
and determine inventory actions. Possible environmental metrics are discussed in 
Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
The discussion focuses on selecting policies for managing inventory that will 
accord with the needs of a greener world. Important inventory decisions include 
choosing which items to store, choosing and applying appropriate ordering rules, 
deciding where to locate stores, and organizing and operating the stores over the 
logistics chain. Applying inventory control methods locally to individual stock items 
or individual stores is unlikely to make a major environmental contribution by itself. 
However, a much greater contribution is possible if environmentally responsible 
inventory management is applied to the supply and distribution chains of products. 
This is because the decisions then include the locations of manufacturing plants and 
stores, which affect transportation requirements. There is also a need for appropriate 
transportation and communications infrastructures. Potentially these have important 
environmental implications, especially when considered within the current context 
of industrialization and globalization.
Industrialization and globalization are important because they have changed 
manufacturing locations and increased the distances between where goods are 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

46	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
produced and their markets. On the other hand, industrialization and globaliza-
tion have developed largely on the basis of cost that depends, according to the 
product, on labor and material costs, the availability of skills, production organi-
zation, and production technology. Locations have seldom been chosen because 
of environmental considerations, even though in many cases, globalization has 
led to more efficient production and to a redistribution of wealth between nations, 
both of which may be good. However, problems still arise that are similar to those 
that occurred during the Industrial Revolution. These problems include pollution 
and the exploitation of industrial workers. Therefore, the question is not whether 
globalization is good or bad, but under what conditions is globalization good and 
when is it less good. Taking account of environmental effects and factors, such as 
how individuals and communities will be affected, the questions that need asking 
include:
What locations should be chosen for manufacturing and for storage?
• 
How should items be distributed?
• 
What rules or incentives should be applied to ensure that the production 
• 
methods used are ethical and that the decisions that are being made are 
environmentally responsible?
However, even when there are convincing arguments for or against globaliza-
tion and new specific locations for the stores and manufacturing plants have been 
proposed and accepted in principle, the changes will require investment and time to 
plan. Behavior will not change overnight.
Stocks are diverse and will be found in many fields, such as retailing, manu-
facturing, medical, or military organizations. Within each group, many different 
products and demands will be found but, because different stocks have different 
advantages and costs and present different environmental hazards, it is unlikely 
that the same environmental strategies will be equally applicable to all items. 
For example, the financial and environmental costs of transporting heavy items 
are likely to be greater than for lighter items. For these reasons it is desirable to 
provide some general principles upon which to base environmentally responsible 
inventory strategies.
3.1.3	 The Structure of the Rest of This Chapter
Some general problems have been outlined and it has been suggested that it is impor-
tant to consider environmental factors when formulating inventory policies.
The rest of this chapter examines whether inventory planning in the broadest 
sense (i.e., including locating stores and factories, controlling stocks in stores, con-
trolling production levels, etc.) can be made more environmentally responsible. 
Some general ideas about inventory are discussed in Section 3.2. In Section 3.3 the 
environment is considered, and then in Section 3.4 inventory and the environment 
are considered together. Finally, at the end of the chapter, the discussion in Section 
3.5 considers some of the wider interaction issues and presents some tentative con-
clusions and proposals.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
47
3.2	 A Conventional Inventory Context
3.2.1	 Reasons for Holding and Not Holding Inventory
A useful operational statement of the inventory problem is to decide when and how 
much of each stock item to order. The objective is usually to balance the advantages 
and the disadvantages of holding that stock. In most inventory situations, these when 
and how much decisions are embedded within a system that ensures that they are 
implemented and the system used. An inventory system thus includes procedures for 
record keeping, ordering, receiving, storing, issuing, and dispatching. The ordering 
decisions may be strongly linked to the manufacturing procedures, especially if the 
system emphasis is on making for stock as opposed to making to order. Inventory 
also has important financial implications. Inventory systems, therefore, need to link 
with the budgeting and financial control systems and how much stock should be held 
as raw material, in process, as finished products, and in transit. These ideas are now 
elaborated.
The main decisions associated with holding stock are to:
Determine which items to stock
• 
Determine where the stock should be held
• 
Choose the inventory control systems
• 
Obtain and equip appropriate storage facilities
• 
Install the proposed inventory control system
• 
Implement and operate the inventory control systems that include proce-
• 
dures for obtaining and controlling the stock
Specific operational activities that exist within the chosen inventory control sys-
tem are to:
Record stock transactions
• 
Maintain appropriate records
• 
Review stock levels at appropriate times
• 
Order and receive the stock
• 
Store the stock securely in appropriate conditions (temperature, humidity, 
• 
etc.)
Dispose of the stock by using it, selling it, dispatching it, or scrapping it 
• 
as appropriate
Perform the necessary administrative activities such as paying suppliers, 
• 
invoicing customers, stock checking, and so forth
The factors encouraging stock to be held are:
Ordering: Placing an order incurs costs (including the administrative cost 
• 
of ordering, the physical cost of receiving and accepting items, and pos-
sibly the cost of packing and transporting items). Ordering is often a fixed 
charge that may be spread over the quantity of items purchased. Thus, the 
order cost per unit purchased reduces as the quantity purchased increases. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

48	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Also, there may be discounts for buying items in larger quantities, further 
reducing the unit cost. Similarly, unit manufacturing costs are reduced if 
items are made in quantity and the setup cost per batch is spread over each 
unit of the complete batch. The unit cost of an item, therefore, usually 
reduces as the purchase or manufacturing quantity increases; this encour-
ages buying in larger quantities and thus having higher average stock.
Stock availability provides flexibility because items are available for 
• 
immediate use rather than needing to wait for an order to be made and for 
a delivery to arrive. Hence, availability provides flexibility to a company, 
and reduces the occurrence of shortages and the consequential organi-
zational problems. This is especially true for long-delivery-time items, 
because it may take a long time before additional items could become 
available. Stock may also be held to meet random fluctuations in demand, 
to smooth seasonal fluctuations in demand and supply, and to allow deliv-
ery and issue quantities to be different.
On the other hand, holding stock is discouraged because:
Holding stock implies that more working capital will be needed.
• 
Having and operating a store requires renting or purchasing premises, pay-
• 
ing for insurance, staff, energy, equipment, racking, and so forth. Usually 
the more stock that is held, the higher the costs.
Stored stock may suffer obsolescence, deterioration, damage, and pilferage.
• 
Having stock can mask problems that would otherwise be identified and 
• 
possibly eliminated.
The last reason and other disadvantages, such as the possibility of stock being left 
over when demand falls, encourage the use of just-in-time (JIT) methods for items 
with certain demand characteristics. JIT aims to receive items just before they are 
needed rather than having the items available just in case. JIT is usually considered 
to be a demand pull system that emphasizes that inventory is waste and suggests that 
stock can mask problems such as long setup times, poor quality, unreliable equip-
ment, and unreliable delivery.
If the inventory system operates in very uncertain conditions, the system needs 
to be designed accordingly. If the uncertainty arises because of poor quality sup-
plies and uncertain timing of deliveries, the problems can be overcome progressively 
because they are repetitive organizational problems. This then changes the emphasis 
from holding stock to protect against the uncertainty to eliminating the problems. If 
that can be done, the need for stock is reduced and the result can become effective 
JIT; that is, a steady flow of items through the supply and distribution chain that 
arrive at the required location at the required time without accumulating items at 
intermediate locations. JIT descriptions frequently suggest the need to develop a net-
work of suppliers that are located geographically close to the user so that deliveries 
can be made rapidly. Similarly, reducing long setup times allows items to be made 
economically in smaller quantities and so speeds up the organization’s response. The 
quicker the response and the better the quality of the parts, the easier it becomes to 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
49
base manufacturing quantities on real demand, and the closer the system comes to 
truly being a demand pull system. Nevertheless, JIT will be unsatisfactory in many 
situations, particularly where there is a lot of uncertainty, for example, with long 
lead-time items with irregular demand and where demand responds to visibility, as 
in retailing. Stocks will be necessary then, even if JIT is used in other parts of the 
logistics chain.
Uncertainty can arise in a particularly acute form in disaster situations, such 
as those posed by tsunamis and earthquakes; military conflict zones, particularly 
civil wars with associated refugee problems; new medical conditions, such as epi-
demics; and so forth. All of these are inherently difficult to anticipate and stocks 
are needed so as to be able to quickly respond. However, because of so much 
uncertainty, JIT as described is inappropriate. Indeed, planning for disasters may 
require the use of entirely new inventory paradigms. These will not be discussed 
further here.
The discussion now considers the more common stock situations and examines 
the different stages in the logistics chain. These stages identify where stocks may 
exist. The discussion then considers some simple traditional inventory analysis. 
Environmental analysis is deferred until Sections 3.3 and 3.4.
3.2.2	 The Logistics Chain
The logistics chain for stock items is taken to include material supply, manufacture, 
product storage, and product dispatch for customer use. Thus, within a logistics sys-
tem the main stages for manufactured items include: mining the minerals (e.g., coal 
and iron ore); converting the mined material into raw material (e.g., steel); making 
piece parts; assembling these parts into finished products (this may require con-
structing several levels of intermediate subassemblies); testing the products; pack-
aging the products; distributing the items to warehouses and other storage areas, 
wholesalers, and retailers; selling the goods; and sending them to the eventual 
users. From the environmental point of view, particular interests focus on how the 
product is produced; how it is used; and, after use, what actions are taken to ensure 
that the items are appropriately scrapped, reused, or recycled. Product design, pro-
cess design, and manufacturing system design have an important influence on most 
of these steps. Additionally, there will be transportation between the different loca-
tions within the chain, and there may be storage at the receiving and dispatch areas 
of any location. Emphasis on the total system is important from an environmental 
point of view.
In practical terms, the use of specific suppliers for some items may be, at least 
in the short term, almost inevitable because of material and skill availability. For 
example, the location of mines or specific manufacturing skills or overriding eco-
nomic factors may mean that it is much cheaper and more effective to transport 
goods large distances than to produce them locally. An extreme example of this is 
the growth of crystals in space where quality conditions may justify additional cost. 
More prosaically, there have been some circumstances in recent years where it has 
been cheaper to buy completed products from China than to purchase the material 
to make the items elsewhere.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

50	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
3.2.3	 Conventional Inventory Analysis That Does 
Not Consider Environmental Factors
Some simple inventory rules that do not consider environmental factors will now be 
discussed. The simplest inventory control models consider inventory flows into and 
out of a single stock location. The inventory control rules respond to the demands for 
the item by eventually creating a replenishment order. However, if the replenishment 
or manufacturing lead time is longer than the available demand knowledge, it will 
become necessary to forecast the demand and to start manufacturing to meet the 
anticipated forecast demand.
In principle, stocks could be held before and after each stage and operation within 
the manufacturing cycle. Additionally, process stock may accumulate at each opera-
tion and some of this may be transferred onto the next stage or operation. Thus 
stocks may be in transit between each operation. The same principle applies to the 
complete logistics chain for a product that could include many raw materials sup-
pliers, multilevels of assembly, and products that are dispatched to many customers 
or warehouses.
Probably the simplest inventory control model is the continuous review inventory 
control system; that is, the stock is reviewed after every transaction. If it is assumed 
that the demand is uniform, that there are no stockouts, and that the lead time (L) is 
fixed with delivery occurring just as the stock is about to run out, then it is clear that 
the system repeats itself and there are no shortages. In this case it is straightforward 
to derive the reorder level (ROL), s, and the reorder quantity (ROQ), q, that minimize 
the total cost of the operation. For example, if the ordering cost and surplus cost are 
known, then the optimal value for the reorder quantity, q, may be calculated using 
the Wilson lot size formula:
	
q
Ar
h
=
2
	
(3.1)
where A is the order cost, r is the demand rate, and h is the holding cost per unit per 
unit of time. The value of the reorder level is s = Lr, where L is the lead time.
A slightly more realistic situation occurs when the demand exhibits variability 
about a constant mean. The reorder levels and reorder quantities can be derived more 
or less as before, but now, because of the variability, each cycle of the system will be 
different and a safety stock is needed to provide protection against the random varia-
tion of the demand. In this case the classical analysis balances the cost of satisfying 
a proportion of the demands (by holding safety stock) against the cost of shortages. 
The performance is a statistical measure that on average the system will aim to sat-
isfy, say, 95 percent of individual demands.
Inventory problems are somewhat greater when there is more than one stage 
in the logistics chain, which of course is the usual situation. Interestingly, rules 
that appear sensible for a single stock location may amplify demand when 
applied to a process with two or more stages. Indeed, as a system becomes 
more complex, the dynamic system performance may start to exhibit unexpected 
characteristics. For example, in a simple two-stage process where each stage 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
51
uses the simple EOQ model, the batch size representing the demand gets pro-
gressively amplified.
It is common to combine inventory control rules with demand forecasting rules 
if it is considered likely that the mean demand will change with time. The rules for 
forecasting demand, for planning and controlling manufacture, and for planning and 
controlling inventory depend on the product and the nature of the market demand. 
If the demand changes rapidly, there is a need to identify trends, seasonality, and 
so forth, and build these into the forecasting system. A frequently used demand 
forecasting system that adjusts well to (not too rapid) demand changes with some 
randomness is the exponential smoothing system. Whatever rules are chosen, the 
rules, together with the lead times, respond differently to the demand that the system 
is trying to satisfy. In other words the dynamic performance of systems is affected 
by the use of different forecasting systems and different inventory control rules that 
determine when and how much to order. The response is also affected by data such 
as different lead times and different demands.
Many models have been analyzed (e.g., see Chikán [1990]). These models corre-
spond to the consideration of many different factors and different statistical distribu-
tions of demand. Each model is of course a simplification of reality and considers 
only a limited number of the possible variables that face an inventory control system 
designer. A fuller description of inventory control and its many rules will be found 
in standard texts, such as Silver et al. (1998).
3.2.4	 Designing an Inventory Control System
An important problem is to decide what inventory control system should be chosen so 
as to respond appropriately when the system is subject to various types of demand.
In the context of this chapter we want to choose inventory control rules that are 
workable, have satisfactory dynamic performance, and also give good environmental 
performance. We want to provide good and consistent service and we want to ensure 
that holding stock is a good investment. Among other things, we need to determine 
the inventory parameters such as the reorder levels and reorder quantities, and the 
performance of the inventory control system over time. If we wish to make and 
maintain complex products such as automobiles and aircraft and their subsystems, it 
is essential to use systematic inventory planning. This is often achieved within a con-
text that is based on material requirements planning (MRP) or enterprise resource 
planning (ERP).
Fluctuations in stock levels and in production levels can lead to shortages, rush 
orders, or surplus stock, each of which has economic and environmental implica-
tions that need to be better understood.
Among the key questions that need to be answered about the inventory planning 
system include:
Are products to be made to order or for stock? The answer to this is largely 
• 
determined by the delivery lead time required by the market and the man-
ufacturing lead time of the suppliers. If the delivery lead time required 
by the market is less than the manufacturing lead time, then it will be 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

52	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
necessary to hold stock. For example, if the manufacturing lead time is 
twelve weeks and the required customer lead time is four weeks, there is 
a need to start manufacturing in anticipation of future sales, and in this 
case to have eight weeks of stock in the pipeline. This obviously needs to 
be based on a forecast of customer demand and it implies that there will 
be stock held at various stages in the production sequence. Stocks held 
at different stages of the logistic chain allow appropriate service to be 
provided. If the forecast of what is a week’s stock is incorrect or demand 
subsequently changes, there will be either a shortage or a surplus. For 
example, if the demand increases above the forecast then the consequence 
could be a decline in the planned service, whereas if the demand falls that 
could leave surplus stock.
What rules should be used for controlling the stock? These will include 
• 
any rules for forecasting, rules to determine when and how much to order, 
and rules for controlling production.
Where should the stores and depots be located?
• 
Where should the items be made or bought?
• 
To design a logistics planning and control system that has the desired least cost 
performance is difficult, but once the system is installed, observation and measure-
ment can identify specific instances of the problems that could arise. However, to be 
more systematic, mathematical and simulation models of the possible inventory sys-
tems could be constructed and used to evaluate the performance of a proposed system 
before the system is installed. Specifically, the response of the proposed system could 
be tested by putting both typical and unusual demands into the system model. Such 
tests could include checking the response to increased or reduced demand, checking 
the effect of occasional large orders, checking the effect of deliveries that arrive late 
or are of poor quality, and so on. Examining such instances encourages users to plan 
contingency responses to potential situations. This analysis should be extensive and 
may be quite time consuming for A and B items that would be chosen by using the 
well-known Pareto analysis (ABC analysis) i.e. high and medium usage-value.
3.2.5	 Summary
Section 3.2.4 indicated the type of information (essentially the demand, the stock 
level, the costs, and the time that it takes to transport and manufacture items) and 
decisions that are required to define a traditional inventory control system. The meth-
ods could be chosen based on rules of thumb, mathematical analysis, and simulation 
possibly combined with local expertise that takes account of local conditions and the 
expertise and experience of the current operators. In other words, there are many 
advantages in combining mathematical analysis, simulation analysis, and practical 
studies together in a mutually supportive manner when examining the performance 
of traditional inventory systems.
As we shall see later, because of the need for agreed performance measures, and 
because the environmental timescale is unlikely to coincide with the operational 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
53
activities of the inventory system, it is even more difficult to measure the environ-
mental performance of an inventory system. Therefore, when designing the more 
complex environmental inventory systems, it is even more desirable to use a combi-
nation of modeling techniques to investigate the outcomes.
3.3	 An Environmental Context for Inventory
3.3.1	 Inventory Systems Factors with Environmental Implications
Section 3.2 presented a broad statement of the inventory control problem and out-
lined some simple traditional inventory control methods. The discussion now consid-
ers individual logistic factors that potentially have positive or negative environmental 
implications and how they may interact with inventory decisions. The aim is to see 
whether this knowledge can help us design inventory systems that take account of 
environmental implications. Although it is environmentally very important to con-
sider how a product (e.g., a car) is used, this is not considered here because it is not 
under the control of the inventory planner.
The discussion considers the operation of the logistics system and the steps 
involved in the lifecycle of the product including product production. Some of the 
factors that interrelate with inventory systems and that have environmental implica-
tions are:
Product design
• 
Process design
• 
Product manufacture
• 
Transport
• 
Alternative products
• 
Obsolescence
• 
Waste
• 
Packaging
• 
System induced effects
• 
Inventory storage
• 
Bonney et al. (2000) discussed the product introduction process, which was taken 
to include product design and process design, together with the manufacturing sys-
tems design that is needed to control the production. The manufacturing systems 
design included plant layout and design, and facility design and evaluation. Bonney 
et al. suggested that an extended concurrent engineering (sometimes called a con-
current enterprise) viewpoint could help to coordinate these different stages of the 
product life cycle.
The listed inventory systems factors, including the product introduction steps in 
the product lifecycle, are now considered. After considering these individual fac-
tors, the chapter proposes metrics to measure them and it then examines them to 
see whether they could form the basis for investigating the environmental effects of 
inventory and encouraging greener activities.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

54	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
3.3.2	 The Inventory System Factors
3.3.2.1	 Product Design
Product design is probably the most important step in determining how resources 
will be used. Product design aims to create a product that will satisfy the market 
requirements in terms of function, quality, cost, and time. Product design—aided 
by appropriate tools such as value analysis, value engineering, standardization, and 
so forth—determines the materials used and the tolerances; in other words, how the 
product will be made and the product cost. Specifically, value analysis and value 
engineering may provide a helpful basis for simplifying the product, minimizing the 
number of parts in a product, and minimizing the environmental implications. It is 
advantageous to build all of the planned requirements into the product at the design 
stage rather than attempting to modify designs later. How design relates to manufac-
ture is discussed next.
3.3.2.2	 Process Design
Process design involves the use of standard parts (whenever possible), the choice 
of materials, the choice of machines and the processes used, jigs and fixtures, labor 
requirements, workplace design, and so forth. Designing for manufacture can be used 
to minimize the environmental impact of the production processes that are needed.
3.3.2.3	 Product Manufacture
Product production is particularly important from the environmental point of view. 
A manufacturing organization aims to convert materials into products efficiently and 
then to distribute the products to customers and storage locations appropriately. The 
efficiency of the product production is largely determined by:
The product design
• 
The process design
• 
The design of the manufacturing system that makes the product. This 
• 
manufacturing system includes planning the material flow, choosing the 
planning and control methods including production and inventory control, 
quality control and financial control, the availability of appropriate stocks 
and resources to meet the demand, the organization used to achieve the con-
version of materials into products, and the methods of operational control.
For products that are to be made for stock, the production/order requirements 
for products, assemblies, parts, and material will be determined by using demand 
forecasts, the current levels of stock, the inventory control rules, and the production 
planning rules. For production that is made to order, inventory may rise as a result 
of changes to production quantities. In both situations stocks of materials and parts 
may be held for the reasons mentioned earlier and these may also be used to help to 
reduce delivery lead times. Environmental effects result from: the planning process, 
changes in demand during manufacture particularly at the start and at the end of a 
product’s life, the efficiency of the production processes, the scrap and waste that 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
55
are created, and the pollution that occurs during production. Changes in the physical 
quality and times achieved may lead to over- or underachievement of programs, 
quality targets, and so forth, and these may have environmental implications.
3.3.2.4	 Relationship between Inventory and Transport
In the early years of the Industrial Revolution, goods were usually produced close 
to the source of the essential resources such as iron and coal. The finished goods 
were then transported to the markets. However, spinning and weaving in the tex-
tile industry in the United Kingdom were greatly influenced by climatic conditions; 
for example, damp conditions in Lancashire for spinning and drier conditions in 
Yorkshire for weaving. Later, materials such as coal and iron ore were brought to 
where the skills and the infrastructure of roads, canals, railways, and distribution 
systems were located.
Nowadays, the location chosen for production is more likely to be dependent 
on the perceived total cost of production, including labor costs, the availability or 
potential availability of skills and the education and training level of the workforce, 
and the available support infrastructure, which includes transport and communi-
cation systems. Also important is the willingness of the community, government, 
and people of the area to accept the production facilities and associated infrastruc-
ture, including possibly detrimental environmental consequences. Many developing 
countries will use potential employment opportunities as an excuse to develop their 
national infrastructure of roads, railways, and ports (sea and air).
Reasons for transporting goods include:
Production efficiency—It may be more efficient to manufacture large 
• 
quantities in one location and then transport the items to where they 
are required rather than transport the materials to near where they are 
required and then manufacture in smaller quantities locally.
Skill—It may not be possible to obtain the required skills locally.
• 
Environmental—It may be better to refine things before sending rather 
• 
than after because items will then be lighter and the transport volume and 
cost may be less. It may also be easier to reuse any waste such as offcuts 
and other scrap metal by reprocessing it at the source.
Cost—Despite goods traveling greater distances, the sum of the travel 
• 
and manufacturing costs may be lower because of lower labor costs or 
lower material costs. However, sometimes the apparent lower costs may be 
based on using accounting methods that do not take into account the full 
cost of travel or the effect on local communities. This chapter specifically 
argues that the travel costs that are used should include environmental 
costs. Currently, for reasons already outlined, it is highly unlikely that the 
company concerned will take account of the environmental effects of the 
travel.
Climatic—Sometimes processing may be easier in a warmer than in a 
• 
colder climate and vice versa. Specifically, the climate also may affect the 
energy costs associated with production and storage.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

56	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Quality—It may be possible to have fewer spinning faults in a damp cli-
• 
mate. Another example is that better quality fruit may be available for can-
ning or freezing if the processing factory is close to the growing areas.
Holding stock at a specific place implies that there will be travel involved in taking 
items to and bringing items from that location. Different locations will have different 
associated financial and environmental costs, and, therefore, there is a need to choose 
appropriate stock locations and suppliers to minimize the total environmental (travel 
and infrastructure) costs. With this as an objective, there may be an advantage to 
restrict sales from a particular source to specifically defined geographical areas. This 
may become a rigid company policy or one that is encouraged by appropriate pricing 
so that environmental and organizational costs are minimized. For example, reducing 
travel would be encouraged by companies having a green tariff that charges reduced 
rates for local deliveries by being part of a regular schedule, and charges premium 
rates for longer distances, urgent deliveries, and environmentally damaging travel.
With retailing, there will be less customer travel if the shop is close to the com-
munity that it serves. On the other hand, large out-of-town supermarkets necessarily 
generate travel, and current supermarket locations are frequently based on where 
large sites are available, the cost of land/rent, and so forth. When shops are located 
in city centers, much inconvenience arises from congestion, parking, and so on. With 
distribution centers there is the need to choose the location and also decide whether 
to have multiple distribution centers or a single center. Internet and mail-order retail-
ing and the method of delivery that is used also affect the environmental costs of 
collecting and delivery.
Analogously, if local production is encouraged, the amount of travel that is 
required is reduced. With perishable items such as food, there may be additional 
advantages such as improved quality. Marketing now likes to highlight when some-
thing has been locally sourced as this plays on local loyalties and implied quality. 
On the other hand, reduced dependence on local sources and local manufacture by 
using sources that are farther away implies greater transportation of goods and, in 
general, longer delivery times.
Specific situations to be avoided include when similar products are sent in similar 
quantities between different areas or countries, for example, bottled water between 
different countries. Except in times of humanitarian disaster, bottled water almost 
universally is considered environmentally bad because of its production methods, 
its packaging, and its transport. However, a major deterrent to reducing this trade is 
the very clever marketing that means that many people now perceive bottled water 
to be of better quality than tap water. Also, selling bottled water is highly profitable. 
This raises the question whether rules designed to encourage environmentally good 
actions would be considered to be an infringement of individual freedom or a con-
straint of trade placed on restaurateurs.
3.3.2.5	 Alternative Products
Alternative products are available in many consumer and industrial situations. Some 
of these items may have a much lower environmental cost than others but are of 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
57
similar functionality. Their use should be encouraged and information about such 
situations should be available so that designers and users can make informed judg-
ments. However, with food products, in addition to the local sourcing issue discussed 
earlier, there are also many products whose withdrawal could have positive health 
benefits. It can be seen that if this information was formalized into environmen-
tal rules, then this would overspill into actions that would affect commercial deci-
sions and personal choices and achieve little except resistance to the idea of external 
involvement. Again there is the potential to affect freedom of choice, and care needs 
to be taken in such situations.
3.3.2.6	 Relationship between Inventory and Obsolescence
Obsolescence is a stage in the product life cycle when, for whatever reason, the 
end of the product life is about to arrive. The time when this occurs depends on 
the perishability of the product, fashion, the dynamics of the market, external 
influences such as technological changes (design methods, rapid prototyping, etc.) 
and material changes (such as the availability of different colors, textures, and 
strengths of new materials), health and safety requirements, environmental influ-
ences creating change, and the economic trade-off between reusing or throwing 
away items.
A difficult problem is to decide whether an item should be scrapped rather than refur-
bished, particularly when the performance of a refurbished machine may be poorer in 
terms of productivity, environmental effects, and so forth. A new machine could have 
lower energy consumption, more precise operations, and produce less waste.
Obsolescent stock is the set of items that is still usable but exists unused at the 
stockists at the end of the product life cycle. The disposal of this remaining stock 
may itself have an environmental cost. The stock levels at the time when a product 
model changes need to be planned and controlled so that they are appropriate to 
the costs and risks that their shortage or surplus incur. It may be also possible to 
use some excess stock for spare parts, but ideally spare parts provisioning should 
be planned as part of the transition procedures. Generally, the sales potential of 
obsolescent stock declines rapidly as a new model becomes accepted, particularly if 
there has been a major technological improvement or fashion change. Influences on 
obsolescence include:
In general, the longer that stocks are held, the more difficult will it become 
• 
to sell the items.
Imbalance in the stocks that are held; for example, if there are more right-
• 
handed than left-handed items available and the items are normally sold 
in matched pairs, it is likely that stocks will be leftover and some items 
will need to be scrapped.
Technological improvements
• 
Fashion changes
• 
Potential obsolescence is a major reason why retailers have sales, particularly of 
seasonal or fashion items such as clothing; a reason why car producers sometimes 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

58	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
produce special edition models that include more extras than normal; and so forth. 
In situations where items cannot be sold, often because of a complete change in 
the fashion or technology, then the leftover products may need to be scrapped and 
become part of waste (see the next section).
3.3.2.7	 Relationship between Inventory and Waste
Waste is somewhat more general than obsolescence and is affected by the perish-
ability of the product. Waste can arise from incorrect ordering, items that have been 
damaged in store, or items that have corroded or perished because of poor storage 
or packaging. Waste also occurs when, to a specific user, the effort to recycle or 
use for another purpose is perceived to be uneconomic. Examples of this arise 
with builders whose wood scraps or small quantities of items are leftover from the 
immediate job in hand. Much food is wasted because of being left unused for too 
long. At the end of a day, cooked food in restaurants is often scrapped for health 
and safety reasons.
In many circumstances waste can be reduced by creating appropriate storage con-
ditions, for example, by controlling temperature and humidity. This might include 
refrigerating or freezing items to extend their life. Such improved storage can 
allow items such as fruit to be available year round. Influences that increase waste 
include:
Items becoming damaged
• 
Deterioration of the items
• 
Obsolescence of the stock held
• 
Poor organization either by the supplier or the potential user
• 
3.3.2.8	 Relationship between Inventory and Packaging
Packaging is often required to protect or handle a product and so it is linked to 
product design. Packaging is commonly required to reduce damage in transit or pro-
vide security against theft. Eventually, this packaging usually becomes waste. For 
this reason, there have been attempts to make packaging recyclable and to place the 
responsibility for the cost of its disposal on to the producer of the goods who chooses 
to use the packaging; the additional cost should encourage designers to make more 
effort with their packaging design. Another example is the use of plastic bags for 
convenience of carrying or for marketing. A recent consumer-led initiative to reduce 
the use of plastic bags (some UK supermarkets probably encouraged the initiative for 
environmental and cost reasons) provided incentives for customers to use their own 
bags or to recycle the old. Another approach that has been adopted by some organi-
zations is to charge for the use of bags.
Ways to reduce packaging requirements include:
Design products to minimize packaging
• 
Build some of the packaging function into the product
• 
Design the packaging so as to minimize environmental impact, for exam-
• 
ple, by using recyclable or biodegradable packaging
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
59
Use multifunction packaging so that it becomes part of the labeling and 
• 
product selling function, for example, on the cans of drinks
Design packaging that can be reused or used for other purposes
• 
3.3.2.9	 Relationship between Inventory Systems 
and System-Induced Effects
It was commented earlier in the chapter that system-induced fluctuations in stock 
levels can result from applying the inventory control rules. This section outlines how 
this occurs.
There is a great deal of knowledge about how to analyze the performance of 
control systems, particularly those based on electrical, electronic, and mechanical 
components. Without this knowledge, the performance of automobiles, aircraft, and 
much military equipment (including radar systems and missiles) would be poorer. 
The basic principle of a control system (also known as a servomechanism or as an 
error-actuated feedback device) is that the difference between the desired and actual 
performance of the system at any time is used as a signal to change appropriately 
whatever is being controlled. Simple examples of control systems are the tempera-
ture of a room being controlled by a thermostat, the distance from a target or the 
angle off from the target being used to control the path and response of a missile, or 
the depression of a spring that may, among other things, help to stabilize the suspen-
sion of a car. The behavior of a physical control system is frequently represented by 
means of differential equations. Analysis of the system representation can show the 
dynamic performance of the system including the transients, overshoots, and steady-
state solutions. Many management control systems use the same principle of having 
a performance target (e.g., the desired quality in a quality control system, a standard 
cost in a budgetary control system, the planned inventory in an inventory control 
system, or the required production quantity in a production control system) against 
which achievements are monitored and used to adjust actions.
The major differences between management control systems and hardware sys-
tems are that management control systems may be less predictable because some of 
the system components are people who may have motivations that are not necessar-
ily in complete accord with the system designers; indeed, these people are likely to 
display intelligence and variability and they may be motivated by information pro-
vided by the system. Another difference is that the controllers of management sys-
tems are usually progressively trying to improve the system performance. However, 
despite this, control system ideas have been used by many investigators to analyze 
and design management systems so that they will have the desired performance. 
Tools that have been used include Laplace transform methods, z-transform methods, 
modern control theory, and, of course, simulation.
Work of interest in this area includes Forrester’s (1961) work on what he calls 
industrial dynamics. Meadows et al. (2004) examined what would happen to the 
world’s resources if the then-current policies continued. Work relevant to production 
and inventory control include Laplace and z-transform methods. Work that uses con-
trol theoretic models applied to the logistics area includes Towill’s (1982) continuous 
models, particularly of inventory and logistics systems; Grubbström and Molinder’s 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

60	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
(1996) analysis of matrix representations of material requirements planning (MRP) 
models using Laplace transform methods; and Popplewell and Bonney’s (1987) 
analysis of production, inventory, and forecasting systems using z-transform discrete 
models to represent systems that are planned on a periodic basis. More recently 
Dejonckheere et al. (2003) used the approach to study the bullwhip effect.
Many of these studies show that different rules used for controlling inventory 
and production levels in a logistics chain can lead to fluctuation in the material held 
and in the production levels, and that this can lead to potential waste. However, 
good design can reduce the amount of variability and create stable systems that have 
“appropriate” performance.
3.3.2.10	 Inventory and Its Storage
This is largely an architectural problem. There is a need to produce a functional 
building that is well insulated, easily accessible, matches the road infrastructure so 
that any extra traffic generated by operators and deliveries is appropriate for the loca-
tion, and so forth. It is desirable that the building is designed to minimize the amount 
of power and resource involved in constructing and operating the stores, and the size 
is influenced by the levels of stock required. Delivery frequency affects the traffic 
volume, and, as discussed separately, the relative locations of the different parts of 
the logistics chain can change the amount of transportation required.
3.3.3	 Major Risks Facing the Inventory Planning System
Major risks associated with inventory items arise in the following situations:
At start-up, because lack of knowledge makes it difficult to forecast cus-
• 
tomer demand. As a result there can be too much or too little stock and too 
much or insufficient capacity to manufacture the items.
When major changes are needed to the product, for example, for market-
• 
ing, technological, or safety reasons. The effect could be that an organiza-
tion is left with a lot of obsolescent stock.
The dynamic effects of the inventory system can create surpluses and 
• 
shortages. Shortages may require taking rush remedial action, for exam-
ple, a priority delivery that may need an additional journey that uses extra 
energy.
Close down procedures may leave too much or too little stock, again with 
• 
the danger of leaving obsolescent stock or needing rush remedial actions.
Major changes in the demand characteristics such as trends or steps in 
• 
demand.
Data uncertainty, particularly with costs, environmental metrics, and lead-
• 
time data. Manufacture and material-supply lead times are not necessarily 
constant and this may lead to surpluses or shortage of stock and require 
the kind of remedial actions already mentioned.
Other risks (and opportunities) arise from noninventory events. For example, natu-
ral occurrences such as floods and adverse weather conditions could affect transport 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
61
availability. External technological changes, including computing and communica-
tion changes and improved quality of data, might improve the functioning of the 
operational inventory control system. The inventory system will need to respond to 
any changes.
3.3.4	 Assessing the Environmental Effects of Inventory
To understand the relationship between inventory and the environment better, there 
is a need to be able to measure the environmental performance of the total system. 
In other words, system performance should be expressed in terms of an environmen-
tal cost, which includes the effects of producing, storing, transporting, using, and 
scrapping the product considered over the complete product life cycle and the whole 
logistics chain. This could be described as life-cycle environmental costing.
Much work is needed to develop appropriate metrics. To date most organizations 
have made very little assessment of the environmental impact of holding inventory 
because, other than broad measures like the carbon footprint, there is little agree-
ment about environmental performance metrics. On the other hand, if metrics (here-
after called the environmental cost) that estimate the environmental impact could be 
produced and agreed upon, then almost certainly models similar to the classic inven-
tory models could be developed and used. Indeed, whenever there are trade-offs and 
appropriate information can be obtained, it should be possible to rework the standard 
inventory analyses to minimize the metric representing the environmental costs. To 
measure system performance, simulation models could consider the effects, say, of 
different levels of energy use or of transport use.
Some suggested approaches related to potential problems are listed in a sequence 
that roughly relates to progressively improved environmental understanding:
Problem avoidance and problem measurement
• 
Comparative analysis
• 
Consequential analysis
• 
Adverse effects analysis
• 
Modeling
• 
Each is briefly discussed next.
3.3.4.1	 Problem Avoidance and Problem Measurement
Problem avoidance and problem measurement assumes that, other things being 
equal, it is sensible to reduce activities that potentially have adverse environmental 
effects. Thus, specific aims of the proposed changes could be to:
Reduce the use of resources, for example, of minerals and energy.
• 
Reduce the production of effluent, for example, by using different pro-
• 
cesses, better filtering, better work procedures, and so forth.
Avoid the use of toxic materials. If toxic materials are found to be present, 
• 
then as soon as is practicable, use procedures to alert their presence with 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

62	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
possible recall. If necessary, these procedures should be international and 
any cover-up must be avoided.
Choose manufacturing and stores locations that help to minimize travel.
• 
As far as possible, reduce the environmental implications of transporting 
• 
goods from the known stores’ locations (e.g., use routing and scheduling 
activities to reduce the distance traveled, choose appropriate modes of 
transportation, etc.).
Produce products in a way that will minimize environmental penalties in 
• 
production, when used, or when modified or scrapped at the end of their life. 
This may require planning for refurbishment and disassembly, minimizing 
unnecessary processing and waste of all kinds, and producing products 
using efficient methods that work well and produce goods of quality.
Treat items appropriately so that they are not damaged in the stores.
• 
Avoid spills.
• 
Avoid dumping.
• 
Many of these items could be monitored or fully recorded, and this could later 
become the basis for more detailed actions. For example, moving through the afore-
mentioned list, one could measure the energy expended by metering, one could check 
the quality of effluent, and the number of journeys undertaken could be recorded, as 
could the fuel consumed. Some of these points are developed further later.
3.3.4.2	 Comparative Analysis
The data from the previous section shows what the system is doing and whether it is 
improving. With comparative analysis, the aim is to take this further.
Comparative analysis compares the effects of varying the main factors for the pro-
posals under consideration (such as the locations of manufacture, travel method, plan-
ning methods, etc.) on the full logistics chain. Possible performance measures could 
include the consequences such as cost, quality, travel distances, the time that it will 
take to transport, uncertainties, and so forth. These performance measures would then 
provide a factual basis for making intuitive decisions, even though, because of differ-
ent weightings, not everyone will necessarily come to the same conclusion. The more 
knowledge that is obtained then the closer the analysis comes to being a simulation.
3.3.4.3	 Consequential Analysis
This approach uses modeling to better understand the consequences that would arise 
from hunches. The more detailed that this becomes, then the closer the approach 
moves toward formal modeling. Where factors are found to have a dramatic effect 
on inventory parameters, this suggests that it may be worth investigating the relation-
ships more thoroughly.
3.3.4.4	 Adverse Effect Analysis (Modeling)
If, in given types of situation, it is possible to make a realistic assessment of the 
environmental consequences of an inventory decision, then it should be possible to 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
63
analyze specific instances of the problem avoidance list. Many of the initial actions 
could be classified as good housekeeping and are probably worth doing in their own 
right. Specific instances of this would be to examine production methods or to exam-
ine design methods. These would almost certainly pay for themselves even before 
any environmental analysis was performed. However, with environmental analysis, 
the effect on resource usage (indeed the effect on most of the problem avoidance 
measures) would be a routine consequence of the analysis. The consequence of each 
analysis provides data relating to another situation equivalent to another case study. 
Gradually, these would lead to a progressive increase in understanding. This in turn 
would help to formulate the procedures to be adopted. This data could eventually 
become the basis for modeling.
3.3.4.5	 Modeling
It might have been inferred from the thrust of the argument that modeling may 
become more possible as knowledge improves. The author thinks that this is a desir-
able objective that would improve understanding progressively. Modeling is a practi-
cal possibility in many situations. Based on sensitivity analysis, it may be possible 
to identify some factors as second-order effects and then to eliminate these from 
further immediate study. The effect of combinations of factors and a variety of mea-
sures can be modeled for subsequent analysis and discussion. Hopefuly, this would 
lead to obtaining agreed upon composite measures. Modeling, once based on the use 
of these agreed upon composite measures, can be used again.
Another use of modeling is to evaluate conjectures in sufficient detail to see 
whether the consequences of the conjecture are substantial. An example of this is 
whether a measure such as an entropy cost could be used to partially represent the 
cost of maintaining control of systems, for example, to avoid system quality prob-
lems (Jaber et al., 2008). The aim is initially to check whether some representation, 
if reasonable, will have important effects, and then to provide guidance on what is 
needed for further investigation.
It is assumed that modeling can eventually be used to derive a realistic assess-
ment of environmental effects in many types of situations. This would allow spe-
cific models to be created that may be used to minimize the error in the estimate of 
that composite measure, which was earlier called the environmental cost.
3.3.5	 Metrics
Most of the actions associated with the aforementioned aspirations may be recorded 
and the simple consequences monitored, for example, the use of resources, the 
amount of effluent, the use of toxic materials, the travel consequences of changing 
the locations of manufacturing and stores, and so on.
The metrics mentioned so far have been somewhat simplistic. They provide a 
factual basis for auditing and for action, but they do not provide a sufficiently good 
environmental measure to rank activities or to provide an environmental cost or 
a decision algorithm. Indeed, it is probably not realistic to rank different actions 
expressed in terms of an agreed upon single environmental metric. However, the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

64	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
measures can be the basis for interpreting situations and improving the quality of 
environmental decisions. These ideas are now developed further.
3.4	 Amalgamating Inventory and 
Environmental Considerations
3.4.1	 Dealing with Inventory and Environmental Interactions
Potential environmental savings are most likely to occur where inventory and envi-
ronmental considerations interact. Bonney and Jaber (2008) considered the main 
categories of players who influence inventory use and control. The paper suggested 
that there are five categories of players related to inventory and the environment: 
international organizations, nation states, local governments, companies and other 
organizations and, finally, people. The categories are outlined in Section 3.4.2.
There is a need for systematic and easily usable methods of environmental inven-
tory modeling, as this would allow us to assess environmental consequences and hence 
give environmental considerations high priority. Specifically, these methods need to 
recognize that the timescale over which environmental problems manifest themselves 
is often much greater than the normal timescale of management decisions. (Of course 
timescales could also be shorter, but in that case the environmental problems would 
usually be identified and eliminated during product testing.) Equally important are to 
be able to make good commercial decisions that do not have adverse environmental 
consequences, and to make good environmental decisions despite possible short-term 
adverse commercial consequences. In short, decisions need to be profitable but we 
also need to leave a world that is fit for future generations. When there is a trade-
off between commercially and environmentally based decisions, then environmen-
tally good activities need to be encouraged. To achieve this in practice will probably 
require a combination of education, commitment, incentives, and penalties.
If it is possible to represent environmental considerations approximately, sim-
ply by changing the costs, then one would expect the inventory analysis and conse-
quent derived rules to have basically the same structure as traditional analyses. If, on 
the other hand, more complex formulations are needed to represent environmental 
implications fairly realistically, then the model structures and the ordering rules that 
are derived may need to completely change.
After considering metrics in greater detail, environmental inventory models are 
investigated. First, however, the players and their responsibilities for activities that 
potentially affect the environment are discussed.
3.4.2	 Categories of Players Involved
Environmental effects and resource usage do not necessarily have geographic bound-
aries. Polluted air and water may travel many miles from their source. Shortages of 
resources can affect everyone with changes to resources’ availability and prices. 
The effects could trigger disputes and, in extreme cases, could require international 
agreement to reconcile the differences. For these reasons it is important to identify 
who has responsibility for specific activities and to create frameworks within which 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
65
all the parties (players) can work. The following is an attempt to structure the rela-
tionships between the players.
In their brief examination of the environmental needs for inventory systems, 
Bonney and Jaber (2008) considered five (hierarchical) categories of players who 
have an influence on the environmental implications of inventory. The five players 
and their roles were suggested to be:
International organizations, which should set frameworks within which 
• 
nations, by agreement, will work.
Nation states, which should first identify and balance international needs 
• 
with the needs of their own nationals and enterprises; and, second, should 
provide rules and legislation that set the context within which players at 
the lower levels of the hierarchy would operate.
Local governments, which should interpret and implement the national 
• 
rules (for example, those related to building regulations, possibly adjusted 
in the light of local conditions), and guide local enterprises and individu-
als toward better environmental solutions.
Companies and other organizations, which should be “as green as possi-
• 
ble” consistent with their other organizational requirements such as need-
ing to work within the law, make a profit, and provide a good working 
environment for their employees.
People, who need to act responsibly within the frameworks set by the 
• 
other players, but who should also aim to influence decisions within orga-
nizations with which they have contact as employees, members of profes-
sional bodies, customers, etc.
Of the five players, the first three set the rules or frameworks within which the 
others work, but it is the companies and individuals that specifically make the deci-
sions that choose and use inventory items. For these reasons this chapter focuses on 
providing guidance specifically at the company level.
3.4.3	 Principles upon Which to Base Responsible Inventory Decisions
The environmental consequences of some actions are potentially so great that there 
is a need for organizations to develop formal procedures to sign off new proposals 
for systems, workplaces, and products. The procedures need to be systematic but 
expeditious. They should not be used to slow developments, as there will be an ongo-
ing need to introduce new solutions quickly as better knowledge is obtained. Ideally, 
the procedures should be internal to the organization but open to inspection from 
the time of certification. In other words, it is suggested that an inventory planning 
system that was designed to take account of views on all of the factors that were dis-
cussed in Section 3.3 should be approved using agreed procedures that retain some 
flexibility. They should be more like agreeing quality systems, health and safety 
systems, or auditing procedures, rather than systems such as the Swedish system for 
workplace design, planning procedures for local authorities, or, even more exacting 
and costly, drug approval in medicine.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

66	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
A tentative list of principles upon which decisions could be made include:
Identifying who is responsible for what (the players and their responsibili-
• 
ties are outlined in Section 3.4.2). This needs translating into who in the 
management function is specifically responsible for designing the system, 
who will be operating the system, and who is administratively responsible 
for checking that the system is operating effectively. Problems that arise 
need to be quickly rectified to the satisfaction of local operational require-
ments and the wider environmental requirements.
Ensuring that decisions are economically and environmentally good. If 
• 
and when there are doubts, then these should be noted. If the consequences 
are potentially great, further research should be carried out.
Avoiding environmentally bad decisions.
• 
Possible ways to check these conditions are to:
Simulate the proposed system as indicated in the previous section.
• 
Pilot any radical or controversial proposals before installing.
• 
Monitor performance after installation.
• 
Regularly audit the procedures and their performance; identify any reme-
• 
dial actions that are required and have procedures in place to ensure that 
they are implemented.
3.4.4	 Procedures for Choosing Actions
It is the responsibility of management to ensure that appropriate procedures are in 
place so that good actions are performed and bad actions are reduced or eliminated. 
This section asks whether incentives could be used to encourage environmentally 
good activities and penalties used to discourage environmentally bad actions.
The decision making is straightforward if a good environmental solution is also finan-
cially better for the user. The problem then becomes one of justifying the investment that 
is required, and then agreeing upon actions such as training staff in the new procedures, 
investing in the required technology, implementing change, and ensuring that the new 
procedures are then followed. The problem is then one of investment appraisal. It would 
be acceptable to use standard investment appraisal methods in this case.
The decision making is less straightforward, however, if the solution was not finan-
cially better but the environmental arguments were strong. How does one assess the 
investment in this situation? First, it would help if incentives were provided to encour-
age the good actions, and possibly sanctions to discourage the not-as-good actions; 
but for this to be practical the actions would need to be based on generic measures 
such as energy expended, distance traveled, and so on. These would need to be part 
of some wider agreement so that it is not to become an open invitation to bring in 
protectionism by the back door. Possible actions could range from setting appropri-
ate trade tariffs, introducing subsidies that ensure that the financial or performance 
penalties were not too great, or introducing legislation. As we are interested in getting 
good results over a very wide range of items, successful outcomes would require the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
67
enthusiastic involvement of many of the population. In turn, this would require that 
the purpose of the activities would need to be clearly explained, and that the reasons 
for the proposed restraints, incentives, or penalties on the activities made clear.
3.4.5	 Could Metrics Be Used to Encourage 
Environmentally Better Actions?
First, we need to be able to identify the actions that are environmentally “good” 
and those that are environmentally “bad.” To encourage good actions and discour-
age bad actions will require agreement on what is good and bad and some sort of 
measurement to know what is happening. The history of voluntary actions is not 
very encouraging and so, almost certainly, most actions will need to be backed by 
encouragement through personal commitment/involvement or through incentives or 
taxation. As an example related to a slightly different area, lower taxation on energy 
efficient cars may encourage people to use smaller cars. Corresponding disincentives 
such as high tax and petrol duty on gas-guzzling cars could be used to penalize high 
fuel usage. This is an example of a green tax that makes it less expensive to carry out 
good rather than bad actions.
However, there will always be people who can afford to ignore incentives. 
Therefore, encouraging green actions (e.g., recycling waste) may need to be backed 
by appropriate laws supported by sanctions, or possibly by using community 
publicity to shame antisocial actions. Unfortunately, the potential unpopularity of 
some green taxes, such as an increased tax on fuel, might make it difficult for politi-
cians to implement such measures. Even though indexing tax on fuel for cars had 
been agreed on in the United Kingdom, when that coincided with a rapidly increas-
ing price of (crude and) refined petrol, it led in early 2008 to protests by truck drivers 
and motorists, and an unwillingness by politicians to face the growing opposition. 
In addition to such green taxes, the only other experience so far is limited to carbon 
trading programs that have been criticized by some for being used as schemes that 
allow groups to avoid environmentally appropriate behavior.
To manage most situations in a sensible and justifiable way, we need metrics to 
inform us about the implications of actions that have been taken, and eventually those 
that will be taken. Ideally the measures should relate directly to the action being mea-
sured; for example, fuel consumption is likely to be a good candidate for assessing 
the impact of car use and the data is available for individual car models. However, in 
general, great care must be used when setting up metrics and developing approaches 
that are intended to encourage environmentally good behavior, particularly if the 
measures are indirect. So far performance measurement systems seldom obtain 
the expected results and they often introduce the law of unforeseen consequences. 
Therefore, metrics will need time to be piloted, to settle down, and also to develop 
over time. They also need to be accompanied by appropriate educational support.
3.4.6	 Examining and Improving Environmental Performance
The following analyses indicate some investigations that could be undertaken 
to study the interrelations between inventory and the environment, and to obtain 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

68	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
insights about the importance of the factors:
Produce a preliminary list of possible factors and actions.
• 
From that list produce a possible ranking.
• 
Carry out ad hoc actions including good housekeeping (e.g., of product 
• 
design and process design). Also use quantitative common sense (e.g., if 
something is wasteful, then study how to reduce it).
Produce simple ad hoc models (e.g., travel and layout models).
• 
Produce simple overall models.
• 
The procedures for producing the list and its evaluation should become more for-
malized as experience is gained. However, the following is a suggested investigation 
procedure. Each of these steps is now discussed.
A preliminary set of factors to be considered first is the inventory list produced 
at the beginning of Section 3.3. A second set would be obtained by systematically 
stepping through the stages in the product life cycle. A third would be to step system-
atically through the geography of the logistics chain. Additionally, any other focus 
that the managers, who have local knowledge, consider important or appropriate to 
the organization should be considered. This will produce a tentative priority listing 
applicable to that company.
Before a detailed investigation of possible actions starts, it is important that an organi-
zation should attempt to rank these factors. Ideally a possible ranking would be obtained 
by producing a Pareto assessment of their potential environmental importance. If this is 
not possible, local knowledge and intuition could reduce the list of possible contenders.
Good housekeeping will almost certainly pay for itself even without environmen-
tal improvement; for example, simplifying designs and the design procedures would 
reduce the number of stock items; reducing set up times will speed up production 
and increase flexibility; and improving material flow and insulating stores would all 
have beneficial effects.
An example of the use of algorithms to reduce travel distance when the stores’ 
locations are known should make it possible to measure the expected effect of mak-
ing certain specific actions, and subsequently to measure the actual distance traveled 
and the modes of transport that are and could be used.
The development of simple overall models probably needs to be deferred for more 
detailed examination.
3.5	 Implications: Where Do We Go from Here?
3.5.1	 General Discussion
It is probable that the human race is on an unsustainable environmental path that 
is caused by its activities. The consequences are thought to include global warm-
ing and overuse of resources. Any solution will need major policy changes by 
governments and companies, and also changes in the behavior of the majority 
of the people on the planet. The longer we take to respond to the situation, the 
greater is the likelihood that we will move toward catastrophe. The three major 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
69
environmental problems facing the world are probably: the creation of greenhouse 
gases, the overuse of resources (including minerals, water, land, and the living 
environment where discernable effects on fish, forests, and biodiversity are occur-
ring), and pollution.
Specific problems arise because in most developing countries, but particularly 
China and India, environmental considerations have usually and understandably 
come second to economic pressures. In particular, energy has been produced largely 
from coal, currently a relatively dirty fuel. Against this, the “developed countries,” 
particularly the United States, have been unwilling or unable to reduce their rather 
profligate use of energy. For example, the United States generates roughly 25 per-
cent of carbon emissions although it has only 5 percent of the world’s population. 
Countries that currently have the benefits of using energy do not want to reduce their 
consumption. On the other hand, countries that have not had the benefits of bountiful 
energy in the past now aspire to catch up. It is interesting that the model of growth 
throughout the world is so pervasive that it is hard to describe the situation without 
using words like benefits and catch up. However, finite resources do not allow the 
current model to continue. It would appear that not only is it going to be difficult 
to obtain agreement on unified actions, even the terminology will need to change. 
Sustainability is a minimum requirement.
To reduce unnecessary environmental damage will require a major change in the 
balance of activities. We need to do more good things, such as produce more renew-
able energy, reduce energy usage by insulating, reduce waste, produce items more 
efficiently by improving the efficiency of the processes, improve the efficiency of 
systems, use things better, design better, and reduce packaging, while avoiding bad 
things such as using energy unnecessarily. There is a need to save nonrenewable 
energy by reducing the use of nonrenewable energy sources (such as coal, oil, and 
gas) and reducing pollution. However, it is unlikely that doing these things will be 
sufficient. There is almost certainly a need for a more radical rethinking of priori-
ties, which will provide additional factors to take account of, even for action that is 
primarily focused on inventory in a general sense.
Although many companies are trying to do something, unfortunately, there have 
been many instances of companies superficially greening their product image as a 
marketing tool to encourage customer purchases rather than as a commitment to 
adopting policies that will help the world to become a greener place. Nevertheless, 
the continuing focus on environmental needs appears to be transferring into real 
efforts in some instances. It is to be anticipated that this will continue and deepen, 
but whether it will be done soon enough is difficult to ascertain.
The market is progressively becoming more environmentally aware with pressure 
coming from many sources including:
The United Nations, European Commission, government, and states
• 
Specific groups of consumers
• 
Pressure groups
• 
The media including radio, television, newspaper, and magazine reports
• 
Individuals
• 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

70	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Governments are beginning to set more realistic targets, but, in general, they have 
been unable so far to match their achievements to their planned timescale.
Perhaps the aim should be to focus the rethinking that is currently taking 
place as a result of the financial crisis to find and fund ways of overcoming the 
even more worrisome environmental situation. Financial cooperation could be 
used so that countries will work together to help the planet. Specifically, the 
source of energy and other resources is an important part of the environmental 
cost. Major investment is needed. Perhaps, taxation should be levied on carbon-
based energy sources, with these funds used specifically to invest in renewable 
energy production methods.
However, much of this is rather pious and wide ranging compared with the task 
that was set for this chapter; namely, to focus more tightly on inventory and its asso-
ciated problems over the logistics chain.
3.5.2	 Questions to Ask about Inventory
It is important to understand the implications—the opportunities and risks that arise 
from different inventory actions. Among the questions that could be asked are:
Could it be environmentally advantageous to change the logistics control 
• 
system including the amount and the location of stocks and the manufac-
turing plants?
How would the total system performance change if appropriate inven-
• 
tory control policies were used? Specifically, what would be the gains and 
losses obtained by using different types of systems?
Specific inventory questions are:
How do we determine the best locations to manufacture specific goods?
• 
How do we determine the best place to hold stock? Can we relocate stocks 
• 
so that total travel is reduced?
Could holding appropriate stock allow the amount of transportation to 
• 
be reduced (e.g., by using bulk deliveries or using more environmentally 
friendly but slower modes of transport such as rail or road rather than air 
freight)?
Do reduced stock levels increase the need for urgent deliveries?
• 
Can one obtain the environmental and cost advantages from bulk deliver-
• 
ies by delivering a range of items together while retaining low levels of 
stock?
What are the environmental consequences of different distribution 
• 
systems?
What are the effects of home delivery systems?
• 
What are the effects of Internet shopping?
• 
How do we prioritize the suggested actions when answers to these and 
• 
other questions are obtained?
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
71
We need to obtain answers to these and many other questions about inventory if 
we are going to ensure that inventory planning can play its full part in creating a 
sustainable environment. 
3.5.3	 Summary and Conclusions
How inventory planning relates to the environment has been the main theme of the 
chapter. The points that were made included:
There are many environmental problems and human activities are contributing to 
these problems. The problems include:
the increase of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, largely caused by the 
• 
use of hydrocarbon based energy, will lead to global warming and cata-
strophic consequences for the world; 
our excessive use of other resources means that current actions are not 
• 
sustainable; 
pollution is affecting water and air quality, bio-diversity and the quality of 
• 
living in many localities. 
The scale of the problems is so severe that urgent, preferably coordinated action is 
needed to reduce everyone’s contribution. However, even working to the most opti-
mistic time scale for implementing changes, the expected environmental implications 
are very disturbing. They include climate change, temperature rises, water shortages, 
and flooding that will adversely affect everyone. It is essential that actions are taken as 
soon as possible by as many players as possible using every means possible.
Actions can be of the following kinds: use less energy and other resources, produce 
less pollution, increase the availability of renewable energy sources, perform activi-
ties more efficiently, produce better designs, insulate better, recycle more, produce less 
waste, etc. Also, in general, improve as many as possible of the current activities that 
have an adverse effect. Several ways were suggested earlier in the chapter by which 
better inventory planning could help the environment. Section 3.3.2 presented a list 
of inventory factors which by proper consideration potentially could help (or hinder) 
environmental performance and Section 3.5.2 presented a list of questions that need 
answering if one is to produce an optimal set of actions. Inventory (considered in a 
generalized sense) actions can make a contribution to improving the environment.
Unfortunately, appropriate environmental cost data are seldom available or easy 
to obtain. Therefore, at the present time it may not be possible to determine optimal 
solutions. Despite that, many positive actions can be undertaken and the results can be 
closely monitored. The aim is to do something positive while at the same time gather-
ing data and improving our knowledge of the effectiveness of the actions. We need 
to learn; we need to learn quickly and then we need to use that knowledge as soon as 
possible to improve our performance, at least nationally but preferably worldwide.
Section 3.4.2 suggested that five groups of players had an interest in inventory 
decisions, namely: international organizations, nation states, local governments, 
companies and other organizations, and people. It was suggested that companies and 
individuals within these companies were in charge of the main inventory decisions 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

72	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
and that these decisions need to be made within the context provided by the first 
three players. 
Every means possible should be used to encourage desirable actions in the time 
scale involved. Comments were made about incentives, taxes and legislation. In par-
ticular, financial incentives should be used to encourage environmentally positive 
actions and taxes used to discourage less good activities. In addition, an extensive 
information campaign will be needed to encourage appropriate actions. The infor-
mation will need to be of two kinds; first there is a need for general information so 
that everyone is aware of the problems and of the need to find solutions and secondly, 
there is a need for specific information about ways that environmental performance 
can be improved. This information will not appear spontaneously; persons will need 
to be responsible for the provision and other persons for the use of such informa-
tion. Information provision could arise from industry wide advisory groups perhaps 
supported nationally. Implementation will need to be guided by people within the 
companies with appropriate authority and enthusiasm to ensure that action is taken. 
Legislation may be needed to encourage less enthusiastic implementers to take the 
necessary actions.
In the short run there are going to be some situations where what is the most 
desirable action is inconclusive because of a lack of clear facts within companies. 
However, all is not lost. Before we get precise answers, we can make do with rough 
and ready solutions but, additionally and in parallel, procedures will be needed that 
will steadily improve the measures and the company data that will be available upon 
which to make decisions in the future. We need to measure the results. In short, the 
suggestion is that the companies should do the obvious, find out more and then refine 
the data and the solutions that arise from the chosen actions.
Even with the use of analytic methods and even with attempts to assess environ-
mental costs, the results will be strongly influenced by the numbers that are selected 
to represent the costs. Obtaining the figures raises two issues. As was discussed in 
Section 3.3 and Section 3.4, the first is conceptual and requires deciding how exactly 
one is going to represent the environmental cost. The second is a practical one that 
in addition to obtaining the basic data, the data also needs to be interpreted to ensure 
that like is compared with like particularly if competitors are ignoring long term 
environmental effects to obtain a cost advantage. Inventory decisions and all other 
decisions will be very difficult if the environmental costs are not known. To take 
account of environmental factors, it is likely that further technical developments 
in modeling are going to be needed and if these investigations are to be taken seri-
ously then the problems to be solved need to be far more focused. Different kinds of 
inventory will require different priorities and investigations may need to be related 
to particular industrial sectors. Now is the time to move away from generalities to the 
detailed hard work that will be required to determine the needs for many companies 
backed by appropriate incentives and legislative framework. 
The chapter has briefly outlined some of the points that need considering if inven-
tory planning is going to play its part in moving towards a sustainable planet. There 
is much to learn and the lessons need to be applied quickly.  An overriding principle 
is that progress will have been made if things are environmentally better after deci-
sions are implemented than they were previously. However, because of assessment 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Planning to Help the Environment	
73
problems is should be recognized that there will always remain difficult decisions 
even when managers of projects are really trying to do their environmental best. 
This is not an excuse to allow the less conscientious decision makers to wriggle out 
of their responsibilities, it needs to be recognized that decisions will need to be tem-
pered by humanity, economics, and the possibility of a sustainable environment as 
well as satisfying non-commercial human needs of community, open spaces, etc. A 
range of potential problems is likely to arise but they must not be allowed to inhibit 
actions. Among them are that analysis may point to solutions that are apparently in 
conflict with competition or an open doors policy and any enforcement will need to 
be based on comparing like with like. Another difficulty is that the time scale over 
which environmental effects may manifest themselves is different from the planning 
horizon of normal economic business decisions. If so, a business decision could, 
knowingly or unknowingly, select a profitable but less good environmental decision
Unfortunately, as was indicated earlier, current decision making has been deter-
mined using non-environmental arguments. Furthermore, in many cases artificial 
costs, taxes, import duties and subsidies have further distorted current decision mak-
ing. For example, there is little consistency in taxation levels between countries or 
between different modes of transport e.g. travel by air does not pay the same fuel 
tax as car travel. In general, taxes are used by countries primarily as revenue earners 
although sometimes there may be an attempt to influence behavior by putting higher 
taxes on less favored activities such as alcohol and tobacco. However, taxes also influ-
ence behavior and so they should be part of the armory used to obtain better environ-
mental behavior. Possibly, when desirable changes are identified associated legislation 
will be needed so as to bring costs in line initially with expenditure and then, eventu-
ally, with expenditure plus associated environmental costs. Complexity is a danger.
Finally, inventory even defined as broadly as in this chapter, is only one small part 
of a company’s operations. If the world is serious about protecting its environment, 
a similar approach will need to be applied by each organization to each functional 
area including construction, estates, office work, sales teams, etc. Nothing less than a 
rethink with different priorities is likely to match the scale of the problems facing us. 
Those that do it well will contribute to the well being of the world and will also have 
started to face the problems that are likely to grow progressively in importance.
References
Bonney, M., M. Head, S. Ratchev, and I. Moualek. 2000. A manufacturing system design frame-
work for computer aided industrial engineering. Int J Prod Res 38(17):4317–4327.
Bonney, M., and M. Y. Jaber. 2008. Environmentally responsible inventory models: Non-
classical models for a non-classical era. 15th International Symposium on Inventories, 
August 20–23, Budapest, Hungary.
Chikán, A., ed. 1990. Inventory models. Budapest, Hungary: Akademiai Kiado.
Dejonckheere, J., S. M. Disney, M. R. Lambrecht, and D. R. Towill. 2003. Measuring and 
avoiding the bullwhip effect: A control theoretic approach. Eur J Oper Res 147(3): 
567–590.
Forrester, J. W. 1961. Industrial dynamics. Waltham, MA: Pegasus Communications.
Grubbström, R. W., and A. Molinder. 1996. Safety production plans in MRP-systems using 
transform methodology. Int J Prod Econ 46-47:297–309.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

74	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Jaber, M. Y., M. Bonney, and I. Moualek. 2008. An economic order quantity model for an 
imperfect production process with entropy cost. Int J Prod Econ, doi: 10.1016/j.
ijpe.2008.08.007.
Meadows, D., J. Randers, and D. Meadows. 2004. Limits to growth: The 30-year update. 
White River Junction, VT: Chelsea Green Publishing.
Popplewell, K., and M. C. Bonney. 1987. The application of discrete linear control theory to 
the analysis and simulation of multi-product, multi-level production control systems. 
Int J Prod Res 25(1):45–56.
Silver, E. A., D. F. Pyke, and R. Peterson. 1998. Inventory management and production plan-
ning and scheduling, 3rd ed. New York: Wiley.
Towill, D. R. 1982. Dynamic analysis of an inventory and order based production control 
system. Int J Prod Res 20(6):671–687.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

75
4 Energy and Inventories
Lucio Zavanella and Simone Zanoni
Università degli Studi di Brescia
Brescia, Italia
4.1	 Overview
The progressive consumption of the nonrenewable energy stocks is determining wide 
fluctuations in the cost of energy (primarily gas and oil), influencing both absolute 
values and volatility, and leading to attention on the strategic role and function that 
these resources play in the economy and life in general. It is well known that the 
debate has quickly spread to encompass other issues, such as the availability of alter-
native resources, including nuclear power generation; the scarcity of the “classic” 
sources, such as fossil fuels; and the impact on the environment (e.g., Rout et al. 
2008). Similarly, there has been growing interest for a more rational and respon-
sible consumption of energy in the industrial processes and services, this being not 
only a fundamental issue for sustainable production, but also a strategic leverage for 
competitiveness, due to the increased contribution of energy to the final cost per unit 
produced. Inevitably, these issues will exert, and are already exerting, an increasing 
and noticeable influence on the management of supplies and inventories, thus open-
ing new horizons and opportunities for research in this field.
This chapter focuses on these issues starting with several situations, already 
discussed in literature, in which inventory features (such as levels and quantities) 
are notably influenced (and frequently determined) by the energy content of the 
Contents
4.1	
Overview..........................................................................................................75
4.2	
Introduction.....................................................................................................76
4.3	
A Preliminary Scheme....................................................................................77
4.4	
Stocking Energy Vectors.................................................................................79
4.5	
Holding Costs and Energy...............................................................................84
4.6	
“Cold” and “Fresh” Supply Chains.................................................................86
4.7	
Energy-Related Practices: Implications on Inventory Management...............87
4.7.1	 The Aluminum Case............................................................................88
4.7.2	 The Iron and Steel Case.......................................................................90
4.8	
Biomass and Its Derivatives............................................................................. 91
4.9	
Concluding Remarks.......................................................................................94
References.................................................................................................................95
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

76	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
inventory itself, and by the cost of the energy source. This is the case with dams 
(water reservoirs), gas/oil stocks and, more recently, warm/cool storage. These 
cases will allow the reader to perceive and understand how, why, and in which ways 
stocks may be linked to energy. The subsequent sections will concentrate on those 
other relevant aspects that cannot be neglected when the relationships between 
stock features and energy are considered. As a reference, the cases of the biomass 
supply chain (and, more generally, biofuels) and the “cold” supply of goods will be 
discussed. These examples will introduce the final comments, which will remind 
the reader that, when energy is employed, environmental aspects (e.g., emissions) 
are also to be taken into account. Therefore, several topics will be addressed to 
illustrate how, when the relationships between energy and inventory are considered, 
traditional economic analysis should be backed by an accurate appreciation of the 
environmental costs.
4.2	 Introduction
Inventory is also defined as “the stock of any item or resource used in an organisa-
tion” (Chase and Aquilano 1995). Basically, types and forms of the resources used, 
and their consequent inventory, vary according to the area investigated, including 
raw materials, finished and semifinished parts, subassemblies, and supplies. In many 
sectors, energy is a fundamental raw material necessary for both production and ser-
vices, even in its different forms, such as electricity, heat and steam, and mechanical 
energy. In other sectors (e.g., power stations), energy is the last product to be supplied 
to final or intermediate customers. Frequently, these systems convert energy from one 
type to another, thus behaving as the more conventional productive systems, that is, 
adopting stock-keeping policies, and ordering and accumulating the resources nec-
essary to meet demand. The description given and the growing attention to energy 
policies underline the importance of incorporating energy-related issues to inventory 
principles and vice versa. (Incidentally, it is interesting to note how, as in Hudson and 
Badiru [2008], energy is classified into two basic types: kinetic and potential, where 
potential energy represents stored energy, as well as energy of position.) As far as 
early literature on the economic features of energy storage is concerned, the contri-
bution by Grubbström and Hultman (1989) is to be mentioned, with particular refer-
ence to the proposed model for exergy storage of a system subject to heat transfer.
As an introductory comment, it is convenient to keep in mind one of the basic 
principles of inventory economics, which is based on the provisioning costs (e.g., 
setup and purchasing) and the costs related to stock creation and maintenance (e.g., 
see Winston 1994). The latter cost is generally given per unit of inventory and per 
time unit and it may be connected both to the opportunity costs (capital tied up to 
the inventory) and to the pure components of the holding activities (e.g., risks and 
costs of obsolescence, taxes on inventory, damages and spoilage, stockout probabili-
ties, insurance, buildings, operating costs, etc.). In addition, purchasing costs may 
include, in the case of production, variable costs, labor, raw materials, and, as in the 
case of the present contribution, energy.
Of course, the activities related to stock energy or substances to be used for 
energy generation must also comply with these inventory laws and principles. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
77
However, in the case of energy-related raw materials and energy itself, the price 
paid for the raw material or the pure energy (i.e., oil, gas, carbon, and, as derived 
energy sources, electricity and process residuals such as hot water and air) cannot 
be neglected either. In fact, this component may be estimated by opportunity cost 
and, above all, it may fluctuate widely within narrow time windows because of 
speculation or demand­­–offer mechanisms. This aspect significantly impacts model-
ing; it implies that the purchase price cannot be assumed as constant over time, nor 
can the holding cost be considered as a given and consolidated value. These two 
principles may be considered connected thanks to the opportunity cost mechanism. 
In addition, this reasoning suggests that the variable holding cost deserves further 
analysis, in accordance with the needs implicit in inventory-related energy issues, 
as discussed Section 4.5.
4.3	 A Preliminary Scheme
In a general framework, the scheme proposed in the European Commission (EU) 
reference document (2008) may be suitable for the present case. Energy inputs into 
a process with a given productive capacity (e.g., tons per week) may differ in type: 
steam, electricity, and fuels. Once the resource requirements have been adjusted by 
their conversion efficiency (e.g., 35–55 percent for electricity and 85–95 percent for 
steam generation), it is possible to appreciate the gross requirement of energy for the 
production capacity. The concept may be extended to include energy recovery and 
different flows of products in the process. Adapting the scheme mentioned to the 
purpose of the present chapter, it is possible to offer the general view of a productive 
system shown in Figure 4.1.
Specific Energy ContentProduct 1 = ∑
+
i
i in
E
E
[
,
i rec
w in
i
i out
w rec
E
E
E
P
,
,
,
,
]
(
)
+
−∑
−
1
GJ
ton 	
(4.1)
Equation 4.1 allows the appreciation of the specific energy consumption related to 
each unit of production to be conveniently expressed, for example, as GJ/ton or kWh/
item. By focusing on a simple system producing one main product, for example, product 
1, various inputs are necessary to the system so as to complete the amount P1 of products 
type 1. These inputs are represented by the flows (Fj) of the raw materials (N) to be pro-
cessed, and by the quantities of the different forms of energy (Ei,in) to be used in the pro-
cess itself (e.g., i = steam/hot water, electricity, fuel, mechanical, other). Specific energy 
consumption may be defined as the net amount of energy used to produce one unit of 
output (in terms of liters, items, tons, etc.), taking into account the net exported energy. 
Depending on the system boundaries, it could be necessary to include the energy con-
version factors, so as to appreciate the real gross requirement of energy (e.g., efficiency 
in producing steam and hot water is significantly larger than the efficiency in electricity 
generation, thus introducing the issue of the type of energy vector used).
As the productive system may provide both products and services, the different 
forms of net exported energy (Ei,out) may represent system outputs, too. These are the 
cases of energy amounts used in other process units, but, as a function of the bound-
aries considered, it is also the case of industries recovering their warm residuals 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

78	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
for district heating. In such situations, Ei,out terms represent recovered resources. Of 
course, the production of product type 1 may also generate byproducts (as in various 
chemical processes; i.e., P2, … Pk, … PM), as well as wastes (in terms of residuals) 
which, in turn, could require energy (EW, in) to be disposed of (e.g., incineration), 
eventually generating an energy export (Ew, rec). Finally, technical solutions may 
allow the recovery of a part of energy (Ei, rec) within the process itself.  Other energy 
efficiency indicators may be formulated, according to investigation needs, such as 
definition of the system boundaries, appreciation of system-oriented or product-ori-
ented energy requirements, multi-product environments and technical comparison 
of different processes.
However, the conclusive remark is that the whole set of energy contributions 
described is transferred into the final products; in other words, each product contains 
an energy contribution that also depends on the process and the type of energy used, 
thus making a substantial difference in terms of equivalent emissions into the envi-
ronment, too. Finally, it should be noted that two types of energy contributions exist: 
the first is a fixed one (everything needed to support production, regardless of the 
quantities produced, such as lighting, maintaining vessel pressures, minimal flows in 
pipes, and furnace temperatures), and the second is a variable contribution (e.g., the 
energy spent for cutting and heating raw materials).
More extensively, it is quite interesting to note how, according to a modern view, 
goods are no longer evaluated mainly on the basis of their economic value or asso-
ciated monetary flows, but also according to their energy requirement and content. 
For example, this concept is applied to buildings (Yohanis and Norton 2006), where 
energy is categorized into embodied and operational energy, and to photovoltaic 
facilities (Muneer et al. 2006). The former case suggests an interesting dualism 
PRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
and/or UNIT 
OTHER PRODUCTIVE SYSTEM 
and/or UNIT 
Esteam, out 
Eelectricity, out 
Efuel, out 
Emechanical, out 
Eother, out 
ENERGY SOURCES/SUPPLY 
Esteam, in 
Eelectricity, in 
Efuel, in 
Emechanical, in 
Eother, in 
RAW 
MATERIALS / 
COMPONENTS 
SUPPLY 
Feed1 
Feed2 
Feed3 
Feedj 
FeedN 
… 
… 
PRODUCTS 
Main Product 
P1 
Byproducts  
P2 
Pk 
PM 
… 
… 
Ew,in 
WASTES 
Ei, rec 
Ew,rec 
PW 
Figure 4.1  A general view of energy flows in a productive system (adapted from the EU 
2008).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
79
between setup (embodied energy) and holding costs (operational energy), while the 
latter example gives outstanding evidence of how the two approaches (economic and 
energetic) may lead to controversial conclusions (the payback of the energy embod-
ied in the facility is about eight years, while the monetary payback is estimated 
around ninety-five years). From a wider point of view, it can be stated that energy 
is a commodity encompassing each object, which, on its turn, requires (or releases) 
energy during its life and up to its end.
4.4	 Stocking Energy Vectors
The fluctuations in the availability of energy-related raw materials, together with the 
volatility of their processing, have led companies and national states to organize their 
own network of reservoirs, buying and stocking these materials during positive periods 
(low prices, common availability) and consuming them during negative ones. Such an 
approach may also be determined by seasonal needs, as in the case of stocking fuels 
during the warmer period to be sufficiently protected during the winter. This is the 
case of strategic gas stocking and also of any traditional household that collects wood 
and biomass during the harvesting period to be protected for the cold season. These 
simple examples show how stocking materials with energy-related purposes is very 
similar to the classic role of inventories, which are used as flying wheels to smooth the 
imbalance between demand and offer, covering peaks and buffering during troughs. 
Energy-related stocks also play an important strategic role, preventing national trau-
mas during seasons of political disruption (oil shocks, interrupted gas provisions).
Historically, literature has paid greatest attention to the study of oil stock, prob-
ably because of its political relevance, raw material versatility (oil is used in heating, 
power generation, and propulsion) and transportability, and geographical distribu-
tion (in this respect, all the other energy sources—carbon, gas, and biomass—differ 
significantly). However, the technological changes and infrastructure development 
set the basis for new opportunities for energy-related means, as in the case of gas.
Gas is generally transported by pipelines from the extraction sites to the final des-
tination. Such a solution presents both advantages and disadvantages, as the simple 
comparison with traditional manufacturing might show:
	
1.	 Pipelines are “rigid” transport systems, connecting specific points of a 
given network: a given supplier is connected to a specific set of customers 
and vice versa, even if, thanks to the pipeline grid, different nodes may be 
reached.
	
2.	 However, supplying consists of a continuous flow, which may be preferred 
to discrete provisioning, where levels vary according to steps in input and 
continuously in output.
	
3.	 The pipeline may be critical, as sudden breakdowns (or shutdowns) of 
critical points may interrupt a relevant part of the flow, or even the entire 
flow.
	
4.	 The gas in the pipeline is a sort of work-in-progress stock, increasing its 
cost while moving through the pipe itself, because of the energy required 
to move it and the part of the infrastructure used.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

80	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
From this point of view, liquid natural gas (LNG) and regassifiers represent an inter-
esting alternative (Energy Information Administration [EIA] 2003), giving flexibility 
to the system. The first plant of LNG started in Arzew, Algeria, in 1964. Since then 
the growth has been impressive, supported by technological changes and cost reduc-
tions at the different phases of the chain (Greaker and Lund Sagen 2008). Regassifiers 
require gas stocking in harbors or, in general, close to the coasts. The natural resource 
is stocked and shipped by cooling the gas itself at extremely low temperature, thereby 
incurring an energy cost for the pumping at relevant pressure and for keeping tem-
peratures at low levels (transportation takes place at –160°C). The same applies at 
the final destination, where ships fill stocking vessels with the transported LNG low 
temperatures until the gas is released into the pipeline distribution. Such a system is of 
great interest for its modeling and potential implications (Holz et al. 2008):
It opens up the gas market to new suppliers who are not necessarily con-
• 
nected by pipelines to the final customers (several natural gas fields are 
far from major markets).
Such a distribution system makes the natural gas supply chain more flex-
• 
ible, for example, in the choice of provisioning harbors, routing, and deliv-
ery stock points (the impact of the infrastructure is reduced, too).
From this point of view, greater competition is stimulated and the oppor-
• 
tunities for natural gas exploitation widened. (At present, this fuel is com-
monly used in power generation and is an interesting propulsion fuel, too, 
although its potential is limited by the scarcity of distribution points.)
However, the distribution of costs varies when compared to the traditional pipe-
line: a higher cost is paid for stocking (cooling and stock pressure) as an initial setup 
cost, while the cost of energy (distributed along the pipeline due to gas pumping) 
is counterbalanced by temperature preserving costs. Even if, from the 1980s, both 
liquefaction and regassification costs decreased significantly, it should be considered 
that the LNG chain is also energy intensive. About 15–20 percent of the raw mate-
rial is claimed to be consumed for the entire processes (liquefaction, transport, and 
regassification).
Gas storage facilities are used to accumulate gas during the year and to regulate 
gas production, making it more stable. This approach covers strategic, economic, 
and technical issues (see, e.g., EIA 2006). Storage may be completed underground 
in exploited gas fields, aquifers, and caverns, although artificial tanks and pipelines 
themselves may play an integrating role balancing pressure and demand. This leads 
to competition over prices and contemporary smoothing of peaks in demand. For 
example, in Italy, demand is extremely seasonal: in winter it is roughly twice the 
summer figure, thus favoring the hypothesis of stockpiling during the summer and 
null stock at the end of the winter season. Extracted gas may be transported and 
stocked closer to the final user, the alternative being to avoid extraction and keeping 
the natural reservoir untouched. In such cases, a difference (immediately apparent 
to inventory researchers) emerges in the inventory holding. When gas is kept in its 
natural field, the holding cost is null, but if the gas is extracted and stocked prior to 
its final usage, the holding cost emerges as a consequence of stock maintaining (in 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
81
a simple approach, the marginal cost), plus capital tied to extraction and transport. 
As a consequence, storage capacity is the most relevant constraint and the strategic 
function of gas for civil and industrial purposes suggesting the growing importance 
of this factor. When dealing with gas storage, a large stock capacity also prevents 
the need for overdimensioning pipelines and extraction sites. It also exerts a mod-
erating action on the market during critical periods, reducing price fluctuations. An 
interesting and complete model may be found in Amundsen (1991). A careful—
and inventory-based—evaluation of the true convenience of gas stocking is made 
complex by the number and variety of parameters specifically involved. Above all, 
taxation emerges as a critical parameter (together with price caps), being a typical 
leverage used with political aims to address the strategic storage aspect of gas reser-
voirs. These aspects are quite complex to model, including their unpredictable effect 
on demand and, consequently, on the inventory needed. By way of example, the 
price to access storage in Italy, which is still almost monopolistic (Holz et al. 2008), 
also includes fees for space, injection, withdrawal, movement, and strategic storage 
(Italian Authority for Electric Energy and Gas 2006). It is evident that the common 
or independent movement of any of these figures will affect the interest in gas stock-
ing, together with any expected fluctuations in price and demand.
In conclusion, the issue of gas storage is an emerging research area, deserving of 
particular attention because of its inventory-related features. Of course, even greater 
attention has been paid in the past to a similar case, namely, petroleum reserves (e.g., 
see Meyer et al. 1979; Oren and Hong Wan 1986). This is the main reason why, in 
the present contribution, it has been preferred to discuss energy resources and vec-
tors other than oil, which can be regarded as a well-consolidated issue. However, the 
great attention paid to oil, due to its strategic role and to the shocks of the 1970s (e.g., 
the embargo in 1973 and the Iranian crisis in 1979), is similar to the recent attention 
to natural gas. Of course, differences in demand, taxation, and technical solutions 
(related to the physical properties of the two substances) make the two cases very 
different. Furthermore, the problems posed by natural gas present some conceptual 
similarities to hydrogen concerns, even if the two orders of scale are completely dif-
ferent. For example, as in Kreith and West (2004):
Liquefaction of hydrogen requires a large amount of energy.
• 
Storage occurs at very high pressures, with a considerable energy input.
• 
Its transport still presents daunting obstacles.
• 
Nevertheless, the conceptual similarities mentioned add interest to the develop-
ment of models for the optimization of the chains of these energy vectors, includ-
ing the amount of energy at the generation phase, the energy requirements, and the 
infrastructure investments for subsequent transport and stocking.
A second category of stocks related to energy is represented by water reservoirs, 
generally accumulated by dams. Where it was an option, the generation of elec-
tricity by means of hydropower has always been competitive because of its costs, 
and it continues to be so now because of environmental awareness and attention to 
power generation with low CO2 emissions. In fact, hydropower is one of the most 
consolidated and time-proven ways to produce energy by renewable resources, and 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

82	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
its technological development reached a mature standard some decades ago. The 
management of water resources exploited in dam-based plants has already been dealt 
with in the literature. As in Prabhu (1980), water reservoirs allow interesting applica-
tions of continuous time inventory models, being a storage process with random input 
and output of finite capacity. His bibliography shows how P.A.P Moran formulated 
his theory on dams in 1959 and the first works date back to the 1950s (H. E. Hurst, 
J. Little, Tjalling C. Koopmans, J. Gani and R. Pyke), mentioning how demand may 
be originated both by electric energy and water to be supplied. The elegant approach 
adopted, based on the queuing theory, is worthy of application to the economics of 
inventories, considering the holding cost of water storage. In a modern view, such a 
cost should include:
The cost of the structure, together with its maintenance and updating
• 
The costs related to the environmental impact, comprising not only the 
• 
local changes (effect of dams and water storage on the site, such as soil 
assessment, changes in humidity and temperature, reflectivity of the arti-
ficial lake surface), but also the entire flow of the original intercepted 
streams
Hidden costs related to the missed opportunities for water utilization, 
• 
such as agriculture and fish farming; in particular, it should be noted that 
extremely dry seasons may oblige the managers to lower dam levels, i.e., 
spillage, to prevent irreparable damage to agriculture, industry, and other 
activities, thus determining an additional holding cost that should not be 
overlooked
In conclusion, the need for accurate models of stock management, visibly quanti-
fied by the water level, emerges as particularly relevant. Such models should help in 
smoothing irregular provisioning of the inflows, taking into account the risks related 
to future incomes (stock usage may determine a deficit due to dry seasons or a loss in 
capacity accumulation during a wet period and already high stock levels).
The issue of water resource utilization and, more specifically, its optimization is 
comprehensively discussed by Loganathan (2008) and the authors wish to acknowl-
edge his contribution.
When the specific issue of energy is taken into account, various technical solu-
tions to its generation (e.g., fossil fuels, nuclear, hydro, etc.) present their own specific 
features (Couto de Oliveira et al. 2002), which are differently, though significantly, 
influenced by the management policies in the stock of the energy generation source. 
For example, operating costs are mainly determined by fuels in fossil-based power 
stations, while equipment construction and environmental impact mainly affect hydro 
and nuclear power plants. In particular, water reservoirs, when freed to be turbined for 
electricity generation (outflow), might become the reservoir of the subsequent power 
station (inflow), like serial inventories. In addition, the decision to produce “clean” 
energy by water saves the larger operating costs of the alternative fossil-fuel power sta-
tions, but reduces the stock of water in the reservoir, too; that is, the production capac-
ity for the future is reduced in favor of a present use. Of course, the problem of the 
relative influence of immediate cost functions on future ones is perceived differently, 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
83
according to the sensitivity of the system to the scarcity of water, as in small capacity 
hydro networks and extreme water fluctuations from season to season.
The appropriate modeling for these systems may vary (e.g., stochastic dual 
dynamic programming proposed by Pereira and Pinto [1991] and Read and George 
[1990], or simulation-based as in Read and George [1990]), since decisions and the 
consequent optimization depend on the forecast in inflows.
Finally, underground thermal energy storage (UTES) technology should be men-
tioned. Such a technology implies the storage of energy wastes and, typically, solar 
thermal energy in reservoirs for future use (Sanner et al. 2003). The convenience of 
such a technique depends on the technical solution adopted (aquifers, boreholes and 
pipes, and cavern storage), which offers different equipment flexibility and invest-
ments (setup cost). Furthermore, holding costs are related to the cost of the deprecia-
tion of the dedicated buildings, plus the decay in the energy content, so the energy 
level of the stock held must be maintained to prevent its value per unit of time from 
decreasing over time, also depending on the demand profile, which determines when 
the stocked energy will be used. Variable costs are determined by the energy used 
to move fluids from and to the reservoirs. In fact, thermal storage may occur on 
different time horizons, from short-term utilization up to seasonal. The UTES tech-
nical solution and the underlying problems leave plenty of room for optimization, 
which could be carried out according to inventory principles, especially because of 
the developing research and market interest in high temperature (>50°C) heat stor-
age. Nevertheless, underground storage goes beyond the case of thermal energy. For 
example, excess energy may be stored by compressing air and pumping it into salt 
caverns, abandoned mines, and depleted gas fields or buried pipes. An alterative, 
as in hydro plants, is pumping water into higher basins for subsequent turbining 
(Patel 2006). The high storage capacity of the compressed air solution is also associ-
ated with relevant investments; for example, due to the problem of cooling the com-
pressed air, the cost of the power system varies between $1000–$1500 per kilowatt). 
However, storage capacity may be a strategic element of choice when positioning 
new wind farms, enabling energy to be stored when wind power exceeds electricity 
demand. In fact, the development of renewable sources, such as wind and solar gen-
eration, focuses attention on the intermittency implicit in these types of resources. 
As penetration levels increase, finding a balance between fluctuating renewable gen-
eration and fluctuating demand becomes more difficult and more expensive to man-
age (Moutoux and Barnes 2007). Solutions to mitigating the intermittency of wind 
generation by storage are, in addition to the cases already mentioned, conventional 
batteries, flywheels, ultracapacitors, flow batteries, and superconducting magnetic 
energy storage. A complex case is described in Denholm (2006), where a completely 
renewable generation system combines wind energy, compressed air energy storage 
(CAES), and biomass gasification. Baseload wind systems using CAES may require 
combustion of natural gas and the development of long distance transmission, thus 
decreasing the environmental and social compatibility of the system. However, the 
use of biofuel might reduce the net carbon emissions of the system, increasing its 
renewable features. CAES systems are also mentioned as an emerging technique (EU 
2008), because of their ability in managing peaks of demand and offering opportuni-
ties for efficiency improvement (Najjar and Jubeh 2006).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

84	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
UTES is generally intended as energy stocking for the colder period; however, 
stocking for warmer periods may also be practiced. The basic question is that 
demand for cooling buildings has significantly increased in recent years due to sev-
eral factors, such as population and rising comfort standards and, not least, global 
warming. The most common equipment for building cooling is electrically driven 
devices. A significantly less energy-consuming alternative is to stock “winter cold” 
in the form of snow and ice for subsequent utilization during the summer. This 
ancient technique is feasible in large areas of the world. A large-scale application is 
the snow cooling plant at the hospital in Sundsvall, Sweden, operating since 2000 
(Skogsberg and Nordell 2001). Snow is stored in a shallow pit (140 × 60 m) of 
watertight asphalt, with a capacity for 60,000 m3 (40,000 tons) of snow. Meltwater 
from snow storage is cleaned and pumped to the hospital and, after the cooling 
usage, the heated meltwater is recirculated into the snow storage. The average cool-
ing energy required by the hospital during the summer amounts to approximately 
700 MWh, with a maximum cooling power of 1.4 MW; 93 percent of the cooling 
demand was attained by 19,000 m3 of snow and the rest by a cooling machine. Most 
of the snow (75 percent) was natural, integrated as needed by snowguns. Without 
thermal insulation and cold extraction, a 30,000 m3 snow pile in Sundsvall would 
be gone by mid-June. A 0.2 m cover of wood chips reduces melting considerably; 
in this case, 75 percent of the snow is preserved and may be utilized for the energy 
saving described, which, in conclusion, is characterized by an extremely cheap 
cost of energy (average close to 60 €/MWh) and a long life expectancy (40 years). 
Moreover, snow/ice cooling plants have a great potential in industry, agriculture, 
and comfort cooling; artificial cooling media are often inflammable, poisonous, and 
environmentally hazardous.
In conclusion, the problem of energy stocking is strategic and is gaining increased 
importance with renewable energies (e.g., stocking solar heat during the day for night 
usage or the presence of wind during a period of no demand). The issue is also 
addressed by the EU reference document on energy efficiency techniques (2008). 
As forms of energy are very different, some of them are more difficult or impossible 
to store. Mechanical and thermal energy cannot be easily stored (e.g., dams and hot 
water tanks). However, the most important case is electricity. Potentially, electric-
ity is stored in batteries, which is a form of chemical storage, just like fuels. This 
probably represents the most successful form of energy storage in terms of trans-
portability, energy density, and duration. In conclusion, the advantages of storage 
technologies are obvious, but they also offer strategic potential to improve both eco-
nomics and the environmental performance of renewable energy sources; external 
fuels are no longer necessary and excess generation by renewables may be efficiently 
used (Gross et al. 2003).
4.5	 Holding Costs and Energy
Variable holding cost is a research issue that has attracted attention for years. Works 
may be found in the literature in 1980 (Muhlemann and Valtis-Spanopoulos 1980) 
and 1982 (Weiss 1982), while a comprehensive review on perishable good inven-
tories may be found in Nahmias (1982). There are further excellent investigations 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
85
dating from the 1990s (Goh 1994; Giri and Chaudhuri 1998) and more recently by 
Alfares (2007) and Ferguson et al. (2007). The contribution by Goh (1994) is partic-
ularly valuable because of the two types of holding cost functions discussed: (1) the 
nonlinear function of the period spent in inventory by the item, and (2) the nonlinear 
function related to the amount of on-hand inventory. As far as the link between vari-
able holding cost and this chapter topic is concerned, it is worth noting that variable 
holding costs may depend on the variability of the economic value of the item and on 
the energy required to preserve it. This is the case of food, where the energy and the 
relevant technical equipment required to preserve it is largely influenced by external 
conditions (temperature, humidity, etc.), thus depending on season and geographic 
stocking of the products, as in the case of the different levels of energy needed to 
preserve food in winter and summer.
Just to mention a couple of familiar examples, freezers and refrigerators are com-
monly used, together with the consequent problem of energy bills and the decision 
whether to keep things fresh in the refrigerator or pretreat and freeze them. Energy 
is necessary to preserve food and other products such as drugs, but also blood; the 
greater the energy used (frozen food vs. fresh), the longer the life of the product. 
Another case of increased holding costs is related to the heating power; a biomass 
subjected to compression (pellet and briquettes production) increases its energy con-
tent per unit of weight, thus increasing its commercial value and, therefore, its holding 
cost. This topic will be discussed in Section 4.8. The holding cost of biomass deriva-
tives increases as a consequence of the manufacturing process added value and the 
cost of storage away from moisture. In other words, the relative values of the holding 
costs introduce the dilemma about the timing and the opportunity of transforming the 
biomass into its derivatives. However, the value of the item stored may also decrease 
over time, for example, because of its energy content decay or because of the energy 
spent to preserve the stock itself. The former is the case of batteries, the charge of 
which decreases over time, and the second is the case of regassifiers and UTES.
The work by Alfares (2007) introduces a holding cost variable according to a step 
function, this being an interesting model for value increase of biomass because of 
pellet or briquette manufacturing or, in general, for products for which longer storage 
periods require extra care. The same contribution (Alfares, 2007) emphasizes how 
the model proposed problems, where an item is stored in different places with differ-
ent holding costs (e.g., perishable items, for which the longer the time to be spent in 
storage, the more sophisticated the services and facilities needed and, consequently, 
the higher the holding costs). Also Giri and Chaudhuri (1994) remark on how vari-
able holding costs are related to supermarket management of fresh food: increasing 
costs are determined by improved storage facilities to prevent spoilage and maintain 
freshness. Of course, integrating policies other than preservation may be put into 
action, such as markdowns or removal of spoiled products. (See also Ferguson et al. 
[2007] for a real-life application of variable holding cost models.)
However, as technological and strategic issues drastically influence the matter in 
question, it is not possible to neglect the impact of alternatives in the supply chain 
management. An example is offered by Bendiksen and Dreyer (2003) referring to 
fish processing in Norway. Even if the focus of the study is on plant locations (of a 
specific region and product) and the relative value, the impact of the technological 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

86	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
change related to the supply chain of the product considered is evident, as it may 
bring into question the strategic geographic position of the plant itself. The possibil-
ity of storing fish on board immediately after the open-sea capture without quality 
loss might change the structure of the chain and the consequent distribution of inven-
tories. Time for open-sea fishing is extended by onboard storing. The most relevant 
technological change exists on new vessels, where the catch is frozen on board, thus 
changing the supply to processing plants from fresh to frozen raw material. Such a 
change determines the need for new storing plants for frozen fish (twelve new plants 
in five–six years, according to the Norwegian case) and processing cycles. In addi-
tion, the technological change modifies the approach to the strategic location of fish 
processing plants, together with the role of the supply-chain actors. Closeness to 
customer areas or fast transport stations becomes more remunerative than closeness 
to rich fishing areas. What is relevant to our purpose is that such a case also shows an 
example of a different distribution of inventories obtained by putting a larger energy 
content at the preliminary stage (cooler fish storage conditions for longer periods). 
This is not a new approach in the food sector; for example, cheese and meat may 
be seasoned or smoked for longer conservation, but such a practice requires longer 
times and energy contributions (smoking, drying buildings, ventilation, temperature 
and humidity control). When compared to fresher products and regardless of the 
taste, the difference lies in higher prices and longer shelf lives. Nevertheless, the 
emerging concept is that at the preliminary stages, the product acquires higher val-
ues because of the contribution of energy (frozen stage and storage). Fluctuations in 
market demand may be covered thanks to a larger inventory level and a longer prod-
uct life (frozen). The case discussed introduces the topic of “cold logistic chains,” 
which are significantly affected by energy-related issues.
4.6	 “Cold” and “Fresh” Supply Chains
Heating and freezing are some of the oldest physical processes for food conserva-
tion, and the contribution of energy to the processes themselves is evident. Certainly, 
heating was formerly used because it was easy to heat by fire; however producing cold 
temperatures, excluding places where ice naturally forms, turned out to be a compli-
cated task for centuries. In the nineteenth century, Norway conducted a flourishing 
trade in ice and transported it as far as the tropics. The first cold-storage premises 
were opened in Chicago in 1878, almost contemporarily to the first consignments of 
frozen meat from South America and Australia to Europe. The first household refrig-
erators appeared on the market in 1910. In 1925, trade in frozen goods for the home 
began in the United States. Refrigerators became widespread from 1950 onward and 
freezers from 1960 (Geiges 1996). Nowadays, chilled and frozen foods are moved 
worldwide. The different transport chains, together with their technical features, are 
described in James et al. (2006). Along these supply chains, energy plays a strategic 
role, being necessary to guarantee quality-based processes, influencing the economic 
performance, too. For example, supermarket refrigeration systems consume about 20 
percent of the total energy of the store. This figure must be corrected to also take into 
account the auxiliary equipment consumption (14 percent) and the energy used for 
the building air-conditioning (17 percent; Getu and Basal 2007).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
87
However, cold supply chain management implies a rather peculiar approach. 
An interesting introduction to the problem may be found in Bogataj et al. (2005). 
The emerging factor in cold supply chains is the visibility and the control, in par-
ticular of the temperature at each step of the chain, which is necessary to pre-
serve food and guarantee its quality to final customers (these issues easily extend 
to perishables). Of course, the progress in technologies and logistics has boosted 
the cold chains, thanks to monitoring, efficient transportation, and communica-
tion information technologies. It should be noted that temperature control is a 
critical issue; temperatures higher than the set values may definitely compromise 
the product, while lower ones may compromise the quality. According to Bogataj 
et al. (2005), this issue is also emerging thanks to regulations such as EN92/1CEE 
on temperature recording in transportation, stocking, and selling points, giving 
us the modern concept of “cold traceability.” In their contribution, starting from 
Grubbstrom’s (1967, 1998) approach to net present value (NPV) and MRP, Bogataj 
et al. (2005) argue that the analysis in frequency space may be more effective 
than the traditional time-based one, offering the opportunity to model perturba-
tions in temperature and the necessary prompt reactions to them. The variations 
in temperature (disturbances) are introduced as delays determining an impact on 
product deterioration, therefore adding an additional cost due to planned cooling. 
The NPV analysis allows the appreciation of the impact of energy-related costs in 
the inventories distributed over the supply chain and the entire time horizon. Such 
an approach may allow the understanding of the basic difference between the fresh 
product chain (shorter product lives, fast transportation, lower energy contribution) 
and the frozen product chain (longer product lives, slower transportation, higher 
energy contribution). The two chains may be compared, remembering that mixed 
situations may be found in practice (e.g., freezing–defrosting–cooking–freezing or 
fresh delivery–freezing).
The study of food supply chains is of challenging interest to inventory and produc-
tion researchers. In fact, the fresh food chain is affected by peculiarities close to typi-
cal production issues, but worth investigating (e.g., Akkerman and Van Donk 2007):
	
1.	 Frequently, setup times are sequence dependent (think about cleaning, 
equipment regulation, and selection of packages) both in time and costs.
	
2.	 Storage should be limited for fresh food, not only because of perishability 
and shelf life, but also because of dedicated equipment and space, which 
could be additionally limited when product mixing is to be avoided.
	
3.	 Processing should be fast, by means of traced and high-quality systems.
4.7	 Energy-Related Practices: Implications 
on Inventory Management
It has been shown how the contribution of energy to productive costs may be par-
ticularly relevant. However, it could even be overwhelming in specific industrial 
sectors, such as the production of silica bars, steel, and primary aluminum. This 
has led practitioners to focus on technical solutions allowing the reduction of 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

88	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
energy consumption per unit produced and energy waste, so as to gain competi-
tive advantages. Frequently, such technical solutions impact inventory features, 
stocked quantities, and their management. The following section will illustrate 
some of these cases to clarify the problem and note its impact on inventory 
management.
4.7.1	 The Aluminum Case
Aluminum is widely recognized as the “green metal,” because of its ease of recy-
cling, durability, and properties, such as lightness and resistance to corrosion. The 
productive cycle of aluminum and its alloys is based on minerals (primary indus-
try, using bauxite) or recycled scraps (secondary industry), the latter process being 
several times less energy intensive. Recycling processes, as in the case of steel and 
copper, significantly contribute to the sustainable development of society; metals 
are continuously reused at the end of product lifetimes. However, the energy spent 
on melting and refining the material is definitely lost because of metal solidification 
in ingots. Therefore, an approximately identical quantity of energy is to be spent 
if the material is subsequently reused for casting or die-casting processes, gener-
ally leading to cost and pollution inefficiencies from a chain perspective. This has 
generated interest in alternative structures of supply chains, as described in Diana 
et al. (2007). The traditional aluminum supply chain is also described and studied 
in Khoo et al. (2001), where a conventional supply of solid ingots is considered. An 
alternative practice was initially observed in Germany and is spreading in Italy. It is 
linked to the supply of the molten metal, transported by adequately equipped trucks 
carrying coated and insulated ladles. Of course, this supply method enables the final 
user, when properly equipped with cranes, to save the remelting energy and reduce 
the storage costs (as fewer ingots are stored in warehouses). The refiner gets some 
advantages, too: the productive cycle of furnaces may be optimized to reduce energy 
consumption and storage costs are also reduced. Of course, there are some disadvan-
tages, especially from the managerial point of view:
The necessary closer cooperation between the user and the supplier is not 
• 
always perceived as a competitive advantage, particularly on the buyer’s 
side.
Both melting (supplier) and production (buyer) cycles have to be synchro-
• 
nized to prevent dead times in the buyer’s production. This may occur 
when trucks are late or when production is delayed even though the molten 
metal, contained in the transported ladle, may be kept in the liquid phase 
for a given time with limited energy contributions. Such a requirement 
makes the system more rigid from the managerial point of view.
The limitation is particularly apparent with uncertain delivery times, con-
• 
sidering the truck-based transport system is more prone to delays.
The quantity of material transported by the truck is less in the case of 
• 
liquid metal than in the case of solid ingots because of the ladle shape and 
weight.
Investment in new equipment (ladles, cranes, fixtures) is needed.
• 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
89
These considerations represent a Pareto efficient frontier, which can be identified 
by analytical models (Diana et al. 2007). Such an efficient frontier is of particular 
interest when environmental concerns are considered, too, as emissions saved at the 
remelting phase are partially lost by the reduced transport capacity. A schematic 
representation of the Pareto efficient frontier is offered in Figure 4.2. In addition, a 
mix of different types of supplies (i.e., sometimes metal ingots and other times mol-
ten metal ladles) may be a strategic leverage to mitigate the impact on the productive 
system flexibility.
From the inventory point of view, this practice leads to a decrease in the final 
product stocks at the supplier, which induces a reduction in stocked raw material at 
the buyer. These aspects are highlighted by certain cost components, such as:
Aluminum ingot solidification costs, which cover the time for which a 
• 
chosen machine (and the related space) is dedicated to containing the mol-
ten metal during the transition from liquid to solid phase, plus the time 
needed to cool the solid ingot before safe handling.
Yearly depreciation of the specialist equipment (e.g., portable ladles to 
• 
carry out transportation and overhead cranes with related fixtures).
Ingot holding costs, which include the space required as well as the inven-
• 
tory equipment, plus management and financial costs (capital tied up and 
opportunity costs).
Costs due for ingot melting at the buy
• 
er’s site.
Warm-up costs of the liquid aluminu
• 
m from the transported ladle tem-
perature to the furnace temperature and for maintaining the temperature 
at the ladle before use.
The case described presents some similarities with steel and iron production.
Pollution level
Current Supply Chain position
Pollution decrease
Costs
decrease
Pollution &
Costs
decrease
Total cost
Figure 4.2  Schematic representation of the Pareto efficient frontier.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

90	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
4.7.2	 The Iron and Steel Case
The iron and steel industry is one of the most strategic and consolidated, but it is 
also one of the most energy intensive processes, accounting for the 19 percent of 
the European industrial energy use in 2004. A common plant type consists of an 
electric arc furnace (EAF) feeding a continuous casting line, the final products of 
which are square-section billets. Given the high temperature of the process (about 
1500°C), billet cooling requires time before delivery to the final customer. Such 
a productive phase takes time and so it is susceptible to optimization, especially 
because of holding costs for the “warm inventory,” which are directly proportional 
to the time interval during which a billet remains in the warehouse, even if it is 
simply cooling (Zanoni and Zavanella 2005; Ferretti et al. 2006). A survey on steel 
plant management (Tang et al. 2001) emphasized that the optimization may refer to 
the whole system or to only a part of it, as typical stages of steel production are steel 
making (SM), continuous casting (CC), and hot rolling (HR). In this case, when the 
billets are produced for a subsequent rolling phase, the loss of energy related to their 
cooling is evident. In fact, such a situation implies that billets are cooled, warmed, 
again, and then rolled. Cooling requires time and space, while warming needs a 
dedicated furnace and the related energy contribution. Alternative technologies, 
such as compact strip production (CSP), present a higher energy performance and 
a simplification in the process stages. Basically, slab continuous casting is coupled 
with continuous strip rolling, thus implying the on-time utilization of cast material, 
shortly after its exit from the EAF. A limiting process is represented by endless strip 
production (ESP), which will allow producing strips directly from liquid-core steel. 
Savings in holding costs (space, cooling, and stocking times) and the reduction of 
the work in process (WIP) are evident. These savings are to be added to the lower 
capital tied up with slabs, and the lower emission levels connected with suppressing 
the reheating process.
The viability of using the energy content transferred to the billet during the SM 
phase, immediately after the CC, has also been exploited by transporting billets in 
special sarcophagi made by refractory. It is reasonable to assume that the same con-
siderations made for the aluminum case still apply: the two production systems (SM 
plus CC and HR) must be synchronized, additional equipment is required, and, in the 
case of truck transport, capacity per delivery is reduced.
It is worth noting that such a practice is recommended in the EU (2001) best avail-
able technologies (BATs). In particular, the reduction of heat loss is recommended 
for intermediate products, thus impacting WIP storage, logistics, and product flows. 
Minimizing storage time and insulating the slabs/blooms (e.g., by heat conservation 
boxes or thermal covers) is suggested. Furthermore, changes in logistics and intermedi-
ate storage lead to the maximization of hot charging, up to direct charging or rolling.
Both of the cases described show how inventories may give up one of their tra-
ditional roles—the function of decoupling (acting as reservoirs or buffers) two pro-
ductive stages or subsequent levels of supply chains. Such a change is dictated by 
energy-related issues, which, in their turn, impact on convenience (cost compres-
sion), sustainability (emission reductions), technological changes, and management 
principles (scheduling, WIP, and lead-times evaluation).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
91
4.8	 Biomass and Its Derivatives
Recent years have seen a renewed interest in biomass, together with a growth in its 
transformation processes and the use of its derivates used as fuels. Such an interest is 
linked both to environmental concerns (neutral cycle of biomasses, which act as CO2 
traps during their lives, releasing it because of usage or decomposition) and the cost 
increase of traditional materials for energy generation (e.g., oil and gas). Basically, 
biomass can be regarded as sun energy stored to be further extracted by different 
processes, such as wood burning. Biomass represents the first type of fuel used by 
mankind, but its prospective in supply and storage are quite new, given the pecu-
liar aspects of its more recent applications. This fact is probably twofold. First, new 
biomass processes are flourishing and becoming competitive. Second, biomass has 
usually been considered as a local resource, even though the demand and the avail-
able sources are not homogeneously spread all over the world. Some countries have 
excess biomass for their own energy economy, while in other countries, biomass 
availability is limited due to population density and industrial activity (Forsberg 
2000). Furthermore, the increasing use of bioenergy in Europe has already created a 
new market for the supply of this resource, which can be satisfied (in the short term) 
also by an increase in the access to biomass over a larger geographical area, thus 
increasing the interest for the relevant supply chains, particularly processes, storage, 
and transportation. In other terms, using an appropriate logistic system, access to 
biomass can be improved over a large geographical area (even though some coun-
tries, such as Italy, explicitly encourage “short” [70 km] biomass supply chains). 
Both the studies by Forsberg (2000) and Hamelinck et al. (2005), using life cycle 
inventory (LCI), confirm that long-range transportation may also allow an efficient 
exploitation of biomass, without losing its environmental benefits.
However, as the authors suggest, the optimization of the chain should consider the 
processes occurring at the different levels of the chain itself. In fact, technological 
evolution enables biomass transformation to facilitate its storage and transport along 
the chain up to its final use (examples of derivatives are biofuels, pellets, briquettes, 
and chips). These transformations require energy utilization, which basically deter-
mines the increase of the specific heat (i.e., kilojoules per kilogram or kilojoules per 
cubic meter) and the density of the biomass, opening interesting frontiers to research 
applied to the optimization of the biomass supply chain and its inventories. For exam-
ple, Gigler et al. (1999) discuss the configuration of biomass supply (willows) to energy 
plants. Basically, wood may be supplied to plants differing in power size and material 
utilization (combustion or gasification), but alternatives characterize the chain steps. 
Wood may be stocked as chips, dried (forced cycles), and finally delivered after a 
given time span (the typical horizon is from a few months to one year). Alternatively, 
willows may be simply cut (chunks or stems), transported, and centrally chipped. 
According to Gigler et al., the former alternative is more economically attractive for 
deliveries within six months, while the latter applies to longer-term deliveries. A sig-
nificant impact is exerted by drying, which can be energy based (forced drying) or 
natural, thus determining an impact on costs, emissions, and energy requirement by 
the cycle. A further interesting finding is that supply chains for gasification plants are 
more expensive than conventional combustion ones if the cost evaluation is expressed 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

92	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
in euro per ton dry matter (DM), but the cost is lower when expressed as euro per 
kilowatt hour, due to the higher efficiency of the technological cycle. This shows 
the appropriateness of a nontraditional analysis, which does not take into account 
solely conventional costs (e.g., euros per ton or euros per year), but also engineering-
oriented measures such as euros per kilowatt hour or euros per kgCO2 to consider 
emission costs. For example, Figure 4.3 shows the trend of the lower heating value 
(LHV), measured on field, of wood residuals (chips) in the sawmill department of an 
Italian company. As time flows, natural drying lets LHV increase, thus resulting in 
an increased chip value as fuel. However, holding costs mitigate this positive effect, 
leading to a lower net value, which depends on the stocking equipment.
The distribution of pellets represents a very interesting reference, too. According 
to Vinterback (2004), distribution may represent 30 percent of the cost for a resi-
dential pellet consumer, and inventory may be greater than 50 percent. Sensitivity 
to moisture by the pellet fuel makes storage a rather critical activity. Improving pel-
let distribution and, in particular, inventory management at the distributors might 
point users toward this heating alternative, appropriately considered as environmen-
tally friendly. Technological innovation has considered storage at the final customer 
by the producer—even if demand profile and productive capacity generally make 
inventory a necessary solution—and room control during pellet storing, even at the 
transportation phase. The ordering mechanism is a rather interesting situation for 
inventory modeling; there exists a reordering point, a maximum storage capacity, 
and the need for a safety stock and uncertain demand.
It is worth noting that wood supply chains are complicated by the profiles of 
demand and raw material availability, the latter being related to the seasonality 
Days
Gross Value
Net Value
LHV
Economic value [€/kg]
Lower Heating values (LHV) [MJ/kg]
20.00
15.00
10.00
5.00
-
Reduction of
the value due
to holding costs
Figure 4.3  Experimental investigation on the lower heating value of wood chips (poplar) 
during natural drying, and estimated gross and net values.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
93
of forest management. This case is frequent in the pulp industry (Carlsson and 
Ronnqvist 2005): the availability of raw material naturally increases in the forest 
up to midsummer, while harvesting builds up the stock between autumn and early 
spring, depending on both cultivating traditions and regulations. In the case of pulp, 
demand from mills is considered stable while, in the case of biomass fuels, demand 
is affected by high seasonality, so that the need for balancing raw material availabil-
ity, production capacity, and final demand reflects on a series of inventories distrib-
uted over the supply chain.
In general, the design of a biomass supply chain is particularly interesting because 
of the transformations of the products (which substantially change their techni-
cal parameters) and the impact of transportation on optimal choices (Hamelinck 
et al. 2005; Gronalt and Rauch 2007). It is also accepted that, within the renew-
able resources framework, biomasses present a complicated scenario, because of 
the variety of feedstocks, conversion technologies, and final usage (e.g., domestic or 
industrial, electricity- and heat-oriented ones). Therefore, a key issue is to secure sus-
tainable supplies of relatively low cost fuels (Gross et al. 2003). However, their ben-
efits are evident, being largely available, flexible (as described), and environmentally 
friendly. As shown in Hamelinck et al. 2005, Gronalt and Rauch 2007, and Gross 
et al. 2003, biomass presents interesting features for its alternatives in supply chains 
and the related inventories. For example, demand is affected by seasonal fluctuations 
to be added to “regular consumption (the latter component being significantly deter-
mined by the paper and furniture industries and/or the combined heat and power 
plants, producing both heat and electricity).” As far as transportation is concerned, 
biomass in loose form is competitive within a short range (50 km) and wood chipping 
is effective in intermediate ranges (up to 100 km), while longer distances require 
biomass transformation into derivatives (e.g., pellets, biofuels). Safety stocks must be 
kept at terminals and plants (expressed in millions of loose cubic meters), guaran-
teeing a set service level in a variable lead time context, limited stock capacity, and 
seasonal availability of raw material. Harvesting windows are limited, according to 
regulations and selected species, and the energetic properties of the raw materials are 
also highly variable, as in the case of wet springs and snowy winters and vice versa, 
thus explaining why pretreatments are frequently hoped for. Furthermore, harvest-
ing methods may differ and transformation processes, even by mobile equipment, 
may take place at different levels/steps of the chain, altering biomass features and 
introducing energy contributions.
These observations lead to attention on conversion processes, which differ in tech-
nology cost and environmental impact (e.g., see Hamelinck et al. 2005), but also offer 
to assimilate, from the distribution point of view, biofuels (such as refined ones) to 
fossil fuels. Basically, bioenergy may be transported in different forms (chips, pellets, 
charcoal, ethanol, etc., and, of course, electricity). Such bioenergy chains, includ-
ing their different products and densification processes—aimed at improving prod-
uct technical features and reducing transport movements and volumes occupied at 
the storage stages—differ in external energy input and energy density of the out-
put. Furthermore, they also differ in vulnerability to, for example, moisture (drying 
may be natural or artificial, but ineffective storage may thwart the process), bacte-
ria, accidents (such as material losses for storage activities; about 15 percent), and 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

94	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
self-ignition. It is interesting to note that biomass deterioration is mainly dependent 
on the material properties, such as moisture content, available nutrients, and chemical 
structure. It also depends on the type of storage (Jirjis 1995): for example, the low-
moisture content of pellets limits the growth of microorganisms (Lehtikangas 2000).
Inventory models encompass these aspects in the concept of holding costs, includ-
ing obsolescence and perishability. In addition, changes in heating value suggest 
opportune modeling of these parameters familiar to inventory researchers and prac-
titioners. According to Hamelinck et al. (2005), storing in open-air costs 1.1 €/(m3y), 
while pellets and dried chips must be bunkered at 87 €/(m3y), up to liquid storage costs 
at 310 €/(m3y). However, it should be emphasized that biomass inventories (and, more 
generally, energy-related ones) should be optimized not only according to cost func-
tion, but also according to CO2 balance calculations, this being a rather critical aspect 
to sustainability. Although the environmental savings with respect to fossil fuels are 
evident (electricity produced by pellets is in the 7–32 kgCO2/MWh range against the 
370–1200 kgCO2/MWh range of gas or coal), some renewable technologies should still 
increase their competitiveness with fossil fuels, thanks to environmental external ele-
ments. To this end, it is opportune to point out that technology changes may modify 
the perspective, as in the case of carbon storage in soil and litter. Furthermore, both 
environmental and economic balances should take into account that biomass may 
generate “coupled products” (e.g., glycerine from the production of rape methyl ester), 
thus providing additional usefulness to these natural resources (Kaltschmitt et al. 
1997). Finally, CO2 emissions and energy required in biomass supply chains severely 
influence the chain sustainability. The ratio between the primary energy and the 
delivered energy is around 1.25 for European crop pellets (the ratio rises to 1.87–1.93 
for methanol chains), that is, extra energy inputs to the chain (mainly derived by fossil 
fuels) and material losses represent more than one-quarter of the final energy pro-
duced (the pellet chain loses about 15 percent of the initial energy). Similarly, Cocco 
(2007) compares three bioenergy chains, offering evidence particularly favorable to 
electrical power generation from biomass (miscanthus and poplar) both in terms of 
net balances and ratio between output and input energy. Within the framework of the 
assumptions made (e.g., average yield per hectare and irrigation requirement), it is 
interesting to observe how energy inputs flow through the chain.
4.9	 Concluding Remarks
Energy belongs to and surrounds everyone’s life and, probably, both increased con-
sciousness and repeated shocks have increased the awareness of this. Inventory 
theory, thanks to its principles and rationale, may substantially help the understand-
ing and the efficient use of this resource. To this end, the present chapter aimed to 
show how energy is related to stocks and how it may influence them. Industrial cases 
and examples from supply chains were presented to let the relevant aspects of the 
inventories, which are related to energy, emerge. The environmental topic was also 
addressed, this being directly linked to energy in terms of emissions and environ-
mental accounting. The whole set of issues proposed shows how the energy-related 
issues are still to be investigated in the view of inventory theory, opening wide oppor-
tunities to researchers and practitioners, with a consequent benefit to the society.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
95
References
Akkerman, R., and D. P. van Donk. 2007. Product prioritisation in a two-stage food production 
system with intermediate storage. Int J of Prod Econ 108(1-2):43–53.
Alfares, H. K. 2007. Inventory model with stock-level dependent demand rate and variable 
holding cost. Int J of Prod Econ 108(1-2):259–265.
Amundsen, E. S. 1991. Seasonal fluctuations of demand and optimal inventories of a non-
renewable resource such as natural gas. Resour Energ 13(3):285–306.
Bendiksen, B. J., and B. Dreyer. 2003. Technological changes—the impact on the raw material 
flow and production. Eur J Oper Res 144(2):237–246.
Bogataj, M., L. Bogataj, and R. Vodopivec. 2005. Stability of perishable goods in cold logistic 
chains. Int J of Prod Econ 93-94:345–356.
Carlsson, D., and M. Ronnqvist. 2005. Supply chain management in forestry—case studies at 
Sodra Cell AB. Eur J Oper Res 163(3):589­–616.
Chase, R. B., and N. J. Aquilano. 1995. Production and operations management: Manufacturing 
and services, 7th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill/Irwin.
Cocco, D. 2007. Comparative study on energy sustainability of biofuel production chains. 
Proc IME J Power Energ 221(5):637–645.
Couto de Oliveira, G., S. Granville, and M. Pereira. 2002. Energy. In Handbook of applied 
optimisation, edited by P.M. Pardalos and M.G.C. Resende. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press.
Denholm, P. 2006. Improving the technical, environmental, and social performance of wind 
energy systems using biomass-based energy storage. Renew Energ 31(9):1355–1370.
Diana, A., I. Ferretti, S. Zanoni, and L. Zavanella. 2007. Greening the aluminium supply chain. 
Int J of Prod Econ 108(1-2):236–245.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2003. The global liquefied natural gas market: 
Status and outlook. DOE/EIA-0637.
Energy Information Administration (EIA). 2006. US underground natural gas storage develop-
ment: 1998–2005.
European Commission (EU). December 2001. Reference document on best available tech-
niques in the ferrous metals processing industry.
European Commission (EU). June 2008. Reference document on best available techniques for 
energy efficiency.
Ferguson, M., V. Jayaraman, and G. C. Souza. 2007. An application of the EOQ model with 
nonlinear holding cost to inventory management of perishables. Eur J Oper Res 
180(1):485–490.
Ferretti, I., S. Zanoni, and L. Zavanella. 2006. Production-inventory scheduling using ant sys-
tem metaheuristic. Int J of Prod Econ 104(2):317–326.
Forsberg, G. 2000. Biomass energy transport: Analysis of bioenergy transport chains using life 
cycle inventory method. Biomass Bioenergy 19(1):17–30.
Geiges, O. 1996. Microbial processes in frozen food. Adv Space Res 18(12):109–118.
Getu, H. M., and P. K. Basal. 2007. Modeling and performance analyses of evaporators in 
frozen-food supermarket display cabinets at low temperatures. Int J Refrigeration 
30(7):1227–1243.
Gigler, J. K., G. Meerdink, E. M. T. Hendrix. 1999. Willow supply strategies to energy plants. 
Biomass Bioenergy 17(3):185–198.
Giri, B. C., and K. S. Chaudhuri. 1998. Deterministic model of perishable inventory with 
stock-dependent demand rate and non linear holding cost. Eur J Oper Res 105(3): 
467–474.
Goh, M. 1994. EOQ models with general demand and holding cost functions. Eur J Oper Res 
73(1):50–54.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

96	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Greaker, M., and E. Lund Sagen. 2008. Explaining experience curves for new energy tech-
nologies: A case study of liquefied natural gas. Energ Econ 30(6):2899–2911.
Gronalt, M., and P. Rauch. 2007. Designing a regional forest fuel supply network. Biomass 
Bioenergy 31(6):393–402.
Gross, R., M. Leach, and A. Bauen. 2003. Progress in renewable energy. Environ Int 
29(1):105–122.
Grubbström, R. W. 1967. On the application of the Laplace transform in certain economic 
problems. Manag Sci 13(7):558–567.
Grubbström, R. W. 1998. A net present value approach to safety stocks in planned production. 
Int J of Prod Econ 56-57:213–229.
Grubbström, R. W. and Hultman, P. 1989. Exergetic and inventory-theoretic aspects of energy 
storage. Eng Costs Prod Econ 15, 343–350.
Hamelinck, C. N., R. A. A. Suurs, and A. Faaij. 2005. International bioenergy transport costs 
and energy balance. Biomass Bioenergy 29(4):114–134.
Holz, F., von Hirschhausen, C. and Kemfert, C. 2008. A strategic model of European gas sup-
ply (GASMOD). Energy Economics, 30:766–788.
Hudson, C. R., and A. B. Badiru. 2008. Energy systems. In Operations research and manage-
ment science handbook, edited by R. A. Ravindran. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Italian Authority for Electric Energy and Gas (AEEG). 2006. Resolution #56/06. Approvazione 
dei corrispettivi di impresa e determinazione dei corrispettivi unici per l’attività di 
stoccaggio, anno termico 2006–2007.
James, S. J., C. James, and J. A. Evans, 2006. Modelling of food transportation systems—a 
review. Int J Refrigeration 29(6):947­–957.
Jirjis, R. 1995. Storage and drying of wood fuel. Biomass Bioenergy 9(1-5):181–190.
Kaltschmitt, M., G. A. Reinhardt, and T. Stelzer. 1997. Life cycle analysis of biofuels under 
different environmental aspects. Biomass Bioenergy 12(2):121–134.
Khoo, H., T. A. Spedding, I. Bainbridge, and D. M. R. Taplin. 2001. Creating a green supply 
chain. Greener Manag Int 35:71–88.
Kreith, F., and R. West. 2004. Fallacies of hydrogen economy: A critical analysis of hydrogen 
production and utilisation. J Energ Resour Tech 126(4):249–257.
Loganathan, G. V. 2008. Water resources. In Operations research and management science 
handbook, edited by R. A. Ravindran. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
Lehtikangas, P. 2000. Storage effects on pelletised sawdust, logging residues and bark. Biomass 
Bioenergy 19(5):287–293.
Meyer, R. R., M. H. Rothkopf, and S. A. Smith. 1979. Reliability and inventory in a produc-
tion-storage systems. Manag Sci 25(8):799–807.
Moutoux, R., and F. Barnes. 2007. Wind integrated compressed air energy storage in Colorado. 
sixth biennial conference on Electrical Energy Storage Systems Applications and 
Technologies San Francisco, California, Sept. 23–26, 2007.
Muhlemann, A. P., and N. P. Valtis-Spanopoulos. 1980. A variable holding cost rate EOQ 
model. Eur J Oper Res 4(2):132–135.
Muneer, T., S. Younes, N. Lambert, and J. Kubie. 2006. Life cycle assessment of a medi-
um-sized photovoltaic facility at a high latitude location. Proc IME J Power Energ 
220(6):517–524.
Nahmias, S. 1982. Perishable inventory theory: A review. Oper Res 30(4):680–708.
Najjar, Y. S. H., and N. M. Jubeh. 2006. Comparison of performance of compressed-air ener-
gy-storage plant with compressed-air storage with humidification. Proc IME J Power 
Energ 220(6):581–588.
Oren, S. S., and S. Hong Wan. 1986. Optimal strategic petroleum reserve policies: A steady 
state analysis. Manag Sci 32(1):14–29.
Patel, M. R. 2006. Wind and solar power systems. Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Energy and Inventories	
97
Pereira, M., and L. Pinto. 1991. Multi-stage stochastic optimisation applied to energy plan-
ning. Math Program 52(1-3): 359–375.
Prabhu, N. U. 1980. Stochastic storage processes: Queues, insurance risk and dams. New 
York: Springer-Verlag.
Read, E., and J. George. 1990. Dual dynamic programming for linear production/inventory 
systems. J Comput Math 19(11):29–42.
Rout, U. K., K. Akimoto, F. Sano, J. Oda, T. Homma, and T. Tomoda. 2008. Impact assessment 
of the increase in fossil fuel prices on the global energy system, with and without CO2 
concentration stabilisation. Energy Policy 36(9):3477–3484.
Sanner, B., C. Karytsas, D. Mendrions, and S. Rybach. 2003. Current status of ground source 
heat pumps and underground thermal energy storage in Europe. Geothermics 32(4-6): 
579–588.
Skogsberg, K., and B. Nordell. 2001. The Sundsvall hospital snow storage. Cold Regions Sci 
Tech 32(1):63–70.
Tang, L., J. Liu, A. Rong, and Z. Yang. 2001. A review of planning and scheduling systems and 
methods for integrated steel production. Eur J Oper Res 133(1):1–20.
Vinterback, J. 2004. Pell-Sim dynamic model for forecasting storage and distribution of pel-
lets. Biomass Bioenergy 27:629–643.
Weiss, H. J. 1982. Economic Order Quantity models with nonlinear holding cost. Eur J Oper 
Res 9(1):56–60.
Winston, W. L. 1994. Operations Research. Boston: ITP Duxbury Press.
Yohanis, Y. G., and B. Norton. 2006. Including embodied energy considerations at the concep-
tual stage of building design. Proc IME J Power Energ 220(3):271–288.
Zanoni, S., and L. Zavanella. 2005. Model and analysis of integrated production-inventory 
system: The case of steel production. Int J Prod Econ 93-94(1):197–205.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

99
5 Healthcare Supply 
Chain Management
Peter Kelle, Helmut Schneider, Sonja 
Wiley-Patton, and John Woosley
Louisiana State University
Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Contents
5.1	
Introduction...................................................................................................100
5.1.1	 Magnitude of Healthcare Industry and Impact 
of Pharmaceutical Costs....................................................................100
5.1.2	 Special Conditions and Terminology of Healthcare SCM................102
5.1.2.1	 Stakeholders........................................................................102
5.1.2.2	 Products..............................................................................102
5.1.2.3	 Policies................................................................................ 103
5.1.3	 Limited Scope of Research Considered............................................104
5.2	
Managerial Research in Healthcare SCM.....................................................104
5.2.1	 Stakeholders and Relationships......................................................... 105
5.2.2	 Value Chains......................................................................................106
5.2.3	 Stakeholder Conflicts.........................................................................107
5.2.4	 Managerial Approaches in Healthcare SCM.....................................109
5.2.4.1	 Outsourcing.........................................................................109
5.2.4.2	 Supply Coordination and Vendor Managed Inventory....... 110
5.3	
Quantitative Modeling in Healthcare SCM and Inventory Control.............. 111
5.3.1	 Inventory Control Policies and Planning Framework 
in Healthcare SCM............................................................................ 112
5.3.1.1	 Demand Specifics for Hospital Pharmacy.......................... 113
5.3.1.2	 Multi-Item, Single-Location Models for Pharmacy 
Inventories........................................................................... 115
5.3.3.3	 Single-Item, Multilocation Models: Multiechelon 
Coordination in Pharmacy.................................................. 116
5.4	
Practical Solutions for Inventory Management of Pharmaceuticals 
in Hospitals.................................................................................................... 118
5.4.1	 Traditional Operations in Hospital Pharmacies................................. 118
5.4.2	 Current Management Trends and Operations in Pharmacy SCM..... 119
5.4.2.1	 Outsourcing......................................................................... 119
5.4.2.2	 VMI..................................................................................... 119
5.4.2.3	 IT-Based Inventory Management Solutions........................120
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

100	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
5.1	 Introduction
A recent visit to a local emergency room (ER) motivated one of the coauthors to liter-
ally investigate the crucial element of supply chain management (SCM) within the 
healthcare system. After experiencing eight hours of delays in the ER waiting room 
and witnessing incredible lags in the medication dispensing process and even further 
impediments to the delivery of treatment modalities, the researcher became outraged 
with the thought of a high-performing healthcare system’s lack of better supply chain 
management and service delivery. As a healthcare consumer, this scenario is likely 
to happen to all of us.
One might contemplate, how does an industry based on customer service fall short 
in the arena of inventory, patient, and materials management? According to business 
researcher Vicki Smith-Daniels (2006), in a field where precision is literally a matter 
of life and death, it seems strange that a crucial supportive function like inventory 
control and purchasing is often a hit-or-miss process. Healthcare, unlike other indus-
tries, has not given supply chain management the detailed attention that it so rightly 
deserves and needs to ensure patient safety and reduce overall healthcare costs.
Inventory management in the healthcare industry presents several interesting 
challenges both from a managerial and operational perspective. The stakeholder 
relationships, product considerations, and managerial and regulatory policies typi-
cally seen in healthcare are unique and worth investigation. Before delving into spe-
cific inventory control issues or demand characteristics that make healthcare SCM 
particularly difficult, it is important to recognize the magnitude of this industry.
5.1.1	 Magnitude of Healthcare Industry and Impact 
of Pharmaceutical Costs
According to statistics published by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, 
healthcare spending topped $2 trillion or 16 percent of the gross domestic product 
(GDP) in the United States in 2005 (Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
2007). In addition, this percentage is projected to increase to 18.7 percent in ten years 
(Heffler et al. 2005; Catlin et al. 2007) state that healthcare expenditures increase 
at an annual rate of 6.9 percent. In addition, there has been a shift from public to 
private healthcare financing in the United States, as well as other countries around 
the world. Most of these efforts are an attempt to continuously find new ways of 
both controlling healthcare expenditures and paying for prescribed treatments and 
pharmaceuticals.
5.4.3	 A Case of Hospital Pharmaceutical Inventory Management............120
5.4.3.1	 Pharmaceutical Distribution Equipment 
and Control Case.................................................................120
5.4.3.2	 Quantitative Modeling Issues............................................. 121
5.4.3.2	 Managerial Decision Support.............................................122
5.5	
Summary and Research Prospective.............................................................122
References...............................................................................................................124
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
101
Especially given the current economic crisis, a growing amount of attention 
is being given to the rising costs of healthcare and specifically pharmaceuticals. 
Healthcare providers, insurance companies, government agencies, and consum-
ers alike are forced to address this issue and to explore alternative methods of cost 
reduction or cost containment (Culyer 1990; Jönsson and Musgrove 1997; Marmor 
and Okma 1998). To gain a better understanding of the significance of this issue, it 
is prudent to first identify the magnitude of healthcare expenditures. According to 
the Plunkett Research Group (2008), “The health care market in the U.S. in 2007 
was made up of hospital care (about $697.5 billion), physician and clinical services 
($474.2 billion), prescription drugs ($229.5 billion), nursing home and home health 
($190 billion), and other items totaling $668.8 billion.”
As shown, the financial aspect of the healthcare and pharmaceutical industries is 
quite staggering. Much of the research in this field has focused on the relevant costs 
of healthcare (Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development [OECD] 
1994, 1995, 1996; Comas-Herrera 1999; Castles 2004); however, Rothgang et al. 
(2005) examined data reported by the OECD from 1970 to 2002 to investigate trends 
in the level of governmental involvement with healthcare systems. Although some 
shifting has occurred over the years, convergence toward a mixed system of both 
public and private healthcare seems apparent.
A significant area of healthcare costs is the pharmaceutical area, which represented 
approximately 10 percent of annual healthcare expenditures in the United States and 
about $550 billion globally in 2007 (Plunkett Research Group 2008). Despite the size 
and importance of this industry around the world, especially in developed countries, 
the area of healthcare SCM and inventory management has been given relatively little 
attention. Several researchers have estimated that inventory investments in healthcare 
range between 10 percent and 18 percent of total revenues (Holmgren and Wentz 
1982; Jarrett 1998). Any measures taken to control expenditures in this area can have 
substantial impacts on the overall efficiency of the organization and its supply net-
work and, as a result, the profitability of healthcare providers.
In 2003, Guillén and Cabiedes examined the pharmaceutical policies of European 
Union (EU) countries from the mid-1980s through the 1990s. As explained in their 
research, the costs of pharmaceuticals continue to increase while countries struggle 
to find financing to support these drugs. They noted that much of the healthcare 
services are shaped by the pharmaceutical policies, and they also identified three 
reasons justifying a focus on pharmaceuticals when examining healthcare supply 
chains: the reliance of modern medicine on drugs to both prevent and cure sickness, 
the significance of pharmaceutical expenditures around the world, and the charac-
teristics of the pharmaceutical industry (i.e., use of technology, innovation, etc.). 
Almarsdóttir and Traulsen (2005) also identified a number of reasons why pharma-
ceuticals deserve extraordinary consideration in controlling inventory. These spe-
cific characteristics make the pharmaceutical industry a very powerful force in its 
own right.
As with any industry, the range of products can vary tremendously depending on 
the market, customer demand, the scope of services, and other managerial decisions. 
For the purposes of this chapter and the specific research cases we present, our focus 
is mainly on the supply chain of pharmaceuticals.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

102	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
5.1.2	 Special Conditions and Terminology of Healthcare SCM
The stakeholders and their interrelationships, the product characteristics, and the 
policies employed all have some impact on healthcare SCM and inventory control. 
We explain some specific conditions and terminology used in healthcare in more 
detail in the following.
5.1.2.1	
Stakeholders
Here we summarize some unique factors influencing how healthcare stakeholders 
interact, how they are controlled, and how they manage operations. A detailed analy-
sis is provided in the next section.
Doctors are the primary caregivers in the healthcare system; however, it is impor-
tant to recognize that physicians, in many cases, are contracted service providers. 
They are not actual employees of hospitals in which they work. Although this 
enables hospitals to expand their service capacities and offer better customer service, 
they must also relinquish some measure of control to these doctors. Autonomy, as 
it relates specifically to customer care, is valued above all else by doctors. Patients 
trust that physicians are prescribing treatments and medicines that will address their 
individual medical needs. Attempts to restrict the choices or influence the conditions 
of medical treatment are met with a great deal of resistance.
Another consideration is that, unlike many industries of this size, hospital admin-
istrators and pharmacy managers have to manage very complicated distribution net-
works and inventory control problems without the proper training or educational 
backgrounds to do so efficiently. This in no way implies that these individuals lack 
the intelligence to perform these tasks. Most hospital administrators and pharmacy 
directors are themselves doctors, which means they are highly skilled and educated 
in medicine; however, they are not the engineers or supply chain professionals who 
are commonly employed to manage similar systems in other industries.
The hospitals order the majority of their supplies from a selected group purchas-
ing organization (GPO) that purchases directly from the production companies.
5.1.2.2	 Products
Product formulary is the term used to identify the variety of drugs offered by the 
hospital pharmacy and is a source of both conflict and cost for the hospital. This 
formulary is comprised of specific medicines each designed to address a particu-
lar medical need, but physicians’ opinions may vary on the most effective drugs 
for satisfying patient requirements. Providing prescription options for the doctors is 
important, both to the doctors and hospital; however, this increases the number of 
drugs that must be carried by the hospital pharmacy for patient treatment if it desires 
to maintain such a high level of customer service. In addition, the product formulary 
changes quite frequently as physicians’ prescribing behavior reacts to advancements 
in medical research and technology.
It is also important to recognize that pharmaceuticals have a number of other 
requirements. They must be handled by trained personnel and experts in this field. 
Extraordinary resources are committed to developing these items, to manufacturing 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
103
them, and to controlling their distribution and usage. All of these aspects are highly 
regulated by governments and other regulatory agencies, and they may require addi-
tional documentation. Finally, unlike other areas, customers have a limited role in 
the product selection process. As patients become more aware of alternative treat-
ments, they may influence doctors as they prescribe medications; however, more 
times than not these choices are made for them.
Many of these items are also perishable and must be destroyed if not used. 
Perishable items have a limited shelf life and in many cases have special transpor-
tation and storage requirements. Part of the concern with pharmaceuticals is that 
outdated or expired items may be overlooked and dispensed to patients, which could 
have potentially disastrous effects both in patient care and public relations. The per-
ishable item inventory control problem is a difficult one and has been studied many 
times using a periodic review approach (see Fries 1975; Nahmias 1975, 1982), with 
less attention being given to continuous review systems; however, there have been a 
number of works in this area in recent years (see Weiss 1980; Schmidt and Nahmias 
1985; Chiu 1995; Liu and Lian 1999; Lian and Liu 2001). Although these studies 
provide valuable insight into the management of such products, none of these models 
have been tested in pharmaceutical inventory control. Given the combination of high 
costs and perishability of prescription drugs, it seems that more study is warranted 
as pharmacy managers look for help in setting optimal order policies.
5.1.2.3	 Policies
Substantial efforts are made to regulate the healthcare industry. Government involve-
ment is high, as it can provide both oversight of caregivers and funding for care 
recipients. Previously, healthcare systems have paid little attention to the manage-
ment of inventories. However, with the implementation of diagnosis-related groups 
(DRGs) in 1983 by the United States government, these systems have turned their 
attention to cost containment as a means of increased profitability. The original 
objective of DRGs was to develop a patient classification system that related types 
of patients treated to the resources they consumed. Hospital cases are segmented 
into 1 of approximately 500 groups expected to have similar hospital resource use. 
DRGs are used to determine how much Medicare pays the hospital, since patients 
within each category are similar clinically and are expected to use the same level of 
hospital resources.
Interestingly, public and managerial policies targeted at cost control have 
failed in many cases to produce the necessary changes in stakeholder behaviors 
to achieve such outcomes. Efforts to control pharmaceutical prices have provided 
little relief as drug manufacturers attempt to recover the resources spent research-
ing and developing these products. These companies also target physicians and 
patients with advertising campaigns as they attempt to influence prescribing 
behavior. Another reason policy has been somewhat ineffective at cost restraint is 
the conflicting stakeholder goals that appear throughout the supply chain. Doctors 
and hospital administration are often at odds as they try to balance the issues of 
prescribing autonomy and product variety. While the doctors want a large variety 
of brand-name drugs, the hospital management strives to minimize costs in the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

104	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
overall system by seeking generic drugs as substitutes for medicines preferred by 
physicians. Hospitals and GPOs have different objectives. Hospitals focus on nego-
tiating the best prices for a wider selection of drugs from different pharmaceutical 
companies, while the GPOs are interested in larger orders from only a few phar-
maceutical production companies.
Inventory control variables are called par levels in healthcare inventory man-
agement. The min par level is equivalent to the reorder point: if the inventory level 
decreases to or below this level, an order is triggered. The max par level is equivalent 
to the order up level (or base stock).
5.1.3	 Limited Scope of Research Considered
This chapter focuses specifically on SCM issues from the perspective of the hos-
pital. We recognize the importance of other members of the supply network in this 
industry; however, the subject is simply too voluminous to cover adequately in this 
setting without restricting the scope somewhat. As such, the authors have selected to 
focus on supply chain problems as they are viewed by hospitals, which is appropriate 
given their significance in the supply chain and the costs they incur. In the following 
sections we identify critical managerial areas that distinguish the healthcare environ-
ment from other industries that have received attention in the past.
Pharmacy directors are turning their attention to controlling costs in the areas 
of SCM and pharmaceutical inventory control. Supply and purchased services 
account for the second largest cost component for a hospital, and it is clearly 
recognized that SCM is one of the principal areas for improvement in organiza-
tional performance. Supply chain management in hospital systems all over the 
world shows great variability both in performance and in focus. Such a variabil-
ity combined with the growing cost of care and pharmaceuticals determines rel-
evant differences in health service efficiency and unacceptable annual increases in 
healthcare costs.
The remainder of this chapter will serve to address several key areas of healthcare 
SCM and pharmaceutical inventory management. A review of the relevant manage-
rial and quantitative modeling literature is provided. Here attention will be given to 
both the overall study of healthcare SCM and the quantitative approaches to inventory 
optimization. The practice of pharmacy operations will be described with specific 
attention given to the movement and distribution of prescribed medications within 
a hospital. Solutions focused on addressing SCM challenges will be presented and a 
specific case of a local hospital will be discussed in more details. Gaps in healthcare 
SCM and inventory research will be listed and recommendations for SCM research 
and best inventory control practices are suggested.
5.2	 Managerial Research in Healthcare SCM
Traditionally researchers have taken two approaches to studying healthcare SCM: 
analyzing the managerial concerns and evaluating various quantitative models. First, 
the managerial aspects of such supply chain systems are discussed. The stakehold-
ers in the healthcare supply chain and value chain are examined along with the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
105
conflicting goals in the system. Thereafter, the most common managerial approaches 
in healthcare SCM are summarized, including outsourcing and vendor managed 
inventory (VMI). In existing research, the focal point has primarily been on descrip-
tion of the system rather than developing innovative models or performing quantita-
tive analyses. However, these descriptive studies are important to documenting the 
actual healthcare supply practices.
5.2.1	 Stakeholders and Relationships
The financial aspects of the healthcare industry are significant, but it is also an 
industry very important to all members of society as it involves a wide range 
of stakeholders. Burns et al. (2002) examined the healthcare industry for three 
years in order to investigate its value chain, to uncover significant industry trends, 
and to identify the major stakeholder groups involved with healthcare services. 
Evidence showed that both vertical and horizontal integration were present in 
healthcare. Vertical integration was illustrated by hospitals teaming with insur-
ance agencies or ambulatory services to combine various portions of this delivery 
network. Noticeable horizontal integration manifested in the form of hospitals 
purchasing other hospitals or in the formation of groups purchasing organiza-
tions. A significant result of this research was the identification of the following 
groups as stakeholders in this industry: (1) payers, (2) fiscal intermediaries, (3) 
providers, (4) purchasers, and (5) producers. Each of these groups is explained in 
more detail in the following.
Any person or organization responsible for supplying the funds to pay for medical 
expenses is identified as a payer. Based on this definition, examples of payers would 
include government, employers, individuals, and employer coalitions. Insurance 
agencies, health maintenance organizations (HMOs), and pharmacy benefit manag-
ers fall under the category of financial intermediaries. Any group supplying health-
care screening, treatment, or any other healthcare-related provisions are considered 
to be providers. Such entities would be physician offices, hospitals (or hospital sys-
tems), surgical centers, alternative and satellite facilities, ambulatory services, and 
pharmacies. Individuals or groups procuring any of these services are viewed as pur-
chasers; however, it is important to note that this category extends beyond the basic 
consumers of healthcare services. This group also includes a wide variety of product 
resellers, independent distributors, pharmaceutical wholesalers, and so forth. The 
final group is the producers whose responsibility is the manufacturing of healthcare 
products, equipment, and technology. This includes pharmaceuticals, surgical equip-
ment, information technology services, medical devices, and other capital equip-
ment found throughout the healthcare system.
Tarabusi and Vickery (1998a, 1998b) stated that attitudes and habits of local phar-
macists and physicians must be known for good access to markets. This research 
identified the importance of cost-containment programs in the pharmaceutical 
industry by comparing the approaches employed by the United States and countries 
of the European Union. Globalization and international partnerships have grown 
as pharmaceutical companies strive to control the research and development costs 
associated with these drugs.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

106	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
5.2.2	 Value Chains
The notion of value in the healthcare service value chain can be described by the 
interrelations of relevant stakeholders. Value chains were first introduced by Porter 
(1985) and are significant marketing tools because they afford managers the oppor-
tunity to assess the specific value added by each member of the supply network. 
Supply chains provide a mechanism for delivering that value to consumers. The 
original view of a value chain focused on a company’s internal activities specifically 
designed to create value for customers; however, this concept has been extended 
to include the entire product and service delivery system (Bower and Garda 1985; 
Evans and Berman 2001).
Pitta and Laric (2004) provided a model of the healthcare value chain and supply 
chains, as they exist in many practical situations. Figure 5.1 illustrates that this sup-
ply chain is not linear or sequential in nature but closely follows the flow of informa-
tion through the system. The success of the system or value created are linked to the 
transfer of quality information as the medical care received by patients relies heavily 
on information processing.
The first two groups interacting in this network are the patients and physicians. 
This stage of the process is generally initiated by the patient and provides valuable 
information necessary to adequately address whatever needs they might have. This 
research showed that individuals are much more likely to share very personal infor-
mation with their healthcare providers when they believe this information is needed 
for medical purposes and when they trust the confidential nature of the patient– 
doctor relationship. The next link in the chain is created by the addition of phar-
macists and other providers of medical equipment and services. In this stage the 
pharmacist creates value by further investigating the medical history of patients, 
3c.
Alternative
providers
7b. Government
licensing
7a. Governmental
security
5c. Life/Disability
insurers
5a. Financially
responsible
parties
5b. Governmental
payers/transfer plans
8.
Pharmaceutical
manufacturers
3a. Medical
equipment
vendors
3b. Medical
service
vendors
3.
Pharmacies
5. Health
insurers
6. Employers
2.
Physicians
4.
Hospitals
1. Patients
7. Governmental
planning
Figure 5.1  Stakeholders in the healthcare value chain (Pitta and Laric 2004).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
107
specifically as it relates to medications, to determine any potential risks or inter-
actions that may result from the addition of new, prescribed drugs. This is a very 
important step in customer service and patient care.
The next addition to the value chain is that of the hospital and the related services 
and procedures that may be included in diagnosing patient symptoms. As explained 
by Pitta and Laric (2004), doctors often request that batteries of tests be performed 
on patients even when symptoms and other indicators suggest a course of treatment. 
Hospitals create and store vast amounts of medical data for patients, which can be 
useful going forward. The fifth member of the healthcare value chain is the health 
insurers, which includes both public and private entities responsible for providing 
financial support to those receiving care. Since many insurers require a series of diag-
nostic tests and related data be completed before approving potentially costly proce-
dures, patient data continues to grow. The addition of insuring groups or companies 
can also be a negative influence on the value chain. As one can see, with the addition 
of new members to the network and the creation of data at each stage, the healthcare 
system and participant interactions are becoming more and more complex.
Employers are the sixth group added to create another value chain. In the United 
States employers are the most often used source of medical insurance for employed 
persons and their families. Here the value is obtained by negotiating better benefits 
for groups of people as opposed to those offered to individuals. When the U.S. gov-
ernment introduced its federal Medicare and Medicaid programs in the 1960s, it 
became the largest medical insurance provider in the United States. A result of this 
involvement is the increasing influence of government regulation and policy in the 
healthcare industry. As such, government becomes the seventh participant of interest 
here as it influences various parts of this system. The final member of the model is 
the pharmaceutical manufacturers. It has already been established that pharmaceu-
ticals represent a significant area of cost in the healthcare industry, as well as being 
the primary means of preventative and curative medical treatment.
5.2.3	 Stakeholder Conflicts
Physicians and pharmacists/pharmacy directors clash over medications offered by 
the hospital. The basic conflict here revolves around the issue of product variety 
versus economies of scale. The doctors have professional and personal preferences 
that are reflected in their prescription decisions. They value their individual freedom 
of choice in selecting the medications that they feel best address the specific needs 
of the patients under their care. Drug manufacturers, sales representatives, and the 
appearance of new drugs in the market also influence physicians. In contrast, the 
pharmacy directors pay more attention to the costs associated with specific medica-
tions and promote the usage of generic rather than brand drugs when available. They 
strive to take advantage of economies of scale whenever possible in the selection of 
drugs offered.
In 2005, Prosser and Walley examined the extent to which cost influenced pre-
scribing behaviors of general practitioners (GPs) in the UK healthcare system. 
According to the authors, primary care organizations, (PCO) involvement has 
steadily increased as a means of providing more unified, controlled budgets for these 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

108	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
physicians, as well as providing a monitoring mechanism of prescribing activities 
with this cost-containment objective in mind. The primary goal of this investiga-
tion was to measure the cost-awareness of doctors and to evaluate the attitudes of 
these GPs towards cost-restraint policies. Another goal was to determine what effect 
this managerial objective might have on their professional behavior. In this case the 
evidence demonstrated that all of the physicians were aware of pharmaceutical costs 
when prescribing treatments for their patients and felt that these costs should be 
considered when making prescription choices. However, there appeared to be a great 
deal of variation in the amount of influence these costs actually had on modifying 
medical decisions. As expected, physicians identified patient care as their primary 
focus during the treatment process with cost being a secondary concern.
Prosser and Walley (2007) continued their research in this area and employed 
qualitative methods to examine the managerial influence of healthcare administra-
tors on the prescribing autonomy of general-care practitioners. In general, physician 
prescribing autonomy has been challenged recently due to the greater sophistication 
of patients in the ability to direct medical decisions and the increased bureaucratic 
involvement in service delivery in healthcare. This research showed that the objec-
tive of cost-containment presents a formidable obstacle for caregivers striving to 
offer the highest level of care and individualized service to those they serve.
This analysis showed that managerial involvement will have limited success in 
influencing GPs’ prescribing autonomy. The conclusion was that the GPs directly 
resisted the attempts administrators made to modify their prescribing behaviors. 
The GPs maintain it is their responsibility to offer the best medications and treat-
ment available to their patients, and that this autonomy is a component of provid-
ing individual care. In many cases this is an area of great conflict between doctors and 
hospital/pharmacy administrators, since larger product formularies desired by doc-
tors usually result in higher inventory costs and reduce the opportunity for cost sav-
ings. When asked, doctors acknowledged the importance of controlling the costs of 
pharmaceuticals, but they identified the quality of patient care as being the para-
mount objective. Managers placed a great deal of importance on keeping prescribing 
costs within established budgets.
Another divergence appears between hospitals and the group purchasing orga-
nization (GPO) on the issue of product variety. Hospitals focus on negotiating the 
best prices for a wider selection of drugs. The attention is shown to brand-name 
medications in most cases. The GPO, on the other hand, strives to minimize costs 
in the overall system by seeking generic drugs as substitutes for medicines preferred 
by physicians. Again, a great deal of effort is given to the achievement of economies 
of scale for demanded items by considering a limited formulary (narrower selection 
of drugs).
The importance of product standardization for managing costs and improving 
clinical performance is outlined with respect to physicians’ unwillingness to accept 
product alternatives to branded ones, even in the face of evidence regarding equiva-
lence. As such, hospitals persist in the argument for wider drug selections. Both 
physician and nurse involvement and leadership in product analysis is necessary for 
successful standardization to occur, and for the provision of metrics pertaining to 
products and their relationship to the performance of the supply chain.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
109
5.2.4	 Managerial Approaches in Healthcare SCM
In this section of the chapter, we first explore the various strategic approaches that 
have been pursued in the area of SCM and inventory control. Some of the topics to 
be discussed are the outsourcing of distribution activities, allowing suppliers to man-
age inventory levels at various distribution points, and the use of common statistical 
techniques to achieve organizational and system goals.
5.2.4.1	 Outsourcing
Kim (2005) presents an explanation of an integrated SCM system developed to spe-
cifically address issues related to pharmaceuticals in the healthcare sector. Many 
industries have recognized the importance of improved information sharing through-
out the supply chain, and this work considers it as the most critical success factor. 
Here the supply network is composed of pharmaceutical companies, a wholesaler, 
and hospitals. The hospital’s operating procedures and policies were reviewed to 
determine system requirements in an effort to improve the management efficiencies 
of the supply chain.
Jayaraman et al. (2000) present several tools and practical ideas to improve the 
flow of materials in a small healthcare facility. Traditional techniques, such as Pareto 
diagrams and department–product–type (DPT) matrices, were employed to track 
item flow and identify sources of errors or difficulties. Researchers suggested sev-
eral procedural and policy changes be implemented to reduce inventory manage-
ment problems. Landry and Beaulieu (2000) present a descriptive study of logistics 
systems at hospitals from three countries—France, the Netherlands, and the United 
States—to identify the best practices for replenishment policies, equipment, and 
handling technologies.
Nicholson et al. (2004) compared the inventory costs and service levels of an 
internally managed three-echelon distribution network and contrasted it with an 
outsourced two-echelon distribution network. Their research revealed that a general 
trend in healthcare is the outsourcing of specific organizational activities, inven-
tory management, and materials distribution to “expert” third-party providers. To 
this point very little attention has been given to inventory management; however, 
changes in pharmaceutical regulations and the formation of the DRGs prompted a 
shift in approach.
When outside entities can provide needed products or services more efficiently 
than internal departments, it can prove very rewarding. In other instances, outside 
providers may demonstrate the ability to provide the desired products or services at 
a higher level of quality than an organization may be capable of achieving (Lunn 
2000). A long-term benefit of outsourcing is the ability to reduce the number of sup-
pliers in the system, which will eventually lower the procurement costs for the down-
stream members of the supply chain. As such, the short-term benefits of increased 
efficiency and higher quality, along with the long-term benefit of lower procurement 
costs, make outsourcing a logical approach to overall cost containment in the health-
care industry and consistent with current practices in inventory management (Veral 
and Rosen 2001).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

110	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Outsourcing decisions in this area are motivated by three factors: the magni-
tude of investment, the impact on service quality and delivery, and the availability 
of qualified service providers. Quality of service is arguably the paramount goal 
of healthcare providers (Li and Benton 1996), and it has been suggested that out-
sourcing various functions allows organizations to improve the quality of its inter-
nal operations. Jarrett (1998) identified several areas in which providers were able 
to improve internal performance. Patient care was improved, which can influence 
customer satisfaction and perceptions related to the quality of service provided by 
an organization. As the expertise develops and the capabilities of external sources 
grow, outsourcing becomes an increasingly attractive option. Another motivation for 
healthcare providers considering outsourcing the inventory management functions 
are the “success” stories similar to those described by Rivard-Royer et al. (2002).
Rivard-Royer et al. (2002) examined the changing role of distributors in the 
healthcare industry in recent years by investigating how operational processes had 
changed at a Quebec hospital As reported by Jarrett (1998), the ever-increasing 
desire to control healthcare costs have led hospitals to reevaluate many of their 
previous policies and operations. Inventory control is a logical area where substan-
tial gains can be realized. Pharmaceuticals represent a significant cost equation 
related to both hospital inventory and quality patient care. As such, many hospi-
tals and hospital systems have focused on this specific material management issue 
when restraining costs. U.S. pharmaceutical distributors were offering “stockless” 
replenishment where the distributors would prepackage items based on usage at 
individual care units (CUs), and would often provide direct delivery of drugs to 
these CUs (Henning 1980). By employing such a system, the distributors share in 
the benefits and risks associated with pharmaceutical savings or costs. The reduc-
tion in pharmaceutical inventory located at the hospital central pharmacy saved 
hospitals valuable resources, and the shifting of duties from the pharmacies to the 
distributors allowed the hospitals to reduce their workforce. Another improvement 
was noticed in enhanced customer service. However, as one would expect, a critical 
success factor in achieving any benefits from such a relationship and process is the 
continuous exchange of information between the point of use and supplier (Bolton 
and Gordon 1991).
5.2.4.2	 Supply Coordination and Vendor Managed Inventory
According to Rivard-Royer and colleagues (2002), by the late 1990s stockless replen-
ishment was a thing of the past as hospitals sought a balance between the amount of 
effort being spent in replenishing hospital inventories and the hospitals’ inventory 
savings. The hospital involved with this study employed a hybrid approach since 
high-demand items were purchased in bulk (at the case level) for delivery directly to 
the patient CUs from distributors, and low-volume items were handled by the phar-
macy central storage (CS). For these low-demand items, the CS was charged with 
breaking down the bulk purchases into smaller quantities for distribution to the vari-
ous CUs as items were used. However, this hybrid approach was found to have lim-
ited benefits to both the hospital and distributors. Distributors were asked to perform 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
111
additional work without receiving a comparable level of additional revenue. The hos-
pital was still unpacking, repacking, and preparing drugs for distribution to the CUs 
and failed to realize significant workload reductions as a result of this replenishment 
approach. Overall, the gains were very limited in this particular study.
One managerial shift has been to vendor managed inventory (VMI), which has 
been shown to have benefits in SCM related to enhanced material handling effi-
ciency. Other trends in supply coordination have included online procurement sys-
tems and the availability of real-time information sharing. These advances have 
demonstrated an ability to reduce total pharmaceutical inventory by more than 30 
percent (Kim 2005). In addition, the improved information sharing throughout the 
supply chain allowed for more timely and accurate inventory data, which resulted in 
better demand forecasts and materials management.
The research of Meijboom and Obel (2007) investigated supply chain coordina-
tion in a global pharmaceutical organization. The authors looked at the issues facing 
a pharmaceutical company with a multilocation and multistage operations structure. 
Simulations are used to explore various coordination activities focusing specifically 
on “tactical control” in the firm. Their results suggest that a functionally organized 
operations structure will be unsuccessful in a multilocation, multistage environment. 
According to the authors, firms can employ one of two methods. They can either use 
a centralized approach relying heavily on information systems, or maintain a decen-
tralized structure that relies on transfer prices as the coordination device.
Lapierre and Ruiz (2007) developed different modeling approaches, a cost mini-
mization model and a balanced schedule model, for improving healthcare inventory 
management by examining the impact of scheduling decisions on the coordination of 
supply activities while recognizing inventory capacities. Specifically, the researchers 
concentrated on timing issues ranging from the purchasing and delivery of inventory 
to the work schedules and job assignments of employees. A significant outcome of 
this work is the promotion of coordinated activities throughout the purchasing and 
procurement process such that schedules can be expanded to include more specific 
details for improving the resource utilization across the organization. The models 
were tested in a hospital in Montreal, and hospital managers believed that the sched-
ules generated by the models were both efficient and well balanced.
5.3	 Quantitative Modeling in Healthcare 
SCM and Inventory Control
One of the primary goals of our initiative is to model and improve inventory manage-
ment practices being employed by hospitals. There are a number of relevant inventory 
models in the current body of supply chain literature that are related to this effort, 
and those models are examined and described herein. In this review most of the 
attention will focus on models addressing multi-item, single-location, and multiech-
elon coordination given the unique conditions germane to the industry considered. 
Inventory models have been collected that have been formulated to address health-
care problems, have been applied, or have a high relevance to healthcare-related 
inventory management.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

112	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
After summarizing the specifics of inventory control policies and planning frame-
works in hospital pharmacies, the demand specifics are described in this section. 
A major portion of this section is devoted to inventory modeling; models of spe-
cific interest are multi-item–single-location and single-item–multilocation models. 
Literature associated with each of these modeling approaches is discussed, as well 
as how these models have been employed in the past.
5.3.1	 Inventory Control Policies and Planning 
Framework in Healthcare SCM
Efficiently managing pharmaceutical inventory systems requires another approach 
than the continuous review reorder point model. There are at least three limitations 
for using the continuous replenishment model in the context of healthcare supply 
systems: (1) the model does not account for the limited human resources; (2) it does 
not account for physical storage capacities, particularly the one at the CS level, 
which is critical in most hospitals; and (3) the decisions are only based on costs, not 
accounting for inventory control activities and their restricted capacity. Each of these 
limitations is elaborated on next.
Continuous replenishment inventory management is usually not applicable in 
hospitals since visits to CUs take a lot of the employees’ time. To make it more effi-
cient, tours are made such that several CUs are visited consecutively for rounds of 
stock control or supply distribution. The periodic replenishment model seems more 
appropriate for healthcare organizations, as each CU is replenished according to a 
schedule instead of when reaching a reorder point. However, with this inventory 
management approach, the frequencies of the visits are determined based on the 
order period and the economic order quantity (EOQ). Storage capacities at CUs and 
the CS are important factors when deciding how frequent a CU should be replen-
ished and how frequent a supplier should be called. An undersized CS and open 
shelves able to contain very limited quantities of the voluminous products is often 
the reality most hospitals have to face. This situation calls for more frequent orders 
to suppliers and keeping more stocks at the CU than those suggested by the EOQ 
model in order to satisfy requirements and respect capacities. In that context, CU’s 
stocks are kept higher to compensate for a small CS. Thus, greater volumes of items 
can be stored onsite by keeping these extra quantities. Another reason for keeping 
more stock in the overall system is that stockouts are time expensive for the supply 
service that needs to make extra emergency visits, internally referred to as hot-picks, 
to CUs, but also for the medical staff members who waste their time making extra 
calls to the supply department or chasing the products at other CUs.
One of the distinct features of materials management in a hospital is the use of 
a periodic review par level (or order-up to level) servicing approach. A major issue 
in setting par levels for various items in a healthcare setting is that these levels tend 
to reflect the desired inventory levels of the patient caregivers rather than the actual 
inventory levels needed in a department over a certain period (Prashant 1991). In most 
cases these par levels are experience-based and politically driven, rather than data 
driven. This poses a problem for warehouse managers, since the inventory they hold 
is typically based on aggregate hospital demands, while requirements of departments 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
113
when aggregated are not in line with such estimates. The literature analyzing the set-
ting of optimal par levels and review periods for multiple echelons draws upon prior 
work in multiechelon inventory systems, which are discussed in the next sections.
On the quantitative side, among one of the first healthcare inventory models 
was published by Michelon et al. (1994) who developed a tabu search algorithm for 
scheduling the distribution operations in a hospital. In their application, the number 
of replenishment visits is given a priori, and the problem consists of finding the 
schedule that minimizes the number of carriers given several time windows and 
practical constraints. Another investigation concentrating on this type of inventory 
control situation was performed by Banerjea-Brodeur et al. (1998) who looked at an 
application of a routing model to match the different CUs to be visited by a laundry 
department in a hospital. Here the authors used a combination of quantitative tech-
niques and common sense to minimize the number of routes while respecting the 
volume capacity constraint of a cart.
Supply chain management can be fitted into a planning framework. Vissers et al. 
(2001) defined a planning framework for hospitals. One of the primary objectives of 
this research was to balance service and efficiency throughout the organization. As 
identified by the investigators, there are three characteristics that fit hospital produc-
tion control settings. They are as follows: (1) a demand that is, generally speaking, 
larger than supply; (2) restrictions on supply defined by contracting organizations; 
and (3) higher patient expectations on service quality (Vissers et al. 2001). As with 
many organizations, the quandary then becomes how to maximize resources while 
still achieving higher levels of customer service. The developed framework consists 
of five levels of planning and control: patient planning and control, patient group 
planning and control, resources planning and control, patient volumes planning and 
control, and strategic planning (Vissers et al. 2001). The researchers describe the 
framework, as well as explain instances where current hospital policies and practices 
deviate from their suggestions and where changes may benefit the organization.
Another attempt is to include SCM into an enterprise resource planning (ERP) 
framework. Implementation of ERP in healthcare is very challenging due to the spe-
cial characteristics to consider. Van Merode et al. (2004) explain the planning func-
tion of the hospital environment and identify facets of the healthcare industry that 
make ERP implementations and utilization more difficult. Some attention is given 
to explaining areas in which ERP can or cannot be used. According to the authors, 
hospital functions should be divided into “a part that is concerned only with deter-
ministic processes and a part that is concerned with non-deterministic processes” 
(van Merode et al. 2004). It is their contention that the deterministic processes can 
be handled very well by ERP.
5.3.1.1	
Demand Specifics for Hospital Pharmacy
The usage of pharmaceutical products in hospitals has specific characteristics. 
Typically, 40 percent to 60 percent are high-demand items that are relatively easy to 
handle based on usage statistics. However, much care is to be taken on the frequent 
changes in the medications used, and on the so-called formulary changes. New items 
come frequently, and an initial qualitative forecast is required. A large proportion 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

114	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
of the items are only rarely used, and the usage times and quantities are frequently 
changing. Another group of items is used by patients for only a few days and fin-
ished afterward. Here the autocorrelation of the demand time series is challenging 
to consider.
Intermittent demand refers to the usage pattern of items that have extended time 
gaps separating irregular or sporadic periods of demand. If the quantities of the usage 
are also variable, we have the so-called lumpy demand that is a major challenge in 
pharmacy inventory management. The study of intermittent and lumpy demand has 
typically been approached from either a forecasting or inventory control perspective, 
with a number of studies incorporating both of these areas to examine practical 
issues related to inventory system performance. The body of work discussed in this 
section provides examples of this.
Sani and Kingsman (1997) provide a good review and compare various periodic 
inventory policies like the normal approximation (Roberts 1962), Naddor’s heuristic 
(Naddor 1980), power approximation (Ehrhardt 1979), and several others. In addi-
tion, a variety of forecasting methods were reviewed with the authors attempting to 
determine which are best for low- and intermittent-demand items. Before discuss-
ing specific inventory control approaches or models, it is important to recognize 
two fundamental notations commonly used in this literature. The minimum inven-
tory parameter, or the reorder point, is commonly denoted as s, while the maxi-
mum inventory parameter, or the order-up-to value, is represented by S. In situations 
where item demand appears to be low or intermittent, variations of the (s, S) form 
of the periodic review inventory control system have been promoted as the optimal 
approach to inventory management. As the authors state in their review, forecasting 
demand for such items can also prove very challenging.
The research presented by Sani and Kingsman (1997) examines the management 
of spare parts for agricultural machinery, which includes many items with seasonal 
demand characteristics displaying vastly different demand from summer to winter 
months. After examining the various (s, S) inventory policies with respect to annual 
inventory costs and customer service levels, Ehrhardt’s (1979) power approximation 
proved to be a good inventory system for managing items with low overall demand. 
This method not only scored well in evaluations of cost minimization but also offered 
reasonable service levels for items with low to medium demand. From the compari-
sons, it seems that the Croston estimator (Croston 1972) is one simple forecasting 
method that performs adequately in most cases (using the exponentially smoothed 
interdemand interval, updated only if demand occurs). One surprising result was 
that a basic twelve-month moving average of demand yielded adequate forecast-
ing results when examining both annual costs and service level, with exponential 
smoothing performing the worst on this measure; however, exponential smooth-
ing performed best on the customer service level measure alone. It is important to 
note that both of the aforementioned techniques were utilized: updates every review 
period and the Croston forecast. Finally, the authors concluded that achieving cus-
tomer service levels greater that 95 percent for lumpy demand items is impossible 
unless high materials stocks are kept as a means to satisfy this objective.
Hollier et al. (2005) developed a modified (s, S) inventory model to address 
cost control issues specific to lumpy demand patterns. This approach integrated a 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
115
maximum issue quantity restriction and a critical inventory position as constraints 
influencing the inventory control policy. Here the primary objective was to minimize 
the system replenishment costs. These authors applied two algorithms, one being a 
tree search and the other a genetic-based algorithm to optimize the decision vari-
ables. The numerical examples and results illustrate the benefits of employing such 
algorithms, as well as demonstrate the utility of the maximum issue quantity and 
critical inventory position constraints when managing lumpy demand items.
Syntetos and Boylan (2006) employ simulation models to provide an evalua-
tion of various forecasting techniques, specifically simple moving average, single 
exponential smoothing, Croston’s estimator, and a new technique introduced in 
their paper, when handling lumpy or intermittent demand items. Service level and 
stock volume were evaluated using a number of performance measures related to 
customer service and inventory costs. In this case the authors reported that the 
new estimator they developed outperformed other forecasting techniques as an 
inventory control method; however, it is important to recognize that the simple 
moving average technique yielded favorable results as well compared to the other 
two methods.
5.3.1.2	 Multi-Item, Single-Location Models for Pharmacy Inventories
We found few papers that applied multi-item models to control healthcare invento-
ries. Dellaert and van de Poel (1996) derived a simple inventory rule, a (R, s, c, S) 
model, for helping buyers at a university hospital in the Netherlands. The notations of 
s and S were as previously defined. Here R represents the length of the review period 
(time between orders) and c is the can-order level. Since most items have a joint sup-
plier and the orders for a certain supplier are always placed on the same day of the 
week, they extended an EOQ model to a so-called (R, s, c, S) model, in which the 
values of the control parameters s, c, and S are determined in a simplistic manner. 
This approach resulted in substantial gains, which were observed in improved ser-
vice levels, reductions in supplier orders, smaller total inventory levels and holding 
costs, and substantially lower system costs, for the participating hospital.
However, we could not find other multi-item inventory applications in healthcare. 
We summarize next the models that seem to have the best application potential for 
this specific area. The majority of results for the multi-item problem are for the 
deterministic demand case where the sizes and the multiproduct sequence of orders 
have to be determined. The problem is known to be NP-complete (nondeterministic 
polynomial time complete) and therefore many heuristics have been proposed. For 
an overview on the approaches, see Gallego et al. (1996), Hariga and Jackson (1996), 
and Minner and Silver (2005).
The early investigations in stochastic multiproduct inventory problems were gen-
erated by Veinott (1965), Ignall (1966), and Ignall and Veinott (1969). Later, in the 
study of Beyer et al. (2001), the researchers examined the management of multiple 
items with a warehousing (storage) constraint, which was based on the early model 
of Ignall and Veinott (1969), and generated results for finite-horizon and infinite-
horizon discounted-cost problems. This work demonstrates optimal policies suitable 
for the various conditions that occur in healthcare.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

116	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Ohno and Ishigaki (2001) examined a continuous review inventory system for 
multiple items exhibiting compound Poisson demands and created a new algorithm 
for determining the optimal control policy. This alternative method was derived 
using the policy iteration method (PIM) and resulted in a substantial decrease in 
processing time needed to evaluate and improve the optimal policy. In addition, the 
new algorithm was tested using three joint ordering policies.
Minner and Silver (2005) analyzed the stochastic demand, continuous review lot-
size coordination problem for Poisson demand, and negligible replenishment lead 
times. A formulation as a semi-Markov decision problem was presented to find the 
optimal replenishment policy and several heuristics were suggested and tested in a 
numerical study. However, the results only apply for pure Poisson demand and cycle 
inventories (i.e., without safety stocks). With the assumption of negligible lead times, 
safety stocks here serve to avoid the negative consequences of transaction sizes that 
exceed available inventory rather than covering against demand uncertainty over the 
replenishment lead time.
In a recent paper, Minner and Silver (2007) analyzed a replenishment decision 
problem where each replenishment has an associated setup cost and inventories are 
subject to holding costs. The solution of this trade-off results in order batch sizes. The 
warehouse space for keeping inventories is limited, which generally restricts these 
batch sizes. A second aspect of their analysis is that demands are random, here being 
modeled by a compound-Poisson demand process. This further complicates the anal-
ysis because now safety stocks and cycle stocks share the limited warehouse space.
5.3.3.3	 Single-Item, Multilocation Models: Multiechelon 
Coordination in Pharmacy
The literature analyzing the setting of optimal par levels and review periods for 
multiple echelons draws upon prior work in multiechelon inventory systems, which 
are discussed next.
One of the first investigations in the area of multiechelon distribution networks 
was performed by Allen (1958), who attempted to optimally redistribute stock among 
several locations. Since then, numerous works extended this model (see Simpson 
1959; Krishnan and Rao 1965; Das 1975; Hoadley and Heyman 1977). Another sig-
nificant effort in this area was conducted by Clark and Scarf (1963), as it was the first 
study that attempted to generate and depict an optimal inventory policy in a multipe-
riod, multiechelon, distribution model involving uncertain demand. Other research 
in this area has focused on the setting of optimal lot sizes and inventory safety stocks 
in a multiechelon supply chain (Deuermeyer and Schwarz 1981; Eppen and Schrage 
1981; Nahmias and Smith 1994).
Sinha and Matta (1991) and Rogers and Tsubakitani (1991) present modeling stud-
ies in this research domain. Both studies focused on two-echelon inventory systems 
employing periodic review under stochastic demand with fixed lead times. Rogers 
and Tsubakitani concentrated on finding the optimal par values for the lower echelon 
such that the penalty costs were minimized. A budget value acted as a constraint 
of the maximum inventory investment. The optimal par level is achieved by utiliz-
ing a critical ratio that is adjusted by the Lagrange multiplier subject to the budget 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
117
constraint. Sinha and Matta focused on minimizing the holding costs of multiple 
products at both echelon levels with the presence of penalty costs at the lower ech-
elon. Similarly, the results demonstrated that the optimal par values for the lower 
echelon items were obtained using a critical ratio; however, the holding cost function 
provided a method for generating the optimal values for the upper echelon.
Nicholson et al. (2004) extend the work of Rogers and Tsubakitani (1991) and 
Sinha and Matta (1991) by considering a three-echelon inventory system. Specifically, 
this research concentrated on the healthcare sector and sought to compare an inter-
nally managed three-echelon system to an outsourced two-echelon distribution system. 
Comparisons focused on inventory costs and service levels. The results suggest that 
outsourcing the targeted functions yielded lower inventory costs without sacrificing 
customer service. As mentioned previously, the use of periodic review par level servic-
ing at the departmental level (i.e., at the individual care units) is a unique characteristic 
to hospital material management; however, it is important to note that the central phar-
macy often operates in a similar manner utilizing another set of par values reflective of 
aggregate inventory requirements. Zhu et al. (2005) found similar results in their study 
by using numerical simulations and sensitivity analysis of two models. Like that of 
Nicholson et al. (2004), this work demonstrated cost savings with high service levels 
for the two-echelon distribution network where item demands were monitored by the 
distributor and delivered directly to the departments for use, as opposed to orders being 
routed through the CS as they would be in a three-echelon system.
Some models consider the case of lost sales. Nahmias and Smith (1994) examine a 
two-echelon supply chain where stockouts can penalize the retailer in cases where 
customers are unwilling to wait for their orders to be filled. The authors assume 
instantaneous deliveries from the warehouse to the retailer, which is often not the 
case in practice. Andersson and Melchiors (2001) executed a similar study that 
allowed for excess demand to be handled using back orders. The supply chain in this 
work was comprised of one warehouse with multiple retail outlets being serviced. 
Demand here is independent Poisson processes, and lead times are considered con-
stant. The heuristic developed by the authors provides a mechanism to evaluate this 
type of supply network on elements of cost and service level.
Another research study examining the lost sales case is that of Hill et al. (2007), 
which looked at inventory control in a single-item, two-echelon system with a con-
tinuous review policy. Again, a central warehouse services several independent 
retailers and then has its stock replenished by an external supplier. The system oper-
ates such that any excess customer demand at the retailer can be filled from the ware-
house provided the item is in stock; however, any items that are not in stock result 
in lost sales. Lead time for the retailer is equal to the transportation time required to 
move the item from the warehouse to the specific retail outlet.
The influence of order risk was examined by Seo et al. (2001) in a two-echelon 
distribution system. They claim that the service policies should reflect the avail-
ability of real-time stock information. Their model adjusts the reorder time on the 
basis of an approximated order risk, which is associated with orders that are filled 
immediately versus those that are delayed. Results show that this order risk policy 
performed well when warehouse lead time was short, where item demand was low, 
and where there was an intermediate number of retailers in the supply chain.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

118	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Axsäter (2003) used an approximation technique to optimize inventory control 
in a two-echelon distribution network. Items displayed stochastic demand, and the 
system relied on a continuous review (R, Q) policy. In this situation, holding costs at 
all locations and back-order costs at the retailer were assumed to be linear. Axsäter 
presents a simplified method for estimating reorder points by using normal approxi-
mations for demand at both the retailer and the warehouse. Lee and Wu (2006) 
examined a simplified two-echelon supply chain system comprised of one supplier 
and one retailer. Here the retailer has a choice between two restocking policies: tra-
ditional methods (such as an EOQ or periodic review approach) or a statistical pro-
cess control (SPC)–based method. The results show support for the SPC method in 
addressing inventory variation issues and in reducing order backlogs. Benefits are 
apparent in the areas of demand management and inventory control, which leads 
the authors to suggest this as an alternative method for managing supply chain and 
inventory costs.
5.4	 Practical Solutions for Inventory Management 
of Pharmaceuticals in Hospitals
The following section discusses some practical solutions to issues facing managers 
when dealing with prescription drugs. The manner in which hospital pharmacies and 
drug distribution/dispensation historically occurred is examined. First we discuss 
the traditional method and then the current trends. We also describe the dilemmas 
hospital personnel face in filling prescribed medications and the alternative methods 
employed to satisfy drug orders. The managerial predicaments associated with man-
aging skilled labor in this system are also explained in limited detail. We close the 
section with the summary of the main results of a project targeted to provide deci-
sion support to inventory management of a hospital pharmacy.
5.4.1	 Traditional Operations in Hospital Pharmacies
Traditionally, hospital pharmacies operated in a centralized manner. Medications 
were stored in a central pharmacy and then distributed by pharmacy technicians 
using dose carts to make deliveries to the various hospital floors and CUs. A setup 
such as this requires large amounts of inventory to be stored in a single location 
while also allowing for quick, easy access to items. These technicians were charged 
with the task of moving the various medicines in the correct amounts or in individual 
cassettes for each patient. These dose carts contained individual cassettes of medica-
tions for each patient, which the nurse or caregiver was then charged with adminis-
tering to the patient. If for some reason the patient’s drug order changed, a special 
trip would be required to retrieve the necessary medications and then return to the 
CU. Thus, changes in medication or dosage may have taken hours to satisfy, result-
ing in time delays in care, increased labor requirements, and an overall increase in 
system costs associated with wasteful or excess operations.
To avoid prolonged delays in administering medications, it was common practice 
for nurses to borrow a medication from another patient. That resulted in additional 
problems in the distribution process and potentially dangerous situations where 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
119
patients may have received the improper medications. Other difficulties associated 
with the specific pharmaceutical types existed. Specifically, federal and state regula-
tions require a variety of documentation associated with the dispensation of narcotic 
drugs. From the time a narcotic is delivered to the hospital until it is administered to 
the patient, the drug must be tracked by the hospital and is surrounded by a number 
of tasks such as checking the ordered medication against the patient’s medical record, 
searching for narcotic keys to the cabinet, documenting for administrative records, 
and reconciling narcotic records after each shift. This example demonstrates some 
specific challenges in controlling and monitoring items in healthcare SCM.
Pharmacists are highly paid professionals being asked to spend long amounts of 
time handling excessive documentation and a labor-intensive drug dispensation and 
distribution process rather than practicing pharmaceutical care. The opportunity to 
reduce repetitive and tiresome tasks was very appealing to administrators and phar-
macists alike. As such, the ability to automate these processes and take advantage of 
computer information systems was valued by stakeholders.
5.4.2	 Current Management Trends and Operations in Pharmacy SCM
Hospitals have typically employed a variety of methods and policies to resolve pharma-
ceutical inventory management issues. A few of the more prominent solutions are dis-
cussed in this section to demonstrate the modern approaches seen in industry. Specifically, 
outsourcing, VMI, and information technology (IT)–based solutions are presented.
5.4.2.1	 Outsourcing
As described in the previous literature review, outsourcing has been widely used in 
the healthcare industry. Regardless of the specific product, entering into partner-
ships with suppliers and distributors for the purposes of combining services have 
generated benefits for the healthcare providers (see, e.g., Li and Benton 1996; Jarrett 
1998; Lunn 2000; Veral and Rosen 2001; Nicholson et al. 2004). The magnitude of 
resources linked to pharmaceutical inventory and its management, the desire to shift 
or reduce pharmacy workloads, and the opportunity to refocus resources on patient 
care make this an appealing proposition for healthcare providers. However, as shown 
by Rivard-Royer et al. (2002), all parties must benefit from such arrangements to 
provide long-term gains.
5.4.2.2	 VMI
Another trend is the growing usage of VMI strategies (Kim 2005). This a specific 
type of outsourcing in which pharmaceutical inventories located at various distribu-
tion locations (i.e., at the CUs) around the hospital are monitored by the supplier, 
in this case the pharmaceutical company or distributor, and replenished as needed. 
Currently, several hospitals employ a continuous review (s, S) inventory control pol-
icy. When demand for an item reaches a predetermined minimum level (s), an order 
is automatically generated and transmitted directly to the supplier. The supplier, in 
turn, ships the amount necessary to refill the distribution centers to the maximum 
quantity (S). Depending on the specific circumstances, materials can be either sent to 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

120	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
the pharmacy for repacking and distribution or sent directly to the point of service, 
which bypasses the pharmacy entirely.
5.4.2.3	 IT-Based Inventory Management Solutions
Information systems play a significant role in all of the aforementioned suggested 
approaches; however, they are perhaps even more critical in the next solution. Perini 
and Vermeulen (1994) reviewed a number of devices (e.g., Lionville CDModule, 
Meditrol, Argus, MedStation™, Sure-Med, and Selectrac-Rx) focused on the dis-
pensing of medicines located around the hospital in the patient care unit with the 
purpose of replacing the traditional dosage carts used by pharmacies, and to shift 
control of locally stored pharmaceutical inventories and controlled substances 
to caregivers at the point of use. Inventory stored in the CUs offer caregivers the 
opportunity to dispense medications quickly to patients; however, restocking these 
units can take extra time. These medication-management machines are designed to 
offer financial and practical advantages over traditional operating procedures where 
inventories are stored in a central pharmacy and then distributed by dose carts as 
needed. Another benefit of using these local devices is the ability to quickly create, 
store, and access point-of-service patient information, which can also expedite the 
documentation requirements associated with drugs. The technology employed by 
these solutions enhances operating efficiency and facilitates customer care by low-
ering the risk of patients receiving incorrect medications. Regardless of the specific 
solution, these systems usually offer pharmaceutical administrators the ability to 
reduce inventory carrying and other costs, to improve billing and usage informa-
tion, and to increase staff productivity by creating a highly integrated, data-driven 
information flow.
5.4.3	 A Case of Hospital Pharmaceutical Inventory Management
In this section we summarize the main results of a project targeted to provide decision 
support to inventory management of a hospital pharmacy. The available equipment 
and current management system are described first; the new quantitative models 
developed by the authors of this chapter are summarized next; and the managerial 
decision support potentials close the section (see the details in Kelle et al. 2008).
5.4.3.1	 Pharmaceutical Distribution Equipment and Control Case
The drugs are stored in the local depots (Pyxis© MedStations) in close to a hundred 
different areas of the hospital. Each area has a different selection of drugs. The Pyxis 
MedStation registers each transaction date, the quantity of demand (withdrawal), 
each delivery (refill), and the actual inventory level. It is connected to the central 
depot (Tallyst© system) electronically.
As the inventory level decreases to a reorder point (min par level) an automatic 
order is triggered by the local depot. The order quantity is determined by the order-
up-to level (max par level). The par levels can be selected and fixed for each drug. 
Currently, the par levels are based on so-called experiences, but no modeling or 
optimization is involved in setting these control values. The central depot satisfies 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
121
the order within a day. Shortage in the central depot is rare, and in that case the 
wholesaler (GPO) refills within a day or an emergency supply is provided.
The demand for each drug is uncertain. The daily usage data is available for each 
drug for the period of one year. High service level is essential in the drug supply. In 
case of a shortage at a local depot (Pyxis), a very costly emergency delivery is nec-
essary. The refill from the central depot is also constrained and expensive because 
a highly educated pharmacist must supervise it. One major goal of the pharmacy 
management is to minimize the number of refills per day. If the refill per day is very 
large, it cannot be done in two shifts, and to provide an extra shift is difficult and 
costly.
The capacity (the total space) of the Pyxis systems is limited. It consists of draw-
ers. Each drawer is subdivided by spacers that can be relocated so different cubicles 
are constructed and assigned to each drug. Different drugs cannot be stored in the 
same cubicle. The total room for the cubicles is fixed. The inventory holding cost 
factor is not a major concern for the hospital because the wholesaler is financing it. 
However, we will include inventory holding cost later and will examine the effect of 
its consideration.
The main goals of the management are to:
Provide a high service level for each drug
• 
Minimize the total number of expected refills (orders) per day for a Pyxis
• 
Use the limited space of a local depot (Pyxis) in the best way by subdivid-
• 
ing it to separate areas (cubicles) for each drug
The decision variables are the reorder point (the min par level) and the order 
up level (max par level) for each drug. The average daily demand and the standard 
deviation of the daily demand can be calculated from historical data. Also, we know 
the storage space requirement for a unit of each drug and the maximum storage 
space in a Pyxis.
5.4.3.2	 Quantitative Modeling Issues
We formulated different optimization models. In the first one we minimize the total num-
ber of expected refills (orders) per day for a Pyxis MedStation subject to two constraints:
The service level for each drug is a fixed high level
• 
The total space needed for the maximum inventory level (
• 
Si) for each drug 
is not more than the available total space of the Pyxis MedStation
We have some challenges that are not handled in literature including the large 
dimensions (around 250 drugs in a Pyxis) and demand uncertainty; the service-level 
constraint combined with space constraint; and the fast solution and simple sensitiv-
ity analysis requirement. For this reason we provided a simplified model and solution 
for the optimization problem. We consider the two constraints (service level and 
space) and the two sets of decision variables separately, and solve it iteratively using 
power approximation (see Ehrhardt 1979) for handling the service level.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

122	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
In the first step we set the reorder point, based on required service level, for each 
item of a Pyxis station, using power approximation formulae. The achieved service 
level depends also on the reorder level, which depends on the cost factor. We can 
show that the optimal order quantity implicitly (by the analogy of the EOQ model) 
sets the optimal cost rate. We need to apply an iterative solution starting with an initial 
estimate. We can select the initial estimate for the reorder point without safety stock 
consideration as the expected lead-time demand and provide the initial estimate. In 
the second step we minimize the number of orders per day under the space constraint 
considering the reorder points set before (see the details in Kelle et al. 2008).
5.4.3.2	 Managerial Decision Support
The result shows that the optimal allocation of the space for the order quantities of 
the items is proportional with the square root of the demand over space rate. It is 
proportional to the available free space (space remaining for cycle stock, after taking 
out the space requirement for the reorder point stock). The reorder point stock is the 
sum of expected demand during the lead time plus the safety stock. The lead time is 
the refill time.
The trade-off between the number of orders and free storage space for a given 
service level can be expressed in a simple functional form depending on the remain-
ing free storage space for cycle stock (above safety stock), so our function implicitly 
includes the service level trade-off. For a fixed service level, the trade-off curve 
has a hyperbola shape that is shifted to the right (higher space requirement) with 
increasing service level requirement. This property allows a simple trade-off analy-
sis including managerial questions such as:
Service level versus expected number of daily orders (worker capacity 
• 
requirement)
Number of drugs stored (formulary) versus service level
• 
Storage volume versus service level and worker capacity requirement
• 
Extension of formulary versus additional worker capacity requirement
• 
5.5	 Summary and Research Prospective
This chapter was introduced with a scenario of an ER supply problem which, with 
variations in details, will possibly be experienced at some time by individuals who 
read this book. The researchers have presented a broad view of characteristics that 
make healthcare supply chain management a very intriguing area of study. The health-
care industry operates in a unique manner in that it has a number of special constraints 
all being enforced at once. Specifically, the focus is on maintaining a high level of ser-
vice and controlling costs, as opposed to reducing them. In traditional supply chains, 
these variables are manipulated to achieve the optimal economic operating setting. 
However, in the healthcare industry, trade-offs are not as easily achieved. Furthermore, 
medicines are special products as noted by Almarsdóttir and Traulsen (2005).
First, the significance of the healthcare industry is demonstrated by the provided 
cost breakdown and by conveying the importance of affordable, quality care to the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
123
described stakeholders. Second, a review of current literature in this specific area is 
presented. It is important to recognize that the need for continued research in this 
domain is warranted. Many of the proposed inventory control models have yet to be 
tested in a healthcare setting or have not been evaluated under conditions of vary-
ing demand types (i.e., intermittent or autocorrelated demand). Finally, traditional 
operations of hospital pharmacies are described and contrasted with some common 
managerial approaches seen in practice today. Specifically, outsourcing and VMI in 
some form are used extensively to alleviate strains on pharmacy resources and mate-
rial management issues. Information technology plays a significant role in determin-
ing the success of these solutions, but the widespread use of materials-management 
machinery in hospitals and throughout hospital systems makes this task even more 
daunting. It seems clear that investments in these resources will continue in the 
future as hospitals increase their reliance on the information created and controlled 
by these machines.
The body of work in healthcare SCM provides a good foundation for further 
study in this area; however, there are a number of gaps that should be addressed. The 
managerial literature in this area has generally focused on identifying stakeholders 
and relationships within the healthcare system and distribution network, with other 
works exploring trends in funding mechanisms and the influence of cost-containment 
policies on this industry. Very few best practices and benchmarks have been identi-
fied for healthcare managers to use as performance guidelines or indicators. We 
believe that future research targeting the changing relationships of stakeholders and 
supply chain partners should be pursued to offer valuable insight into the impacts of 
outsourcing and other supply chain coordination techniques currently in use. Both 
outsourcing and VMI are used extensively in modern healthcare supply chains, but 
little is known about the influence these business relationships have had on organiza-
tions or their operations outside of cost. As many hospitals employ outsourcing and 
IT-based medicine distribution machines as a means of simplifying their inventory 
management systems, they are actually adding to the complexity of their pharma-
ceutical distribution network. To this point, little is known about these arrangements 
or their implications.
In addition to the managerial literature, there are a number of gaps in the quanti-
tative modeling research as well. Although there are a number of inventory control 
models that may be applicable to pharmaceutical management within hospitals, many 
of these models have yet to be tested in this setting. The special product characteris-
tics mentioned in the earlier part of the chapter present unique challenges to manag-
ing such inventories and warrant further study. In addition, the use of the medicine 
machines at local care units (like Pyxis machines) suggests that multiple constraints 
must be considered when determining the control values employed at both the local 
and central storage areas. Service level, not inventory holding costs, is the primary 
concern in this system. Models combining space, workload, cost, and service-level 
constraints have yet to be developed; however, efforts in this area could prove invalu-
able to pharmaceutical managers as they attempt to focus on supply chain operations 
that offer cost-containment benefits. It is also important to develop models showing 
the trade-off between the extension of the formulary (variety of drugs provided) ver-
sus additional cost, workload, storage capacity requirement, and service problems. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

124	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
To that end, the authors of this chapter are currently examining such problems and 
developing models to facilitate multicriteria decision support.
In conclusion, as we strive to comprehend and mend healthcare’s woes we must 
remember that healthcare spending in the United States reached $2.3 trillion in 2007 
and is projected to reach $3 trillion in 2011. Healthcare spending is projected to 
reach $4.2 trillion by 2016 (Poisal et al. 2007). The United States spends six times 
more per capita on the administration of the healthcare system than its peer Western 
European nations (McKinsey Global Institute 2007). The McKinsey Quarterly 
(2004) reported that health insurance expenses are the fastest growing cost com-
ponent for employers. Our endeavor while academic in nature cannot heal all of 
healthcare’s illnesses; however, our goal is to provide a practical model for executive 
decision support specifically in pharmaceutical inventory control. Our contention 
is that this research model will help to optimize inventory levels, maximize space 
usage, reduce pharmacy personnel workloads, and maintain high customer-service 
levels, thus decreasing cost and enhancing efficiencies in healthcare.
References
Allen, S. 1958. Redistribution of total stock over several user locations. Nav Res Logist Q 
5(1):51–59.
Almarsdóttir, A., and J. Traulsen. 2005. Cost-containment as part of pharmaceutical policy. 
Pharm World Sci 27(3):144–148.
Andersson, J., and P. Melchiors. 2001. A two-echelon inventory model with lost sales. Int J 
Prod Econ 69(3):307–315.
Axsäter, S. 2003. Approximate optimization of a two-level distribution inventory system. Int 
J Prod Econ 81-82:545–553.
Banerjea-Brodeur, M., J.-F. Cordeau, G. Laporte, and A. Lasry. 1998. Scheduling linen deliv-
eries in a large hospital. J Oper Res Soc 49(8):777–780.
Beyer, D., S. P. Sethiand, and R. Sridhar. 2001. Stochastic multiproduct inventory models with 
limited storage. J Optim Theor Appl 111(3):553–588.
Bolton, C., and J. Gordon. 1991. Health care material management. Working paper, Queen’s 
University, Kingston.
Bower, M., and R. A. Garda. 1985. The role of marketing in management. McKinsey Quarterly, 
Autumn 85(3):34–46.
Burns, L., and Wharton School Colleagues. 2002. The health care value chain producers, 
purchasers, and providers. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.
Castles, F. 2004. The future of the welfare state: Crisis myths and crisis realities. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press.
Catlin, A., C. Cowan, S. Heffler, B. Washington, and the National Health Expenditure Accounts 
Team. 2007. National health spending in 2005: The slowdown continues. Health Aff 
26(1):142–153.
Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, Office of the Actuary, National Health Statistics 
Group. 2007. 2005 National Health Care Expenditures Data. http://www.cms.hhs.gov/ 
nationalhealthexpenddata/01_overview.asp? (accessed October 20, 2007).
Clark, A., and H. Scarf. 1963. Optimal policies for a multi-echelon inventory problem. Manag 
Sci 6(4):475–490.
Chiu, H. 1995. An approximation to the continuous review inventory model with perishable 
items and lead times. Eur J Oper Res 87(1):95–108.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
125
Comas-Herrera, A. 1999. Is there convergence in the health expenditures of the EU Member 
States? In Health care and cost containment in the European Union, edited by E. 
Mossialos and J. Grand, 197–218. Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
Croston, J. 1972. Forecasting and stock control for intermittent demands. Oper Res Q 
23(3):289–304.
Culyer, A. 1990. Cost containment in Europe. In Health care systems in transition: The search 
for efficiency, edited by OECD, 29–40. Paris: OECD.
Das, C. 1975. Supply and redistribution rules for two-location inventory systems: One period 
analysis. Manag Sci 21:765–776.
Dellaert, N., and E. van de Poel. 1996. Global inventory control in an academic hospital. Int J 
Prod Econ 46-47:277–284
Deuermeyer, B., and L. Schwarz. 1981. A model for the analysis of system service level in 
a warehouse-retailer distribution system. In Multi-level production/inventory control 
systems: Theory and practice, edited by L. Schwarz, 163–193. Amsterdam: North-
Holland.
Ehrhardt, R. 1979. Power approximation for computing (s, S) inventory policies. Manag Sci 
25(8):777–786.
Eppen, G., and L. Schrage. 1981. Centralized ordering policies in a multi-warehouse system 
with lead times and random demand. In Multi-level production/inventory control sys-
tems: Theory and practice, edited by L. Schwarz, 51–67. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Evans, J., and B. Berman. 2001. Conceptualizing and operationalizing the business-to- business 
value chain. Ind Market Manag 30(2):135–48.
Fries, B. 1975. Optimal order policy for a perishable commodity with fixed lifetime. Oper Res 
23(1):46–61.
Gallego, G., M. Queyranne, and D. Simchi-Levi. 1996. Single-resource multi-item inventory 
systems. Oper Res 44(4):580–595.
Guillén, A., and L. Cabiedes. 2003. Reforming pharmaceutical policies in the European Union: 
A “penguin effect”? Int J Health Serv 33(1):1–28.
Hariga, M., and P. Jackson. 1996. The warehouse scheduling problem: Formulation and algo-
rithms. IIE Trans 28(2):115–128.
Heffler, S., S. Smith, S. Keehan, C. Borger, M. Clemens, and C. Truffer. 2005. U.S. health 
spending projections for 2004–2014. Health Affairs. http://content.healthaffairs.org/
cgi/content/abstract/hlthaff.w5.74#otherarticles (accessed on October 14, 2007).
Henning, W. 1980. Utilizing suppliers to the hospital’s best interest. Hosp Mater Manag Q 
1(3):39–47.
Hill, R., M. Seifbarghy, and D. Smith. 2007. A two-echelon inventory model with lost sales. 
Eur J Oper Res 181(2):753–766.
Hoadley, B., and D. Heyman. 1977. A two-echelon inventory model with purchases, deposi-
tions, shipments, returns, and transshipments. Nav Res Logist Q 24(1):1–20.
Hollier, R., K. Mak, and K. Yiu. 2005. Optimal inventory control of lumpy demand items using 
(s, S) policies with a maximum issue quantity restriction and opportunistic replenish-
ments. Int J Prod Res 43(23):4929–4944.
Holmgren, H., and J. Wentz. 1982. Material management and purchasing for the health care 
facility. Washington, DC: AUPHA Press.
Ignall, E. 1966. Optimal policies for two-product inventory systems, with and without setup 
costs. PhD diss., Cornell University.
Ignall, E., and A. Veinott. 1969. Optimality of myopic inventory policies for several substitute 
products. Manag Sci 15(5):284–304.
Jarrett, P. 1998. Logistics in the health care industry. Int J Phys Distrib Logist Manag 
28(9):741–742.
Jayaraman, V., C. Burnett, and D. Frank. 2000. Separating inventory flows in the materials 
management department of Hancock Medical Center. Interfaces 30(4):56–64.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

126	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Jönsson, B., and P. Musgrove. 1997. Government financing of health care. In Innovations 
in health care financing, edited by G. J. Schieber, 41–64. Washington, DC: World 
Bank.
Kelle, P., H. Schneider, S. Wiley-Patton, and J. Woosley. 2008. Pharmaceutical supply chain 
specifics and inventory solutions for a hospital. Working paper, ISDS Department, 
Louisiana State University.
Kim, D. 2005. An integrated supply chain management system: A case study in healthcare 
sector. Lect Notes Comput Sci 3590:218–227.
Krishnan, K., and V. Rao. 1965. Inventory control in N warehouses. J Ind Eng 16(3): 
212–215.
Landry, S., and M. Beaulieu. 2000. Étude internationale des meilleures pratiques de logistique 
hospitalière. Montreal: Cahier de recherche du groupe CHAINE.
Lapierre, S., and A. Ruiz. 2007. Scheduling logistic activities to improve hospital supply sys-
tems. Comput Oper Res 34(3):624–641.
Lee, H., and J. Wu. 2006. A study on inventory replenishment policies in a two-echelon supply 
chain system. Comput Ind Eng 51(2):257–263.
Li, L., and W. Benton. 1996. Performance measurement criteria in health care organizations: 
Review and future research directions. Eur J Oper Res 93(3):449–468.
Lian, Z., and L. Liu. 2001. Continuous review perishable inventory systems: models and heu-
ristics. IIE Trans 33(9):809–822.
Liu, L., and Z. Lian. 1999. (s, S) continuous review models for products with fixed lifetimes. 
Oper Res 47(1):150–158.
Lunn, T. 2000. Ways to reduce inventory. Hosp Mater Manag Q 21(4):1–7.
Marmor, T., and K. Okma 1998. Cautionary lessons from the West: What (not) to learn from 
other countries’ experience in the financing and delivery of health care. In The state of 
social welfare, edited by P. Flora, P. R. de Jong, J. Le Grand, and J. Y. Kim, 327–350. 
Aldershot, UK: Ashgate.
McKinsey and Company. 2004. Will health benefit costs eclipse profits. The McKinsey 
Quarterly Chart Focus Newsletter (September 2004).
McKinsey Global Institute. 2007. Accounting for the cost of health care in the United 
States. http://www.mckinsey.com/mgi/rp/healthcare/accounting_cost_healthcare.asp 
(accessed October 15, 2008).
Meijboom, B., and B. Obel. 2007. Tactical coordination in a multi-location and multi-
stage operations structure: A model and a pharmaceutical company case. Omega 
35(3):258–273.
Michelon, P., M. Dib Cruz, and V. Gascon. 1994. Using the tabu search method for the distri-
bution of supplies in a hospital. Ann Oper Res 50(1):427–435.
Minner, S., and E. Silver. 2005. Multi-product batch replenishment strategies under stochastic 
demand and a joint capacity constraint. IIE Trans 37(5):469–479.
Minner, S., and E. Silver. 2007. Replenishment policies for multiple products with compound- 
Poisson demand that share a common warehouse. Int J Prod Econ 108(1-2): 
388–398.
Naddor, E. 1975. Optimal and heuristic decisions on single- and multi-item inventory systems 
Mgmt Sci. 21(11):1234–1249.
Nahmias, S. 1975 Optimal ordering policies for perishable inventory—II. Oper Res 
23(4):735–749.
Nahmias, S. 1982. Perishable inventory theory: A review. Oper Res 30(4):680–707.
Nahmias, S., and S. Smith. 1994. Optimizing inventory levels in a two-echelon retailer system 
with partial lost sales. Manag Sci 40(5):582–596.
Nicholson, L., A. J. Vakharia, and S. Selcuk Erenguc. 2004. Outsourcing inventory management 
decisions in healthcare: Models and application. Eur J Oper Res 154(1):271–290.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Healthcare Supply Chain Management	
127
Ohno, K., and T. Ishigaki. 2001. A multi-item continuous review inventory system with com-
pound Poisson demands. Math Meth Oper Res 53(1):147–165.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 1994. Health: Quality 
and choice. Paris: OECD, OECD Health Policy Studies No. 4.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 1995. New directions in 
health care policy. Paris: OECD, OECD Health Policy Studies No. 7.
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD). 1996. Health care 
reform: The will to change. Paris: OECD, OECD Health Policy Studies No. 8.
Perini, V., and L. Vermeulen Jr. 1994. Comparison of automated medication-management sys-
tems. Am J Hosp Pharm 51(15):1883–1891.
Pitta, D., and M. Laric. 2004. Value chains in health care. J Consum Market 21(7):451–464.
Plunkett Research Group. 2008. Health care trends. http://www.plunkettresearch.com/ 
Industries/HealthCare/HealthCareTrends/tabid/294/Default.aspx (accessed September 
10, 2008).
Poisal, J., C. Truffer, S. Smith, A. Sisko, C. Cowan, S. Keehan, B. Dickensheets, and the 
National Health Expenditure Accounts Projections Team. 2007. Health spending pro-
jections through 2016: Modest changes obscure part D’s impact. Health Aff 21(2): 
W242–253.
Porter, M. 1985. Competitive advantage: Creating and sustaining superior performance. New 
York: The Free Press.
Prashant, N. 1991. A systematic approach to optimization of inventory management functions. 
Hosp Mater Manag Q 12(4):34–38.
Prosser, H., and T. Walley. 2005. A qualitative study of GPs’ and PCO stakeholders’ views on 
the importance and influence of cost on prescribing. Soc Sci Med 60(6):1335–1346.
Prosser, H., and T. Walley. 2007. Perceptions of the impact of primary care organizations on GP 
prescribing: The iron fist in the velvet glove? J Health Organ Manage 21(1):5–26.
Rivard-Royer, H., S. Landry, and M. Beaulieu. 2002. Hybrid stockless: A case study. Int J 
Oper Prod Manag 22(4):412–424.
Roberts, D. 1962. Approximations to optimal policies in a dynamic inventory model studies. 
In Applied probability and management science, edited by K. Arrow, S. Kardin, and 
H. Scarf, 207–229. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Rogers, D., and S. Tsubakitani. 1991. Inventory positioning/partitioning for backorders opti-
mization for a class of multi-echelon inventory problems. Decis Sci 22(3):536–558.
Rothgang, H., M. Cacace, S. Grimmeisen, and C. Wendt. 2005. The changing role of the state 
in healthcare systems. Eur Rev 13(S1):187–212.
Sani, B., and B. Kingsman. 1997. Selecting the best periodic inventory control and demand 
forecasting methods for low demand items. J Oper Res Soc 48(7):700–713.
Schmidt, C., and S. Nahmias. 1985. (S–1, S) policies for perishable inventory. Manag Sci 
31(6):719–728.
Seo, Y., S. Jung, and J. Hahm. 2001. Optimal reorder decision utilizing centralized stock infor-
mation in a two-echelon distribution system. Comput Oper Res 29(2):171–193.
Simpson Jr., K. 1959. A theory of allocations of stocks to warehouses. Oper Res 7(6): 797–805.
Sinha, D., and K. Matta. 1991. Multiechelon (R, S) inventory model. Decis Sci 22(3): 484–499.
Smith-Daniels, V. 2006. Supply chains critical to well-being of health-care systems. 
Knowledge@W.P. Carey, http://knowledge.wpcarey.asu.edu/article.cfm?articleid= 
1245 (accessed October 14, 2008).
Syntetos, A., and J. Boylan. 2006. On the stock control performance of intermittent demand 
estimators. Int J Prod Econ 103(1):36–47.
Tarabusi, C., and G. Vickery. 1998a. Globalization in the pharmaceutical industry, part I. Int J 
Health Serv 28(1):67–105.
Tarabusi, C., and G. Vickery. 1998b. Globalization in the pharmaceutical industry, part II. Int 
J Health Serv 28(2):281–303.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

128	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
van Merode, G., S. Groothuis, and A. Hasman. 2004. Enterprise resource planning for hospi-
tals. Int J Med Inf 73(6):493–501.
Veinott, A. 1965. Optimal policy for a multiproduct, dynamic nonstationary inventory prob-
lem. Manag Sci 12:206–222.
Veral, E., and H. Rosen. 2001. Can a focus on costs increase costs? Hosp Mater Manag Q 
22(3):28–35.
Vissers, J., J. Bertrand, and G. de Vries. 2001. A framework for production control in health 
care organizations. Prod Plann Contr 12(6):591–604.
Weiss, H. 1980. Optimal ordering policies for continuous review perishable inventory models. 
Oper Res 28(2):365–374.
Zhu, L., H. Wang, and L. Zhao. 2005. Comparative research on three-echelon and two-echelon 
medicine inventory model with positive lead-time. J Southeast Univ (English Edition) 
21:500–505.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

129
6 Inventory Modeling for 
Complex Emergencies 
in Humanitarian 
Relief Operations
Benita M. Beamon and Stephen A. Kotleba
University of Washington
Seattle, Washington
Contents
6.1	
Introduction...................................................................................................130
6.2	
Literature Review.......................................................................................... 131
6.3	
System to Be Modeled: South Sudan Relief Efforts...................................... 132
6.4	
Humanitarian Relief Inventory Model..........................................................134
6.4.1	 Summary of Modeling Notation........................................................134
6.4.2	 Assumptions...................................................................................... 135
6.4.3	 Expected Reorder Level per Cycle.................................................... 135
6.4.4	 Expected Average Number of Units Held per Cycle......................... 137
6.4.5	 Expected Average Number of Units Held per Cycle 
(No Emergency Orders).....................................................................138
6.4.6	 Expected Average Number of Units Held per Cycle 
with Emergency Orders..................................................................... 140
6.4.7	 Cycle Length for Relief Cycles with and without 
Emergency Orders............................................................................. 140
6.4.8	 Revisiting: Average Number of Units Held per Cycle with 
Emergency Orders............................................................................. 141
6.4.9	 Total Average Number of Units Held per Cycle................................ 141
6.4.10	 Total Average Cycle Length.............................................................. 142
6.4.11	 Expected Number of Back Orders per Cycle.................................... 143
6.4.12	 Per-Cycle Back Order Probabilities...................................................144
6.4.13	 Total Cost Equation........................................................................... 145
6.4.14	 Deriving Optimal Conditions............................................................ 145
6.4.15	 Solution Procedure............................................................................ 146
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

130	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
6.1	 Introduction
In 1998 there were 400 natural disasters reported in the International Federation 
of the Red Cross World Disasters Report (1999). These natural disasters affected 
more than 144 million people, resulting in 90,000 deaths and 5 million temporarily 
displaced persons. In 1998, the governmental donor community spent more than $3 
billion responding to the immediate effects of natural disasters and man-made emer-
gencies (International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 1999). In 
2005, the International Federation of the Red Cross World Disasters Report stated 
that the number of disasters had risen dramatically to an average of 707 disasters 
per year from 1999 to 2003, affecting an average of 213 million people per year 
(International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies 2005).
The challenge for nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) and other relief agen-
cies responding to global emergencies (e.g., volcanic eruptions, earthquakes, floods, 
war) is how to prepare and manage relief activities in an unpredictable environment. 
Even with modern scientific advances, the onset of large-scale disasters can occur 
with little warning, and once a disaster strikes, the relief response often necessitates 
a variety of NGO expertise. Regardless of an NGO’s operational specialty (e.g., hous-
ing and shelter, water and sanitation, pharmaceuticals), and whether the response is 
on a national or international level, each NGO shares the common critical objective 
of rapidly delivering the correct amount of goods, people, and monetary resources to 
the needed locations. As a result, the ability of an NGO’s supply chain and logistic 
operations directly affects the success of a relief effort.
Recent studies such as Fenton (2003) and Thomas (2003) often compare the cur-
rent state of supply chain management capabilities within humanitarian organizations 
to that of the commercial sector in the 1970s and ’80s. At that time, the commer-
cial sector began to realize the strategic advantages and significant improvements 
supply chain management could offer in effectiveness and efficiency. This led to 
extensive research in the area of supply chain and logistical analysis. Even so, quan-
titative methods and principles are rarely applied to humanitarian operations. Also, 
as global relief responses are growing in scale and magnitude, humanitarian sup-
ply chain management is becoming increasingly complex. The growing logistical 
needs are outpacing the capabilities of current management approaches. This is 
partly due to the aid sector’s regard for logistics as a necessary expense (rather than 
an important strategic component in their work), the lack of depth in operational 
knowledge (due to high humanitarian agency employee turnover), and the gen-
eral lack of investment in technology and communication. The trends of increas-
ing numbers of natural disasters and increasing emphasis on accountability have 
served as motivating factors to increase understanding and improve the capacity 
for delivering humanitarian relief. This work focuses specifically on developing an 
6.5	
Conclusions and Future Research.................................................................. 146
Acknowledgments................................................................................................... 147
Appendix: Closed-Form Expression for Q1............................................................ 147
References............................................................................................................... 149
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
131
inventory management strategy for a warehouse supporting a complex emergency 
relief operation.
6.2	 Literature Review
Quantitative tools for emergency relief have typically come in the form of mathe-
matical and network flow models. Oh and Haghani (1996) analyze the transportation 
of large amounts of many different commodities, such as food, clothing, medicine, 
medical supplies, machinery, and personnel in the most efficient manner to mini-
mize the loss of life and maximize the efficiency of the rescue operations. The result 
is a formulation and solution of a multicommodity, multimodal network flow model 
for a generic disaster relief operation. The model is constructed to have four nodes, 
five arcs, and three transportation modes. Two heuristics are developed with the first 
utilizing a Lagrangian relaxation approach and the second employing an iterative 
fix-and-run process. Oh and Haghani (1997) further explore their heuristic models 
and provide more detailed analysis.
As has been well documented in disaster relief analysis, the infrastructure for 
the transportation of relief supplies is often unreliable. Due to this unreliability, 
Barbarosoglu et al. (2002) abandon dependence on road networks and focus on the 
use of helicopters for aid delivery and rescue missions during natural disasters. Their 
research is mainly concerned with developing mathematical models that solve tactical 
and operational scheduling decisions regarding helicopter activities. The authors uti-
lize existing research in helicopter routing to address crew assignment, routing, and 
transportation issues encountered during the initial response phase of disaster man-
agement. Infrastructure unreliability as an obstacle to developing and maintaining 
supply chains was also the motivation behind Thomas (2002). The author develops a 
method for quantifying the reliability of supply chains for contingency logistics sys-
tems based on reliability interference theory. Barbarosoglu and Arda (2004) further 
explore modeling the uncertainty involved in emergency response. They develop a 
two-stage stochastic programming framework for transportation planning in disaster 
response. In this work, the authors expanded on Oh and Haghani’s (1996) determin-
istic multicommodity, the multimodal network flow problem to include uncertainties 
that exist in estimating resource requirements of first-aid commodities, the vulner-
ability of resource provider facilities, and the survivability of the connecting routes 
in the disaster area.
Ozdamar et al. (2004) examines logistics planning in emergencies involving dis-
patching commodities to distribution centers of affected areas. The network flow 
model developed by the author addresses a dynamic time-dependent transportation 
problem, and repetitively derives a solution at given time intervals to represent ongo-
ing aid delivery. The model regenerates plans incorporating new requests for aid mate-
rials, new supplies, and transportation modes that become available during the current 
planning time horizon. The plan indicates the optimal mixed pick up and delivery 
schedules for vehicles within the considered planning time horizon as well as the 
optimal quantities and types of loads to be picked up and delivered on these routes.
Sakakibara et al. (2004) also examine commodity flow in a road network dur-
ing disaster response, and partitions the road network into isolated components. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

132	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
The authors use a topological index to quantify road network accessibility, and 
then evaluate the isolation of districts in a disaster location. The authors present a 
methodology for specifying effective road links for avoiding functional isolation of 
districts.
Mathematical modeling of inventory management in emergency relief efforts has 
received little attention in the literature. Depending on the nature of the disaster, 
humanitarian emergency operations can continue for many years. To ensure continu-
ous capacity in long-term responses, NGOs often institute arrangements for the stor-
age of relief items in warehouses located near the response location. This research 
focuses on developing an inventory management policy to improve the effectiveness 
and efficiency of emergency relief during long-term humanitarian responses.
6.3	 System to Be Modeled: South Sudan Relief Efforts
The last decade has seen a decisive increase in the loss of life, property, and material 
damage due to the rising occurrence of natural disasters (United States Agency for 
International Development 2005). Also on the rise and equally as devastating, are 
man-made disasters, which are referred to within humanitarian agencies as complex 
humanitarian emergencies (United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants 
2004). UNICEF (2003) defines a complex humanitarian emergency as, “A humani-
tarian crisis in a country, region, or society where there is significant or total break-
down of authority resulting from internal or external conflict and which requires an 
international response that extends beyond the mandate or capacity of any single 
humanitarian agency.”
Complex humanitarian emergencies are typically rooted in racially, ethnically, or 
religiously charged warfare, and are frequently characterized by horrific violations 
of human rights. The disturbing trend with complex humanitarian emergencies is 
that when conflicts erupt within the borders of a country, the dividing line between 
civilians and combatants is frequently blurred. Militant or rebellious groups are usu-
ally the same civilians living and socializing in and around the villages they attack. 
This type of warfare commonly resorts to the use of insidious tactics where humani-
tarian agencies are denied access to groups of people in need of assistance. Also, at 
the center of these shocking developments is the emergence of civilians, including 
women, children, and humanitarian workers, as the deliberate targets of warfare 
rather than its incidental victims. The vast devastation of complex humanitarian 
emergencies can also be attributed to the typically long length of the disaster, which 
imposes not only financial hurdles, but also legal, moral, and political dilemmas 
to those attempting to provide relief. Humanitarian efforts responding to complex 
emergencies often last for many years, and therefore require logistics systems that 
can support long-term relief activities.
The destruction resulting from long-term complex humanitarian emergencies 
has recently been witnessed in the Balkans tragedy, the genocide in Rwanda, and 
most dramatically in the civil war in south Sudan. The United States Holocaust 
Memorial Museum (2005) describes the warfare in Sudan, Africa’s largest country, 
as one of the most devastating humanitarian crises ever to affect the world. Since 
1983, civil war has ravaged south Sudan, leaving over 2 million dead and over 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
133
4 million displaced (United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants 2004). 
For over twenty years, humanitarian agencies have been responding to the emer-
gency by airlifting aid to many parts of the underdeveloped south Sudan region. 
The United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants World Refugee Survey: 
Sudan (2004) estimates that millions of people are dependent on the relief supplies 
provided by humanitarian agencies. Air access is vital for agencies providing relief 
as the existing roads in Sudan are often in poor condition, heavily mined, prone 
to attack by bandits and militia, and at times impassable due to seasonal rains 
(United States Holocaust Memorial Museum 2005). The south Sudan civil war 
has been fought primarily with guerrilla warfare tactics, which are based on prin-
ciples of ambush and sabotage. The result is a sporadic need for humanitarian aid 
in unpredictable quantities. Prepositioning of relief supplies near the affected area 
has proven to be an effective strategy for responding to emergencies of this nature 
(UNICEF 2005).
In 1989, in response to the continual need for humanitarian aid in south Sudan, 
Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) was created under the coordination of the United 
Nations as a consortium of UNICEF, the World Food Programme, and more than 
thirty-five NGOs. The purpose of OLS was for the United Nations to provide the 
necessary air transport and security for NGO operations, and to provide a strict code 
of conduct to maintain high standards and impartiality in the delivery of human-
itarian assistance to Sudanese civilians. OLS operates out of a United Nations 
base in the northwest Kenyan town of Lockichoggio, and provides more than a 
dozen daily airlifts of food, relief supplies, and people (Humanitarian and War 
Project 2005). The air transport and security provided by the OLS have allowed 
many NGOs to preposition relief items in warehouses throughout Lockichoggio. 
As such, Lockichoggio has developed into a logistical hub for the south Sudan 
relief efforts.
Global prepositioning of relief supplies is an expansion of the warehousing strat-
egy typically seen in complex humanitarian emergency responses. This response 
strategy allows NGOs to respond quickly to disasters with relief supplies from stra-
tegically stocked warehouses throughout the world. Global prepositioning is a rela-
tively new approach, and currently only a few NGOs can support the large expense 
of operating a warehouse that serves the international community. World Vision 
International has taken the lead in implementing a global prepositioning system. 
Their global prepositioning units (GPUs) are part of a strategy that allows them to 
respond rapidly and effectively to large-scale emergencies. The GPU system was 
initiated in 2000 with three warehouse locations (Denver, Colorado; Brindisi, Italy; 
Hanover, Germany), but the full impact of their operations has yet to be determined. 
The trade-off of operating a global prepositioned system is rapid response but large 
transportation costs. The challenge for NGOs is to integrate a GPU system into a 
long-term humanitarian relief response effectively and efficiently.
The objective here is to develop an efficient, quick-response warehouse inven-
tory policy for a humanitarian organization responding to a complex humanitarian 
emergency. The analysis is based on a case study of a single humanitarian agency 
operating a warehouse in Lockichoggio and responding to the south Sudan crisis 
within the OLS framework.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

134	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
6.4	 Humanitarian Relief Inventory Model
Quantitative multisupplier supply chain inventory modeling is an active area of 
research (see Minner and von-Guericke [2003] for a review of such models). Our 
research develops a multisupplier inventory model that accounts for the unique 
demand patterns that occur in humanitarian emergency relief operations. We will 
first provide the relevant model framework and then describe our model in detail. 
Our model develops an inventory policy for the unique characteristics of a long-term 
complex humanitarian emergency relief response, considering the specific charac-
teristics of the ordering process and demand distribution, yielding new expressions 
for on-hand inventory, stockout probability, expected number of back orders, and 
ultimately the decision variables Q1, r1, Q2, and r2.
General multisupplier inventory models, such as Moinzadeh and Nahmias (1988), 
assume a continuous review inventory system with two options for resupply. These 
models are an extension of the standard (Q, r) inventory policy that allows for two 
lot sizes (Q1 and Q2), and two reorder levels (r1 and r2). An order of size Q1 is placed 
when the inventory position reaches r1 (this is a regular, or normal reorder option). 
An emergency reorder option is an expedited order of size Q2 placed when the inven-
tory reaches a position of r2 (where r1 > r2). The lead times for normal and emergency 
reorders are assumed constant in the model and are represented as t1 and t2, respec-
tively (where t1 > t2). In addition to requiring a shorter lead time, the items ordered 
through the emergency resupply channel are also assumed to incur higher fixed and 
per-unit ordering costs than the normal orders. The rest of the notation is given next 
with units in parentheses, and will be used throughout the rest of the chapter.
6.4.1	 Summary of Modeling Notation
K
• 
1: Fixed cost for placing a normal order ($)
K
• 
2: Fixed cost for placing an emergency order ($)
c
• 
1: Per-unit cost for a normal order ($)
c
• 
2: Per-unit cost for an emergency order ($)
h
• : Inventory holding cost per item per unit time ($)
 
• p: Back-order cost per item per unit time ($)
p
• : Probability of a stockout occurring within a cycle
OH
• 
: On-hand inventory per cycle (number of items)
BO
• 
: Number of back-ordered items per cycle (number of units)
T
• : Expected cycle length (time units)
 
• m: Expected demand rate (quantity per unit time)
D
• 
: Annual demand (number of units)
Q
• 
1: Quantity of relief items in a normal reorder (units)
Q
• 
2: Quantity of relief items in an emergency reorder (units)
r
• 
1: Reorder level for normal orders (units)
r
• 
2: Reorder level for emergency orders (units)
In this section, we present a multisupplier inventory model for the south Sudan 
relief operations. Data was collected on site in Lockichoggio, Kenya, from warehouse 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
135
manager interviews and warehouse stock-keeping cards during September 2004. We 
developed the Sudan humanitarian inventory model as a continuous inventory review 
system with two options for resupply. The model allows for two lot sizes (Q1 and Q2) 
and two reorder levels (r1 and r2). An order of size Q1 is placed when the inventory 
position reaches r1 (a regular, or normal resupply option). The expedited emergency 
resupply option is of size Q2 and placed when the inventory reaches a position of r2. 
The normal and emergency resupply options represent placing orders with a supplier 
in Nairobi and an international supplier, respectively. The international supplier may 
be directly affiliated with the relief agency, as with the GPUs of World Vision, or 
may have no affiliation at all.
Our process for developing the model begins by analyzing the expected reorder 
level for each cycle. Next, we focus on the on-hand inventory and expected number 
of back orders, compute the probability of a stockout per cycle and the total cost 
equations, and finally derive optimality conditions.
6.4.2	 Assumptions
These assumptions will apply to the humanitarian relief model:
 r
• 
1 > r2, in a given cycle, an emergency order will never be placed before 
a normal order.
 
• t1 > t2, an emergency order has a shorter lead time.
 
• The international supplier will not experience stockouts.
 
• Replenishment lead time for normal orders is eight days, and for simplifi-
cation is assumed constant.
 
• Items ordered through the emergency resupply channel incur a higher 
fixed and per-unit ordering cost than normal orders.
 
• Replenishment lead time for emergency orders is two days, and due to 
relative low variation is assumed constant.
 Q
• 
1 > r1, an order quantity will be large enough to not automatically trigger 
an additional reorder.
 
• Demand ~U[1, b] units.
 
• Demand occurs in discrete ten-day intervals.
6.4.3	 Expected Reorder Level per Cycle
Humanitarian emergency relief systems require rapid response. Therefore, we 
assume that the inventory position is under continuous review. However, since the 
requests for items occur in discrete time intervals, the inventory policy shares some 
characteristics with periodic review models.
For the inventory model, we define the random variables:
R
• 
e: Actual inventory level at the time when a reorder is placed, Re ≤ r1
I
• : Inventory position just before a request is made, I > r1
D
• 
: Demand ~U[1, b], where D and b are discrete, and b ≥ 1
I
• ′: Inventory position just after a request has been fulfilled, I′ ∈ℜ
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

136	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
In the humanitarian relief model, undershoots are possible (an undershoot is the 
difference between the set inventory reorder level and the actual inventory level 
when a reorder is placed).
Let the current inventory level be at a position i just before a request for d items is 
placed. Then, after the request has been fulfilled, the inventory level will drop to a 
position of i′. Therefore, define i′ as:
	
i′ = i − d	
(6.1)
If i′ ≤ r1, then a reorder must be placed, and the resulting reorder level, re, is re = i′. 
Let Y be the number of units below r1 that the inventory level reaches when a reorder 
is placed in any given cycle. Then define the random variable Y as:
	
Y
r
I
I
r
otherwise
=
−′
′ <



1
1
0
	
(6.2)
and it follows that if I′ < r1 then:
	
R
r
Y
e =
−
1
	
(6.3)
Then the expected value of the current inventory when the order is placed, E[Re], 
follows from Equation 6.3 as:
	
E
E
[
]
[ ]
R
r
Y
e =
−
1
	
(6.4)
We begin by analyzing the current inventory position (I) with a reorder level (r1), 
just before a demand (D) is placed. There are two cases for I.
Case 1: If i > r1 + b, then i′ cannot drop to r1 or lower after the next request for 
items since the demand, D, is uniformly distributed and max(d) = b. In this 
case, i′ > r1.
Case 2: If i ≤ r1 + b then i′ can drop to r1 or lower after the next request for 
items. In this case, i′ ≤ r.
Therefore, in determining the expected reorder level, E[Re], we only have to con-
sider cases where reorders are possible. From earlier, reorders are possible only when 
the current inventory level, i, is in the range [r1 + 1, r1 + b]. A plot of all possible 
values of Y where I ∈ [r1 + 1, r1 + b] is given in Figure 6.1. The i values, which repre-
sent the current inventory position before an order is received, are plotted along the 
x-axis. y-Values, which are the number of units below the reorder level, r1, when a 
reorder is placed, are plotted along the y-axis.
Now, let h(y) be the probability density function of Y. Then, h(y) is given by:
	
h y
b
y
n
y
b
n
b
( )
,
=
−
∑
≤
≤
−
=1
0
1
 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
137
Using the identity Σn
x
x
x
n
=
+
=
1
2
2
yields:
	
h y
b
y
b
b
y
b
( )
(
)
(
) ,
=
−
+
≤
≤
−
2
0
1
2
	
(6.5)
We can then find the expected value of Y, E[Y], from the expression: E[Y] = 
Σy
b
y h y
=
−
0
1 ( ( )). It then follows that:
	
E[ ]
(
)
Y
y b
y
b
b
b
b
yb
y
y
b
y
b
y
=
−
+
=
+
−
=
−
=
−
=
∑
∑
2
2
2
0
1
2
0
1
2
0
1
b−
∑






Using the identity Σn
x
x
x
x
n
=
+
+
=
1
2
2
1
2
2
(
)(
), then
E[ ]
((
)
(
))
((
)
(
))(
Y
b
b
b b
b
b
b
=
+
−
+
−
−
−
+
−
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
2
2
2
(
)
)
b
b
−
+



=
−
1
1
6
3
1
3 	
(6.6)
Substituting Equation 6.6 into Equation 6.4 gives the expected reorder level, 
E[Re], as:
	
E[
]
R
r
b
e =
−
−




1
3
1
3 	
(6.7)
6.4.4	 Expected Average Number of Units Held per Cycle
The fact that demands occur at discrete intervals has a significant effect on the 
amount of inventory held per cycle. This demand pattern causes the inventory level 
y: number of units below re-order level, r1
0
1
2
3
b-1
b-2
b-3
r+1
r+2
r+3
i: current inventory level
r+b-1
r+b
Each of these events
occurs with equally
likely probability.  
Figure 6.1  Distribution of Y.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

138	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
to experience periods of stability followed by sudden drops as items are removed in 
discrete batches. There are two distinct phases of the inventory cycle: Phase I and 
Phase II. Phase I is the replenishment lead time of an order of size Q1. Phase II is the 
time between the receipt of an order of size Q1 and the placement of the next order. 
As long as the lead time, t1, is less than the time between orders, then there will 
be no demand during the replenishment lead time, t1, and the inventory level will 
remain constant until the arrival of Q1.
For simplification, we will approximate the discrete demand pattern of batches 
of items removed from inventory as continuous. The rate of demand is the 
expected demand per time, m. The humanitarian relief inventory model is depicted 
in Figure 6.2.
6.4.5	 Expected Average Number of Units Held 
per Cycle (No Emergency Orders)
The first situation to consider when determining the average amount of on-hand inven-
tory is in cycles with no emergency orders. When no emergency orders occur, the 
inventory level during Phase I of the humanitarian relief model remains constant.
By dividing the graph in Figure 6.2 into three sections (section A, section B, sec-
tion C), we can compute the total average on-hand inventory as the sum of each 
section. The area of section A is r1 × t1, the area of section B is ((1/2) × (Q1/m) × Q1), 
and the area of section C is ((Q1/m) × r1). The expression for OH1 is the sum of these 
three terms and is given by:
	
OH
Q
Q r
r
1
1
2
1 1
1 1
2
=
+
+
µ
µ
τ
	
(6.8)
Time 
Inventory Level 
r1
Q1
τ1
one cycle 
section C 
0
section A 
section B 
Figure 6.2  On-hand inventory plot for the humanitarian relief model with no emergency 
orders.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
139
Recall that when a reorder is placed, it is likely that the resultant inventory level 
will not be exactly equal to the reorder level, r1, but at the actual reorder level, re, 
where r1 > re (see Figure 6.3).
We can again divide the total area under the curve of Figure 6.4 into three sec-
tions (section A, section B, section C) and compute the total on-hand inventory as the 
sum of each section. The area of section A is now re × t1, the area of section B is 
((1/2) × (re + Q1 – r1/m) × ( re + Q1 – r1), and the area of section C is ((re + Q1 – r1/m) × 
r1). OH1 is the sum of these three terms and is given by:
	
OH
R
Q
r
R
Q
r r
R
e
e
e
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
=
+
−
+
+
−
+
(
)
(
)
µ
µ
τ
	
(6.9)
Time 
Inventory Level 
r1
re
Q1
τ1
one cycle 
section C 
section A 
section B 
Figure 6.3  On-hand inventory depicting the expected reorder level, re.
Q2
Time 
Inventory Level 
r1
r2re
Q1
τ1
τ2
one cycle 
section C 
section A 
section B 
section D 
Figure 6.4  OH2*, a cycle in which an emergency order is placed with existing inventory.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

140	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
6.4.6	 Expected Average Number of Units Held 
per Cycle with Emergency Orders
The second situation to consider when determining the average amount of on-hand 
inventory is cycles with emergency orders. Before we derive an expression for the 
average on-hand inventory when emergency orders are placed, we must first discuss 
the nature of a cycle with emergency orders. In the humanitarian relief model, an 
emergency order may be placed any time after a normal order is placed. There are 
two possible cases for the inventory level when an emergency order is placed:
Case 1: The inventory level is greater than or equal to zero (i′ ≥ 0).
Case 2: The inventory level has fallen below zero (i′ < 0).
Figure 6.4 depicts Case 1, a cycle in which an emergency order is placed when 
the inventory level is greater than zero. We will refer to the on-hand inventory in this 
case as OH2
*.
To determineOH2
* we must find the area under the curve in Figure 6.4. By divid-
ing the curve into sections, we can take the same approach as before. The area of 
section A is re × t1, the area of section B is Q1*(t1 – t2), the area of section C is ((1/2) × 
((re + Q1 + Q2 – r1)/m) × (re + Q1 + Q2 – r1), and the area of section D is (((re + Q1 + 
Q2 – r1)/m) × r1). OH2
* is the sum of these four terms and is given by:
     
OH
R
Q
Q
r
R
Q
Q
r r
Q
e
e
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
1
1
2
*
(
)
(
)
*(
=
+
+
−
+
+
+
−
+
µ
µ
τ
τ
τ
1
2
1
−
+
)
Re
	
(6.10)
6.4.7	 Cycle Length for Relief Cycles with and without Emergency Orders
Now we can determine expressions for the cycle length T1 (cycles without emergency 
orders) and for the cycle length T2 (cycles with emergency orders). Equation 6.8 is 
the on-hand inventory for a cycle with no emergency orders. The total cycle length 
is the sum of the normal order lead time (Phase I) plus the expected length of time 
between a normal order arrival and the placement of the next normal order (Phase II). 
The expected cycle length for cycles with no emergency orders, T1, is given as:
	
T
R
Q
r
e
1
1
1
1
=
+
+
−
τ
µ
(
)
	
(6.11)
Equation 6.10 is the on-hand inventory for a cycle with emergency orders. As 
before, the total cycle length is the sum of the normal order lead time (Phase I) plus 
the expected length of time between normal order arrival and the placement of the 
next normal order (Phase II). The expected cycle length for cycles with an emer-
gency order, T2, is then given as:
	
T
R
Q
Q
r
e
2
1
1
2
1
=
+
+
+
−
τ
µ
(
)
	
(6.12)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
141
6.4.8	 Revisiting: Average Number of Units Held 
per Cycle with Emergency Orders
We can now compute the average on-hand inventory per unit time for the cases of 
placing and not placing an emergency order to test whether it is ever cost-effective 
to place an emergency order while inventory still exits. Dividing Equation 6.9 and 
Equation 6.10 by their respective average cycle lengths, Equation 6.11 and Equation 
6.12, we obtain expressions for the average on-hand inventory per unit time without 
emergency orders, AOH1, and with emergency orders, AOH2
*:
	
AOH
R
R
Q
r
R
Q
r r
e
R
Q
e
e
e
1
2
1
1
1 2
1
1
1
1
=
+
+
+
−
+
−
+
−
(
)
(
)
µ
µ
τ
r1
1
µ
τ
+
	
(6.13)
	
AOH
Q
R
Q
Q
r
R
Q
Q
r r
e
e
2
2
1
1
2
1 2
1
2
1
1
*
*
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
+
−
+
+
−
µ
µ
(
)
τ
τ
τ
τ
µ
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
−
+
+
+
+
−
Re
R
Q
Q
r
e
	
(6.14)
It can be shown that Equation 6.13 will always be less than Equation 6.14, and 
therefore it is never economical to place an emergency order when the current inven-
tory level is greater than zero.
This does not mean that placing an emergency order will never be beneficial. We 
have just shown that at the time of a reorder, if the inventory level is greater than or 
equal to zero, than it is not economical to place an emergency order, as it will only 
increase holding costs. However, if the inventory has fallen below zero (a stockout 
occurs), then supplies have been back-ordered and an outstanding demand remains 
in the field. In this situation, it is reasonable to place an emergency order. Instead 
of waiting for the replenishment lead time of t1, an emergency order can be placed 
and supplies delivered to the field within the time of t2. Also, as we have shown that 
any time the emergency order creates a positive inventory level, our holding costs 
increase. Therefore, when an emergency order is placed, it should be for exactly the 
amount of supplies back-ordered, which would bring our current inventory level to 
zero. Hence, for the humanitarian relief model we set Q2 = expected number of back 
orders (E[BO]). This cycle is depicted in Figure 6.5.
The area under the curve in Figure 6.5 represents the amount of on-hand inven-
tory during a cycle with an emergency order. Since the amount back-ordered is never 
considered part of our on-hand inventory, our reorder level, Re, is reduced to zero. 
Substituting Re = 0 into Equation 6.10 gives the following expression for on-hand 
inventory during a cycle with an emergency order:
	
OH
Q
r
Q
r r
2
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
=
−
+
−
(
)
(
)
µ
µ
	
(6.15)
6.4.9	 Total Average Number of Units Held per Cycle
The total average on-hand inventory per cycle, OH, considers the probability of 
cycles with and without emergency orders. We define p as the probability that a cycle 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

142	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
will have an emergency order. Then OH is given by:
	
OH
p OH
pOH
=
−
+
(
)
1
1
2 	
(6.16)
Substituting the average on-hand inventory for cycles without emergency orders, 
Equation 6.9, and the average on-hand inventory for cycles with emergency orders, 
Equation 6.15, into Equation 6.16 yields the following approximation for the average 
on-hand inventory during a cycle:
  
OH
p OH
pOH
p
r
Q
r
r
Q
e
e
=
−
+
=
−
+
−
+
+
−
(
)
(
) (
)
(
1
1
2
1
2
1
1
2
1
µ
r r
r
p
Q
r
Q
r r
e
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
)
  
(
)
(
)
µ
τ
µ
µ
+




+
−
+
−




=
−
+



+
−
+
−
r
p
Q
r
p
Q
r
e
e
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
1
2
1
2
1
µ
τ
2
2µ




	
(6.17)
6.4.10	 Total Average Cycle Length
As in the calculation of the total average on-hand inventory in Equation 6.16, the 
calculation for the total average cycle length considers the probability of both cycles 
with and without emergency orders. The total cycle length, T, is:
	
T
p T
pT
=
−
+
(
)
1
1
2 	
(6.18)
Q1
Time 
Inventory Level 
r1
r2 = 0
Q1
Q2
τ2
τ1
one cycle 
Figure 6.5  Realization of a cycle in the humanitarian relief model with an emergency 
order.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
143
The expected cycle length for cycles with an emergency order, T2, as shown in 
Figure 6.5, is:
	
T
Q
r
2
1
1
1
=
+
−
τ
µ
(
)
	
(6.19)
To determine the total expected cycle length, we substitute Equation 6.15 and 
Equation 6.11 into Equation 6.14, which simplifies to:
	
T
r
p
Q
r
e
=
+
−
+
−
τ
µ
1
1
1
1(
)
	
(6.20)
6.4.11	 Expected Number of Back Orders per Cycle
To determine the total cost per cycle due to back orders, we must first determine the 
expected number of back orders per cycle, E[BO]. Calculating E[BO] is very similar 
to calculating the expected reorder level, E[Re]. In determining E[BO], we now con-
sider the number of units below zero the inventory level reaches at the time a reorder 
is placed (that is, when y, the number of units below the reorder level, r1, is greater 
than r1, (y > r1)). Define Y′ as the number of units below zero the inventory reaches 
when a reorder is placed. Then, Y′ = Y – r1, and the number of back orders per cycle, 
BO, is given by BO = Y′, and E[BO] = E[Y′].
In calculating E[Re], we determined the probability density function of Y, and that 
the range of Y was defined on y [0, b – 1], where y = 0 describes a situation where the 
inventory position falls to exactly r1 when a reorder is placed. Therefore, since we 
are now interested in the situation in which y > r1, our range for Y′ is defined as Y′ ∈ 
[r1 + 1, b – 1] as shown in Figure 6.6.
Since Y′ is a subset of Y, we can take the probability density function of Y, origi-
nally given in Equation 6.5, and limit its range to r1 + 1 ≤ y ≤ b – 1. Substituting 
y = y′ + r1 into Equation 6.5 and restricting the range allow us to compute the 


y: number of units below re-order level, r1
0
1
2
b-1
b-2
b-3
r+1
r–1
r
r+2
r+3
r+1
i: current inventory level
r+b-1
r+b
Each of these events
occurs with equally
likely probability.  
Possible
values of Y’  
Possible
values
of Y 
Figure 6.6  Probability density function of Y and Y′.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

144	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
probability density function of Y′, h(y′), as:
	
h y
b
r
y
b
b
y
b
r
( ')
(
)
(
)
, 
–
–
=
−
−′
+
≤
′ ≤
2
1
2
1
1
	
(6.21)
Then, E[
]
( (
))
′ =
′
′
′=
−−
Y
y h y
y
b r
Σ
1
1
1
, which can be computed as:
 	
E[Y ] =
′
′
′
=
+
′
′=
−−
=
−
∑y h y
b
b
y b
y
b r
y
b r
( (
))
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
−
=
−−
=
−−
∑
∑
∑
−
′ −






=
1
1
1
2
1
1
2
1
1
2
y r
y
b
y
b r
y
b r
+
+
−
+
−
+
+




=
b
b
r
b
(
)
(
)
(
)(
)
η
η
η
η
η
η
η
2
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
6
3
2
1
1
2
1
3
1
2
3
3
3
−
+
−
−
+
+
b r
br
r
b
r
b
b
(
)
where h = b - r1 - 1. Therefore, the expected number of back orders per cycle, 
E[BO], is:
	
E[
]
(
)
BO
b
b r
br
r
b
r
b
b
=
−
+
−
−
+
+
3
2
1
1
2
1
3
1
2
3
3
3
	
(6.22)
6.4.12	 Per-Cycle Back Order Probabilities
Previously, we defined p as the probability of an emergency order occurring within a 
cycle (and therefore a stockout occurring within a cycle). We can now derive a value 
for p. We also defined Y′ as the number of units below zero the inventory reaches 
when a reorder is placed, which is the number of back orders, and derived the prob-
ability density function of Y′, h(y′), in Equation 6.5. Therefore, p, the probability of 
a stockout in a cycle, is the sum of the individual probability densities of y′ where 
y′ ≥ 1. Therefore:
	
p
h y
b
r
y
b
b
y
b r
y
b r
=
′
=
−
−′
+
′=
−−
′=
−
∑
(
)
(
)
(
)
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
−
′=
−−
′=
−−
′
∑
∑
∑
=
+
−
−
′
1
2
1
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
(
)
b
b
b
r
y
y
b r
y
b r
y =
−−
∑








1
1
1
b r
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
145
        
=
+
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
−
+
−
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
)
(
b
b
b b
r
r b
r
b
r
b
r −












=
−
+
−
+
+
1
2
2
2
1
1
2
1
2
)
(
)
b
br
r
b
r
b
b
	
(6.23)
6.4.13	 Total Cost Equation
The total cost is computed on a per-cycle basis, where one cycle is defined as the 
time between consecutive orders of Q1. The total cost is the sum of the fixed cost of 
placing a normal order, K1; the per-unit cost for a normal order, c1Q1; the fixed and 
per-unit cost of an emergency order multiplied by the probability of placing an emer-
gency order, p(K2 + c2Q2); the inventory holding costs, h(OH); and the back-order 
costs, pE[BO].
Therefore, the total cost in a cycle, TC, is given as:
	
TC(Q1, Q2, r1, r2) = K1 + c1Q1 + p(K2 + c2Q2) + h[OH] + pE(BO)	
(6.24)
It then follows that the average cost per unit time, AC, is:
	
AC Q Q r r
TC Q Q r r
T
(
,
, ,
)
(
,
, ,
)
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
=
	
(6.25)
6.4.14	 Deriving Optimal Conditions
W can now derive optimal conditions. For fixed values of r1 and r2, the optimal val-
ues of Q1 and Q2 can be found using the optimality conditions for the average cycle 
cost. The optimality conditions are:
	
∂
∂
= ∂
∂
=
AC
Q
AC
Q
1
2
0
	
(6.26)
Recall that an emergency order of Q2 is placed to raise the inventory level back to 
zero. Therefore, Q2 is the expected number of back orders in a cycle, so Q2 = E[BO]. 
Substituting Q2 = E[BO] into the total cost equation, Equation 6.24, gives:
	
TC(Q1, r1, r2) = K1 + c1Q1 + p(K2 + c2E[BO]) + h[OH] + pE[BO]	
(6.27)
Since the expected number of back orders (Equation 6.22) and the total average 
on-hand inventory (Equation 6.17) are independent of Q2, the total cost equation 
(Equation 6.24) is independent of Q2. The average total cycle length (Equation 6.20) 
is also independent of Q2, and therefore the partial derivative in Equation 6.26 with 
respect to Q2 is equal to zero. This reduces the number of optimality equations to 
one, which can be solved directly for Q1. The optimality condition is as follows:
	
dAC
dQ1
0
=
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

146	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
where
	
dAC
dQ
TC
T
dT
dQ
T
dTC
dQ
1
2
1
1
1
= −
+
	
(6.28)
Solving Equation 6.28 gives the following closed-form expression for Q1 (see 
Appendix for derivation):
     
Q
r
r
p
h
h r
p
pr
e
e
e
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
=
+
−
−
±
−
+
−
(
)
 
( (
(
)
(
τ µ
τ µ
p
r
h
c r
p
r
e
))
(
))
  
( ( (
)
)
+
+
+
−
+
−
τ µ
τ µ
µ
µτ
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
+
+
+
+
K
pK
E BO pc
1
2
2
(
)(
))
π
	 (6.29)
6.4.15	 Solution Procedure
The following steps outline the procedure for developing a solution to the model:
	
1.	 Select an order stockout risk (OSOR). The OSOR is the risk we are willing 
to accept that any cycle in our system will experience a stockout, and will 
depend on the severity of the emergency. Intuitively, the more critical the 
aid, the lower the OSOR we will select. We can set the OSOR as we wish 
since the stockout probability, Equation 6.23, is independent of Q1.
	
2.	 Set p = OSOR and determine the reorder level r1 from Equation 6.23.
	
3.	 Use r1 to determine the expected reorder level, E[Re], from Equation 6.4.
	
4.	 Determine the expected number of back orders per cycle, E[BO], using r1 
in Equation 6.22.
	
5.	 Substitute r1, re, p, E[BO] and the initial parameters into Equation 6.29 
and solve for Q1.
6.5	 Conclusions and Future Research
In this research, our objective was to develop an inventory model for a prepositioned 
warehouse responding to a complex humanitarian emergency, which is one of the 
three emergency classifications to which humanitarian and nongovernmental agen-
cies respond (rapid onset and slow onset are the other two). Complex humanitarian 
emergencies are unique due to their unpredictable demand patterns and long dura-
tions. The high (often life-threatening) stakes of humanitarian relief place a heavy 
emphasis on a quick logistics response. It is essential that humanitarian logistics 
operations (including warehousing in a complex emergency) be performed as effi-
ciently and effectively as possible. Field research for this chapter was performed 
with our host organization, World Vision International. Data was collected from its 
warehouse operations in Lockichoggio, Kenya, as it was responding to the complex 
humanitarian emergency in south Sudan. Based on our recorded data, we developed 
a mathematical model that optimized the reorder quantity and reorder level based on 
reordering, holding, and back-order costs.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
147
The research presented in this chapter is a first step in developing strategic inven-
tory management systems for humanitarian relief. The model investigated a single 
“item” (which may be interpreted as a single type of relief kit or a single set of items), 
developed order quantities that were independent of vehicle or container sizes, and 
assumed a continuous demand approximation. Future work would investigate the 
effects of a (correlated) multi-item system that incorporates container sizes, which 
would likely prove especially important in a relief situation. Another next step would 
include explicit modeling of the discrete inventory removals (rather than using a con-
tinuous approximation). Additionally, a more thorough study to understand the full 
implications of back-order costs within humanitarian logistics is needed. The back- 
order cost represents a penalty for unmet demand, but since there are no financial prof-
its made in humanitarian logistics, the lost sales approach used in commercial logistics 
is not necessarily appropriate. A back-order cost in humanitarian logistics represents 
potential suffering (or loss of life) endured by a potential recipient from not receiving 
a relief item, but also for the “advertising” opportunity lost by the relief agency for not 
delivering an item. NGOs do not have an income stream to fund their work outside 
of donations and therefore must remain vigilant that their actions are being noticed 
within the donor community. The back-order cost used in our model is a one-time 
penalty applied to each unit of demand that could not be immediately met from inven-
tory. Eventually, back orders are met from an expedited order, but the length of time 
required to fulfill back orders is not considered. In the real system, there is a window 
of opportunity during which relief items can be used in the field, and the longer the 
delay for a needed item, the more devastating the effects. Future research would ana-
lyze the impact of time-dependent shortage costs and develop a more detailed quanti-
fication methodology for assessing shortages in humanitarian logistics.
Acknowledgments
This work was partly supported by the Interdisciplinary Program in Humanitarian 
Relief at the University of Washington. The authors would also like to thank World 
Vision International, and especially Randy Strash and George Fenton for their sup-
port and effort during the data gathering process, and to the anonymous referees for 
their helpful comments and suggested improvements.
Appendix: Closed-Form Expression for Q1
Given the optimality condition
	
dAC
dQ1
0
=
where
	
AC(Q1, Q2, R1, R2) = TC(Q1, Q2, R1, R2)/T,
	
TC(Q1, Q2, r1, r2) = K1 + c1Q1 + p(K2 + c2E[BO]) + h[OH] + pE[BO],
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

148	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
	
T
R
p
Q
r
e
=
+
−
+
−
τ
µ
1
1
1
1(
)
and
	
OH
r
p
Q
r
p
Q
r
e
e
=
−
(
)
+



+
−
+
−


1
1
2
1
1
2
1
2
1
2
µ
τ
µ
(
)



we can form the expression for AC as:
AC
K
c Q
p K
c E BO
h R
p
e
Q
R
=
+
+
+
+
−
+
(
) +
1
1
1
2
2
1
1
1
(
(
))
(
)
µ
τ
e
e
p
Q
r
R
p
Q
r
E BO
2
12
12
1
1
1
2
1
1
(
)
(
)
(
)
−
+
−
−
+
−
(
) +
+
µ
π
τ
2µ
We can factor and simplify AC to get the following:
	
AC
R p
Q
r
K
c Q
p K
e
=
−
+
+
−
−
−
−
−
1
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
(
)
  
τ µ
µ
µ
µ
p c E BO
hR Q
hR
hR pQ
hR p
e
e
e
e
µ
τ µ
τ
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
(
)
 
−
−
(
+
+
µ
π
µ
−
+
−
+
−
)
hR
hR p
hQ
hr
E BO
e
e
2
2
1
2
1
2
2
(
)
Taking the derivative of AC with respect to Q1 gives:
dAC
dQ
c
hR
hR p
hQ
R
R p
Q
e
e
e
e
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
= −−
−
+
−
+
−
+
µ
τ µ
(
1
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
1
2
2
2
−
+
+
−
+
−
−
−
−
r
R
R p
Q
r
K
c Q
e
e
)
(
)
   
τ µ
µ
µ
2
2
2
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
p K
p c E BO
hR Q
hR
hR pQ
e
e
e
µ
µ
τ µ
−
−
−
+
(
(
)
   
(
)
+
−
+
−
+
−
)
2
2
1
2
2
1
2
1
2
hR p
hR
hR p
hQ
hr
E BO
e
e
e
τ µ
π
µ
Setting dAC
dQ1
0
=
yields the following expression:
	
−
−
+
−
+
−
+
−
=
2
2
2
2
2
1
2
1
1
1
1
c
hr
hr p
hQ
r
r p
Q
r
e
e
e
e
µ
τ µ
(
)
(τ µ
µ
µ
µ
µ
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
2
2
2
2
2
+
−
+
−
−
−
−
−
r
r p
Q
r
K
c Q
p K
p c
e
e
)
 
E BO
hr Q
hr
hr pQ
hr p
h
e
e
e
e
(
)
 
 
(
−
−
+
+
−
2
2
2
2
1
1
1
1
τ µ
τ µ
r
hr p
hQ
hr
E BO
e
e
2
2
1
2
2
2
+
−
+
−
)
π
µ
(
)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Inventory Modeling for Complex Emergencies	
149
Solving for Q1 yields:
	
Q
r
R
p
h
h
R
p
pR
e
e
e
1
1
1
2
1
1
1
2
1
1
=
+
−
−
+
−
−
+
−
(
)
(
(
(
)
(
τ µ
τ µ
p
r
h
c R
p
r
e
))
(
))
  
( (
(
)
)
+
+
+
−
+
−
τ µ
τ µ
µ
µτ
1
1
1
1
1
1
2
2
1
+
+
+
+
K
pK
E BO pc
1
2
2
(
)(
))
π
References
Barbarosoglu, G., and Y. Arda. 2004. A two-stage stochastic programming framework for 
transportation planning in disaster response. J Oper Res Soc 55(1):43–53.
Barbarosoglu, G., L. Ozdamar, and A. Cevik. 2002. An interactive approach for hierarchical 
analysis of helicopter logistics in disaster relief operations. Eur J Oper Res 140(1): 
118–133.
Fenton, G. 2003. Coordination in the Great Lakes. Forced Migrat Rev 18(5):23–24.
Humanitarian and War Project. 2005. Available online from Feinstein International Famine 
Center, Tufts University, hwproject.tufts.edu/publications/electronic/e_croo.html 
(accessed August 26, 2005).
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 1999. World Disasters 
Report 1998: Focus on Ethics and Aid.
International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies. 2005. World Disasters 
Report 2004: Focus on Community Resilience.
Minner, S., and O. von-Guericke. 2003. Multiple-supplier inventory models in supply chain 
management: A review. Int J Prod Econ 81–82:265–279.
Moinzadeh, K., and S. Nahmias. 1988. A continuous review model for an inventory system 
with two supply modes. Manag Sci 34(6):761–773.
Oh, S., and A. Haghani. 1996. Formulation and solution of a multi-commodity, multi-modal 
network flow model for disaster relief operations. Transport Res 30(3):231–250.
Oh, S., and A. Haghani. 1997. Testing and evaluation of a multi-commodity multi-modal net-
work flow model for disaster relief management. J Adv Transport 31(3):249–282.
Ozdamar, L., E. Ekinci, and B. Kucukyazici. 2004. Emergency logistics planning in natural 
disasters. Ann Oper Res 129(1–4):217–245.
Sakakibara H., Y. Kajitani, and N. Okada. 2004. Road network robustness for avoiding func-
tional isolation in disasters. J Transport Eng–ASCE 130(5):560–567.
Thomas, A. 2003. Humanitarian logistics: Enabling disaster response. San Francisco: Fritz 
Institute.
Thomas, M. U. 2002. Supply chain reliability for contingency operations, in Proc Ann Reliab 
Maintain Symp, 61–67.
UNICEF. 2003. Programme Policy and Procedures Manual: Programme Operations. 
UNICEF: New York.
UNICEF. n.d. UNICEF Operations in Southern Sudan. Monthly Reports. www.unsudanig.org/
publications/ols/ (accessed August 26, 2005).
United States Agency for International Development, Office of U.S. Foreign Disaster 
Assistance (OFDA/AID). 2005. Field Operations Guide for Disaster Assessments and 
Response.
United States Committee for Refugees and Immigrants. 2004. World Refugee Survey 2004 
Country Report: Sudan. http://www.refugees.org/countryreports.aspx?area=investigat
e&subm=19&ssm=29&cid=170 (accessed August 26, 2005).
United States Holocaust Memorial Museum. 2005. Sudan: South/NUBA MTNS. www.
ushmm.org/conscience/alert/sudan/ (accessed August 26, 2005).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

151
7 Seeing Inventory 
as a Queue
Gerry Frizelle
University of Cambridge
Cambridge, United Kingdom
Contents
7.1	
Introduction................................................................................................... 152
7.2	
Basic Inventory Control................................................................................. 153
7.2.1	 Active Stock.......................................................................................154
7.2.2	 Buffer Stock.......................................................................................154
7.2.3	 Control Parameters and Performance Measures............................... 155
7.3	
Queuing Theory............................................................................................. 155
7.3.1	 General Results for Queuing Theory................................................. 155
7.3.2	 Types of Queues................................................................................156
7.3.3	 The Impact of Randomness...............................................................156
7.3.4	 Viewing Inventory as a Queue........................................................... 157
7.4	
Information Theory and Entropy................................................................... 157
7.4.1	 What Is Information?......................................................................... 158
7.4.2	 Entropy.............................................................................................. 159
7.4.3	 Data Compression and Entropy......................................................... 159
7.4.4	 Entropy and Complexity....................................................................160
7.5	
Bringing the Strands Together: Entropy, Queues, and Complexity............... 161
7.5.1	 Modeling the Observation Process and Secretiveness...................... 161
7.5.2	 Observations and Measurement......................................................... 162
7.5.3	 Applying the Ideas to Inventories...................................................... 163
7.6	
Analysis......................................................................................................... 163
7.6.1	 Calculating the Variation of the Actual from Planned 
Inventory Profile................................................................................164
7.6.2	 Estimating Probabilities.................................................................... 165
7.6.3	 Using Entropy as a Measure.............................................................. 165
7.7	
Case Study..................................................................................................... 166
7.7.1	 Background........................................................................................ 166
7.7.2	 Data Collection.................................................................................. 167
7.7.3	 Data Analysis..................................................................................... 167
7.7.4	 Results................................................................................................ 167
7.8	
Conclusions.................................................................................................... 169
Notes....................................................................................................................... 170
References............................................................................................................... 172
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

152	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
7.1	
Introduction
There have to be good reasons to look at the control of inventories from a queuing 
perspective, as the two subjects seem to have little in common. Such a viewpoint must 
offer insights and measures that are otherwise unavailable. This chapter explains the 
ideas and illustrates the benefits that can accrue from adopting such a standpoint.
Inventory control is concerned with how to order and monitor inventory levels to 
provide a company’s customers with a level of service that, at the very least, meets 
their requirements at a competitive cost. Thus the emphasis is on predictability and 
how best to attain it. Classical queuing theory considers random processes and is 
couched in probabilistic terms. Its aim is to build mathematical models of situations 
where queues can occur. Usually the goal is to try to minimize the amount of time 
lost waiting in queues. Thus the two topics occupy opposite extremes of a spectrum 
of uncertainty ranging from the deterministic to the wholly random.
While both employ mathematical models, basic inventory control theory is 
relatively straightforward and intuitive; although the fundamental ideas have been 
embellished over time. Queuing theory, on the other hand, requires a degree of math-
ematical sophistication, even when dealing with the most basic models. It suffers 
from two further handicaps. The first is that many real-world situations cannot be 
precisely handled, in the sense that they lead to useful formulae.1 Often only average 
behavior can be described. Unfortunately, excessive stocking costs are commonly 
incurred when the system’s behavior is anything but average. The second difficulty 
is that models can change quite dramatically with small changes in the structure of 
the system being modeled. Examples of such changes are in the number of servers 
employed (a generic term for the mechanism that processes the entities forming the 
queue), how they are linked, the pattern of arrivals, the pattern of service times (i.e., 
how long it takes to process each entity), and so on.
What then does a queuing standpoint bring and how can the shortcomings of 
the approach be surmounted? The answer to the first question is that it provides 
a dynamic view of inventory. More precisely it permits us to compare what was 
planned with what actually happened. Indeed we can go further and then examine 
the causes for these deviations from the plan and rank them by their severity. No 
counterpart of such an approach seems to be available in traditional inventory con-
trol theory. The answer to the second question comes from the use of yet another 
theoretical tool—information theory. This reveals an entirely unexpected link into a 
specific form of queuing behavior. It indicates that inventory can, in some ways, be 
regarded as a special type of queue and is typical of the unsuspected relationships 
that mathematics sometimes uncovers.
This chapter, therefore, is structured in the following way. Sections 7.2, 7.3, and 
7.4 give some background on the three areas just mentioned starting with the brief-
est summary of those parts of traditional stock control theory that are relevant to 
the discussion. The ideas will probably be familiar to readers. Then comes a short 
introduction to the simplest models in queuing theory as, fortunately, these are all 
that we will require. The third section sets out some of the concepts that underpin 
information theory. More depth is provided here as the material is probably less 
well known.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
153
Section 7.5 attempts to bring the ideas together and explains the all-important 
link between information theory and queues along with the consequences. After 
that, Section 7.6 is devoted to an illustrative example to demonstrate, among other 
things, how the data are analyzed. The aim is to provide, in quantitative terms, an 
understanding of what drives the dynamics of a particular inventory system.
The case study in Section 7.7 sets out to show how these ideas can and have been 
used in practice. It records the findings that were obtained on the workings of a com-
plex network of supply chains. It illustrates how viewing inventories as dynamical 
queues can identify and prioritize problem areas in a way that is not possible simply 
by applying standard inventory control techniques.
Throughout, mathematics will be kept to a minimum with only key formulae pre-
sented and explained. Our goal is to provide understanding and insight, not proofs. 
However, notes are provided at the end of the chapter. Here more formal and techni-
cal explanations can be found about topics appearing in the main body of the chapter, 
but where such detail would be a distraction. These will be indicated by a superscript 
in the text. The list of references at the end is intended primarily for readers who 
would like relevant background. So, for example, they will provide proofs of the 
relevant theorems behind the standard results quoted in the chapter. The list is not 
meant to be exhaustive.
7.2	
Basic Inventory Control
This section summarizes those parts of inventory control theory that will be needed 
in the remainder of the chapter. The focus is only on so-called independent demand 
inventory control (the words inventory and stock will be used interchangeably; 
Axsäter 2006). Here we assume the existence of some form of warehouse where 
inventory accumulates. It will contain a variety of different products; these are 
referred to as stock-keeping units (SKUs). The demand for any one product (SKU) is 
independent of the demand for any other. Products are ordered from a supplier—this 
could be an internal supplier—and are shipped to a customer. There can, of course, 
be several suppliers and several customers involved. Independent demand means that 
we need to only consult the demand history for the particular SKU in which we are 
interested.
The goal of inventory control is to minimize the total cost of inventory. It bal-
ances the costs of holding stock with the cost of ordering, the so-called economic 
order quantity, and the cost of lost business through being unable to supply. One 
consequence of independent demand is that the total inventory costs will simply be 
the sum of the costs of holding individual items.
The inventory that is held is sometimes classified into two categories, active 
stock and buffer stock. This is shown in Figure  7.1, as the so-called saw-tooth 
diagram, for a single SKU. Active stock is the inventory that is assumed to be 
required; buffer stock is inventory held just in case. In other words, with total 
knowledge of the future demand pattern and assured deliveries, a buffer stock is 
not required. However, uncertainty can arise in at least three ways: changes to the 
level of demand, suppliers not meeting delivery promises, and failing to deliver the 
quantity ordered.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

154	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
7.2.1	 Active Stock
Figure 7.1 shows the opening active stock just equal to the known level of demand. 
Replenishment supplies are available, provided a new order is placed within a 
specified lead time (LT). This is when the inventory level reaches the reorder point. 
Reaching the reorder point triggers the new order. The amount ordered (the reor-
der quantity, Q) just equals the known demand for the next period, and, on receipt, 
brings the level back up to the maximum stock (S). The order arrives at the point at 
which the existing stock is equal to the buffer stock.
Of course, the real world is not so well ordered; the saw-tooth will not have the 
regular pattern of Figure 7.1. The demand slope can vary, steeper when the demand 
is increasing and vice versa. Deliveries can be late or early and so on. Therefore, in 
practice, one of two broad policies is usually followed. The first is always to order a 
fixed quantity. Here Q is fixed so that whenever the reorder point (s) is reached, the 
quantity (Q) is reordered. A variant of this is to fix S, the maximum stock (instead of 
Q). Now whenever the reorder point is reached, the amount reordered always brings 
the stock up to the maximum value. The second approach is to work to a fixed reor-
der frequency, for example, we might decide to order every week. In that case the 
amount ordered will depend on the inventory level at the end of the week; the reorder 
point is no longer relevant. Here too the rule is usually order enough to restore the 
level to some fixed maximum value.
The important point is that the active stock reflects what is known in advance; 
management have full knowledge of the demand and delivery patterns, even where 
these may be varying.
7.2.2	 Buffer Stock
The buffer stock is the inventory level between the lower dotted horizontal line, in 
Figure 7.1, and the x-axis. Its role is to cover unexpected events. Where these increase 
either in severity or frequency, the buffer stock likewise needs to be increased. Were 
events to be totally predictable, no buffer would be required. In that case, the next 
order would be delivered at the point where the stock ran out. It also follows that 
0
Order
Placed
Order
Received
Time
Lead
Time (LT)
Inventory Level
Order Quantity (Q)
Max Stock Level (S)
Buﬀer
Stock
Reorder points
Active
Stock
Figure 7.1  Idealized (saw-tooth) inventory diagram showing stock level over time.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
155
holding a buffer stock adds to the total costs. Therefore, one way to make the opera-
tion more cost-effective is to take steps that allow the buffer stock to be reduced.
7.2.3	 Control Parameters and Performance Measures
It is worth reiterating that management chooses the key control parameters: the reor-
dering mechanism (reorder point or reorder frequency), how much to reorder, when 
to reorder, and what level of buffer stock to hold.
The principal measures of the system’s performance include how well the com-
pany meets customers’ demands, average levels of inventory held, the money tied up 
in inventory, and the number of stockouts. Most systems will probably include other 
metrics such as the performance of the suppliers delivering to the warehouse.
7.3	
Queuing Theory
The basic ideas behind queuing theory are simple and are summarized in Figure 7.2. 
Entities arrive to be serviced at a “server” and, when the service is complete, they 
leave. If the server is busy when an entity arrives, it is forced to wait and a queue is 
formed. The entities arrive at a certain rate, the arrival rate, and are serviced at a 
certain rate, the service rate. Queues are so common that it is scarcely necessary to 
give examples; most people have experienced queuing at checkouts in supermarkets 
or waiting to get through airports.
7.3.1	 General Results for Queuing Theory
Queuing theory attempts to answer a number of important questions: When is a 
queuing system stable, in a statistical sense? What is the average waiting time for 
entities in the queue? What is the average service time? How long might a queue 
become? The answers help in designing facilities that will have adequate capacity.
Surprisingly, however, there are relatively few general results available. Two 
important ones are given here. The first derives the general condition for stability 
in a queuing system. It says that the arrival rate of entities at the server must be less 
than the service rate—with one important exception discussed in Section 7.3.2. The 
result is written mathematically in Equation 7.1:
	
ρ
λ
µ
=
< 1
	
(7.1)
Server 
Queue of
entities 
waiting 
Entities 
leaving
Figure 7.2  The basic input–output structure of a simple queue.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

156	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
where r is called the traffic intensity, l is the arrival rate, and m is the service rate. 
When the utilization factor is greater than one, we have instability with queues that 
keep on growing, sometimes called explosive queues. The second important result is 
Little’s law. This relates the average number of entities in the system to the average 
time in the system and the arrival rate. The formula is given in Equation 7.2:
	
N
T
= λ
	
(7.2)
where N is the average number in the system, l is the average arrival rate, and T is 
the average time spent in the system. Thus knowing, for example, the queue length 
and the arrival rate, the average time for entities to get through the system can be 
calculated.
7.3.2	 Types of Queues
The simplest form of queue comprises a single server, entities arriving one at a time, 
being serviced on a first come, first served basis and leaving immediately after the 
service has been completed. The arrival time is random and the service times are also 
randomly distributed.2 This type of queue is given the following three-part descrip-
tion; it is called an M/M/1 queue. M stands for Markovian (named after Markov, 
one of the founders of the theory of random processes). The first letter describes the 
arrival pattern and the second the distribution of the service time; the third part gives 
the number of servers. In this case we have a particularly simple formula, shown as 
Equation 7.3, giving the probability that there are k items in the system.
	
pk
k
=
−
(
)
1
ρ ρ 	
(7.3)
where pk is the probability of having k entities in the system, and r is the traffic 
intensity. The two points about this equation are that shorter queues are more likely 
than long queues, and that the chance of the server being idle is (1 − r). Thus if the 
utilization factor is 0.75, then, not surprisingly, the server will be idle for around 25 
percent of the time. Expressions for the other measures, such as average time in the 
system, can then be written down.
There is one other type of queue to mention. This is the D/D/1 queue, where D 
stands for deterministic. In other words, the arrival times of entities are precisely 
known, as are the service times. This is the one queue where r can be equal to one. 
Here we are able to time the arrivals to come at exactly the point where the service 
on the preceding entity has been completed.
7.3.3	 The Impact of Randomness
The D/D/1 queue and the M/M/1 queue sit at opposite ends of a spectrum of increas-
ing randomness.3 The impact of increasing randomness can be illustrated by looking 
at the number of entities in the system. In the case of the D/D/1 queue, if the next 
entity arrives when the previous one has completed service, then there is never more 
than one in the system. Indeed if the traffic intensity is 0.75, then there need only be 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
157
an average number of 0.75 entities. In this case an entity completes, then the server 
sits idle for 25 percent of the cycle time, at which point the next entity arrives to be 
serviced. However, in the case of the M/M/1 queue, the average number in the sys-
tem is three (the formula for the average number in the system is given by ρ
ρ
/(
))
1−
. 
Thus the price for increasingly random behavior is longer queues.
7.3.4	 Viewing Inventory as a Queue
Before leaving the topic, we need to introduce the idea of a virtual server. This 
is when there is no actual service involved but merely a delay. In such a case the 
assumption is that “service” begins when the entity arrives at the queue and is com-
plete at the point where the entity leaves the queue. If we combine this idea with that 
of the D/D/1 queue, we have an alternative description of the active stock mechanism 
shown in Figure 7.1, albeit one where “deliveries” are of single items only. However, 
the queuing model can be modified to handle bulk arrivals, equivalent to delivering 
a reorder quantity, Q.
So far we gain little from taking a queuing perspective, apart from two insights. The 
first is that we should not try to run the system flat out, where r = 1, unless we were 
to exercise total control, which is, of course, impossible. The second is that we pay 
for loss of control in terms of greater inventory; hardly a surprising result. The other 
measures furnished by the queuing theory are nothing more than we calculate anyway 
in inventory control. For example, the average number in the system, N, is simply the 
average inventory level. What is more, this number can be recorded directly in a ware-
house, not derived from a mathematical formula of only limited applicability.
Something is missing. We need to develop a measure that can be calculated by 
directly observing the inventory (queue) sitting on a shelf while providing insights 
not available from the existing inventory control theory. In addition we want to 
employ some of the ideas and structures from queuing theory but without the short-
comings highlighted earlier, such as having to build a mathematical model for each 
type of queue we encounter. We would then have a more empirical and hence more 
robust approach.
7.4	
Information Theory and Entropy
The missing link is provided by information theory. This section spends a little time 
explaining the ideas, as, in contrast to queuing theory, some of the concepts are quite 
subtle, but the mathematics are relatively straightforward.
Information theory is largely the creation of one man, Claude Shannon, devel-
oped while he was working at Bell Laboratories at the Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology. His interest was in the mechanics of sending and receiving messages. 
He envisaged a sender linked in some way to a receiver, possibly through a wireless 
connection. This link is called the channel of communication, or channel. He real-
ized that to send a message remotely, it had to be translated into a form that could be 
transmitted. For example, the earliest wireless messages were sent in Morse code. 
This translates letters of the alphabet into a series of dots and dashes (characters). 
He described the activity as coding the message. The message would then need to be 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

158	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
decoded at the other end by the receiver. It meant that the sender and receiver had to 
agree in advance on a coding scheme.
Shannon (Shannon and Weaver 1999) asked himself what corresponded to an effi-
cient code, that is, one that was flexible enough to enable any message to be encoded 
but was as short as possible (data compression); the shorter the length of the encoded 
message, the more quickly it could be sent. In addition, frequently used letters of 
the alphabet should have shorter codes (codewords) than those used infrequently. 
For instance, although Morse code is not a particularly efficient code, the letter E is 
coded as a single dot.
Shannon was also interested in how quickly a message could be sent (the trans-
mission rate). This turns out to be the capacity of the channel; the so-called channel 
bandwidth (Cover and Thomas 2006). Linked to that was the important issue of 
noise—roughly speaking, characters received that have nothing to do with the mes-
sage. Clearly the presence of noise will reduce the effective capacity of the channel. 
One of Shannon’s extraordinary discoveries was that it is possible to transmit nearly 
noiseless messages provided that the channel capacity is not exceeded.
7.4.1	 What Is Information?
Information (also known as self-information), as defined by Shannon, is a measure 
of the content of information associated with an event. It is defined, in mathematical 
terms, as
	
I X
p X
( )
log
( )
=




2
1
	
(7.4)
Here I is the information, X is the event, and p(X) is the probability of the event 
happening. Its unit of measure is a bit. This rather extraordinary definition needs 
some explaining. The first question is why is there a probability involved. This 
is because information is something new, that is, news. Thus in the case of the 
sender and receiver, it is data the sender has and the receiver wishes to have. So 
from the receiver’s point of view, the content is news (otherwise why send the 
message?). The next question is why is the reciprocal of the probability used. 
The answer, that people sometimes find difficult to understand, is that the rarer 
the event, the more information it carries. We can see this by writing a sentence 
first omitting the vowels, then the consonants. Thus taking the first phrase of the 
preceding sentence and leaving out the vowels gives “W cn s ths by wrtng sntnc”; 
then leaving out the consonants gives “e a ee i ii a eee.” We might make a reason-
able guess at what the first version of the phrase was, but the second is unintel-
ligible. This is because consonants occur less frequently than vowels (on average) 
and thus carry more information.
The third aspect of this formula is the introduction of a logarithm. This is a little 
harder to explain. Basically a message is a string of characters (letters, numbers, etc.). 
Each character will contain a certain amount of information. Taking logarithms is 
a way of “counting” the number of characters in the string, that is, the information 
content. Taking logarithms to the base 2 reflects the fact that we are in a digital age 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
159
where we deal, ultimately, with only with ones and zeros. The definition of a bit only 
applies when we employ logarithms to the base of 2.
7.4.2	 Entropy
The idea of counting will become clearer when the concept of entropy is explained. 
Entropy (or more correctly entropy rate) is the lower limit to which a message can 
be compressed. It is also a measure of the average random uncertainty in a message. 
Entropy, as defined by Shannon, is given by the following formula:
	
H X
p x
p x
p x I x
N
N
( )
( )log
( )
( ) ( )
= −
=
∑
∑
2
	
(7.5)
Here H is the symbol for entropy, X is a random variable describing an event, and 
p(x) is the probability associated with the occurrence of X (formally of X taking the 
value x). N is the number of random variables involved.
Equation 7.5 will look strange to anyone who has encountered entropy in physics or 
chemistry. However, it is the same concept, just formulated in a slightly different fash-
ion. Entropy (and information theory) turns out to be an idea of extraordinary power 
and generality (Cover and Thomas 2006). Moreover it has proved to be more important 
and useful than information, as given in Equation 7.4. Unfortunately, exploring this 
fascinating topic further would take us too far away from the subject of the chapter.4
The first version of Equation 7.5 is the one most commonly used. The second 
version shows the link to the information, in Equation 7.4.5 Notice one important 
characteristic of Equation 7.5: it does not depend explicitly on the choice of random 
variable. Thus, in theory at least, it can be applied to any random variable, providing 
that the random variable is properly defined.
7.4.3	 Data Compression and Entropy
It will now be shown how Equation 7.5 is applied, how entropy is linked to data compres-
sion, and how taking logarithms has the effect of “counting the information content.”
Suppose that we plan to run a warehouse that will contain eight distinct SKUs. 
Our first task is to devise a labeling system. Our main (rather improbable) criteria 
are that the label should be a binary string and be as short as possible. Equation 7.5 
can tell us how long the label will need to be. However, as we are not yet in business, 
we have no idea which units will sell well and which will not. Therefore, we must 
assume that all are equally likely to sell (so-called equiprobability). Thus we assign a 
1/8 chance that a particular SKU will be ordered when a sale is made. Putting these 
probabilities into the entropy formula (Equation 7.5) gives Equation 7.6.
	
H
p
p
i
i
i
(
)
(
)log
labeling SKUs
single SKU
= −
=∑
1
8
2
(
)
(
)
log
single SKU
labeling SKUs
H
i
= −
=∑
1
8
1
1
8
2 8
8
3
=
=
log
	
(7.6)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

160	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
(recall that –log p = log p-1 = log (1/p)). This calculation tells us that we will require 
a label of, at least, length three to give each item a unique identification. It does 
not say that every label will be of length three, but that there will be at least one of 
length three.
To see this, assume that we simply call the SKUs zero, one, two, three, and so 
on but in binary. The first three products will be labeled 0, 1, 10. The eighth will 
be 111, a label of length three. Thus, the entropy formula has linked the num-
ber of SKUs—the variety of stock items we require—to the (minimum) label 
lengths.6
This also explains why the use of logarithms introduces a way of counting. 
Recall that 8 can be written as 23. When we take the logarithm (to the base 2) of 
this number we get 3 log2 2. This equals 3, the minimum label length and says that 
the information content is 3 bits. Had we had only four SKUs then the information 
content (formally, the chance of selling a particular SKU) would have been two; 
you can see this by inserting 1/4 into Equation 7.5.
One important final point is that the entropy takes its maximum value (where 
the number of outcomes are finite) when all outcomes are equiprobable, as in this 
example. Equiprobability is another way of saying we have no prior knowledge—in 
this case of the level of future sales. Equation 7.5 takes the simple form shown in 
Equation 7.7, where N is again the number of random variables. In our example, this 
is the number of SKUs we will be storing in the warehouse.
	
H
S
N
max( )
log
=
2
	
(7.7)
Suppose now that the warehouse has been running for some time and we want 
to introduce a computer-based inventory system. We wish to minimize the amount 
of memory space used, because every time we have a stock transaction we need to 
record the label of the SKU involved. Might we be able to use the additional data we 
have on sales history to reduce the call on memory? We can do this by assigning the 
shorter labels to the SKUs most in demand. Hence we would label the most popular 
SKU “0,” the second most popular SKU “1,” and so on. Thus the most frequently 
recorded transactions, making the greatest demand on memory, will have the short-
est records and vice versa.
7.4.4	 Entropy and Complexity
Entropy has yet another useful property. It provides a measure for one form of com-
plexity.7 This type of complexity may be thought of as being generated by a system 
that can evolve in a number of different ways. These different ways are called the 
possible trajectories the system can follow over time. Each possible trajectory has 
an associated probability, reflecting the chance of the system actually selecting it. 
The entropy is therefore the amount of information, averaged over the trajectories, 
required by the observer. Clearly, the more trajectories available to the system, the 
more complex it is.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
161
7.5	
Bringing the Strands Together: 
Entropy, Queues, and Complexity
All of this is somewhat peripheral to inventory control. It still needs to be established 
how the ideas developed so far are linked together. The first step is to model the 
process of taking observations; in our case, the movement of inventory in and out of 
a warehouse.
7.5.1	 Modeling the Observation Process and Secretiveness
The process of observation is shown in Figure 7.3. This diagram suggests that there 
may be parallels between taking observations and the passing of messages. We might 
think, rather fancifully, of the system “sending messages” to the observer, which he 
or she then records. There is a major difference, however: the system’s goals differ 
from those of the observer. The former is to offer a level of customer service, the lat-
ter to record accurately what is happening. One consequence is that the observation 
process must actively avoid impacting on the system as it might interfere with the lat-
ter achieving its goals. For example, if the recording mechanism itself impacted the 
accuracy of the resultant record, then deliveries could be compromised, adversely 
affecting the level of service. Such a situation used to occur when inventory move-
ments were recorded manually. Stock records sometimes might only be updated at 
the end of a working day, or even the end of a week. In the interim, dispatch promises 
were made based on incorrect data.
This noninvolvement is described as treating the system as though it were secretive 
(Frizelle and Suhov 2008). In practical terms it means that, when we come to analyze how 
the inventory system is performing, we have to rely solely on our record. So, for exam-
ple, we cannot interrogate the system—except possibly in extreme circumstances.
However, secretiveness is also an issue even when setting up the system. Suppose 
we decide to create an inventory control package to sell as a commercial product. We 
need to specify our new offering. Two obvious fundamental parameters will be how 
many SKUs our product can handle and how big the stock records will need to be. 
Might we have customers that have millions of items in stock, for instance? Clearly 
what we need in each case is a number that is big enough to guarantee that we can 
accommodate whatever requirements our prospective customers demand of us. How 
do we calculate this number? The proposed system itself cannot tell us. We might try 
to find what existing competitive systems do, we might try to discuss the matter with 
potential customers, we might survey the literature, or do all of these things and more. 
However, the fact is that such a number can never be calculated (this is a fascinating 
SKU movement 
occurs 
Movement 
observed
Record of 
movement created
Figure 7.3  The stages of an observation and recording process..
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

162	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
topic in its own right; interested readers are directed to Cover and Thomas [2006] or 
Hofstadter [1979]). All we can do is make well- or ill-informed guesses.
7.5.2	 Observations and Measurement
Returning to Figure 7.3, once we have created our record, we will want to use it to 
carry out some form of measurement. The goal will be to assess how well the inven-
tory control system is performing. That generates more questions: What precisely do 
we observe? What measure do we use? Do we need more than one measure?
Now there is a surprising relationship that allows us to address the first two ques-
tions. It turns out that our inability to ever provide definitive answers to such ques-
tions as “how many SKUs do we allow for?” when designing the system, holds the 
key. We have to conclude that, in general, we are never going to be able to determine 
an upper limit in the total certainty that it will never be breached—although it may 
be possible in specific instances. Stating this in mathematical terms, we must work 
on the assumption that the systems we are dealing with can have an infinite number 
of states.8 We must be careful about what we are saying; it is that we are never able, 
in general, to determine an upper limit, so we have to treat systems as if no such 
limit exists. 
However, as the reader will probably have guessed, we will want to use entropy as 
our measure. That creates a problem, as Equation 7.7 now takes the value of infinity. 
It raises practical difficulties if we want to use it as a measure, particularly when 
comparing two systems.
The question is then, is it possible to have a system with an infinite number of 
states but finite entropy? The answer is yes. We can find a mathematical condition 
that puts an upper limit on the entropy per state and ensures that the overall entropy 
is finite, even though the number of states is not.9 We can state the condition for the 
entropy to be maximized but remain finite; the probabilities must follow the so-
called geometric distribution.
Now comes the surprising bit: This distribution has exactly the same structure 
as the formula for the M/M/1 queue. The only difference is that the probabilities are 
replaced by the traffic intensity. In other words, for the input–output system shown 
in Figure 7.2, the entropy of the system is linked to the behavior of the queues. This 
completes the jigsaw for it suggests that when looking at input–output systems, we 
need to observe queuing behavior, and when we take an entropy measurement we 
measure queuing entropy. Moreover, when we compare two systems, we do so on 
the basis of the dynamics of their respective queues. It tells us, among other things, 
which of the two exhibits the most complex behavior.
There is more. When the queue behavior can be modeled as M/M/1, its entropy is 
at a maximum for the specific value of the traffic intensity. This is what was meant 
when it was stated at the start of the chapter that queues (specifically M/M/1 queues) 
sit at one end of a spectrum of uncertainty. Equally, if the system was to be wholly 
deterministic, the D/D/1 queue, then the entropy will be zero—the other end of the 
spectrum. It says, in effect, that we can model a real-world queue as being composed 
of two elements: a deterministic bit and a random bit.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
163
7.5.3	 Applying the Ideas to Inventories
The notion of active stock was introduced at the start of the chapter, as represented 
by the saw-tooth in Figure 7.1. As pointed out, everything is known (deterministic): 
the demand, the delivery time, the delivery quantity and so on. Thus active stock rep-
resents variety without probability. We can go a stage further and say that achieving 
the stock profile represented by the active stock is the immediate goal of the stock 
control system
In practice, of course, we can never be wholly certain. If we look at the actual 
inventory profile of a SKU over time, it will be the conflation of the planned and 
unplanned. However, if we know what was meant to happen, then we can separate 
the planned from the unplanned.
The idea is shown in Figure 7.4. The light gray is the planned profile—the goal the 
system is trying to achieve. It has been drawn in an irregular fashion to emphasize 
the fact that the shape of the profile is irrelevant. This line has to be “constructed,” as 
it is unlikely to exist in any inventory records. It is done by looking back at planned 
orders and deliveries. The dark gray line is the actual profile and this can be drawn 
directly from the inventory records. The shaded area is the variation between the 
two; the unexpected element giving rise to the entropy.
7.6	
Analysis
Two key pieces of analysis are carried out. The first is to assign causes to the varia-
tions between the planned and actual performance. There is, of course, no defini-
tive list of such causes. However, typical examples include customers changing 
their minds (e.g., canceling orders, modifying orders, rescheduling orders, replacing 
orders), the inability to dispatch to customers through having insufficient stock on 
hand, late delivery by suppliers, delivery shortages, and erroneous deliveries from 
suppliers. The list is determined by the specific nature of the stocking operation, 
what that particular management wants to know, and what data are available.
Level of 
Inventory
Planned proﬁle 
Actual 
proﬁle
Time
Figure 7.4  The planned inventory profile against the actual one.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

164	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
The second key piece of analysis is making comparisons. These can be between 
the performance of individual SKUs, between suppliers, or between customers. 
Other useful data include whether incomplete deliveries are more of a problem than 
late deliveries. We might assume that if we ordered one hundred of a particular SKU, 
it is preferable to have, say, thirty delivered on the day required with the balance 
later, than having all one hundred delivered late. However, it may not prove to be so 
in practice.
7.6.1	 Calculating the Variation of the Actual 
from Planned Inventory Profile
Table 7.1 demonstrates how the calculations behind Figure 7.4 are carried out. The 
table shows deliveries into and out of a warehouse for a single SKU. Under “Planned,” 
columns A and B record the quantities planned to be delivered from the supplier and 
the dispatches required by the customer. The resulting planned inventory levels, at 
the end of each day, are given in column C along with the opening stock. Under 
“Actual,” columns D, E, and F show the actual performance under the same three 
headings. The inventory variation is recorded in column G.
It will be clear from this example that poor delivery to the customer is being 
caused by poor delivery from the supplier. Thus, the first order that was supposed 
to be delivered on Monday does not come until Tuesday (see columns A and D). On 
Wednesday the supplier only delivers ten instead of the thirty required. Thursday’s 
order is delivered a day late and then not in full, as twenty of the quantity delivered 
form part of Wednesday’s order. This inability to supply causes violent fluctuations 
in the stock levels, with a stockout on Thursday. However, that is not the whole story. 
On Monday there was sufficient inventory in the warehouse to make a full delivery 
of eighty (column F, opening stock). However, the customer changed his mind and 
asked for only fifty, with fifty the following day and the balance on Wednesday 
Table 7.1
Calculations Behind Figure 7.4
Planned
Actual
Day
Delivery 
from 
Supplier 
(A)
Dispatch 
to 
Customer 
(B)
Inventory 
Level (C)
Delivery 
from 
Supplier (D)
Dispatch to 
Customer 
(E)
Inventory 
Level (F)
Difference 
(G) = (F) 
− (C)
Opening 
inventory
100
100
Monday
50
80
70
—
50
50
–20
Tuesday
—
50
20
50
50
50
+30
Wednesday
30
—
50
10
30
30
–20
Thursday
50
40
60
—
30
—
–60
Friday
—
50
10
50
—
50
+40
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
165
(column E). This was because the customer was unable to take the whole eighty in 
a single delivery.
A second way to carry out the analysis is shown in Table 7.2. Here the supplier 
and the warehouse performance are separated: the former is given in columns A, 
B, and C; the latter in columns D, E, and F. The causes, summarized in the previ-
ous paragraph, are recorded in column G. Notice that no mention has been made 
here about the supplier’s late deliveries on Monday, Tuesday, or Wednesday. This 
is because a key role of a warehouse is to provide a reliable dispatch service to the 
customer and is one of the principal reasons for holding inventory. Thus while poor 
service from the supplier was a problem, it is not the major cause for the pattern of 
dispatches on those three days.
7.6.2	 Estimating Probabilities
The next stage in the analysis is to calculate the relative frequencies. So, for example, 
in Table 7.1 in column G, –20 appears twice while 40, 30, and –60 each appear once. 
Therefore, an estimate of the associated probabilities (based on a very small sample of 
five) are 0.40 for –20, and 0.20 each for 40, 30, and –60. Notice that we can do the same 
in column G in Table 7.2, giving a probability estimate for “Customer changes sched-
ule” as 0.60 and a probability estimate for “Late delivery of supplier” as 0.40. Once the 
probabilities have been estimated the entropy can be calculated from Equation 7.5.
7.6.3	 Using Entropy as a Measure
We have still not answered one of the questions posed at the start of Section 7.5.2: What 
measure do we use? Or more to the point, why do we select entropy as the measure?
Table 7.2
Detailed Representation of the Results Shown in Table 7.1
Supplier Performance
Dispatch Performance
Day
Planned 
Delivery 
(A)
Actual 
Delivery 
(B)
Difference 
(C) = (B) 
– (A)
Planned 
Dispatch 
(D)
Actual 
Dispatch 
(E)
Difference 
(F) = (E) 
– (D)
Principal Causes 
(G)
Opening 
inventory
100
100
Monday
50
—
–50
80
50
–30
Customer changes 
schedule
Tuesday
—
50
50
50
50
0
Customer changes 
schedule
Wednesday
30
10
–20
—
30
30
Customer changes 
schedule
Thursday
50
—
–50
40
30
–10
Late delivery 
by supplier
Friday
—
50
50
50
—
–50
Late delivery 
by supplier
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

166	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
There are three practical reasons and one theoretical one. The first practical one 
is that entropy aggregates variation, in a way that probabilities do not; the latter 
always sum to unity. You can think of it as an indicator of the level of turbulence 
in a system—the system behaving in unexpected ways. The greater the tendency 
for this to happen, the more turbulent (complex) the process becomes. In terms of 
Figure 7.4, the two lines will progressively diverge from one another as turbulence 
increases.
The second reason is that it is possible to allocate levels of turbulence to their 
causes.10 Thus, for example, we can differentiate between causes about which we can 
do something and those we cannot.
The third reason is that we can make comparisons, thanks to the aggregating 
properties of entropies. Thus we can compare supplier performance by carrying 
out calculations based on columns A, B, and C of Table 7.2, for different suppliers. 
Indeed we can go further and look at how much disruption a particular event causes 
when it happens as against how much of a problem it causes overall. For example, a 
particular supplier may deliver late and cause considerable inconvenience to a num-
ber of customers—very disruptive when it happens. However, it is rare for that sup-
plier not to be on time so, overall, it is not a major issue.
The theoretical reason is that Equation 7.5 can be applied wherever a random 
variable can be defined and probabilities assigned to the various outcomes. This has 
the great advantage that any type of queue can be studied. It frees us from having to 
build a new model for every specific queue we encounter. This is a powerful advan-
tage because we can make comparisons between very different stock profiles within 
the same warehouse, for example.
There are drawbacks in using the measure. The first and most obvious one is 
the very strangeness of the measure, not to mention its mathematical structure. 
Managers feel uncomfortable about being asked to trust a measure that they do not 
fully understand. Experience has shown that trust grows when it highlights matters 
with which the management is already familiar and when it is used in conjunction 
with more traditional metrics.
A second drawback is the very versatility of entropy as a measure. As we have 
just seen, entropy values can be calculated irrespective of the nature of the variable 
under consideration. This is also a weakness when comparing systems. The mea-
sure itself gives no guidance as to the validity of the comparison being made. We 
could just as easily compare chalk with cheese as chalk with chalk. We need some 
additional model to ensure that this does not happen. That is another reason why 
the link between entropy and queues is so important; it leads us always to compare 
queuing behavior.
7.7	
Case Study
7.7.1	
Background
The case study describes a project carried out in a large distribution center (DC). 
The project aimed to provide some insight into the performance of the supply chains 
feeding into and out from the DC. Located near Birmingham in the United Kingdom, 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
167
this extremely complex operation involved a large number of suppliers, haulers, and 
end customers, as well as having a sizeable internal operation (Robinson 2008).
This exercise focused on three factories delivering nine products—SKUs—into 
the DC, which, in turn, dispatched them to three end customers. In total twenty-eight 
chains were involved (a chain is considered to be a supplier, a customer, and a product). 
The DC plays the role of customer to the factories and supplier to the end customers.
The advantages of looking at the performance of the various inventories within 
the DC is that this represents the one point where all the chains come together. It is 
also where the data can be found. Therefore the approach provides a consistent way 
to compare the performance of a disparate group of players.
7.7.2	
Data Collection
Data collection was a three-stage process. The first stage involved accessing actual 
inventory records for each of the SKUs held in the DC, to obtain a historical plot 
of the actual inventory levels. These data were, conveniently, event based (in that a 
record was made every time the inventory level changed) and stored electronically.
Stage two involved a reconstruction of the planned inventory levels. These data came 
typically from orders and schedules placed on and by the distribution depot. Such orders 
indicate the dates and quantities required. In total, seven data sources were consulted.
The final stage was more problematical, assigning causes to the variations 
observed. One practical problem was that, with no one person or company in overall 
control, it was not always easy for the project leader to find and obtain permission 
to use the data. A second was that records were dispersed among the various parties 
involved; so that linking cause to effect was not always easy.
7.7.3	
Data Analysis
A major simplifying assumption was made. This was that each of the supply chains 
could be considered in isolation from the others, except where a stockout of a par-
ticular SKU caused a dispatch to be delayed to an end customer. Thus, for example, 
the variation between what should have been delivered to stock and what was for one 
SKU was independent of the variation between what should have been delivered to 
stock and what was for a different SKU.
Making valid comparisons was a concern. It helped that queues (inventory levels) 
were always being observed and always at the same location. It enforced a degree 
of uniformity on the exercise. Nonetheless practical difficulties regularly cropped 
up. One such difficulty is when the same SKU exists in different package sizes, for 
example, pallets, boxes, cartons, and so forth. Counting had to be consistent, so the 
unit chosen was the smallest one encountered. Thus if a pallet was delivered to a 
storage location but was then split into cartons for onward delivery, the unit of mea-
sure would be cartons.
7.7.4	
Results
Figure 7.5 gives the key findings. It shows the major causes of disturbance in the 
network of queues under consideration. The six causes of inventory fluctuations 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

168	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
(virtual server states), shown on the horizontal axis, are explained in Table 7.3. The 
table shows that it was found possible to identify sources of variations. The first bar, 
“Sales,” records the instances of end customers changing their minds between plac-
ing the order and the delivery. As can be seen, this is a major problem. However the 
“Production” bar is even higher. It suggests that the factories supplying the DC are 
not coping with the volatility of the customer demand. If anything they are making 
matters worse as this bar is significantly higher. It is surprising that all this turbulence 
appears to have been recovered by the time delivery is made into the DC, as reflected 
Table 7.3
Description of How the Bar Chart in Figure 7.5 Was Constructed
Title Identifying 
the Bar
Planned Activity
Cause of Fluctuation
Sales
Planned orders from final customer to 
supplier (these orders bypassed the 
distribution warehouse)
Deviation of what was finally ordered 
from what was planned
Production
What each plant planned to produce
Deviation between what was planned 
and what was actually produced
Delivery to 
distribution center
Planned delivery to distribution center
Deviation from what was promised
Inventory
Expected inventory, as calculated 
from expected incoming and 
outgoing stock
Deviation of actual inventory figures 
from expected
Picking
Planned pick lists
Deviation of actual pick from plan
Customer delivery
Delivery, as agreed with the customer
Deviation of what was actually 
dispatched to customer from what 
was agreed to be delivered
0
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0.5
Sales
Production Shipment
to DC
Inventory
Picking
Delivery to
customer
Entropy (in bits)
Figure 7.5  Causes of turbulence in the supply chains.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
169
by the size of the “Shipment to DC” bar. The reason for this was not altogether clear 
but seems merely to be a reflection on the haulers’ performance—they delivered 
when they were asked to. In other words, the haulage stage from the factory to the 
DC has not aggravated the situation. What is clear is that by the time products come 
to be delivered to the end customer, turbulence is still present, although considerably 
attenuated from that seen further up the chains. It is concluded that holding inter-
mediate inventory in a warehouse is not providing a total buffer against fluctuations 
generated further back in the operation.
Finally, the “Inventory” bar shows the impact of the various sources of turbulence 
on inventory performance, in terms of how far the actual level deviates from the 
planned level. Such fluctuations have to be covered by a buffer stock. Therefore one 
can—at least in theory—estimate the cost, in terms of excess stocking costs, of hav-
ing a turbulent supply chain.
It was also possible to identify which factories were the problem suppliers, 
which customers created the greatest difficulties in terms of changing their minds 
about what to order, and which of the nine products proved the most difficult to 
manage through the chains. One particular factory was found to be having special 
problems.
The case study illustrates the benefits that can accrue when viewing inventory 
as a dynamic queue. It offers a way to assess the performance of a complex net-
work of supply chains by providing a single measure at a key node in the network. 
The measure creates both an absolute performance metric (how closely the SKU 
achieves its goal of meeting the planned inventory profile) and a comparative mea-
sure (the relative performance of suppliers, customers, and other participants in 
the network). Where the investigation does not provide the complete answer, it at 
least highlights those locations that need to be examined in depth. Such an analysis 
would not be possible relying solely on the data provided by traditional inventory 
control systems.
7.8	
Conclusions
We have attempted to demonstrate the additional benefits that accrue when we 
view inventories as a class of queue. The principal one is that it encourages us to 
consider the dynamical behavior of inventories. This is revealed in the inventory 
profile shown in Figure 7.4, which is part planned and part random. Moreover, the 
figure demonstrated how the two components can be separated; in other words, the 
total behavior is the sum of the predicted and the random elements. However, the 
viewpoint brings a second benefit. We say that a virtual server is involved. This 
assumes that service begins when an item goes into stock (joins the queue) and is 
complete when it leaves. It encourages us to think in terms of server states, that is, 
is the server behaving as it should or, if not, what is it doing. The important aspect 
of this rather odd standpoint is to highlight the link between server behavior and 
queue behavior. In rather more prosaic terms, we look to see what causes the queue 
to behave as it does and, more important, put a measure on the amount of turbulence 
that is created as a result.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

170	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
In fact, this linkage of server to queue states allows the ideas to be applied to two 
forms of inventory not usually included in traditional stock control theory and, for that 
reason, not considered in the body of the chapter. However, they need a brief mention 
for completeness. The first is where a real server exists, for example, a resource in a 
factory (Frizelle and Suhov 2001). The queues involved are often referred to as work 
in process. The nature of the factory dynamics is then revealed by analyzing the server 
states, for example, is the resource working or in a state of breakdown. The second 
form of inventory is that found in industrial processes. Here we are dealing with gases, 
liquids, or solids. In mathematical terms, they are described by continuous variables. 
Inventory control is not an issue, apart from making sure that supplies are delivered 
when required. As the materials are usually stored in some form of container—tanks, 
silos, or bins—there is a physical upper limit on how much can be held. Indeed a pro-
cess plant will have been designed with these capacities in mind.
We also described the benefits that come from using entropy as a performance 
metric. First, entropy is a measure of turbulence and is, more generally, a measure 
of one form of complexity. Second, it is independent of what is being measured. 
This means that we can compare similar systems, which in this context means the 
queuing behavior of different SKUs. It also releases us from first having to specify a 
queuing model to enable us to carry out measurements. Third, entropy provides an 
absolute measure, in the sense that no uncertainty means no entropy and maximum 
entropy is defined relative to the traffic intensity of the queue.
However, the real benefit comes from being able to apply the ideas in practice. 
Observing the queue dynamics in a large distribution depot provided insight into how 
a complex network of supply chains was performing. The analysis revealed likely 
causes of the problems and indicated where unnecessary costs might accrue through 
having to hold excessive buffers in the system. Such insights cannot be gleaned from 
ordinary stock control theory.
It was commented at the start of the chapter that adopting this perspective can 
only be justified if it provides some fresh viewpoints. The hope is that this has been 
demonstrated to be the case.
Notes
	
1.	 The technical term for this is that no closed form of solution exists. It 
means that, in practice, one would probably have to use either approxima-
tions or some form of simulation to evaluate results.
	
2.	 These two statements have a precise mathematical definition for the sim-
plest queues. The arrivals follow a Poisson distribution, whose probability 
mass function is given by λ
λ
ke
k
−
! , where k is the number of arrivals in a 
given time interval and l is the average arrival rate. The service times are 
distributed as a negative exponential whose probability density function is 
given by µ
µ
e
x
−. Here m is the service rate and x is the time to complete a 
specific service.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Seeing Inventory as a Queue	
171
	
3.	 As will become clearer further on in the chapter, the D/D/1 queue corre-
sponds to a queue with zero entropy associated with it. The M/M/1 queue 
has maximum entropy, the value dependent on the traffic intensity.
	
4.	 There is an extraordinary link between entropy, complexity, and Turing 
machines. The latter is a sort of theoretical computer, named after its 
inventor, Alan Turing. They provide the conceptual underpinning of 
today’s computers. For anyone interested, there is a very readable account 
in Cover and Thomas (2006) and a greater exploration of some of the ideas 
in Hofstadter (1979).
	
5.	 Readers familiar with statistics or probability theory will see that entropy 
is the expected value of the information. Notice how entropy aggregates 
all the contributing sources of information but gives more weight to like-
lier events and less to rarer ones, even though these latter carry more 
information.
	
6.	 You can try other coding schemes using binary numbers but you will 
always finish up with at least one SKU having a label of length three. For 
example, you might think that all possible permutations of 1 and 0 might 
be more efficient. Thus we would call our eight SKUs 0, 1, 00, 01, 10, 11, 
000, and 001. Remember that these are not numbers but labels. Even so, 
we still need two labels of length three.
	
7.	 The form of complexity involved is called the Kolmogorov–Sinai com-
plexity. Essentially it is about the limits of compressibility and defines the 
complexity of a string as the shortest computer program that can produce 
the string. For example, a string of totally random numbers will require a 
program of at least the length of the string—if a shorter program could be 
found, the numbers would not be random (even though there are programs 
that supposedly generate random numbers). This form of complexity is 
approximately equal to the entropy proposed by Shannon. This is part of 
the link alluded to in note 4.
	
8.	 By an infinite number of states, we mean countable infinite number. The 
important point here is that the states are discrete. Thus we can put them 
in a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbers. An example of 
a countable set is a jobs-to-do list.
	
9.	 If this looks like mathematical jiggery-pokery, then think about Σ1
1
2
∞
n, 
that is, adding 1/2 to 1/4 to 1/8 and so on. This sum never reaches 1 but we 
can prove that it “tends to 1,” as the number of terms increases to infinity. 
Thus the number 1 is an upper bound on the series.
	 10.	 The equation for this is given by H A B
H A
p a b
a A b B
p a b
p a
( , )
( )
( , )log
,
( , )
( )
=
−
∈
∈
Σ
. 
Here A corresponds to the set of causes and B to the set of consequences, 
that is, the resulting queue turbulence of the causes. The term on the left-
hand side of the equation is called the joint entropy and the double sum-
mation term is called the conditional entropy. The latter is the term that 
associates the causes of turbulence with their causes.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

172	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
References
Axsäter, S. 2006. Inventory control. Berlin: Springer.
Cover T. M., and J. Thomas. 2006. The elements of information theory. Hoboken, NJ: John 
Wiley & Sons.
Frizelle, G., and Y. Suhov. 2001. An entropic measurement of queuing behaviour in a class of 
manufacturing operations. Proc Roy Soc A: Math Phys Eng Sci 457(2001):1579–1601.
Frizelle, G., and Y. Suhov. 2008. The measurement of complexity in production and other 
systems. Proc Roy Soc A: Math Phys Eng Sci 464(2098):2649–2668.
Hofstadter, D. R. 1979. Godel, Escher, Bach: An eternal golden braid. New York: Basic Books.
Kleinrock, L., and R. Gail. 1996. Queueing systems: Problems and solutions. New York: Wiley.
Robinson, M. June 2008. Complexity observed in supply chains. But can it be diagnosed? 
Paper presented at Complexity in Business IET, London.
Shannon, C. E., and W. W. Weaver. 1999. The mathematical theory of communications. 
Urbana, IL: University of Illinois Press.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

173
8 Fuzzy Inventory Models
Alfred L. Guiffrida
Kent State University
Kent, Ohio
8.1	 Introduction
The efficient management of inventory requires managers to make decisions on 
two fundamental questions: (1) how large should an inventory replenishment order 
be, and (2) when should an inventory replenishment order be placed. These two 
decisions are integral in the support of an overall inventory management program 
that typically has the objective of providing a desired level of customer service at 
a minimal cost. Beginning in 1913 with Harris’s economic order quantity (EOQ) 
Contents
8.1	
Introduction................................................................................................... 173
8.2	
Parameter Estimation in Classical Inventory Models................................... 175
8.2.1	 Summary of Modeling Inventory Cost Inputs................................... 175
8.2.2	 Robust Properties of the EOQ Inventory Model............................... 177
8.2.2.1	 Misspecification of Optimal Order Quantity...................... 177
8.2.2.2	 Misspecification of Order Quantity Parameters................. 178
8.2.3	 Limitations of Robustness in the EOQ Model................................... 179
8.3	
The Inventory Management Literature.......................................................... 179
8.3.1	 Overview of General Inventory Models............................................ 179
8.3.2	 Overview of Inventory Models with Special Characteristics............ 180
8.4	
Fuzzy Inventory Literature............................................................................ 182
8.4.1	 Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) Models........................................ 182
8.4.2	 Economic Production Quantity (EPQ) Models................................. 183
8.4.3	 Joint Economic Lot Sizing Models.................................................... 185
8.4.4	 Single Period, Newsvendor Models................................................... 185
8.4.5	 Multiperiod Inventory Models........................................................... 187
8.4.6	 Multi-Item Inventory Models............................................................ 187
8.4.7	 Inventory Control Systems................................................................ 187
8.5	
Summary and Conclusions............................................................................192
References...............................................................................................................192
Fuzzy Literature.............................................................................................192
Nonfuzzy Literature.......................................................................................196
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

174	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
model, numerous mathematical inventory models have been published in the inven-
tory literature to assist managers in determining the size and timing of an inventory 
replenishment order in support of this objective.
Mathematical inventory models can be broadly categorized into two groups: deter-
ministic models and stochastic models. Deterministic inventory models were the first 
class of inventory models to evolve. In the years following the introduction of the Harris 
EOQ model, numerous variants and extensions of the EOQ model rapidly appeared in 
the literature. Deterministic inventory models typically contain few parameters, and all 
input data for these parameters are assumed to be known with complete certainty. The 
total cost function includes the costs associated with ordering, holding, and purchasing 
inventory. The optimal order quantity that minimizes the total cost function, then, can be 
easily found. Deterministic models also assume that the demand and lead-time charac-
teristics of the inventory system are known with complete certainty, leading to a simple 
and straightforward mathematical structure for modeling demand during lead time.
Stochastic inventory models first appeared in the literature in the early 1950s. 
These models were formulated to capture the uncertainty and variability that exist 
in most real-world inventory situations but were assumed away in deterministic 
inventory models. As a result of incorporating uncertainty in demand and lead time, 
stochastic models require more model parameters than deterministic inventory mod-
els, and require that some input parameters be defined in probabilistic terms. The 
optimal solution of a stochastic inventory model generates a set of policy variables, 
which minimize an expected total cost function. Seminal papers by Arrow et al. 
(1951) and Dworetzky et al. (1952a, 1952b) established the foundation for stochastic 
inventory models and led to the introduction of shortage costs.
Stochastic inventory models assume that demand, lead time, or both factors can 
be described by random variables. The underlying mathematical structure for a sto-
chastic inventory model is more complex than that of a deterministic model and 
requires a policy statement from management for the inventory system performance 
measure such as a service level or fill rate.
In practice, implementing either form of inventory model requires the acceptance 
of a set of assumptions that govern the model use, as well as the recognition that 
estimates must be made for model parameters such as demand rates, lead times, and 
inventory-related costs.
Obtaining realistic input values for the parameters of a mathematical inventory 
model is a challenging task. The analyst performing this task is often operating in 
a decision environment that is characterized by uncertainty, ambiguity, and the lack 
of perfect information on customer demand rates, manufacturing, and delivery lead 
times, in addition to inventory cost structures for ordering, holding, and shortages.
Fuzzy set theory is primarily concerned with how to quantitatively deal with 
imprecision and uncertainty, and offers the decision maker another tool in addition 
to the classical deterministic and probabilistic mathematical tools that are used in 
modeling real-world problems. Fuzzy set theory was introduced in the engineering/
computer sciences literature by Zadeh (1965) and has gained widespread promi-
nence as a means to model vague data in production management applications. A 
comprehensive review on the application of fuzzy set theory in production manage-
ment can be found in Guiffrida and Nagi (1998).
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
175
In deterministic inventory models, the analyst must assign a unique numerical 
value to each model cost parameter as well as to the demand and production rates 
that characterize the market place and production environment in which the model 
operates. Similarly, for stochastic inventory models, the assignment process involves 
using random variables to quantify these inputs under conditions of uncertainty. The 
advantage of using fuzzy set theory in inventory management lies with its inherent 
ability to quantify vagueness and imprecision. The purpose of this chapter is to pro-
vide a review of the application of fuzzy set theory to inventory management. The 
review will highlight how fuzzy logic has been used in inventory models and will 
provide inventory analysts with an alternative, and perhaps complementary, method-
ology for developing inventory models.
The chapter is organized into two major components. Collectively, Sections 8.2 
and 8.3 provide the motivation and foundation for using fuzzy set theory in modeling 
inventory systems. In Section 8.2, we address the current state of the nonfuzzy mod-
eling efforts for obtaining estimates of the cost parameters of inventory models. The 
literature on formulating cost estimates for inventory model parameters is reviewed. 
The robust properties of inventory models to errors in parameter estimation and mis-
specification of optimal lot sizes are also discussed. In Section 8.3, a review of classi-
cal inventory models is presented. In Section 8.4, we build upon this framework and 
demonstrate a review of the literature on fuzzy inventory models. A summary and 
conclusion for the chapter is presented in Section 8.5.
8.2	 Parameter Estimation in Classical Inventory Models
In this section we summarize the literature on determining input values for the 
inventory cost parameters of order, holding, and shortage. These three parameters 
are present in nearly all inventory models which have been reported in the literature. 
The property of robustness is also introduced and material is presented that demon-
strates the sensitivity of inventory models to specific errors in the optimal lot size 
and in the specification of individual parameters.
8.2.1	 Summary of Modeling Inventory Cost Inputs
Mathematical inventory models, like all management science/operations research 
models, require the assignment of numerical values to the input parameters of the 
model. There is widespread agreement among inventory analysts as to the need of 
assigning such numerical values; however, the process of estimating the parameters 
is of concern. Wagner (1980) presents a comprehensive review of the practical prob-
lems associated with implementing inventory control systems. A key issue identi-
fied in this review is the need for a thoughtful and scientific investigation of the 
issues relating to the specification of demand forecasts and costs related to inventory 
modeling.
Deterministic inventory models typically require inputting at least two cost param-
eters: an order cost for making replenishment and an inventory holding cost for 
carrying items in inventory. Stochastic inventory models generally require a cost 
associated with stocking out and back-ordering, in addition to ordering and inventory 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

176	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
holding costs. Zanakis et al. (1980) refer to cost estimation in inventory control as 
the thorn that aggravates the users of inventory control models. Gardner (1980) states 
that the commonly and almost universally accepted belief held by inventory analysts 
is that relevant cost information for determining the input values for the parameters 
of an inventory model can somehow be obtained from a firm’s accounting system.
Table 8.1 provides an overview of research studies over the past fifty years that 
have addressed how to determine the costs associated with ordering, holding, and 
stockouts in inventory models.
The major concern throughout the studies outlined in Table 8.1 is the capture 
of accurate and relevant cost data that can be used to describe the costs associated 
with ordering, holding, and shortages. Today’s advancements in inventory control 
software, such as material requirements and enterprise planning systems, as well as 
the growing implementation of radio frequency identification, has made the handling 
and integration of inventory-related information more efficient and available to the 
decision maker in real-time. However, the troublesome issue of defining numeri-
cal values for the input parameters of an inventory model still exists. It must be 
Table 8.1
Summary of Research on Cost Inputs for Inventory Models
Model Cost Component
Research Study
Order
Holding
Stockout
Anderson et al. (2006)
X
Badinelli (1986)
X
Berling (2008)
X
Biggs et al. (1990)
X
Bock (1964)
X
Brown (1985)
X
Campbell and Rankin (1998)
X
Chang and Niland (1967)
X
Coopersmith (1990) 
X
Denicoff et al. (1960)
X
Jordan (2008)
X
Karr (1958)
X
Kim (1991)
X
Lambert (1975)
X
Lambert et al. (1990)
X
Malucci (2008)
X
Oral et al. (1972)
X
Reid et al. (1984)
X
Schary and Christopher (1979)
X
Schwartz (1966)
X
Walter and Grabner (1975) 
X
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
177
recognized that totally error-free parameterization of inventory models is not very 
likely. In the next section we examine the extent to which the robust properties of the 
inventory models themselves afford protection again parameter misspecification.
8.2.2	 Robust Properties of the EOQ Inventory Model
The sensitivity of the inventory cost of the EOQ to errors in the estimation of its 
model parameters can be found in numerous inventory management textbooks that 
were published between 1950 and 1975. Starr and Miller (1962, 14) introduced the 
concept of “sufficient accuracy” with respect to the measurement of inventory-related 
costs. They note that the typical EOQ-based inventory analysis is not overly sensi-
tive to reasonable errors in the measurements of cost, and that the optimal course of 
action as suggested by the solution of the inventory model is not likely to be changed 
very much, even by relatively large errors in the measurements of costs. As such, 
inventory analysts often take comfort in the knowledge that uncertainty and error 
introduced when specifying the numerical value of parameters input to an inventory 
model may have little effect on determining the value of inventory policy variables as 
a result of the “robust” property inherent to some mathematical inventory models.
Analyses that highlight the robustness of EOQ-based inventory models have 
developed beyond the scope of inventory management textbooks and into the main-
stream inventory management research literature. The research on this topic has 
developed in two ways. First, researchers have examined the effect of incorrect lot 
sizes on the total cost performance of the EOQ inventory system; second, research-
ers have examined the effects of misspecifications of individual and group param-
eters on the total cost performance of the EOQ inventory system.
8.2.2.1	 Misspecification of Optimal Order Quantity
Several researchers have examined the cost penalty associated with the EOQ model 
when a nonoptimal order quantity (Q) is used in place of the optimal EOQ order 
quantity (Q*). Wagner (1969) presents the penalty cost ratio defined by
	
PCP
Q
Q
Q
Q
=
+



−
∗
∗
1
2
1	
(8.1)
For example, if the optimal EOQ order quantity is overestimated by 25 percent, 
the resulting percentage cost error is approximately 2.5 percent. Brown et al. (1986) 
generalized Equation 8.1 to the form
	
PCP
n
nQ
Q
Q
Q
n
=
+




+ 











−
∗
∗
1
1
1	
(8.2)
when the relationship between holding costs and average inventory is represented by 
a power function defined by index n. Diseconomies of scale between holding cost 
and average inventory are introduced when n < 1; economies of scale are introduced 
when n > 1. When n = 1, a linear relationship between holding cost and average 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

178	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
inventory is implied and Equation 8.2 simplifies to Equation 8.1. Chigopekar (1990) 
further generalizes this stream of research by introducing planned shortages into the 
EOQ model with shortage costs modeled by a power function of index n. The result-
ing penalty cost ratio is
	
PCP
n
n
X
Y
X
a
X
a
Y
X
n
n
=
+




+
−
+
+
−
+
+
1
1
1
1
1
1
(
)
( (
)
)
(1+




a an
)
	
(8.3)
where X is the ratio of the nonoptimal order quantity (Q) to the optimal order quan-
tity (Q*), Y is the ratio of the nonoptimal maximum shortage (S) to the optimal 
maximum shortage (S*), and a = (Q/S*) − 1. When the deviation in Q* and S* are 
in the same proportion, X = Y and Equation 8.3 simplifies to Equation 8.2. A user-
friendly spreadsheet methodology for exploring the robust property of the EOQ to 
lot size errors using the penalty cost ratio (PCP) approach is found in Guiffrida and 
Papp (2008).
8.2.2.2	 Misspecification of Order Quantity Parameters
Lowe and Schwarz (1983) note that the parameter inputs for the EOQ lot-sizing model 
are assumed to be stationary and known, when in reality these quantities are often 
nonstationary and more accurately defined as a function of time or a range of val-
ues. They develop two measures for assessing the accuracy (or “goodness”) of using 
parameter estimates in the EOQ model as well as two procedures (minimax and 
expected value criteria) for estimating the uncertain parameters. For the stationary 
cases, formulae based on the minimax and expected value criteria are used to develop 
parameter estimators based on ranges where uncertain parameters are defined by 
minimum and maximum values. In the nonstationary cases, formulae are developed 
that introduce time dependency into the range-based parameter estimates. A numeri-
cal example is used to demonstrate change in inventory policy resulting from the 
application of the difference in accuracy measures and estimation procedures.
Dobson (1988) extends the work of Lowe and Schwarz (1983) and demonstrates 
through a series of propositions a more detailed quantification of the insensitivity of 
the EOQ inventory model under conditions of parameter uncertainty. Error bounds 
for the expected error ratio are defined for the joint distribution of the order cost, 
holding cost, and annual demand parameters of the EOQ. The error bounds are 
derived for the distribution independent case (e.g., estimates are only dependent on 
the range endpoints) and for the case when the distribution of the parameters follows 
the gamma and beta distributions.
Yu (1997) studied the EOQ model under two robust criteria: (1) minimizing the 
maximum total inventory cost, and (2) minimizing the maximum percentage devia-
tion from the optimal total inventory cost. Under these criteria, the input data of 
the EOQ model are defined by continuous intervals. A linear time algorithm was 
developed to find robust decisions under each criterion. A stochastic EOQ model, in 
which the model parameter inputs are defined by known probability distributions, is 
formulated and solved, and the results of the stochastic optimization are compared 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
179
to the solutions achieved under the robust decision criteria. Theorems are presented 
that show that the robust decision criteria outperform the stochastic optimization 
approach with respect to the EOQ inventory model.
8.2.3	 Limitations of Robustness in the EOQ Model
The scope of robustness with respect to the parameterization of inventory input 
parameters may be limited for several reasons. First, the properties of robustness 
have only been studied in the literature for the EOQ inventory model. Second, inven-
tory experts have expressed disagreement as to the assurances that robustness offers 
in the parameterization of inventory models, such as the EOQ. Peterson and Silver 
(1979) state that the robustness of the EOQ model is an important fundamental con-
cept in operational inventory control. Zangwill (1987) takes the position that reliance 
on the robust properties of the EOQ model can lead to false or misleading results, 
especially when viewed from the zero inventory philosophy.
8.3	 The Inventory Management Literature
A comprehensive review of all inventory models published since 1913 has never 
been undertaken and would be a daunting task due to the sheer number of published 
inventory models. For example, a search using the phrase “mathematical inventory 
models” in Google Scholar returns over 90,000 hits. In this section we present a 
summary of literature reviews on inventory models that have appeared in the litera-
ture. In Section 8.3.1 a review of general inventory models is presented. This section 
covers models that were published before 1982. Section 8.3.2 contains a review of 
inventory models with special characteristics. This section covers models published 
since 1982.
8.3.1	 Overview of General Inventory Models
Bramson (1962) presents a review of inventory models with variable lead time. 
Models are classified according to two coding schemes. The first coding scheme 
consists of three variables that describe the type of inventory control policies used in 
the inventory model to govern order review, size, and treatment of shortages. Within 
this first coding scheme, the order review policies encoded are: (1) continuous review, 
(2) periodic review, (3) random review, and (4) other/irrelevant. Order sizes are coded 
as: (1) Q = 1, (2) optimal Q, (3) a fixed multiple of Q, and (4) other/irrelevant. Demand 
under a shortage is treated as: (1) completely back-ordered, (2) completely lost, (3) 
partially back-ordered and partially lost, and (4) other/irrelevant.
The second coding scheme consists of one to three letters and is used to classify 
the type of distribution used for demand and lead time. A single letter signifies the 
form of the distribution used in the model to define customer demand. A second let-
ter identifies the accompanying lead-time distribution. Demand and lead-time distri-
butions considered are: (1) normal, (2) Poisson, (3) exponential/geometric, (4) Erlang, 
(5) gamma, (6) negative binomial, (7) unit demand, or (8) other. When all three let-
ters are used, the third letter denotes the time interval between demands.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

180	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
The coding schemes are used to classify ten inventory models published in the 
literature from 1955 to 1961. Pursuant to the theme of this review paper, Bramson 
(1962) provides a step-by-step derivation of an expression for comparing the vari-
ability of the demand and lead-time distributions for variable demand inventory 
models in an appendix to the paper.
Aggarwal (1974) provides a comprehensive classification of the literature in math-
ematical inventory control models that appeared from 1964 to 1973. The classifi-
cation scheme used to organize inventory models in the paper is identified using 
a well-designed and easy to read figure found on page 444 of the paper. Within 
this classification scheme, inventory systems are broadly classified as either static or 
dynamic models. The static model subgroup is further broken down as to whether 
the models represent single or multiple items. Both model forms (single or multiple 
items) are further partitioned based on the number of locations and echelons the 
models engage. Models in the dynamic subgroup are broken down as to whether the 
model is deterministic or stochastic. Stochastic models are further classified as to 
whether they possess a known or unknown demand distribution.
A list of eleven quantifiable inventory variables present in the literature is then dis-
cussed, to which Aggarwal (1974) adds four additional variables that cannot be eas-
ily quantified. Individual research papers from the inventory literature are grouped 
into six specific categories. These categories are: (1) models for determining opti-
mum inventory policies (twenty-three papers), (2) lot-size optimization (five papers), 
(3) optimization of specific management objectives (eight papers), (4) models for opti-
mizing highly specific situations (twenty papers), (5) applications of advanced math-
ematical theories (nine papers), and (6) models bridging the gap between theory and 
practice (five papers). The author concludes the review paper with an interesting dis-
cussion of the limitations set forth for the general practicability of inventory models.
Two additional inventory review papers that present detailed classification 
schemes for inventory models are found in Nahmias (1978) and Silver (1981). The 
classification schemes presented in these papers differ from those of Bramson (1962) 
and Aggarwal (1974), in that models for perishable products are now included as a 
part of the overall inventory model classification scheme.
8.3.2	 Overview of Inventory Models with Special Characteristics
Nahmias (1982) reviewed the literature on inventory models for perishable invento-
ries. The review is restricted to the ordering policies of perishables. Ordering policies 
for inventory that is subject to obsolescence is excluded. Prior to being introduced 
as a distinct class of inventory model in the classifications schemes presented by 
Nahmias (1978) and Silver (1981), selected perishable inventory models published 
prior to 1973 were reviewed by Aggarwal (1974) under the classification of “models 
for optimizing highly specific situations.”
The classification scheme used by Nahmias (1982) is based on two major group-
ings: (1) models for single and multiple products with fixed lifetime perishability 
under conditions of deterministic and stochastic demand, and (2) models with ran-
dom lifetime perishability in which the product lifetime follows either a known prob-
ability distribution or experiences exponential decay. Similar in form to his prior 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
181
review paper (Nahmias 1978), a detailed and thorough explanation of each class 
of model addressed in the review is provided. Thirty papers from the literature are 
reviewed under the category of models with fixed life perishability; nine papers are 
reviewed under the category of random lifetime perishability. Noting the analogy 
between queuing models with customer impatience and perishable inventory models, 
two papers that apply analytical results from the queuing application are examined. 
The review concludes with the acknowledgment that interest in perishable inventory 
problems has been influenced by problems in blood bank management, and selected 
papers from the literature on blood bank management are reviewed.
Raafat (1991) presents a review of the literature on continuously deteriorating 
mathematical inventory models (also known as inventory models subject to expo-
nential decay or age-independent perishable inventory models). Following the classi-
fication scheme defined in Silver (1981), eight groupings are defined for categorizing 
the literature on continuously deteriorating inventory models. Within seven of the 
groupings, two distinct subgroupings are introduced to further partition models 
found in the literature. Nine classes of continuously deteriorating inventory models 
are identified and each class of model is then categorized according to the classifica-
tion scheme defined in the paper. Within a given model class, relevant papers from 
the literature are addressed. A total of sixty-three papers are reviewed across the 
nine model classes.
Benton and Park (1996) reviewed the literature on inventory lot sizing models 
with quantity discounts. The taxonomy adopted consists of three nested classifi-
cations. The first classification categorizes quantity discount models according to 
whether the demand profile underlying the model is time phased. Second, within 
each demand class the type of discount model (all-units discount or incremental 
discount) is established. Last, the model is classified from the point of view of the 
parties involved (e.g., from the lot sizing perspective of the buyer only or from the 
joint lot sizing perspective of both the buyer and supplier).
A total of fifty-one papers on inventory lot sizing models with quantity discounts 
were reviewed. The vast majority of the papers incorporated models that were not 
time phased with respect to demand (thirty-five papers). Forty papers had models 
that were based on incremental discount schedules; eleven papers had models that 
were based on all-units discount schedules. The vast majority of the papers did not 
adopt a joint buyer–supplier orientation with respect to lot sizing (thirty-six papers), 
and no papers addressed the buyer–supplier interaction under a time-phased demand 
orientation. Benton and Park (1996) acknowledge that more complex models are 
needed to address the buyer–seller interaction with respect to the lot sizing decision 
involving quantity discounts when demand is time phased.
Goyal and Giri (2001) present a review of the literature on deteriorating inventory 
models published since the early 1990s. Their review addresses new contributions to 
the literature on deteriorating inventory models that have been published since the 
earlier review of the field Raafat (1991). Their review is classified according to three 
categories: (1) models for inventory with fixed lifetimes, (2) models for inventory with 
a random life, and (3) models for inventory with decays corresponding to the propor-
tional inventory decrease in terms of its utility or physical quantity. The detail of the 
review effort is impressive with consideration given to the demand structures used 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

182	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
by researchers in modeling deteriorating inventory, as well the specialized model 
attributes that address pricing, scheduling of payments, the time value of money, and 
inventory storage. The review encompasses more than 120 new contributions to the 
literature on deteriorating inventory models.
Several authors have published recent reviews of specialized topics within the 
inventory management literature. These reviews are summarized in Table 8.2.
8.4	 Fuzzy Inventory Literature
The literature survey on mathematical inventory models that was presented in 
Section 8.3 provides a foundation for examining the literature on fuzzy inventory 
models. In this section we will review the literature on fuzzy inventory models. 
The review is organized along seven general classes of inventory models and their 
extensions. These classes are economic order quantity models, economic production 
quantity models, joint economic lot sizing models, single period newsvendor models, 
multiperiod inventory models, multiproduct inventory models, and systems (continu-
ous and periodic review) for inventory control.
The objective of this survey is to identify how fuzzy set theory has been used 
in the formulation of the fuzzy inventory model. The semantics of fuzzy set theory 
will not be discussed as a part of this review. The interested reader is referred to 
Kaufmann and Gupta (1988) for the supporting details on the mathematics of fuzzy 
inference. An introduction on how to use fuzzy set theory in mathematical inven-
tory models is found in Buckley et al. (2002) and Buckley (2005). These references 
expertly illustrate how to apply fuzzy set theory in the formulation and solution of 
inventory models.
8.4.1	 Economic Order Quantity (EOQ) Models
As in the traditional inventory literature, the fuzzy economic order quantity 
has provided the genesis for the evolution of fuzzy inventory models. Six papers 
have addressed the basic EOQ model under varying schemes of fuzzy parameter 
Table 8.2
Summary of Literature Reviews on Specialized Topics 
in Inventory Management
Research Study
Inventory Topic Reviewed
Khouja (1999)
Newsvendor models
Kennedy et al. (2002)
Spare-parts inventory
Minner (2003)
Inventory models with multiple suppliers
Urban (2005)
Inventory-level-dependent demand models
Silver (2008)
Inventory models contributed by Canadian researchers
Williams and Tokar (2008)
Inventory models published in logistics journals
Ben-Daya et al. (2008)
Joint buyer–vendor inventory models
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
183
assignments. An additional seven papers model the fuzzy EOQ with back orders (see 
Table 8.3). Ten papers provide extensions to the fuzzy EOQ model (see Table 8.4).
We introduce the following notation for use throughout this section. Let C denote 
a crisp (nonfuzzy) model parameter/attribute; let F denote a fuzzy model parameter/
attribute.
8.4.2	 Economic Production Quantity (EPQ) Models
The economic order quantity model assumes that all units of the EOQ lot size are 
delivered from an outside vendor at the same time. Hence, if the EOQ was used as an 
internal production lot sizing model, the assumption of instantaneous replenishment 
would equate to an infinite (and unrealistic) production rate. By relaxing the instan-
taneous replenishment to allow for a production rate that is greater than the demand 
rate, the EOQ model can be modified to determine the optimal production lot size as 
a function of setup and inventory holding costs. This modification of the traditional 
Table 8.3
Fuzzy Economic Order Quantity Models
Economic Order Quantity Model
Model Input Parameters
Model
Order 
Quantity
Order 
Cost
Holding 
Cost
Annual 
Demand
Park (1987)
C
F
F
C
Vujosevic (1996)
C
F
F
C
Lee and Yao (1999)
F
C
C
C
Yao et al. (2000) 
F
C
C
F
Yao and Chiang (2003)
C
C
F
F
Wang et al. (2007)
C
F
F
C
Economic Order Quantity Model with Back Orders
Model Input Parameters
Model
(Q, S)
Order 
Cost
Holding 
Cost
Back-Order 
Cost
Annual 
Demand
Chen et al. (1996)
(C, C)
F
F
F
F
Yao and Lee (1996)
Yao and Lee (1999)
(F, C)
C
C
C
C
Chang et al. (1998)
(C, F)
C
C
C
C
Yao and Su (2000)
(C, C)
C
C
C
F
Wu and Yao (2003)
(F, F)
C
C
C
C
Yao and Su (2008)
F max inv
C
C
C
F
Note: C = crisp (nonfuzzy) model parameter/attribute. F = fuzzy model parameter/attribute.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

184	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Table 8.4
Extensions to the Fuzzy Economic Order Quantity Model
Model 
Extension of Traditional
EOQ Model
Fuzzy Model Attributes
Roy and Maiti 
(1995)
Extends the classic EOQ model to 
include a constraint for available 
warehouse storage space.
Ordering costs, holding costs, and the 
maximum available warehouse storage 
space are defined using fuzzy 
numbers.
Mondal and Maiti 
(2002)
Formulates a multiple item EOQ model 
under constraints for total investment, 
storage space, and the number of 
production runs.
Two fuzzy model formulations are 
presented: In model 1, the available 
storage area and maximum number of 
orders are defined by fuzzy numbers. 
In model 2, ordering costs and 
inventory holding costs are defined by 
fuzzy numbers.
Chang (2003) 
Extends Porteus’ (1986) EOQ model for 
process quality and setup reduction 
quality improvement.
The opportunity cost of capital for 
process improvement is modeled as a 
fuzzy number.
Chang (2004)
Extends the order quantity model of 
Salameh and Jaber (2000) for items of 
imperfect quality.
Order quantity models for items of 
imperfect quality are presented when 
the defect rate and annual demand are 
defined by fuzzy numbers.
Yadavalli et al. 
(2005)
Formulates a multiple item EOQ model 
subject to a budget constraint for the 
number of stocked units.
Order costs and inventory holding costs 
are defined by fuzzy numbers.
De and Goswami 
(2006)
Develops an EOQ model under 
conditions of inflation and product 
deterioration for a finite time horizon 
with permissible payment delay.
The deterioration rate and inflation rate 
are modeled as fuzzy numbers.
Chen and Ouyang 
(2006)
Extends the order quantity model of 
Jamal et al. (1997) for deteriorating 
items with allowable shortage and 
permissible delay in payment.
The inventory carrying cost and the 
interest rate (earned and paid) are 
defined as fuzzy numbers.
Mahata and 
Goswami (2007)
Extends the EOQ model to include 
permissible delays in payments to both 
retailers and customers under 
conditions of product deterioration.
The demand rate and inventory costs of 
setup, holding, and purchasing are 
defined as fuzzy numbers.
Liu (2008)
Redefines the EOQ as a profit 
maximization model where demand is 
a function of the unit item price, and 
the item unit cost is a decreasing 
function of the order quantity.
Annual demand and the item unit cost 
are defined as fuzzy numbers.
Roy et al. (2008)
Formulates a multiple product EOQ 
model for deteriorating items subject to 
constraints on cost and storage space.
Ordering cost, inventory holding cost, 
available storage space, and budgetary 
cost are defined by fuzzy numbers.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
185
EOQ model is often referred to as the economic production quantity (EPQ) model. 
An early treatment of the formulation of the EPQ model is found in Eilon (1956).
Tables 8.5 and 8.6 overview twelve fuzzy EPQ models have been identified in 
the literature. Four papers are based on the traditional (crisp) EPQ model and use 
fuzzy numbers to model the input parameters and the optimal production lot size; 
eight of the papers apply fuzzy logic to extensions of the traditional EPQ model that 
addresses multiple items, constraints resulting from cost budgets and limited storage 
space, and imperfect product quality.
8.4.3	 Joint Economic Lot Sizing Models
Inventory models that address issues of inventory coordination between a buyer 
and seller have been extensively studied in the literature. This class of inventory 
models is commonly referred to as joint economic lot sizing (JELS) models. The 
objective of these models is the development of a jointly coordinated buyer– 
seller inventory strategy that is more beneficial to each member’s individual 
noncoordinated inventory strategy. A detailed review of the literature on crisp 
model formulations of the joint economic lot size model is found in Ben-Daya 
et al. (2008).
Table 8.7 summarizes six fuzzy JELS models that have been introduced, with 
each fuzzy model representing an extension to a previously published JELS model.
8.4.4	 Single Period, Newsvendor Models
The newsvendor model is a single-period, probabilistic inventory model whose objec-
tive is to determine the order quantity that minimizes expected underage costs (costs 
due to shortage) and overage costs (costs due to holding inventory). Alternatively, 
the model can also be formulated to maximize expected profits. The interest in the 
newsvendor model is high with more than fifty papers published on applications of 
Table 8.5
Fuzzy Economic Production Quantity Model
Model Input Parameters
Model
Production 
Lot Size
Demand
Production
Setup 
Cost
Inventory Holding 
Cost
Lee and Yao (1998)
C
F
F
C
C
Chang (1999)
F
C
C
C
C
Lin and Yao (2000) 
F
C
C
C
C
Hsieh (2002)
  Model 1
C
F
F
F
F
  Model 2
F
F
F
F
F
Note: C = crisp (nonfuzzy) model parameter/attribute. F = fuzzy model parameter/attribute.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

186	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
the model in inventory control. A detailed review of the literature up to 1999 was 
conducted by Khouja (1999).
Fuzzy extensions to the newsvendor model are found in nine papers (see Table 8.8). 
Early papers (Petrovic et al., 1996; Ishii and Konno, 1998; Li et al., 2002) concen-
trated on using fuzzy numbers as an alternative to modeling demand as a random 
variable and for defining potentially imprecise cost-input parameters. Later papers 
(Kao and Hsu, 2002a; Dutta et al., 2005; Shao and Ji, 2006) concentrated on dem-
onstrating how specialized solution procedures from fuzzy set theory could be used 
Table 8.6
Extensions to the Fuzzy Economic Production Quantity Model
Model
Extension of Traditional EPQ 
Model
Fuzzy Model Attributes
Pappis and 
Karacapilidis 
(1995)
Extends the EPQ model to include 
multiple items using the common 
cycle method of Buffa and Sarin 
(1987). 
The optimal number of production runs for a 
set of products produced in a batch 
production environment is determined 
when the aggregate demand across all 
products is modeled as a fuzzy number.
Roy and Maiti 
(1997)
A demand-dependent unit cost and 
quantity-dependent setup cost are 
introduced subject to a constraint on 
storage capacity. The model is 
formulated for both single and 
multiple items.
The optimal production lot size is modeled 
and solved as a fuzzy mathematical 
programming model that minimizes the 
total cost of setup, holding, and production 
subject to a fuzzy storage capacity 
constraint.
Chang and 
Chang 
(2006)
Includes a production cost term and 
incorporates a unit cost structure 
that is lot-size dependent.
The production lot size, demand rate, 
production rate, and item unit cost are 
defined using fuzzy numbers.
Mandal and 
Roy (2006a)
Develops a multiple-item production 
lot sizing model were items of 
imperfect quality are subject to 
repair.
Production repair, setup, and holding costs 
are modeled as fuzzy numbers.
Chang et al. 
(2006) 
Extends the EPQ to include multiple 
items.
Item demands are defined as fuzzy numbers.
Chen et al. 
(2007)
Allows imperfect products that can 
be sold at a discount.
The production lot size and cost inputs of 
the model are defined using fuzzy numbers.
Islam and Roy 
(2007)
Formulates a multiple-item EPQ 
model with demand-dependent unit 
production costs and production 
process reliability subject to an 
inventory space constraint.
Production, inventory carrying, interest, and 
depreciation costs as well as the available 
storage space are modeled as fuzzy 
numbers.
Panda et al. 
(2008)
Incorporates fuzzy budget and shortage 
constraints to the multiproduct EPQ 
model with imperfect production.
The maximum value of the budgets for total 
production and screening costs, and for 
total shortage costs are defined as fuzzy 
numbers.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
187
to solve the fuzzy newsvendor problem. Most current papers (Yao et al., 2006; Dutta 
et al., 2007a; Dey and Chakraborty, 2008) investigate general extensions of the fuzzy 
newsvendor model into areas of cash management, multiple procurement opportuni-
ties, and resalable returns.
8.4.5	 Multiperiod Inventory Models
In real-world applications, inventory and production decisions are interdependent and 
temporal in nature. Fuzzy logic has been useful in formulating multiperiod lot sizing 
models. Table 8.9 provides an overview of fuzzy multiperiod inventory models.
8.4.6	 Multi-Item Inventory Models
Multi-item models make up a large number of fuzzy inventory models found in 
the literature. These models typically require advanced solution methodologies 
such as genetic algorithms, fuzzy simulation-based optimization, and fuzzy non-
linear programming. A summary of fuzzy multi-item inventory models is found in 
Table 8.10.
8.4.7	 Inventory Control Systems
The trade-offs associated with using continuous review versus periodic review 
inventory control systems are well addressed in the inventory literature (see, for 
example, Silver et al., 1998). The majority of inventory models reported in the fuzzy 
inventory literature have adopted a continuous review inventory control system (see 
Table 8.11).
Table 8.7
Fuzzy Joint Economic Lot Sizing Models
Fuzzy JELS 
Model
JELS Model 
Extended
Fuzzy Model Attributes
Lam and Wong 
(1996)
Dolan (1978)
Single and multiple incremental price discounts are modeled 
as fuzzy numbers.
Das et al. (2004a)
Yang and Wee 
(2000)
A fuzzy multiobjective model is developed for a deteriorating 
item that is subject to a price discount. A fuzzy goal 
programming methodology is used to solve the model.
Mahata et al. 
(2005)
Banerjee (1986)
The joint buyer–vendor lot size is modeled as a fuzzy 
number.
Ouyang et al. 
(2006)
Goyal and 
Nebebe (2002)
Defective items are introduced into the JELS formulation 
and modeled as a fuzzy number.
Yang (2007)
Yang (2006) 
The annual demand and adjustable production rate are 
modeled as fuzzy numbers.
Sinha and Sarmah 
(2008)
Sinha and Sarmah 
(2007) 
The annual demand as well as the order and holding costs of 
the buyer are modeled as fuzzy numbers.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

188	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Table 8.8
Fuzzy Newsvendor Models
Costs
Model
Demand
Purchase
Holding
Shortage
Key Model Attributes
Petrovic et al. 
(1996)
First to formulate a fuzzy newsvendor 
model. Presents two cost-minimization 
models that extend the classic discrete 
demand newsvendor inventory model.
  Model 1
F
C
C
C
  Model 2
C
C
F
F
Ishii and 
Konno (1998)
C
C
C
F
Profit maximization of the classic 
discrete demand newsvendor model.
Li et al. (2002)
Demand is modeled as a continuous 
fuzzy random variable in model 2.
  Model 1
C
C
F
F
  Model 2
F
C
C
C
Kao and Hsu 
(2002a)
F
C
C
C
Utilizes an area measurement solution 
index based on the fuzzy number 
ranking procedure of Yager (1981) to 
solve the fuzzy newsvendor model.
Dutta et al. 
(2005)
F
C
C
C
Demand is modeled as a continuous 
fuzzy random variable and the fuzzy 
newsvendor model is solved using the 
graded mean integration method of 
Chen and Hsiesh (1999).
Shao and Ji 
(2006)
F
C
C
C
Extends the newsvendor model with 
fuzzy demand to the multiproduct case 
under a profit maximization objective. 
A hybrid genetic algorithm/fuzzy 
simulation solution methodology is 
used to solve the model.
Yao et al. 
(2006)
F
C
C
C
Extends the cash management 
newsvendor model of Johnson and 
Montgomery (1974) to include fuzzy 
demand.
Dutta et al. 
(2007a)
F
C
C
C
Extends the fuzzy newsvendor model to 
accommodate two procurement 
opportunities within the single period 
horizon.
Dey and 
Chakraborty 
(2008)
F
C
C
C
Extends the resalable returns 
newsvendor model of Vlachos and 
Dekker (2003) to include fuzzy 
demand.
Note: C = crisp (nonfuzzy) model parameter/attribute. F = fuzzy model parameter/attribute.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
189
Table 8.9
Fuzzy Multiperiod Inventory Models
Model
Key Model Attributes
Sommer (1981)
Uses fuzzy dynamic programming to determine optimal inventory and 
production levels in a real-world integrated multiperiod inventory and 
production scheduling problem for an organization engaged in a planned 
withdrawal from a market.
Kacprzyk and 
Staniewski (1982)
Applies fuzzy set theory to determine an optimal aggregate inventory 
replenishment strategy subject to a set of long-term management objectives.
Lee et al. (1990)
Introduces fuzzy logic into material requirements planning (MRP) by 
defining period demand as a fuzzy number. A fuzzy part period balancing 
algorithm is developed.
Lee et al. (1991)
Extends their previous research on multiperiod fuzzy lot sizing and 
introduces fuzzy versions of the Wagner–Whitin and Silver–Meal lot sizing 
models.
Liu (1999)
Applies fuzzy decision making to investigate optimal inventory policy for a 
multiperiod inventory system with partial back orders.
Table 8.10
Fuzzy Multi-Item Inventory Models
Model
Key Model Attributes
Roy and Maiti 
(1998)
Formulates a multiobjective inventory model for multiple items subject to deterioration 
and with stock-dependent demand. The objectives of the model are maximizing profit 
and minimizing wastage cost. Fuzzy numbers are used to define the profit goal, 
wastage cost, and storage area.
Das et al. 
(2000)
Develops a multi-item inventory model with demand-dependent unit cost subject to 
fuzzy constraints on total storage area, shortage cost, and average inventory 
investment.
Yao et al. 
(2003)
Models the optimal ordering policy for two mutually complementary products when 
the item prices and order quantities are fuzzy.
Das et al. 
(2004b)
Formulates a multi-item stochastic inventory model with back orders and with 
demand-dependent unit costs subject to fuzzy budgetary and storage space 
constraints.
Mandal et al. 
(2005)
Develops a multi-item, multiobjective inventory model with shortages and demand-
dependent unit costs subject to fuzzy constraints on storage space, number of orders, 
and production cost. Inventory holding, order, and shortage costs are defined by 
fuzzy numbers.
Maiti and 
Maiti (2006)
Formulates a multi-item inventory model where item demand is dependent upon the 
selling price, frequency of advertisement, and displayed inventory level of the item. 
The objective of the model is to maximize profit subject to storage in two 
storehouses and investment constraints. Fuzzy numbers are used to define the 
storehouse capacity, the item purchase cost, and maximum inventory investment.
(Continued)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

190	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Table 8.10 (Continued)
Fuzzy Multi-Item Inventory Models
Model
Key Model Attributes
Mandal and 
Roy (2006b)
Introduces a multi-item inventory model for items that are displayed on two shelves 
(back room and front room) and item demand is a function of the displayed 
inventory level. The model objective determines the optimal display and order 
quantity of each item such that average profit is maximized. The available display 
area and item purchase, holding, shelf, and order costs are defined by fuzzy 
numbers.
Maiti and 
Maiti (2007b)
Formulates a multi-item inventory model for seasonal products where item demand is 
a linearly increasing function of time. Upon sale, items are governed by a bulk 
release pattern between the two warehouses. Item ordering costs and shortage costs 
are defined by fuzzy numbers.
Roy et al. 
(2007)
Develops a multi-item model to determine the optimal item production and inventory 
levels subject to fuzzy constraints on the maximum available storage space and the 
total budgetary capital.
Maiti (2008)
Presents a multi-item inventory model that includes inflation, the time value of 
money, and a bulk storage pattern over two warehouses. Item purchase costs, the 
maximum inventory investment, and the maximum storage at the source warehouse 
are defined by fuzzy numbers.
Table 8.11
Fuzzy Inventory Control Systems
Model
Type of Control 
System
Fuzzy Model Attributes
Gen et al. (1997)
Continuous 
review
Three models under fuzzy ordering, inventory holding, and 
shortage costs are considered: (1) crisp order quantity and 
reorder point, (2) fuzzy order quantity and crisp reorder 
point, and (3) crisp order quantity and fuzzy reorder point.
Katagiri and Ishii 
(2000) Katagiri 
and Ishii (2002)
Periodic review
Extends the optimal rotation and allocation model for 
perishable products of Nose et al. (1981) to include fuzzy 
shortage and outdating costs.
Petrovic and 
Petrovic (2001)
Continuous 
review, periodic 
review
Examines three inventory performance measures (fill rate, 
inventory holding cost, and regularity of replenishment) 
under both continuous and periodic review polices when 
annual demand is defined by a fuzzy number.
Samanta and 
Al-Araimi 
(2001)
Periodic review
Presents a fuzzy logic–based model for inventory control. 
Simulation is used to illustrate the inventory control 
capabilities of the model.
Ouyang and 
Chang (2001)
Continuous 
review
Extends the variable lead time and partial back-order model of 
Moon and Choi (1998) to have a fuzzy lost sales rate.
(Continued)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
191
Table 8.11 (Continued)
Fuzzy Inventory Control Systems
Model
Type of Control 
System
Fuzzy Model Attributes
Kao and Hsu 
(2002b)
Continuous 
review
Determines the optimal order quantity and reorder point when 
lead time demand is modeled with crisp lead time and fuzzy 
demand.
Ouyang and Yao 
(2002)
Continuous 
review
Implements a minimax distribution free solution procedure to 
determine the optimal order quantity and reorder point when 
lead time demand is modeled with variable lead time and 
fuzzy demand.
Ouyang and 
Chang (2002) 
Continuous 
review
Extends Ouyang and Chang (2001) by incorporating a 
minimax distribution-free-based solution procedure to 
determine the optimal fuzzy inventory strategy.
Pai and Hsu 
(2003)
Continuous 
review
Determines the optimal order quantity and reorder point when 
lead time demand and inventory holding cost are fuzzy 
numbers.
Chang et al. 
(2004) 
Continuous 
review
Extends the variable lead time model with back orders and lost 
sales of Ouyang et al. (1996) to include fuzzy lead time 
demand and a fuzzy back-order rate.
Dey et al. (2005)
Periodic review
Determines the optimal inventory policy for a multiobjective 
inventory model when lead time demand, and ordering, 
holding, and shortage costs are defined as fuzzy numbers.
Chang et al. 
(2006)
Continuous 
review
Extends Ouyang et al. (1996) to determine the optimal order 
quantity and lead time for fuzzy lead time demand and fuzzy 
annual demand.
Maiti and Maiti 
(2007a)
Continuous 
review
Formulates and solves, using a genetic algorithm, the optimal 
order quantity and reorder point variables for a warehouse 
inventory model with back orders when lead time demand is 
fuzzy.
Dutta et al. 
(2007b)
Continuous 
review
Determines the optimal order quantity and reorder point when 
lead time demand and annual demand are defined by fuzzy 
numbers.
Lin (2008) 
Periodic review
Extends the periodic review model with variable lead time of 
Ouyang and Chuang (2001) to include a fuzzy shortage 
quantity and fuzzy back-order rate.
Vijayan and 
Kumaran 
(2008)
Continuous 
review, periodic 
review
Optimal inventory policies are determined for models when 
the costs associated with ordering, holding, and shortage are 
jointly and individually defined by fuzzy numbers.
Tutuncu et al. 
(2008)
Continuous review
Introduces a decision support system to determine the optimal 
order quantity and reorder point when the costs of 
production, ordering, inventory holding, and storage are 
defined by fuzzy numbers.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

192	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
8.5	 Summary and Conclusions
This chapter has addressed an extensive literature review and survey of fuzzy set 
theory in inventory management. Eighty-three inventory models organized into 
seven general classes of inventory models have been reviewed. The emphasis in each 
review was to identify how fuzzy set theory was used in the formulation of the inven-
tory model.
The chapter has also provided a summary of published literature reviews on 
traditional inventory models. Issues concerning the parameterization of traditional 
inventory models were also discussed. It is against this landscape that researchers in 
inventory management may identify the potential benefits of using fuzzy set theory. 
This chapter should give researchers in inventory management new tools and ideas 
on how to approach modeling problems in inventory management. The chapter also 
provides a foundation for researchers currently engaged in research of fuzzy inven-
tory models, and hopefully may identify and stimulate new advancements in the 
application of fuzzy set theory to problems in inventory management.
References
Fuzzy Literature
Buckley, J. J. 2005. Fuzzy probabilities: New approach and applications. Berlin/Heidelberg: 
Springer.
Buckley, J. J., T. Feuring, and Y. Hayashi. 2002. Solving fuzzy problems in operations research: 
Inventory control. Soft Comput 7(2):121–129.
Chang, H.-C. 2003. Fuzzy opportunity cost for EOQ model with quality improvement invest-
ment. Int J Syst Sci 34(6):395–402.
Chang, H.-C. 2004. An application of fuzzy sets theory to the EOQ model with imperfect qual-
ity items. Comput Oper Res 31(12):2079–2092.
Chang, H.-C., J.-S. Yao, and L.-Y. Ouyang. 2004. Fuzzy mixture inventory model with vari-
able lead-time based on probabilistic fuzzy set and triangular fuzzy number. Math 
Comput Model 39(2/3):287–304.
Chang, H.-C., J.-S. Yao, and L.-Y. Ouyang. 2006. Fuzzy mixture inventory model involving 
fuzzy random variable lead time demand and fuzzy total demand. Eur J Oper Res 
169(1):65–80.
Chang, P.-T., and C.-H. Chang. 2006. An elaborative unit cost structure-based fuzzy economic 
production quantity model. Math Comput Model 43(11/12):1337–1356.
Chang, P.-T., M.-J. Yao, S.-F. Huang, and C.-T. Chen. 2006. A genetic algorithm for solving a 
fuzzy economic lot-size scheduling problem. Int J Prod Econ 102(2):265–288.
Chang, S.-C. 1999. Fuzzy production inventory for fuzzy product quantity with triangular 
fuzzy number. Fuzzy Set Syst 107(1):37–57.
Chang, S.-C., J.-S. Yao, and H.-M. Lee. 1998. Economic reorder point for fuzzy backorder 
quantity. Eur J Oper Res 109(1):183–202.
Chen, L.-H., and L.-Y. Ouyang. 2006. Fuzzy inventory model for deteriorating items with 
permissible delay in payment. Appl Math Comput 182(1):711–726.
Chen, S. H., and C. H. Hsieh. 1999. Graded mean integration representation of generalized 
fuzzy number. J Chin Fuzzy Syst Assoc 5:1–7.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
193
Chen, S. H., C.-C. Wang, and S. M. Chang. 2007. Fuzzy economic production quantity model 
for items with imperfect quality. Int J Innovat Comput Inform Contr 3(1):85–95.
Chen, S.-H., C.-C. Wang, and A. Ramer. 1996. Backorder fuzzy inventory model under func-
tion principle. Inform Sci 95(1/2):71–79.
Das, K., T. K. Roy, and M. Maiti. 2000. Multi-item inventory model with quantity- 
dependent inventory costs and demand-dependent unit cost under imprecise objec-
tive and restrictions: A geometric programming approach. Prod Plann Contr 11(8): 
781–788.
Das, K., T. K. Roy, and M. Maiti. 2004a. Buyer-seller fuzzy inventory model for a deteriorat-
ing item with discount. Int J Syst Sci 35(8):457–466.
Das, K., T. K. Roy, and M. Maiti. 2004b. Multi-item stochastic and fuzzy-stochastic inventory 
models under two restrictions. Comput Oper Res 31(11):1793–1806.
De, S. K., and A. Goswami. 2006. An EOQ model with fuzzy inflation rate and fuzzy deterio-
ration rate when a delay in payment is permissible. Int J Syst Sci 37(5):323–335.
Dey, J.-K., S. Kar, and M. Maiti. 2005. An interactive method for inventory control with fuzzy 
lead-time and dynamic demand. Eur J Oper Res 167(2):381–397.
Dey, O., and D. Chakraborty. 2008. A single-period inventory problem with resalable returns: 
A fuzzy stochastic approach. Int J Math Phys Eng Sci 1(1):8–15.
Dutta, P., D. Chakraborty, and A. R. Roy. 2005. A single-period inventory model with fuzzy 
random variable demand. Math Comput Model 41(8/9):915–922.
Dutta, P., D. Chakraborty, and A. R. Roy. 2007a. An inventory model for single-period 
products with reordering opportunities under fuzzy demand. Comput Math Appl 
53(10):1502–1517.
Dutta, P., D. Chakraborty, and A. R. Roy. 2007b. Continuous review inventory model in mixed 
fuzzy and stochastic environment. Appl Math Comput 188(1):970–980.
Gen, M., Y. Tsujimura, and D. Zheng. 1997. An application of fuzzy set theory to inventory 
control models. Comput Ind Eng 33(3/4):553–556.
Guiffrida, A. L., and R. Nagi. 1998. Fuzzy set theory applications in production management 
research: A literature review. J Intell Manuf 9(1):39–56.
Hsieh, C. H. 2002. Optimization of fuzzy production inventory models. Inform Sci 
146(1/4):29–40.
Ishii, H., and T. Konno. 1998. A stochastic inventory problem with fuzzy shortage cost. Eur J 
Oper Res 106(1):90–94.
Islam, S., and T. K. Roy. 2007. Fuzzy multi-item economic production quantity model under 
a space constraint: A geometric programming approach. Appl Math Comput 184(2): 
326–335.
Kacprzyk, J., and P. Staniewski. 1982. Long term inventory policy-making through fuzzy deci-
sion making. Fuzzy Set Syst 8:117–132.
Kao, C., and W.-K. Hsu. 2002a. A single period inventory model with fuzzy demand. Comput 
Math Appl 43(6/7):841–848.
Kao, C., and W.-K. Hsu. 2002b. Lot size-reorder point inventory model with fuzzy demands. 
Comput Math Appl 43(10/11):1291–1302.
Katagiri, H., and H. Ishii. 2000. Some inventory problems with fuzzy shortage cost. Fuzzy Set 
Syst 111(1):87–97.
Katagiri, H., and H. Ishii. 2002. Fuzzy inventory problems for perishable commodities. Eur J 
Oper Res 138(3):545–553.
Kaufmann, A., and M. M. Gupta. 1988. Fuzzy mathematical models in engineering and man-
agement science. Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Lam, S. M., and D. S. Wong. 1996. A fuzzy mathematical model for joint economic lot size 
problem with multiple price breaks. Eur J Oper Res 95(3):611–622.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

194	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Lee, H.-M., and J.-S. Yao. 1998. Economic production quantity for fuzzy demand quantity and 
fuzzy production quantity. Eur J Oper Res 109(1):203–211.
Lee, H.-M., and J.-S. Yao. 1999. Economic order quantity in fuzzy sense for inventory without 
backorder model. Fuzzy Set Syst 105(1):13–31.
Lee, Y. Y., B. A. Kramer, and C. L. Hwang. 1990. Part-period balancing with uncertainty: A 
fuzzy sets theory approach. Int J Prod Res 28(10):1771–1778.
Lee, Y. Y., B. A. Kramer, and C. L. Hwang. 1991. A comparative study of three lot-sizing 
methods for the case of fuzzy demand. Int J Oper Prod Manag 11(7):72–80.
Li, L., S. N. Kabadi, and K. P. K. Nair. 2002. Fuzzy models for single-period inventory prob-
lem. Fuzzy Set Syst 132(3):273–289.
Lin, D.-C., and J.-S. Yao. 2000. Fuzzy economic production for production inventory. Fuzzy 
Set Syst 111(3):465–495.
Lin, Y.-J. 2008. A periodic review inventory model involving fuzzy expected demand short and 
fuzzy backorder rate. Comput Ind Eng 54(3):666–676.
Liu, B. 1999. Fuzzy criterion models for inventory systems with partial backorders. Ann Oper 
Res 87:117–126.
Liu, S.-T. 2008. Fuzzy profit measures for a fuzzy economic order quantity model. Appl Math 
Model 32(10):2076–2086.
Mahata, G. C., and A. Goswami. 2007. An EOQ model for deteriorating items under trade 
credit financing in the fuzzy sense. Prod Plann Contr 18(8):681–692.
Mahata, G. C., A. Goswami, and D. K. Gupta. 2005. A joint economic-lot-size model for pur-
chaser and vendor in fuzzy sense. Comput Math Appl 50(10/12):1767–1790.
Maiti, M. K. 2008. Fuzzy inventory model with two warehouses under possibility measure on 
fuzzy goal. Eur J Oper Res 188(3):746–774.
Maiti, M. K., and M. Maiti. 2006. Fuzzy inventory model with two warehouses under possibil-
ity constraints. Fuzzy Set Syst 157(1):52–73.
Maiti, M. K., and M. Maiti. 2007a. Two-storage inventory model with lot-sizing dependent 
fuzzy lead-time under possibility constraints via genetic algorithm. Eur J Oper Res 
179(2):352–371.
Maiti, M. K., and M. Maiti. 2007b. Two-storage inventory model in a mixed environment. 
Fuzzy Optim Decis Making 6(4):391–426.
Mandal, N. K., and T. K. Roy. 2006a. Multi-item imperfect production lot size model with 
hybrid number cost parameters. Appl Math Comput 182(2):1219–1230.
Mandal, N. K., and T. K. Roy. 2006b. A displayed inventory model with L-R fuzzy number. 
Fuzzy Optim Decis Making 5(3):227–243.
Mandal, N. K., T. K. Roy, and M. Maiti. 2005. Multi-objective fuzzy inventory model with three 
constraints: A geometric programming approach. Fuzzy Set Syst 150(1):87–106.
Mondal, S., and M. Maiti. 2002. Multi-item fuzzy EOQ models using genetic algorithm. 
Comput Ind Eng 44(1):105–117.
Ouyang, L.-Y., and H.-C. Chang. 2001. The variable lead time stochastic inventory model with 
a fuzzy backorder rate. J Oper Res Soc Jpn 44(1):19–33.
Ouyang, L.-H., and H.-C. Chang. 2002. A minimax distribution free procedure for mixed 
inventory models involving variable lead time with fuzzy lot sales. Int. J Prod Econ 
76(1):1–12.
Ouyang, L.-Y., and J.-S. Yao. 2002. A minimax distribution free procedure for mixed inven-
tory model involving variable lead time with fuzzy demand. Comput Oper Res 29(5): 
471–487.
Ouyang, L.-Y., K.-S. Wu, and C.-H. Ho. 2006. Analysis of optimal vendor–buyer integrated inven-
tory policy involving defective items. Int J Adv Manuf Tech 29(11/12):1232–1245.
Pai, P.-F., and M.-M. Hsu. 2003. Continuous review reorder point problems in a fuzzy environ-
ment. Int J Adv Manuf Tech 22(5/6):436–440.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
195
Panda, D., S. Kar, K. Maity, and M. Maiti. 2008. A single period inventory model with imper-
fect production and stochastic demand under chance and imprecise constraints. Eur J 
Oper Res 188(1):121–139.
Pappis, C. P., and N. I. Karacapilidis. 1995. Lot size scheduling using fuzzy numbers. Int Trans 
Oper Res 2(2):205–212.
Park, K. S. 1987. Fuzzy-set theoretic interpretation of economic order quantity. IEEE Trans 
Syst Man Cybern Syst Hum 17(6):1082–1084.
Petrovic, D., R. Petrovic, and M. Vujosevic. 1996. Fuzzy models for the newsboy problem. Int 
J Prod Econ 45(1/3):435–441.
Petrovic, R., and D. Petrovic. 2001. Multicriteria ranking of inventory replenishment policies in 
the presence of uncertainty in customer demand. Int J Prod Econ 71(1/3):439–446.
Roy, A., S. Kar, and M. Maiti. 2008. A deteriorating multi-item inventory model with fuzzy 
costs and resources based on two different defuzzification techniques. Appl Math 
Model 32(2):208–223.
Roy, T. K., and M. Maiti. 1995. A fuzzy inventory model with constraint. OPSEARCH 32(4): 
287–298.
Roy, T. K., and M. Maiti. 1997. A fuzzy EOQ model with demand-dependent unit cost under 
limited storage capacity. Eur J Oper Res 99(2):425–432.
Roy, T. K., and M. Maiti. 1998. Multi-objective inventory models of deteriorating items with 
some constraints in a fuzzy environment. Comput Oper Res 25(12):1085–1095.
Samanta, B., and S. A. Al-Araimi. 2001. An inventory control model using fuzzy logic. Int J 
Prod Econ 73(3):217–226.
Shao, Z., and X. Ji . 2006. Fuzzy multi-product constraint newsboy problem. Appl Math 
Comput 180(1):7–15.
Sinha, S., and S. P. Sarmah. 2008. An application of fuzzy set theory for supply chain coordi-
nation. Int J Manag Sci Eng Manag 3(1):19–32.
Sommer, G. 1981. Fuzzy inventory scheduling. In Applied systems and cybernetics, vol. VI, 
edited G. Lasker, 3052–3060. New York: Pergamon Press.
Tutuncu, G. Y., O. Akoz, A. Apaydin, and D. Petrovic. 2008. Continuous review inventory 
control in the presence of fuzzy costs. Int J Prod Econ 113(2):775–784.
Vijayan, T., and M. Kumaran. 2008. Inventory models with a mixture of backorders and lost 
sales under fuzzy cost. Eur J Oper Res 189(1):105–119.
Vujosevic, M., D. Petrovic, and R. Petrovic. 1996. EOQ formula when inventory cost is fuzzy. 
Int J Prod Econ 45(1/3):499–504.
Wang, X., W. Tang, and R. Zhao. 2007. Fuzzy economic order quantity inventory models 
without backordering. Tsinghua Sci Tech 12(1):91–96.
Wu, K., and J.-S. Yao. 2003. Fuzzy inventory with backorder for fuzzy order quantity and 
fuzzy shortage quantity. Eur J Oper Res 150(2):320–352.
Yadavalli, V. S. S., M. Jeeva, and R. Rajagopalan. 2005. Multi-item deterministic fuzzy inven-
tory model. Asia Pac J Oper Res 22(3):287–295.
Yager, R. R. 1981. A procedure for ordering fuzzy subsets of the unit interval. Inform Sci 24: 
143–161.
Yang, M. F. 2006. A two-echelon inventory model with fuzzy annual demand in a supply 
chain. J Inform Optim Sci 27(3):537–550.
Yang, M. F. 2007. Optimal strategy for the integrated buyer-vendor model fuzzy annual 
demand and fuzzy adjustable production rate. J Appl Sci 7(7):1025–1029.
Yao, J.-S., S.-C. Chang, and J.-S. Su. 2000. Fuzzy inventory without backordered for fuzzy 
order quantity and fuzzy total demand quantity. Comput Oper Res 27(10):935–962.
Yao, J.-S., M.-S. Chen, and H.-F. Lu. 2006. A fuzzy stochastic single-period model for cash 
management. Eur J Oper Res 170(1):72–90.
Yao, J.-S., and J. Chiang. 2003. Inventory without backorder with fuzzy total cost and fuzzy stor-
ing cost defuzzified by centroid and signed distance. Eur J Oper Res 148(2): 401–409.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

196	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Yao, J.-S., and H.-M. Lee. 1996. Fuzzy inventory with backorder for fuzzy order quantity. 
Inform Sci 93(3/4):283–319.
Yao, J.-S., and H.-M. Lee. 1999. Fuzzy inventory with or without backorder for fuzzy order 
quantity with trapezoid fuzzy number. Fuzzy Set Syst 105(3):311–337.
Yao, J.-S., L.-Y. Ouyang, and H.-C. Chang. 2003. Models for a fuzzy inventory of two replace-
able merchandises without backorder based on the signed distance of fuzzy sets. Eur 
J Oper Res 150(3):601–616.
Yao, J.-S., and J.-S. Su. 2000. Fuzzy inventory with backorder for fuzzy total demand based 
on interval-valued fuzzy set. Eur J Oper Res 124(2):390–408.
Zadeh, L. A. 1965. Fuzzy sets. Inform Contr 8(3):338–353.
Nonfuzzy Literature
Aggarwal, S. C. 1974. A review of current inventory theory and its application. Int J Prod Res 
12(4):443–482.
Anderson, E. T., G. J. Fitzsimons, and D. Simester. 2006. Measuring and mitigating the costs 
of stockouts. Manag Sci 52(11):1751–1763.
Arrow, K., T. Harris, and J. Marschak. 1951. Optimal inventory policy. Econometrica 
19(3):250–272.
Badinelli, R. D. 1986. Optimal safety stock investment through subjective evaluation of stock-
out costs. Decis Sci 17(3):312–328.
Banerjee, A. 1986. A joint economic-lot-size model for purchaser and vendor. Decis Sci 
17(3):292–311.
Ben-Daya, M., M. Darwish, and K. Ertogral. 2008. The joint economic lot sizing model: 
Review and extensions. Eur J Oper Res 185(2):726–742.
Benton, W. C., and S. Park. 1996. A classification of literature on determining the lot size 
under quantity discounts. Eur J Oper Res 92(2):219–238.
Berling, P. 2008. Holding cost determination: An activity-based cost approach. Int J Prod 
Econ 112(2):829–840.
Biggs, J. B., E. A. Thies, and J. R. Sisak. 1990. The cost of ordering. Journal J Purch Mater 
Manag 26(3):30–36.
Bock, R. H. 1964. Measuring cost parameters in inventory models. Manag Tech 4(1):59–66.
Bramson, M. J. 1962. The variable lead-time problem in inventory control: A survey of the 
literature, Part I. Oper Res 13(1):41–35.
Brown, R. M. 1985. On carrying costs and the EOQ model: A pedagogical note. Financ Rev 
20(4):357–360.
Brown, R. M., T. E. Conine, and M. Tamarkin. 1986. A note of holding costs and lot-size 
errors. Decis Sci 17(4):603–610.
Buffa, E. S., and R. K. Sarin. 1987. Production/operations management. New York: Wiley 
& Sons.
Campbell, R. J., and L. J. Rankin. 1998. What customer orders really cost. Mid Am J Bus 
13(1):41–47.
Chang, Y. S., and P. Niland. 1967. A model for measuring stock depletion costs. Oper Res 
15(3):427–447.
Chitgopekar, S. S. 1990. Sensitivity analysis of the EOQ model with planned shortages. 
OPSEARCH 27(2):102–108.
Coopersmith, J. 1990. The cost of fulfillment. Catalog Age 7(11):111–114.
Denicoff, A. M., J. P. Fennell, and H. Solomon. 1960. Summary of a method for determining 
the military worth of spare parts. Nav Res Logist Q 7(3):221–234.
Dobson, G. 1988. Sensitivity of the EOQ model to parameter estimates. Oper Res 36(4): 
570–574.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Fuzzy Inventory Models	
197
Dolan, R. J. 1978. A normative model of industrial buyer response to quantity discounts. In 
Research frontiers in marketing: Dialogues and directions, edited by S. C. Jain, 121–
125. Chicago: American Marketing Association.
Dworetzky, A., J. Kiefer, and J. Wolfowitz, 1952a. The inventory problem: I. Case of known 
distribution of demand. Econometrica 20(2):187–222.
Dworetzky, A., J. Kiefer, and J. Wolfowitz. 1952b. The inventory problem: II. Case of unknown 
distribution of demand. Econometrica 20(3):450–466.
Eilon, S. 1956. Economic lot sizes in batch production. Engineering 182(4729):522­–523.
Gardner, E. S. 1980. Inventory management and the gods of Olympus. Interfaces 10(4): 
42–45.
Goyal, S. K., and B. C. Giri. 2001. Recent trends in modeling of deteriorating inventory. Eur 
J Oper Res 134(1):1–16.
Goyal, S. K., and F. Nebebe. 2000. Determination of economic production-shipment policy for 
a single-vendor–single-buyer system. Eur J Oper Res 121(1):175–178.
Guiffrida, A. L., and T. Papp. 2008. On the robust properties of the economic order quantity 
model. Proc of the Int Acad of Bus and Econ, Las Vegas, 20–22.
Harris, F. 1913. How many parts to make at once. Factory Mag Manag 10(2):136–152.
Jamal, A. M. M., B. B. Sarkar, and S. Wang. 1997. An ordering policy for deteriorating items 
with allowable shortage and permissible delay in payment. J Oper Res Soc 48(8): 
826–833.
Johnson, L., and D. Montgomery. 1974. Operations research in production planning, schedul-
ing and inventory control. New York: Wiley & Sons.
Jordan, H. H. 2008. Calculating the true cost of inventory. APICS- Perform Advantage 
(February):58–61.
Karr, H. W. 1958. A method of estimating spare-part essentiality. Nav Res Logist Q 5(1): 
29–42.
Kennedy, W. J., J. W. Patterson, and L. D. Fredendall. 2002. An overview of recent literature 
on spare parts inventory. Int J Prod Econ 76(2):210–215.
Khouja, M. 1999. The single period (news-vendor) problem: Literature review and sugges-
tions for future research. Omega 27(5):537–553.
Kim, S.-K. 1991. An analysis of inventory stockout models. PhD thesis, Pennsylvania State Univ.
Lambert, D. M. 1975. The development of an inventory costing methodology: A study of the 
costs associated with holding inventory. PhD thesis, Ohio State Univ.
Lambert, D., M. Bennion, and J. Taylor. 1990. The small order problem. Manag Decis 
28(3):39–45.
Lowe, T. J. and L. B. Schwarz. 1983. Parameter estimation for the EOQ lot size model: 
Minimax and expected value choices. Nav Res Logist Q 30(2):367–376.
Malucci, L. J. 2008. What is the order cost. APICS Magazine (March/April):12.
Minner, S. 2003. Multiple-supplier inventory models in supply chain management: A review. 
Int J Prod Econ 81–82:265–279.
Moon, I., and S. Choi. 1998. A note on lead time and distributional assumptions in continuous 
review inventory models. Comput Oper Res 25(11):1007–1012.
Nahmias, S. 1978. Inventory models. In Encyclopedia of computer science and technology, 
edited by J. Belzer, A. G. Hlzman, and A. Kent, 447–483. New York: Marcel Dekker.
Nahmias, S. 1982. Perishable inventory theory: A review. Oper Res 30(4):680–708.
Nose, T., H. Ishii, and T. Nishida. 1981. Some properties of perishable inventory control sub-
ject to stochastic lead-time. J Oper Res Soc Jpn 24:110–135.
Oral, M., M. S. Salvador, A. Reisman, and B.V. Dean. 1972. On the evaluation of shortage 
costs for inventory control of finished goods. Manag Sci 18(6):B-344–B-351.
Ouyang, L. Y., and B. R. Chuang. 2001. A periodic review inventory-control system with vari-
able lead time. Int J Inform Manag Sci 12(1):1–13.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

198	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Ouyang, L. Y., N. C. Yeh, and K. S. Wu. 1996. Mixture inventory model with backorders and 
lost sales for variable lead time. J Oper Res Soc 47(6):829–832.
Peterson, R., and E. Silver. 1979. Decision systems for inventory management and production 
planning. New York: Wiley.
Porteus, E. L. 1986. Optimal lot sizing, process quality improvement and set up cost reduction. 
Oper Res 34(1):137–144.
Raafat, F. 1991. Survey of literature on continuously deteriorating inventory models. J Oper 
Res Soc 42(1):27–37.
Reid, R. A., C. Huth, and D. N. Bryson. 1984. Inventory cost determination: A public sector 
challenge. J Purch Mater Manag 20(4):27–31.
Reuter, V. C. 1978. The big gap in inventory management. J Purch Mater Manag 14(3): 
17–22.
Salameh, M. K., and M. Y. Jaber. 2000. Economic production quantity model for items with 
imperfect quality. Int J Prod Econ 64(1–3):59–64.
Schary, P. B., and M. Christopher. 1979. The anatomy of a stock-out. J Retailing 
55(2):59–70.
Schwartz, B. L. 1966. A new approach to stockout penalties. Manag Sci 12(12): 
B-538– B-544.
Silver, E. A. 1981. Operations research in inventory management: A review and critique. Oper 
Res 29(4):628–645.
Silver, E. A. 2008. Inventory management: An overview, Canadian publications, practical 
applications and suggestions for future research. INFOR 46(1):15–28.
Silver, E. A., D. F. Pyke, and R. Peterson. 1998. Inventory management and production plan-
ning and scheduling. New York: Wiley.
Sinha, S., and S. P. Sarmah. 2007. Buyer–vendor coordination through quantity discount pol-
icy under asymmetric cost information. Proc IEEE Int Conf Ind Eng and Eng Manag, 
1558–1562.
Starr, M. K., and D. W. Miller. 1962. Inventory control and practice. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Urban, T. 2005. Inventory models with inventory-level-dependent demand: A comprehensive 
review and unifying theory. Eur J Oper Res 162(3):792–804.
Vlachos, D., and R. Dekker. 2003. Return handling options and order quantities for single 
period products. Eur J Oper Res 151(1):38–52.
Wagner, H. M. 1969. Principles of operations research, with applications to managerial deci-
sions. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Wagner, H. M. 1980. Research portfolio for inventory management and production planning 
systems. Oper Res 28(3):445–475.
Walter, C. K., and J. R. Grabner. 1975. Stockout cost models: Empirical tests in a retail situa-
tion. J Market 39(3):56–68.
Williams, B. D., and T. Tokar. 2008. A review of inventory management research in major 
logistics journals. Int J Logist Manag 19(2):212–232.
Yang, P., and H. Wee. 2000. Economic ordering policy of deteriorated item for vendor and 
buyer: An integrated approach. Prod Plann Contr 11(5):474–480.
Yu, G. 1997. Robust economic order quantity models. Eur J Oper Res 100(3):482–493.
Zanakis, S. H., L. M. Austin, D. C. Nowading, and E. A. Silver. 1980. From teaching to imple-
menting inventory management: Problems of translation. Interfaces 10(6):103–110.
Zangwill, W. I. 1987. From EOQ towards ZI. Manag Sci 33(10):1209–1221.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

199
9 Modeling Hidden Costs 
of Inventory Systems
A Thermodynamic Approach
Mohamad Y. Jaber
Ryerson University
Toronto, Ontario
9.1	 Introduction
The earliest inventory model that is available in the literature is the economic order 
quantity (EOQ) model developed by Harris (1913). Since its introduction, Harris’s 
model has been the basis for many models in inventory management, supply chain 
management, and reverse logistics. The popularity of the EOQ model has been rec-
ognized by both academics and practitioners (e.g., Osteryoung et al. 1986). Some 
of the positive features attributed to the popularity of the EOQ model are its simple 
mathematics and the insensitivity of the total cost to changes in the order quan-
tity (batch size). Despite its popularity, the EOQ model has been criticized by some 
Contents
9.1	
Introduction...................................................................................................199
9.2	
Thermodynamics and Operations Research..................................................201
9.3	
The Laws of Thermodynamics and the Concept of Entropy.........................202
9.3.1	 Basis for the Model............................................................................202
9.3.2	 Commodity Flow Function................................................................203
9.3.3	 Entropy and Its Cost..........................................................................204
9.4	
A Price-Driven Economic Order Quantity Model........................................205
9.5	
Extensions and Applications..........................................................................208
9.5.1	 Inventory Management......................................................................208
9.5.2	 Supply Chain Management................................................................ 210
9.5.3	 Reverse Logistics............................................................................... 211
9.6	
A Price-Quality Driven Economic Order Quantity Model........................... 213
9.7	
Summary and Conclusions............................................................................ 215
References............................................................................................................... 216
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

200	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
researchers on the basis that its assumptions are never met (e.g., Woolsey 1988). 
Some of these works are reviewed next.
Adkins (1984) observed that the application of EOQ in some firms led to results 
that ranged from disappointing to disastrous. Selen and Wood (1987) cautioned that 
substantial miscalculations or misinterpretations during parameter input (most spe-
cifically the holding cost and the order cost) determination often led to poor results. 
Woolsey (1988) severely critiqued using the EOQ model to the extent that he wrote: 
“If you continue to love and use the EOQ without knowing what it is costing you, I 
can only suggest that you deserve each other” (p. 72). Jones (1991) cautioned that 
most accountants fail to identify relevant costs in a system and, consequently, most 
manufacturers who use the EOQ formula to minimize relevant annual costs will cal-
culate a lot size higher than what it would be if the model were employed correctly.
Therefore, the common cost parameters used in the EOQ model are aggregated 
costs, particularly the ordering cost, holding cost, and shortage cost, and some of 
their components are difficult to estimate, so the results obtained may be misleading. 
For example, the holding cost may include all (or some) of the following: cost of 
money tied up that is either borrowed (on which interest is paid) or could be put to 
other use (in which case there are opportunity costs); storage cost (supplying a ware-
house, rent rates, heat, light, etc.); loss (due to damage, pilferage, and obsolescence); 
handling (including all movement, special packaging, refrigeration, putting on pal-
lets, etc.); administration (stock checks, computer updates, etc.); insurance; and taxes 
(Waters 2003). In addition to the usual reported costs, there are hidden costs associ-
ated with production/inventory systems that are not usually accounted for (Ullmann 
1982; Pendlebury and Platford 1988; Gooley 1995; Crusoe et al. 1999; Konar and 
Cohen 2001; Fisher and Siburg 2003; Callioni et al. 2005).
In recent years, there has been a call by a few researchers in the field to think 
outside the box of classical inventory management (e.g., Sprague 2002; Bonney 
et al. 2003; Chikán 2007). This may result in researchers attempting to bridge their 
fields with others to gain insight into their own, benefiting from the synergies of such 
processes. For example, some researchers in the discipline of operations research 
management science have applied Shannon’s (1948) information theory and entropy 
approaches to account for disorder when modeling the behavior of production or 
supply systems (e.g., Karp and Ronen 1992; Ronen and Karp 1994; McCarthy et al. 
2000). However, few have applied classical thermodynamics reasoning to modeling 
such systems. For example, Jaber et al. (2004) postulated that the behavior of produc-
tion systems very much resembles that of physical systems. Such a parallel suggests 
that improvements to production systems may be achievable by applying the first and 
second laws of thermodynamics to reduce system entropy (or disorder). Jaber et al. 
(2004) introduced the concept of entropy cost to account for hidden and difficult-to-
estimate costs associated with inventory systems. This chapter will discuss the works 
along this line of research, and will propose a future research direction.
The remainder of this chapter is organized as follows. Section 9.2 provides a 
review of the literature for those works that bridged thermodynamics and operations 
research/management science. Section 9.3 provides a background to the principles 
of the thermodynamics of commodity flow systems. Section 9.4 provides the math-
ematics for applying the laws of thermodynamics to the economic order quantity 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
201
model. Section 9.5 discusses some of the recent extensions and applications of the 
model presented in Section 9.4. Section 9.6 extends the basic model presented in 
Section 9.4 by modeling the commodity flow function (or demand) to be dependent 
on price and quality rather than on price alone as in Section 9.4. Section 9.7 sum-
marizes and concludes this chapter.
9.2	 Thermodynamics and Operations Research
Operations research (OR) has always been synonymous with management science, 
with the names being interchangeable (e.g., Barish 1963). OR tools, such as opti-
mization, queuing theory, game theory, decision analysis, and simulation, are being 
applied to solve real-world problems in inventory theory, supply chain and logistics 
management, production planning, scheduling, and so forth.
Researchers have been using OR tools to analyze and design more efficient and 
productive systems. However, few researchers started thinking of such systems as 
being analogous to physical systems (Goodeve 1953; Wilson 1970), while others 
attempted to bridge the two disciplines. Drechsler (1965) was the first who attempted 
to show how the “law of disorder” or the “second law of thermodynamics” (or 
entropy) influenced management thinking. The second law of thermodynamics sug-
gests that every system, left unto itself, tends toward disorder (Drechsler 1968), 
which frequently appears in the form of queues of materials waiting to be processed, 
machines waiting for service, finished products waiting for customers, and so forth. 
Drechsler (1968) applied the law of disorder to analyze complex-decision-type sys-
tems where he modeled a decision tree similar to a steam-power generation plant 
using a thermodynamic analogy. Samaras (1973) argued that the effects of entropy 
include common problems of inefficiency and related elements such as higher costs, 
lower outputs, greater wastes, and lower profits. Entropy effects also include a low-
ered capability to adapt to changes in the world, low morale, and loss of motiva-
tion and business failure. Tyler (1989) presented a model of manpower systems 
and suggested that entropy can be evaluated from the tenure profiles of manpower 
systems.
This research interest, although slow, continued in recent years. Whewell (1997) 
argued that logistical processes for supply chains are as significant as are the laws 
of thermodynamics for technologists. By making parallels between a logistic system 
and a thermodynamic system, his analysis suggests that suppliers must give their 
customers increased choice, flexibility, and value from the service they provide if 
they want to win a larger market share from competitors. Harris (1999) argued that 
the second law of thermodynamics works. It helps understand the need to achieve 
higher availability; that is, to keep more customers coming back by having better ser-
vice on less-costly items. Chen (1999) matched elements of the business process to 
components of thermodynamics, and compared the managerial functions of a socio-
economic system to the thermodynamic behavior of the physical universe. Two laws 
of the business process based on those of thermodynamics were derived. The first law 
states the conservation of resources. Losses in the process, which consume resources 
and erode system productivity, have been discussed. The second law discusses the 
governing principle that makes the output of a system acceptable to customers. Tseng 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

202	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
(2004) applied the first and second laws of thermodynamics to constrain the pro-
cesses by which raw materials are transformed into consumable goods and these 
goods are distributed afterward. He suggested that the size of the sales force can be 
determined by introducing the concept of temperature from thermodynamics to rep-
resent the flow (demand) of goods as hot (high) or cold (low).
More recently, Jaber et al. (2004) postulated that the behavior of production sys-
tems very much resembles that of physical systems. Such a parallel suggests that 
improvements to production systems may be achievable by applying the first and 
second laws of thermodynamics to reduce system entropy (or disorder). The EOQ 
and just-in-time (JIT) models were used to demonstrate the applicability of these 
laws. Along the same line of research, several models have been developed by the 
authors in inventory management, supply chain management, and reverse logistics. 
These works will be discussed in Section 9.5.
9.3	 The Laws of Thermodynamics 
and the Concept of Entropy
Thermodynamics is a branch of physics that deals with the energy and work of a 
system, the transfer of energy between the system and its surrounding, and the con-
version of energy from one form to another. Temperature, volume, pressure, and 
chemical composition are the properties that define a thermodynamic system. A ther-
modynamic system is said to be in equilibrium when the values for these properties 
remain unchanged over time. Mainly, there are two laws (the first and the second) of 
thermodynamics that govern the creation of energy and its flow that are of interest 
here. For more details, the textbook on thermodynamics by Cengel and Boles (2002) 
is recommended.
9.3.1	 Basis for the Model
The first law of thermodynamics states that energy is conserved, that is, energy can-
not be created or destroyed. Energy can be added to a thermodynamic system from 
a high-temperature reservoir or lost to a low-temperature sink by a heat (work) pro-
cess. The internal energy of a thermodynamic system is the amount added by heat-
ing (dQ) minus the amount lost by doing work (dW) on the system. This difference, 
dU = dQ – dW, is the internal energy of a thermodynamic system that is associated 
with the random, disordered motion of molecules. Analogously, if heat were money, 
then one could say that a change in savings (dU) is equal to the money deposited (dQ) 
minus the money withdrawn or spent (dW).
The second law of thermodynamics places constraints upon the direction of the 
flow of heat between the system and its surrounding. It suggests that it is not pos-
sible for a device to operate in a cycle receiving heat and producing a net equivalent 
amount of work; and that it is not possible for a device to operate in a cycle and 
produce no effect other than the transfer of heat from a lower-temperature reservoir 
to a higher-temperature reservoir. The second law of thermodynamics is always asso-
ciated with the concept of entropy, which is a measure of the amount of energy that 
is unavailable to do work (wasted energy) or a measure of the disorder of a system. 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
203
The second law of thermodynamics also suggests that the entropy tends to increase 
with time, that is, entropy is an arrow of time itself. The change in entropy over time, 
dS/dt, is represented as the heat added or removed over time, dQ/dt, divided by the 
temperature, that is, dS/dt = (dQ/dt)/T or dS = dQ/T.
A thermodynamic system is defined by its properties, which are temperature, vol-
ume, pressure, and chemical composition. Analogous to a thermodynamic system, 
a production system could be described by its characteristics too, which are price 
and quality of a commodity. For example, reducing (increasing) the price (tempera-
ture) of a commodity (energy) below (above) the market price (surrounding tem-
perature) conceptually increases customers’ demand (energy flows from a high- to a 
low-temperature reservoir), and produces a commodity flow (sales) from the system 
to its surrounding (market). Part of the work done on the system to generate this 
flow of commodity is wasted in accordance with the second law of thermodynam-
ics. Figure 9.1 shows some of the commodity flows (sales) to the market that are 
converted to revenue (equivalent to useful work) and wasted work (hidden cost) that 
result from this flow process.
9.3.2	 Commodity Flow Function
When work is done on a thermodynamic system, the system goes through a change 
in its state (e.g., increase in temperature), and a certain flow ensues to the system’s 
surrounding (which is at a lower temperature). Analogously, in a production system 
the price is reduced below the market equilibrium value ensuing a flow of the com-
modity to the market. The commodity flux, or demand rate (r(t)), is synonymous to 
the energy transferred,  &Q = dQ/dt = C(Ts − T), in a thermodynamic system, where C 
is the thermal capacity, Ts is the system temperature, and T is the temperature of the 
surrounding. The demand rate, r(t), is then given as
	
r t
K P t
P t
( )
( ( )
( ))
= −
−
0
	
(9.1)
where P0 (t) is the market equilibrium price at time t, P(t) is the unit price at time t, 
and K (analogous to a thermal capacity) is the change in the flux for a change in the 
Waste
Production/inventory system 
Market 
r(t) = –K(P(t) –P0(t))
Figure 9.1  Flow of commodity from the system to the market.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

204	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
price (P(t) – P0(t)) of a commodity, and is measured in additional units per year per 
change in unit price, e.g., units/year/$. Equation 9.1 is also similar in form to excess 
demand functions discussed in mathematical economics literature (e.g., Arrow and 
Debreu 1954; Uzawa 1960).
The operations management literature (which includes operations research/ 
management science) advocates that a firm wishing to acquire a market share for its 
product may follow one of the following strategies: (1) the firm provides the same 
quality product as its competitor at a lower price, (2) the firm provides a better quality 
product than its competitor for the same price, or (3) perhaps, a firm adopts an aggres-
sive policy by providing a better quality product than its competitor at a lower price.
Jaber et al. (2004) adopted the first strategy as described in Equation 9.1, where 
P(t) < P0 (t) for every t ∈ [0,T], where T is the inventory cycle time; a strategy of 
increasing commodity flow. With this strategy, the equilibrium price P0 (t) – P0 is a 
constant for every t ∈ [0,T], and P (t) is a monotonically decreasing function over the 
specified interval, that is, P′ (t) < 0 and P′′ (t) > 0 for every t ∈ [0,T]. This strategy is 
assumed to increase customers’ demand, that is, r(t) increases over the interval [0,T] 
as a result of the price discounts (P (t) − P0 (t) < 0).
9.3.3	 Entropy and Its Cost
Heat, or energy, can never pass spontaneously from a cold to a hot body. Work needs 
to be done on the system to allow energy to transfer. This transfer has one direction as 
the process is irreversible. A parallel could be drawn for a supply system. For exam-
ple, a supplier that seeks to increase its share of the market will attempt to increase 
and sustain customer satisfaction relative to its competitors, and/or attempt to reduce 
costs associated with providing the same level of satisfaction (Whewell 1997, 18). 
Whewell (1997) advocates that changes to improve customer satisfaction can alter 
the established practices in at least one part of the supply process. Such changes can 
create disorder (entropy) and the costs associated with it are difficult to quantify.
Note that when P (t) − P0 (t), the direction of the commodity flow is from the sys-
tem to its surrounding, that is, from a high-temperature reservoir (lower price) to a 
lower-temperature reservoir (higher market equilibrium price). The entropy genera-
tion rate must satisfy (Cengel and Boles 2002)
	
S t
d
t
dt
r t
P t
P t
K
P t
P
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
=
=
−
+



=
σ
1
1
0
0
0
2
( )
( )
( )
t
P t
P t
+
−




	
(9.2)
where r (t) is given from Equation 9.1, s (t) is the total entropy generated by time t, 
and S(t) is the rate at which entropy is generated over time. The total demand in a 
cycle of duration T, D(T), is taken from Equation 9.1 as
	
D T
r t dt
K P t
P t dt
T
T
( )
( )
( ( )
( ))
=
=
−
−
∫
∫
0
0
0
	
(9.3)
where D(T) is measured in units and it is the lot size quantity, that is, Q = D(T), if all 
units are of good quality and if shortages do not occur. Similarly, the total entropy 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
205
generated in a cycle of duration T, s (T), is taken from Equation 9.2 as
	
σ( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
T
S t dt
K
P t
P t
P t
P t
T
=
=
+
−




∫
0
0
0
2
0
T
dt
∫
	
(9.4)
Then the entropy cost per cycle, E(T), is given by dividing the expression in Equation 
9.3 by that in Equation 9.4 to get
	
E T
D T
T
K P t
P t dt
K
T
P t
P t
( )
( )
( )
( ( )
( ))
( )
( )
=
=
−
−
∫
σ
0
0
0
+
−
(
)
∫
P t
P t
T
dt
0
2
0
( )
( )
	
(9.5)
where E(T) is measured in dollars.
9.4	 A Price-Driven Economic Order Quantity Model
A typical inventory model will relate the total cost of operating the system to 
surplus (holding) cost, shortage (lost sales or back order) cost, and initiation (i.e., 
ordering, setup, and planning) cost (e.g., Bonney 1994). The EOQ model cost 
function is the sum of two conflicting costs, which are the holding, HC(T), and the 
order, A, costs per cycle of length T. In the EOQ model, the stock of a commod-
ity is replenished every T units of time by Q units. These Q units are depleted at 
a rate of r(T), with the inventory level at time t, I(t), and is taken from Equations 
9.1 and 9.3 as
	
I t
Q
r t dt
D T
K P y
P y dy
t
t
( )
( )
( )
( ( )
( ))
=
−
=
−
−
−
∫
∫
0
0
0
	
(9.6)
Note that I(0) = D(T) and I(T)= 0, where t ∈ [0,T]. The total cost per cycle for an 
EOQ model is given as
	
C T
A
HC T
A
h
I t dt
A
h
D T
K P y
P
T
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ( )
=
+
=
+
=
+
−
−
−
∫0
0
0
0
( ))
y dy
dt
t
T
∫
∫




	
	
(9.7)
where h is the holding cost per unit per unit of time. The unit time cost function is 
given by dividing Equation 9.7 by T to get
 
c T
C T
T
A
HC T
T
A
T
h
T
D T
K P y
P y
( )
( )
( )
( )
( ( )
( )
=
=
+
=
+
−
−
−
0
)dy
dt
t
T
0
0
∫
∫




	
(9.8)
As discussed earlier, there is no doubt that the proper estimation of the EOQ 
model input parameters—order cost, carrying (holding) cost, and the demand 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

206	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
rate—is essential for producing reliable results. To address this problem, Jaber 
et al. (2004) proposed accounting for an additional cost, the entropy cost in Equation 
9.5, when analyzing EOQ systems. Therefore, Equation 9.8, after adding Equation 
9.5, is written as
     
ψ( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
T
c T
E T
T
C T
T
A
HC T
E T
T
A
T
h
T
K
=
+
=
=
+
+
=
+
−
( ( )
( ))
( ( )
( ))
P t
P t dt
K P y
P y dy
T
t
−
−
−
−




∫
∫
0
0
0
0

+
−
−
+
∫
∫
dt
K P t
P t dt
TK
T
T
P t
P t
P
0
0
0
0
  
( ( )
( ))
( )
( )
0
2
0
( )
( )
t
P t
T
dt
−
(
)
∫
	
(9.9)
The EOQ model assumes a constant demand rate, that is, r = r(t) where t ∈ [0,∝), 
which implies that Equation 9.1 reduces to r
K P
P
= −
−
(
)
0 such that P < P0. This 
assumption reduces Equation 9.8 to
	
c T
A
T
hr T
( ) =
+
2 	
(9.10)
whose optimal solution is T
A hr
* =
2 /
, or equivalently Q
Ar h
* =
2
/ , which are the 
optimal cycle time and the optimal order quantity (lot size), respectively. Similarly, 
Equation 9.5 reduces to
	
E T
D T
T
K P
P dt
K
dt
T
P
P
P
P
( )
( )
( )
(
)
=
=
−
−
+
−
(
)
∫
σ
0
0
0
0
0
2
T
PP
P
P
∫
= −
−
0
0
	
(9.11)
Then Equation 9.9 is written from Equations 9.10 and 9.11 as
	
ψ( )
(
)
T
A
T
hr T
PP
P
P T
A
T
hr T
E
T
=
+
−
−
=
+
+
2
2
0
0
	
(9.12)
where E
P P P
P
=
−
0
0
/(
) and r
K P
P
= −
−
(
)
0 . Equation 9.12 is convex since d
/
2ψ( )
T  
dT2> 0 ∀ T > 0. Setting d
/d
ψ( )
T
T = 0 and solving for T results in
	
T
A
E
hr
**
(
)
=
+
2
	
(9.13a)
and
	
Q
r A
E
h
**
(
)
=
+
2
	
(9.13b)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
207
Substituting Equation 9.13a in Equation 9.12, Equation 9.12 reduces to
	
ψ **
(
)
=
+
2hr A
E 	
(9.14)
Taking the ratio of T
T
**
*
/
 = Q
Q
**
*
/
 results in
	
Q
Q
E
A
**
* =
+
1
	
(9.15)
The cost of controlling the flow of one unit of commodity is determined by divid-
ing Equation 9.5 by Equation 9.13b to get
	
u
E
Q
E
r A E
h
=
=
+
*
(
)
2
	
(9.16)
From Equations 9.15 and 9.16, one can realize that as P and P0 decrease while 
keeping P0 – P and A constant, and E
P P P
P
=
−
0
0
/(
) decreases, Q
Q
**
*
/
→ 1 and u → 
0 when P and P0 become very small. Furthermore, decreasing P and P0, while increas-
ing P – P0, suggests that E approaches a very low value, making it insignificant. These 
observations suggest that it is more relevant to account for entropy cost for expensive 
and low-demand items rather than inexpensive and high-demand items.
As markets became more dynamic and global, manufacturing firms have been 
faced with fierce competition and a rapidly changing environment. This led many 
manufacturing firms to introduce and implement various improvement programs to 
enhance their competitiveness. Among the managerial philosophies invented and 
implemented is just-in-time (JIT), which generally seeks the elimination of waste 
in all aspects of a firm’s production activities: human relations, vendor relations, 
technology, and management of materials (Chen 1999). JIT promotes smaller lots 
of materials or products for flexibility. Although smaller batch sizes provide greater 
flexibility, they may increase the control costs (entropy cost). Some researchers 
have echoed this implicitly. Ullmann (1982) identified excess managerial cost to 
control the improvement process as a hidden cost. Crawford et al. (1988) identi-
fied costly problems (e.g., accounting, lack of training, interference between new 
and old methods) encountered by JIT implementers. Cavinato (1991) cautioned that 
smaller-lot size policies require tighter management and monitoring of the logistics 
information system in real-time, which is costly. Lummus et al. (1995) identified 
“confusion” in pricing of customized products as a hidden cost. Crusoe et al. (1999) 
listed increased labor union leverage, the inappropriateness of flexible manufactur-
ing systems (FMSs) for certain products, the difficulties in maintaining a steady 
stream of incoming materials when dealing with commodities, and the increased 
space requirements due to the rearrangement of machines into cells, as some of the 
hidden costs of JIT systems.
JIT turns the EOQ formula around. Instead of accepting setup times as fixed, 
companies work to reduce setup time and reduce lot sizes. Ideally, the optimal order 
quantity is equal to the daily demand, that isQ
r
J
** = . Then, from Equation 9.13b 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

208	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
r
r A
E h
=
+
2 (
)/ , and the optimal setup is A
rh
E
J =
−
/2
. Since A
rh
E
J =
−
/2
> 0, 
this implies that the holding cost is h
E r
> 2 / or h
P P P
P
>
−
2
0
0
2
/(
) . In a JIT system, 
and from Equation 9.16, the cost of controlling the flow of one unit of commodity 
is u
E r
J =
/ , whereQ
r
J
** = . This implies that it is more expensive to control the flow 
of commodity in a JIT system than in a classical EOQ system, where uJ > u since 
Q
Q
J
**
**
<
. This may explain the hidden costs indicated in some of the literature.
9.5	 Extensions and Applications
The model developed by Jaber et al. (2004), described in Equation 9.9, was extended 
to other inventory situations and its applicability was investigated in supply chain 
and reverse logistics contexts. The extensions to the model of Jaber et al. (2004) and 
its applications are briefly discussed in the following subsections.
9.5.1	 Inventory Management
The work of Jaber et al. (2006) differs from the work of Jaber et al. (2004) by 
assuming a constant rather than an increasing demand rate for a finite rather than an 
infinite planning horizon. In Jaber et al. (2006) the price of the commodity contin-
ues to decrease as a result of competition in the market, where the firm can predict 
with certainty that the equilibrium price would reach a target value P0( )
τ , where 
P
P
0
0
0
( )
( )
>
τ , and t is some future point in time when the firm has no information 
on how the market price will behave. Their results suggested that for large values 
of the order cost, A, it might not be necessary to include the entropy cost. This 
may caution managers who wish to reduce the order (setup) costs to simultaneously 
reduce entropy costs.
Jaber (2007) extended the model of Jaber et al. (2004) to account for permissible 
delays in payments. Like quantity discounts (e.g., Crowther 1964; Dolan 1987), per-
missible delays in payments is a business practice used by many suppliers to promote 
commodities and gain larger market shares by offering credit terms to their custom-
ers. The EOQ model was investigated for permissible delays in payments (e.g., Haley 
and Higgins 1973; Kingsman 1983; Goyal 1985; Salameh et al. 2003). From Jaber 
(2007), Equation 9.12 is rewritten as
	
ψ( )
(
)
T
A
T
hr T
y
T
E
T
rkP
T y
=
+
−
+
−
2
2
2
2 	
(9.17)
where T is the cycle time, y is the permissible delay in payment and y ≤ T, k is the 
investment rate, and h > kP. The solution for Equation 9.17 is given by setting the 
first derivative of Equation 9.17 equal to zero and solving for T to get
	
T
A
E
h
kP ry
hr
*
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
−
2
2
	
(9.18a)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
209
and
	
Q
r A
E
h
kP ry
h
*
(
)
(
)(
)
=
+
+
−
2
2
	
(9.18b)
Equation 9.18b is identical to that in Goyal (1985) except for the term  E(T) = E =
P P P
P
0
0
/(
)
−
, where the ratio ofQ QGoyal
*
*
/
reduces to
	
Q
Q
rE
rA
h
kP ry
Goyal
*
*
(
)(
)
=
+
+
−
1
2
2
2 	
(9.19)
Equation 9.19 indicates that as demand, r, and order cost, A, approach large 
values, then Q QGoyal
*
*
/
→ 1. As P and P0 decrease while keeping P0 – P constant, 
E
P P P
P
=
−
0
0
/(
) decreases, suggesting thatQ QGoyal
*
*
/
→ 1 when P and P0 are very 
small. These observations also suggest that accounting for entropy costs may be 
more relevant for low-demand and expensive items. When there is no delay in 
payments, y = 0, Equations 9.17, 9.18a, 9.18b, and 9.19 reduce to Equations 9.12, 
9.13a, 9.13b, and 9.15, respectively. With delays in payments the order quantity is 
larger, that is, Equation 9.18b is greater than Equation 9.13b; then from Equation 
9.16, the cost of controlling the flow of one unit of commodity becomes cheaper.
Jaber et al. (2009) investigated the model of Jaber et al. (2004) for deterioration 
effects. The effect of deteriorating items on inventory policies has been studied exten-
sively, and review papers of inventory models for deteriorating items have been writ-
ten by Rafaat (1991) and Goyal and Giri (2003); the EOQ model has been considered 
in the largest share of these studies. Jaber et al.’s (2009) objective was to examine 
whether the effect of deterioration counterbalances the earlier suggested increases in 
batch sizes and leads to smaller batches. Here, we present a simplified form of the 
model presented in Jaber et al. (2009), then Equation 9.12 can be rewritten as
	
ψ
α
α
α
( )
[(
)
]
 ln
[
(
)
T
A
T
E
T
rh
T
T
=
+
−
−
−
+
−+
−
−
−
1
1
1
1
1
(
)
+
−
−
T
T
ln(
)]
ln(
)
1
1
2
α
α
	
(9.20)
Equation 9.20 can be solved using a numerical search technique.
Jaber et al. (2009a) extended the classical economic manufacture (order) quantity 
(EMQ/EOQ) model and the lot-sizing problem with learning and forgetting (Jaber 
and Bonney 1998) by including the entropy cost concept introduced in Jaber et al. 
(2004).
Jaber et al. (2009b) applied the concept of entropy cost to extend the classical EOQ 
model under the assumptions of perfect and imperfect quality. They did so by inves-
tigating the model of Porteus (1986) for the concept of entropy (Jaber et al. 2004). 
Porteus (1986) modified the EOQ model by assuming that when producing a single 
unit of the product, the production process (machine) shifts to an out-of-control state 
with a Markov transition probability (r) and the production process begins to produce 
defective products. Once the process is out of control it remains in that state until the 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

210	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
entire lot of size Q is produced. The total cost function was given as
	
ψ
ρ
ρ
( )
T
A
T
c r
h
c
c
rT
c
r T
E
T
u
R
u
R
=
+
+
+




+
+
1
2
2
2
2
	
(9.21)
The optimal solution is given by setting the first derivative of Equation 9.21 to 
zero to get
	
T
A
E
h
c
c r
c
r
R
u
R
*
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
2
1
2
2
ρ
ρ
/
	
(9.22a)
and
	
Q
r A
E
h
c
c
c
r
R
u
R
*
(
)
(
)
=
+
+
+
2
1
2
ρ
ρ
/
	
(9.22b)
where cu is the unit cost; cR is the cost of reworking a defective unit; and E, r, A, and 
h are as defined earlier in this section. Note that when r   = 0, Equations 9.21, 9.22a, 
and 9.22b reduce to Equations 9.12, 9.13a, and 9.13b, respectively.
9.5.2	 Supply Chain Management
Jaber et al. (2006) applied the concept of entropy cost developed by Jaber et al. 
(2004) to a two-level (vendor–buyer; e.g., Goyal 1977; Banerjee 1986) supply chain, 
where they assumed a finite planning horizon. In their model, a vendor’s cycle has l 
buyer’s cycles, where l is a positive integer. If the buyer orders n times a year, then 
the vendor has m replenishment cycles a year, where ml = n and m and n are positive 
integers. Since the vendor’s demand flow is a stepped function, the vendor’s com-
modity flow is written as
	
r t
K
P t
P
t
v
v
v
v
( )
(
( )
( ))
,
= −
−
0
	
(9.23)
where Pv(t) and P0v(t) are respectively the vendor’s commodity and equilibrium price 
functions, and Kv is similar in definition to K (later referred to by Kb where the sub-
script b indicates the buyer). The entropy generated in the jth vendor’s cycle that has 
l buyer’s cycles was given as
	
σ
λ
v j
v
v
v
v
v
n
K
P t
P
t
P
t
P t
,
,
,
( , )
( )
( )
( )
( )
=
+
−



0
0
2




=
+
=∑
i
v
v
v
K
P i j
n
P
i j
n
P
1
0
0
λ
λ
λ
( , , , )
( , , , )
,
,v
v
i
i j
n
P i j
n
( , , , )
( , , , )
λ
λ
λ
−






=∑
2
1
	
(9.24)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
211
where i = 1 2
, ,
,
K λ, j
m
= 1 2
, ,
,
K
, and T
n
= τ / , with t being the length of the plan-
ning horizon. The entropy cost of the jth vendor’s cycle was given as
	
E
n
Q
n
v j
v j
,
,
( , )
( , )
λ
λ
σ
λ
=
	
(9.25)
The total supply chain cost was given as
	
T
n
nA
h D
n
E
n
n A
h
sc
b
b
b
j
m
v
v
( , )
( , )
(
λ
τ
λ
λ
=
+
+
+
+
=∑
2
1
2
2 λ
τ
λ
λ
−
+
=∑
1
2
1
)
( , )
,
/
D n
E
n
v j
j
n
	
	
(9.26)
where Ab is the buyer’s order cost, hb is the buyer’s holding cost per unit per unit 
time, Eb is the entropy cost per buyer’s cycle, and r is the demand rate per unit time 
and assumed to be constant and uniform over time, Av is the vendor’s order (setup) 
cost, hv is the vendor’s holding cost per unit per unit time, and l is the vendor lot-size 
multiplier (positive integer) of the buyer’s order quantity Q.
9.5.3	 Reverse Logistics
Since the 1980s, manufacturers have been moving toward shorter product life cycles, 
smaller lot sizes (e.g., JIT), and frequent deliveries to sustain their competitive 
advantage in a dynamic and global marketplace. This quickened the forward flow 
of products in a supply chain resulting in faster rates of product waste generation 
and depletion of natural resources. Consequently, manufacturing and production 
processes have been viewed as culprits in harming the environment (Fiksel 1996, 
in Beamon 1999). This concern gave rise to the concept of reverse logistics (RL) or 
the backward flow of products from customers to manufacturers to suppliers (e.g., 
Gungor and Gupta 1999). Like supply chains, reverse logistics manages the flow of 
products to be recovered, however, in the opposite direction (i.e., from downstream 
to upstream), and therefore managing inventory in reverse logistics is of importance 
(e.g., Fleischmann et al. 1997).
Jober and Rosen (2008) applied the first and second laws of thermodynamics and 
the concept of entropy cost developed by Jaber et al. (2004) in a closed-loop model 
(Richter 1996a, 1996b). The production environment described in Richter (1996a, 
1996b) consists of two shops. The first shop is for production and recovery (e.g., 
repair, remanufacturing), while the second shop is for collecting used/returned items 
from the market at some rate. Richter (1996a, 1996b) investigated the EOQ model 
where recovered items are considered as good as new. The total cost function was 
an aggregated cost of production, recovery, and holding costs of produced/recovered 
and used items. Since this model assumes both forward and backward flows of goods 
to and from the market, Figure 9.1 is altered to model the collection rate (commod-
ity flow in the reverse direction), where V(t) is the collection price the manufacturer 
is willing to pay for a used product, and V0 (t) is the collection price a customer can 
obtain for his/her used product if sold individually where P0 (t) > P(t) > V(t) > V0 (t). 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

212	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Like Equation 9.1, the collection flux of used products, or the recovery rate u(t), can 
be written as (Jaber and Rosen 2008)
	
u t
C V t
V t
( )
( ( )
( ))
=
−
0
	
(9.27)
where C is similar in definition to K in Equation 9.1. Figure 9.2 illustrates the behav-
ior of forward and backward flows between the production system and its market.
The collection of repairable items is also assumed to be a constant percentage, b, 
of the demand rate, β
β
r
K P
P
= −
−
(
)
0 , where the ratio of Equation 9.27 to Equation 
9.1 is presented as β = u t r t
( ) ( )
/
. These two assumptions are consistent with the 
model of Richter (1996a, 1996b), and therefore are adopted here. Richter (1996a, 
1996b) assumed that in an interval of length T there are m repair (remanufacturing) 
batches of size R each, and n production batches of size Q each, where x = mR + nQ,
T
x r t
x r
x
K P
P
=
=
=
−
−
/
/
/
( )
(
)
0 . The unit time cost function was given as
	
ψ
α
β
( ,
, )
(
)
  
n m x
nS
mS
r
x
h x
n
m
h
P
R
f
u
=
+
+
+




+
2
2
2
β
β
β
x
h
Q m
m
Er
x
u
2
1
2
1
2
+
−
+
+
(
)
(
)
	
(9.28)
where E T
E
P P P
P
( )
(
)
=
=
−
0
0
/
and r
K P
P
= −
−
(
)
0 . The optimal lot size that mini-
mizes Equation 9.28 is determined by setting ∂
∂=
ψ / x
0 and solving for x in terms 
of the other variables and parameters to get
	
x n m
r nS
mS
E
h
h
P
R
f
n
m
u
( ,
)
(
(
) )
=
+
+
+
+
(
) +
+
2
1
1
2
2
β
β
β
α
β
m
m
−
(
)
1
	
(9.29)
Equation 9.28 is also convex over n and m. Equations 9.27 and 9.28 were solved 
using a four-step solution procedure. The results of Jaber and Rosen (2008) sug-
gested that it is cheaper per unit cost to control the flow of an item in the forward flow 
(from the production system to the market), or in the backward flow (collection of 
used items from the market for recovery by the production system), when the lot size 
Production/inventory system 
Market 
r(t) = –K(P(t) –P0(t))
u(t) = C(V(t) –V0(t))
Figure 9.2  A cyclic commodity flows between the production/inventory system and its 
market.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
213
(production + recovery) is large rather than small. Their results also suggested that 
accounting for entropy costs may be more relevant for low-demand and expensive 
items, than for high-demand and inexpensive items.
9.6	 A Price-Quality Driven Economic 
Order Quantity Model
The work of Jaber et al. (2004) assumed that a commodity flows from the production/
inventory system to the market as a result of a price differential between the product’s 
selling price and its market price, while the quality differential remains unchanged. 
That is, and as in Equation 9.1, demand flows as a result of reduction in price only. 
This section postulates that commodity flow is driven by both price and quality.
There is a general consensus among researchers that the demand for a product is 
dependent on price and quality, where demand increases as the price (quality index) 
of a product decreases and vice versa. Some of these studies are those of Dorfman 
and Steiner (1954), Cowling and Rayner (1970), Spence (1975), Kalish (1983), 
Narasimhan et al. (1993), Teng and Thompson (1996), and Vörös (2002). Therefore 
and without loss of generality, the demand function in Equation 9.1 can then be writ-
ten as
	
r t
P t
g t
P t
g t
( )
( )
( )
( )
( )
= −
−






κ
0
0
	
(9.30)
where P(t) and g(t) (0 < g(t) < 1) are the price and the quality index of the product, 
respectively, at time t. For the flow to occur, P t g t
P t g t
( )
( )
( )
( )
/
/
<
0
0
for every t > 0.
The EOQ model assumes a constant demand rate, that is, r = r(t) where t ∈ 
[0,∝), which implies that Equation 9.1 reduces to r
P g
P g
= −
−
κ(
)
/
/
0
0 , such that
P g
P g
/
/
<
0
0. Therefore, the entropy cost per cycle given in Equation 9.11 could then 
be written as
	
E T
P g
P g dt
T
P g
P g
P g
P g
( )
(
)
=
−
−
+
−
∫
κ
κ
/
/
/
/
/
/
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2
(
)
= −
−
∫
dt
PP
g P
P g
T
0
0
0
0
	
(9.31)
For Equation 9.31 to be positive g P
P g
g g
P P
0
0
0
0
<
⇒
<
/
/ . The total cost per unit 
of time is developed in a similar manner to Equation 9.12 after replacing Equations 
9.1 and 9.5 with Equations 9.30 and 9.31, respectively, and is given as
	
ψ
κ
( )
(
)
(
)
T
A
T
h
P g
P g
T
PP
g P
gP T
=
−
−
−
−
/
/
0
0
0
0
0
2
/
/
−
−
+
−
m
P g
P g
g
g
g T
κ
γ
(
)
0
0
0
0
	
(9.32)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

214	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
where g P
gP
g P
gP
g g
P P
0
0
0
0
0
0
−
⇒
<
⇒
<
< 0
/
/ , m is the unit purchasing cost 
(m < P), and g is the cost of improving the quality of the product by 1 percent above 
the market quality (g0) of products made by the competitors. Here it is assumed that 
the initial product quality index is at least equal to that of its competitors. The profit 
per unit of time is given as
	
ϕ
κ
κ
( )
(
) (
)
(
)
 
T
P
m
P g
P g
A
T
h
P g
P g
T
= −
−
−
−
+
−
/
/
/
/
0
0
0
0 2
 
(
)
+
−
−
−
PP
g P
gP T
g
g
g T
0
0
0
0
0
γ
	
(9.33)
The optimal cycle time is given by setting the first derivative of Equation 9.33 
equal to zero and solving for T to get
	
T
A
h
P g
P g
PP
g P gP
g g
g
* =
−
+
(
)
−
−
(
)
−
−
2
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
γ
κ
/
/
	
(9.34)
Substituting Equation 9.34 in Equation 9.33 reduces it to
	
ϕ
κ
κ
( , )
(
) (
)
    
(
P g
P
m
P g
P g
h
P g
P g
= −
−
−
−
−
−
/
/
/
/
0
0
0
0
2
) A
PP
g P
gP
g
g
g
−
−
+
−




0
0
0
0
0
γ
	
(9.35)
The optimal solution (
,
)
*
*
P
g
for Equation 9.35 can be determined by solving the 
following nonlinear programming problem (NLPP)
Maximize
	
 Z
P g
= ϕ( , ) 	
(9.36a)
subject to
	
m
P
P
≤
≤
0 	
(9.36b)
	
g
g
0
1
≤
≤
	
(9.36c)
where P and g > 0.
To illustrate, consider an inventory situation with the following input parameters: 
k = 20, P0 = 105, m = 50, g0 = 0.7, h = 1, A = 200, and g = 50,000. Substituting 
these in Equation 9.35 and optimizing the NLPP in Equations 9.36a–9.36c, the opti-
mal solution is attained at g* = 1 and P* = 101.65, where ϕ(
,
)
*
*
P
g
= 43,431 and 
T = 6.737 (Q
T
r
=
×
= 6.737 × 967 = 6515). For this case, the cost to control the flow 
of a single unit from the inventory system to the market (unit entropy cost) is given 
from Equation 9.31 as E/Q = 0.05. This could be described as an aggressive product 
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
215
diffusion strategy where the firm competes on both quality (g* = 1 > g0 = 0.7) and 
price (P* = 101.65 < P0 = 105). Now, assume that g  is doubled (g  = 100000), then 
the optimal solution is attained at g* = 0.7 and P* = 77.53 where ϕ(
,
)
*
*
P
g
= 20,618 
and T = 1.26 (Q = 1.26 × 785 = 989), with E/Q = 0.43. This is a strategy where 
the firm has the competitive advantage to compete on price alone (g* = g0 = 0.7 and 
P* = 77.53 < P0 = 105), since it is too expensive to improve the product quality index 
beyond its initial value g = g0 = 0.7. The aggressive strategy suggests ordering in larger 
lots less frequently as it is cheaper to control the flow of the product (0.05 < 0.43) from 
the firm’s inventory system to its market, and it is more profitable (43,431 > 20,618).
Suppose now m = 85; for the same values of the input parameters suggested in 
the first example, the optimal solution is attained at g* = 1 and P* = 119.57, where 
ϕ(
,
)
*
*
P
g
= 15,839 and T = 8.544 (Q
T
r
=
×
= 8.544 × 608.70 = 5201). For this case, 
the cost to control the flow of a unit from the system to the market is E/Q = 0.113. 
This strategy suggests that the firm has the advantage to compete on the quality index 
alone (g* = 1 > g0 = 0.7 and P* = 119.57 > P0 = 105).
9.7	 Summary and Conclusions
This chapter presented a survey of the recent works that models commodity flow as 
an energy flow closing boundaries (system to market). These surveyed works pos-
tulated that the behavior of production systems resembles that of physical systems. 
Such a parallel suggests that production systems may be improved by applying the 
first and second laws of thermodynamics to reduce system entropy (disorder). The 
rationale for this new concept is to account for the hidden, difficult-to-estimate costs 
that usually are not accounted for when analyzing inventory systems.
This entropy (disorder) cost (Jaber et al. 2004) was investigated in different con-
texts including inventory management (Jaber et al. 2004, 2009; Jaber 2007, 2009, 
2009a, 2009b,), supply chain management (Jaber et al. 2006), and reverse logistics 
(Jaber and Rosen 2008). These studies suggested that when accounting for entropy 
(disorder) costs, it is cheaper to manage large lots than the small ones. It was further 
suggested that it might be more relevant to account for entropy for expensive items 
than for inexpensive ones.
This chapter also extended the model of Jaber et al. (2004) assuming that a com-
modity flows from the production/inventory system to the market as a result of price 
and quality differentials, rather than price alone. A basic mathematical model was 
developed with illustrative numerical examples. The numerical results described 
the conditions for three commodity flow strategies. The first strategy, an aggressive 
one, proposed that a firm competes in its market on both price and quality. This is 
possible when investing to improve quality is economically feasible and when the 
unit cost is relatively low compared to price. The second strategy proposed that a 
firm competes on price alone when it is too expensive to improve the quality of the 
product. The third and last strategy proposed that a firm competes on quality alone 
when the unit cost is relatively high compared to price. The models surveyed in this 
chapter could be revisited and investigated for both price and quality. This is left for 
future work.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

216	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
References
Adkins, A. C. 1984. EOQ in the real world. Prod Inventory Manag 25(4):50–54.
Arrow, K. J., and G. Debreu. 1954. Existence of an equilibrium for competitive economy. 
Econometrica 22(3):265–290.
Banerjee, A. 1986. A joint economic lot size model for purchaser and vendor. Decis Sci J 
17(3):292–311.
Barish, N. N. 1963. Operations research and industrial engineering: The applied science and 
its engineering. Oper Res 11(3):387–398.
Beamon, B. M. 1999. Designing the green supply chain. Logist Inform Manag 12(4): 
332–342.
Bonney, M. 1994. Trends in inventory management. Int J Prod Econ 35(1–3):107–114.
Bonney, M., S. Ratchev, and I. Moualek. 2003. The changing relationship between produc-
tion and inventory examined in a concurrent engineering context. Int J Prod Econ 
81–82:243–254.
Callioni, G., X. de Montgros, R. Slagmulder, L. N. van Wassenhove, and L. Wright. 2005. 
Inventory-driven costs. Harv Bus Rev 83(3):135–142.
Cavinato, J. 1991. Lowering set-up costs. Chilton’s Distrib 90(18):52–53.
Cengel, Y., and M. Boles. 2002. Thermodynamics: An engineering approach. Boston: 
McGraw-Hill.
Chen, W.-H. 1999. Business process management: A thermodynamics perspective. J Appl 
Manag Stud 8(2):241–257.
Chikán, A. 2007. The new role of inventories in business: Real world changes and research 
consequences. Int J Prod Econ 108(1–2):54–62.
Cowling, K., and A. J. Rayner. 1970. Price, quality, and market share. J Polit Econ 78(6): 
1292–1309.
Crawford, K. M., J. H. Blackstone, and J. F. Cox. 1988. A study of JIT implementation and 
operating problems. Int J Prod Res 26(9):1561–1568.
Crowther, J. 1964. Rationale of quantity discounts. Harv Bus Rev 42(2):121–127.
Crusoe, J., G. Schmelzle, and T. Buttross. 1999. Auditing JIT implementation. Intern Audit 
14(4):21–24.
Drechsler, F.S. 1965. Management and the laws of disorder. Sci Bus (winter issue):287.
Drechsler, F. S. 1968. Decision trees and the second law. Oper Res Q 19(4):409–419.
Dolan, R. J. 1987. Quantity discounts: Managerial issues and research opportunities. Market 
Sci 6(1):1–22.
Dorfman, R., and P. O. Steiner. 1954. Optimal advertising and optimal quality. Am Econ Rev 
44(5):826–836.
Fiksel, J. 1996. Design for environment: Creating eco-efficient products and processes. New 
York: McGraw-Hill.
Fisher, H., and D. Siburg. January 2003. A publisher’s cash management plan Part 4—Manag-
ing your inventory. PMA Newsletter, 1–5.
Fleischmann, M., J. M. Bloemhof-Ruwaard, R. Dekker, E. van der Laan, J. A. E. E. van Nunen, 
and L. N. van Wassenhove. 1997. Quantitative models for reverse logistics: A review. 
Eur J Oper Res 103(1):1–17.
Goodeve, C. 1953. Operational research as a science. J Oper Res Soc Am 1(4):166–180.
Gooley, T. B. 1995. Finding the hidden cost of logistics. Traffic Manag 34(3):47–50.
Goyal, S. K. 1977. An integrated inventory model for a single supplier-single customer prob-
lem. Int J Prod Res 15(1):107–111.
Goyal, S. K. 1985. Economic order quantity under conditions of permissible delay in pay-
ments. J Oper Res Soc 36(4):335–338.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

Modeling Hidden Costs of Inventory Systems	
217
Goyal, S. K., and B. C. Giri. 2003. The production–inventory problem of a product with time 
varying demand, production and deterioration rates. Eur J Oper Res 147(3):549–557.
Gungor, A., and S. M. Gupta. 1999. Issues in environmentally conscious manufacturing and 
product recovery: A survey. Comput Ind Eng 36(4):811–853.
Haley, C. W., and R. C. Higgins. 1973. Inventory policy and trade credit financing. Manag Sci 
20(4):464–471.
Harris, F. W. 1913. How many parts to make at once? Factory: The Magazine of Management 
10(2):136–152. (Reprinted in Oper Res 38(6):947–950, 1990.)
Harris, T. 1999. The second law of supply chain management. IIE Solutions 31(3):24.
Jaber, M. Y. 2007. Lot sizing with permissible delay in payments and entropy cost. Comput 
Ind Eng 52(1):78–88.
Jaber, M. Y., and M. Bonney. 1998. The effects of learning and forgetting on the optimal lot 
size quantity of intermittent production runs. Prod Plann Contr 9(1):20–27.
Jaber, M. Y., M. Bonney, and I. Moualek. 2009a. Lot sizing with learning, forgetting and 
entropy cost. Int J Prod Econ, doi: 10.1016/j.ijpe.2008.08.006.
Jaber, M. Y., M. Bonney, and I. Moualek. 2009b. An economic order quantity model for an 
imperfect production process with entropy cost. Int J Prod Econ, doi: 10.1016/j.
ijpe.2008.08.007. 118(1):26–33.
Jaber, M. Y., M. Bonney, M. A. Rosen, and I. Moualek. 2009. Entropic order quantity (EnOQ) 
model for deteriorating items. Appl Math Model 33(1):564–578.
Jaber, M. Y., R. Y. Nuwayhid, and M. A. Rosen. 2004. Price-driven economic order systems 
from a thermodynamic point of view. Int J Prod Res 42(24):5167–5184.
Jaber, M. Y., R. Y. Nuwayhid, and M. A. Rosen. 2006. A thermodynamic approach to model-
ling the economic order quantity. Appl Math Model 30(9):867–883.
Jaber, M.Y. and M.A. Rosen 2008. The economic order quantity repair and waste disposal 
model with entropy cost. Eur J Oper Res 188(1):109–120.
Jones, D. J. 1991. JIT & the EOQ model: Odd couple no more! Manag Account 72(8):54–57.
Kalish, S. 1983. Monopolist pricing with dynamic demand and production cost. Market Sci 
2(2):135–159.
Karp, A., and B. Ronen. 1992. Improving shop floor control: An entropy model approach. Int 
J Prod Res 30(4):923–938.
Kingsman, B. G. 1983. The effect of payment rules on ordering and stockholding in purchas-
ing. J Oper Res Soc 34(11):1085–1098.
Konar, S. and M. A. Cohen. 2001. Does the market value environmental performance? Rev 
Econ Stat 83(2):281–289.
Lummus, R. R. 1995. Are confusion costs stealing your profits? Ind Manag 37(3):26–28.
McCarthy, I. P., T. Rakotobe-Joel, and G. Frizelle. 2000. Complex systems theory: Implications 
and promises for manufacturing organisations. Int J Manuf Tech Manag 2(1–7): 
559–579.
Narasimhan, R., S. Ghosh, and D. Mendez. 1993. A dynamic model of product quality and 
pricing decisions on sales responses. Decis Sci 24(5):893–908.
Osteryoung, J. S., E. Nosari, D. E. McCarty, and W. J. Reinhart. 1986. Use of the EOQ model 
for inventory analysis. Prod Inventory Manag 27(3), 39–46.
Pendlebury, J., and R. Platford. 1988. The heavy hidden cost of materials handling. J Cost 
Anal Manag 2(1):4–8.
Porteus, E. L. 1986. Optimal lot sizing, process quality improvement, and setup cost reduction. 
Oper Res 34(1):137–144.
Rafaat, F. 1991. Survey of literature on continuously deteriorating inventory models. J Oper 
Res Soc 42(1):27–37.
Richter, K. 1996a. The EOQ and waste disposal model with variable setup numbers. Eur J 
Oper Res 95(2):313–324.
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

218	
Inventory Management: Non-Classical Views
Richter, K. 1996b. The extended EOQ repair and waste disposal model. Int J Prod Econ 45 
(1–3):443–447.
Ronen, B., and R. Karp. 1994. An information entropy approach to the small-lot concept. 
IEEE Trans Eng Manag 41(1):89–92.
Salameh, M. K., N. E. Abboud, A. N. El-Kassar, and R. E. Ghattas. 2003. Continuous review 
inventory model with delay in payments. Int J Prod Econ 85(1):91–95.
Samaras, T. T. 1973. Overcome entropy or your organization dies. Office 77(3):13.
Selen, W. J., and W. R. Wood. 1987. Inventory cost definition in an EOQ model application. 
Prod Inventory Manag 28(4):44–47.
Shannon, C. E. 1948. A mathematical theory of communication. Bell Syst Tech J 
27(3):379–423.
Spence, A. M. 1975. Monopoly, quality, and regulation. Bell J Econ 6(2):417–429.
Sprague, L. G. 2002. Inventory management. In International encyclopedia of business & 
management–manufacturing & operations, 2nd ed., edited by L. Sprague, 4849–4954. 
London: Thomson International Press.
Teng, J., and G. L. Thompson 1996. Optimal strategies for general price-quality decision mod-
els of new products with learning production costs. Eur J Oper Res 93(3):476–489.
Tseng, K.-J. 2004. Application of thermodynamics on product life cycle. J Am Acad Bus Camb 
4(1/2):464–470.
Tyler, G. W. 1989. A thermodynamic model of manpower systems. J Oper Res Soc 40(2): 
137–139.
Ullmann, J. E. 1982. White-collar productivity and growth of administrative overhead. Natl 
Prod Rev 1(3):290–300.
Uzawa, H. 1960. Walras’ tâtonnement in the theory of exchange. Rev Econ Stud 27(3): 
182–194.
Vörös, J. 2002. Product balancing under conditions of quality inflation, cost pressures and 
growth strategies. Eur J Oper Res 141(1):153–166.
Waters, D. 2003. Inventory control and management. London: Wiley.
Whewell, R. 1997. Turning up the heat under the supply-chain. Logist Focus J Inst Logist 
5(4):18–22.
Wilson, A. G. 1970. The use of the concept of entropy in system modelling. Oper Res Q 
21(2):247–265.
Woolsey, G. 1988. A requiem to the EOQ. Prod Inventory Manag 29(3):44–47. (Reprinted in 
Hosp Mater Manag Q 12(1):82–90, 1990)
© 2009 by Taylor and Francis Group, LLC

