FROM IDG
ISSUE 127
Guide to  
iOS 11.2
iPhone  
iPad
The
and
in
Get more from 
your iPhone X 
with our top tips
iPhone
BUYING 
GUIDE
+ 

2 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
CONTENTS
FEATURES
ROUND-UP
Keep updated with all the latest iPad & iPhone 
news, by following us on Twitter and Facebook
4
14
4 
The iPhone in 2018
10 
The iPad in 2018 
14 
iPhone X tips and tricks
24 
Guide to iOS 11.2
29 
AirPlay 2 FAQ
34 
How Apple turns chores into exciting features
39 
iPhone buying guide
57 
Best games for iPhone X
68 
Latest iOS games
Cover photo by Chris Adamus on Unsplash

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 3
CONTENTS
HOW TO
OPINION
68
78
If Face ID is the future, where will we see it next?    97
REVIEW
Astropad Studio    78
Disable Face ID on the iPhone X    83
Power off and restart your iPhone X    85
Close apps on the iPhone X    87
Take a screenshot on the iPhone X    89
Delete duplicate contacts from an iPhone    90
Send GIFs from an iPhone    93

4 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
I
t’s not enough that the new iPhone X is only a couple 
of months old; rumours about next year’s iPhone are 
already starting to fly. We’ll keep track of what’s been 
said and what seems feasible in this article so you can 
keep up with the latest iPhone gossip.
The iPhone in 2018
The iPhone X just hit stores, but there’s already speculation about 
2018’s model. Macworld staff round up all the rumours

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 5
FEATURE
What’s the latest?
A report in Nikkei Asian Review claims that Apple is 
working on its own power management chips for iOS 
devices, which it will start integrating into iOS devices 
in 2018. 
Current iOS devices use power management chips 
made by the UK company Dialog Semiconductor. These 
chips manage battery charging and the power supplied 
from the battery to the various components within the 
phone. Nikkei’s sources say Apple’s new chip will be the 
most advanced in the industry, and would allow Apple 
to deliver better performance with longer battery life.
There is some uncertainty as to the timing, however. 
One of Nikkei’s sources says it will show up in some 
products next year, while another thinks it might not 
appear until 2019.
Plausible? Apple is driving hard to produce as much 
of its own silicon as possible. For example, it recently 
started integrating its own graphics processors instead 
of one licensed from PowerVR. The power management 
chip plays a crucial role in mobile devices, and seems 
an obvious component for Apple to bring in-house as 
opposed to more general commodity components like 
RAM or flash storage.
A refreshed iPhone SE may be on the way
A report from China’s Economic Daily News claims 
that an iPhone SE2 (that’s a tentative name) is on the 
way. The report says it will be assembled by Wistron 
in India (as the current iPhone SE is) and land in the 
first half of 2018.

6 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
This coincided with an report from Focus Taiwan 
from a few months ago. Is this just a rumour echo 
chamber, or independent verification?
Plausible? The current iPhone SE is getting a little old 
with it’s A9 chip. The new one is said to be a relatively 
simple refresh, with a similar design and size and 
an upgrade to the A10. That certainly seems likely, 
considering the target markets and price point for the 
iPhone SE. But it is unlikely to satisfy those Apple fans 
who want all the good stuff found in the iPhone 8 and 
X in a small phone with a 4in display.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 7
FEATURE
Faster modems and better antennas
KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi Kuo, always on top of 
the latest Apple supply chain gossip, says that we’ll see 
much improved cellular baseband chips in next year’s 
iPhones. It will again source chips from both Intel and 
Qualcomm, but most phones (70- to 80 percent) will 
sport the Intel chip, specifically an Intel XMM 7560 
modem. The Qualcomm modem is expected to be the 
Snapdragon X20.
Both modems support 4x4 MIMO (current iPhones 
support only 2x2 MIMO) and 5x carrier aggregation, and 
should work with the newly-deployed 600MHz carrier 
bands, provided that Apple does all the necessary 
work on antennas and software. 
This means a big jump in maximum cellular 
performance, including gigabit LTE speeds and support 
for more frequencies in more areas. 
Kuo further claims that at least one iPhone model 
(probably the largest one) will support dual-SIM 
dual-standby (DSDS) with both SIMs offering LTE 
connections. Dual SIMs aren’t common in the US, 
but there are some markets where it’s an expected 
feature of high-end phones.
Plausible? Apple is behind its biggest Android rivals 
when it comes to cellular connectivity. In the right 
locations, the best Android phones support newer 
LTE technologies and faster real-world download 
and upload speeds. All the rumoured features would 
leapfrog today’s top-end Android phones, but of 
course premium 2018 Android devices will likely have 
these features as well. Getting on par with Samsung 

8 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
and Google’s best in this area is something that 
needs to happen.
Three phones, three sizes
Another rumour, again from analyst Ming-Chi Kuo at 
KGI Securities, is that Apple will have three models of 
iPhone next year. There will be a new phone the same 
size and design and the iPhone X along with a ‘Plus’ 
model that features the same design only with a 6.5in 
display and a higher resolution.
But Apple still needs a new but less expensive 
model to sell at a lower-than-£1,000 price, which Kuo 
believes will take the shape of a 6.1in LCD based phone 
with the same aspect ratio, but a lower resolution. Kuo 
believes this phone will be priced between £650 and 
£750. The LCD model pictured in KGI’s mock-up (below) 
is unlikely to exactly match the final unit. Apple will 
likely need some bezels on the bottom or top to hold 
the LCD display control circuitry. But the KGI report 
Image: KGI Research

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 9
FEATURE
does believe the bezels will be much smaller, as Touch 
ID and the home button will be gone in favour of Face 
ID and the TrueDepth camera. 
Plausible? A bigger plus-size model makes sense, as 
does a less expensive, lower-resolution LCD model 
meant to achieve a lower price. But Apple literally folds 
the bottom of the OLED display under itself to hide 
the display controller, a trick they can’t pull off with 
an LCD, so we expect a little more bezel in the LCD 
version. The bigger unanswered question is whether 
the LCD version will have a single camera, like the 
non-Plus iPhone models today. 
More frame parts, faster data?
KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi Kuo wrote a research 
note obtained by other Mac news outlets that details 
his thoughts on next year’s iPhone. Kuo believes 
that the new phone will use a metal frame that is 
composed of more parts than the iPhone X, in order 
to improve data transmission quality. Kuo says that 
orders Apple has placed with Catcher Technology and 
Casetek are for two frames, one for a phone like the 
current iPhone X, and another for an iPhone X-like 
model with a larger screen.
Plausible? A new frame for better data transmission 
on next year’s phone seems to imply that the current 
iPhone X isn’t performing as well as it could be. But we 
haven’t heard about transmission problems. It could be 
to support faster transmission speeds (like gigabit LTE) 
or the newer 600MHz LTE frequency band.

10 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
W
hen it comes to the tablet market, there’s 
the iPad and there’s everybody else. Apple 
dominates the market, especially in the 
premium price range. To hold on to its position, Apple 
has been kept things fresh with new models like the 
The iPad in 2018
If you want to get a sense of where the iPad will go in 2018, 
look to the iPhone X, writes Jason Cross 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 11
FEATURE
12.9in iPad Pro and new technologies like Apple 
Pencil and ProMotion.
But the fundamental design of the iPad hasn’t 
changed much in years. That could all change in 
2018, as Apple gives use the first holistic new iPad 
design in a very long time.
What’s the latest?
According to DigiTimes, which cites “sources from 
related upstream suppliers,” Apple wants to release 
a new, cheaper 9.7in iPad in 2018. The sources 
claim the model would start at around £259. That’s 
considerably cheaper than the already rather 
affordable £329 iPad Apple sells today.
No specifications or details were given, just an 
estimated arrival of “second quarter of 2018”.
Plausible? Apple’s iPad sales have been in a slow 
downward slide from its heights in 2014, but have 
started to recover this year thanks in large part to 
the new lower-priced £329 model. It makes sense 
for Apple to keep the price pressure on. 
This may not be a new model, but just a tweaked 
version of the current model expected to sell at 
a lower price, with more advanced iPads and iPad 
Pros filling out the rest of the pricing stack.
New A11X processor
Recent iPad models have come equipped with new 
A-series chips based on the same architecture that 
debuted in the previous year’s iPhones. For example, 
the A10 found in the iPhone 7 and 7 Plus has two 

12 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
high-performance CPU cores and two high-efficiency 
cores, a six-core graphics processor, and up to 3GB 
of RAM. The A10X found in the iPad Pro has three 
high-performance and three high-efficiency cores of 
the same architecture, a 12 graphics cores, and up to 
4GB of RAM.
In the same way, the top iPad models of 2018 are 
expected to feature an A11X derived from the A11 
Bionic found in the iPhone 8 and iPhone X. 
Citing sources within the Apple supply chain, 
Chinese site MyDrivers claims that the A11X will have 
three high-performance CPU cores (up from 2 in the 
A11), five high-efficiency cores (up from four in the 
A11), and will be built using TSMC’s upcoming 7nm 
manufacturing process. The A11 is built on a 10nm 
process – currently cutting-edge.
There is no mention of this, but it almost goes 
without saying that the new chip will once again 
include more RAM and more graphics cores, too. 
It would be really weird if it didn’t.
Face ID and slim bezels, but no OLED
KGI Securities analyst Ming-Chi Kuo, who regularly leaks 
upcoming Apple device details based on conversations 
with Apple’s suppliers, believes that at least one model 
of iPad in 2018 will take its cues from the iPhone X.
That is, it will have greatly reduced bezels and the 
TrueDepth camera system with Face ID, doing away 
with Touch ID.
Building TrueDepth into the iPad will be a little 
trickier than the iPhone, however. While the ‘default’ 
way to hold an use the iPhone is in portrait orientation 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 13
FEATURE
(the iPhone X’s home screen doesn’t even rotate), the 
iPad is regularly used in both portrait and landscape 
modes for nearly all tasks, with most apps made to 
work in either orientation. Face ID will have to be 
adjusted to work whichever way you hold your iPad, 
and Apple will need to come up with a solution that 
won’t easily be blocked by your hands holding on to 
the sides of the device.
While the iPhone X has an OLED display, the new 
iPad is expected to keep its LCD. There are no 120Hz 
mobile OLED panels yet and Apple will want to keep 
the ProMotion feature. And besides, an OLED display 
that large would be quite expensive.
The TrueDepth camera and Face ID will eventually make 
it to many Apple products, and the iPad Pro is up next

14 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
I
f you’re lucky enough to own an iPhone X, we reveal 
how to master Apple’s flagship device. These tips will 
help you work through some of the interface quirks 
and point out features about you may not have known.
1. Show battery percentage
Unfortunately, there’s no setting to show the battery 
percentage in the status bar. Now that it’s split into 
iPhone X tips and tricks
With no home button and a status bar split on either side of The 
Notch, using the iPhone X is a little different. Jason Cross reports

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 15
FEATURE
The easiest way to see your battery percentage 
is, unfortunately, to show the Control Centre
the left and right side of the notch, there just isn’t 
room. The quickest way to show your remaining 
battery percentage is to look at Control Centre. Just 
swipe down from the upper-right side of the notch.
Hopefully, a future iOS update will allow you to 
tap on the status bar to show battery percentage, 
Do Not Disturb status, and other useful info.
2. Master the new gestures and commands
When you first set up your iPhone, it showed you how 
to go to the home screen and bring up the app switcher. 
But do you know how to take a screenshot? (Press 
Volume Up and the Side button at the same time.) 
Lucky for you, we have a quick, simple guide to all 
the most common new gestures and commands.

16 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
3. Quickly show  
the app switcher
Officially, one brings up the app 
switcher by dragging up from 
the bottom of the screen and 
pausing for a second, until all the 
app cards show up.
But you can speed this up a bit. 
For starters, you don’t always have 
to wait for all the cards to show up 
– just a brief pause will do it. 
You might find the easiest way 
to pop those app cards into view 
is to quickly swipe up and over to 
the side (in either direction), sort 
of like an upside-down ‘L’ shape. 
You can do this very quickly and it 
makes the app cards pop right up.
You don’t have to swipe 
up very far, either. Really, any 
upward swipe will work as long 
as your finger remains on the 
screen when it stops its upward 
momentum. Experiment a little 
bit and you’ll find that you can get the app switcher 
to show up very quickly. 
4. Quit apps
On other iPhones, you force-close apps by bring up the 
app switcher, finding the app you want to close, then 
swiping upward on its app card. If you do this on the 
iPhone X, it will simply return you to the home screen 
A quick up-and-over motion 
brings up the app switcher in a 
split second

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 17
FEATURE
without closing the app. You need to bring up the app 
switcher (see the previous tip), then press and hold 
anywhere on the stack of app cards. Then you can swipe 
up on an app to close it, or you can tap the little red 
circle close button in the upper left of each card.
5. Speed up Face ID
Face ID is pretty fast, but can be a little slower than 
Touch ID in some circumstances, like unlocking your 
phone after taking it out of your pocket or bag. You 
can speed this up a little, though, with the right 
settings and habits.
First, make sure that ‘Raise to wake’ is enabled. 
You’ll find the toggle in Settings > Display & 
Brightness. This will prevent you from having to tap 
on the screen to wake it up before swiping to unlock, 
unless you’re unlocking your phone while it rests on 
Closing apps works a bit differently on iPhone X

18 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
a desk or in a dock. Next, get used to swiping up on 
the screen before you have it facing you. If you swipe 
upward before Face ID can see your face, the phone 
will simply wait for Face ID to authenticate and then 
pop right to your home screen. So swiping up on your 
phone while you raise it to look at the screen will get 
animation going, and you’ll be at your home screen as 
soon as your face gets in view.
In Settings > Face ID & Passcode, you’ll find a 
toggle called ‘Require Attention for Face ID’. If you 
disable this, Face ID can authenticate you even if your 
eyes aren’t looking right at the phone. This is a bit 
less secure, but it can speed things up a bit, and may 
be helpful if you find that your sunglasses don’t work 
with Face ID very well.
6. Improve Face ID accuracy
Sometimes, Face ID will not recognize you. Maybe the 
lighting is weird, or you’re holding your phone at a 
funny angle, or you’ve done something to significantly 
change the way your face looks.
That’s okay, Face ID will continually learn what you 
look like and improve its accuracy, but only if you let it.
When Face ID doesn’t recognize you, the phone will 
prompt you for your passcode. It’s tempting to press 
Cancel and try again, but you shouldn’t. Just enter 
your passcode. This will tell your iPhone “yes, I was 
the person you were trying to identify” and it will take 
that failed attempt as new data to incorporate into its 
biometric model of your face. 
Over time, this will help Face ID recognize you more 
accurately, more often.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 19
FEATURE
7. Master Animoji
Animoji are limited to only 10 seconds, but if you want 
to record something longer, use the screen recording 
capability and then edit out all the iPhone interface in 
the editing app of your choice. Be sure to Force-touch 
the recording button in Control Centre and enable 
microphone recording, or nobody will hear you.
It’s not obvious, but you can use Animoji as a sticker 
in iMessages, too. Just bring up the Animoji interface 
as usual, but instead of recording, make the face you 
want to use for your sticker and then drag the Animoji 
character right up into your conversation.
8. Turn on Reachability
The extra-tall display on the iPhone X makes it even 
harder to reach up to the top with your thumb. And 
now that Control Centre is there, you may have to 
do it more often. The easiest solution is to enable 
Reachability, which shifts the entire screen downward 
so you can easily reach the top. You’ll find the toggle 
in Settings > General > Accessibility.
9. Swipe back and forth between apps
Reachability can make that tall screen a little 
easier to manage, but it’s off by default

20 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
If you want to quickly switch between open apps, just 
swipe left or right on the little Home indicator at the 
bottom of the screen. No need to swipe up first at all. 
You can swipe back and forth through all your open 
apps this way, making it much more useful than the old 
‘double tap the Home button to switch to the last app 
you used’ command.
10. Add a virtual 
Home button
If you just can’t live without 
the Home button, you can create 
a virtual one using Assistive 
Touch. Well, sort of – it’s a 
hack but it works.
Head to Settings > General 
> Accessibility > AssistiveTouch. 
Once you’re in this deep settings 
sub-menu you’ll have to toggle 
AssistiveTouch on and select 
Customize Top Level Menu. 
You’ll notice it is set to 6 icons 
by default, so press the minus 
sign until it’s down to one. Tap 
on that one icon (probably a 
star that says ‘custom’) and set 
it to ‘Home’.
Back in the AssistiveTouch 
menu, you may want to 
lower the Idle Opacity setting, so your virtual home 
button will be easier to see through if it blocks an 
important part of the screen. 
Creating a virtual home button is 
pretty easy to do, but might create 
as many problems as it solves

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 21
FEATURE
Just drag your virtual home button to the Centre 
of the bottom of your phone, or really anywhere 
else you’d like it to go.
11. Charge faster
The 5-watt adaptor that comes in the box with your 
iPhone X (and every other iPhone) is very slow. Your 
phone can charge much faster.
Apple sells a 29W USB-C adaptor and USB-C 
Lightning cable that will fast-charge your iPhone X using 
USB Power Delivery. But that’s an expensive solution: 
£49 for the charger (from fave.co/2jZoCcn) and £25 
(from fave.co/2k1oPMf) for the cable.
Instead, buy the 12W USB power adaptor (or use 
the one that came with your iPad). It’s only £19 from 
fave.co/2jlWgt4, and it gives you most of the benefit 
when charging your iPhone. It way faster than the 
included adaptor, and the expensive USB-C adaptor 
only charges you up 10- to 15 minutes faster.
12. Force a hard restart
If your iPhone X becomes totally unresponsive, you 
can try forcing a hard restart. Quickly press and release 
Volume Up, then Volume Down, then press and hold 
the Side button. Remember, do not hold down either of 
the volume buttons, but do hold the Side button. After 
holding it for about 10- to 15 seconds, you’ll see the 
Apple logo, and you can let go.
13. Fix photo and video incompatibility
By default, the iPhone X stores photos using a new 
image format called HEIF (High-Efficiency Image 

22 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
Format). When you use the Share a photo on social 
media or send it in an email, your phone will convert 
them to the more compatible JPG file format, but this 
isn’t always bulletproof.
If you find some situation where your images are 
incompatible with whatever app you’re using, you can 
force your phone to save new images in the JPG format.
Head to Settings > Camera > Formats and switch 
from ‘High Efficiency’ to ‘Most Compatible’. This won’t 
convert any existing images, but new images will be 
saved in JPG so they’ll work with everything.
With video, the situation is similar: the iPhone X 
will save in HEVC (High-Efficiency Video Codec) instead 
of H.264. Changing that camera setting forces your 
phone to use the older format.
Most Compatible will save your images and videos as JPG and 
H.264, but they’ll use up about double the storage space

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 23
FEATURE
The new formats are about half the size of the 
old formats, so your new photos and videos will take 
up a lot more space, but at least you’ll have solved 
your incompatibility problem. Because of the huge 
space savings with HEIF/HEVC, we suggest you don’t 
change this setting until you actually run into an 
image incompatibility problem.
14. Turn off auto-brightness
This is really an iOS 11 issue, not just an iPhone X 
issue, but it’s worth acknowledging all the same.
Auto-brightness used to be a toggle in the Display 
& Brightness settings menu, but it appears to have 
been removed in iOS 11. In fact, it’s still there, it’s 
just much harder to find. You’ll have to go to Settings 
> General > Accessibility > Display Accommodations 
to find the toggle switch.
Auto-brightness on iPhone takes the brightness 
level you set and tries to maintain the same ‘apparent’ 
brightness my making the screen brighter if you’re in 
bright daylight or dimmer if you’re in a dark indoor 
room. In other words, the brightness slider is your way 
of telling the phone “this is how bright I like my screen 
in my current environment” and auto-brightness is 
your phone’s way of trying to keep that relative level 
in all lighting conditions. 
For most users, having auto-brightness enabled 
should improve battery life, but those who set their 
brightness very low and keep it there might be better 
off with it disabled.

24 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
i
OS 11 is the biggest change to Apple’s mobile 
operating system in years. It’s so ambitious in scope 
that some of it’s its most interesting features didn’t 
make it into the initial release. iOS 11.1 mostly fixed 
bugs and brought us a bunch of new emoji, but iOS 11.2 
is more substantial, with the addition of Apple Pay Cash. 
After six beta releases, Apple made the unusual 
move of pushing out iOS 11.2 over the weekend, 
because it fixes a nasty bug whereby apps that trigger 
daily notifications could cause your iPhone to crash 
starting on 2 December.
Guide to iOS 11.2
iOS 11.2 brings us critical bug fixes, adds Apple Pay Cash and 
faster wireless charging, reveals Jason Cross

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 25
FEATURE
What’s in iOS 11.2?
New features
The biggest new feature of iOS 11.2 is Apple Pay Cash 
(only in the US, for now). Apple’s person-to-person 
payment system works within iMessage and lets you 
instantly and directly send money to other iOS users. 
iOS 11.2 also speeds up the maximum rate of 
wireless charging on iPhone 8, 8 Plus, and X. These 
phones shipped with support for the Qi standard up 
to 5 watts, but 11.2 bumps it up to 7.5 watts. That’s 
technically faster than the in-box adaptor, which is 
infamously slow. But of course, you’ll need a Qi-based 
wireless charger that properly supports rates up to 7.5 
watts to notice the difference.
You’ll also notice the new ability to control AirPlay 
2 devices in Control Centre. You can quickly switch 
between controlling multiple different playback 
destinations independently. This is important 
groundwork for the coming HomePod release, but it 
works with Apple TV (4th generation or 4K) right now if 
you update that device to the tvOS 11.2 as well.
This update adds three new live wallpapers for the 
iPhone X. It also brings a change for developers who 
offer recurring subscriptions – they’ll be able to charge 
introductory rates. For example, a service that costs £10 
a month could be free for the first two weeks, or £5 for 
the first month. This change should affect tvOS 11.2 as 
well, so all those subscription streaming services might 
get introductory deals.
There’s a new ‘Sports’ section in the TV app. 
The Podcasts app can now advance automatically to 
the next episode of the same show.

26 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
Bug fixes
Of course, we expect iOS point-releases to fix some 
bugs, and 11.2 cleans up quite a few. As mentioned 
already, it addresses the 2 December crash bug. Apple 
has also fixed that bug in the Calculator app where your 
input was waiting for long animations to play out (if 
you hit 1+2+3 you’d get 24, because it didn’t register 
the second plus sign). And, of course, the A [?] bug 
introduced in 11.1 is gone too, but Apple had already 
released a small 11.1.1 update to fix that.
The full list of bug fixes, from Apple, is as follows:
•  Fixes an issue that could cause Mail to appear to be 
checking for new messages even when a download is 
complete 
•  Fixes an issue that could cause cleared Mail 
notifications from Exchange accounts to reappear 
•  Resolves an issue where Settings could open to a 
blank screen 
•  Fixes an issue that could prevent swiping to Today 
View or Camera from the Lock Screen 
•  Addresses an issue that could prevent Music controls 
from displaying on the Lock Screen 
•  Fixes an issue that could cause app icons to be 
arranged incorrectly on the Home Screen 
•  Addresses an issue that could prevent users 
from deleting recent photos when iCloud storage 
is exceeded 
•  Addresses an issue where Find My iPhone sometimes 
wouldn’t display a map 
•  Fixes an issue in Messages where the keyboard could 
overlap the most recent message 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 27
FEATURE
•  Improves stability in Calendar 
•  Fixes an issue in Calculator where typing numbers 
rapidly could lead to incorrect results 
•  Addressed an issue where the keyboard could respond 
slowly 
•  Adds support for real-time text (RTT) phone calls for 
the deaf and hard of hearing 
•  Improves VoiceOver stability in Messages, Settings, 
App Store, and Music 
•  Resolves an issue that prevented VoiceOver from 
announcing incoming Notifications
Visual changes
There are a number of small visual changes. Album art 
in the Command Centre is in a square icon, a few emojis 
have new art, there’s a new waiting animation for the 
The 
Wi-Fi and 
Bluetooth 
toggle 
behaviour is 
explained in 
a pop-up
Image: MacRumors

28 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
Live Photo effects (loop, bounce, and long exposure), 
and you can now access the same wallpapers that came 
with the iPhone 8 and X on other iPhone models. 
The new Wi-Fi and Bluetooth toggle behaviour in 
Control Centre is explained in a pop-up window. This 
doesn’t address complaints that these toggles do not 
actually fully disable Wi-Fi or Bluetooth, but at least it 
lets users know what’s going on. You’ll notice a little 
bar in the upper right of the lock screen to indicate 
the corner you’ll find Control Centre in.
How can I get it?
After a day or two, you should be automatically 
prompted to install iOS 11.2. If you don’t want to wait, 
simply head to Settings > General > Software Update.
If you want to use Apple Pay Cash, you’ll have to 
be in the US. At the time of writing no date has been 
announced for the UK.
A new Control Centre indicator on the lock screen

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 29
FEATURE
A
irPlay has been with us for a long time. It’s an 
evolution of the old AirTunes protocol, which 
was meant only for music. In 2010, AirTunes got 
a host of new capabilities (music, photos, video) and a 
new name. A year later, it gained the ability to mirror 
your iOS or Mac screen to a compatible AirPlay receiver. 
With an Apple TV, you could put your Mac desktop on 
your PC in the blink of an eye!
You’ve seen the AirPlay logo in dozens of apps, often 
tucked away in the Share menu. If you want to beam 
content from your iOS device to the Apple TV or a set of 
AirPlay 2 FAQ
This major update to Apple’s wireless streaming protocol focuses 
on multi-room audio. Jason Cross reports

30 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
speakers, it’s delightful. But it has languished over the 
last several years, adding no meaningful new features 
while the rest of the wireless world moved on. 
With iOS 11, Apple has introduced AirPlay 2. This 
is the first real update to the AirPlay protocol in a 
long time, and it seems tailor made to suit Apple’s 
ambitions to spread media throughout your home 
with Apple TV 4K and HomePod.
What’s new in AirPlay 2?
AirPlay 2 focuses on new audio features for the AirPlay 
protocol, and for the most part ignores the screen 
casting and video playback parts.
It adds the following key features:
Multi-room playback: Apps can send audio to several 
different devices around the home, with playback 
synced between them.
Enhanced buffering: AirPlay 2 compatible speakers will 
do a better job buffering audio to avoid skips and drops.
Multi-device control: When audio is streaming to 
AirPlay 2 devices, it can be controlled via multiple 
different Apple devices. So you can start playing 
content on your iPhone, and then later pick up your 
iPad and control playback.
What devices support AirPlay 2?
As far as Apple devices go, AirPlay 2 will work on the 
iPhone 5s or newer, the iPad Mini 2 or newer, Apple TV 
(4th generation and 4K), and any MacBook made in the 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 31
FEATURE
past seven years or so. You’ll also need speakers that 
support AirPlay 2. Apple’s upcoming HomePod does, as 
will the speakers connected to your Apple TV. Third-
party brands will need to release new products or, in 
some cases, update firmware to support AirPlay 2. Some 
brands that have announced support include:
•  Bang & Olufsen
•  Beats
•  Bluesound
•  Bose
•  Bowers & Wilkins
•  Definitive Technology 
•  Denon
•  Devialet
•  Dynaudio
•  Libratone
•  Marantz
•  McIntosh
•  Naim
•  Polk
Some of the speaker brands pledging support for AirPlay 2

32 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
Sonos fans can rejoice too, as the company 
has announced AirPlay 2 support starting in 2018, 
both on new products and in updates to existing 
products. Sonos has never supported AirPlay before, 
so that’s a big turnaround.
How do I get it?
You’ll need more than just AirPlay 2 compatible gear. 
AirPlay 2 needs to be supported by the OS and apps, 
too. It was announced as part of iOS 11, but didn’t make 
the cut when iOS 11 was first released in September. 
AirPlay 2 support will come in an update to macOS, 
tvOS, and iOS – possibly 11.2 for iOS and tvOS and 
10.13.2 for macOS.
It also needs support from app developers. You can 
count on Apple’s apps to be updated immediately, 
but if you prefer to play music around the house 
AirPlay 2 requires new devices support or firmware upgrades

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 33
FEATURE
with Spotify or Audible you’ll need to wait for an app 
update. Given the benefits and the relatively low 
complexity of adding support, it seems most major 
apps will probably update quickly.
What else do I need to know?
If you’re going to beam music all around the house, 
you’ll need to know which speakers are where, right? 
AirPlay 2 integrated with HomeKit, so that speakers 
can attach themselves to different rooms.
This means you can use them in HomeKit’s Scenes 
to play audio in addition to adjusting the lights.
When Apple announced AirPlay 2, it showed off a 
feature of Apple Music called ‘Shared Up Next’. One 
iOS user can play back music, but other users in the 
same location can all contribute to the Up Next song 
list. This feature will probably show up in Apple Music 
when AirPlay 2 and HomePod ship.

34 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
W
hen Apple comes to mind, it probably conjures 
images of slick, carefully engineered devices 
with innovative, envelope-pushing features. 
And the company’s surely had more than its fair share 
of those, but it’s also managed to pull off a subtler but 
far greater feat that goes under appreciated. 
Apple has a history of taking boring tech chores and turning them 
into selling points. Dan Moren reports
How Apple turns chores 
into exciting features

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 35
FEATURE
The company has not only figured out how to make 
us eat our vegetables – technologically speaking – but 
it’s also turned those very features into selling points. 
Because it’s one thing to sell a flashy, shiny device; it’s 
quite another to get people excited about the mundane 
necessities of the technology world. 
Baby got backups 
In autumn 2007, I’d only recently started working at 
Macworld, and I was assigned to cover what was the 
biggest of big deals in those days: the launch of Apple’s 
latest version of Mac OS X, code-named Leopard. 
As these were still the days where you had to get 
yourself a physical disc to install a new OS (and pay 
for the privilege), I hauled myself down to my local 
Apple Store. What I found was a decent length line of 
people all queued up to get their copies of the new 
operating system. 
I talked to a few folks in the line and what surprised 
me was how many were eager to try out one particular 
new feature of Leopard: Time Machine. This was, after 
all, a feature that let you back up your computer to an 
external hard drive – nothing new in what it was doing, 
but a significant change in that it was now included as 
part of the core operating system.  
But the idea of people being excited about backing 
up their data was mind-boggling. This was historically a 
chore, the kind of thing that people knew they should 
do for their own benefit, but just ended up putting 
off. From Apple’s perspective, it was a feature to draw 
more people to the platform and perhaps even to lock 
them into the platform by committing their data to its 

36 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
own backup scheme. But it also made life easier for the 
company itself: for example, insuring that customers 
could easily back up their data before bringing 
their Macs in for service, or even forestall customer 
support questions related to data loss. Since users no 
longer had to go and buy expensive backup software 
separately, it removed an excuse for not backing up. 
And, indeed, Time Machine paved the way for iOS’s 
iCloud Backup feature. Now it’s probably the rare 
person who doesn’t back up their Macs and iOS devices, 
though Apple could still stand to increase the default 
iCloud space and provide a similar cloud backup service 
for Macs. Thanks to Time Machine and its successors, 
backing up has become a habit rather than a chore.
Thanks to Time Machine backing up your Mac is no longer a chore

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 37
FEATURE
Security touchdown
In the earliest days of personal computing, 
security wasn’t necessarily something that most 
people spent a lot of time thinking about. Mostly 
because it wasn’t until much later that we started 
storing our most important information digitally 
or connecting them to networks that opened us to 
new threats. But it got even more challenging when we 
started carrying our data-laden devices around with us. 
Even in those earliest days, I don’t think most 
people bothered to put passcodes on their iPhones. 
Especially when the device was new, users didn’t 
want to be slowed down by having to punch in a 
four-digit code (so onerous!). As smartphones became 
increasing targets for theft and people started 
using more and more apps to access sensitive or 
personal data, passcodes became de rigueur – only 
the industry default of four-digit passcodes, which 
cashpoints had long accustomed us to, were quickly 
deemed to be not secure enough. 
So, what to do? You want to encourage people 
to use longer passcodes, but you want to balance 
that security with the convenience of not having 
to thumb-type a lengthy string of letters and 
numbers every time you want to access even the 
most basic feature on your phone.
Touch ID was the major selling point of the iPhone 
5s, just as Face ID has been for the iPhone X, and once 
again Apple got us to all think about improving our 
digital hygiene practices. Because once you set up 
Touch ID or Face ID, you could have a lengthy secure 
passcode and not have to worry about entering it all 

38 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
the time. Of course, neither biometric security option 
provides perfect protection – as we’ve seen, people 
will always try to come up with ways to trick them – 
but if it encourages people to use longer, more secure 
passcodes, then Apple’s still managed to pull off 
that impressive feat of getting us to do something we 
know is good for us, even when we don’t want to. 
Thus Touch ID was born

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 39
C
hoosing which iPhone to buy has always been 
tricky. If you can’t afford the latest model Apple 
offers older models at a lower price. Plus, there 
are screen sizes and storage options to consider. Here, 
we look at each of the eight handsets Apple currently 
offers. We’ll discuss price, specifications and features, 
so you’ll feeling much more confident that you’re about 
to make the right decision about which iPhone to buy.
Apple’s line-up now features eight models, so choosing the right 
one can be tricky business. Ashleigh Macro reveals your options
iPhone buying guide
FEATURE

40 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
Buying an iPhone on contract
The two most common ways to buy an iPhone are SIM-
free from Apple itself or a third-party reseller, or buying 
an iPhone on contract. A contract usually starts with 
an upfront payment that will vary depending on the 
iPhone model you opt for and also how much you’ll be 
paying each month. That upfront payment is followed 
by monthly payments, normally for a total of 24 months, 
after which you own the phone (in most cases). Those 
monthly payments also cover data, minutes and texts.
The following networks offer iPhone contracts:
•  O2
•  EE
•  Vodafone
•  Three
•  Tesco Mobile
•  Sky Mobile
•  Virgin Mobile
As do the following third-party resellers:
•  Carphone Warehouse
•  Mobiles.co.uk
•  E2save
•  Mobile Phones Direct
The iPhone Upgrade Programme
Apple offers a scheme called the iPhone Upgrade 
Programme (fave.co/2k5iuPM), where you make an 
upfront payment of £69 followed by regular monthly 
payments of between £38 and £64. You can then 
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 41
upgrade to the new iPhone each time one is announced, 
staying on the same or a very similar plan.
You should be cautious about the value this offers 
(as the phone is not yours to sell at the end of your 
contract so you’re effectively renting it), but in some 
circumstances it may be the right approach for you.
It’s also important to note that this is for a SIM-free 
iPhone. You will then need to get a SIM-only contract 
for your data, minutes and texts.
You do get AppleCare+ included in the Upgrade 
Programme, though, which is a two year insurance for 
your iPhone that will cover you for two incidents of 
accidental damage. You’ll still have to pay an excess 
fee should you need to use it, but it’ll be much cheaper 
than having to cough up the full price of a repair.
FEATURE

42 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
Second-hand iPhones
You’ll have noticed that buying an iPhone doesn’t 
come cheap. However, if you’re strapped for cash you 
don’t have to dismiss the idea of buying an iPhone 
completely. You may be able to get a good deal on 
one of the older handsets is someone is looking to 
sell their current iPhone. iPhones reaching back to the 
5s will be able to run iOS 11, although some features 
such as AR won’t work properly on older models that 
don’t have powerful enough processors.
Display size
There are now four screen sizes of iPhone available: 
4-, 4.7-, 5.5- and 5.8in. Which you like best is going to 
come down to personal preference. Here in the iPad & 
iPhone User office, we favour the 4.7in screen size for 
portability and one-handed use.
But the better tech (better cameras and in the case 
of the iPhone X a better screen and Face ID) can be 
found in the 5.5 and 5.8in models of iPhone and Apple 
offers a reachability feature to help make one-handed 
use for the larger sizes easier by shrinking the contents 
of the screen when you double touch the Home button. 
Plus, the bigger the screen the better videos and 
games are going to look. If you’re unsure which size 
is going to suit you best, we recommend visiting your 
local Apple Store and trying them. 
Storage capacity
You’ll find that each iPhone is available in two capacity 
options. It’s important to consider which you need 
before you buy, because they don’t have a microSD 
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 43
card slot that will allow you to add additional storage 
at a later date. 32GB may sound like a lot of storage, 
but you might be surprised how quickly that will 
disappear, particularly if you like to download lots 
of apps and games, or store photos on your handset.
We believe 64GB will be enough for most people, 
though, so consider carefully whether you need any 
more than that before you cough up the cash for the 
higher capacity. Have a look at your current phone, 
and how much storage space you have used up to 
determine how much space you really need.
iPhone X
Price:  £999 (64GB) from fave.co/2k4x2iq 
£1,149 (256GB) from fave.co/2k45qdn
To celebrate the iPhone’s 10th birthday, Apple has 
unveiled the iPhone X. It looks very different from the 
FEATURE

44 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
other handsets in Apple’s line-up. It has a 5.8in edge-
to-edge screen, Face ID rather than Touch ID to allow 
you to unlock your phone using your face, a 12Mp 
dual-lens camera on the rear and Portrait mode for the 
front and back cameras. It also offers wireless charging 
using the Qi standard. It’s impressive, that’s for sure, 
but it is expensive. With prices starting at £999 this is 
a serious investment, and with a glass back and even 
more glass on the front it’s certainly an iPhone you will 
need to take very good care of.
Should you buy the iPhone X? The answer is going to 
come down to budget, and how much you love having 
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 45
the latest and greatest technology. This is a luxury 
iPhone that you’re likely to love if you’ve got the cash to 
splash, but realistically one of Apple’s cheaper iPhones 
is going to be enough for most people.
Specifications
•  5.8in (2436x1125, 458ppi) Super Retina HD display, 
OLED HDR
•  iOS 11
•  A11 Bionic processor
•  Hexa-core 2.39GHz (2x Monsoon + 4x Mistral) CPU
•  Apple GPU (three-core graphics)
•  3GB RAM
•  64/256GB storage
•   Dual rear-facing cameras: 12Mp (f/1.8, 28mm) and 
12Mp (f/2.4, 52mm), OIS, phase detection autofocus, 
2x optical zoom, quad-LED dual-tone flash
•  7Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 32mm), 1080p at 
30fps, 720p at 240fps, face detection, HDR
•  No headphone jack (Lightning adaptor and Lightning 
EarPods included)
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC 
•  USB 2.0
•  Face ID (no Touch ID fingerprint sensor)
•  Apple Pay
•  Wireless charging
•  Splash, water and dust resistant
•  146.6x70.9x7.7mm
•  174g
FEATURE

46 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
iPhone 8 Plus
Price:  £799 (64GB) from fave.co/2ixoFLU 
£949 (256GB) from fave.co/2iARmYE
Launched at the same time as the iPhone X, the 8 Plus 
is the 5.5in option that is the direct successor to the 
iPhone 7 Plus. It has a new glass design and wireless 
charging, as well as the powerful A11 Bionic chip that 
will be great for the AR capabilities of iOS 11.
Still an expensive smartphone, the 8 Plus is for those 
looking for close to the best but with an entry point of 
£200 less. It’s still got a big screen, powerful processor, 
wireless charging and great rear-facing cameras, but 
you’ll miss out on edge-to-edge and Face ID.
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 47
It’s not a good upgrade if you’ve got an 7 Plus, but 
for iPhone 7 owners or owners of one of Apple’s older 
phones it might be worth it for the faster processor, 
wireless charging and dual-camera set-up. The 8 Plus 
is available in Silver, Gold and Space Grey (there’s no 
more Rose Gold, but Gold now seems to be a blend of 
the Gold and Rose Gold shades of previous iPhones).
Specifications
•  5.5in (1920x1080, 401ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  A11 Bionic processor
•  Hexa-core 2.39GHz (2x Monsoon + 4x Mistral) CPU
•  Apple GPU (three-core graphics)
•  3GB RAM
•  64/256GB storage
•   Dual rear-facing cameras: 12Mp (f/1.8, 28mm, OIS) 
and 12Mp (f/2.8, 57mm), phase detection autofocus, 
2x optical zoom, quad-LED dual-tone flash
•  7Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 32mm), 1080p at 
30fps, 720p at 240fps, face detection, HDR
•  No headphone jack (Lightning adaptor and Lightning 
EarPods included)
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  Wireless charging
•  Splash, water and dust resistant
FEATURE

48 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
•  158.4x78.1x7.5mm
•  202g
iPhone 8
Price:  £699 (64GB) from fave.co/2k3DEO5 
£849 (256GB) from fave.co/2k5Ihax
The iPhone 8 is also new, as a successor to the iPhone 
7. It too has the glass design and wireless charging, 
as well as the faster processor. We’d suggest skipping 
the iPhone 8 if you’ve already got an 7 or 7 Plus, but 
if you’ve got the 6s or older it could be a worthwhile 
upgrade, particularly if your contract is coming to 
an end. And if you’re considering whether to opt for 
the iPhone 8 or one of the more pricey models, we’d 
suggest that the £300 saving over the iPhone X is worth 
it. You’ll still get a gorgeous phone with great camera 
and processor technology (although the camera isn’t 
the dual-lens setup like the Plus and X), and the 4.7in 
screen size is actually our favourite for portability and 
ease-of-use.
Specifications
•  4.7in (1334x750, 326ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  A11 Bionic processor
•  Hexa-core 2.39GHz (2x Monsoon + 4x Mistral) CPU
•  Apple GPU (three-core graphics)
•  3GB RAM
•  64/256GB storage
•  12Mp rear-facing (f/1.8, 28mm), phase detection 
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 49
autofocus, OIS, quad-LED dual-tone flash
•  7Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2), 1080p at 30fps, 720p 
at 240fps, face detection, HDR, panorama
•  No headphone jack (Lightning adaptor and Lightning 
EarPods included)
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 5.0
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  Wireless charging
•  Splash, water and dust resistant
FEATURE

50 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
•  138.4x67.3x7.3mm
•  148g
iPhone 7 Plus
Price:  £669 (32GB) from fave.co/2k5oBn5 
£769 (128GB) from fave.co/2ixXReL 
£819 (128GB) from fave.co/2k5McEh
The iPhone 7 Plus was Apple’s top-of-the range device 
right up until the firm’s 12 September event, so it’s 
still a brilliant phone with fantastic specs and features. 
Highlights include its 5.5in screen and dual-lens rear 
camera with Portrait mode. It comes in 
five colours (the red iPhone 7 Plus 
is no longer available to buy from 
Apple): Jet Black, Black, Silver, 
Gold and Rose Gold.
Specifications
•  5.5in (1920x1080, 401ppi) 
LED-backlit IPS LCD, capacitive 
touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  Apple A10 Fusion processor
•  Quad-core 2.34GHz (2x 
Hurricane and 2x Zephyr) CPU
•  PowerVR Series7XT Plus 
(six-core graphics) GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  32/128/256GB storage
•  Dual rear-facing cameras: Dual: 
12Mp (f/1.8, 28mm, 1/3in, OIS) 
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 51
  and 12Mp (f/2.8, 56mm, 1/3.6in), phase detection 
autofocus, 2x optical zoom, quad-LED dual-tone flash
•  7Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 32mm), 1080p at 
30fps, 720p at 240fps, face detection, HDR
•  No headphone jack (Lightning adaptor and Lightning 
EarPods included)
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  Splash, water and dust resistant
•  158.2x77.9x7.3mm
•  188g
iPhone 7
Price:  £549 (32GB) from fave.co/2ixBtBY 
£649 (128GB) from fave.co/2iyEged 
The 7 Plus is accompanied by its smaller sibling, the 
4.7in 7. The main difference between the two is the 
screen size and rear camera setup. Like its bigger 
brother, there’s no headphone jack, though you’ll get 
the adaptor as well as the EarPods. It too is water-
resistant and dustproof, but without the rear dual-lens 
camera there’s no Portrait mode available. It’s available 
in Jet Black, Black, Silver, Gold and Rose Gold.
Specifications
•  4.7in (1334x750, 326ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
FEATURE

52 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
•  iOS 11
•  Apple A10 Fusion processor
•  Quad-core 2.34GHz (2x Hurricane 
and 2x Zephyr) CPU
•  PowerVR Series7XT Plus (six-core 
graphics GPU
•  2GB RAM
•  32/128 storage
•  12Mp rear-facing camera (f/1.8, 
28mm, 1/3in), phase detection 
autofocus, OIS, quad-LED dual-tone 
flash 
•  7Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 
32mm), 1080p at 30fps, 720p 
at 240fps, face detection, 
HDR, panorama
•  No headphone jack (Lightning 
adaptor and Lightning EarPods 
included)
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  Splash, water and dust resistant
•  138.3x67.1x7.1mm
•  138g
iPhone 6s Plus
Price:  £549 (32GB) from fave.co/2k2mws6 
£649 (128GB) from fave.co/2iB3Tvd
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 53
The 5.5in iPhone 6s Plus is, much to our surprise, 
still available to buy from Apple despite the launch of 
the iPhone 8 Plus. It was first released in September of 
2015 so is now two years old, but it’s no slouch. Like 
the other iPhones mentioned here, it has 3D Touch 
(the 6s series was the first to feature 3D Touch), but its 
specifications are slightly outdated.
Specifications
•  5.5in (1920x1080, 401ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  Apple A9 processor
FEATURE

54 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
•  Dual-core 1.84GHz Twister CPU
•  PowerVR GT7600 (six-core graphics) GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  32/128GB storage
•  12Mp rear-facing camera: (f/2.2, 29mm, 1/3in, 
1.22µm), phase detection autofocus, OIS, dual-LED 
dual-tone flash
•  5Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 31mm), 1080p at 
30fps, 720p at 240fps, face detection, HDR, panorama
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  158.2x77.9x7.3mm
•  192g
iPhone 6s
Price:  £449 (32GB) from fave.co/2k5ILgT 
£549 (128GB) from fave.co/2k2mws6
 
The iPhone 6s, like the 6s Plus, is two years old. It 
features the 4.7in display size that the iPhone 7 and 
iPhone 8 do, but with the older tech beneath it.
Specifications
•  4.7in (1334x750, 326ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  Apple A9 processor
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 55
•  Dual-core 1.84GHz Twister CPU
•  PowerVR GT7600 (six-core 
graphics) GPU
•  3GB RAM
•  32/128GB storage
•  12Mp rear-facing camera: (f/2.2, 
29mm, 1/3in, 1.22µm), phase 
detection autofocus, OIS, dual-LED 
dual-tone flash
•  5Mp front-facing camera (f/2.2, 
31mm), 1080p at 30fps, 720p 
at 240fps, face detection, 
HDR, panorama
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS, GLONASS, GALILEO, QZSS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  138.3x67.1x7.1mm
•  143g
iPhone SE
Price:  £349 (32GB) from fave.co/2iz5EZN 
£449 (128GB) from fave.co/2k4LRl7
The iPhone SE is actually newer than the 6s and 6s 
Plus, after it launched in the Spring of 2016. It has 
a very different form factor to the other phones 
available, designed as an entry-level option for those 
who want a smaller screen.
FEATURE

56 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
It sports the same design as the discontinued 
iPhone 5s, with a rather low resolution of 1136x640, 
but thanks to the small display that equates to 326ppi. 
Inside, though, the SE is much like an 6s in terms of 
specs, so you’re still getting some power just in a 
smaller package.
Specifications
•  4in (1136x640, 326ppi) LED-backlit IPS LCD, 
capacitive touchscreen
•  iOS 11
•  Apple A9 processor
•  Dual-core 1.84GHz Twister CPU
•  PowerVR GT7600 (six-core graphics) GPU
•  2GB RAM
•  32/128GB storage
•  12Mp rear-facing camera: (f/2.2, 
29mm, 1/3in, 1.22µm), phase 
detection autofocus, dual-LED 
dual-tone flash
•  1.2Mp front-facing camera (f/2.4, 
31mm), 720p at 30fps, face detection, 
HDR, FaceTime over Wi-Fi or Cellular
•  3.5mm headphone jack
•  Wi-Fi 802.11 a/b/g/n/ac
•  Bluetooth 4.2
•  A-GPS, GLONASS
•  NFC
•  USB 2.0
•  Apple Pay
•  123.8x58.6x7.6mm
•  113g
FEATURE

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 57
T
here’s nothing more frustrating than firing up your 
luxurious new smartphone, tapping one of your 
favourite games from your last device, and finding 
that it just doesn’t look right. In the case of the iPhone 
X, apps not updated for the new extra-tall, notch-
adorned OLED display have black bars bookending the 
experience. With that in mind, here are 10 of the top 
games you can play on Apple’s new phone, and each 
one has been optimized for that dazzling screen. 
Andrew Hayward rounds up the best titles for Apple’s flagship phone
Best iPhone X games
ROUND-UP

58 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
1. Monument Valley 2 
Price: £4.99 from tinyurl.com/yawmg8fw
If you haven’t gotten around to playing Monument 
Valley 2, now is definitely the time to do so. Ustwo’s 
sequel looks gorgeous on any screen you can find it on, 
but that’s especially true with the iPhone X, as the vivid 
colours dazzle on the 5.8in OLED display and the extra 
screen real estate gives you an even better view of the 
mind-boggling environmental puzzles.
Much like the original game, Monument Valley 2 
is all about trying to solve your way out of these odd 
structures and levels, which don’t always conform to 
real-world rules. But that’s a large part of the draw, as 
you experiment with moving around platforms and dials 
to find a way out. Of course, you should play Monument 
Valley first – even if it’s not yet iPhone X-optimized.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 59
ROUND-UP
2. Super Mario Run 
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/jdczpgx
Nintendo might still be fairly new to this whole mobile 
thing, but Super Mario Run has thankfully shown that 
the legendary gaming company is hip to the idea of 
keeping its iOS games updated with fresh content. 
Chief among those updates is the addition of iPhone 
X full screen compatibility, with the vibrant game 
expanded to fit the taller frame.
But that’s not all. Last year’s holiday gift also recently 
got a nice burst of added content, with a new world of 
courses added to the World Tour (if you’ve completed 
the rest), plus a new Remix 10 mode that sends you 
blasting through a series of teeny-tiny stages. It’s still 
$10 to unlock the full game after the free taste, but we 
think it’s worth it for classic Mario made mobile.

60 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
3. Impossible Road 
Price: £2.99 from tinyurl.com/yabvxn7l
Even after four years of release, Impossible Road is one 
of those games we keep coming back to time and again. 
It’s a perfectly distilled arcade-style challenge that finds 
you guiding a rolling ball down a twisting and turning 
rollercoaster-like course. You’ll need to avoid swiftly 
falling off into the void, but if you can guide yourself 
back onto a later part of the track within a few seconds, 
you can massively boost your score. That’s a feature, 
not a bug. With the default white-and-blue theme, 
the notch is unavoidable – although the ultra-minimal 
aesthetic remains striking. But the alternate black-and-
orange looks perfect on the iPhone X screen (although 
tough to capture in screenshot form), and the game has 
seen a couple other UI tweaks in this update.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 61
ROUND-UP
4. Animal Crossing: Pocket Camp 
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/ycxnofq3
Nintendo is now three-for-three in bringing its beloved 
console and handheld franchises to the App Store, as 
the brand new Animal Crossing: Pocket Camp shows 
(Fire Emblem Heroes is the other, FYI). If you haven’t 
encountered the series on Nintendo’s own systems, it’s 
essentially a low-key life simulator, albeit one filled with 
cute animals and addictive activities. This new mobile 
rendition puts you in charge of your own campsite and 
roving camper, both of which you’ll decorate by filling 
them with items… which you’ll obtain by completing 
tasks around the island. It’s a compelling little game 
that you can play in little chunks throughout the day. 
And the bright, cartoonish style is incredibly charming 
to boot. Animal Crossing has never looked better.

62 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
5. Alto’s Adventure 
Price: £4,99 from tinyurl.com/y7lvs9ep
We’re so glad to see Alto’s Adventure pumped up and 
looking extra-beautiful on the iPhone X’s screen. This 
is a game we loved on previous iPhones and iPads, 
as well as on Apple TV, and it’s one that deserves as 
much screen as you can devote to it: Snowman’s side-
scrolling, snowboarding game is really that gorgeous.
You’ll glide down a mountain for as long as you can, 
evading pursuing elders, grinding on bunting lines, 
and rescuing runaway llamas, all while a cheery jingle 
loops in the background. While you ride, time passes 
fabulously, as the lighting and weather conditions 
shift and the layered backgrounds showcase all of that 
beauty on your large, handheld screen.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 63
ROUND-UP
6. Modern Combat Versus 
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/yddaloty
The iPhone X might not be a dedicated game console, 
but a game like Modern Combat Versus might fool 
you with its glossy, TV-ready 3D graphics. Gameloft’s 
series has always been cutting-edge visually, even 
dating back several years to the earliest editions, and 
this latest version takes things a step further with 
crisp environments and player models, plus loads of 
detail in the mix. As the title suggests, Modern Combat 
Versus is all about multiplayer action, as you pop online 
for frantic 4-on-4 live battles that challenge you to 
maintain control of a point on the map. It’s a freemium 
game, so there’s a grind here for unlocking additional 
gear and agents, or you can spend cash to speed things 
up. But you can still have plenty of quick fun for free.

64 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
7. Chameleon Run 
Price: £1.99 from tinyurl.com/yd7brp4g
Here’s another side-scrolling favourite that’s been 
around a little while, but it’s much, much different in 
tone from something like Alto’s Adventure. Chameleon 
Run is crazy-tough, sending you leaping across far-flung 
platforms in the hopes of making it to the end goal in 
each stage. And if you mistime a jump or land on the 
wrong platform, you’re toast. Game over, man. 
How you avoid the latter issue is by tapping the 
screen to change colour, going from yellow to pink or 
vice versa. You can only land on platforms of the same 
colour as your lizard body, so you’ll need to rapidly 
swap to make it through most of these challenges. It’s a 
really slick-looking game in motion, and even more so 
on the iPhone X’s great screen.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 65
ROUND-UP
8. The Witness 
Price: £9.99 from tinyurl.com/ycuqr7tc
Undoubtedly one of the best-looking games you can 
put on your iPhone X, The Witness drops you onto a 
lush island full of puzzles to solve. How many puzzles? 
More than 500, actually, which start simply enough 
with line puzzles on signs posted throughout the 
world, but soon become quite a bit more challenging 
and engrossing. Between the puzzles, you’ll unlock 
a gorgeous environment filled with vividly-coloured 
plant life, spectacular architecture, and a quiet sense of 
mystery all about the island. Given its massive stack of 
challenges, you might be tempted to play The Witness 
for weeks and weeks (or more), so it’s a good thing the 
game looks so fabulous in full-screen on the iPhone X.

66 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
9. Old Man’s Journey 
Price: £4.99 from tinyurl.com/y82btz3w
We recommended Old Man’s Journey a few months 
back thanks to its gorgeous hand-drawn look, emotional 
story beats, and evocative soundtrack, and we’d like 
to offer that grand thumbs-up once more now that the 
game is properly optimized for the iPhone X. 
Truth be told, there isn’t that much ‘game’ to Old 
Man’s Journey: it’s a like a storybook adventure with 
just enough interactivity to hook you in. As the titular 
elder beset by unfortunate news, you’ll travel the 
countryside and fiddle with some breezy puzzles as 
you trek to fulfil your sudden quest – and take breaks 
every so often to reminisce about the good times 
and bad decisions of his past. It’s sweet, and so very 
beautiful on Apple’s latest handset.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 67
ROUND-UP
10. Oceanhorn 
Price: £7.99 from tinyurl.com/ya5dx3mz
On a list with a couple of legit Nintendo games, 
here’s one that looks and plays like another one of 
the company’s classics, even if it actually isn’t one. 
Oceanhorn does an impeccable impression of The 
Legend of Zelda, delivering an epic (yet mobile-
friendly) adventure on both land and sea. 
You’ll explore dungeons, solve puzzles, battle 
enemies, and try to find out the real story behind the 
titular sea beast, and while Oceanhorn may not be a 
real Zelda game, it captures the essence quite well in 
a portable package. And while this game has been out 
for a few years now, it has been gradually enhanced 
and refined over the years, and it still looks really 
slick on the iPhone X.

68 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
W
hether you’re playing on the spectacular 
iPhone X or something less extravagant, the 
App Store has plenty of new games to help 
bring a swipe to your finger and a smile to your face. 
November saw a pretty sweet stack of compelling 
iOS game releases, and amidst the excitement and 
stress of the holiday season, you may need some fresh 
distractions. Here are our top new releases.
Andrew Hayward looks at this month’s best new releases
Latest iOS games

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 69
ROUND-UP
1. GRID Autosport 
Price: £9.99 from tinyurl.com/ybvy5698
There’s no shortage of great racing games on iPhone 
and iPad, and we picked our favourites over the summer 
– but we might have to tweak that list after playing 
GRID Autosport. It’s billed as a console-quality mobile 
game, and that’s absolutely true since it’s a port of a 
2014 console and PC game. And it really hasn’t suffered 
in the  transition to touch devices.
GRID Autosport delivers realistic racing with 
simulation-style physics but more forgiving, arcade-
like handling, and it packs in the content with 100 cars 
and 100 tracks to race on. It also runs like a dream on 
the iPhone X, at least, although you do need a pretty 
recent iOS device to even run it. The £10 price point 
is higher than most on the App Store, but it’s worth it 
for a meaty racing experience, plus all of the add-on 
downloadable content is totally free.

70 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
2. GNOG
Price: £4.99 from tinyurl.com/y862fcaz
While a game like The Room tries to challenge and 
befuddle players with its puzzle boxes, GNOG instead 
seems content to entertain more than confound. It too 
gives you a series of puzzling boxes or devices to try 
and unlock and explore, but it has a very loose and light 
feel to the exploration, encouraging you to poke and 
prod until something new happens.
What makes the game such a delight is the variety 
and visual splendour of each new object – a monster 
head, to be precise. You’ll flip them around, tap and 
swipe switches, and be greeted with dazzling graphics 
all the while. And with augmented reality support, you 
can even drop the puzzle boxes into your real-world 
surroundings if you prefer.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 71
ROUND-UP
3. Flipflop Solitaire 
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/ydgkogex
Zach Gage is a prolific game designer, but lately he’s 
been focused on tweaking classic games into something 
fresh and exciting for mobile. He did that with the great 
Sage Solitaire and last year’s Really Bad Chess, and now 
he’s remixing the former card game classic again with 
the new Flipflop Solitaire. Once more, it’s designed for 
one-handed play, but in a very different way.
This variant is built to be ‘unrestrictive’ like a sandal 
(thus its name), letting you stack cards counting up or 
down, but you can only move stacks of a single suit. It’s 
a clever twist, and like in Sage Solitaire, it’s the kind of 
mechanic that adds a welcome bit of challenge to the 
game. There’s quite a bit to play for free, but you can 
pay £2.99 within to unlock extra modes.

72 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
4. Lineage II: Revolution
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/yay45jxx
Vast and beautiful massively-multiplayer online 
games are usually found on computers and consoles, 
but Lineage II: Revolution manages to streamline the 
experience enough to work on mobile, and it’s no less 
attractive as a result. Like GRID earlier on this list, 
Lineage II is a 3D stunner that effectively looks like a 
glossy Mac game running on your iPhone or iPad.
In action, Lineage II can be played like a mouse-
driven online role-player, as you take quests, hack and 
slash through enemies, and grind for new equipment 
and higher levels. However, by default, the core loop 
of running quests is done automatically: you’ll tap a 
button and watch your hero run to a destination and 
fight. Whether or not you prefer that approach is up to 
you, but it helps deliver the feel of an MMO with less 
need for obsessive attention.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 73
ROUND-UP
5. Sky Gamblers – Infinite Jets 
Price: £4.99 from tinyurl.com/ybqqafrk
Atypical Games’ Sky Gamblers series has delivered 
reliable dogfighting fun over the years, and the latest 
entry Sky Gamblers – Infinite Jets keeps that streak 
alive in a fresh setting. Scrapping the historical focus 
of past entries, Infinite Jets adds a modern-day sheen 
as you take control of speedy, soaring jets above major 
cities around the world.
The single-player campaign offers shoot-outs over 
locales like San Francisco and Rio de Janeiro, as you 
take down fellow fighter jets and other targets, while 
the online action promises blistering seven-on-seven 
battles for aerial supremacy. It’s another slick-looking 
game that packs in plenty of polish for the £5 asking 
price (and it’s also on Mac at the same price).

74 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
6. Far From Noise
Price: £2.99 from tinyurl.com/y8r22u3v
Many games deal with death (or let you deal out death), 
but very few actually bother to contemplate it, or 
focus on the moments before its seeming imminence. 
Given that, Far From Noise feels like a very distinctive 
experience. You see a car teetering over a cliff with the 
ocean below, and there’s a woman inside. You’re the 
woman, and you’re freaking out (understandably).
What unfolds next is a loose conversation about 
what happened and how she got to this point, first with 
herself and later with a forest creature who happens by. 
That’s the whole game: it’s just dialogue options and 
storytelling, but it’s a compelling way to spend a couple 
hours and maybe have a deep think about what you’d 
do in the same, perilous situation.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 75
ROUND-UP
7. Neverending Nightmares 
Price: £3.99 from tinyurl.com/y6ww9scg
On the other hand, if you’re looking for a something 
that’s quite a bit freakier, then Neverending 
Nightmares might suffice. It’s a psychological horror 
game inspired by the creator’s own battles with 
depression and obsessive-compulsive disorder, and 
the tendencies he explores manifests themselves in 
reality as you wander the game world.
It begins in the character’s bedroom and throughout 
the maze-like house, as you walk the side-scrolling 
plane and see black-and-white environments covered in 
distortion. You can interact with coloured objects as you 
explore, and along the way, some seriously, seriously 
disturbing things happen. The tension is thick, even 
when nothing is really happening at the moment.

76 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
8. Puzzle Fighter
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/y84kj6c2
Capcom’s Super Puzzle Fighter II Turbo is one of the 
all-time great puzzle games, pairing colour-matching 
gem manoeuvring with Street Fighter characters that 
lob attacks when you clear big chunks from the screen. 
The new Puzzle Fighter for iOS keeps that same core 
approach while bringing in characters from other games 
(such as Mega Man and Dead Rising), not to mention 
a freemium approach. The core gameplay remains 
endearing, although not quite as fluid with touch 
controls as you’d find with a gamepad in past versions. 
However, this edition is pretty limited in terms of play 
modes, and unlocking stuff can be kind of a grind. It’s 
still worth a look, though, even if this isn’t the ultimate 
version of the brilliant formula.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 77
ROUND-UP
9. Tower Fortress 
Price: Free from tinyurl.com/y9s92q4p
Nitrome publishes some of the best pixel-packed 
games on the App Store (such as Gunbrick and Magic 
Mansion), so the release of Tower Fortress certainly 
caught our attention. It’s a bit like Downwell in reverse, 
albeit without the sort of frantic helplessness of falling 
into an unknown darkness filled with things that can kill 
you. Instead, you’ll ascend up the tower level by level, 
blasting or avoiding the things that attempt to slay you 
and unlocking loads of suits of armour and guns along 
the way. Each run features random levels, so you’ll 
never play the same level twice, plus there are boss 
battles along the way. How long can you survive in your 
trek up the tower?

78 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
REVIEW
Price: $79.99 (around £60 inc VAT)
Buy from: fave.co/2iCkVZT
Astropad Studio
A
s a longtime Adobe Photoshop and Lightroom 
user, I periodically consider buying a digitizer, 
such as a Wacom tablet, to better take advantage 
of editing with brushes and other tools that work with 
pen-based input. I know photographers and artists who 
swear by them, but it would be a significant expense for 
my comparatively modest editing needs. 
It turns out, though, I already have an excellent pen-
based touchscreen device: an iPad Pro with an Apple 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 79
REVIEW
Pencil. More often than not, it’s usually on my desk at 
home or in my bag at a coffee shop.
Astropad Studio turns that iPad Pro into a digitizer. 
Most Wacom tablets incorporate a pen-sensitive surface 
that transmits strokes and taps over a wire. If you want 
to spend at least £800, the Wacom Cintiq provides a 
touch-sensitive screen on which to work. 
Astropad Studio does the same on the iPad Pro 
you already own, wired or wirelessly. The company 
also sells Astropad Standard, which works with non-
Pro iPad models and costs $29.99 (around £22) as a 
one-time purchase.
The Astropad Studio app runs on the iPad Pro and 
communicates with a sister application on the Mac. 
When connected – via a Lightning-to-USB cable or with 
both devices on the same Wi-Fi network – the iPad Pro 
displays a portion of the Mac’s screen, which you can 
control using your fingers or an Apple Pencil. How much 
you see depends on your screen resolution. When set 
to 100 percent view, the iOS app reveals only a section, 
necessitating some window resizing. You can also view 
the entire Mac screen on the iPad by holding Astropad’s 
main button and tapping the Full-screen button, 
but that means you’re not working 1:1 with the app 
you’re controlling, which may not be as accurate when 
drawing. Switching between views and repositioning 
the active area is simple and quick, however.
It’s important to note that Astropad Studio isn’t 
limited to specific applications, nor does it require 
plug-ins or other hooks. The Pencil becomes your 
mouse pointer, with the ability to pass along Pencil-
specific gesture data as needed.

80 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
REVIEW
If you’re using Astropad Studio and the iPad Pro as 
a digitizer, you’ll probably have one hand poised over 
your keyboard and the other using the iPad. However, 
you can also control everything from the iPad using an 
on-screen keyboard, shortcut keys (Command, Option, 
Shift, Control) that are easily displayed, and quick 
access to basic commands such as Undo, Redo, Cut, 
Copy, and Paste. Those are the defaults; you can set up 
any menu item in that space.
Further customization is possible through Magic 
Gestures, actions that involve both finger touches and 
Pencil drawing. Annoyed that you can’t flip the Apple 
Pencil over and erase? (Even years out of school where 
I rarely touch a real pencil, that’s a behaviour that 
Astropad Studio on the iPad Pro and a resized Lightroom Classic to fit Astropad’s visible 
area at 100 percent. Instead of shrinking the application window, you could focus Astropad 
Studio on areas and move the view as needed.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 81
REVIEW
Set up sidebar shortcuts to common application tasks
will probably never go away.) Activate a tool’s erase 
function by holding one finger on the screen and 
drawing with the Pencil. Or touch two fingers on the 
screen and tap with the pencil to right-click and bring 
up the contextual menu. You can configure Magic 
Gestures for other actions, too.
All of those features are welcome, but the top 
consideration with a setup like this is performance. On 
a 10.5in iPad Pro, connected via USB to my late 2016 
MacBook Pro with Touch Bar, the app reported a 2ms 
response time. On my home Wi-Fi network, running 

82 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
REVIEW
at 5GHz using an Eero system, that time was 4- to 
5ms. In both situations while I attempted some quick 
sketching, there didn’t appear to be any noticeable lag.
Moving the active area around does introduce a 
slight delay while the screen re-renders; it displays a 
low-resolution proxy for a second and then the higher-
resolution version kicks in. A setting to display a non-
Retina version of the screen solves this, as long as 
you don’t mind a softer image (which mostly manifests 
itself in software interface items and text).
Buying advice
Overall, Astropad Studio is an impressive way to 
incorporate pen input into Mac drawing or image 
editing. The yearly subscription price feels steep for my 
personal editing needs, but if you do this kind of work 
more regularly, it’s justified. Jeff Carlson

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 83
HOW TO
F
ace ID is at least as secure as Touch ID, but it does 
have its drawbacks. If you have an identical twin, 
for example, they will probably be able to fool it. 
And if someone gets hold of your phone and manages 
to point it at your face, that might unlock it (provided 
you turn your attention toward it).
If you quickly want to set your phone so that your face will no 
longer unlock it, Jason Cross reveals what to do
How to: Disable  
Face ID on the iPhone X

84 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
Apple has safeguards in place, just as it did with 
Touch ID: If Face ID tries to authenticate on someone 
else’s face and fails several times, it will disable and 
require your passcode. Still, there may be times when 
you feel that you don’t want anyone to be able to use 
Face ID to get into your phone. Fortunately, it’s quite 
easy to temporarily disable it. It’s fast and discreet.
Temporarily disable Face ID
Just press and hold the side button, and either one 
of the volume buttons (it doesn’t matter which one). 
It’s a quick squeeze of your phone. After about two 
seconds, you’ll see the lock screen above, with sliders 
to power off the phone, show your Medical ID, or trigger 
Emergency SOS. At this point, Face ID is disabled. The 
next time you try to unlock your phone, even if you 
hit Cancel, the only way to get in will be to enter your 
six-digit passcode.
Turn off Face ID for good
You should note that Face ID is only temporarily 
disabled using the method described above. Once 
you use your passcode to unlock your phone, it will 
be active again. You have to go into Settings > Face ID 
& Passcode to turn it off for good. The iPhone 8 and 8 
Plus work this same way for Touch ID, but you should 
know that this is different from previous iPhones. On 
those, you would press the side button five times. 
Don’t do that on your iPhone 8 or X. If you do, it will set 
immediately set off Emergency SOS mode with a loud 
siren. This will also disable Face ID, but it’s probably not 
the best way to do it.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 85
HOW TO
Y
ou shouldn’t have to turn off your iPhone very 
often. If you’re not going to use it for a few hours, 
it’s not worth the hassle (and minuscule battery 
life savings) to shut it down.
But, if you know you’re not going to use your phone 
for a couple days, or on a very long international flight, 
and you want to save every last ounce of battery life, 
shutting it down can be an effective option.
How to: Power off  
and restart your iPhone X
Jason Cross explains how to turn off your handset

86 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
Also, if you suspect some bug has made your phone 
unresponsive or slow, the first troubleshooting step 
should be that old IT standby: turn it off and on again.
You used to be able to force a restart on iPhone by 
holding down the side and Home button for awhile – 10 
seconds or so. With no Home button, you have to force 
a reset a little differently on iPhone X.
To shut down the iPhone X, quickly press and 
release the Volume Up button, then the Volume Down 
button, then press and hold the Side button. Your phone 
will show a ‘slide to power off’ bar at the top. Slide that, 
and it will turn off your phone.
This is different from the emergency mode activated 
by pressing and holding the Side button and either 
volume button for two seconds. That gives you quick 
access to SOS mode, Medical ID, and it disables Face ID 
until the phone is unlocked with your passcode. This 
power-off method does none of that.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 87
HOW TO
I
t’s a common misconception that closing out apps 
on your iPhone helps extend battery life. This isn’t 
true – iOS suspends inactive background applications 
effectively. Restarting apps from scratch takes more 
time and can result in shorter battery life than simply 
unsuspending them.
But apps aren’t always perfectly well behaved. 
Sometimes they freeze or the interface gets corrupted, 
How to: Close  
apps on the iPhone X
Closing apps is a little different, writes Jason Cross

88 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
and you need to start over fresh. Those sorts of 
situations are the only times you should close apps. 
With no home button, how do you do it? Simple:
1.  Bring up your list of all apps by swiping up from the 
bottom of the screen and pausing for a second. You’ll 
see cards for all your apps pop in.
2.  Press and hold anywhere on those app cards. You’ll 
see a red circle appear on the upper left of each one.
3. Tap any red circle to close that app.
4.  Tap anywhere outside the stack of app cards to 
cancel the app-closing mode.
You can also swipe up on the cards to close apps, 
but only once the red circles are showing. Swiping 
up on an app any other time just returns you to the 
home screen. Again, you shouldn’t feel it necessary 
to close apps in order to extend your phone’s battery. 
Constantly closing and re-launching apps will probably 
cost you battery life, compared to allowing the 
operating system to manage its resources. But if you 
want to ensure that an app isn’t doing anything in the 
background, or need to relaunch it to fix a problem, 
closing apps can be effective.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 89
HOW TO
T
aking screenshots is one of the most-used iPhone 
features, and with iOS 11’s new screenshot 
editing features, it’s more useful than ever. But 
you’ve always taken a screenshot by pressing the Side 
button and Home button, and that won’t work on an 
iPhone X as is no Home button. Fortunately, it’s just 
as easy on Apple’s new phone. Simply press the Side 
button and the Volume Up button at the same time. 
How to: Take a screenshot 
on the iPhone X
Taking a screenshot is as easy as it used to be, reveals Jason Cross

90 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
O
ver time the contacts list on your iPhone can 
quickly become cluttered with duplicates: 
multiple entries for the same people. This might 
be due to new email addresses, phones numbers, or 
other ephemera being added here and there, or simple 
carelessness. However it happens, the end result is 
usually a mess.
Clearing this up is easy to do, though, as the 
duplicates can either be merged into single master 
Martyn Casserly shows how to bring back order by removing or 
merging unnecessary duplicate contacts
How to: Delete duplicate 
contacts from an iPhone

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 91
HOW TO
contacts, or deleted if they serve no purpose. In this 
article we show how to get control of your iPhone 
address book once more.
Merge (link) duplicate contacts
If the various contacts you have for the same person 
contain different information – maybe work and home 
numbers – then they can be merged into one with only 
a few quick steps.
To open your Contacts app, tap the green Phone 
icon on the Home screen, then select Contacts from 
the options at the bottom of the screen. Scroll through 
the list until you find the contact that you want to 
merge, and tap it.
On the page that appears you should see an Edit 
option in the top-right corner. Tap this and you’ll be 
able to adjust the information linked to this particular 
contact. Scroll down to the bottom of the page and 
you’ll see the ‘link contacts...’ option. Tap this and you’ll 
be taken back to your list of contacts. Now you just 

92 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
need to select the name that you want to merge with 
the one you’re currently editing. Tap on it to open the 
card, then in the upper right-hand corner tap on the 
Link option, followed by Done.
Now your many will have become one. Of course, 
if you have several for the same person then you can 
continue linking until they are all in a single contact.
Delete duplicate contacts
In some cases, you might not want to link or merge 
multiple contacts as one is redundant. Here it’s best to 
delete the superfluous entries. To do so, first tap on the 
green Phone icon on your Home page. Select Contacts 
from the option at the bottom of the screen, and find 
the one you want to delete. Tap on it, then on the card 
that appears tap the Edit option in the upper right-hand 
corner. On the next page, scroll down until you find 
the Delete Contact option. Tap this. Now, confirm your 
decision by tapping on the dialog box that appears, and 
the contact will be removed from your list.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 93
HOW TO
I
t’s easy to send animated GIFs from your iPhone 
using the Messages app, using the built-in app drawer 
added in iOS 11. In this tutorial we show how to make 
use of this feature, and amuse and delight your friends 
with yawning babies, dancing Pokémon, Taylor Swift 
doing thumbs up, and so on.
(It’s also pretty easy to send GIFs over WhatsApp, if 
that’s more your thing.)
Amuse and delight your friends by sending out animated GIFs from 
the Messages app on your iPhone. David Price show how
How to: Send  
GIFs from an iPhone

94 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
Sending GIFs from Messages’ built-in selection
Open the Messages app, and either tap the compose 
icon (a pen in a square) to create a new message or 
open an existing conversation. Unlike many of the 
newer features in this app, GIF support is not limited to 
iMessage conversations with other iOS users; it works 
in conventional texts too.
At the bottom of the screen you’ll see two icons 
to the left of the message body field (a camera and 
the capital A for Messages’ App Store), and if it’s an 
iMessage a microphone to the right so you can record 
voice messages. Tap the App Store ‘A’ and a row of new 
icons will appear below. The icons that appear will 
vary depending on which compatible apps you’ve got 
on your phone.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 95
HOW TO
Tap the red magnifying glass icon. (If you tap and 
hold it you’ll see that it’s labelled #images.) Tap the 
upward-pointing chevron to slide out the drawer to 
full-screen; you can swipe up to scroll through more 
GIFs. Tap the ‘Find images’ field at the top to search 
for something specific.
Once you’ve found a GIF you like, tap it and after 
a short pause it will be dropped into a message. (If 
you’re not quite sure, you can tap and hold the GIF 
instead, to see it blown up to full size; tap it again to 
go back to the previous page, or tap the arrow to add 
it to your message.) Add any text you want, then tap the 
send arrow. If you change your mind, tap the X at the 
top-right of the GIF to remove it.

96 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
HOW TO
Sending your own GIFs
We’ve shown how to access 
the built-in selection of GIFs 
you can find in Messages. But 
it’s also possible to make your 
own custom GIFs, based on 
Live Photos, YouTube videos 
and more. We have separate 
articles showing how to make 
GIFs on Mac, and how to make 
GIFs on an iPhone. You can 
find and save GIFs online; and 
don’t forget that if someone 
sends a GIF to you, you can tap 
and hold to save that to your 
Photos app.
As part of the iOS 11 
update, Apple added a new 
Animated folder to Photos, and 
this is where any GIFs you save 
will be stored. So to add one of your GIFs to a iMessage 
or text in the Messages app, you simply have to tap the 
camera icon, then tap Photos, and find the Animated 
folder. Tap the GIF you want to send, then confirm by 
tapping Choose, and it will be dropped into a message 
ready for sending.

ISSUE 122 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 97
OPINION
A
head of the iPhone X’s announcement back in 
September, there had been plenty of rumours 
about it including biometric security based on 
facial recognition, as well as whether or not Apple was 
struggling to incorporate Touch ID into this new model. 
Unsurprisingly, there was a lot of hand-wringing over 
iPhone X is the first Apple device to incorporate Face ID, but it’s a 
solid bet that it won’t be the last, writes Dan Moren
If Face ID is the future, 
where will we see it next?

98 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
OPINION
this move, with plenty of pundits who insisted that Face 
ID was only a sop until Apple could figure out how to 
incorporate Touch ID into its new all-screen phone. 
Now that the iPhone X has finally made its way 
into the world, we’ve gotten a little more perspective 
on the matter. Not only have we seen how Face ID is 
a major departure from previous facial recognition 
systems, but we’ve also had Apple executives 
point out that the company had long ago made 
the decision to ditch Touch ID for Face ID – which 
we should have all logically considered when the 
rumours were flying, as the company’s not going to 
be struggling with design decisions mere months 
before they ship millions of devices. 
But now that Face ID is about to become part of 
many of our daily lives, it’s worth considering what else 
might be in store for this technology. Because if the 
company’s moving away from Touch ID in its flagship 
device, you can bet that Face ID is here to stay. 
More faces  
As good as the early reviews say Face ID is, the 
technology isn’t without its limitations. Some of these 
are on the minor side: for example, certain types of 
sunglasses might not be compatible because they block 
the wavelength of light needed for the infrared-based 
equipment in the True Depth cameras. Likewise, those 
of us in colder climes might need to pull down our 
scarves in order for the camera to recognize us. Hardly 
deal-breakers, but inconveniences. (Let’s not laud Touch 
ID and pretend it didn’t have its own problems, or have 
you never had to retrain the sensor when your skin was 

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 99
OPINION
too dry?) But in one way Face ID does take a step back 
from Touch ID: it only supports enrolling a single face. 
For many people that may be no problem at all, but for 
those users who allow others to use their device – a 
partner, child, parent, or so on – it can be frustrating 
to have to revert back to sharing a strong, possibly 
hard to remember passcode (and your passcode is 
strong, right?). 
Similarly, sharing a password is a bigger security 
risk,  since it allows for access to many protected parts 
of iOS that are otherwise inaccessible. And if you 
wanted to revoke the access you’d given someone 
with Touch ID, it was easy enough to remove a 
fingerprint from the device; changing your passcode 
is definitely more annoying.
In some ways this is easy to reconcile with Apple’s 
philosophy – the company has always pushed the idea 
that an iPhone is really for a single user. (Ever tried to 
buy or download apps with multiple iTunes accounts?) 

100 ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
OPINION
But I’m also convinced that the company will eventually 
expand Face ID’s purview to handle different people 
accessing the same device, for one very good reason... 
More devices
Although the iPhone X is the first Apple device to 
incorporate Face ID, it’s a solid bet that it won’t be 
the last. The simplest reason is that if it does indeed 
provide the most reliable and most powerful form of 
biometric security, why restrict it to just a single device? 
Moreover, Apple would no doubt like to offer the 
feature on other devices to allow users to have a single 
authentication method on all their devices. 
The iPad is the most obvious choice for the next 
device to get Face ID, at least if it follows the previous 
example of Touch ID. Bringing the system to another 
iOS device ought to be relatively straightforward, and 
Apple would no doubt like to get rid of the home button 
on its tablet and free up valuable space there as well. 
(Plus, the swiping up gesture to bring up the Dock 
and multitasking interfaces on the iPad in iOS 11 is 
already reminiscent of the iPhone X’s replacement for 
the home button.)
More interesting, however, is the Mac. Touch ID has 
been slow to migrate to the Mac, appearing only on the 
Touch Bar-enabled MacBook Pros. But the Touch Bar 
has been one of the company’s less popular features of 
recent years, and while many – myself included – had 
expected the company might integrate Touch ID into a 
Magic Keyboard or Magic Trackpad, it certainly seems 
plausible that the company decided to skip that entirely 
once it had made the decision to bet on Face ID.

ISSUE 127 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 101
OPINION
And unlike iOS devices, Macs don’t generally suffer 
from the same limited space or power problems that 
Apple has to balance on phones and tablets. Plus it 
opens up a better experience for using Apple Pay on 
your Mac, and let’s be honest: it’ll probably be even 
more reliable than logging in to your Mac using your 
Apple Watch.
Both iPads and Macs are far more likely to be 
shared between multiple users, and Macs of course 
have explicit support for multiple accounts, which, 
on Touch ID-enabled MacBook Pros, even supports 
user-switching via fingerprints. So it seems a pretty 
good bet that Face ID would follow in that feature’s 
footsteps. And hey, maybe it will even encourage Apple 
to acknowledge that iPads get shared between different 
users as well, and finally bring the multi-user support 
enabled for education into mainstream usage, but 
perhaps that’s a topic for another day.


