Wireless
BEST 
earbuds
+
FROM IDG
ISSUE 128
Guide to Meltdown and 
Spectre CPU flaw
iPhone X  
HEAD TO HEAD:
iPhone 8 
vs
iPhone 8 Plus  
YEAR IN
REVIEW: 
2017

2 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
CONTENTS
NEWS
NEWS ANALYSIS
COMPARISON
17
4 
 Apple responds to claims 
it slows down old iPhones
6 
 Meltdown and Spectre
11 
 Apple and Shazam
17 
iPhone X vs 8 Plus vs 8
6
4

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 3
CONTENTS
Keep updated with all the latest iPad & iPhone 
news, by following us on Twitter and Facebook
BUYING GUIDE
ROUND-UP
OPINION
49
67
Looking ahead to 2018    95
67
FEATURES
Best wireless earbuds    49
Best iOS games of 2017    67
Latest iOS games    84
Year in review: 2017    33
What’s next for Face ID?    44

4 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS
A
pple has released a statement to TechCrunch 
to address accusations on the Internet that the 
company purposely throttles the performance of 
older iPhones in order to boost new iPhone sales. Here 
is the statement to TechCrunch:
Our goal is to deliver the best experience for 
customers which includes overall performance and 
Apple answers its critics. Roman Loyola reports
Apple responds to claims 
it slows down old iPhones

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 5
NEWS
prolonging the life of their devices. Lithium-ion 
batteries become less capable of supplying peak 
current demands when in cold conditions, have a low 
battery charge or as they age over time, which can 
result in the device unexpectedly shutting down to 
protect its electronic components.
Last year we released a feature for iPhone 
6, iPhone 6s and iPhone SE to smooth out the 
instantaneous peaks only when needed to prevent 
the device from unexpectedly shutting down during 
these conditions. We’ve now extended that feature to 
iPhone 7 with iOS 11.2, and plan to add support for 
other products in the future.
The batteries in iPhones, iPads, and other portable 
devices degrade over time, thanks to heat and age. This 
means an older battery becomes less suited to meet 
the demands of a device’s processing peak. With an 
iPhone, this could cause the device to shut down.
To address this, Apple last year updated iOS with 
power management features so that processing 
peaks were smoothed out by putting a cap on the 
power draw from the battery, or by distributing power 
requests over multiple cycles.
As TechCrunch points out, this is a problem with 
lithium-ion batteries, and Apple’s power management 
is an attempt to prolong the life of your device, not 
to shorten it. If Apple were truly trying to hamper 
performance to force sales of new devices, the 
company would be basically asking for legal and 
governmental problems.

6 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS ANALYSIS
B
y now you will have heard about the Spectre 
and Meltdown CPU flaws, but you might not fully 
understand what the issue is and how you can 
protect yourself against the risks. We’re here to help. 
Here’s how these vulnerabilities affect your Apple 
devices and what you can so to keep them safe.
Meltdown and Spectre FAQ
What is the issue here?
There are three separate potential security issues 
at play here, one named Meltdown and two named 
Spectre. They all take advantage of something called 
speculative execution. Basically, modern CPUs try to 
Michael Simon reveals why you shouldn’t panic
Meltdown and Spectre 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 7
NEWS ANALYSIS
speed things up by taking educated guesses to predict 
what the next operation will be, and will go so far as to 
execute them ahead of time. If the prediction is correct, 
the CPU has an answer all ready to go. If it’s incorrect, 
the ‘speculative execution’ is removed. The whole 
process is nearly instantaneous and should be invisible 
to the software and operating system. The Meltdown 
and Spectre bugs allow hackers to read and access 
this information in the OS kernel memory by taking 
advantage of the delay in its rollback.
What devices do they effect?
In a nutshell, all of them. If you have a PowerMac G5 or 
an iPhone 3GS, you’re probably okay, but all modern 
Macs and iOS devices are affected. While Meltdown 
mainly affects Intel-based Macs and PCs, in Apple’s 
case it also affects iOS devices. Spectre affects all 
iOS, macOS, and tvOS. WatchOS is unaffected by the 
Meltdown and Spectre flaws.
What’s Apple doing to fix it?
Well, there isn’t really a real fix. These exploits rely 
on flaws baked right into the very design of the 
CPUs themselves. The best Apple or anyone can 
do is mitigate the risk, and Apple is already taking 
steps to do so. In December, Apple released macOS 
10.13.2, iOS 11.2, and tvOS 11.2 with mitigations to 
lessen the risk, and iOS 11.2.2 also “includes security 
improvements to Safari and WebKit to mitigate the 
effects of Spectre”. Additionally, Safari 11.0.2 includes 
mitigations against Spectre on macOS. Apple says 
more mitigations are on the way.

8 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS ANALYSIS
What about older operating systems?
It’s unclear from Apple’s statement, but presumably 
it will issue security updates to address the issue, as 
evidenced by this support page (fave.co/2CU8R1H). 
If you have a system new enough to run macOS High 
Sierra and iOS 11, your best bet is to update. If you 
have an older system for which those OSes are not 
supported, you don’t have any choice but to hold tight.
Will my device be affected?
It’s too early to say, but Apple assured users that 
there won’t be any noticeable performance impact. It 
says it ran the December update through Geekbench, 
Speedometer, JetStream, and ARES-6 and saw “no 
measurable reduction in the performance of macOS and 
iOS”. Additionally, it has tested its Safari mitigations 
with the similar results, including an impact of less than 
2.5 percent using the JetStream benchmark.
How can I protect my device from attack?
Update your operating system
This is the obvious answer, but it’s also the best one. 
As we said, there is no real fix for Meltdown or Spectre, 
just ways to make exploits harder to pull off. Apple has 
already begun taking steps to protect users, but they 
will only be effective if they’re installed.
So, if you can update your Mac and iOS device 
to High Sierra and iOS 11, respectively, do so. Apple 
has squashed many of the early bugs and the latest 
versions are running smoothly, so if you want the best 
protection from Meltdown and Spectre, the latest 
version of the latest OSes are the best way to do it.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 9
NEWS ANALYSIS
Update Safari, Firefox, and Chrome
Apart from macOS, iOS, and tvOS, Apple is also updating 
Safari to address a possible JavaScript exploit of the 
Spectre flaw. This will be arriving soon, so check the 
updates tab in the App Store app to install it once 
it arrives. Firefox 57.0.4 adds protections to that 
browser, and Chrome 64 (to be released on 23 January) 
will do the same for Google’s browser. In the meantime, 
an optional feature called Site Isolation can help reduce 
risk in Chrome.
Don’t download apps from untrusted developers
Hackers can’t get into your system unless you let 
them in, so be mindful of where your apps are coming 
from, especially in the Mac. Obviously, the Mac App 
Store is the safest way to download apps, but there 
are a number of legitimate developers that offer apps 
Your best protection is 
to download the latest 
versions of the latest 
operating system

10 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS ANALYSIS
outside Apple’s store. Most of them are safe to install, 
but you should do some research before hitting the 
download button. macOS already users by default 
when launching apps from unidentified developers, so 
pay attention to any prompts you get when opening 
an app for the first time.
Stay vigilant
As Apple says, the risk to users is fairly low, but 
the scale here is massive. With hundreds of million 
vulnerable devices, hackers are going to be working 
overtime to exploit these flaws, so be aware of a 
anything amiss with your device or accounts, and take 
the appropriate action if necessary.
The Mac App Store 
is the safest place to 
download apps from

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 11
NEWS ANALYSIS
S
hazam was a true game-changer as one of the 
first apps to appear in the App Store back in July 
2008. With just a tap, Shazam could identify 
nearly any song you heard without needing to know 
anything about it. Shazam was a magical app that 
I used to show off my iPhone, and unlike all those 
other apps whose novelty wore off in just a few weeks 
(anyone remember iBeer?), Shazam has only gotten 
better over the years.
Apple’s purchase of Shazam means much more to the iPhone than 
its acquisition of Beats, writes Michael Simon
Apple and Shazam

12 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS ANALYSIS
Apple has long had partnered with Shazam to 
power Siri’s song identification service, but now the 
Cupertino giant has confirmed that it is buying the 
company outright for a cool $400 million, a relative 
bargain in today’s tech dollars. On the surface, a 
Shazam purchase ensures that Siri will always be 
able to recognize the song you’re listening to and 
will provide a boost to Apple Music, but I think Apple 
has much bigger plans for the service.
Like everything else Apple seems to be doing now, 
it’s about augmented reality and machine learning. 
And it could be the thing that finally puts Siri back at 
the front of the pack.
Listen up
Shazam’s main strength is music identification, and 
that fits well into Apple’s current strategy. It’s not 
just Siri on our phones: AirPods, HomePod, and Apple 
Watch could benefit from Shazam’s uncanny ability 
to name that tune.
And we might not even have to ask. On the new 
Pixel phones, Google has implemented a feature that 
displays the name of a song playing nearby even if 
Assistant hasn’t been asked. It’s a neat feature that’s all 
done locally, and I use far more often than I thought I 
would. A similar feature would be great on the iPhone, 
and with Shazam’s massive library at Apple’s disposal 
it would be far superior to Google’s. 
But where Shazam could really help Siri’s ears is 
with HomePod. Apple wants its new home speaker to 
‘reinvent home music’, but if all it does is sound good, 
that’s hardly revolutionary. If Apple could leverage 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 13
NEWS ANALYSIS
its Shazam acquisition to build some serious smarts 
into HomePod, it could be a difference maker. We will 
already be able to ask Siri to play things like the most 
popular song in 1986, but Shazam could amplify its 
knowledge considerably. It would be great to tap your 
AirPods and ask “Play the song that goes like this...” 
or “Play that Ed Sheeran song about Ireland.” Shazam 
might not be able to do that now, but the groundwork is 
certainly in place, particularly when paired with Apple’s 
own AI musical capabilities.
And it could go beyond simple song identification 
too. Apple could use Shazam to create personalized 
playlists right on HomePod, based on your listening 
habits and tastes. Apple Music already creates mixes 
that are pretty great, but Apple’s machine learning 
could use what it hears to create customized playlists 
It’s hoped you’ll be 
able to create playlists 
on a HomePod

14 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
NEWS ANALYSIS
for the time of day that only play in our homes. That 
alone could be a reason to spend £349 on a HomePod. 
Seeing is believing
Shazam may be a household name when it comes to 
song identification, but the underlying technology 
has much broader application. Back in 2015, Shazam 
added visual recognition to its portfolio, and while it 
hasn’t caught on quite as well as its audio capabilities, 
Apple’s new AR push could definitely benefit.
Even with ARKit, Apple is lagging when it comes 
to augmented reality, especially on the AI side 
of things. Most notably, Google has introduced a 
technology with the Pixel 2 called Lens, which works 
with Assistant to identify and interact with real-world 
objects. For example, you could point your phone at 
a building and Assistant will tell you about it, or you 
can scan a business card and it will automatically be 
added to your contacts. Google will soon be rolling 
out Lens to all Android phones, and once it does, 
Siri on the iPhone will seem even more outdated 
than it already does.
But Shazam could give Apple a real boost here. 
While the public face of Shazam’s visual recognition 
has mainly focuses on brands – like scanning a movie 
poster to access a trailer – but Apple could tap into 
Shazam’s engine to give Siri a whole new class of 
intelligence. We’ve read enough rumours about the 
Apple car and Apple glasses to see that AR is the next 
area of focus, and Shazam could help bring that future 
into view. We know Shazam will amplify Siri’s ears, 
but it could be a boost to its vision too.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 15
Better but not exclusive
When Apple bought Beats, I expected Apple would 
force users to buy an iPhone if they wanted a new 
pair. That hasn’t happened. Instead, Apple has made 
the experience better on the iPhone with seamless 
pairing, a feature that I suspect has sold more iPhones 
than forcing people to switch.
I expect something similar with Shazam. While 
conventional thinking would suggest that Apple would 
shutter the Android app in a few months, I don’t think 
that will be the case. But I do think Shazam will be 
better on iOS. Android users will get the same song-
identifying Shazam that’s available today while iOS 
users will enjoy more features, even beyond what’s 
baked into the newer products. Apple likely won’t 
FEATURE

16 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
cut people off, but it will add enough cool features 
for people to notice. I think we’ll see a delineation 
between the Shazam app on the Play Store and the 
App Store, as Apple enhances its capabilities on iOS 
and adds exclusive features.
Apple’s purchase of Shazam might have been a 
bigger deal three years ago, but it could have much 
more of an impact on your Apple devices now. Earlier 
today, TechCrunch reported that Spotify and Snap were 
also interested in purchasing Shazam, so the potential 
here is more than just cornering the market on song 
identification. Apple is poised to leap into the AI and AR 
race with both feet, and Shazam could be the perfect 
technology to vault them to the head of the class.
And if not, well, at least Siri will be better than 
Assistant and Cortana at IDing songs. That’s worth 
$400 million, right?

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 17
A
pple launched three new iPhones in 2017: the 
8, 8 Plus, and the X (pronounced iPhone ten). If 
you are thinking about upgrading your phone, 
you are likely to be wondering which one will suit you 
best. Over the following pages we compare each of the 
models, so you can find the handset that’s right for you.
Price
The cost of these three iPhones is probably the biggest 
divider and it may well be your budget that is the 
deciding factor. However, note that while there are 
huge discrepancies between the prices if you buy 
your handset directly from Apple, if you are spreading 
payments over a two-year period with your mobile 
network the difference may only be a few pounds a 
Karen Haslam looks at how Apple’s latest handsets compare
iPhone X vs 8 Plus vs 8
COMPARISON

18 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
month. Also note that there is less difference in price 
between the 256GB version of one handset and the 
64GB version of the next model up. For example, 
the 256GB 8 Plus costs just £50 less than the 64GB 
iPhone X. So the choice is really between flagship 
phone and the extra space.
iPhone X: £999 (64GB), £1,149 (256GB)
iPhone 8 Plus: £799 (64GB), £949 (256GB)
iPhone 8: £699 (64GB), £849 (256GB)
Size
The iPhone 8 is smallest and thinnest of the three 
handset, but only slightly. If your choice was going to 
be based on the size and shape of the iPhone, then 
there is very little difference here. When it comes to 
weight, the difference is greater, however.
iPhone X: 143.6x70.9x7.7mm, 174g
iPhone 8 Plus: 158.4x78.1x7.5mm, 202g
iPhone 8: 138.4x67.3x7.3mm, 148g
Verdict
If it’s a small iPhone you are looking for then there is 
not really a significant difference here. It’s certainly not 
worth disqualifying the iPhone X over a few millimetres 
in size, and with just 26g between them, the X is hardly 
going to feel hefty in comparison to the fractionally 
lighter iPhone 8.
If you really want a small iPhone then there is 
another iPhone you could consider. The SE is Apple’s 
smallest handset:

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 19
COMPARISON
iPhone SE: 123.8x58.6x7.6mm, 113g
Display
The iPhone X and 8 may be almost identical when it 
comes to size and weight, but there is one very big 
difference: the size of the screen.
iPhone X: 5.8in Super Retina HD display
iPhone 8 Plus: 5.5in Retina HD display 
iPhone 8: 4.7in Retina HD display
When it comes to screen size it looks like there 
is one clear winner here, the iPhone X. However that 
5.8in diagonal measurement is deceptive. If you 
measure the screen’s height and width the results are:
iPhone X

20 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
iPhone X: 62x135mm
iPhone 8 Plus: 69x122mm
Phone 8: 59x105mm
So, there is a world of difference between the iPhone 
8 and the X screen, but in terms of the 8 Plus, there is 
just an extra 13mm in height on one phone and an extra 
7mm in width on the other. 
If, however, you exclude the iPhone X notch (the 
area at the top of the display that houses the Face ID 
camera) from that measurement, then the 
screen is more accurately 62mm across 
by 130mm down (so 8mm longer than 
the 8 Plus). But it’s still bigger than the 
8 Plus screen, and given 
that the handset is itself 
smaller, that is something 
to celebrate. Also for many 
the 8 Plus is just too big 
and cumbersome to hold 
comfortably. The choice 
isn’t really about screen 
size, but rather it is about 
how much of a sacrifice 
you are prepared to make 
to get a larger screen.
Verdict
When it comes to picking 
a phone you should ask 
yourself whether you 
want an iPhone screen 
iPhone 8 Plus 
and 8

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 21
COMPARISON
that is longer, or an iPhone screen that is wider. Also, 
will you be using your iPhone to watch movies and TV 
shows filmed in 16:9 aspect ratio, because where the 
iPhone 8 and 8 Plus are 16:9 screens, the iPhone X 
screen is a 19.5:9 screen and as a result you may end 
up choosing to watch movies in a letter box format 
rather than crop elements.
Display quality
There is one other thing to say about the display on the 
iPhone X – it’s an OLED screen that Apple is calling a 
Super Retina display. 
iPhone X: TrueTone, 2436x1125-pixel resolution at 
458ppi, with 1,000,000:1 contrast ratio
iPhone 8 Plus: Retina Display, 1920x1080 pixel 
resolution at 401ppi, and a 1300:1 contrast ratio
iPhone 8: Retina Display, 1334x750-pixel resolution 
at 326ppi, and a 1400:1 contrast ratio
This is the first time an iPhone has been available 
with an OLED screen. OLEDs have a lot of excellent 
features including absolute blacks – hence that 
1,000,000:1 contrast ratio – and a wider viewing angle.
When we used the iPhone X we were impressed. 
Colours were bold and bright, and the whites more 
true to life, also perhaps a shade more yellow than on 
the iPhone 8 Plus, which seemed have a bluer tint. In 
comparison to the 8 Plus dark areas were brighter and 
clearer. This is thanks to the other feature of the screen 
– HDR (high dynamic range) – which expands the range 
of both contrast and colour. When we watched dark 

22 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
scenes in movies there was a lot more clarity on the X 
than on the other iPhone models.
The problem with OLEDs is they can suffer from 
screen-burn – a ‘ghost’ image that remains on the 
screen (something plaguing the Google Pixel 2), colour 
shifting can also be a problem. Apple says that it has 
taken steps to guard against this.
Verdict
The OLED screen on the iPhone X is a sight to behold, 
especially thanks to the incorporation of HDR. But we 
feel the dimensions of the screen are the wrong aspect 
ratio to really enjoy movies, which is where HDR would 
be of most benefit. We are also slightly apprehensive 
about some of the issues OLEDs are known for.
Processor
When it comes down to processor there is really not a 
significant difference between the three phones as each 
phone uses Apple’s A11 Bionic system-on-chip. In fact, 
when it came to benchmark tests, we found that the 
Geekbench scores were practically identical although 
we actually found that the 8 Plus and 8 scored slightly 
higher than the iPhone X when we tested them.
Verdict
With multi-core scores around the 10,100 mark – 
almost twice what the iPhone 7 Plus scored – and 
more than the competition (the Samsung Galaxy Note 
8 scores around 6,471 while the Google Pixel 2 scores 
6224) – we think that which ever iPhone you choose 
the processor speed will not disappoint.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 23
COMPARISON
Camera
All three phones have a 12Mp rear-facing camera, 
but there are some key differences.
The iPhone X and the iPhone 8 Plus have two 
cameras on the back. That’s a ƒ/1.8 aperture wide-
angle and ƒ/2.4 aperture telephoto camera that 
combine to create the stunning portrait shots with 
the blurred background that those phones can take. 
The iPhone X and 8 Plus also have an optical zoom 
and can digital zoom up to 10x.
The iPhone 8 just has the one 12Mp camera on the 
back with a ƒ/1.8 aperture, so it can’t take the fancy 
portrait shots, and it’s digital zoom goes to 5x.
Another difference is the fact that the rear-facing 
lenses on the iPhone X both have optical image 
stabilisation (OIS), which should equal better low light, 
while only the wide-angle lense on the 8 Plus has this.
iPhone X

24 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
In our photo tests we found that macro photos taken 
with the iPhone X were better than those on the 8 Plus, 
and the additional OIS is probably the reason for that.
There is also new technology in the A11 Bionic 
processor that allows Apple to go a step further with 
this portrait photography in the iPhone X and 8 Plus. 
The ‘Neural Engine’ in the image signal processor 
can allow you to change the lighting conditions after 
taking the photograph.
Portrait Lighting options include Natural Light, 
Studio Light, Contour Light, Stage Light, and Stage Light 
Mono. The latter two options black out the background 
while the other options change how the light appears to 
fall on your face. Right now the feature is in beta – and 
it doesn’t always give the best results, but its a fun way 
to enhance the already good portrait style shots. If you 
take a lot of pictures of people and would like to create 
the bokeh effect then we think you’d love this feature of 
the iPhone X. If you don’t know what the bokeh effect is 
we’d probably suggest you don’t really need it.
Turning to the camera on the front of the iPhones. 
The selfie/FaceTime camera on the front of the X is 
different to that found on the 8 and 8 Plus.
On the iPhone 8 models you will find a 7Mp 
FaceTime HD camera with Retina Flash (the same 
as on the iPhone Plus) but on the iPhone X there is 
a 7Mp TrueDepth front camera with Portrait mode 
and Portrait Lighting. This TrueDepth camera is what 
makes Face ID possible – as we will explain later. In 
terms of taking photos, the TrueDepth camera on the 
front of the iPhone X can take what Apple is calling 
Portrait Mode Selfies. In other words, the front-facing 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 25
COMPARISON
camera can take photos with a sharp foreground and 
an artfully blurred background to create the same 
bokeh effect that the two cameras on the back of 
the iPhone X and Plus can achieve.
Verdict
When it comes to cameras the X gives you the extra 
image stabilisation and Portrait Mode Selfies. The 8 Plus 
is more than adequate if you don’t want to spend your 
days taking selfies (and we can’t help but think that 
the people who do that are all using Snapchat anyway). 
However, the camera in the iPhone 8 is still great, so, if 
you aren’t bothered by the addition of the rear-facing 
Portrait Mode, the iPhone 8 is more than adequate.
The missing Home Button
There is one huge difference between the iPhone X and 
the iPhone 8 and 8 Plus and it may be the thing that 
iPhone 8 Plus 
and 8

26 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
turns you off the iPhone X altogether. The trade-off for 
getting the bigger screen on the iPhone 8 is the demise 
of the Home Button. Yes, the trademark Home Button, 
which was perhaps as part of a design of the iPhone as 
the click wheel was on the iPod, has gone.
The removal of the Home Button means that Apple 
needed to make some changes to the iPhone interface. 
So if you were to buy an iPhone X you would have 
to learn a new way to navigate the interface. You 
may adapt to this quickly, or you may find yourself 
frustrated. It depends on how willing you are to 
embrace change, and how intuitive the new way of 
interfacing with the iPhone is.
We have this article that explains how to use the 
new iPhone X, and all the new gestures that you will 
have to learn. When we used the iPhone X for a short 
time we found we quickly adjusted to the new gestures.
Verdict
We found that it was a lot easier to get used to the 
different gestures on the iPhone X than we expected, 
but we still feel that the Home button was more 
intuitive and it is frustrating to feel that you have to 
perform extra steps to do things that previously only 
took one button press.
Face ID vs Touch ID
There is another change as a result of the missing Home 
Button. Touch ID, Apple’s fingerprint recognition system 
for securing your phone so that only you could open it, 
and allowing you to pay for things using Apple Pay, has 
been replaced with Face ID.
COMPARISON

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 27
We feel a bit sad about the loss of Touch ID on 
the iPhone X. We liked the simplicity of being able to 
unlock our phone just by touching the Home Button, 
and we enjoyed being able to use our iPhone to pay 
for things in shops. With Face ID you will unlock your 
phone by looking at it. 
There is a lot of concern buzzing around the web 
about the reliability of Face ID and how secure it is.
COMPARISON

28 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
Since the iPhone X launched there have been 
various cases of people being able to unlock someone 
else’s iPhone X – normally identical twins or family 
members, but there have also been tales of people 
unlocking iPhone X models with masks. .
Apple says that Face ID is more secure than Touch 
ID. According to Apple, there is only a one in a million 
chance that Face ID would allow someone else to 
unlock your iPhone – that someone would have to be 
your doppelgänger. In essence, Face ID is secure from 
a criminal since they are unlikely to look like you, but if 
it’s your sibling you want to keep secrets from then you 
might not be so lucky.
Apple also recommends that children under the 
age of 13 shouldn’t use Face ID as their faces are still 
developing and “distinct facial features 
may not have fully developed”.
Touch ID, on the other hand, has a 
one in 50,000 chance of being cracked 
by someone else’s fingerprint. (It 
strikes us that it would be easier to find 
someone who looked like someone 
else than to find someone with a 
similar fingerprint if you were intent on 
hacking into their phone though).
We found Face ID worked very well, 
although initially we found it failed 
to recognize us on a few occasions. 
However, the initial failings were 
due to Face ID learning us, and as it 
became accustomed to recognizing 
us in various lighting and with or 
COMPARISON

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 29
without glasses and the like, it happily unlocked the 
iPhone whenever required.
One last thing to note here – when it comes to 
security the difference between Face ID and Touch ID 
is really irrelevant because anyone can unlock your 
iPhone if they have your passcode. So if you don’t 
have a secure passcode – that’s a passcode that isn’t 
000000 or 123456 – then you might as well leave 
your iPhone unlocked.
Verdict
There are some benefits to Face ID. You never feel like 
you are having to unlock your phone, and logging onto 
services that would have previously used Touch ID, now 
work with Face ID, so accessing your banking app on 
your phone can be quicker, if your iPhone X recognizes 
it’s you. But it can be frustrating to use it when after 
your iPhone recognizes you it is still necessary to press 
the Side button to activate a payment.
Specifications
Those are the main differences that will probably 
make the biggest difference to you. But there are a 
few more differences between the iPhone 8, 8 Plus 
and X in terms of specifications.
There are also a few things that are identical as we 
will outline below.
Colour choices
iPhone X: Space Grey/Silver
iPhone 8 Plus: Gold/Silver/Space Grey
iPhone 8: Gold/Silver/Space Grey
COMPARISON

30 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
Capacity
iPhone X: 64GB/256GB
iPhone 8 Plus: 64GB/256GB
iPhone 8: 64GB/256GB
Water resistance
iPhone X: Rated IP67 under IEC standard 60529
iPhone 8 Plus: Rated IP67 under IEC standard 60529
iPhone 8: Rated IP67 under IEC standard 60529
Processor chip
iPhone X: A11 Bionic chip with 64-bit architecture, M11 
motion coprocessor
iPhone 8 Plus: A11 Bionic chip with 64-bit architecture, 
M11 motion coprocessor
iPhone 8: A11 Bionic chip with 64-bit architecture, M11 
motion coprocessor
Battery life
iPhone X: Lasts up to 2 hours longer than iPhone 7
iPhone 8 Plus: Lasts about the same as iPhone 7
iPhone 8: Lasts about the same as iPhone 7
Wireless charging
iPhone X: Wireless charging (works with Qi chargers)
iPhone 8 Plus: Wireless charging (works with Qi 
chargers)
iPhone 8: Wireless charging (works with Qi chargers) 
We’ve skipped over wireless charging which is a new 
feature for the iPhone 8, 8 Plus and iPhone X. We aren’t 
convinced about how important a feature it is, but if it is 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 31
COMPARISON
something you are attracted to, it’s worth emphasising 
that the feature is available on both the iPhone 8 and X 
so it’s not a reason to choose one phone over the other. 
Buying advice
There are a few features that the iPhone X has that we’d 
love, such as the Portrait Mode Selfies and the improved 
Portrait Mode on the rear camera. The bigger screen on 
the smaller handset sounds great, but we feel it’s a little 
iPhone X, Apple 
Watch and AirPods 
using an AirPower 
charging matt

32 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
COMPARISON
spoiled by the notch and the fact that it’s not actually 
any wider than that on the iPhone 8.
In addition, the removal of the Home Button means 
that not only do you need to relearn the interface, but 
you can no longer use Touch ID. We find this very off-
putting, however, we are suspicious that it is something 
we will all have to learn to live with, because the 
likelihood is that future iPhones will adopt this edge-to-
edge screen and Face ID.
Right now though, we’d say go ahead and buy the 
iPhone 8 Plus if you want to use the improved Portrait 
Mode, or just stick with the cheaper iPhone 8 and enjoy 
the Home Button while you still can. That’s unless you 
want to be one of an elite using the new iPhone X and 
all the bragging rights that that entails. And we know 
quite a few people who fit into that category.
iPhone 8 Plus

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 33
FEATURE
I
t has become cliché to use the term ‘mixed bag’ to 
describe anything with both good and bad qualities, 
but there is no better term for the kind of year Apple 
has had in 2017. It was a year marked by some of 
Apple’s best product releases in years, and the company 
has the growing sales to match. At no point in Apple’s 
history has it has so many products that reach so many 
people, and it has never had a bigger impact on the 
world of consumer technology.
Apple had one of its best years ever in 2017. And one of its worst. 
Jason Cross reports
Year in review: 2017

34 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
These bright notes are soured by a whole host of 
screw-ups, delays, and stagnation. Perhaps Apple’s 
doing too much too fast, but it seems that the most 
valuable company in the world should probably have 
the resources to maintain quality as it expands its reach.
Here’s a look back at Apple’s major hits and 
misses of 2017.
Catching up with hardware
Apple has always made sophisticated hardware with 
incredible craftsmanship, but Android enthusiasts 
could rightly lay claim to a few very desirable features. 
This year, Apple finally delivered wireless charging, an 
extremely ‘bezel-less’ design, fast charging via USB 
Power Delivery, and perhaps the world’s best OLED 
display in a mobile device. We could argue about 
other features like removable storage, but for the most 
part, the iPhone line is no longer feels like it’s missing 
significant features relative to top-tier Android phones.
Apple caught up in other areas, too. The Apple TV 4K 
feels like the last streaming box to support 4K and HDR, 
but it’s one of the best. And Apple did the right thing 
by making iTunes movie purchases and rentals in 4K 
cost the same as the HD version, and even updated HD 
movies in your library to the 4K version automatically 
(if available).
When it comes to smart watches, there’s Apple 
Watch and there’s everything else. Apple’s dominant 
position in this market hasn’t stopped fans from looking 
sidelong at those Galaxy Gear watches with LTE, wishing 
Apple would get the hint. Apple delivered in a big way 
with Apple Watch Series 3, which manages to pack 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 35
FEATURE
LTE support and a faster processor into the same form 
factor. When you look at the whole picture – speed, 
software support, interface, build quality, aesthetics, 
size, comfort, battery life – Apple Watch Series 3 is 
so far ahead of the rest of the smartwatch market 
it’s laughable.
Leading the way
While much of Apple’s hardware efforts in 2017 could 
be viewed as catching up to features present in top 
competitors, we also saw industry-leading innovations.
Take Augmented Reality. ARKit in iOS 11 is leagues 
ahead of the competition. The maturity, accuracy, and 
robustness of these developer tools resulted in a mini-
explosion of AR apps. And while Google’s Project Tango 
Apple is late to the 4K streaming 
party, but it delivered a great box

36 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
has never caught on, ARKit apps run on any iPhone or 
iPad sold in the past few years – hundreds of millions 
of devices. Google tried to catch up with ARCore, but 
it has limited reach and scale. It seems made in clear 
response to Apple’s ARKit.
Face ID on iPhone X is another great example of 
Apple pushing the industry forward. The TrueDepth 
camera is far more sophisticated than the front-facing 
sensors on other phones. Apple’s not the first to 
implement facial recognition in a phone, but it’s the 
Face ID is way ahead of 
anything on any other 
phone, and is going to be 
copied everywhere

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 37
FEATURE
first to do it with the speed, reliability, and security 
necessary for it to fully replace your fingerprint, even 
for authenticating purchases. There was controversy 
around Face ID and the elimination of Touch ID, but 
time has proven it to be a hit. You’re going to see Face 
ID and other TrueDepth features like Animoji copied by 
everyone else in the course of the next year or two.
And, while the iPad didn’t a major overhaul (we 
could see that in 2018), Apple continues to dominate 
the premium tablet market with features, performance, 
battery life, and app support far beyond its Android 
competitors. The 10.5in iPad Pro is easily the best 
iPad Apple’s ever made.
Falling behind
For all of Apple’s leading advances, there are some core 
products that feel like they’re coasting.
Siri is perhaps the most important area in which 
Apple is being left in the dust but its competitors. 
iOS 11 brought only marginal improvements, while 
Amazon’s Alexa and Google Assistant are in a whole 
other league. Siri simply understands our speech 
less effectively, delivers less desirable results, is all-
around less reliable, and has a very limited feature set 
compared to Alexa and Assistant. For Siri to catch up, 
it has to make major strides along every axis, all while 
Google and Amazon drive forward as fast as they can. 
This is not an area where Apple should be content with 
second-best, much less distant third.
Apple’s Photos app suffers similar deficiencies 
compared to the best from Google. From a service 
standpoint, Google offers free unlimited photo and 

38 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
video storage with the purchase of one of its phones; a 
huge benefit that would be trivial for Apple to replicate. 
Google Photos’ ability to quickly and accurately identify 
people in our photo libraries is light years beyond 
Apple’s (it even does pets), and its AI-powered search 
functions are an order of magnitude more advanced. 
Apple has rarely jumped aboard the latest processor 
releases as fast as the Windows ecosystem, but there’s 
little excuse for the MacBook Pro to still sport a dual-
core CPU when those quad-core 8th Generation Core i7 
processors are all over the Windows laptop scene. It’s 
not a big platform overhaul – these are almost drop-in 
replacements. We’ve got a laundry list of substantial 
changes we’d like to see in the MacBook line, but in 
the meantime, Apple could at least keep the processors 
current, especially when the new model offers such 
enormous performance benefits.
iOS 11’s big leap forward
iOS 11 is a really, really big update. It’s the most 
ambitious iOS update in years, and incorporates a lot 
of new under-the-hood technologies together with 
significant new design changes.
There’s so much ‘new’ in there. New setup 
experience. New Control Centre. New app store. There 
are new toys for developers like ARKit, new photo 
and video formats (HEIF/HEVC), improvements to Siri, 
indoor Maps... the list is extensive. Nowhere is iOS 11 a 
bigger deal than on iPad. iPads with iOS 11 are capable 
of serious work thanks to a new Dock, changes to 
multitasking, drag-and-drop support, and a smart new 
keyboard feature called QuickType. 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 39
FEATURE
iOS 11 is so big and ambitious that a couple 
of its key features didn’t make the initial release. 
Apple Pay Cash just landed in iOS 11.2, and we’re still 
waiting on Messages in iCloud. Nonetheless, from a 
features standpoint, iOS 11 is a massive improvement 
that mostly gets things right. Except...
Software bugs abound
iOS 11 is full of bugs, and Apple just can’t seem 
to shake them. Every iOS release coincides with 
complaints about it slowing down my iPhones, many 
of them imagined. iOS releases also prompt cries of, “it 
iOS 11 makes the iPad dramatically more functional

40 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
ruined my battery life,” but in iOS 11 there seems to 
have been some real bugs that caused serious battery 
life problems for a big number of users.
Apple’s problems with iOS 11 seem never-ending. 
A quick 11.0.1 update fixed a problem with Exchange 
email servers. 11.0.2 fixed a problem that caused 
some iPhone 8 and 8 Plus owners to hear crackling in 
their earpieces. Then there was a problem with haptic 
feedback on some iPhones, fixed in 11.0.3. 
The 11.1 release added lots of new emoji, but 
introduced a really obvious bug: typing a capital 
‘I’ autocorrected to a capital ‘A’ followed by an 
undecipherable unicode symbol. Oh, but then some 
iPhone X users found that their touchscreens stopped 
working in cold weather, and that had to be fixed in 
11.1.2 (along with a bug with Live Photos).
Apple even had to kick out iOS 11.2 in the middle of 
the night on a weekend, because it fixed a bug whereby 
daily notifications would cause iPhones to reboot 
starting at 12:15am on 2 December. 
Apple didn’t end the year on a high note, confirming 
what many iPhone users had speculated: the power 
management built into iOS can slow down performance 
on iPhones with old batteries. This isn’t a bug, however, 
and Apple’s reasoning makes sense on a technical 
level; the company is trying to preserve battery life 
and prevent crashes and shutdowns on older iPhones 
as batteries lose their ability to supply peak voltage. 
But Apple screwed up the delivery of this feature 
and its messaging to users, and it’s led to a number 
of class-action lawsuits that will probably be settle 
sometime next year.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 41
FEATURE
Amateur-hour bugs like these are the antithesis 
of the Apple marketing pitch – that when you control 
the hardware and the software, ‘it just work’. Lest iOS 
have all the fun with dumb bugs that should have 
been caught, macOS got in on the fun with a the very 
serious Root Bug. The company responded very quickly, 
but then botched that by breaking file sharing and 
reintroducing the bug if you upgraded to 10.13.1 after 
installing the fix. Wasn’t the whole point of macOS High 
Sierra to focus on reliability and performance instead of 
introducing major new features?
Apple’s had a rough year with software. iOS 11 has 
a ton of big improvements, but some of its features 
didn’t make release and the reliability has been far 
Nobody should have to try a workaround to type a capital ‘I’

42 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
below the company’s usual standards. Even some of the 
releases that weren’t bug-ridden caused headaches, like 
when iTunes 12.7 dropped support for iOS apps. It’s a 
necessary step in de-cluttering the bloated mess that 
is iTunes, but it could have been handled in a way that 
didn’t catch so many users off guard.
Delays, delays, and more delays
As much as Apple has done this year, it was supposed 
to do more. Delays are a normal part of tech, but this is 
rarely true of Apple; the company develops in secret, 
only announcing something when it is sure it is going to 
release when promised.
But we’re still waiting on Messages in iCloud. We had 
to wait months for Apple Pay Cash. 
Thanks to manufacturing difficulties, the iPhone X 
had to launch six weeks after the iPhone 8 and 8 Plus, 
and was set to be in very limited supply for many weeks 
thereafter. Apple and its partners have done a great job 
fixing supply issues and improving availability, but it’s a 
delay that shouldn’t have happened.
HomePod is already a year or two behind its 
competitors in the home speaker space, and now 
it’s going to miss 2017 entirely. Missing this holiday 
season will certainly impact sales – Alexa and Google 
Home are hot items, and people don’t want to buy 
another smart speaker just a few months later. 
Especially one that, at £349, costs way more.
In some cases, Apple promised a release by the end 
of the year and just barely squeaked in under the wire. 
Amazon Prime Video on Apple TV dropped in December 
(six months after its announcement) and the iMac Pro 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 43
FEATURE
is shipping – and you can’t even buy the big 14- and 
18-core configurations.
Here’s to a smoother 2018
We put a lot of pressure on Apple. We constantly 
expect new market-defining, groundbreaking products 
on the scale of the iPhone or iPad. If a year passes 
without an Apple Car, or Apple AR Glasses, or an Apple 
over-the-top streaming television service, we read 
scores of op-ed missives about how Apple has lost 
its ability to innovate. 2017 was a year marked by a 
bunch of exciting new Apple releases in both hardware 
and software, but a heaping pile of shameful bugs 
and product delays cast doubt about Apple’s ability 
to execute at the quality level we expect. If there’s 
one thing we want most from Apple in 2018, it’s a 
commitment to improving quality.
Apple’s complex TrueDepth 
camera array caused a delayed 
launch for iPhone X, and 
shipping shortages. It was 
rectified quickly, at least

44 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
A
head of the iPhone X’s announcement back in 
September, there had been plenty of rumours 
about it including biometric security based on 
facial recognition, as well as whether or not Apple was 
struggling to incorporate Touch ID into this new model. 
Unsurprisingly, there was a lot of hand-wringing over 
this move, with plenty of pundits who insisted that Face 
ID was only a sop until Apple could figure out how to 
incorporate Touch ID into its new all-screen phone. 
What’s next for Face ID?
iPhone X is the first Apple device to incorporate Face ID, but it’s a 
solid bet that it won’t be the last, writes Dan Moren

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 45
FEATURE
Now that the iPhone X has finally made its way 
into the world, we’ve gotten a little more perspective 
on the matter. Not only have we seen how Face ID is 
a major departure from previous facial recognition 
systems, but we’ve also had Apple executives point 
out that the company had long ago made the decision 
to ditch Touch ID for Face ID, which we should have all 
logically considered when the rumours were flying, as 
the company’s not going to be struggling with design 
decisions mere months before they ship millions 
of devices. But now that Face ID is about to become part 
of many of our daily lives, it’s worth considering what 
else might be in store for this technology. Because 
if the company’s moving away from Touch ID in its 
flagship device, you can bet that Face ID is here to stay. 
More faces  
As good as the early reviews say Face ID is, the 
technology isn’t without its limitations. Some of these 
are on the minor side: for example, certain types of 
sunglasses might not be compatible because they 
block the wavelength of light needed for the infrared-
based equipment in the True Depth cameras. Likewise, 
those of us in colder climes might need to pull down 
our scarves in order for the camera to recognize us. 
Hardly deal-breakers, but inconveniences. (Let’s not 
laud Touch ID and pretend it didn’t have its own 
problems, or have you never had to retrain the sensor 
when your skin was too dry?) 
But in one way Face ID does take a step back from 
Touch ID: it only supports enrolling a single face. For 
many people that may be no problem at all, but for 

46 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
those users who allow others to use their device – a 
partner, child, parent, or so on – it can be frustrating 
to have to revert back to sharing a strong, possibly 
hard to remember passcode (and your passcode is 
strong, right?). 
Similarly, sharing a password is a bigger security 
risk,  since it allows for access to many protected parts 
of iOS that are otherwise inaccessible. And if you 
wanted to revoke the access you’d given someone 
with Touch ID, it was easy enough to remove a 
fingerprint from the device; changing your passcode 
is definitely more annoying.
In some ways this is easy to reconcile with Apple’s 
philosophy – the company has always pushed the idea 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 47
FEATURE
that an iPhone is really for a single user. (Ever tried to 
buy or download apps with multiple iTunes accounts?) 
But I’m also convinced that the company will eventually 
expand Face ID’s purview to handle different people 
accessing the same device, for one very good reason. 
More devices
Although the iPhone X is the first Apple device to 
incorporate Face ID, it’s a solid bet that it won’t 
be the last. The simplest reason is that if it does 
indeed provide the most reliable and most powerful 
form of biometric security, why restrict it to just a single 
device? Moreover, Apple would no doubt like to offer 
the feature on other devices to allow users to have a 
single authentication method on all their devices. 
The iPad is the most obvious choice for the next 
device to get Face ID, at least if it follows the previous 
example of Touch ID. Bringing the system to another 
iOS device ought to be relatively straightforward, 
and Apple would no doubt like to get rid of the home 
button on its tablet and free up valuable space there 
as well. (Plus, the swiping up gesture to bring up the 
Dock and multitasking interfaces on the iPad in iOS 11 
is already reminiscent of the iPhone X’s replacement 
for the home button.)
More interesting, however, is the Mac. Touch ID has 
been slow to migrate to the Mac, appearing only on the 
Touch Bar-enabled MacBook Pros. But the Touch Bar 
has been one of the company’s less popular features of 
recent years, and while many – myself included – had 
expected the company might integrate Touch ID into a 
Magic Keyboard or Magic Trackpad, it certainly seems 

48 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
FEATURE
plausible that the company decided to skip that entirely 
once it had made the decision to bet on Face ID.
And unlike iOS devices, Macs don’t generally suffer 
from the same limited space or power problems that 
Apple has to balance on phones and tablets. Plus it 
opens up a better experience for using Apple Pay on 
your Mac, and let’s be honest: it’ll probably be even 
more reliable than logging in to your Mac using your 
Apple Watch.
Both iPads and Macs are far more likely to be shared 
between multiple users, and Macs of course have 
explicit support for multiple accounts – which, on Touch 
ID-enabled MacBook Pros, even supports user-switching 
via fingerprints. So it seems a pretty good bet that Face 
ID would follow in that feature’s footsteps. And hey, 
maybe it will even encourage Apple to acknowledge 
that iPads get shared between different users as well, 
and finally bring the multi-user support enabled for 
education into mainstream usage, but perhaps that’s 
a topic for another day.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 49
Best wireless earbuds
Séamus Bellamy’s top picks offer a comfortable fit, good battery 
life, and great audiorites
BUYING GUIDE
E
arbud makers have been busy doing away with 
wires – a good thing whether or not your phone 
still has a headset jack. You no longer have to deal 
with cords if you don’t want to. True wireless earbuds 
connect to one another and your audio source via 
Bluetooth. No wires mean no inline microphones or 
controls, but truly wireless earbuds sound just as good 
as traditional Bluetooth counterparts (for better or 
worse). They also boast all of the features we’ve come 
to expect from earbuds designed to work with your 
smartphone, tablet, or PC.

50 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
Since Apple’s AirPods became a runaway hit, an 
endless stream of companies have rolled out their own 
true wireless earbuds and earphones. As you might 
expect, not all of them are worth your time or money 
– so we’ve got your back with buying suggestions to 
meet a wide variety of needs. 
Best true wireless earbuds
Jaybird Run true wireless sport headphones
Price: £169 inc VAT from fave.co/2COunl6
For £10 more than you’ll fork over for a pair of Apple’s 
AirPods, you can invest in a significantly better true 
wireless headphone listening experience. With a 
customizable equalizer settings, the £169 Jaybird 
Run True Wireless Headphones sound great, are 
sweat- and water-resistant, and come with a number 
of fit options to ensure comfort. For the time being, 
these are the true wireless headphones that we 
recommend for most people.
Weighing 6.83g a piece, you won’t mind the weight 
of the Jaybird Runs. Unlike Apple’s AirPods, which 
hang off of your ear’s tragus and antitragus, the Jaybird 
Runs need to be jammed, albeit shallowly, into your 
ear canal. Not only does this ensure that they’ll stay in 
your head – even during strenuous activities – but the 
earbud’s position in your ears will create a tight seal, 
thanks in part to the included silicon tips (available 
in a number of sizes). This provides users with some 
passive noise cancellation – that’s good news for the 
quality of any audio you’ll listen to, but maybe bad 
news for some athletes.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 51
BUYING GUIDE
Jaybird’s advertising for the Run shows lots of 
healthy fitness buffs running and working out. But as 
having passive noise cancellation in play could make 
it difficult to hear what’s going on in the environment 
around you, you might want to think twice before taking 
these things out on the road or trail with you. 
The Jaybird Run headphones stick a ways out of 
most people’s ears while they’re wearing them, but not 
much. Being black in colour and 19.5x19x14.3xmm, 
they’re less noticeable than Apple’s iconic white buds.
Jaybird’s headphones are designed, primarily, 
with athletes in mind and the Run are no different. To 

52 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
make them stand up to sweat and other liquids you 
might encounter during a workout, the earbuds come 
with a reasonable amount of weatherproofing – just 
don’t take them in the shower or pool with you. Even 
if you’re not running a marathon during a downpour, 
their weather resistance is still good news. You won’t 
have to worry about the Run shorting out in drizzle 
while you listen to them on your morning commute.
Pairing the headphones was a pain-free affair. After 
installing their free companion app and charging them 
up in their included battery case, simply open the case 
and stick them in your ears. You’ll be guided through 
the setup process via an audio prompt.
Controlling the headphones while using them is 
just as simple – there’s a push-button built into the cap 
of each earbud, where you’ll find most of the controls 
we demand from a set of modern headphones: pause/
play, voice assistant access, and the ability to accept 
or end a call. Strangely, while you can advance to the 
next track in a playlist, there’s no button press that 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 53
BUYING GUIDE
allows you to skip back a track. If you’re into it, you 
can use either earbud on its own.
According to Jaybird, the Run offer four hours of 
playtime off of a single charge, with an additional eight 
hours’ worth of juice available in their battery case. I 
found their actual runtime to be a little shorter than 
this, but not by much. It’s worth noting that I’m not a 
fan of the battery case. While it’s well made, it’s taller 
and wider than it needs to be. If you want to stick it in a 
trouser pocket, you’ll want to be wearing a set of cargos.
Jaybird’s X7s were one of the first sets of Bluetooth 
headphones that let users change the equalizer settings 
of through the use of a companion app. Their Run true 
wireless headphones have access to their same app, 
making for some great audio, especially for the price.
Out of the box, the Run’s audio is a bass-heavy 
affair, which is typical for a good set of athletics-
oriented cans. Mids are subdued, and warm, while 
high frequency sound is forward sounding. And while 
it can’t match the broad soundstage of the Bose 
SoundSport Free or Beoplay E8, I was pleased with 
what I heard. I feel that these headphones sound better 
than Apple’s less-expensive AirPods and are capable 
of glowing blow-for-blow with Sony’s WF-1000x (£200 
from fave.co/2CQzku0). That it’s possible to modify 
their sound profile at a firmware level through the use 
of the free Jaybird app is icing on the cake. The app 
comes with a number of ready-made equalizer settings 
designed by Jaybird and a handful of notable athletes. 
But in addition to this, it also allows users to not only 
create their own equalizer settings, but save them and 
share them online.

54 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
The Jaybird Run wireless earbuds sound great, are 
weather resistant, and packed full of functionality. 
That they provide all of this at a reasonable price 
makes them an excellent choice.
Best low-cost true wireless earbuds
Apple AirPods
Price: £159 inc VAT from fave.co/2D1ts4h
When Apple pulled the headphone jack off the iPhone 
7, it also unveiled a new set of wireless earbuds called 
AirPods, and claimed they were so great, users wouldn’t 
mind the missing headphone jack. 
Oh, heavens no. Like so many Apple products 
before them, the AirPods bring with them as many 
problems as they solve. With no on-board buttons, 
the AirPods require users to ask Siri to do everything, 
from changing a track to adjusting the volume. What’s 
more, Siri doesn’t have the same abilities in all music 
apps – an arbitrary restriction set by Apple to steer 
you toward Apple Music.
But let’s start with the first question everyone has 
about the AirPods. Aren’t you worried they will fall out 
of your ears? Thankfully, I can report that my AirPods 
stay put when I’m dancing, headbanging, jogging, 
hanging upside down, riding my stationary bike, 
sprinting to catch the bus, and shaking my head around 
smacking my temple like I’m trying to dislodge water 
stuck in my ear. Really, they aren’t going to fall out. 
They also need to be comfortable enough to 
wear all day, and not fall out. It turns out they’re 
very comfortable, virtually the same shape as the 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 55
BUYING GUIDE
EarPods but with more heft. They perch right in my 
ear openings and stay put better than the EarPods or 
silicone-tipped earbuds.
The AirPods sound better than the EarPods, but 
they have that same kind of fit, where the bud itself 
just rests in your ear opening, instead of going way 
down into your ear canal. And since they don’t have a 
silicone or foam tip like the buds that get shoved more 
deeply into your ear, they don’t seal off outside noise 
as fully. But their impressive volume quickly drowns 
out your surroundings. Once my iPhone is at about 60 
percent volume, I can no longer hear myself speak at 
a normal volume while I’m wearing the AirPods.
The white stems that hang down from the AirPods 
hold the microphone, which you’ll need for voice 
calls, and speaking with Siri. I used Siri to make a 
The wireless AirPods 
resemble the EarPods, but 
the AirPods have a heftier, 
more substantial design 
that stays put in my ears

56 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
voice call both indoors and outdoors, and the people I 
chatted with reported a slight echoey sound common 
to Bluetooth phone calls, but only when I really 
pressed them to evaluate my sound. All in all, the 
sound was good enough for calls.
Speaking to Siri, though, somewhat mars the 
AirPods experience. To turn up the volume with the 
free EarPods, you click a button on the inline remote. 
With the AirPods, however, you have to double-tap one 
AirPod, wait for your music to pause and the Siri chime 
to sound, and say “Turn it up” (or, even better, “turn up 
the volume,” just to make sure Siri will understand). 
Then you wait another couple of beats for your music 
to resume, now two notches louder. If you say “Turn 
it up to 50 percent,” the volume still gets turned up 
two notches louder. It’s an annoying process, so you’re 
better off using the volume controls on your phone – if 
your phone is in arm’s reach.
Siri can also control Apple Music and your own music 
collection stored in Apple’s Music app. But Apple chose 
not to give full Siri control to third-party music apps, 
and that’s a huge bummer when you try to use earbuds 
that require the use of Siri. In Spotify, I could turn the 
volume up and down, and skip to the next track. But to 
start a song over (three clicks on the EarPods remote, 
thank you very much), I couldn’t say “start this song 
over,” though “go back one track” was more responsive. 
And, obviously, I couldn’t call up specific artists, albums, 
playlists, and songs. The AirPods are at their best when 
you are all-in with Apple devices and services. If you’re 
a die-hard user of Spotify or Pandora, these might not 
be the headphones for you.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 57
BUYING GUIDE
But either way, Siri is just too slow and buggy to 
be a rock-solid control set. I quickly found myself 
wanting to just use the controls on the iPhone itself. 
As a side note, I’ve never appreciated iOS 10’s Raise 
to Wake feature so much until I got my AirPods, since I 
can bring up the lock screen play/pause, forward, and 
rewind buttons so easily, and leave Siri out of it.
The auto-pause feature does work well, and mostly 
seamlessly across apps. When you are listening to the 
AirPods, and you take one out of your ear, the sound 
pauses. When you put it back in your ear, it starts 
playing again. While the feature is mostly solid, it isn’t 
a sure thing. A few times the music would start playing 
again after I’d stuck one AirPod in my jacket pocket 
while talking to a cashier. Other times, taking an AirPod 
out would pause a podcast in Pocket Casts, but putting 
it back in wouldn’t start it playing again. Instead, I had 
to hit Play on the iPhone itself. If you do want to play 
The EarPods are easier 
to control, but the 
AirPods never tangle

58 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
music on only one AirPod for some reason, you can just 
press Play on the iPhone after taking one out.
Because Apple makes these, the AirPods are locked 
in to iOS 10 like no other headphones will ever be. 
You can check the battery life in the Battery widget in 
Notification Centre. Even just opening the charging case 
with the AirPods inside will pop up a notification on 
your phone showing the charge level of your AirPods 
(left and right – strangely, they don’t wear down at 
exactly the same level) and the case.
The charging case is brilliant. It’s small and white 
and easy to stash in a pocket or bag. It kind of looks 
like a fancy package of dental floss, with a top that flips 
open and shut with a tight magnetic click. The AirPods 
charge inside this case, so if you keep them there when 
they’re not in your ears, and then remember to charge 
 A little LED inside the case 
glows green when the 
AirPods are mostly charged, 
orange when they need 
charge. A more accurate 
meter is on the iPhone

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 59
BUYING GUIDE
the case now and then, keeping the AirPods charged 
isn’t too much of a burden. The case itself charges via 
a Lightning port, so I just try to remember to top it off 
while I’m using the AirPods at my desk.
In my tests, the AirPods easily get Apple’s stated 
5 hours of music time per charge. I’m at five hours on 
my stopwatch right now, in fact, and the AirPods have 
12 percent charge left according to the Battery widget 
in iOS 10. Apple says the case should have about 24 
hours of battery life in it, and just 15 minutes in the 
case can power your AirPods for three more hours (it 
got me from 4- to 79 percent). The AirPods make a 
sad little sound when they reach 10 percent, so you’ll 
know they’re almost out of juice.
Connecting the AirPods to an iPhone for the first 
time is as easy as opening the case. A message pops 
up on the iPhone offering to connect, and when you 
do, the AirPods also appear in the Bluetooth menu 
of any Macs (running macOS Sierra) you use with the 
same iCloud account. Switching to an iPad and Apple 
Watch with the same iCloud account is similarly easy, 
and you don’t have to trick your iPhone into unpairing 
with the AirPods to listen to them on a different device. 
They’re always paired to everything, and you can just 
select AirPods on that thing and press play.
The back of the charging case has a round white 
button that’s barely visible. With the AirPods in the 
open case, you can press and hold that button to turn 
a tiny LED in the case white. That means they’re in 
pairing mode, and you can pair them to an Android 
phone or another Bluetooth device, although without 
Siri or the extra features. 

60 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
For iPhone and iPad users, you can’t find an better 
set of earbuds for ease of pairing. You should know, 
however, AirPods aren’t as easy to use as other true 
wireless earbuds for controlling your music. It also has 
terrible passive sound cancellation, so you’ll hear a lot 
of the world around you when using it.
Best true wireless headphones for audiophiles
B&O’s Beoplay E8
Price: £269 inc VAT from fave.co/2CZOQae
Let’s get this out of the way: The B&O Beoplay E8 
true wireless earphones cost £269. Being both a 
cheapskate and a music aficionado, I tried, hard, to 
convince myself that other less expensive true wireless 
headphones that I’ve tested sound just as good, or 
better, than the E8s do. But they don’t. If you demand 
the best possible sound in a compact, wire-free 
package, these are the headphones to get.
The E8 earphones are constructed from lightweight 
polymer with aluminium accents. As each earbud 
weighs about 7g each, most people won’t find it a 
burden to have them jammed into their skull for 
hours at a time – provided they’ll fit. Instead of 
using rubber fins, or hooking into your ears like other 
in-ear headphones do, the E8s stay in place by being 
thrust into the opening of your ear canal. That they 
come with four different sizes of silicon tips to ensure 
a secure fit as well as a set of Complyfoam foam tips 
helps to ensure a good fit – but you might want to 
buy them from a shop or online store with a solid 
return policy, just in case.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 61
BUYING GUIDE
Available in black or charcoal colour schemes, the 
E8’s tasteful style run contrary to their audacious 
price. B&O’s Art Deco logo graces the cap of each 
earbud, along with a metallic accent. That’s it. Sized 
at 152x152x51mm, they’re neither the smallest nor 
the largest true wireless headphones that we’ve seen. 
When I inserted them in my ears, I found that they 
were noticeable, but not awkwardly so, like the Bose 
SoundSport Free.
Then there’s the E8’s leather-bound charging case. 
Next to the one that comes with Apple’s AirPods, it’s 
the smallest, sleekest charging case that we’ve come 
across. You should know that the E8 are not in any way 
weather resistant. If you’re looking for something to 
wear at the gym, look elsewhere.

62 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
B&O states that when played at a moderate volume, 
their E8 headphones should run for four hours before 
needing to be topped up. With the two additional 
charges that the carry case holds, you can expect 
around 12 hours of total use before the works need 
to be charged via Micro-USB. I found this battery 
usage estimate to be accurate.
Tinkering with volume, playing/pausing or 
changing music tracks, taking a call, or engaging audio 
transparency (more on that in a second) is all done 
through the use of tapping or holding your finger 
against a touch panel built into the side of the earbuds. 
I found that touch was registered by the E8 90 percent 
of the time, with worse results occurring when my 
fingers were wet or cold. Through the use of the free 
The charging case 
can recharge the 
earbuds twice

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 63
BUYING GUIDE
B&O app for iOS or Android, it’s possible to tweak the 
amount of audio transparency that the headphones 
provide and to modify the sound profile with a number 
of presets or with ones that you come up with yourself.
No matter whether you listen to them using their 
factory preset profile or tweak your tunes, you’ll find 
that the E8s sound very, very good, especially for 
Bluetooth earphones. Each earbud contains a 5.7mm 
electro-dynamic driver, and offer a frequency range 
of 20- to 20,000Hz. Using their default audio profile, 
they offer a stunning wide soundstage, with slightly 
forward bass, that was warm and punchy, but never 
overwhelming. The warm mids and clear highs that 
the headphones produced made everything I listen to, 
from Acquiraga Drom to Żywiolak, sound amazing.
But, the price. At £269, they’re one of the most 
expensive pairs of true wireless headphones we’ve 
reviewed, so far. Over the course of using the E8s, I 
repeatedly asked myself whether they were worth 
the price. My answer: if you can afford to splurge on a 
luxury item like this, absolutely.
While they rate among the most expensive true 
wireless headphones we’ve tested, the B&O Beoplay 
E8 are without a doubt, the best sounding and most 
luxurious-feeling headphones that we’ve tested. 
If you can afford them, you’ll most likely be very 
pleased with your purchase.
What to look for
Sound
Sounding good is a set of earbuds’ raison d’être. When 
you invest in a new pair of true wireless earbuds, 

64 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
it’s fair to assume that they should make everything 
sound its best.
We start each sound test by listening to a playlist 
of five songs that spans different genres and features 
strong, layered performances: that we know very very 
well: Feel Right (Mark Ronson, featuring Mystikal); Up & 
Rise (Hazmat Modine); Shake Your Hips (The Legendary 
Shack Shakers); Déjà Loin (Yann Tiersen); and I’m a Little 
Mixed up (Diana Krall).
We play this set of songs for an hour, paying 
attention to low, mid, and high-frequency performance, 
and whether they provide a broad, rich soundstage. 
We also listen for any sign of distortion at low or high 
volumes. Afterward, we use the earbuds in our daily 
lives for a minimum of three hours a day over the 
course of a week, making sure to take in at least one 
TV show or movie. (This allows us to verify that the 
audio keeps in sync with the video we see.) Finally, we 
pay attention to incoming and outgoing call quality, to 
make sure that you won’t get annoyed during a chat.
Fit
A set of earbuds or earphones may sound amazing, 
but no one will know it if they don’t fit well – a good 
seal keeps environmental noise out and your audio 
channelled into your ears, where it belongs. Because no 
two pairs of ears are identical, we note if a set of true 
wireless earbuds comes with different ear pieces.
We also pay attention to the tightness of a seal, 
as a snug fit provides passive noise cancellation (aka 
the hush that falls over your life when you jam a pair 
of earphones or earplugs into your skull). If you’re 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 65
BUYING GUIDE
in a noisy airport, tuning out your environment is a 
plus – but it’s less than ideal if you’re out running, for 
safety reasons. We take this into consideration when 
evaluating earbuds designed for working out.
Comfort
They might fit and sound great, but if your new true 
wireless cans hurt your ears, you won’t wear them. 
We wear the earbuds for at least three hours a day 
for a week and note if a particular set becomes 
uncomfortable after a few hours of use.
Apple AirPods

66 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
BUYING GUIDE
BUYING GUIDE
Connectivity
True wireless headphones use Bluetooth to connect 
to each other and to your audio device. We pay 
attention to connectivity issues stemming from signal 
interruptions between the earbuds and their audio 
source, and also note if audio drops from the left or 
right side during playback.
Features
At minimum, a good pair of wireless earbuds should be 
able to accept calls as well as play and pause music. If a 
pair offers additional features beyond the basics, those 
functions should work well and be easy to use.
Price
It almost goes without saying that if you pay a premium 
for earbuds, they should sound spectacular. If a pair 
of headphones sound great and don’t cost much? 
Even better. 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 67
ROUND-UP
I
t has been another great year for iOS games, as 2017 
delivered a heap of must-play iPhone and iPad picks. 
Some were designed first for touch while others were 
elegantly ported from other platforms, but at the end 
of the day, these are the games that impressed us the 
most and kept us coming back for more this year.
Andrew Hayward rounds up the best titles of 2017
Best iOS games of 2017

68 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
1. Monument Valley 2 
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2CYtE4l
The original Monument Valley quickly established 
itself as one of the all-time essential iOS games, 
delivering an original puzzle-solving experience that 
felt perfectly tailored for a portable touch device. This 
year’s Monument Valley 2 didn’t reinvent the wheel, but 
it brought enough tweaks and expansion to completely 
avoid feeling like an uninspired sequel.
As before, Monument Valley 2 is all about solving 
environmental puzzles in an array of baffling and 
beautiful levels that don’t conform to realistic physics 
or architectural tenets. Now, however, you’ll guide 
both Ro and her child, with puzzles and obstacles that 
involve both at the same time. It’s more of the same, but 
more brilliance is never a bad thing.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 69
ROUND-UP
2. MUL.MASH.TAB.BA.GAL.GAL 
Price: £2.99 from fave.co/2CZXQw2
Riverman Media set themselves up for a real marketing 
challenge with MUL.MASH.TAB.BA.GAL.GAL, a title that 
tells you nothing about the experience within and 
probably scared off more than a few curious parties. 
But as we discovered earlier this year, the game behind 
that intimidating title is excellent. It’s a twist on Atari’s 
Pong at its core, only you’re controlling the paddles on 
both ends of the screen – and you’ll bat a ball around to 
destroy the sea monsters that swim in between. You’ll 
have to defeat them before they reach the top, and the 
challenge quickly builds as you access new levels. Over 
time, MUL.MASH awards new types of paddles with 
special abilities, letting you mix and match to create the 
most effective combo. It’s tough, but totally rewarding.

70 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
3. HQ – Live Trivia Game Show 
Price: Free from fave.co/2D3Zz38
2016’s iOS game sensation was Pokémon Go, but 
2017’s is massive in a very different way: it’s a live 
trivia game show with a real-time host and hundreds 
of thousands of concurrent players. It’s HQ (Free) of 
course, which has been blowing up in recent weeks as 
new players flock to the daily competition in the hopes 
of winning potentially thousands of pounds in real cash.
Happening every single night and also on weekday 
afternoons, HQ serves up a dozen rapid-fire questions 
to answer, with correct guessers moving on to the next 
query. Those who survive the gauntlet until the end 
split the jackpot, but right now, HQ is the most exciting 
thing in iOS gaming.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 71
ROUND-UP
4. Miracle Merchant 
Price: £1.99 from fave.co/2D1Hgf7
We’ve seen a lot of card-based games in the Clash 
Royale mould this year, but Miracle Merchant is 
something else – it’s a single-player game like solitaire, 
but it doesn’t look or play anything like that card classic. 
Here, you’re a skilled alchemist with a line out the door 
of customers, and they’d all like a custom potion to suit 
their individual wants and needs.
Using their preferences as a starting point, you’ll pick 
four ingredient cards to create each potion, with the 
physical alignment of the cards affecting the ultimate 
composition. You’ll have to carefully construct each new 
potion using your limited resources to satisfy customers 
and continue your game. It’s a really clever twist on solo 
card games, and rather beautiful as well.

72 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
5. Hidden Folks 
Price: £3.99 from fave.co/2CZNV9A
If you grew up searching for the stripe-adorned star 
of the Where’s Wally? books, then you’ll know exactly 
what to do in Hidden Folks: it’s a game about finding 
small, specific people, creatures, or things inside of 
sprawling scenes. Only here, the images are not only 
purely black and white, also animated. That gives the 
drawings a lot more personality than you’d see from a 
static image, with charming animations, amusing sound 
effects, and interactive mini-puzzles that require a bit 
more effort than just tapping on an object. And yet the 
biggest highlight of Hidden Folks is just how incredibly 
chill the entire experience is: you can play at your own 
pace, and it’ll never prod you in the process. It’s a real 
delight, especially on the larger screen of an iPad.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 73
ROUND-UP
6. Mushroom 11 
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2CQjdfV
Mushroom 11 didn’t begin life on iOS, but the 
developers say it was originally built for touch devices 
– and that becomes readily apparent the moment you 
start touching the blob. The green, amorphous organism 
can only be controlled by poking and prodding it in a 
direction, which you’ll do with one or more fingers to try 
and work through an array of environmental challenges.
You’ll reshape and push the organism left and right 
in the side-scrolling, post-apocalyptic stages, through 
tunnels, safely over dangling cliffs, and through clumsy 
machines. Mushroom 11 has a real trial-and-error edge 
to it, as you’ll need to experiment with inputs and 
tactics to make the blob do what you want it to. And the 
ultimate a-ha moments are usually pretty special.

74 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
7. Euclidean Lands 
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2CQ6aLi
Part Monument Valley, part Lara Croft Go, and part 
Rubik’s Cube, Euclidean Lands wears a few influences 
on its sleeve yet ultimately still feels like an original 
and inspired creation. Each level takes of the shape of 
a cube with warriors and items on certain panels, and 
you can rotate entire rows and columns to shift things 
around and try to get the jump on enemies.
It begins simply enough, but then further twists 
keep things compelling: you’ll find giant spikes in spots 
you’ve already traversed, dangerous floor panels and 
nearby switches to trigger, and even multiple cubes 
with differently-coloured portals between them. Like 
Kunabi Brother’s also-great Blek, this iOS puzzler makes 
a memorable impact.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 75
ROUND-UP
8. Pigeon Wings 
Price: £1.99 from fave.co/2D42s3Y
Pigeon Wings doesn’t make heavy use of your iPhone 
or iPad’s touch display, but it still feels perfectly suited 
to a phone or tablet. It’s part high-speed racing game, 
part side-scrolling shooter, and all pretty darn appealing 
as you take flight as a bird attempting to stop the evil 
plans of a nefarious aeronautics mogul (yes, really).
What work so well here are the tilt controls: you’ll 
race against other bird through tight corridors, needing 
to swoop up and down to fit into tunnels and around 
hazards, and the precise controls are perfectly suited 
for the task. Many of the games on this list are meatier 
fare, but Pigeon Wings totally nails its bite-sized, 
arcade-style approach.

76 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
9. Splitter Critters 
Price: £2.99 from fave.co/2CTXfZr
Splitter Critters is Apple’s choice for 2017’s iPhone 
game of the year, and it just so happens to be one 
of our big favourites as well. RAC7 Games’ original 
creation is perfectly suited for smartphones and tablets, 
as it reimagines the platform-puzzle genre by letting 
you solve stages in a totally unique way: by slicing the 
world in half and rearranging its pieces. It’s a wild idea, 
but it’s also one that works beautifully here. You can put 
a big gash in a level to create a path for the little aliens 
to reach their ship, for example, or to avoid enemies. 
Later on, you’ll create multiple tears to help point lasers 
in the right directions to work your way through a lab, or 
deal with an abundance or water. It’s incredibly clever, 
and quite fun too.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 77
ROUND-UP
10. Push & Pop 
Price: Free from fave.co/2CQ7fCQ
It might sound like a totally killer dance move, but Push 
& Pop (Free) is actually an iOS puzzle game… and it’s 
still pretty awesome. Your little cube guy is dropped 
into a 5x5 grid with a few blocks, and you’ll slide across 
rows and columns to push together complete lines of 
blocks and clear them, Tetris-style.
But the more you slide around, the more blocks 
are gradually added to the confined space, making it 
feel awfully tight in there – and absolutely critical that 
you keep clearing lines. This endless freebie is simple 
in approach but infinitely replayable, plus it’s packed 
with style thanks to fabulous background music and a 
glitchy, colour-shifting aesthetic.

78 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
11. The Witness 
Price: £9.99 from fave.co/2D4Bolv
After captivating puzzle and adventure fans on PC and 
PlayStation 4 in 2016, The Witness spread onto Apple 
devices in 2017 – and it’s a treat on both Mac and 
iOS alike. The iOS version is cheaper but no less fully-
featured, as it contains the entire, absorbing experience 
including more than 500 total puzzles.
The Witness finds you alone on a curious, gorgeous 
island dotted with those puzzles, and you’ll have to 
solve them to discover who you are and why you’re 
there. The maze-like line puzzles are approachable 
enough at first, but become significantly more complex 
over time. It’s Apple’s pick for the best iPad game of 
2017, and a large screen is ideal, but don’t shrug it off if 
you prefer to play on iPhone. It’s just as dazzling there.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 79
ROUND-UP
12. GRID Autosport 
Price: £9.99 from fave.co/2CPDNNk
The two best racing games on the App Store – Real 
Racing 3 and Asphalt 8: Airborne – are both free-to-
play games with some thankfully small freemium 
annoyances in the mix. But if you’re looking for a full-
bodied racing game that doesn’t have timers, premium 
power-ups, or any other odd shenanigans in the mix, 
then turn your attention to GRID Autosport.
Coming over from PC and consoles, GRID Autosport 
is a big, beautiful, simulation-style experience that 
packs in 100 cars and 100 circuits along with realistic 
physics and some of the best graphics ever seen on 
an iOS device. Ten pounds might seem like a lot, but 
for a deep, awesome racing experience with no in-app 
purchases in sight, it’s well worth it.

80 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
13. Flower 
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2COszbX
Now here’s an unexpected video game protagonist: 
the wind. You’ll deliver useful gusts in Flower, a 
much-loved indie game that recently made its way over 
from PlayStation consoles. As the wind, you’ll sweep 
up flower petals and blow them around the levels to 
make others bloom, thus rejuvenating dead fields or 
reactivating windmills.
That might sound a bit silly, but as on consoles, 
Flower is an absolute gem. It’s a gorgeous and soothing 
experience, as you use tilt controls to guide the flower 
petals around with ease, plus there’s a surprisingly 
emotional narrative that builds over the course of the 
six levels, although the game only shows its hints of 
story through subtle audio/visual cues.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 81
ROUND-UP
14. Casuality 
Price: £1.99 from fave.co/2D3aGcU
Like a lot of puzzle games, Casuality begins simply 
enough before ratcheting up its complexity and 
challenge level, but Causality otherwise isn’t like a lot 
of other puzzle games. We called it a turn-based puzzler 
‘with a twist’ over the summer, and more specifically, it’s 
a turn-based puzzler with time manipulation at its core.
Can you master the space-time continuum? You’ll 
have to if you want to overcome Causality’s 60 levels. 
Finishing each means guiding the little astronauts along 
paths to their rightful destinations, but that typically 
entails twisting the fabric of time, using portals, 
and ensuring that everything happens in its correct 
sequence. This one’s a real brain-bender.

82 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
15. Iron Marines 
Price: £3.99 from fave.co/2CSyjkS
Ironhide created a near-perfect mobile tower defence 
experience with the Kingdom Rush trilogy, and now Iron 
Marines sees the studio keep a lot of that groundwork 
and shift over towards real-time strategy. In other 
words, Iron Marines is the StarCraft-like experience we 
rarely see on touch devices, with a meaty campaign and 
more depth than you’d expect. Here you’ll command a 
group of super-powered space soldiers as you plough 
through alien attackers, establish bases, and hold down 
the fort against waves and waves of foes. It still feels 
a lot like Kingdom Rush and certainly looks the part 
with its familiar cartoonish look, but with 14 campaign 
missions, bonus levels, and plenty more in tow, Iron 
Marines is an on-the-go RTS done right.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 83
ROUND-UP
16. Old Man’s Journey
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2D3bjTO
Old Man’s Journey is a lot less exhausting than the title 
might suggest – in fact, it’s downright charming, even 
if the subject matter isn’t always upbeat. This breezy 
point-and-click-style adventure game begins with the 
man receiving a letter that clearly didn’t bring happy 
news, but after taking a beat, he grabs his gear and 
begins trekking towards places unknown.
And this game is about the journey as much as the 
destination, as you help guide the man across gorgeous 
terrain by manipulating the rolling fields and natural 
features with your fingers. Along the way, you’ll catch 
glimpses of his past: the good times, the bad, and 
what has ultimately sent him on this quest. Old Man’s 
Journey might be light on gameplay, but it gets pretty 
heavy emotionally.

84 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
W
e’ve some fantastic new games this month. 
Some are ports of celebrated games from 
consoles and computers, while others are 
delightful debuts, but whatever their origins, they 
collectively pack a huge punch. Key releases include 
atmospheric indie adventure Inside, dreamily inventive 
puzzler Gorogoa, and a full-fledged iPad port of Sid 
Meier’s Civilization VI, and that’s just the tip of the 
iceberg: we have several more selections to keep you 
playing well into next month and beyond. 
Andrew Hayward looks at this month’s best new releases
Latest iOS games

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 85
ROUND-UP
1. Life Is Strange 
Price: £2.99 from fave.co/2CTZ1d3
Episodic narrative adventures have proven popular 
on iPhone and iPad, as seen with Telltale’s Walking 
Dead and Batman series (among others), but Square 
Enix’s Life is Strange strikes a different tone. It’s a story 
about teenagers and some of the very real stresses 
and dilemmas they face, with an unexpected level of 
authenticity within… oh, and the ability to control time.
So it’s a bit supernatural too, but Life is Strange still 
excels with its emotional storytelling while building 
some larger stakes with heroine Max’s newfound ability. 
She uses it to try and reverse some sad happenings 
around her, but expectedly, that kind of power has some 
drawbacks too. Life is Strange has a strong following on 
consoles and computers, and this new iOS port comes 
with the first episode, with the next two episodes sold 
within and two more still en route.

86 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
2. Inside
Price: £6.99 from fave.co/2CR685Y
Playdead’s Limbo is an absolutely mesmerizing game 
– a shadowy journey through the wilderness, just a boy 
and his wits against unseen dangers. And the studio’s 
new game, Inside, essentially builds upon that same 
premise. It’s still a side-scrolling game starring an 
unarmed boy, it’s still a bit bleak-looking, and it still 
doesn’t feature any dialogue or overt storytelling.
But it’s just as marvellous. Inside finds your young 
hero exploring a factory where some seriously bizarre 
experiments are taking place, and the atmosphere 
builds steadily as you enter and even participate to 
evade capture. It’s unsettling, to say the least, but the 
environmental puzzles are clever and the atmosphere is 
fantastic. The free download lets you play a small chunk 
for free, then it’s £6.99 to unlock the rest.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 87
ROUND-UP
3. Gorogoa 
Price: Free from fave.co/2D0KPCb
Even some of the most inventive puzzle games today 
tend to have roots in previous games from other 
makers, but Gorogoa is the rare puzzler that feels 
extraordinarily original. It’s like a children’s picture 
book, complete with rich artwork and show-don’t-tell 
storytelling, only you’ll have a few panels on screen at 
the same time, and they have layers.
You can move into and out of many of the scenes, 
pulling back or looking closer, and then the panels 
can interact with each other. For instance, you might 
drop one scene atop another to reveal a hidden item, 
or move a character from one panel to the next by 
putting him in front of a doorway. And all the while, the 
adventure unfolds. Gorogoa is charming and beautiful, 
and truly unlike any other game out there.

88 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
4. Sid Meier’s Civilization VI
Price: £5.4.99 from fave.co/2D0LeEH
What’s more surprising about this listing: that the 
full-blooded Sid Meier’s Civilization VI has made the 
move from Mac over to iPad, or that there’s a £54.99 
iPad game? Both are pretty surprising, but if any tablet 
game can warrant the expense, it’s surely the latest and 
greatest entry in Firaxis Games’ brilliant turn-based 
strategy franchise.
At first glance, it’s every bit the Civilization VI 
experience you’ll find on a computer, letting you 
guide historical civilizations to greatness via the ‘4X’ 
approach: ‘explore, expand, exploit, and exterminate’. 
Luckily, it’s a free download that lets you play 60 turns 
before needing to shell out for the full game, giving you 
a robust opportunity to try it out.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 89
ROUND-UP
5. Reigns: Her Majesty 
Price: £2.99 from fave.co/2CSni2X
Civilization VI shows how you can create an incredibly 
vast and complex simulation of ruling over a land. 
Conversely, Reigns shows perhaps the most streamlined 
and efficient way of handling such a task. It’s a very 
different experience, naturally: in Reigns, you must 
make decisions that affect your entire kingdom, and 
swipe one way or the other to make a call.
The first Reigns was one of our favourite games of 
2016, and the new Reigns: Her Majesty offers more or 
less the same core experience with a twist: now you’re 
the queen instead of a king. Expectedly, the shift to a 
female perspective changes how you’re treated, but the 
game remains breezily entertaining while bringing in 
some vital commentary along the way.

90 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
6. Fez Pocket Edition
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2CPNRGg
Finally reaching iPhone and iPad a few years after its 
Mac, PC, and console release, Fez Pocket Edition makes 
the beloved indie game much easier to play wherever 
you’d like. Fez is a puzzle game disguised as an old-
school platform-action affair, and it’s not as 2D as it 
looks: its biggest gameplay hook is that you can rotate 
the game world 90 degrees at a time to find unseen 
paths and secrets.
It’s a really neat twist that changes how you look at 
the pixel environments, and the ultra-charming graphics 
and music should keep you pleasantly puzzle-solving 
even in the complicated later bits. The touch controls 
are solid, but you’re better off using an MFi gamepad if 
you have one.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 91
ROUND-UP
7. Arena Of Valor 
Price: Free from fave.co/2CZZa1M
Arena of Valor just launched in North America, but it’s 
already an enormous smash elsewhere: the Chinese 
version, called King of Glory, has more than 200 million 
users and is the top-grossing mobile game in the world. 
Not a bad foundation for the latest mobile MOBA 
(multiplayer online battle arena) game in the vein of 
League of Legends and Dota 2.
It looks a lot like mobile rival Vainglory at first 
glance, but the 5v5 online battles and larger three-lane 
maps put it closer to Mac and PC contemporaries. As 
usual, you’ll work with online teammates to try and take 
down the opposing squad’s base, ploughing down their 
turrets and heroes in the process. Will it become just as 
huge of a hit here? We’ll have to wait and see, but you 
can jump in for free and try it for yourself today.

92 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
8. Bridge Constructor Portal
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2CZTRj3
It’s been almost seven years since the last proper 
Portal game released, and given Valve’s surprising 
shift away from development of late, it may be a 
long while before we see another one – if ever. But 
the physics-based puzzle classic takes on a new 
approach with Bridge Constructor Portal, a mash-up 
with another physics-centric franchise. Instead of 
navigating a person through various portals, you’ll 
instead build bridges of increasing complexity to guide 
little forklifts to their proper destinations. This spin-
off keeps the humour and familiar aesthetic of Portal, 
and remains clever even if it doesn’t hit quite the same 
mind-blowing heights as the core Portal games. Fans 
should still appreciate it, though.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 93
ROUND-UP
9. Getting Over It 
Price: £4.99 from fave.co/2D3dIxF
Getting Over It is a game designed to delight… in 
your frustration, that is. Like creator Bennett Foddy’s 
QWOP, GIRP, and other games, it is purposely difficult 
to control, and that somehow makes it all the more 
irresistible to the persistent players that figure out how 
to overcome its intentional kludginess.
In this case, Getting Over It drops your hero into a 
large metal pot and gives you only a sledgehammer, 
which you’ll use to somehow propel yourself up a 
very large and jagged mountain. Overcoming trees 
and cliffs requires ample trial-and-error manoeuvring, 
and it could take you hours to make your way to the 
top. Sound exhilarating? Believe it or not, Getting 
Over It has amassed a big following in recent weeks, 
especially with streamers broadcasting their irritation 
over the Internet.

94 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
ROUND-UP
10. Sonic Runners Adventure
Price: £2.99 from fave.co/2CPOYWs
We’ve seen some mediocre Sonic the Hedgehog 
mobile games over the years – excluding the classic 
16-bit ports, of course – but Gameloft’s Sonic Runners 
Adventure breaks that cycle. It splits the difference 
between the old-school Genesis games and a modern 
side-scrolling runner game, sending Sonic along 
automatically as you focus on jumping to avoid hazards.
Sonic Runners Adventure has a clean and colourful 
look, and while a similar rival like Rayman Fiesta Run 
packs in a bit more excitement, it does a good job of 
providing a fun mobile take on Sonic. And surprisingly, 
especially for a Gameloft title, Sonic Runners Adventure 
is a fully premium game with no in-app purchases. 
That’s part of what makes it so appealing.

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 95
2
017 was a pretty great year for iOS. A whole lot 
of my wish-list items for iPhone and iPad got 
checked off. And yet, like a kid who got a bike 
under the tree and still immediately begins assembling 
a birthday wish list, it’s my job as a columnist to 
immediately ask Apple what it’s done for iOS lately. 
Ungrateful, I know, but life goes on: Here’s what I hope 
to see from Apple in the world of iOS in 2018.
Looking ahead to 2018
What the iPhone, iPad, and iOS need in 2018. Jason Snell reports
OPINION

96 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
OPINION
More iPhones
The iPhone X was the banner product of 2017, but 
it’s still just a first take on a whole new generation of 
iPhone hardware. In 2018 I’d like to see an upgrade 
to the iPhone X, sure – ideally retaining the iPhone X 
name, because who wants to buy the iPhone XI? But 
I’d also like to see an iPhone X Plus, with a huge OLED 
screen. Personally, the iPhone X is about as much 
iPhone as I want to carry in my hand or pocket, but I 
know a bunch of iPhone Plus users who would love to 
use a larger iPhone X.
I am not sure I actually wish for there to be a follow-
up to the iPhone 8, but I suspect there will be, probably 
called the iPhone 9. Ideally it will add Face ID, though 
probably not an OLED screen, since that would basically 
make it an iPhone X. I expect that this will probably 
be the last generation of the older iPhone models, but 
who knows? Apple keeps older iPhone models kicking 
around way past their usual expiration date.
The one ‘old’ phone I really want to see in 2018 
is the iPhone SE. It’s been a couple of years since the 
iPhone SE was released, keeping a 4in screen in the 
iPhone product line, and at a low price. This is a model 
that doesn’t need to be updated, but it’s about time for 
a version with iPhone 7 or 8-level specs.
iPads with less around the edges
The iPad Pro had a good year, with updates across the 
board. It may be too much to ask for an iPad Pro update 
in 2018, but what’s the fun in that? Whether it comes 
this year or next, it’s obvious that the next iPad Pro 
should feature reduced bezels and remove the home 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 97
OPINION
button, replacing it with Face ID. (The trick with the 
iPad Pro, as well as any possible iPhone X Plus, is that 
they’re devices that can be used in either portrait or 
landscape orientation – requiring an extra degree of 
complexity from Face ID.)
As someone who is a fervent believer in the iPad 
Pro as a productivity device, I’m also going to continue 
beating the drum for improvements that make the iPad 
Pro more like a ‘real’ computer, such as a USB-C port 
and broader support for external USB devices, most 
notably on the storage side.
The iPad Pro is in many ways defined by the two 
accessories that only work on iPad Pro models: the 
Apple Pencil and the Smart Keyboard. Both of them 
could use a refresher. A new Pencil could potentially 
be shorter (the better to use it with an iPhone X Pro?), 
support inductive charging, and include a side button 

98 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
OPINION
or eraser. A new Smart Keyboard could add a row of 
function keys for media control.
But what I really want is for Apple to fully embrace 
the iPad-as-laptop concept and build an even smarter 
keyboard, an attachable keyboard with real, tactile 
keys and a hinge that lets the iPad Pro be used like a 
laptop. I’m using a version of this product right now, 
but it’s made by a third-party manufacturer with a poor 
track record for reliability. The concept is solid; Apple 
could make it a reality.
It feels like a request from ages ago, but my 
children loved the iPad mini. I’d like Apple to give it 
an update. It doesn’t need to turn into an iPad Pro, 
but revising it and keeping it around along with the 
low-end iPad would be nice. I don’t expect this to 
happen, honestly, but I hope it does.
iOS 12 wishes
This autumn we’ll see another revision to iOS. First 
and foremost, I’d like the iPad Pro not to be forgotten. 
The iPad had to wait two years for an update to its 
multitasking features, and that slow pace of updates 
is not going to help the platform get stronger. I’d like 
to see iPad multitasking get more refined, with the 
ability to pair the same app with different partners 
and easily create two instances of the same app at 
once, a la Safari.
The discontinuity between the iPhone and iPad 
interfaces needs to be addressed at some point, 
hopefully this year. Right now they’re similar, but not 
the same, and it means that using both an iPhone and 
an iPad drops can leave you in an uncanny valley of 

ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER 99
OPINION
interface confusion. If you add Face ID to the iPad, what 
happens to the swipe-up gesture, which currently kicks 
off both multitasking and Control Centre?
More broadly, the move of Control Centre to the 
top right corner of the iPhone X seems like the weak 
spot in Apple’s reconceptualization of the iPhone 
interface for a buttonless device. I used Control Centre 
all the time when it was a flip away, but in the top right 
corner, it’s largely forgotten. Maybe Apple can merge 
multitasking and Control Centre on the iPhone as it’s 
done on the iPad, or integrate 3D touch somehow. 
Heck, I’d take a customizable set of Control Centre 
icons on the lock screen, in the vein of the current 
flashlight and camera buttons.
Finally, a couple of items that have been on this wish 
list for a few years now, and yet never seem to get done. 
I’m not ready to give up. The policy Apple uses to grant 

100 ISSUE 128 • iPAD & iPHONE USER
OPINION
a small amount of free iCloud storage space needs 
to change. The free 5GB just isn’t large enough to do 
almost anything useful. Apple could raise the allotment, 
allow an additional amount per every device attached 
to an Apple ID (or set of family IDs), or even offer a year 
of a larger data plan with purchase of a device. I firmly 
believe that Apple doesn’t need to nickel and dime 
people with its iCloud storage plans – once people 
use them and get used to them, they will pay for more 
storage. But the upsell happens way too soon, before 
users can see how useful iCloud storage can be.
And then there’s iCloud Photo Library. I use it, I 
wrote a book about it, and it’s so frustrating that family 
members can’t choose to share full-resolution photos 
with one another. My wife and I have to go through 
a ridiculous rigmarole to import her iPhone photos 
into my Photos library, and a similar process so that 
she can access the master library. My daughter should 
have an easy way to choose what photos she takes 
get added to the family photo library. Google Photos 
has taken steps in this direction; it’s several years past 
time for Apple to do it.

THE WORLD’S BEST-SELLING APPLE MAGAZINE
HOW TO PLAY RETRO GAMES ON A MAC
FEBRUARY 2018
Apple in 2018:
What we expect, 
what we want
FROM IDG
iMac Pro:
iMac Pro:
Apple’s slimline powerhouse heralds new era for the Mac
Everything you need to know
Meltdown and Spectre: 
RETRO


