


2    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
66 Apps for the New Year      
11 apps that will help you 
focus on what’s important 
to you in 2018. 
68 Spend Less!    
Apps to help you save 
money, manage bills, and 
get deals!  
70 Augmented Reality Apps      
Cutting-edge apps that put 
Apple’s ARKit to good use. 
Great Gear
 
74 iPhone X Essentials 
Top quality accessories for 
your premium smartphone. 
77 Digital Nomad   
5 accessories every mobile 
professional needs.    
iUsers
 
53 Brit Jones
57 Gabby Beckford
73 Luca Romano
Spring 2018
Regular Departments
4 
Editor's Message 
6 
Staff Picks  
8 
Trending  
10 Around the iPhone Life Ofﬁ ce
12 Photo Contest Winners
14 Hey, Sarah
16 Tech Mishaps
18 Favorite Podcasts
80 iView: The Best in Bluetooth   
Gear  
iNews
 
20 iPhone X Review
We put Apple’s most-hyped 
smartphone to the test.
24 Hands on with the Apple 
Watch Series 3 + Cellular
Why our COO thinks this is 
the ﬁ rst smartwatch worth 
buying. 
Life + Tech
 
54 From a Bird’s-eye View  
Jaw-dropping photos and 
pro tips for every drone 
enthusiast. 
58 Digital Dating  
Don’t learn the hard way–
take our advice and snag a 
hot date!
60 Experts Weigh in on Screen  
Time
Read this before handing 
your child an iPad.
Best Apps
 
64 Everyday Chef    
Apps and inspiration to turn 
weeknight meals into a 
culinary event.  

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    3
HOW-TO GUIDE
IOS 11
COOKING
APPS
Get the most out of Apple’s latest mobile operating
system.
33  iPhone Life’s iOS 11 Guide 
 
 
34  New & Noteworthy
38  Notes
39  Safari
40  Camera & Photos
42  Apple Music
44  Apple Maps
46  iPad Productivity
48  Battery Life Fixes
50  iPhone X Tips
ONLINE 
DATING TIPS
58
PAGE
WIRED FOR TECH: 
KIDS IN THE 
DIGITAL AGE
64
PAGE
60
PAGE

Upgrade Your Skills
e all want to feel like we’re continually improving and gain-
ing new skills in life. For those of us with iPhones, iPads, 
and Apple Watches, having conﬁ dent mastery of the de-
vices we use every day can contribute signiﬁ cantly to that 
sense of accomplishment. It’s satisfying to know how to scan and 
send a document in less than a minute, to send cool effects in your 
text messages, and to be able to help a friend optimize their iPhone’s 
storage or battery life. That feeling of proﬁ ciency is priceless!
To that end, in this year’s How-To Guide (pg. 33) we make sure you 
have all the most useful features of iOS 11 under your belt. And if 
you’re lucky enough to own Apple’s premium iPhone, you’ll ﬁ nd our 
iPhone X guide extra helpful when adjusting to life without the Home 
button. You’ll learn how to set up and use Face ID to unlock your 
phone, how to use Apple Pay to make purchases, and how to navigate 
the Home screen and App Switcher with a new set of iPhone X-only 
gestures (see page 50).
Some of you may still be on the fence about whether or not to buy the 
iPhone X and Apple Watch Series 3 with cellular connectivity. We get 
it; these are big investments! You may ﬁ nd yourself asking a friend to 
hold their iPhone X just to see how it feels in your hand. Or perhaps 
you keep pestering your nephew to call you on his cellular Apple Watch 
to see if you notice a difference in sound quality. Well you can relax; the 
verdict is in! Read our hands-on reviews of Apple’s new lineup (see pg. 
20 and pg 24). Spoiler: The iPhone X’s True Tone OLED display is even 
better than we expected. 
As we settle into 2018, it’s also a great time to stock up on inspiration 
for the year ahead. If you’re working toward a new goal, check out page 
66 to ﬁ nd the right apps to support you on your journey. We also have 
some great ideas of ways to put your iDevices to use in all areas of 
your life, from traveling (pg. 77) to bargain shopping (pg. 68) to dating 
(pg. 58). Enjoy!
Donna Cleveland
Editor in Chief
iPhone Life magazine, donna@iphonelife.com, Twitter: @schillcleveland
Editor's Message
W
Readers weigh in on the questions we’ve been 
pondering at iPhone Life.
Re: Amazon Echo’s Always-Listening Speaker
An always-on system is a no go. We all say things 
or have conversations sometimes that only are 
meant for a particular person or group. With an 
always-on system, these conversations can be 
recorded by the parent company and used 
accordingly. 
-Steven Kohn
Re: What’s Your Favorite Podcast App?
I listen to a lot of podcasts and use Downcast. 
I’m generally happy with it although there are a 
lot of settings, so it can be confusing sometimes!
-Donna Campbell
Re: On Opting for the iPhone 8 Plus Over the 
iPhone X
I’ve become comfortable with the physical size 
of the iPhone 7 Plus, so the smaller size (and 
narrower screen) of the iPhone X was not allur-
ing. Also, the new concepts of facial recognition, 
no Home button, and notched screen, not to 
mention the price, brought me back to the more 
familiar 8 Plus.
-Richard Erschik
Re: What Are Your Favorite iOS 11 Features?
I really appreciate the Do Not Disturb While Driv-
ing feature, shifting keyboard, Live Photo editing, 
Control Center, screen recording, and multiple 
app selection features.
-James Stobaugh
Re: Why I’m Getting the Apple Watch 
Series 3 + Cellular
I am 80 and ﬁ gure I’d upgrade my current Apple 
Watch so I can use it as a medical alert device 
without having to be in constant proximity to my 
iPhone. 
-Jackie Krear
Comments from Readers
4    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


6    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
Name: Conner Carey
Title: Feature Web Writer 
Years at iPhone Life: 2
Apple Products Owned: iPhone X, iPad Air, 
Apple Watch, and MacBook 
Ofﬁ ce Quirk: I’m not at the ofﬁ ce most 
afternoons; I prefer to write in pj’s with my dog. 
STAFF PICKS
MEMBERS OF THE IPHONE LIFE TEAM 
SHARE THEIR GO-TO GEAR & GADGETS
This Is Ground MOD 4 
($385)
This iPad-sized modern briefcase is as functional as it is stun-
ning. The MOD 4 includes a place for your iPad, notebook, 
passport, earbuds, and phone, as well as slots for three cards, 
two pens, the included Tile Mate Bluetooth tracker, and more. 
At the center, there are three magnetic docks for attaching 
the interchangeable insert(s) of your choice. Made in Italy, this 
luxury item is worth the splurge. 
WatchDots 
($9.99)
If you love your Apple Watch 3 + Cellular but aren’t such a fan 
of the big red dot that announces it, WatchDots is the solu-
tion. Simply place the small piece of vinyl in the color of your 
choice on the edge of your Digital Crown and, if you want, on 
the Side button too. They offer another fun way to customize 
your Apple Watch to your liking. 
i.am+ BUTTONS 
($199.95)
I like my wireless earbuds to have style, and this pair of i.am+ 
BUTTONS exudes it. They come with an impressive number 
of ear-ﬁ tting options, including winged styles for extra sup-
port during workouts. Speaking of which, these are my go-to 
earbuds for exercise. They stay put no matter what, and they 
provide fantastic sound too.
LINK AKC Smart Dog Collar 
($149)
If your dog enjoys sneaking out the 
door to chase squirrels up the street 
like my dog does, you may want to 
get the LINK AKC collar to track them 
down. In addition to GPS, the collar 
also tracks their activity level through-
out the day, helping you keep your 
best friend healthy. 


The Numbers 
TRENDING
Gartner predicts that by 2020, 40 percent 
of employees will pay less for healthcare 
by wearing ﬁ tness trackers.
40 PERCENT
According to consulting ﬁ rm PwC, the 
commercial drone industry will soar to 
$127 billion by 2020, with uses in farm-
ing, transportation, and even ﬁ lms.
$127 BILLION
Unico Smartbrush Oral Hygiene Device (Price TBA) 
Our usual morning routines (i.e., showering, getting dressed, brushing our teeth, 
etc.) are hardly the most exciting part of our day. Because of that, we often slack 
in areas we shouldn’t. Maybe we even choose to pop a breath mint instead of 
brushing our teeth (gross!). This device will make brushing your teeth much eas-
ier. Just place this device in your mouth and it’ll have your teeth clean in three 
seconds ﬂ at—so no more excuses!
Inﬁ nity Loop: Energy 
(Free) 
This puzzle game might seem simple, 
but it’s actually super fun. Your goal is 
to connect all the necessary wires so 
that the lights come on. The app’s puz-
zles grow progressively more difﬁ cult with each level, 
so you’ll need to stay sharp.
Animal Crossing: Pocket Camp 
(Free) 
If you long for the days of playing 
Animal Crossing on your Nintendo DS, 
then brace yourself—Animal Crossing 
is ﬁ nally available as a mobile game. 
In this spinoff of Nintendo’s console franchise, you’ll 
decorate your own campsite, meet new animal friends, 
complete odd jobs, and more!
UNICORN 
(Free) 
This numbered coloring book app is 
a great stress reliever—and you don’t 
need to be an artist to enjoy it. Just 
ﬁ ll the numbered boxes with the cor-
responding color and voila! You’ll have a colorful mas-
terpiece in no time. This is the perfect app to keep you 
busy in a fun, creative way. Plus, it’s named after one of 
the most magical creatures ever!
Soon The Everyday Bucket List 
(Free) 
How many times have you made a men-
tal note to watch a movie your friend 
recommended, only to forget about it 
later? This app helps you keep track of all 
your fun aspirations, whether that’s a ﬁ lm you’re excit-
ed to watch or a restaurant you’d love to try.
WHAT’S HOT IN THE APP STORE
UNIQUE PRODUCT
We put up a valiant ﬁ ght against down-
loading Facebook Messenger. But ac-
cording to a statistic from Facebook, the 
app boasts over 1.2 billion monthly active 
users. It’s safe to say most of us gave in.
1.2 BILLION
8    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Best 12 iOS 
Action Gaming 
Apps of 2017
bit.ly/2BeVwQI
In this article, 
we take a look 
at some of the 
App Store’s best 
and most critically acclaimed action games of 2017. 
Whether you enjoy single-player or multiplayer 
action and adventure, this roundup of stellar iOS 
games, presented in no particular order, will offer 
something for all mobile action fans.
What to Do If 
Your iPhone 
Keeps Freezing
bit.ly/2AgK2Zv
No one wants to 
deal with a frozen 
iPhone. But now 
and again it hap-
pens, especially if you just updated to a new version 
of iOS or you have an older iPhone model. In this 
article, we’ll teach you what to do when your device 
starts acting up, whether a single app crashes or 
your entire iPhone freezes. If iOS 11 is the source 
of your problems, we’ll offer some short-term solu-
tions that should help until Apple releases ﬁ xes to 
all the iOS update bugs. 
Leather iPhone 
X Cases 
bit.ly/2yil75R
When you have 
an expensive 
piece of technolo-
gy like the iPhone 
X, you want to 
protect it but also show it off. The best way to do 
this is with an equally impressive case that serves 
as a frame for your high-tech work of art. We had 
the opportunity to try several Leather Wallet Cases 
($39–69) from Burkley, and will share our experienc-
es with you.
ONLINE AT
IPHONELIFE.COM
PUBLISHER AND CEO
David Averbach • david@iphonelife.com
CHIEF TECHNOLOGY OFFICER
Raphael Burnes • raphael@iphonelife.com 
CHIEF OPERATING OFFICER
Noah Siemsen • noah@iphonelife.com
EDITOR IN CHIEF
Donna Schill Cleveland • donna@iphonelife.com
SENIOR EDITOR AND FOUNDER
Hal Goldstein • hal@iphonelife.com
SENIOR WEB EDITOR
Sarah Kingsbury • sarah@iphonelife.com
MANAGING EDITOR
Rheanne Taylor • rheanne@iphonelife.com
ART DIRECTOR
Jaime Thatcher • jaime@iphonelife.com
FEATURE WEB WRITER
Conner Carey • conner@iphonelife.com
CUSTOMER SERVICE & AD TRAFFICKING
SPECIALIST
Tamlin Day • tamlin@iphonelife.com
CONTRIBUTORS
David Averbach (page 20)
Conner Carey (pages 6, 50, 74)
Donna Cleveland (pages 4, 34, 42, 46, 48, 60)
Abbey Dufoe (pages 64, 66)
Hal Goldstein (page 80)
Hallei Halter (pages 58, 68)
Christopher Henshaw (page 54)
Sarah Kingsbury (page 14)
Jono Lee (page 77)
Dig Om (page 70)
Noah Siemsen (page 24)
Rheanne Taylor (pages 8, 38, 39, 40, 44)
CUSTOMER SERVICE & SUBSCRIPTIONS 
For address changes or subscription questions, visit iphonelife.com/customerservice, email customerservice@
iphonelife.com, or call 847-763-4940.
CONTRIBUTE 
To write for iPhone Life magazine or iphonelife.com, visit iphonelife.com/share.
ADVERTISE
To advertise in iPhone Life, call 641-472-9962, fax 641-472-1879, or visit iphonelife.com/advertise.
PUBLICIZE YOUR PRODUCT 
Send press releases, join our vendor network, and submit products for review at iphonelife.com/getpublicity.
PRINTER 
Quad Graphics, 1700 James Savage Rd., Midland, MI 48640 USA 800-448-4288
NEWSSTAND DISTRIBUTION 
Curtis Circulation Company, 760 River Rd., New Milford, NJ 07646 USA 201-634-7400
NEWSSTAND COORDINATOR 
National Publisher Services 267-252-4093
iPhone Life (ISSN 1949-2018) is published quarterly, four times a year, Spring, Summer, Fall, Winter by Mango Life 
Media at 402 North B St. #108, Fairfield, IA 52556, USA. Periodicals postage paid at Fairfield, Iowa, and at additional 
mailing offices. Subscription rates payable in U.S. dollars, checks drawn on a U.S. bank, or by credit card—one year: 
$15.97, two years: $24.97. Postage: United States free; Canada and Mexico add $7 per year; outside North America, 
add $18 per year. Please allow ten to twelve weeks for receipt of first issue. Executive, Editorial, Circulation, Advertising, 
Marketing Offices: 402 North B St. #108, Fairfield, IA 52556. Telephone: 641-472-6330, Fax: 641-472-1879. 
© Copyright 2018 , Mango Life Media LLC, all rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced without 
written permission. Reasonable efforts are made to provide accurate and useful information, but the reader must 
make his or her own investigations and decisions; the Publisher and Editorial Staff cannot assume any responsibility 
or liability for the use of information contained herein.
POSTMASTER: Please send address changes to Cynthia Klaas, Client Relationship Manager, Hallmark Data Systems 
7300 Linder Skokie, IL 60077.
Cover images courtesy of  Apple Inc.
VAlex/shutterstock  
Garder Elena/shutterstock  
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    9

AROUND   THE 
IPHONE    LIFE    OFFICE
What Is Your Favorite App Right Now?
Donna Cleveland, Editor in Chief
I’ve been obsessed with Giada De 
Laurentiis’ cooking show for years. Now 
with the Food Network app (free), I can 
quickly ﬁ nd one of Giada’s fresh Italian 
pasta or rich mascarpone cheesecake 
recipes in a matter of seconds.
Conner Carey, Feature Web Writer
After a seriously stressful week, I use 
Audible (free) to listen to Bill Bryson’s 
book A Short History of Nearly Every-
thing. I use the app’s built-in sleep timer 
to drift off as I learn about the workings 
of the universe.
Rheanne Taylor, Managing Editor 
I love ordering photo prints using Print 
Studio (free). You can get your images 
printed on everything from wood and 
metal to greeting cards and posters. 
And doing so is a breeze since the app 
pulls your shots directly from Instagram 
or the Photos app.
iPhone Life Sponsors
Tamlin Day, Ad Trafﬁ cking & Customer 
Service Specialist
A group of psychologists created 
Replika (free) to provide emotional sup-
port to people with anxiety. The AI-based 
app learns through conversation and is 
completely free and private. None of 
your information is sold to third parties.
10    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


Photo Contest 1st Place
2nd Place
By Elise Margolin
@e_margolin_photos
Reader's Choice 
and 1st Place 
winners will 
receive the 
following prize:
The Olloclip Core Lens Set for 
the iPhone includes ﬁsheye, 
wide-angle, and macro lenses 
($99.99 value, olloclip.com). 
iPhone photography
3rd Place
By Gyula Rusinczky
@rolldotyears
By Rishav Agarwal
@yolo.solo
12    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Photo Contest Finalists
By Suyog Chhatre
@suyog.chhatre
By Richard Harper
@fuhrtop
By Cherie Hefner
 @cheriehefner13
By Shreya Kathuriya
@photoshreya
By Rhys Moses
@mukade1001
By Paulo Bracero
@jps_bracero
Reader's Choice
contest winners
Want to see your photo featured here? Upload your 
shot(s) to your personal Instagram account and in-
clude the hashtag #iphonelifephotocontest in your 
photo’s caption. If you are selected as a winner, 
we’ll contact you via your direct messages within 
the Instagram app. Our editors will choose the top 
three entries; the post with the most likes will win 
Reader’s Choice. Our Reader’s Choice and 1st-place 
winner will receive the Olloclip Core Lens ($99 val-
ue). We will also feature all our winners and ﬁnalists 
in an upcoming issue of iPhone Life magazine.
By Lydia Cassatt
@lydiacassatt
By Steve Overton
@techagentvt
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    13

14    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
HEY, SARAH
Need iPad and iPhone help? Sign up for iPhone 
Life Insider and Sarah will help you with all your 
iPhone troubleshooting and iOS-related issues. 
To learn more go to iPhoneLife.com/Insider.
Dear Forget,
It’s true that many of the auto-generated Memories 
slideshows are not that great. Unfortunately, you 
can’t disable the feature. But since Memories are in 
their own tab in the Photos app, you can do what I 
do—just pretend that tab doesn’t exist!
 
If you dislike one of the Memories, you can remove 
individual photos by tapping on the Memory, then 
tapping Select. Tap on the photos you want to de-
lete and then hit the Trash icon in the lower right. To 
delete the entire thing, scroll down to the bottom of 
the Memory and tap Delete Memory. Interestingly, 
you can disable holiday-themed memories altogeth-
er by going to Settings > Photos, and toggling off 
Show Holiday Events.  
Would you please advise me how to stop 
Photos from arbitrarily generating 
Memories in iOS?
Sincerely,
Would Rather Forget
Where is AirDrop in iOS 11? I’ve searched 
all over but can’t seem to ﬁnd it anywhere. 
Sincerely,
Dropped
Sarah Kingsbury is the senior web editor of iPhoneLife.com. She goes almost nowhere 
without her iPhone and is a contributor to the site’s Tip of the Day column. She has 
over a decade of experience writing and editing for online and print publications.
Dear Dropped,
For some reason Apple has made AirDrop a little 
harder to ﬁnd in iOS 11. It’s still there, but you need 
to open Control Center and 3D Touch the tile that 
has the Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and Data icons. This will 
expand the tile; the AirDrop icon can be found 
among the additional icons that appear. Tap on 
the AirDrop icon to turn the feature on or off or to 
change who can send and receive things to or from 
you via AirDrop.
Dear Blue,
 
You can switch audio output between Bluetooth 
devices in Control Center, just not via the Bluetooth 
control. Open Control Center and tap the pulsing 
icon in the media playback panel (located at the top 
right corner of the new Control Center). Tapping that 
allows you to see all your Bluetooth options and 
select your earbuds from there. 
I am running iOS 11 on my iPad Pro. I can’t 
ﬁnd a way to switch to my Bluetooth ear-
buds without going to Settings. In iOS 10 
I could swipe up and change devices from 
Control Center. Am I missing something?
Sincerely,
Blue Over Bluetooth


16    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
Tech Mishaps
I Asked a Str anger  to Lunch
I was playing on my phone in the hallway outside the bathroom at work, waiting for my business partner so we could go to 
lunch. When he came out, I started walking alongside him, matching his pace as we walked toward the door. “Where should we 
go for lunch?” I asked him. He didn’t respond. I looked up, only to ﬁ nd that in fact it was a woman who worked in our building 
(and who I’d never spoken to) who I was talking to and walking with. We said nothing as I shufﬂ ed sheepishly back to the bath-
rooms to await my business partner.
-Zombie Walker
Embarr  assing Fails in the 
Digital Age
Illustration by Tamlin Day, conartistrydesigns.com 

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    17
One Way to Break the Ice 
One morning, I received an unexpected text from a new 
friend I barely knew. “Hey, come here for lunch and have sex 
with me.” I wasn’t sure what to reply, knowing the text was 
meant for her husband and not me. Next time I saw her, we 
both died laughing!
-Speechless
You r Boss Said What? 
I started a new job and texted my supervisor that I had made 
my ﬁ rst sale. She replied: “Proud of you.” Or so she said. The 
text I got was, “F*$k you!”
-Mixed Messages
I Tex ted Som eon e Else’s Grandma
I like to send photos and little snippets from my life to my 
grandma. This went on for a month or so. One day, I ﬁ nally 
got a response: “It seems like you have a beautiful family, but 
I’m not your grandma.” Yeah, turned out I’d saved more than 
one number for grandma in my phone. That explains why she 
never texted back.
-Adopted Granddaughter 
I Flir ted with a Chur ch Elder  
Once I texted a church elder and meant to end the text with 
a thumbs up, but accidentally sent a kissy face instead. I was 
mortiﬁ ed!
-Blushing Face
I Broadcast My Insecur ities to a Roo m Full 
of Business Profession als  
I’m a professional speaker who talks about the importance of 
positive self-talk to business audiences. The evening before 
an important business keynote, I recorded some afﬁ rmations 
for my private use on my computer. During my PowerPoint 
presentation the next day, the recordings suddenly and un-
expectedly blared out over the auditorium sound system to 
the beneﬁ t of my (mostly male) audience. What did it say you 
ask? “I have a SLIM and SEXY body!” I’m still mortiﬁ ed as I 
write this years later!
-Conﬁ dence Killer
I Invited Myself to My Student’s Hou se for  
Dinner 
I meant to text my boyfriend, “What’s for dinner?” I sent it to 
the parent of one of my students instead. It could have been a 
lot worse, but it was still embarrassing!
-Presumptuous Teacher
I Com plained Abou t My Gir lfr iend—To My 
Gir lfr iend!
One time when I was on a trip, I sat down to email a friend 
who’d asked me how my relationship was going with my 
then girlfriend. I went into great detail in the email about how 
I wasn’t feeling the relationship anymore and how we were 
going different ways in life. I even made a bad joke about her 
having a big butt. Unfortunately, I accidentally sent the email to 
my girlfriend, because her name started with the same letter 
as my friend’s name. I panicked and tried to hack her email, 
but I couldn’t answer her security code questions because, as 
it turned out, I didn’t know her as well as I thought I did.
Sincerely, Lesson Learned
Elxan Nagiyev/shutterstock  
Have a hilarious tale to share about a 
texting mix-up or other tech-related fail? 
Email techmishaps@iphonelife.com with 
your stories. We’ll feature the funniest 
stories (anonymously, of course!) in the 
next issue of iPhone Life magazine.
BECOME AN 
IPHONE LIFE INSIDER
iphonelife.com/insider

FAVORITE PODCASTS
fr om  iPhon e Life Reader s and Staff
Optimal Living Daily
I just discovered this podcast, which is 
great. Host Justin Malik ﬁ nds and narrates 
a blog post every day from a top blogger 
in the personal development, productivity, 
or minimalism space. Each episode is only 7–10 minutes, 
which is the perfect length of time for me, and it’s nice to 
get exposure to a broad range of blogger content without 
having to read.
-Raphael Burnes, CTO at iPhone Life
Pod Save the People
This podcast is one of my favorites,
 because I love activism-geared news 
and listening to interviews with people 
involved in education, health, and criminal 
justice policy. 
-Suzannah Kingsbury, Student at Northwestern University
Waking Up with Sam Harris
When it comes to intellectual content, I 
really like Sam Harris, who explores topics 
such as politics, human behavior, and the 
future of society from as objective of a 
standpoint as I have found. I love the way he challenges 
identity politics. 
-Sara Estrin, Resident Doctor in Las Vegas
Where Should We Begin? with Esther 
Perel 
This podcast lets you peek inside real 
therapy sessions with psychotherapist 
Esther Perel and hear stories of the under-
currents in real couples’ relationships and see how she 
navigates these dynamics.
-Alea Lobdell, Birth and Postpartum Doula at Doula Bloom
WTF Am I Doing With My Life? with 
Kristy Arnett
Kristy’s podcast gives me the opportunity 
to grow every time I listen to an episode. 
She asks powerful questions, tells personal stories, 
and brings on guests who are amazing individuals. This 
show makes me reﬂ ect on important topics and provides 
support for whatever I am dealing with at the time. It’s a 
really inspiring way to start my day!
-Olga Moreno, Account Director at Crowe PR
Heavyweight
This podcast sparks feelings of nostalgia 
and is sentimental, sweet, and very 
cleverly written and executed.
-Nicholas Naioti, Owner and Manager at 
the Arbor Bar
Strange Fruit
I like this show from WFPL News for a 
black queer perspective on pop 
culture and current events.
-Suzannah Kingsbury, Student at 
Northwestern University
Bad With Money With Gaby Dunn
Gaby Dunn is one of my favorite internet 
personalities. She’s interviewed a lot of 
pretty well-known people and isn’t afraid 
to ask the hard-hitting questions about 
money that most people avoid like the plague. 
-Samm Wechsler, Administrative Assistant at Massage by 
Mary
Listen to the 
iPhon e Life Podcast
Are you a podcast fanatic? Do you like following 
iPhone news? Then check out our podcast at 
iPhoneLife.com/Podcast.
18    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


20    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
iPhone X Review: 
Best & Worst Features
by David Averbach

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    21
ypically when Apple releases a new iPhone, 
the changes are indisputably upgrades. 
There’s nothing controversial about adding 
a better camera and faster processor while 
keeping the price the same. When Apple 
decided to remove the headphone jack 
from the iPhone 7, it was the ﬁrst time that 
the changes felt more like a trade-off than an upgrade. When 
Apple released the iPhone X, I was left with a similar feeling. 
Apple upgraded the camera, designed an edge-to-edge dis-
play, and added Face ID, but removed the Home button and 
with it the popular Touch ID sensor. To further complicate the 
equation, Apple raised the price to $1,000. When I watched 
Apple announce the iPhone X, I was left with more questions 
than answers. Would I miss the Home button and Touch ID? 
Would the iPhone’s unusual notch at the top of the display 
bother me? How reliable would Face ID be? Most importantly, 
I wondered if the iPhone X was worth the extravagant price 
tag. After two months of using the iPhone X, I’m ready to 
weigh in with a deﬁnitive hands-on review.
The Screen
Last year I made the switch from the standard iPhone form 
factor to the larger iPhone Plus. I loved the big screen and 
the dual camera, but I hated having to carry around the larger 
phone. The main appeal of the iPhone X to me was that the 
edge-to-edge display allowed me to have the larger screen and 
dual camera of the iPhone 8 Plus but the smaller form factor 
of the iPhone 8. What I’ve found, however, is that while the 
iPhone X has a similar-sized screen as the iPhone 8 Plus, the 
ratio is very different. The iPhone X is tall and narrow while 
the iPhone 8 Plus is wider. I’ve found the dimensions of the 
iPhone 8 Plus to be more user friendly. However, this tradeoff 
is more than made up for by the iPhone X’s incredible OLED 
screen. The OLED display has much better color contrast than 
the iPhone 8 (and 8 Plus) LED display. The improved screen 
is not only impressive when viewing photos and videos, but 
because OLED represents true blacks more clearly, the display 
is noticeably better when reading text. The text is so crisp, it 
almost feels like you’re using an e-reader. Apple also added a 
feature called True Tone which adjusts the screen’s white bal-
ance to match the lighting in the room. I’ve found this feature 
to make a huge difference in usability, especially in low light.
No Home Button
In order to accommodate the beautiful new display, Apple 
was forced to remove the Home button. To say that the Home 
button has been essential to iPhone’s UI would be an under-
statement. I have used the Home button constantly, and I was 
pretty concerned about how the UI would work without it. 
When using the iPhone X, there is a thin line on the bottom of 
the screen that serves as a digital Home button. To close out 
an app and return to the Home screen, you simply tap the line 
and swipe up (see pg. 50 for the full iPhone X guide). There 
are a few UI changes that I’ve found to be a little confusing 
such as accessing the Control Center (swipe down from the 
top right corner of the display) and the App Switcher (do a 
swooping motion from the bottom), but for the most part I’ve 
been surprised by how quickly I’ve adjusted to not having the 
Home button and how little I’ve missed it. It honestly only 
took me about a day of use to adjust.
The Notch
The edge-to-edge display is broken up on the top of the 
screen by what Apple is calling a notch. The notch is the 
section of the screen where Apple has put the front-facing 
camera, sound piece, and the sensors for Face ID. One of my 
biggest concerns with the iPhone X was that the notch would 
get in the way during daily use. I’ve been pleasantly surprised 
to ﬁnd that it doesn’t really bother me. It does get in the way 
when watching videos in full-screen mode, but I rarely use 
my phone to watch videos anyway, and it doesn’t affect me 
during day-to-day use.
Face ID
When Apple ﬁrst released a phone with Touch ID, it was a 
bit buggy. It took a few attempts to unlock the phone, and the 
sensor frequently failed to identify your ﬁnger. Touch ID even-
tually turned into a polished feature, but it took a couple of 
iterations for Apple to get it right. Because of this, my  
expectations for Face ID were really low. I could not have 
been more wrong. Face ID is incredibly accurate and polished. 
It works even when I have a hat and sunglasses on and it 
also works in the dark. I’ve found Face ID to be particularly 
effective at unlocking a phone that’s already in use for things 
like downloading apps or accessing Apple Wallet. While Touch 
ID required an extra step to unlock (placing your ﬁnger on the 
reader), Face ID is automatic (because you’re already looking 
at the screen).
With previous iPhones, you had to choose whether to dis-
play previews of notiﬁcations on your Lock screen. Displaying 
previews was really convenient because you could see mes-
sages without unlocking your phone, but it also sacriﬁced your 
privacy by allowing anyone else to see the previews without 
T
“I’ve been surprised by 
how quickly I’ve adjust-
ed to not having the 
Home button and how 
little I’ve missed it.”

having to unlock your phone. With Face ID, your iPhone can 
identify who is looking at the phone and therefore display pre-
views only to you. This feature not only saves you time every 
time you get a message, but it also shows how much atten-
tion to detail Apple paid to getting Face ID right.
Camera
I love the iPhone’s Portrait mode. It allows me to capture 
amazing photos that previously would’ve required an expen-
sive DSLR camera. The problem with Portrait mode on my 
iPhone 7 Plus was that conditions had to be perfect in order 
for it to function. You had to have a lot of light and be the per-
fect distance away from the subject. With the iPhone X,  
Portrait mode works under a wide range of circumstances. 
Most notably, it works a lot better in low light. Apple also 
brought Portrait mode to the front-facing camera. While I 
haven’t found the front-facing Portrait mode to work quite as 
well, it’s still a really nice option to have. Apple also introduced 
Portrait Lighting, which offers four different lighting effects 
to use with Portrait mode. I haven’t found them to work very 
well though.
Wireless Charging
With the iPhone X’s edge-to-edge display and glass back, 
I’ve resigned myself to using a protective case. This can make 
it difﬁcult for me to dock my phone when charging. Because 
of this, I’ve been really enjoying the iPhone X’s wireless 
charging capabilities. I didn’t think I’d care about it at all, but 
it’s really convenient to simply place your iPhone on a Qi 
charging pad. I was relieved to discover that wireless charging 
works with most cases.
Other Factors
The iPhone X’s A11 chip has been noticeably faster for me 
than the A10 chip in the iPhone 7 Plus, and iOS 11 has run 
much smoother with the X. I was a little concerned about bat-
tery life, because the X has a smaller battery than the Plus, but 
I’ve found that my battery lasts longer than it did on the iPhone 
7 Plus. One of the most disappointing things about the phone 
for me has actually been its form factor. Typically, Apple makes 
each iteration of the phone thinner and lighter, but the iPhone 
X is about the same size as the iPhone 7. Nothing about its de-
sign is particularly noteworthy, with the exception of the glass 
back, which looks nice, but makes the phone more fragile.
Conclusion
I had a lot of reservations about purchasing the iPhone X.  
After using the phone for two months, I could not be happier. 
Most of the new features have exceeded my expectations, 
while most of my concerns have turned out to be nonissues. 
While there are a few UI choices that I’ve found to be a bit con-
fusing, overall, I believe it’s the most polished phone Apple has 
ever made. The iPhone 8 and 8 Plus are also great phones, but 
if you can afford the upgrade, the iPhone X is well worth the 
money.  
David Averbach is the CEO and Publisher of iPhone Life  magazine. David has an obses-
sion with all things Apple. He grew up on Macs and now has a MacBook Pro, iPhone, 
iPad, Apple TV, and an Apple Watch. David enjoys traveling and Ultimate Frisbee. He 
has been to over 20 countries. To contact David, email him at David@iphonelife.com.
“Portrait mode works 
under a wide range of 
circumstances. Most 
notably, it works a lot 
better in low light.”
22    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    23

HANDS ON 
WITH THE 
APPLE WATCH 
SERIES 3 
+ CELLULAR
24    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

THE FEATURES I LOVE—
AND WHAT I’M STILL 
WAITING FOR
BY NOAH SIEMSEN
PROS:
• RELIABLE CELLULAR CONNECTION 
• FAST APP LAUNCHING AND TASK SWITCHING
• EASY TO SET UP, USE, AND MANAGE
• EFFECTIVE ACTIVITY RINGS
• AMAZING BATTERY LIFE
CONS:
• LACK OF CUSTOMIZATION OPTIONS
• CORNERS OF DISPLAY ARE LESS RESPONSIVE
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    25

WHY I BOUGHT THE APPLE 
WATCH
This is the ﬁrst version of the Apple Watch that tempted 
me. Previous models simply fell short of my expectations for 
the device. However, the addition of an independent cellular 
data and GPS connection, along with the increase in proces-
sor speed, made the purchase easily justiﬁable in my mind. 
Suddenly it felt like an opportunity to be liberated from the 
constraints of my bulky iPhone for certain activities, and that 
beneﬁt was enough for me to go for it.
MEETING EXPECTATIONS
 A few months in and so far I’ve been really happy with it. 
I’ve used my Apple Watch untethered mainly during physical 
activities like cycling, coaching, playing soccer, or just about 
any time I don’t want an unwieldy phone bouncing around in 
my pocket. As a husband and father of three boys, I regularly 
ﬁnd that something or someone needs to be picked up on my 
way home. Going without my phone no longer means I am 
unreachable. That’s a big deal. I also ﬁnd that I’m much more 
likely to look at notiﬁcations on my watch than on my phone. 
The vibration of the haptic feedback has a sort of melody to 
it, resulting in an unexpectedly functional device. I’m quite 
impressed with how Apple was able to generate a haptic lan-
guage that I intuitively understand. When you receive a phone 
call or turn-by-turn feedback, you intuitively understand that 
the notiﬁcation is more important than one from Clash Royale 
signaling that a chest is ready to unlock.
BIGGEST DISAPPOINTMENTS
I ﬁnd the versatility of the built-in apps to be a little under-
whelming, and in general I’d like more control over different 
parts of how I interact with Apple Watch features. I was antic-
ipating being able to work with the watch to create a custom 
ﬁtness plan, but it’s a bit more generic then I imagined. And 
while I found the haptic feedback to be an incredibly effective 
tool, I immediately wanted to see Apple push it further. With 
effective haptic feedback, you don’t have to look at your watch 
and yet you know a certain action is happening. To me, this 
screams out as a next-level form of communication. Wouldn’t 
it be nice to be able to customize the intensity and pattern of 
haptic feedback for each type of notiﬁcation the same way 
you pick a ringtone? 
RESPONSIVENESS
The speed of launching and moving between apps has 
been better than I expected and doesn’t feel slow at all. 
However, when I lift my wrist, it takes just a little bit too long 
to show me the time. I’d like that to be more sensitive, so it 
lights up faster.
BATTERY LIFE
I typically get two days out of one charge. Even with mod-
erate use, it hasn’t run out of battery in less than a day and a 
half. For me this is more than enough.
HEY SIRI
Hands-free Siri works great, if a bit slow, but I just don’t ﬁnd 
myself using it much. Perhaps I’ll discover more beneﬁts later.
CALL QUALITY
The call quality is quite a bit better than I expected. The 
audio is loud enough, I can hear what people are saying, and 
I don’t have to keep the watch next to my face. People on 
the other end don’t complain or ask me if I’m talking on my 
watch. It offers an all around smooth experience unless you’re 
in a very noisy crowd.
FITNESS FEATURES
I’ve been impressed with my watch’s ability to read and 
track my activity. In addition to logging my time walking and 
standing, it uses the heart rate monitor to accurately detect 
when I’m doing more strenuous exercise. Tracking my ring 
patterns over time has been very helpful in identifying recur-
ring deﬁcits in my activity routine. But once you try to go past 
the automatic data collection into customization of workouts, 
I’ve found it lacking. I was hoping to have more exercise types 
to choose from in Workouts, and to be able to customize the 
options. For example, if I’m playing soccer outside, I want to 
be able to specify that and to also set whether it’s a high- or 
low-intensity session. If it’s not giving me an accurate read, 
I’m less hooked into it emotionally.
APPLE MUSIC
The Apple Music app gives you access to songs you’ve add-
ed to your iCloud Music Library on your iPhone, but doesn’t 
give you unlimited access to 40 million songs like you might 
expect unless you use Siri. To be fair this is still very cool, but 
falls short when it comes to music discovery or building an 
on-the-go playlist. To help ﬁll the gap, Apple added a Radio 
app, which lets you choose from stations by genre. You can’t 
play music using the watch’s speaker, but it’s easy to connect 
to outside audio sources via Bluetoooth.
Noah Siemsen is the Chief Operating Officer for iPhone Life magazine and has been an 
Apple enthusiast since his father purchased the original Macintosh. Throughout his 
career, Noah has worked extensively in product development, product design, graphic 
design, information systems, marketing, and as an executive officer. He also loves 
working with iPhone Life to help people get the most out of their Apple products.
26    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


28    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
IPHONE LIFE MARKETPLACE  -  SPONSORED PROMOTIONS & SPECIAL OFFERS    
LifeProof SLAM 
($49.99, LifeProof.com)
Your iPhone X can handle splashes; LifeProof SLAM takes 
care of drops. This super tough case is built to bounce back 
from bruising falls and unforgiving ﬂ oors—ensuring your de-
vice’s glass back and OLED screen stay ﬂ awless. LifeProof 
SLAM is certiﬁ ed drop-proof up to 6.6 feet (2 meters). That 
means your tallest friend can drop it from their shoulder 
and your precious iPhone X will come out unscathed. 
LifeProof SLAM is Qi 
compatible, meaning 
you can use nearly 
any wireless charger 
with your device with-
out having to remove 
the case ﬁ rst. The 
back of the SLAM is 
clear, allowing you 
to enjoy and admire 
the elegance of 
your iPhone X while 
keeping it protected. 
SLAM also provides 
complete access to all 
ports and controls, so 
your iPhone X works 
and sounds like the 
case isn’t even there.
Clean lines, a screenless front, and a pop of color around 
the perimeter give SLAM its unmistakable urban air. The 
case merges intense drop protection with modern styling 
so it’s ready for all of your adventures. Order yours today.
iPhone Life Insider 
($9.99/month or $59.94/year, iPhoneLife.com/Insider)
If you’re like most people, you know your iPhone or iPad 
can do amazing things, but you’re not actually taking advan-
tage of many of the possibilities. You’re not alone. Whether 
you’re an iPhone newbie or an iOS enthusiast, iPhone Life 
Insider can take you to the next level of iPhone and iPad 
expertise! What all does your membership include? I’m so 
glad you asked. 
Daily Video Tips
Get a one-minute video tip in your inbox every day! They’re 
easy to follow, learn from, and share. 
In-Depth Video Guides 
Our video courses will guide you through everything from 
how to use your iPad or Apple TV to how to improve your 
iPhone photography skills. 
Digital iPhone Life Magazine Subscription & Archive
Get access to every digital issue of iPhone Life magazine, 
past and present. Plus, easily access the magazine from 
your iPhone, iPad, or computer.  
Ask an Editor
Have a frustrating iOS problem or an iPhone question you 
just can’t ﬁ gure out? Email one of our editors and a real, live 
person will help you ﬁ nd the best solutions to your prob-
lems.
Go to iPhoneLife.com/Insider to start on your path to be-
coming an iPhone expert today!

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    29
Gobudi Casebudi 
($8.95, Casebudi.com)
Never risk damaging your Apple 
Watch during transport again. 
Casebudi by Gobudi is designed spe-
ciﬁ cally to protect any watch during 
unpredictable travel. Casebudi’s sleek 
form minimizes bulk while providing 
a shell solid enough for your daily life 
and adventures alike. 
Casebudi’s shell is constructed of 
tough ballistic nylon and sports a 
top-quality Japanese zipper. Each 
case is individually inspected and test-
ed, zippers and all, and is packaged 
in the United States for shipment. 
The included carabiner allows you to 
easily hook Casebudi onto a backpack 
or briefcase. Plus, each Casebudi in-
cludes a one-year warranty as well.
Casebudi is a winning solution to 
keep your Apple Watch safe. I got a 
chance to test out the Casebudi and 
was impressed with its sturdiness, 
strength, and sleek design. If you 
travel with your Apple Watch, wheth-
er on the daily commute or during 
long trips, Casebudi is the accessory 
you need to ensure it stays in perfect 
working condition. 
IPHONE LIFE MARKETPLACE  -  SPONSORED PROMOTIONS & SPECIAL OFFERS    
Informant 5 
(Free, PocketInformant.com)
You need an app that can do it all—a 
one-stop place for easily reviewing 
everything on your to-do list and in 
your schedule. Informant 5 is that 
app. Whether you’re managing a work 
project with many parts or planning a 
dinner date, Informant 5 is the app to 
keep it all organized. 
Informant 5 
has a 30-day 
calendar view 
that’s actually 
helpful. You 
can create 
events, to-
dos, projects, 
and tasks and 
keep track of 
everything 
from bills to 
pay to your 
best friend’s 
birthday. The 7-day view in Informant 5 
is my favorite, because it lays out ev-
erything beautifully with color-coding 
for an easy glance at the week ahead. 
Other features include weather and 
email integration as well as TravelAs-
sist, which automatically manages 
any time zone confusion, and Dark 
Mode, which makes your schedule 
easier to see in lowlight situations. 
And we still haven’t mentioned it all. 
Informant 5 is free to try, so why are 
you still reading this? Get it in the App 
Store now. 
Tablift 
($39.95, Tablift.com)
The vast majority of iPad stands ar-
en’t made for lounging, which means 
you end up holding your tablet at 
awkward angles when you should be 
stretched out in maximum relaxation 
mode. Not true of the incredible 
Tablift stand, which is designed for 
use on any uneven surface, including 
your bed, couch, or lounge chair by 
the pool.
When it comes to iPad productivity 
gear, there are more options than you 
could ever sort through. But they’re 
all designed for someone sitting at a 
desk. Yet there are highly productive 
people who aren’t able to get out of 
bed to work; for them, Tablift is not 
just for comfort but for quality of life. 
Tablift is designed to clip onto any 
iPad model. The four legs are ﬂ exible, 
allowing you to shift and shape Tablift 
however it works best for you. Tablift 
has three built-in angles, but those 
ﬂ exible legs also allow you to adjust 
your iPad to whatever angle you ﬁ nd 
most comfortable. As the hands-free 
iPad stand you’ve always dreamed of, 
Tablift will turn your iPad experience 
into one of ultimate comfort. 

30    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
IPHONE LIFE MARKETPLACE  -  SPONSORED PROMOTIONS & SPECIAL OFFERS    
Videoblocks 
($149/year, Videoblocks.com)
Videoblocks is your premium source 
for high-deﬁ nition stock video foot-
age. A Videoblocks subscription 
makes it easier than ever before 
to bring your creative vision to life, 
thanks to its library of over 3 million 
videos, After Effects, and motion 
backgrounds. Plus, Videoblocks con-
sistently releases new content that 
will allow your reservoir of incredible 
stock footage to continue to expand. 
With your low ﬁ xed subscription 
price, you’ll gain access to Video 
Blocks’ vast library of HD clips, in-
cluding access to the only contributor 
marketplace that gives 100 percent of 
commissions back to the artists. 
Videoblocks goes above and beyond 
with its download policy: once you’ve 
downloaded any type of content, it’s 
yours to keep and use forever. 
Videoblocks is beloved by huge con-
tent creators, including National Geo-
graphic, NBC, the Travel Channel, and 
more. Start your free 7-day trial today 
at Videoblocks.com/iPhoneLife.
Matias Wired Aluminum Keyboard 
($59, Matias.ca)
Apple recently discontinued its 
famous Wired Aluminum Keyboard; 
the company is switching to wireless 
across the board and leaving a lot of 
customers in the dust. But have no 
fear, Matias has stepped in to provide 
a keyboard of equal value and 
arguably better quality to ﬁ ll the gap. 
The Matias Wired Aluminum 
Keyboard is modeled after Apple’s 
iconic aluminum keyboards, providing 
an experience that looks and feels 
just as nice as the original. The built-in 
hub is great for connecting your 
favorite wired mouse (or wireless 
dongle) with a second port available 
for plugging in ﬂ ash drives or other 
devices. Matias also added a conve-
nient volume control wheel and 
Mac-friendly function keys.  
If you’re using legacy software on 
older systems, this keyboard works 
for you too. The Matias Wired 
Aluminum Keyboard is compatible 
with Mac OS X all the way back to 
version 10.6.8 (Snow Leopard). If 
you’re tired of Apple’s “courageous” 
endeavors, get the keyboard you 
know and love from Matias.
alara by BRINK case 
($39.99–$49.99, BRINKcase.com)
The alara case is designed to protect 
both your phone and you. If you’re 
concerned about cellphone radiation, 
you’ll ﬁ nd no better case than alara. 
By redirecting radiation away from 
your head and body, this patented 
technology reduces your exposure by 
up to 67 percent while maintaining 
your phone’s cellular signal. In fact, 
the alara case is the only case on the 
market that reduces your exposure to 
cell phone radiation while maintaining 
your phone’s signal. It automatically 
pairs with your iPhone when you snap 
on the case. 
The alara case exceeds US military 
standards and is drop-proof up to 6 
feet, providing maximum protection 
in multiple ways. The case is also 
designed to give you access to all of 
your iPhone’s ports and functions, so 
it’s protective without being 
obstructive. 
The minimalist design of alara is per-
fect for everyday life. Your purchase 
comes with a 60-day money-back 
guarantee, but you won’t need it as 
the alara undergoes rigorous lab test-
ing to ensure all of its parts are work-
ing optimally for you. It’s available for 
the iPhone 8, 8 Plus, and iPhone X; 
get yours today.

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    31
IPHONE LIFE MARKETPLACE  -  SPONSORED PROMOTIONS & SPECIAL OFFERS    
Scosche MagicMount Charge 
($69.99–$79.99, Scosche.com)
Wireless charging has come to the 
iPhone, but Apple has yet to release 
its own wireless charging pad. No 
worries; the MagicMount Charge by 
Scosche has you covered. Perfect 
for your kitchen counter, desk, or 
side table, this mount magnetically 
holds your iPhone perpendicular to 
the ground, making it easy to tap the 
screen and use your iPhone while it’s 
charging. 
Since Apple 
decided to 
use the indus-
try standard 
in wireless 
charging, you 
don’t have to 
worry about 
compatibility. 
The Magic-
Mount Charge 
is Qi certiﬁ ed 
for a safe, reliable wireless charge 
that’s been tested and proven. The 
mount easily attaches to a counter or 
car window with its StickGrip suction 
base that has a strong hold while re-
maining portable.  
The MagicMount Charge works with 
your new iPhone 8, iPhone 8 Plus, or 
iPhone X or any other Qi-compatible 
device. Scosche is the leading mount 
brand in the United States; get the 
best for your new device. And check 
out Scosche’s full collection of wireless 
charging solutions at Scosche.com.
FullContact 
(Free–$9.99/Month, 
FullContact.com/Apps)
Ditch the subpar Contacts app and 
get FullContact instead. Not only does 
FullContact seamlessly manage all your 
Contacts from various sources, it looks 
for updates to information, merges 
duplicates, and even allows you to scan 
business cards so you can quickly, easi-
ly, and accurately add their details. 
If you’ve ever been to an industry 
tradeshow or networking event, 
you’ve likely collected a handful of 
business cards that are all too easily 
lost. Not with FullContact! Use the 
app to scan each card and easily keep 
track of all that useful new information. 
Plus, two real people at FullContact 
will review the scan to make sure 
everything is completely accurate.
Whether for business or personal 
use, being able to contact the right 
people without any problems is huge-
ly important. We all need a contact 
app that not only does its job well 
but improves our overall experience. 
FullContact does that and more. Give 
it a try today.
Tip of the Day Newsletter 
(Free, iPhoneLife.com/DailyTips)
Master your iPhone in one minute a 
day. Sign up to receive free, bite-sized 
how-tos, tips, and tricks delivered 
straight to your inbox. Our Tip of the 
Day newsletter is the best way to 
keep up to date on all the latest and 
greatest features your iPhone is capa-
ble of. Whether you’re a beginner or 
an advanced user, our tips will make 
your iPhone experience more efﬁ cient 
and enjoyable. 
Over 90,000 people reap the beneﬁ ts 
of our daily tips. And with an ever-ex-
panding archive of over 1,000 iPhone, 
iPad, Apple Watch, and Apple TV tips, 
there’s guaranteed to be nuggets 
of useful information in each email. 
Learn better from watching videos? 
Become an iPhone Life Insider to up-
grade to daily video tips (plus a whole 
lot of other incredible goodies). 
With our tips, learn how to repost a 
photo to Instagram, set up Apple Pay 
on your iPhone, expertly navigate the 
Mail app, customize your Apple Watch 
face, master the latest features of 
new operating systems like iOS 10, 
and so much more. Visit iPhoneLife.
com now, and select Daily Tips to sign 
up for free. 

32    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

pple’s mobile operating system is constantly evolving. In fact, the tech giant has released major iOS updates 
annually since the launch of the very ﬁ rst iPhone in 2007. Each year we get excited for these updates, as 
they’re ﬁ lled with new features and tweaks that streamline our most basic tasks. However, they can also be 
frustrating, particularly for those of us who feel like we only just got the hang of the previous version of iOS!
Here at iPhone Life, we’ve been learning to navigate Apple’s latest iOS 11 update and have gone through 
trial and error to master every change, big and small. And it was worth it! Apple’s update boasts improved 
augmented reality support, a redesigned App Store, a much more functional Notes app, and a slew of hidden 
features that took us a little longer to discover. In this guide, we’ll teach you all of our favorite iOS 11 features. 
You’ll learn how to scan QR codes, use Siri to translate languages, scan and sign important documents in the 
Notes app, and take advantage of Do Not Disturb While Driving. Once you get the hang of iOS 11, we’re con-
vinced you’re going to love it as much as we do.
A
HOW-TO GUIDE
IOS 11
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    33

Customize Control Center
With iOS 11, you can ﬁnally 
customize Control Center on 
your iPhone. This allows you to 
remove functions you rarely use 
and replace them with something 
better (like Low Power Mode or 
Screen Recording!). To customize 
Control Center, go to Settings 
> Control Center > Customize 
Controls. To remove a control, tap 
the red circle next to the feature 
you want to remove. Under More 
Controls, tap the green circle 
to add a feature to your Control 
Center. Under Include, hold and 
drag the three horizontal lines to 
the right of each feature to rear-
range the order in which they show up in your Control Center.
Turn On Do Not Disturb While 
Driving
Goodbye, distracted driving! 
A new feature Apple introduced 
with iOS 11 blocks notiﬁcations 
when you’re on the road. To en-
able this feature, go to Settings > 
Do Not Disturb, and tap Activate 
under the Do Not Disturb While 
Driving heading. From here, se-
lect Automatically and the feature 
will kick into action either when 
your phone senses fast motion or 
connects to a Bluetooth receiver 
in your car. From the previous 
page, you can also set up  
Auto-Reply to send a default text 
to people who try to reach you 
while you’re in transit, so they know you’ll get back to them 
when you’re able. 
Type Your Questions to Siri
Once you’re hooked on Siri, 
you’ll ﬁnd yourself using it for  
everything from checking the 
day’s forecast to adding coffee 
to your shopping list. However, 
keep in mind that no one really 
wants to hear you dictating a text 
to your best friend or arguing with 
your virtual assistant about how to 
pronounce her name. Now with 
iOS 11, you can take advantage of 
Siri discreetly by typing your ques-
tions instead of speaking. To do 
this, go to Settings > General > 
Accessibility > Siri, and toggle on 
Type to Siri. Now, a text box will 
pop up when you summon Siri. 
Keep Track of App & Account 
Logins 
Apple has added a dedicated 
section in Settings that harbors 
all your app and account login 
information in one convenient 
place. Go to Settings > Accounts 
& Passwords to see all your ac-
counts including your email ser-
vices and iCloud. If you tap App 
& Website passwords, you’ll ﬁnd 
a combination of Safari logins and 
app account login information. 
You can view, delete, and edit in-
formation in this view. This stops 
short of a full-ﬂedged password 
manager in that it doesn’t include 
credit cards, but it’s hugely help-
ful if you have a hard time remembering all the passwords 
you’ve invariably collected over time.
Call for Help with Emergency 
SOS
Apple has made it easy for 
you to call your local emergency 
service if you ﬁnd yourself in a 
situation where you need help. To 
do this on the iPhone 7 or earlier, 
rapidly press the Side button ﬁve 
times. If you own an iPhone 8, 8 
Plus, or iPhone X, press and hold 
the Side button and a volume 
button. Before using this feature, 
go to Settings > Emergency SOS 
and turn on Auto Call to make it 
extra easy to call for help; next, 
choose whether or not to enable 
the Countdown Sound, which 
audibly alerts you that you’re 
initiating a call. This feature reveals your location to emergen-
cy services and contacts, even if you’ve turned off Location 
Services. 
HOW-TO GUIDE
NEW &
NOTEWORTHY
34    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Find New Apps
Are you tired of the same old 
apps you use every day? Apple 
has made it easier to discover 
something new in the App Store. 
When you launch the App Store, 
you can scroll through the new 
Today tab to view curated content 
from Apple. This includes things 
like how-to articles for beating 
game levels, interviews with the 
makers of popular apps, and video 
walk-throughs of hot new titles. 
There’s also a dedicated Games 
tab that helps you ﬁnd new and 
exciting releases. And Apple has 
added an app checkout experi-
ence that’s styled the same as the 
Apple Pay checkout. 
One-Handed Keyboard
There’s a new iPhone setting 
that allows you to type on your 
phone one-handed—a great fea-
ture once you do a little practic-
ing. Just go to Settings > General 
> Keyboard > One Handed Key-
board, and pick either right or left 
hand. Once enabled, you’ll notice 
the keys shifted to the side next 
time you type. To switch back 
to the default keyboard, tap the 
arrow icon in the gray space. To 
go back to the one-handed key-
board, press and hold the globe 
icon and tap the icon for either 
the right- or left-handed keyboard 
option. 
Use Your Camera to Read QR 
Codes
QR codes are bar codes for 
smartphones that individuals 
and companies are using in new 
and creative ways to do things 
like launch apps, visit websites, 
join Wi-Fi networks, and share 
playlists. Now with iOS 11, your 
iPhone’s native Camera app can 
read QR codes. To test this fea-
ture out, launch your Camera app 
and point your camera at the QR 
code on this page. A notiﬁcation 
banner should pop up at the top 
of your screen asking if you’d like 
to visit iPhoneLife.com. Tap on 
the banner to trigger the action. 
Mark Up Your Screenshots
Apple has made it much easier 
to mark up and share screen-
shots. When you take a screen-
shot (by pressing the Home 
and Side button simultaneously 
on the iPhone 8 or older, and 
pressing the volume up and Side 
button simultaneously on the 
iPhone X), a thumbnail of your 
shot will appear in the lower left 
corner. Swipe left to dismiss it, or 
tap it to enter the markup screen. 
Here, you’ll have the option to 
draw on your screenshot or 
add text, shapes, or a signature 
(use a stylus for more accurate 
handwriting). When done, tap the 
Share icon to send it to a friend.
Use Siri to Translate Your 
English
A new translation feature  
allows you to ask Siri to translate 
English to several languages 
including Mandarin, French, 
German, Italian, and Spanish. If 
you ask Siri for a translation for 
a sentence, Siri will speak the 
translation aloud as well as show 
it on your screen. You’ll also have 
a play button that you can tap to 
repeat the translation. If you’re 
not hearing the translation aloud, 
check to see if you have the Si-
lent switch turned on, which by 
default silences Siri’s voice. 
Share Wi-Fi Passwords with 
Nearby Devices 
You know when you visit a 
friend and you have to stoop 
down by the Wi-Fi router to 
enter in a long string of letters 
and numbers just to access the 
Wi-Fi network? Luckily, Apple 
added a new feature with iOS 11 
that aims to help you avoid that 
nuisance. Now when you try to 
connect to a Wi-Fi network, any 
friend close by with a device 
running iOS 11 will get a pop-up 
screen asking if they want to 
share their login information with 
you. If they tap Send Password, 
the password will automatically 
ﬁll on your device, and you’ll be connected. 
HOW-TO GUIDE
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    35

Free up & Optimize Storage
You can save space on your 
device by optimizing your stor-
age. To do this, go to Settings 
> General > iPhone Storage. At 
the top of the page, you’ll see a 
full breakdown of what’s taking 
up all your space. Below that, 
you’ll ﬁnd optimization choices, 
including the option to delete 
old text threads and message 
attachments. You can also ofﬂoad 
apps, a new option that allows 
you to remove storage-heavy 
apps but keep any personal data 
(like game scores) intact. Enable 
Ofﬂoad Unused Apps to auto-
matically delete apps you haven’t 
opened in a while, or scroll down and tap on apps from the 
list below to ofﬂoad apps manually.
Automatically Answer Calls
With the latest update, you can 
now allow your phone to auto-
matically answer calls after three 
rings. If you’re the type of person 
who’s always near their phone 
but sometimes takes too long to 
answer, or if you ﬁnd the swip-
ing-to-answer motion annoying or 
difﬁcult to do, then you can turn 
on this setting. To do this, go to 
Settings > General > Accessibili-
ty. Then scroll down to Call Audio 
Routing. Tap Auto-Answer Calls, 
and toggle it on. You can choose 
the duration of time your iPhone 
will ring before it automatically 
answers the call.
Save Files to Files App
A hallmark feature of iOS 11 
is the Files app, which takes a 
stab at bringing desktop-style ﬁle 
management to the iPhone and 
iPad (a lot like Finder on macOS). 
Now, when you view ﬁles like 
photos, Word documents, or 
PDFs, to name a few, you can 
tap the Share icon and you’ll see 
Save to Files as an option. You’ll 
then have the choice to save the 
document locally with the app or 
to the cloud so that it’s accessi-
ble on all your devices. 
Sort Documents with Files App
With the Files app, you can 
easily organize, tag, and access 
documents that you’ve saved 
locally on your iDevices or with 
a cloud service. Files is separat-
ed into two tabs: Recents and 
Browse. Recents shows the ﬁles 
you’re working on so you can 
quickly jump back in to projects. 
Browse shows you all the loca-
tions where you can store your 
ﬁles, including on your device or 
using a cloud service like iCloud 
Drive or Dropbox. The Browse 
section also includes your Re-
cently Deleted ﬁles, Favorites, 
and Tags. If you want to see 
when your ﬁles were last opened, tap the list view icon in the 
top right to see a list of dates under Last Modiﬁed. 
Using iMessage Apps
Now when you tap the App 
Store icon to the left of the text 
entry box in a message conver-
sation, you’ll see a newly for-
matted app drawer that appears 
as a side-scrolling list of all your 
iMessage apps. Tap an app to 
open it in the lower third of your 
screen. To download more iMes-
sage apps, tap the App Store 
icon on the far left of the list and 
tap Visit Store. From there, you 
can search for titles or peruse 
featured apps and stickers in the 
pop-up window. If you tap the 
price of an app and download it, 
it will then appear in your list of 
iMessage apps. 
Using iMessage Effects
There’s a hidden feature in the 
Messages app that allows you 
add fun visual effects that show 
up when your recipient opens 
your text. With iOS 11, Apple has 
added two new effects: Echo and 
Spotlight. To add them to your 
texts, ﬁrst open a thread with a 
friend and type your message. 
When you’re done typing, press 
and hold the send icon to the 
right of the text entry box. A win-
dow will pop up with iMessage 
effects. Select Screen at the 
top and then swipe left to scroll 
through effects. Tap the upward 
arrow when you’ve selected one 
you’re happy with.
HOW-TO GUIDE
36    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


Scan Documents 
A great new functionality 
of the Notes app is the ability 
to easily scan documents. To 
use the scanner, simply open a 
note, tap the plus icon along the 
bottom of the screen, and tap 
Scan Documents. The camera 
viewﬁnder will appear. Tap the 
three-circle icon for the follow-
ing options: Grayscale, Black & 
White, Photo. Choose Black & 
White if you’re scanning text-only 
documents, like receipts. If you 
need more light, tap the ﬂash 
icon to enable, turn off, or set 
ﬂash to Auto. The feature will 
automatically straighten the doc-
ument into a rectangle for you. Tap Keep Scan when you’re 
happy with your selection.
Add a Table 
Apple has now added the ability 
to include tables in your notes, 
which is useful if you’re creating a 
list, like your workout stats or bud-
get. To add a table to Notes, sim-
ply open the Notes app and then 
either create or open an existing 
note. Then tap the screen to edit 
the note. Above your keyboard, 
there will be a row of icons. Tap 
the icon that looks like a small 
table. Tap within a cell of the table 
to add text. At the top and on the 
left side of the table are two small 
icons with three dots. Tap on the 
top icon to add or delete a col-
umn. Tap on the left icon to add or 
delete a row. Tapping the icon also allows you to edit your text.
Choose a Paper Type
Gone are the days of the stan-
dard white paper option in the 
Notes app—now you have ac-
cess to six new lined and gridded 
paper designs that help you keep 
your handwriting straight when 
writing with a stylus or with your 
ﬁnger. To try these designs out 
for yourself, simply open a note 
and then tap the Share icon in 
the top right corner. Select Lines 
& Grids and then choose the line 
style or grid style that you like 
best. The style you selected will 
now be the background for this 
individual note. To set a line or 
grid style as your default for all notes, go to Settings > Notes 
> Lines & Grids. 
Edit Text with New Formatting 
Options 
There are new text format-
ting options in the Notes app, 
which might seem like a pretty 
small change but makes the app 
signiﬁcantly more user-friendly. 
Although the Notes app already 
had some basic formatting op-
tions, iOS 11 has made them 
much easier to access—and has 
brought a few new additions too. 
Located on the bar above your 
keypad, you’ll see a row of icons. 
To edit text, select the “Aa” icon. 
From here, you can set the text 
style with options like Headline 
and Body, indent text, underline letters, and create numbered 
and bullet point lists.
Use Gestures to Lock, Pin & 
Move Notes to New Folders
If you create a lot of notes, 
then you understand the strug-
gle of trying to sort through and 
protect those notes. Thankfully, 
the new gestures make organiz-
ing your notes easier than ever. 
When viewing a list of all your 
notes, you can now swipe right 
to pin your note to the top of 
your list (a useful feature if you 
have an important note that you 
access regularly and don’t like 
searching for), and you can swipe 
left to lock, delete, or move a 
note to a new folder. Previously, 
locking and moving notes took a little more effort, so this is a 
welcome change we’re excited to see.
NOTES
HOW-TO GUIDE
38    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Turn a Safari Webpage into a 
PDF 
When you come across an 
article or webpage that has great 
information you want to save, 
you can convert it into a PDF us-
ing Safari. To do this, simply open 
your Safari browser and ﬁnd the 
webpage you want to save as 
a PDF. Then, tap the Share icon 
along the bottom center of the 
screen and scroll through your 
options until you see Create PDF. 
Tap on it. A PDF version of the 
webpage will pop up. You can tap 
the marker icon in the upper right 
corner to edit it and mark it up. 
Once you’re done, tap the Share 
icon in the lower left corner to share the PDF via Messages or 
Mail, print the PDF, or save it to the Files app.
Easily Look Up Word 
Deﬁnitions
Safari puts an inﬁnite amount 
of information at your ﬁnger-
tips, including the deﬁnitions of 
words! And iOS 11 has made 
ﬁnding those deﬁnitions easier 
than ever. Now when you type 
the word “deﬁne” into Safari’s 
search bar and follow it with 
the word you want to look up, 
you won’t even have to hit enter 
before you see the word’s deﬁni-
tion. The deﬁnition will automati-
cally pop up as a top suggestion. 
To see more details, simply tap 
on the deﬁnition and you’ll imme-
diately be taken to a page where 
you can view the deﬁnition of the word in greater detail.
Prevent Cross-Site Tracking
Ever noticed how when you 
start researching a new product, 
suddenly you see targeted ads 
for that product popping up on 
other websites? That’s due to 
cross-site tracking, and if you like 
your privacy (as most of us do), 
then it’s a feature that probably 
makes you a bit uncomfortable. 
You’ll be happy to know then that 
Apple’s latest update has added 
a bunch of new security features, 
including the ability to prevent 
companies from tracking your 
browsing habits. If you want to 
prevent targeted ads and make 
it harder for advertisers to gather 
your data, just go to Settings > Safari and then toggle on  
Prevent Cross-Site Tracking.
Track Your Friend’s Flight 
Here’s a tip you’ll love next 
time you’re picking up a friend or 
family member from the airport. 
Similar to how you can easily 
look up word deﬁnitions using 
Safari’s search bar, iOS 11 now 
allows you to easily track ﬂight 
statuses too. All you have to do is 
type in the airline name and ﬂight 
number in the search bar and the 
ﬂight information will automati-
cally pop up as a top suggestion. 
If you need to see more ﬂight 
information, tap on the sugges-
tion. From here, you can view 
the ﬂight’s information in greater 
detail, including its duration, ﬂight 
path, and even directions to the airport where it’ll be arriving.
Use Automatic Reader Mode 
on Speciﬁc Sites
Reader Mode in Safari makes 
webpages easier to read by re-
moving advertisements and other 
distracting content. With iOS 11, 
users can choose to automatically 
enable Reader Mode on select 
(or all) websites using Automatic 
Reader View. That means you’ll no 
longer have to manually enable 
Reader Mode every time you visit 
a site. To do this, just long press 
the Reader Mode icon in the top 
left corner of a webpage (next to 
the search bar). From here, you 
can automatically use Reader 
View every time you open that 
speciﬁc webpage, or you can choose to automatically enable 
Reader Mode on all compatible sites. 
SAFARI
HOW-TO GUIDE
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    39

Save Stills of a Live Photo by 
Changing the Key Photo 
Don’t like the still that Apple’s 
algorithm selected for your Live 
Photo? No problem! You can 
choose a different one by se-
lecting a new key photo. To do 
this, open the Live Photo you 
want to adjust and tap Edit in the 
upper right corner. You’ll see all 
the frames of the Live Photo at 
the bottom and will be able to 
choose which still image to use 
by dragging your ﬁnger over the 
timeline. Once you ﬁnd the key 
frame you want to represent your 
Live Photo, stop scrolling and tap 
Make Key Photo, then tap Done. 
In the editing menu, you can also trim the three-second clip 
by dragging the edges of the timeline in if you wish. 
Preserve Your Camera Settings
If you’re an avid iPhone pho-
tographer, you may wish to set 
certain camera settings as your 
standard in the Camera app so 
that you don’t need to enable your 
preferred settings every time you 
go to take a picture. Well, now 
it’s possible to make those ad-
justments! Just go to Settings > 
Camera > Preserve Settings, and 
then toggle on any settings that 
you want to make standard. You 
can choose to preserve the last 
ﬁlter you used and decide wheth-
er you want the Camera app to 
remember whether you turned 
Live Photo on or off (otherwise, it 
will automatically enable Live Photo).
Turn Your Live Photo into a GIF
This is one of our favorite new 
iOS features—you can now turn 
your photos into GIFs without 
using a third-party app! There are 
two GIF options on the iPhone: 
Loop and Bounce. To check them 
out yourself, simply take a Live 
Photo as you normally would and 
navigate to it within the Photos 
app. Now swipe up to reveal your 
Effects options. You’ll see Loop, 
Bounce, and Long Exposure. 
Loop and Bounce are your two 
GIF options. To see what they 
look like, simply select one and 
watch as the effect brings your 
Live Photo to life in a fun new 
way. Once you’ve made your selection, tap the Share icon to 
send it to your friends. 
Record Your Device Screen
Apple’s update allows you to 
record your own screen, which 
is an incredibly useful feature 
when putting together tutorials or 
demonstrating how fun the new 
game you’re playing is. To record 
your iPhone or iPad screen, ﬁrst 
add this feature to Control Center 
by going to Settings > Control 
Center > Customize Controls, 
and then tapping the green but-
ton next to Screen Recording. 
Then access Control Center and 
tap the screen recording icon. 
A red bar will appear at the top 
of your screen, letting you know 
that you’re recording. When 
you’re ﬁnished, simply tap the red bar and then tap Stop. 
Take a Live Photo While Using 
FaceTime
Next time you’re on a Face-
Time call with another iPhone or 
iPad user running iOS 11, you’ll 
notice a shutter button in the 
lower left corner. When you tap 
this, you’ll capture a Live Photo 
of the call. Both people will be 
informed that a Live Photo was 
captured, so no need to worry 
about being captured without 
your knowledge. Unlike a screen-
shot, the resulting photo will not 
show your small video thumbnail, 
just the person you’re talking to. 
If you wait until the person you’re 
talking to does something funny 
and then press the button, you can later apply the Loop or 
Bounce effect to create a fun GIF of your Live Photo.
HOW-TO GUIDE
CAMERA
& PHOTOS
40    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


Create an Apple Music Proﬁle 
If you’re an Apple Music sub-
scriber, you can now set up a user 
proﬁle and follow friends. To do 
this, open Apple Music and tap 
the For You tab on the bottom. 
Then tap the proﬁle icon in the up-
per right corner. You’ll already have 
a nickname, but you may want to 
change it now that it will be view-
able to friends. Just tap Edit, en-
ter in your name, and then choose 
your visibility settings. Select 
People You Approve, and you’ll be 
able to approve who follows you; 
choose Everyone to allow anyone 
to follow you without needing per-
mission to see what you listen to. 
You can add a photo to your proﬁle by tapping the proﬁle icon.
Follow Friends
Now that your proﬁle is set 
up, you’re ready to ﬁnd friends 
to follow. To do this, tap the For 
You tab and tap your proﬁle icon. 
Under your account info, tap Find 
More Friends. You can choose 
from a list of your contacts who 
use Apple Music or tap Facebook 
to connect your social media 
contacts. If a user account is set 
to private, you’ll have to request 
to follow and get their approval 
before you can see what they’re 
listening to; if they haven’t set 
up social features, you’ll see the 
option to Invite them to set up a 
proﬁle. Once you have a group of 
followers and people you follow, you’ll see them listed under 
your proﬁle in For You. 
See What Friends Are Listening 
To
If you’re in a music rut and 
want to discover something 
fresh, checking out what your 
friends are listening to is a quick 
way to ﬁnd something you’re 
probably going to like. To view 
friend activity, go to the For You 
tab. If you scroll down, you’ll 
see a section called Friends Are 
Listening To. You’ll also see friend 
recommendations here. Tap See 
All in the upper right corner of 
the section to see more of what 
your friends are listening to. The 
friend’s picture will be in the bot-
tom right corner of the album art 
so that you can see which friend is listening to each song.
Search for a Friend by 
Username
Did you know the Apple Music 
search tab is for more than ﬁnding 
new artists or songs to listen to? 
If a friend tells you their Apple 
Music username, you can use 
the search option to track them 
down. To do this, open the Music 
app and tap Search. Under the 
bar, make sure the sorting option 
is set to Apple Music, then type 
in the name and scroll down past 
song and artist results to People. 
You should see your friend’s name 
listed there. Once you’re follow-
ing your friend, tap their name to 
view their proﬁle. You’ll see play-
lists they’ve chosen to share, what they’ve been listening to, 
and who they’re following and who’s following them.
Oldie but Goodie: Make Songs 
Available Ofﬂine
Adding songs to your Apple 
Music library doesn’t have to 
take up space on your device, but 
if you want to listen to certain 
tracks without using your data 
plan, you should download them 
for ofﬂine listening. To do this, 
navigate to a song or album that 
you want to download. If it hasn’t 
been added to your library, tap 
the plus sign next to it. Once 
added, the plus sign will be re-
placed by a cloud and arrow icon. 
Tap the cloud icon to download 
the songs or album and make 
them available ofﬂine. Once you’re ready to listen to down-
loaded music, tap Library from the bottom menu, and then 
select Downloaded Music.
HOW-TO GUIDE
APPLE
MUSIC
Note: You must be a 
paying Apple Music 
subscriber in order 
for these tips to work 
effectively.
42    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


Navigate Through Malls & 
Airports
No more getting lost in major 
airports or shopping centers—
Maps now provides indoor maps 
for buildings in select cities 
such as Chicago, Denver, and 
London, with more locations 
to come. Though you can’t yet 
get turn-by-turn directions, the 
maps include a full layout of the 
building and include bathrooms, 
stores, restaurants, and airport 
terminals. To view indoor maps, 
search for your destination in 
Apple Maps and zoom in on the 
location until you see a sign that 
says Look Inside. Tap Look Inside 
in the map view or search below the map by tapping one of 
the options by the Directions button. 
Never Miss an Exit
How many times have you been 
traveling through a major city only 
to miss your exit because you 
didn’t have time to switch lanes? 
If you travel a lot, it’s probably hap-
pened to you far too many times. 
Fortunately, iOS 11 aims to solve 
this problem by letting you know 
which lane you need to be in. In 
the Maps app, you’ll see all the 
lanes displayed at the top of your 
screen. The lane you need to be in 
will be highlighted so you can see 
where you need to be at a glance; 
that way you have time to success-
fully navigate through trafﬁ c.
Explore Major Cities with 
Flyover
Apple’s Flyover feature, which 
lets you explore cities with your 
iOS device, has just gotten a 
lot cooler. Flyover now utilizes 
iOS 11’s new ARKit (augmented 
reality) to create a tour that you 
control with the positioning of 
your iPhone by moving and tilting 
your screen. To use this feature, 
enter in a destination in Apple 
Maps, such as New York City, and 
tap the Flyover option to the left 
of Directions. From here, pinch 
and spread your ﬁ ngers to zoom 
in and out and swivel and tilt your 
iPhone screen to view your sur-
roundings from every angle and direction. 
View the Speed Limit When 
Traveling 
When traveling down highways 
or through small towns, you can 
go miles without seeing a speed 
limit sign, which can leave anyone 
feeling uneasy. Sure, you can 
guess how fast you should be go-
ing, but that doesn’t go over well 
if you get pulled over for driving 
70 mph in a 40-mph zone. Thanks 
to Apple’s latest update, now the 
speed limit is displayed in the 
upper left corner of the map view 
for you to reference when you’re 
in doubt, that way you don’t get 
stuck with a speeding ticket. If you 
ﬁ nd that this addition unnecessar-
ily clutters your screen, you can 
always go in to Settings > Maps > 
Driving & Navigation, and toggle off Speed Limit. 
Use Light Guidance to See an 
Overview of Your Trip 
If there are routes you travel 
often, hearing Maps guide your 
every turn can be a nuisance. 
Now Maps recognizes when 
you travel to a certain location a 
lot and gives you the option to 
forego turn-by-turn directions. 
To access this feature, choose a 
location that you travel to regu-
larly and select Go. At the top, 
you’ll see “Tap for light guidance” 
above your directions. Once se-
lected, you’ll see an overview of 
your trip instead. If you decide 
you would like to use turn-by-turn 
directions, simply select “Tap for 
full guidance” in the upper left corner.
MAPS
HOW-TO GUIDE
44    iPhone Life  Spring 2018


Move Files with 
Drag and Drop 
The iPad has 
become a much 
more powerful pro-
ductivity tool with 
iOS 11, thanks in 
large part to Drag 
and Drop. This new 
multi-touch feature 
makes it easy to 
transfer ﬁles from 
one Apple app to another. Think of it as the iOS version of a 
mouse. To use Drag and Drop, tap and hold a piece of content 
(like a photo or text) with one ﬁnger until the content pops out 
on the page. Now with another ﬁnger, tap additional pieces 
of content to gather them together. If you’re using two apps 
at once with Slide Over or Split View, you can simply drag the 
content across the screen and drop it to the other app. 
Add More Apps to 
Your Dock
The dock on your 
iPad used to hold 
just four apps of 
your choosing. No 
more! Using Drag 
and Drop, you can 
drag up to 13 apps 
into the dock by 
pressing an icon 
for a couple of sec-
onds until it pops out on the screen, then moving it down to 
the bottom of the screen and dropping it in the dock. On the 
right hand side of the dock, you’ll see the last three apps you 
opened, which should make your general workﬂow smoother. 
If you don’t like having your recently used apps in your dock, 
however, you can disable this feature by going to Settings > 
General, and turning off Show Recents.
Access Your Dock 
at Any Time
With iOS 11, you 
can access your 
iPad dock at any 
time even when 
you have third-party 
apps open. This 
simple change 
makes it easy to 
multitask when 
you want to quickly 
reference another app or use Drag and Drop to move ﬁles 
around. To access your dock, simply swipe up from the bottom 
of your screen. From there, you can drag an app from the dock 
onto the display to summon a Split View or Slide Over window. 
Another way to use the dock is to start by gathering a bundle 
of ﬁles in the app you have open, then swiping up for the dock 
and dragging the bundle onto the app icon you’d like to transfer 
it to. 
Use Apple’s New 
App Switcher
Your iPad’s App 
Switcher has un-
dergone a make-
over. When you 
double press the 
Home button, you’ll 
see all of your re-
cently used apps 
in a grid of cards. 
This view makes 
it easy to access your recently used apps. You’ll also ﬁnd a 
redesigned Control Center here. In Control Center, you can 
press and hold icons to access an expanded menu of options 
for each control (see pg. 34 to learn to customize your Control 
Center). If an app is misbehaving, you can launch the App 
Switcher and swipe up on the app’s card to close it and then 
restart it by tapping the app icon on your Home screen. 
 
Pair Your Favorite 
Apps with Split 
View
Your device now 
remembers which 
apps you’ve used 
side by side in 
Split View so your 
favorite pairings are 
easier to access. 
To ﬁnd the app 
pairings you’ve 
created using Split View, summon the App Switcher by double 
pressing the Home button and tap the card with two apps in 
it. Split View is compatible with the iPad Pro, iPad Air 2 or lat-
er, and iPad mini 4. As before, to summon Split View, drag an 
app from the dock to the right or left corner of the screen and 
drop it there. You can also enter Split View from a Slide Over 
window by swiping down on the top of the Slide Over app.
 
HOW-TO GUIDE
IPAD 
PRODUCTIVITY
46    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Moveable Slide 
Over Window
Slide Over—
which works with 
the iPad Pro, iPad 
Air or later, and 
iPad mini 2 or  
later—allows you 
to drag an app from 
the dock onto the 
center of another 
app and create an 
overlay so you have quick access to two apps at once. With 
iOS 11, you can move an app you have open in Slide Over 
around the screen so it doesn’t obscure a crucial part of the 
screen beneath it. You can do this by pressing and holding the 
grey line at the top of the Slide Over window and then drag-
ging the app to the right and left side of the screen. And re-
member, you can swipe right to dismiss an app in Slide Over, 
and swipe left to bring it back.
 
Open Four Apps 
at Once
With a little 
know-how, you 
can now use four 
apps on your iPad 
at once! To do this, 
ﬁrst open an app 
and then enter Split 
View by dragging 
an app from the 
dock to either side 
of the screen. Next, open an app in Slide Over by dropping it 
around the center of the screen (if you drop it on the side it 
will replace one of the Split View apps instead). Now you’re 
ready to open your fourth app! Navigate to a video in Safari or 
YouTube and tap the Picture in Picture icon in the lower right 
corner to play the video in the corner while keeping your other 
three apps open and in use. You did it!
Type Faster Using 
the iPad Keyboard
Most of us 
have been typ-
ing for years and 
are used to the 
tactile feel of a 
physical keyboard. 
So when you try 
typing using the 
iPad’s on-screen 
keyboard, it can be 
slow-going. However, Apple has added a helpful punctuation 
tool with iOS 11 that helps speed up the process. Instead of 
having to switch to a whole new keyboard to add punctuation 
or numbers, you can now enter a key’s secondary entry by 
simply pressing the key, swiping down and releasing to enter 
the mark associated with that key. This makes life a lot easier 
when typing on your iPad!
Open Notes 
Instantly with 
Apple Pencil
If you like to use 
your iOS devices 
as a replacement 
for a planner or 
journal, you’ll ap-
preciate some of 
the attention Apple 
has paid to the Notes app with iOS 11 (see pg. 38 for more 
on Notes). There’s also a special Notes feature for those of 
you who own an iPad Pro and Apple Pencil that lets you open 
a new document in an instant. To take advantage of this new 
feature, simply tap the Apple Pencil to your screen when your 
iPad is locked but awake to launch the Notes app and begin 
writing. 
HOW-TO GUIDE
BONUS!
Oldie but Goodie: Watch Videos While You Work
Using Picture in Picture on your iPad, you can play 
a video or make a FaceTime call while continuing to 
browse other apps. To do this, start by playing a video in 
full screen mode. Next, press the Home button or tap 
the icon in the lower right corner to minimize the video 
window to a corner of the screen. Once a small video 
window appears, you can use two ﬁngers to resize it 
and drag it around to any corner of the display. To return 
to where you found the video, tap on the Picture in Pic-
ture window to summon a row of three icons and tap 
the left-most one. Picture in Picture is available on the 
iPad Air, iPad Air 2, iPad Pro, and iPad Mini 2 or later.
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    47

Check Your iPhone for 
Suggestions
If your iPhone isn’t new,  
chances are you’re going to 
notice signiﬁcant battery drain 
when you update to iOS 11. 
Luckily, Apple’s new update has 
some tips up its sleeve to help 
slow the leak! Just go to Settings 
> Battery and under Battery Life 
Suggestions, your device will dis-
play any settings it’s found that 
could be eating up your battery, 
like Auto Lock or Background 
App Refresh. If you don’t see the 
Battery Life Suggestions section, 
your iPhone doesn’t currently see 
any ways to improve battery life 
via settings. However, we do! Keep reading to ﬁnd out. 
Turn off Raise to Wake
Raise to Wake is a feature that 
senses when you’ve picked up 
your iPhone and lights up the 
Home screen in response. This 
feature is turned on by default, 
which can drain your battery fast 
if you pick up your iPhone a lot 
or walk with it swinging in your 
hand. To turn off Raise to Wake, 
go to Settings > Display & Bright-
ness > and toggle off Raise to 
Wake. Now when you pick your 
phone up, just press the Side 
button on the right side of your 
device to see the Lock screen. 
It’s not so hard!
Update All Your Apps 
When Apple releases a soft-
ware update, third-party app 
developers have to play catch-up. 
That’s why there’s a beta version 
of iOS for developers—so that 
they can prepare and optimize 
their apps for the latest and 
greatest operating system. If you 
don’t have your iPhone set up to 
automatically update your apps, 
taking the time to do so manually 
could help solve your battery 
drain woes, as the updated ver-
sions of apps are more likely to 
work efﬁciently with iOS 11. To 
do so, launch the App Store and 
tap Updates at the bottom right 
of the screen. Tap Update All or go through and choose which 
apps you’d like to update.
Reduce the Number of Widgets 
on Your Lock Screen 
Widgets allow you to quickly 
view important information such 
as weather forecasts, headlines, 
and your activity status when 
you swipe right from your Lock 
or Home screen. But all those 
widgets take power to keep up 
to date. If your battery is dying 
too quickly, consider getting rid 
of any widgets you don’t need. 
To do this, navigate to your wid-
get screen, scroll to the bottom 
of the widgets page, and tap 
Edit. Here you can remove wid-
gets by tapping the red circle 
next to a widget name and tap-
ping Remove. Then tap Done.
HOW-TO GUIDE
BATTERY LIFE FIXES
48    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Restart Your iPhone
Restarting your iPhone at the 
ﬁrst sign of trouble is trouble-
shooting 101. If you ever have any 
issue with your device, a simple 
restart almost always helps ﬁx 
it. Restarting your iPhone won’t 
solve your battery drain issue, 
but it can help to slow the drain 
when your iPhone is acting up. To 
restart your iPhone, simply hold 
down the Sleep/Wake button on 
the iPhone 8 or earlier and hold 
down the Side button and vol-
ume button on the iPhone X until 
Slide to Power Off appears on 
the screen. Then swipe right to 
power off your iPhone. Once your 
device has successfully shut down, wait a few minutes and 
then power back on in the same manner.
Turn off Background App 
Refresh
Background App Refresh up-
dates your apps automatically, 
cutting down on load time when 
you launch apps. But allowing 
all your open apps to continually 
update in the background is a 
sure-ﬁre way to drain your iPhone 
battery. Apple keeps this setting 
turned on by default, so if you’ve 
updated to iOS 11, you’re going 
to want to check to make sure it 
isn’t switched on even if you’ve 
turned it off in the past. To turn 
off Background App Refresh, go 
to Settings > General > Back-
ground App Refresh. Tap Back-
ground App Refresh again at the top. Tapping the Wi-Fi option 
protects your data, but still uses battery. Tapping off is the 
best option for longer battery life.
Leave iPhone Facing Dow
When your iPhone is facing up, 
the screen illuminates whenever 
you receive a notiﬁcation. And if 
you receive a lot of notiﬁcations, 
they could easily be part of your 
battery problem. You can avoid 
this by leaving your iPhone face 
down on your desk. Doing this 
will preserve battery life since 
your iPhone won’t light up when 
you receive a notiﬁcation. If 
you’re attached to seeing every 
new notiﬁcation that comes in, 
make sure to go to Settings > 
Display & Brightness > Auto-Lock 
to make sure your phone goes 
back to sleep after 30 seconds.
Turn on Reduce Motion
You know those zooming ef-
fects that occur when you launch 
and close apps? What about 
the ﬁreworks and confetti you 
can add to your text messages? 
While they create a cool visual, 
unfortunately they also drain your 
iPhone’s power pretty fast. You 
can disable them by going to Set-
tings > General > Accessibility > 
Reduce Motion > and then tog-
gling on Reduce Motion. This will 
eliminate message effects and 
the iPhone’s zoom animations 
when you open and close apps.
Limit Location Tracking to 
While Using the App or Never
Location Tracking raises more 
than privacy concerns—it’s also 
a sneaky way you could be ex-
pending battery power. Lots of 
different apps want to know your 
location, but most of them don’t 
need to know this information 
when they aren’t in use, with a 
few exceptions, such as naviga-
tion apps. For the rest, it makes 
sense to disable location tracking 
or allow it only while using the 
app. To do this, go to Settings 
> Privacy > Location Services. 
Select individual apps to custom-
ize location tracking. If the app 
doesn’t require your location to be fully functional, go ahead 
and select Never. Otherwise choose While Using the App.
Add Low Power Mode to 
Control Center
When your battery is running 
low and you’re relying on it for 
a few more hours of use, Low 
Power Mode will be your best 
friend. When enabled, the feature 
turns off settings like Mail Fetch 
and Hey Siri to preserve the 
little juice you have left. You can 
enable Low Power Mode in your 
battery settings, but we recom-
mend making it even easier to 
access by adding it to your  
Control Center. To do this, tap 
Control Center in Settings and 
tap Customize Controls. Find 
Low Power Mode from the list 
and tap the green plus button to add it to the pane. Low 
Power Mode will automatically shut off once your phone is 
charged to 80 percent.
HOW-TO GUIDE
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    49

Setting Up Face ID
One of the most talk-
ed about features of the 
iPhone X is Face ID. And 
it works eerily well. The 
process is so fast that you’ll 
be tempted to make sure 
it doesn’t just let anybody 
in (don’t worry, it doesn’t). 
The iPhone X prompts you 
to set up Face ID when you 
set up your device for the 
ﬁrst time, but if you skipped 
that part or feel like it didn’t 
do as good of a job as you 
wanted it to, you can set up 
Face ID by going to Settings 
> Face ID & Passcode > 
Set Up Face ID. Follow the 
on-screen prompts as it 
asks you to tilt your head in 
circular motions. It will ask 
you to scan your face twice. 
Once it’s done, Face ID 
will be set up! Now tap the 
Side button to lock your phone and try it out.
Make Face ID Work Even 
Faster
Face ID is designed to be 
secure ﬁrst and fast sec-
ond. By default, the iPhone 
X has a setting turned on 
that requires you to look 
directly at your iPhone 
screen before it will unlock. 
This is meant to make Face 
ID more secure by making 
it much more difﬁcult for 
someone to unlock your 
phone with your face when 
you don’t want them to. 
However, I’ve noticed that 
this does make Face ID feel 
slightly slower. Of course, 
we’re talking seconds here. 
But for some, speed may 
be more important than 
an added layer of security. 
To make Face ID faster by 
turning off Require Atten-
tion, go to Settings > Face 
ID & Passcode. Enter your password and then scroll down 
and toggle off Require Attention for Face ID. Tap Ok to con-
ﬁrm.
HOW-TO GUIDE
IPHONE X TIPS
EVERYTHING YOU NEED TO KNOW 
TO USE YOUR NEW DEVICE
50    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Closing Apps in the App 
Switcher
For years, we’ve double 
pressed our Home buttons 
to enter the App Switcher, 
that familiar carousal of 
our recently used apps. 
When you set up the new 
iPhone X, Apple shares 
the new way to open the 
App Switcher in its setup 
instructions: swipe up from 
the bottom of the screen to 
just below the center, hold 
for a second, and let go. 
But once you’ve opened 
the App Switcher, ﬁguring 
out how to close apps isn’t 
so obvious. To close apps in 
the App Switcher on your 
iPhone X, you’ll need to tap 
and hold on an app until a 
red circle appears in the 
top left corner of each app. 
Now you can tap the red 
circle to close an app completely or swipe up like you do on 
older iPhone and iPad models. 
Access & Customize  
Control Center
With the iPhone X, Apple 
decided to make returning 
to the Home screen as 
simple as swiping up from 
the bottom of your screen. 
Because this happens to 
be how you access Control 
Center on other iPhone 
models, the process takes 
some getting used to. To 
access Control Center on 
your iPhone X, you now 
swipe down from the top 
right corner of your screen. 
If you feel like swiping 
down from the top is a bit 
of a stretch, then you can 
also enable Reachability 
for easier Control Center 
access. You can do this by 
going to Settings > General 
> Accessibility and toggling 
on Reachability. Once that’s 
done, you activate Reachability by swiping down on the 
bottom edge of the screen. This will pull the screen down a 
bit, at which point you can easily reach the top corner of the 
lowered screen to open Control Center. Now, to customize 
Control Center, go to Settings > Control Center > Customize 
Controls. From here, you can tap the green circle next to a 
feature to add it to Control Center and the red circle to re-
move a feature.
Add an On-Screen Home 
Button
The beautiful edge-to-
edge display of the iPhone 
X leaves no room for a 
Home button. But if you 
ﬁnd yourself missing the 
old Home button, you can 
add an on-screen one to 
your screen thanks to an 
Accessibility feature. To add 
an on-screen Home button 
to your phone, go to Set-
tings > General > Accessi-
bility > AssistiveTouch and 
toggle AssistiveTouch on. 
A small circle will appear 
in the lower right corner of 
the screen. You can tap and 
drag the button wherever 
you want, along the perim-
eter of the screen. Tap the 
button to see your options. 
Within the AssistiveTouch 
settings, you can also cus-
tomize what shortcuts appear when tapping the button. If 
you like the reinstated Home button, you can even move it 
to the exact same location it used to be. And when you’re 
not using it, it fades to a light gray, so it’s barely there.
Access Notiﬁcations & 
Adjust Privacy Settings
The iPhone X has a notch 
at the top that creates a 
distinct top left and top 
right section of the screen. 
To access Notiﬁcation 
Center, you swipe down 
from the very top left of the 
iPhone X screen. That’s all 
there is to it! But did you 
know that the iPhone X 
can hide Lock screen noti-
ﬁcations from anyone who 
looks at your phone who 
isn’t you? While this privacy 
feature is nothing new, the 
addition of facial recog-
nition changes how this 
feature can be used. To hide 
your notiﬁcations from nosy 
friends and family, go to 
Settings > Notiﬁcations > 
Show Previews and select 
When Unlocked. Now your 
iPhone will hide the contents of notiﬁcations from everyone 
except you. When you pick your phone up, the contents will 
be revealed as the iPhone X recognizes you. The unlock time 
is less than a second, so it feels like the previews show up 
as soon as you look at them. 
HOW-TO GUIDE
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    51

Using Apple Pay 
The Home button served 
a lot of functions on older 
iPhone models. With the 
iPhone X, Apple has had 
to ﬁ gure out new ways to 
make those same functions 
work now that the button 
is gone. Because of this 
change, using Apple Pay on 
your iPhone X works a little 
differently now too. The 
process isn’t much different 
than it was on previous 
iPhone models; the only 
real change is that you’ll 
use Face ID instead of 
Touch ID to authenticate 
purchases. As usual, ﬁ rst 
you’ll need to make sure 
you’ve set up Apple Pay on 
your iPhone. Next, check 
to see if the X has permis-
sion to activate Apple Pay 
using the Side button. This 
feature is on by default, but if you have any trouble, you can 
turn it on yourself by going to Settings > Wallet & Apple Pay 
and toggling on Double-Click Side Button. When it comes 
time to use Apple Pay, you can activate it by double-clicking 
the Side button. It will then scan for your face to conﬁ rm it’s 
you before completing the purchase. 
Use Portrait Lighting & 
Portrait Mode to Take 
Selﬁ es
The front-facing camera 
on the iPhone X is capable 
of a lot of incredible things, 
including improving your 
selﬁ e game with Portrait 
Mode and Portrait Lighting. 
To use Selﬁ e Portrait Mode 
and Portrait Lighting on 
your iPhone X, ﬁ rst open 
the Camera app. In the 
lower right corner, tap the 
camera icon with a curved 
arrow to switch from the 
back camera to the front 
camera. Now you’re in sel-
ﬁ e mode. Near the bottom, 
you’ll see Photo in yellow. 
There will also be words 
on either side, including 
Slo-Mo, Video, Portrait, 
etc. Swipe left on Photo to 
select Portrait. You’re now 
in Portrait Mode. Automatically, you’ll see the words Natural 
Light and below it a cube with a circle at its center. This is 
Portrait Lighting. Tap on the cube to open a menu and see 
the other options that trail behind it. Once you select the 
lighting you want to use, position your face in the frame. 
The words labeling which Portrait Lighting you’re using will 
be highlighted yellow when the subject (you) is the correct 
distance from the camera. Tap the large white shutter button 
to take the photo.
View Battery Percentage
Can’t ﬁ nd battery per-
centage on your new 
iPhone X? On other iPhone 
models, you can see your 
battery percentage at the 
top of your screen when 
the setting is on. But on 
the iPhone X, the battery 
percentage looks like it has 
disappeared altogether. 
But fear not—checking the 
battery percentage on the 
X is easy. Simply swipe 
down from the top right 
of the screen, just as you 
would when opening Con-
trol Center. You don’t have 
to fully open Control Center 
if you simply want to see 
the battery percentage. 
As soon as you begin the 
swipe, you’ll see the per-
centage right next to the 
battery icon. While this may 
seem obvious once you know where it is, this has stumped 
a lot of people, including iPhone Life’s very own CEO, David 
Averbach. 
Talk to Siri
For years we’ve been 
pressing and holding 
the Home button on our 
iDevices to summon 
Apple’s virtual assistant. 
No more! With the iP-
hone X, you can now 
press and hold the Side 
button (which replaced 
the Sleep/Wake button 
on the right side of the 
iPhone) to talk to Siri. As 
usual, you can also use 
your voice to summon 
Siri by going to Settings 
> Siri & Search, and tog-
gling on Listen for “Hey 
Siri.” After going through 
a quick setup process, 
you’ll now have the op-
tion to summon your vir-
tual assistant not only by 
holding the Side button 
but also hands free as 
well simply by saying “Hey Siri,” followed by your request.
HOW-TO GUIDE
52    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

Waze: I depend on this app to let me know the best 
routes to avoid congestion, construction zones, and ac-
cidents. Seriously, I don’t even like to leave my neighbor-
hood before checking Waze.
Starbucks: I don’t make any purchases from Starbucks if 
it’s not through the app. I often use the mobile pick-up 
option when I’m running late and low on caffeine, plus I 
get free drinks and double-star days!
CreditStacker: This app is one of my new faves. Designed 
and built by Angel Rich (Forbes called her the next Steve 
Jobs), this app teaches me all about credit while I basically 
play Candy Crush. I honestly didn’t know FICO was an ac-
ronym until I started playing Credit Stacker.  
Bible by Life.Church: Even if I can’t read the Bible daily, 
I at least get to read a verse each day with this app. And I 
can’t miss it, because even if I don’t log into the app, 
I still receive daily verses sent to my email. 
brightwheel: I can see what my toddler is up to at any 
time with brightwheel. His teacher uses it to send me pic-
tures and updates throughout the day. 
Podcasts: Podcasts are my new jam! I get so much wind-
shield time with my job being in ﬁ eld sales, and the pod-
cast that introduced me to podcasts remains my favorite: 
Hey Frase. I love Fraser’s voice and personality, and I ﬁ nd 
podcasts make trafﬁ c and commutes more bearable. 
Happify: My friend shared this app with me. It’s amazing 
for helping me just stay positive and grateful and keeping 
me focused on all the good things in life.
iPeriod Period Tracker: This app has saved me so much 
trouble when it comes to tracking my cycle. It lets me 
know when I’m ovulating and it’s a very necessary remind-
er of when it’s time to take out my NuvaRing! 
BRIT JONES
Location: Loudoun County, VA
Age: 31
Bio: Brit is a wife, mom, and co-host of Good Things DC radio talk 
show, streamed live on Sundays at 1 p.m. (ET) via 
ListenVisionLive.com. She’s also a millennial insurance nerd.
FEATURED iUSER: 
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    53


iPhone Life  Spring 2018    55
’ve always loved traveling around the country and 
enjoying beautiful places with groups of friends. 
Once drones became an affordable way to produce 
professional images, I was pretty much hooked. My 
favorite aspect of aerial photography is the ability to ﬁ nd 
and appreciate symmetry in nature, both intentional and 
accidental. Having an eye in the sky has let me see new 
perspectives that people unknowingly pass every day.
GETTING STARTED
1. Choose Your Equipment
Figuring out what you want a drone for is step one. Are 
you shooting for fun or freelance? Will you be capturing 
TIPS FOR 
DRONE 
PHOTOGRAPHY
CAPTURING AERIAL 
PERSPECTIVES
BY CHRISTOPHER HENSHAW
I
This article was originally published on VSCO’s 
website at vsco.co/vscox/journal.

56    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
stills, video, or both? Do you travel much? All of these factors 
play a huge role in ﬁ nding a device that you’ll be comfortable 
with. Personally, I wanted a drone that could produce profes-
sional images, withstand frequent travel, and act as an all-
around workhorse. With these features under consideration, 
the DJI Mavic Pro ($999) was my go-to choice. I am a huge 
fan of DJI. The company has a bunch of different models for 
every level of consumer.
2. Know the Rules
I would highly recommend downloading the FAA Remote 
Pilot UAS Study Guide at faa.gov for the commercial license 
test. Even if you’re not applying for your license, you’ll ﬁ nd 
information on proper ﬂ ight methods, restrictions, and pretty 
much everything you need to properly handle a drone for 
personal or commercial use.
3. Be Prepared
At the shooting location, it usually takes less than ﬁ ve 
minutes to unpack your drone and get it in the air, but it’s 
very important to prepare your gear ahead of time. I usually 
have the drone, batteries, and controller in separate carrying 
cases; that way I can spread them around my bag to make 
packing easier. I currently use four batteries, which I’m al-
ways charging so I don’t miss a shot. I’ll usually charge all the 
batteries the night before a shoot and power up the drone 
to conﬁ rm the software is up to date. Once you’ve driven an 
hour to capture a shot just to be stopped for 30 minutes while 
the drone performs a mandatory update, you’ll ﬁ nd yourself 
taking preventative measures so it doesn’t happen again.
ADVICE FOR CAPTURE
1. Gain Perspective
The best part about ﬂ ying with a drone is the ability to be 
physically stationary while seeing so many different angles 
and perspectives and colors. I usually try to scout locations 
prior to going out; a lot of that time is spent switching 
between Google and Apple Maps to see if locations would 
look good from an aerial perspective.
My biggest piece of advice is to remember how important 
a role light plays in aerial photography. The time of day you’re 
ﬂ ying will either make or break your scene.
2. Consider Your Environment
The coolest thing about producing aerial imagery is that I 
don’t have to go far to ﬁ nd something worth shooting. One of 
my favorite shots I’ve taken was right above my house. But 
really any form of nature looks amazing from a bird’s-eye view. 
Just make sure to follow local laws pertaining to drones!
It’s also a great idea to bring a set of Neutral Density (ND) and 
Polarizing (CP) ﬁ lters if you’re going to be shooting in different 
landscapes. Luckily there are a ton of accessories being made 
for the newer line of drones to maximize your image quality.
Christopher Henshaw is a freelance photographer who splits his time between Cali-
fornia and New York. His interests include breaking and crashing motorcycles, scout-
ing shooting locations on Google Maps from the comfort of his bed, and disappearing 
into the wilderness with his friends on weekends. Contact Christopher via his website, 
christopherhenshaw.com

UNUM: I use this app to let me visually plan out my 
Instagram feed before I upload a photo. It helps keep my 
feed cohesive.
Adobe Lightroom: With Lightroom on my iPhone as well 
as my computer, I can custom edit photos and share them 
between each device.
Google Photos: This is a great app for keeping all of my 
photos easily accessible without taking up storage on my 
phone. 
Snapchat: Snapchat lets me keep in contact with my 
blog’s followers in the moment! I can ask for suggestions 
when I’m in a new city, share a crazy travel story, or link a 
new blog post and get immediate responses.
WordPress: I use WordPress to draft blog posts when 
inspiration strikes, check my blog stats, and reply to com-
ments on the go. 
GoPro: This app lets me download my photos from my 
GoPro Hero4 via Bluetooth to my phone, so I can edit and 
upload them in a matter of minutes.
GhostCodes: GhostCodes is designed speciﬁ cally to 
help you connect with other avid Snapchatters around the 
world. From travel snappers to comedy snappers, it allows 
you a peek into so many different peoples’ lives.
eZy Watermark lite: I use this app to watermark my pho-
tos—I design a signature and can apply it to multiple pho-
tos with one click to ensure my photos aren’t used without 
credit.
CamScanner: CamScanner allows me to scan paper docu-
ments into .pdf, .jpg, and .png ﬁ les and upload them to my 
Google Drive or email them. It’s so easy—and who actually 
owns a scanner anymore?
GABBY BECKFORD
Age: 22
Location: Richmond, VA
Bio: Gabby is a millennial world traveler who has visited more 
than 25 countries so far. She documents her adventures on her 
travel website PacksLight.com.
FEATURED iUSER: 
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    57

58    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
nline dating has become the norm, but 
that doesn’t mean people are instantly 
good at it! First, you need to decide 
which of the many available dating apps 
to use and then the real work begins. 
You’ll need to know how to craft a bio 
that shows off your assets, avoid com-
mon pitfalls, and set up dates with real 
people. But don’t worry, I’ve put together the following list 
of my best tips that will help make using dating apps fun and 
rewarding. 
CHOOSING THE RIGHT APP
Consider your age, location, sexual orientation, and what 
you’re looking for as helpful guides to choose which apps to 
try ﬁ rst. In my experience, location matters the most when 
it comes to using dating apps. In areas with a smaller popu-
lation and dating pool, apps that are synonymous with online 
dating such as Tinder (free) and OKCupid (free) have the 
most users available for me to connect with. But closer to city 
areas and urban sprawl, I can conﬁ dently use apps that are 
growing in popularity like Bumble (free) and Coffee Meets 
Bagel (free). There are also apps that put a fun spin on trying 
to connect with someone. For example, Hater (free) matches 
people based on what they commonly dislike. I can think of 
nothing better than bonding with someone over how choco-
late mint ice cream tastes like frozen chocolate toothpaste.
WRITING YOUR BIO
 
The best dating advice I’ve received (by which I mean, I’ve 
read online) is this: Instead of making a list of what you want, 
make a point to show what you bring to the relationship. And 
DIGITAL DATING
ALL THE RIGHT TIPS FOR GETTING ALL THE RIGHT SWIPES  
O
BY HALLEI HALTER

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    59
believe me, the best 
way to put that advice 
into practice is to 
write bios on multiple 
dating apps to ﬁ nd a 
kindred spirit (or at the 
very least, someone 
who thinks watching 
a scary movie with 
me on $5 Tuesday is a 
solid date). 
When writing my 
bio, I start with my 
hobbies, include a 
little bit about my job 
and maybe my family 
or social life, and then 
I end with what kind 
of relationship I’m 
looking for. Am I set 
on ﬁ nding a long-term 
relationship, or am I 
just looking for some-
thing casual? Or do I 
just not know yet? Put it in the bio. Stating deal-breakers such 
as “no smokers” or “must love coffee” can save you and the 
people looking at your proﬁ le some time, but remember to 
word everything politely. It’s hard to understand tone of voice 
when reading online.
AVOIDING FAKE PROFILES
As it goes with pretty much everything on the internet, 
dating apps can be rife with bots controlling fake proﬁ les. 
However, some apps let you connect your social media 
accounts to your proﬁ le. Including a Facebook or Instagram 
account or a Spotify playlist dedicated solely to Adele can help 
distinguish you and potential dates from fakes. Also, if the 
other person sends repetitive messages or tries to get you to 
use their link to talk to them on another site (usually requiring 
your credit card number), it’s likely a bot.
CHOOSING YOUR PROFILE PICTURES
Creating a good 
proﬁ le requires just 
enough effort to show 
that you tried. Pictures 
work absolute 
wonders on the 
amount of responses 
you receive. Most 
apps have a limit of 
up to ten pics you can 
post on your proﬁ le. 
It helps for your ﬁ rst 
photo to be a clear, 
well-lit selﬁ e. A full-
body shot of yourself 
is also a must and is 
a great way for you to 
show off you enjoying 
a hobby or standing 
next to a cool art 
mural. Group shots 
with friends at events 
can help be an 
ice-breaker for conver-
sation, but limit these group pics to two. I’ve passed on many 
proﬁ les that had me guessing who was the one common per-
son in all the photos. 
Remember you can have fun with changing up or switching 
out your posted pics. I added my most popular pic months 
after I created a proﬁ le and features me in a banana costume 
sipping on a margarita.
SET UP A DATE
Finally, the whole point of online dating for most people is 
to meet in person. After some back-and-forth messages 
establishing mutual interest (especially when you clicked so 
well over your shared hatred of chocolate mint ice cream), 
suggest meeting for dinner, a walk in a public park, or check 
out an event you would both like. You don’t have to be frustrat-
ed if an app isn’t working for you. There are more apps to try, 
and plenty of people to meet.
DON’T BELIEVE EVERYTHING 
YOU READ!
 According to a survey conducted by 
global research agency OpinionMatters, 
53 percent of people lie in their online 
dating proﬁ les, most often by using old 
photos to represent themselves or lying 
about their job to appear more successful.
Hallei is obtaining her BFA in Creative Writing  while living in Fairfi eld, Iowa. She's 
currently working on a novel about people using witchcraft to clean their houses.

8 TIPS FROM PSYCHOLOGISTS FOR RAISING 
CHILDREN IN THE AGE OF SCREENS
BY DONNA CLEVELAND
Always-Connected
Kids

he scene of a parent reading a bedtime story to 
a toddler is familiar and timeless. Then you notice 
something that tells a new tale; the child reaches 
out a dimpled hand and tries to swipe and tap the 
page as if it were an iPhone screen. Instances 
like this signal a new era in which young kids can 
navigate an iPhone or computer more intuitively than many 
adults. If you look around, you’ll ﬁ nd that today’s kids may be 
wired ﬁ rst for technology and second for the physical world.
With training from an early age, this generation will no 
doubt be much more ﬂ uent in new technology than those of 
us who adopted screens later in life. There are very real con-
cerns, however, about how screen time can affect children’s 
development. The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) 
advises parents to avoid screen time for children under 18 
months old, as they are just learning to navigate their physical 
surroundings. When it comes to older children and teens, 
opinions vary about how we should be managing our kids’ 
(and our own) relationship with these extremely useful yet 
addictive devices. We’ve asked child psychologists to weigh in 
to help us make sense of this unusual challenge.
MODERATION IS KEY
 “Screen addiction is like other addictions—but we can’t 
treat it in the same way. Unlike drugs or alcohol, you cannot 
abstain from screens. It is more like food, where we need to 
help people develop a healthy relationship and learn limits. 
Here are some suggestions: Acknowledge that it can be fun 
to use these devices and that they are a huge part of socializ-
ing and connecting with peers. Let them know that we want 
to help them develop their ‘muscle of moderation,’ as l like to 
put it. Willpower is an important life skill!” -Dr. Edward 
Hallowell, psychiatrist and ADD & ADHD specialist in Arling-
ton, MA
TOUCHSCREENS HELP 
UNDER-PRIVILEGED KIDS LEARN
A 2014 survey of more than 1,000 parents of preschoolers 
found that low-income children were twice as likely to read 
stories on a daily basis when given access to a touchscreen 
device. “Technology can actually be an easy route into pro-
moting reading,” said Dr. Jason Eckerman, psychologist and 
ADHD specialist at Impact Psychology in Minneapolis, MN. 
The survey also found that all the kids enjoyed reading more 
when given access to both print and touchscreen books and 
were more likely to outperform the expected standard for 
their age. 
TECH IS A PRIVILEGE 
“When it comes to cellphone use, be clear on who owns 
the phone. The phone is a privilege. It is a very big responsi-
bility and like everything else, freedom and responsibility go 
hand in hand. Part of being responsible is monitoring your 
time and use of the phone. Be clear from the beginning that 
if your child is no longer being responsible, they lose the free-
dom to have a phone, and because it’s your property, you may 
take it back.” -Dr. Hallowell
PRACTICE WHAT YOU PREACH
Let’s be honest, kids are not the only ones vulnerable to the 
addictive qualities of screens. In fact, according to the latest 
reports from Nielsen, American adults spend nearly 11 hours 
each day parked in front of a screen, whether that’s a comput-
er, the TV, a tablet, or smartphone. So if you tell your kids that 
no phones are allowed at the dinner table, make sure you’re 
not breaking your own rules. “Remember that your children 
T
Screen Ti me Guidelines
18 Months and Younger
The AAP recommends no screen time 
for infants and toddlers as they are at 
risk of being overstimulated by the bright 
lights and sounds from digital media.
18–24 Months 
You can carefully introduce media to 
older toddlers, focusing on high-quality, 
slow-paced content with no ads.
2–5 Years 
Children in this age group should be lim-
ited to one hour of media per day.
6 Years–Teens: 
While the AAP used to cap its recom-
mended media time to two hours per 
day, its most recent recommendation is 
to leave media use under the supervi-
sion of parents, who should make sure 
screen time is not replacing any other 
components of a healthy life.
TIP!
Video Chat with Toddlers
Surprisingly, the one exception 
to the AAP’s no-screen-time 
rule for kids is video chat. Since 
FaceTime or Skype interactions 
are happening at a life-like pace, 
pediatricians say video calls 
with family and friends can be 
a positive tech experience for 
infants and toddlers.
From the American 
Academy of Pediatrics
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    61

62    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
are always watching you,” advised Dr. Hallowell. “Are you put-
ting down your devices to connect with your world?” 
GAMING LINKED TO HIGHER TEST 
SCORES
Our devices hold the gateway to any type of content imag-
inable. Because of that, it doesn’t make sense to classify 
screen time as either good or bad. A good example of this is 
a 2016 study in the International Journal of Communication 
that found that Australian teenagers who regularly gamed also 
scored better in math, reading, and science. But according to 
computer psychologist Dr. Tim Lynch, the value all depends 
on the quality and content of the game. “Time spent playing 
games can be beneﬁ cial or not depending on the content,” 
said Lynch. “We need to be aware of this and make sure that 
our kids get exposed to positive interactions, limit the neutral 
ones, and eliminate the negative ones.” 
PROTECT YOUR CHILD’S 
CREATIVITY
“Often the internet sites that kids frequent include a con-
stant rating, evaluation, or critique of their personal pictures 
and posts,” said Dr. Chinwe Williams, a counseling professor 
at Argosy University in Atlanta, GA. “Excessive critique dimin-
ishes creativity, originality, and individualism of some youth. 
They lose insight of their opinion because they are seeking a 
certain level of approval.” By seeking out content that inspires 
them toward a personal goal, starting their own blog, and 
blocking or unfollowing critics as needed, Williams said kids 
can help minimize the negative effects of the internet while 
enjoying the beneﬁ ts.
PRIORITIZE FACE-TO-FACE 
INTERACTIONS
A recent UCLA study indicates that an increase in screen 
time is related to limitations in social skills. In the study, 
researchers gave two groups of sixth-graders a test that 
measured their understanding of emotional cues. The group 
that attended a ﬁ ve-day nature camp scored higher on the 
test after their time away from digital media. Dr. Eckerman 
underscored the importance of learning these nonverbal cues. 
“When you’re in conversation with others, it’s important to 
be able to read peoples’ facial reactions and see how they 
respond when you’re talking with them. It gives you a helpful 
piece of feedback, so you can make adjustments depending 
on how other people are reacting,” said Eckerman. “This is 
why I typically recommend that parents draw some sort of 
boundaries around cellphone use at home. If you have family 
dinners together, this is a great opportunity to have everyone 
put their cellphones away and learn more of those nonverbal 
cues that are so essential when interacting with others.”
However, not all digital media is bad for social development. 
In fact, developers have created smartphone apps speciﬁ cally 
to help teach kids with autism non-verbal skills. “Apps that 
help kids identify and label facial expressions and read other 
non-verbal cues, like body language, are a really cool way to 
help children with autism progress in those areas,” said Dr. 
Joe Dilley, author of The Game Is Playing Your Kid and psy-
chologist in Los Angeles. 
SCREEN TIME GIVES PARENTS A 
BREAK, AND THEY DESERVE IT
You may have heard of the term “screen-time shaming,” 
where people make parents feel judged for allowing their kids 
to use technology. Whether you ﬁ rmly believe in the beneﬁ ts 
of screen time or just need a break from the incessant de-
mands of parenthood, you can ﬁ nd ways to stop the haters in 
their tracks.
“I always tell parents that they have to do what makes 
sense for them and their family,” said Dr. Eckerman. “If other 
parents or adults make judgments about your child’s screen 
time, I generally frame it in two ways. First, it’s becoming 
clear that technology is going to be playing a major role in 
our children’s lives as they grow older, and one of our jobs 
as parents is to prepare them the best we can for the future. 
Second, while there are plenty of beneﬁ ts, you can acknowl-
edge that you understand that technology can have negative 
effects in certain areas of development. Share what you’re 
doing to promote development in those areas. If they’re con-
cerned about devices shortening your child’s attention span or 
social skills, talk about how you like to play games as a family 
that promote those skills. People are generally more under-
standing when they see that there’s intention behind your 
decision.”
Donna Schill Cleveland is the Editor in Chief of iPhone Life magazine. After a short stint 
as a newspaper reporter, she became web editor at iPhone Life, where she continues to 
pair her penchant for storytelling with her love of Apple products. Donna holds a mas-
ter’s degree from the University of Iowa School of Journalism & Mass Communication.
Get an 
iPhone 
tip every 
day. 
iPhoneLife.com/dailytips


64    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
ou rely on your iPhone for everything, 
so why not for dinner tonight? Down-
load these free apps to get you started. 
Some require a trip to the grocery 
store, while others help you scrounge 
up dinner with what you already have 
in the fridge. And if you’re lacking moti-
vation, check out the bonus Instagram 
accounts to get all the food inspiration 
you need.
Blue Apron 
(Free) 
Blue Apron has a variety of tried-and-true 
recipes to get you excited about cooking. One 
food hack with this app is that you actually don’t 
even need a subscription in order to get some amazing Blue 
Apron recipes. Just download the app, continue as a guest, and 
look through the provided menus, complete with step-by-step 
directions on how to cook up a mean steak or pad thai.
Allrecipes Dinner Spinner 
(Free) 
Allrecipes has recipes for pretty much every-
thing (if you hadn’t guessed by the title). Use 
the app’s Dinner Spinner feature to pick the 
dish type, ingredients, and cook time for an easy-to-choose 
feed of options. Each recipe also breaks down prep time and 
cook time, estimating when that yummy meal will be on your 
table. You can see photos of other people’s creations for inspi-
ration, and share your food hacks in the comments to improve 
your meal next time!
Food Network In the Kitchen 
(Free) 
If you binge-watch the Food Network, the TV 
channel’s ofﬁ cial recipe app is for you. Not only 
can you pick your own Food Network personali-
ty for the app, but you can ﬁ nd recipes based on your favorite 
shows! Watch your favorite chef cook a turkey chili or learn 
how to up your weeknight dinner game with the ability to 
save directions and watch videos.
Pinterest 
(Free) 
Pinterest rose to fame because of its DIY proj-
ects, but don’t forget its collection of recipes 
too—especially for special occasions. If you’re 
looking for a signature cocktail, a special baked good, or a 
healthy fruit smoothie, look no further than Pinterest. Collect 
all your favorite meals on your food board, then check out your 
pins later and reference the directions as you cook.
Y

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    65
Handpick 
(Free) 
Handpick offers a daily feed of dishes from 
bloggers and food sites from all over the web. 
One of the coolest features of the app is its 
pairing of ingredients—you can pick your favorite ingredient, 
like chicken, and the app will tell you what items compliment 
it well. Pick a few more and up pops a list of recipes for you 
featuring your favorite foods, along with a list of allergens, 
ingredients, and what you’ll need from your pantry to cook 
the perfect meal for you.
Yummly 
(Free) 
“Why shop when you can start cooking?” 
That’s Yummly’s motto. You can discover reci-
pes within the app that include ingredients you 
already have in your fridge and pantry. If you do end up need-
ing to take a trip to the grocery store, it’s easy to add ingredi-
ents into the app’s built-in shopping list. When you’re ready, 
you can follow the recipe’s text instructions or video guide and 
cook away!
HelloFresh 
(Free)
Don’t be turned off by the subscription! Like 
Blue Apron, you don’t need to pay for the 
service to enjoy the easy step-by-step 
directions of Hello Fresh’s app. You can explore vegetarian or 
meat-based recipes, all of which include total cook time and 
calorie breakdown as well as utensils you’ll need in order to 
complete the dish in record time, cooked to perfection.
Fill your Instagram feed with 
cooking inspiration
Half Baked Harvest 
@halfbakedharvest 
Have 30 minutes and one pot to 
make dinner? Whether it’s pasta, 
soup, or queso, Half Baked Harvest 
has you covered. Save all your 
favorite recipes to your Collections 
to cook on the weekend.
Tasty 
@buzzfeedtasty 
You may have seen these viral food 
videos ﬁ lling your Facebook feed, 
but you should deﬁ nitely add them 
on your own Instagram—Buzzfeed 
just might give you enough push to 
bake a marble cake after dinner!
Sunset 
@sunsetmag 
If you’re looking for dinner party 
inspiration, Sunset magazine is the 
way to go. Watch as they delicately 
plate cheese or craft a ﬂ oral center-
piece. Indulge a little bit in this West 
Coast-themed account. I like to im-
provise some of the ingredients to 
make it a little more wallet-friendly.
Abbey Dufoe is a freelance writer and a web producer at a nonprofi t based in Prince-
ton, NJ. She’s always itching for the newest iOS gadget (current favorite - the iPhone 
8). She tweets and blogs about the earth and the Internet on Twitter at @abbeydufoe 
and at abbeydufoe.com.

hether you’re training for a 5K or ap-
plying for your dream job, the start of 
a new year is a great time to set new 
goals and go after them. With the 
help of these apps, you can start the 
year off right by mixing up your work-
out routine at the gym, changing out 
the clothes in your closet, or 
organizing your busy schedule.
Achieve Your Personal Goals
Fantastical 2 
($4.99)
Made a News Year’s resolution to organize your 
life? Fantastical merges the best of Google Cal-
endar, iCloud, Apple Reminders, and Microsoft 
Exchange, making it easy to keep track of multiple calendars 
and to-do lists. You can share calendars with other contacts, 
and you can color code them too! Need to make a change? 
All changes sync seamlessly and update on all your devices 
automatically. 
Meetup 
(Free)
The new year is a great time to try new things. 
Try Meetup and get to know people with similar 
interests. Explore groups by category to ﬁ nd 
events near you. Try out a coffee house in a nearby town, join 
a rock climbing group for beginners, or attend a lecture series. 
Search a ton of categories to ﬁ nd the right group or event for 
you.
Stitch Fix Personal Stylist 
($20/month) 
Feeling the need to mix up your wardrobe 
without paying too much for a personal stylist? 
Stitch Fix has you covered. For a styling fee of 
$20 per month, you can take a style quiz and have Stitch Fix 
Apps for
Starting the
Off Right
by Abbey Dufoe
w
new year
66    iPhone Life  Spring 2018

send a box of clothes straight to your door every month (or 
more often if you like). Ask your stylist for speciﬁ c pieces (like 
a coat for winter or new boots to round out your outﬁ t) or just 
let them peruse your Pinterest board for ideas and voila!—
new clothes to pick from. You choose what to buy, no strings 
attached (except your styling fee).
The New York Times 
(Free)
If you’re tired of drowning in constant news 
from your social media networks, you can use 
this app from The New York Times to get news 
alerts—no subscription necessary. Once you download the 
app, it will prompt you to select the alerts you want to sub-
scribe to (breaking news and top stories should do the trick). 
A few times a day, you’ll get a push notiﬁ cation about what’s 
going on in the world. You can read 10 free articles per month 
or pay $14.99 to read all the articles you want. 
Get in Shape
Nike+ Run Club 
(Free)
If you signed up for a run this year and haven’t 
had time to prepare, don’t panic! Nike has you 
covered. In the app, you can make a custom-
ized running plan, a cool option for veterans and beginners 
alike. You can even train along with your friends—virtually, of 
course. Inside the app, you can see your friends’ progress and 
post your runs (and sweaty selﬁ es!). Run to the top of the 
leaderboard in this collaborative app, and win achievements 
along the way. Keep track of your splits, average pace, and 
elevation gains while wearing your Apple Watch as you train 
for that 5K! 
Sworkit 
(Free) 
No time for the gym? No worries! Sworkit is 
here to help you get started. First, select the 
kind of workout you want to do. The app has a 
wide range to choose from, including strength, cardio, yoga, 
and stretching. Next, select the amount of time you want to 
spend on your workout—anywhere from 5 to 60 minutes. 
Then begin, wherever you happen to be. Sworkit has an app 
for kids too (Sworkit Kids) with workouts tailored for children.
AllTrails 
(Free) 
New year, new trails! Find all the best crowd-
sourced trails around you with the AllTrails app. 
Explore the great outdoors with a list of trails 
closest to you, and save your favorite trails to your list. You can 
even see a detailed trail map of every hike, as well as photos 
that users have taken to better acquaint yourself with your 
new hiking spot.
Land Your Dream Job
LinkedIn Job Search 
(Free) 
If you’re looking for a job, dust off your LinkedIn 
proﬁ le and download LinkedIn Job Search. The 
app comes with job alerts for different cities 
across the United States as well as keyword searches. 
LinkedIn Jobs also connects with your LinkedIn app in order 
to keep you posted about employers that might be interested 
in you based on your proﬁ le, so keep that up to date.
Idealist 
(Free)
If you’re looking for opportunities to better your 
life in 2018, look no further than Idealist. In this 
app, you can ﬁ nd jobs, internships, and volun-
teer opportunities near you at non-proﬁ ts and other do-good 
organizations specializing in helping the community, environ-
ment, and the arts. You can even volunteer at events! Just 
download the app, allow your location, and browse through 
the listings.
Take Charge of Your Health
Health 
(Free)
Start 2018 off by allowing Apple access to your 
motion activity (if you haven’t already). This will 
allow you to track your activity, mindfulness, 
nutrition, sleep, and even more if you have an Apple Watch. 
Every day, check your walking and running distance, your 
steps taken, and ﬂ ights of steps climbed. Link it with other 
apps you may be using (like Nike+ Run Club, Strava, 
Headspace, Yummly, and more) to track all your health data 
together. The app also stores your medical ID. In case of an 
emergency, responders can see your allergies, blood type, 
height, weight, and more right on your phone.
Sleep Cycle Alarm Clock 
(Free)
Bring in the new year with better sleep. Use 
Sleep Cycle to help you do just that. For it to 
work, you have to place your phone near your 
bed. Set a range of time to wake up, and the app will wake 
you up based on your sleep patterns to ensure you get a good 
night’s rest. It also comes with an intelligent snooze (in case 
you want to catch a few extra z’s) and sleep aid sounds in 
case you have trouble dozing off. Track your progress after a 
few days to see if your iPhone is actually helping you sleep 
better!
Abbey Dufoe is a freelance writer and a web producer at a nonprofi t based in Prince-
ton, NJ. She’s always itching for the newest iOS gadget (current favorite - the iPhone 
8). She tweets and blogs about the earth and the Internet on Twitter at @abbeydufoe 
and at abbeydufoe.com.
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    67

68    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
Splitwise 
(Free)
I connected with my roommate on Splitwise 
and we’ve been enjoying ﬁ nancially responsi-
ble bliss by knowing who owes who for what. 
When entering a bill, we enter a description (for example ‘pa-
per towels’), add the cost, and then record how we split the 
bill (equally, half, all, or none). And since we connect via our 
emails, at the end of the month I get a reminder that yes, I 
still owe her the $10 she spotted me during our last trip to the 
thrift store.
Mercari 
(Free)
Mercari is a resale app similar to Poshmark 
or Depop. I use Mercari the most because of 
how easily I can save a search and set up alerts 
for new items matching what I’m looking for. Plus, the app 
Spend Less!
6 Money-Saving Apps for the 
Thrifty iPhone User
by Hallei Halter

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    69
regularly sends me coupons for money off my total purchase. 
Items are sold individually, so there’s no add-to-cart option, 
but most sellers are a friendly chat away from bundling items 
so I can save on shipping and use a coupon. 
Snupps 
(Free)
I suffer a massive brain fart whenever I see a 
clearance aisle, which makes Snupps the top 
money-saving app for me. Snupps is an orga-
nizer app—it allows me to create a shelf by taking pictures of 
items in a collection, and then I make notes and ﬁ ll in prod-
uct details, such as purchase price or expiration date. I have 
shelves for skincare, books, spices, and art supplies. Being able 
to see what I already have and how much I paid for it helps me 
to refrain from purchasing more than I need or buying the same 
book twice. Something fun for me is seeing the total amount I 
paid for an entire shelf compared to its estimated value, espe-
cially if it’s a collection of things I regularly use coupons to pur-
chase, such as body lotion. Snupps also connects users all over 
the world so I can look at someone’s shoe collection in another 
country while I avoid buying a ﬁ fth lip balm.
Dollarbird 
(Free)
I prefer to manually enter my purchases instead 
of connecting my bank account to budget 
apps. Dollarbird lets me do that with quite a 
bit of customization options. I can label my purchase, make a 
descriptive note, and create my own color-coded categories. 
The color-coding helps the most when I look at my overall pur-
chases for the month. A lot of red on the simple color strip (no 
bar graphs or pie charts here) means I went out to eat maybe 
more than I should have while purple hints that it’s the holiday 
season and I’ve been buying gifts. Each category has a drop-
down arrow that reveals the label and amount spent, so I can 
quickly see who I had coffee with this month and consider 
getting a less expensive drink next time.
Ibotta 
(Free)
Ibotta is a rebate app that I browse before 
heading out to get groceries. I choose what 
store I’ll be shopping at and see if any of the 
rebate offers match my grocery list. If one does, I click on the 
offer to activate it (usually I have to answer a survey question 
or watch a very short video ad) before purchase and either 
upload a picture of my receipt or scan the receipt’s barcode 
when I get home. I use it for Dollar Tree, Walmart, and Hy-
Vee, but it also has rebate offers for multiple online retailers. 
Receipts are reviewed by Ibotta, and I get the rebate money 
in my Ibotta account within 48 hours. Ibotta pays out to my 
PayPal account in denominations of $20, so over the course 
of a year I get a decent percentage of my money back from 
weekly grocery trips. What I really enjoy are the ‘any brand’ 
rebate offers. For example, I can get 25 cents back for buying 
any brand of orange juice at the store that has the rebate offer 
listed. 
Givling 
(Free)
Givling is unique in that it crowdfunds to help 
people pay off debt by various interactive 
means. I may never get my student loans paid 
off through this app, but it does offer the opportunity to win 
daily prize money by playing two rounds of a trivia game. I 
also watch up to three video ads each day to contribute to 
the current loan payoff fund of a stranger. Givling chooses 
which users’ student loans (up to $50,000) or mortgages 
(up to $25,000) to pay off based on the order in which users 
signed up for the app, who the highest-contributing funder 
is, and random draw. Givling makes the daily two minutes of 
using their app very fun and exciting—I learn weird facts via 
the trivia game and watch as someone’s loan shrinks on the 
percentage thermometer on the opening screen. Givling has a 
very active Facebook page to answer questions and talk about 
the pressing need to help people (hopefully one day me) out 
of debt.
Almost every large business has an app that has saved me money (and scored me some free stuff, 
especially around my birthday), so I recommend downloading apps from stores you purchase from 
most often. My most frequented grocery store, Hy-Vee, has its own app that lets me browse sales 
ads and add coupons digitally to my store card that I then scan at the register. Some restaurants I 
live near have apps that offer digital punch cards as well, which allow me to scan receipts to earn 
free food or drinks. 
Check Out Apps by Local Retailers and Restaurants
Hallei is obtaining her BFA in Creative Writing  while living in Fairfi eld, Iowa. She's 
currently working on a novel about people using witchcraft to clean their houses.

70    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
Augmented 
Reality Apps
See Your Everyday World in a 
Whole New Way
by Dig om
ugmented reality (AR) merges computer-generated images with 
the real world around you. AR uses your device’s position to control 
what you see on your touchscreen. Some AR apps make use of 
Apple’s ARKit platform to superimpose digital images on to your 
iPhone camera’s viewﬁ nder and therefore the world around you. 
Others draw you into an AR world where you can use your position-
ing to maneuver through your surroundings and see different views. 
The following are some of our favorite augmented reality apps that 
will get your feet wet with this groundbreaking technology. 
Euclidean Lands 
($3.99)
Euclidean Lands is a 
unique mashup of a 
rotating Rubik’s Cube 
puzzler, turn-based strategy game, 
and ﬁ rst-person adventure. Immerse 
yourself in this medieval game world 
with its beautiful isometric cubic archi-
tecture, complex combat strategies, 
and battles with enemies. Euclidean 
Lands is all the more immersive when 
you factor in its AR component, allow-
ing players to interact with this game 
superimposed over your real-world 
environment. If you enjoy brain-teasers 
and story-driven platformers that call for 
careful strategizing, you’ll love 
Euclidean Lands. 
A

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    71
INKHUNTER 
(Free)  
INKHUNTER lets you virtually try on custom tattoo designs through 
the world of augmented reality. Choose any design that you like, point 
the camera somewhere on your body, and INKHUNTER will let you 
view your future tattoo on your skin from many different angles. This is a great app 
for anyone planning a larger tattoo and wanting to get a good idea of how the design 
will ﬂ ow with the natural contours of their body. It’s also ideal for anyone getting 
their ﬁ rst tattoo, as it lets them get a visual of what their ﬁ rst tattoo might look like.  
Sky Guide AR 
($2.99) 
With Sky Guide AR you simply open the app, hold your iPhone or iPad 
skyward, and begin automatically ﬁ nding constellations, planets, and 
satellites. Sky Guide AR offers an effortless way to learn about what’s 
going on in the skies above. It has a simple and intuitive interface, packed with 
informative celestial details that make it perfect for all ages and experience levels. 
Whether you’re an astronomy buff or a total newbie, Sky Guide AR will satisfy your 
curious mind. Conveniently, this app works without Wi-Fi, cellular service, or GPS 
and keeps your eyes comfortable with its night mode. It even sends you 
notiﬁ cations when the International Space Station passes overhead.  
ARise 
($2.99) 
ARise is an intriguing AR 
game in which you have 
to move your iPhone or 
iPad around to gain perspective and 
navigate through obstacles. In this 
advanced puzzler/platformer hybrid, 
you solve puzzles by physically moving 
around in the real world. You get to ex-
plore (from a third-person perspective) 
a vivid, living world in which your pint-
sized avatar solves puzzles using visual 
cues and by looking at the game from 
every angle. You cross chasms, scale 
cliffs, and blaze new 3D trails. Built 
from the ground up to support Apple’s 
ARkit, ARise is a game the children will 
love, as will any fan of games such as 
Mario and Monument Valley.

72    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
magicplan 
(Free)  
This app is ideal for carpenters, real estate agents, architects, home 
inspectors, interior designers, and do-it-yourselfers. You can use 
magicplan to view and map your space in 3D, generate job estimates, 
plan DIY projects, or furnish your home. It makes it easy to create ﬂ oor plans in min-
utes and edit them with annotations, objects, and tasks, all with just a few taps. The 
app is free to download and use, but you will need to make an in-app purchase to 
download ﬂ oor plans in certain shareable formats.
bubbli 
(Free) 
This app lets you record AR images that effectively transport the viewer 
to the time and place the image was captured. With bubbli, you simply 
do a slow and steady pan around your environment, standing in one 
place as you move your iPhone around you. This produces an immersive, 360-degree 
image that you can share with friends and family via a variety of messaging platforms, 
including Facebook, iMessage, email, and more. To fully appreciate the bubbli image, 
viewers have to physically turn in a circle and look up and down to view the entire 
scene, which really makes the viewer feel like they are seeing exactly what you saw 
when you captured the shot. 
Dinosaurs 
Everywhere! 
(Free)  
Dinosaurs Everywhere 
is a great app for young kids as well as 
dinosaur enthusiasts. Just hold your 
iPhone up like you’re going to take a 
picture and watch as huge, 3D dino-
saurs go stomping through the world 
around you. Dinosaurs are all shown 
to scale, and by tapping on a dinosaur 
you can quickly learn more about the 
species and zoom in on the dinosaurs 
to get a closer look at them. There are 
10 different dinosaur species available 
in this game that you can superimpose 
over your day-to-day environment. You 
can also play this game through Google 
Cardboard for an even more immersive 
VR experience. 
Dig Om is senior gear editor at iPhone Life. His 
interests include the arts, web design, tattooing 
(sacredfi retattoos.com), and journalism. Be-
tween writing for iPhone Life, creating websites 
(idoctechsupport.com), gardening, illustrating, 
and enjoying the wonders of nature with family, 
Siva manages to keep himself quite busy. You can reach him at 
dig@iphonelife.com.

Plume Air Report: This app allows me to keep a tab on 
the air quality around me at all times of the day. It also 
displays the activities (such as running, cycling, eating 
outside, etc.) that I can perform safely for that particular air 
quality value.
Onion Browser: I am very concerned about my privacy 
and hence rely on Onion Browser—the ofﬁ cial iOS alterna-
tive to the popular anonymity software Tor—to keep myself 
safe and secure online. It bypasses all trackers and makes 
the user invisible to them. I ﬁ nd it much better than Apple’s stock 
Safari browser.  
HotspotShield: I use the free version of HotspotShield to 
keep my browsing and other online activities completely 
private. I am a big fan of its one-click connection feature. 
intoLive: This app turns your videos into live wallpapers 
that you can use on your device. I recently used it to get 
the iPhone 8-exclusive wallpaper on my iPhone 7 Plus.
Simple Transfer: This is by far my favorite sharing/transfer 
app for iOS. It allows me to transfer ﬁ les to and from my 
Windows laptop in a few keystrokes.
Dropbox:  I rely on Dropbox’s free plan for my cloud 
backup needs. It gives me peace of mind to have my data 
backed up on a platform other than iCloud.
CamScanner: This app turns my iPhone 7 Plus into a 
handy scanner. I use it to scan important documents and 
keep a copy of them on all my devices. 
VLC for Mobile: Though I like iOS 11’s new video player, I 
still prefer to use the trusted VLC player on my PC as well 
as iPhone 7 Plus. I mainly use it to watch movies whenev-
er I am on the go.   
LUCA ROMANO
Location: Florida
Age: 34
Bio: Luca is a trucker and an iPhone hacking enthusiast. He 
enjoys tweaking the iPhone so much that he even started a small 
blog (YaluJailbreak.net) this year dedicated to news, jailbreak tips, 
and tutorials.   
FEATURED iUSER: 
iPhone Life  Spring 2018    73

74    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
iPhone X
The Best Gear for the Best iPhone
Chargers & Cables
Belkin BOOST UP Wireless Charging 
Pad 
($59.99)
The iPhone X is compatible with Qi 
wireless chargers, which means any 
standard wireless charger will work 
with it. But Belkin decided to create a 
charging pad speciﬁ cally for the iPhone 
X and iPhone 8—and what you get is a 
product that compliments the iPhone X 
beautifully. Set up your charging station 
wherever is convenient for you, plug in 
the pad, and simply place your iPhone X 
down to get started. The BOOST UP is 
designed to work with most lightweight 
cases; I tested this out and found that it 
generally worked perfectly with thin or 
plastic cases, which I expect to be true 
with just about any wireless charger. 
Overall, I like the design of the Belkin 
BOOST UP more than Mophie’s similar 
Wireless Charging Base; although that’s 
a great alternative option as well. 
MEEM Cord with Storage 
(Starting at $59.99)
While getting the iPhone X was an 
upgrade, I chose to downgrade my 
storage capacity to save a little money 
on an already premium device. That’s 
why the MEEM Cord stuck out to me 
as a great idea. This cord can charge 
and sync your device with its USB-to-
Lightning connectors; however, it can 
also hold 32 GB, 64 GB, or even 128 
GB of data, depending on the cord you 
choose. You can use the cord to store 
device backups or to simply store 
media and documents, allowing you 
to free up space on your device. It’s 
not on the cloud, so you never have to 
worry about security; and you can view 
all of your stored information within the 
Meem app on your device. 
Moshi USB Cable with Lightning 
Connector 
($24.95) 
Every iPhone user needs an extra 
Lightning cable. Whether your old one 
is fraying or you need a second cable 
for on-the-go and in-the-car use, Moshi 
makes one that will last you a long, long 
time. Wrapped in ballistic nylon braiding 
with aluminum housing on either end, 
this cord can handle more than 20,000 
cycles of 180-degree bend testing—so 
it’s super durable. Moshi has cords in 
various sizes, but this one is four feet 
long, which is 20 percent longer than 
Apple’s Lightning cord. The nylon braid-
ing makes this Moshi cord resistant to 
tangling too. It’s also available in four 
different colors: white, gray, red, and 
pink. 

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    75
Essentials
Twelve South RelaxedLeather Case 
($49.99)
This is the case I’m currently using 
on my iPhone X, and I can’t imagine 
switching it out anytime soon. The 
RelaxedLeather case is slim and 
leather-wrapped, with two card slots on 
the back. It offers the perfect balance 
of protection and style and comes in 
a variety of attractive colors (mine is a 
deep wine red called Marsala). I found it 
surprisingly difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd an iPhone X 
case that didn’t feel too bulky. Now this 
case isn’t advertised as being built for 
drop protection, but I’d say it’s sturdy 
enough for the occasional small drop. If 
you like the practicality of a wallet case 
and want a case that will only improve 
in appearance with use, I highly recom-
mend the RelaxedLeather case. 
Nomad Clear Folio Leather Case 
($49.95)
I love the overall design of the 
Nomad Clear Folio case. The case is 
drop-proof up to six feet and is clear, 
which means you can see the beauty of 
your iPhone X at all times. The leather 
folio cover both protects the screen 
and acts as a wallet with its three credit 
card slots and hidden cash pocket. The 
leather is high quality and the product 
looks stunning. My only complaint is 
that the folio doesn’t also function as 
a stand, which I generally have come 
to expect from any folio case. This is 
another case that will only improve in 
appearance as time goes on and the 
leather becomes beautifully weathered. 
Speck Presidio Case 
($39.95)
If drop protection is your top concern, 
Speck’s Presidio case is the best option 
on our list. With drop protection up to 
ten feet, this two-layer case is truly 
impressive. I have it in Dusty Green, 
which is my favorite kind of military 
green; however, Speck offers its 
Presidio case in a multitude of different 
patterns and colors, including clear. 
The extra protection makes this case 
slightly bulky, but it’s still slim for a case 
focused on durability. The raised bezel 
edges help protect the front of your 
device and the case’s scratch-resistant 
ﬁ nish keeps it looking great. This case 
also includes a lifetime warranty, so if 
anything happens to it during the life-
time of your device, Speck will replace 
the case for you. 
by Conner Carey
Cases

76    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
Simple Snap Screen Protector 
($39-$49) 
It takes a steady hand to perfectly 
apply a screen protector, right? Not 
with Simple Snap. The name says it all. 
When the screen protector arrives, it’s 
at the center of an alignment mold with 
a cutout of your phone’s shape. Once 
you peel off the correct side, you simply 
push the mold onto your phone, which 
lays the screen protector perfectly 
straight and in place the ﬁ rst time. This 
is the screen protector I’m currently 
using on my iPhone X, and thus far it’s 
done a fantastic job. I did have a couple 
small bubbles in the lower right corner 
upon installation, but I delicately lifted 
the corner and placed it back down to 
ﬁ x it.
Zagg InvisibleShield Glass+ Screen 
Protector 
($34.99)
Zagg is usually my go-to company 
when it comes to screen protectors. 
I’ve used many Zagg screen protectors 
in the past and have loved their incredi-
bly smooth application and solid screen 
protection. For the iPhone X, Zagg has 
taken extra measures to make sure 
your expensive device goes unharmed. 
With reinforced edges and three times 
the shatter protection, the Glass+ is 
prepared for all of your adventures. It’s 
made to have the most impact protec-
tion available, while also making sure 
your screen looks pristine with smudge 
and scratch resistance. Plus, Zagg 
includes a lifetime warranty—if your 
Glass+ gets worn or damaged, Zagg 
will replace it for the lifetime of your 
device. 
Tech21 Evo Glass Screen Protector 
($44.95) 
This is the screen protector our CEO 
David Averbach ran off with as soon 
as his iPhone X arrived in the mail. He 
said it was easy to apply, didn’t create 
any bubbles, ﬁ t nicely, and so far has 
kept his screen protected. Evo Glass is 
meant to be super thin and beautifully 
clear, so your OLED screen can shine 
through in all its glory. It’s also scratch- 
and smudge-resistant, so you won’t 
need to replace it just because of a little 
nick obscuring your screen. It’s also 
designed to work with Tech21 cases, 
which means it works with most, if not 
all, cases. It gets my boss’s approval! 
Conner Carey is a  feature web writer at iP-
hone Life and a contributing writer for Love U 
magazine. Her work has been published on Art 
Parasites Berlin and Chronically. She holds a 
bachelor's in English with an emphasis in Cre-
ative Writing and resides in Fairfi eld, Iowa. You 
can fi nd her personal blog at connerleecarey.com or follow her on 
Twitter @connerleecarey.
Screen Protectors

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    77
y tailor looked at me quizzically. “You want 
to increase the size of the pockets on your 
jeans to ﬁ t your iPhone?” He clearly thought 
this was a weird request, despite the fact 
that we saw each other so often I’d become 
his digitally savvy pseudo nephew who 
helped manage his Yelp. But no matter; I 
wasn’t going to allow a few shallow front 
pockets on my two favorite jeans to ruin the 
experience of using my big-screened iPhone 
6s Plus while traveling.
Digital 
Nomad
5
by Jono Lee
Essential 
Items
Every
Needs
M

78    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
I mention this story to convey the extent to which I obsess 
over having the best possible experience using my iPhone. So 
when I decided to join Remote Year—a program that allows 
professionals to travel together over the course of a year—I 
spent about three months researching the best iOS travel 
gear to bring with me. I came up with the following criteria for 
buying products:
High Quality and Durable: One of the worst 
things that can happen when traveling is having 
a belonging you rely on break. It’s hard to guar-
antee you’ll ﬁ nd a store that can repair your item or will 
have similar ones in stock. 
Travel-Sized: I didn’t have much luggage space, 
and in general the less you have to carry with 
you the better you’ll fare. Buying compact items 
allowed me to travel with a 33-liter backpack and one 
piece of checked luggage for an entire year.
Multipurpose: The best products combine mul-
tiple functionalities or simplify some part of my 
life.
10 months, 20 countries, and 50,000 miles later, and I’d 
used some products that worked out well and some that 
didn’t. Below are the iOS products that did. I’ve used them 
consistently and can happily recommend them to you.
External Battery Charger with 
Built-In Cable
An external battery is my number one recommendation 
while traveling. However, most people don’t realize that many 
models now have a Lightning or micro-USB cable built in so 
you don’t need to bring a separate cable. No one wants to deal 
with extra cables if they don’t have to. After buying a charger 
that died after a few months, I now look for MFi-certiﬁ ed 
products as a way to ensure quality, like the OLALA C1-i 
Portable Charger ($26.99–$34.99).
Running Belt
This suggestion may lead you to think I run a lot. That would 
be false. Outside of being used for running, this item is more 
of a discreet, new-age fanny pack. I use it in situations where 
there’s a high chance of being pick-pocketed, such as when 
attending a music festival or visiting a touristy area with large 
crowds. At almost every single music festival or large event 
I’ve attended this year, a few friends in my group have had 
their phones stolen. Wearing  a running belt can help you 
avoid this. While there are many options these days, the 
model I own by SPIbelt ($14.95–$25.99) is one of the 
originals, and I’ve been happy with its quality. You can easily 
hide the belt underneath clothes and comfortably ﬁ t a phone 
and wallet in it. I also attach a small carabiner to the clasp so 
that no one can unclasp it without me knowing.
Reinforced Lightning Cables
How many of your Lightning cables are already frayed, 
discolored, and sad? They look similar to how I feel after I’ve 
trekked 20 minutes to Chipotle only to ﬁ nd out they’ve run 
out of guacamole. Instead of continually buying new standard 
Lightning cables, it’s better to invest in a reinforced version 
3
1
2

iPhone Life  Spring 2018    79
like the Anker Powerline+ ($12.99–$19.99). It’s rated for 6X 
more bends and after using mine for a few months now, I 
could see it lasting for years.
Packable Backpack and Duffel 
Bag
Having the right combo of bags for every travel scenario 
is like a puzzle. Yeah, I’m going to travel between continents 
with my big 35-liter backpack and big checked luggage, but I 
deﬁ nitely don’t want to use those for a daily cafe commute or 
short weekend trip.
That’s where I’ve become enamored with packable bags. 
They’re not very stylish. In fact, most of them are pretty ugly 
and scream “I’m going camping!” which is not the vibe I want 
to give off. However, you can’t beat their practicality. They ﬁ t 
anywhere, and the good ones are made from high-quality 
nylon that can take a beating (although these thin bags do 
need to be replaced consistently when used heavily).
The ﬁ rst packable bag I have is the Tortuga Travel 
Daypack ($49). I use it multiple times per week to commute 
to cafes or working spaces. It’s super light, packs down small, 
has enough pockets to accommodate whatever I need that 
day (including all of my devices), and has a plain exterior. I do 
have to note two downsides: the Travel Daypack doesn’t have 
much padding to protect my computer, and its shape is a bit 
ugly and droopy, but that’s what you get with a structureless 
packable bag. 
My second go-to bag is Eagle Creek’s Packable Duffel 
($25–$30). It’s a simple, lightweight bag that does its job well 
with one nice additional touch: the main zipper is lockable. 
Eagle Creek overall is a great brand. 
Bluetooth Speaker
Ultimate Ears, a division of Logitech, pumps out some of 
the best Bluetooth speakers on the market. They’re a bit more 
expensive than competing brands, but the sound, quality, 
design, and durability is amazing. I have the UE ROLL 
($49.99–$99.99), which is super rugged (I’ve dragged it across 
many beaches), but many of my friends from Remote Year use 
the UE BOOM ($79.99–$199.99) and they love it as well.
Jono is a designer, developer, writer, and all-around curious human being. He 
experienced a quintessential Asian American upbringing in Cupertino, California. He 
learned to force computers to do his bidding at UCLA, and mixed in his creative skills 
as a product designer at a tech company in San Francisco. Today, he has his own travel 
advice project called Wanderprep (wanderprep.com).

80    iPhone Life  Spring 2018
iVIEW
luetooth has become the wireless standard for sim-
ply and securely transferring small amounts of data 
between two devices. Like many, I use Bluetooth to 
connect my iPhone to devices like my Apple Watch, AirPods, 
wireless speaker, and keyboard. Lately, I’ve been testing out 
some not-so-obvious Bluetooth accessories. Here, I’ll share 
three personal recommendations of products that are not only 
highly rated on Amazon but that I’ve found to be easy to set 
up and use and that are well supported by their respective 
manufacturers. 
RENPHO Bluetooth Smart Scale 
($29.95)
I weigh myself using the RENPHO Bluetooth Smart Scale 
with its glass face and stainless-steel electrode pads. After 
opening the free RENPHO app, I step on the scale and watch 
as my weight automatically registers. The trending line graph 
tracks my progress.
If I wear shoes when I step on the scale, the app records 
my weight and Body Mass Index (BMI) only. However, I can 
also measure my body fat, water percentage, muscle mass, 
protein, and metabolic age when I stand straight with my bare 
dry feet uniformly touching the electrode pads. The captured 
data can be synced with Apple’s Health app. 
Greater Goods Bluetooth Blood Pressure Monitor 
($44.95)
The Greater Goods Bluetooth Blood Pressure Monitor, like 
the RENPHO scale, works seamlessly. I had never measured 
my own blood pressure before, but Greater Goods’ short 
manual and online video tutorials made setting up and using 
the monitor easy. I wrap the cuff on my upper arm, open the 
app, press the start button on the monitor, and watch the cuff 
compress and release. Then the monitor displays my systolic 
and diastolic blood pressure and pulse rate. The app records 
the results, shows views of my history in various ways, and 
passes the data to the Apple Health app. 
The portable monitor runs on AAA batteries or hooks up 
to an outlet. It comes with a storage case, quality cuff, and 
large backlit LCD display with oversized numbers. A hyper-
tension indicator bar and irregular heartbeat sensor alerts me 
of any issues. A portion of the cost is donated to the charity 
Love146, which works to end child trafﬁcking and cares for 
survivors.
Eocean Selﬁe Stick Tripod 
($21.99)
Bluetooth also enhances the use of my iPhone 7 Plus cam-
era. The cleverly designed Eocean Selﬁe Stick Tripod functions 
both as a selﬁe stick and tripod and can extend up to 26.7 
inches. Folded, the stick is 7.9 inches long and weighs 6.7 
ounces. When using it as a tripod, the aluminum alloy stick 
and non-slip foot pad keep it stable.
A soft silicone clamp interior protects the phone from 
scratching. The clamp rotates 360 degrees, which allows you 
to capture horizontal or vertical photos. The head and neck of 
the selﬁe stick also rotate, which means you can take pictures 
from various angles.
A removable remote is embedded in the stick. The remote 
makes it easy to take individual or group photos whether in 
selﬁe or tripod mode. After pairing the remote, pressing the 
button takes a picture. The remote recharges using the mi-
cro-USB port at the bottom of the stick.   
Next-Level Bluetooth Accessories 
B
Illustration by Mikaila Maidment, mikailamaidment.com
Hal, along with his wife Rita, founded iPhone Life’s original publishing company, Thad-
deus Computing, in 1985.  You can reach him at hal@thaddeus.com. Check out Hal’s 
new book at meditatingentrepreneur.com.



