
iPhone 6: For Seniors 2015
Copyright © 2014 Conceptual Kings.
All are rights reserved. 
This book or any portion thereof may not be reproduced or used in any manner
whatsoever without the express written permission of the publisher except for the use of
brief quotations in a book review.
Introduction
The iPhone 6 is one the latest releases of smartphones by Apple. It is the successor to the
iPhone 5 and has many new and improved features over its predecessor.
These phones are perfect for seniors as it comes standard with larger screens, faster data
management and many apps that can help them in their daily lives. Almost any activity in
their lives that they may need help with they can find an application in the Apple app store
to help them.
As an older person, they need devices that will help enhance their lives to make living
easier. Anything that can make their everyday activities easier to cope with is a great asset
to them.
In this book, we will explore some of the features of the iPhone 6 that can benefit seniors
in their regular activities.
1. Typing
Typing on the iPhone 6 is made simple with the virtual keyboard that is displayed
when text entry should be done. With large letters, it is convenient for the senior to
clearly identify the letters used for input and be able to correctly type the
information as needed. With features such as autocorrect, they will not make as
many mistakes as before when typing.
 
2.  Contacts
The iPhone 6 has an easy interface that will allow seniors to store all their contacts.
Anytime they need to get in touch with someone they can scroll through their
complete list or search based on the person’s name. The contact card will contain all
the relevant contact details they have stored so they can choose which method they
want to use to make contact.
 
3.  Continuity

The iPhone 6 has a feature called Handoff which facilitates the continuity to take
place. It gives seniors the ability to start something on one device and to finish it on
another. It is quite convenient for the seniors who have memory problems, as it will
help them remember what they were doing previously and complete it.  This feature
in itself will help senior citizens become more productive.
 
4.  Message History
The iPhone 6 has great storage ability which allows it to store almost every message
that has been received indefinitely. This helps the senior to keep a record of all
incoming and outgoing messages so they can go through them at their leisure. They
have the option to clean out after 30 days, but some seniors prefer to keep their
records and read them over in their spare time.
 
5.  Audio/Video Message
Some senior citizens hate to type text or email messages on the iPhone. However,
they have an option of recording an audio or video message to get their
communication across to their intended recipient. They will find recording easier
than typing a message so some seniors may find that easier.
 
6.  Email Signatures
Some seniors may enjoy using a personal message or inspirational thought at the
end of their email communication. They can use the iPhone 6 to create a
personalized email template that will go out with all their emails and help to inspire
and cheer up their recipients.
 
7.  Typing Errors
The iPhone 6 offers effective correction of typing errors when a mistake is made.
The phone can be rigorously shaken when the error is made and a prompt will be
shown to correct the error. You will be able to tap the blue undo text option which
will delete the previously typed word.
 
8.  Camera
The iPhone 6 comes with an amazing camera, so seniors can use the iPhone to
capture different moments to share with their friends and family. There is also a
video camera that can be used to capture video action which can be stored forever. It
can be used to capture memorable moments that will never be forgotten.
 

9.  Photo Albums
The photo app on the phone can be used to organize the photos that are stored in
separate albums. Seniors may have many photos and memories of their lives which
may include their activities, family pics, hobby pics, and so much more. Once the
pictures are organized, it will make it easier for them to find the photo they need.
 
10.                      Applications
Seniors will have access to millions of apps which they can choose from to
download from the app store. These apps span many categories therefore for any
interest or need they can find an app to help them achieve something. Apps are used
to accomplish things in a faster and more efficient way, so the seniors will definitely
appreciate it.
 
11.                      iCloud
Using an Apple device, there is the option of utilizing the iCloud services. This
allows the senior to store their documents, music, photos, and all their data to their
cloud account. This will allow them to easily access their information across all their
Apple devices and make updates. Configuration and setup is fairly easy, therefore
the senior will have no issue in getting it setup and running in no time.
 
12.                      Custom vibrations
The iPhone 6 can be customized to vibrate in special ways to match different
notifications. If it is ringing or receiving a message, the phone can be configured so
the senior knows exactly what is happening on the phone. The vibration can be
customized to motion in different ways or intensities so once the vibration is felt you
can differentiate what kind of alert is on the screen.
 
13.                      Custom Ringtones
The ringtones can also be customized to match messages or an actual person who is
trying to communicate with you. This is a great way for the senior to identify when
someone is trying to communicate with them. Once they have setup the identifying
tones, they will not necessarily have to look on the phone when it is ringing. They
can simply listen and be certain of what is happening on the phone.
 
14.                      Social Networks
There is the ability to log on to one of many available social networks. The networks
will allow the senior to connect with many people through various ways. This could

be used to connect them with friends, family, or past acquaintances. It may be
different for them, but eventually they will get used to the new approaches of
communication.
 
15.                      FaceTime
FaceTime is a great feature that will give seniors an option to have video
communication with other individuals who have Apple products. It is a clear and
crisp video option that allows connection at the touch of a finger. Contacting your
friends and family has never been easier, and it is very convenient for seniors to
operate.
 
16.                      Music
Even as a senior, they will still have music that they enjoy to hear. Whether it is
storing your audio on your phone or accessing music on the internet, they can find
all their music easily. Virtually any music file can be found by any artist. Therefore,
the senior will always be entertained with tons of music that they will not get
enough of.
 
17.                      Do Not Disturb
The iPhone 6 has the option of setting a Do Not Disturb feature which mutes or
silences communication when the user does not want to be interrupted. This is
perfect for seniors who have various times throughout the day when they do not
want to be disturbed, such as quite time or nap time.
 
18.                      Sharing Files
The ease of sharing files makes the iPhone 6 a great choice for senior citizens. They
can easily tap the file and the sharing options will be displayed to them. They can
choose which one they prefer, and the phone will guide them through the process of
sending the file.
 
19.                      Photo Sharing
The iPhone 6 has options that allow photos to be automatically uploaded when they
are captured. The automatic feature will help seniors as it prevents them from
having to do that themselves, and also it prevents them from mistakenly deleting the
pictures from the phone. This way, their photos will always be stored forever.
 
20.                      Zooming Features

The phone is designed to be flexible in the sense that the text on the screen can be
zoomed in to be able to see clearly what is on the screen. This is done by doing a
finger gesture which enlarges the words, so for seniors this will prevent them from
not being able to see what is on the screen.
 
21.                      Screen Capture
There is a screen capture option that can be used to capture exactly what is on the
screen. Sometimes the senior may want to share the exact screenshot on the screen
and this allows them to easily do so. This is especially helpful in situations where
they need assistance to do something.
 
22.                      Speech Commands
The phone has the ability to receive voice commands from the user. This is a great
feature that can be utilized by the seniors quite easily. It simply requires them to
speak into the phone and state what they want the phone to do. This can assist them
to complete some of the easier tasks on the phone.
 
23.                      Settings
The overall settings on the phone can be adjusted for the senior for the phone to
operate in their preferred way. This is one of the ways to customize the device to
ensure it works just how the senior intends for it.
 
24.                      Background Pictures
The background pictures of the phone can be easily changed to suit the preference of
the senior. They may want to have something on their phone that will bring them joy
and happiness by looking at it. Maybe it is a picture of their younger days or of their
grandkids, they can choose anything they want to display.
 
25.                      Notifications
The notifications are used to alert the senior to what is currently happening on the
phone. It will notify them of messages, updates or to any change that has happened
to the phone. The notifications can be managed from this area to ensure that they
have all been read.
 
26.                      Calendar
There is a calendar contained on the iPhone 6 which can help the senior efficiently
program their daily activities into the phone. This allows them to keep track of their

events, milestones and important dates. They will always be organized and never
lose a date again.
 
27.                      Reminders
This is not as complicated as the calendar but it is used to remind the seniors of
important activities. One such activity is the taking of the medication which they
may forget at times and the phone can be used to remind them.
 
28.                      Home Return
The iPhone 6 has a convenient home button that allows the user to return to the
home screen at any time when using the device. This is perfect for seniors when
they are doing something and may get into difficulty, they can easily start back from
the home screen and follow the steps once more.
 
29.                      Volume
For calls, video, and all audio output from the phone, the senior can use the volume
controls to increase or decrease the sound. The sound can be amplified to ensure that
seniors can hear even if they suffer from hearing impairment.
 
30.                      Auto-lock
The phone has an auto lock feature that locks the phone automatically when it is not
in use. This can help to protect the confidential data of the senior. The time can be
set as desired by them, but the default time to auto lock is one minute.
 
31.                      Sensitive Data
There are applications available that can store the important information such as
banking information, passwords, codes and various things that are confidential to
the senior. This may be even to help them to remember some of the things that
should be committed to memory. Once they are stored they are guaranteed it will be
protected by encryption.
 
32.                      Apple ID
This unique ID can be used by the seniors to interact with all of Apple by using one
number. It can also assist with purchasing to take the complication out of the
actions. The simpler something is, the easier it will be for the senior citizen to adapt.
The Apple ID allows them to sign in and access all their account settings in any
Apple device.

 
33.                      Purchases
Purchases can be made through the iPhone 6, which will always maintain the
purchase history. The purchases made can be reviewed at any time. This is a great
way for family members to keep track of the senior’s activities to ensure that they
are not wasting their resources.
 
34.                      iTunes
ITunes can be used to access various kinds of content that may prove useful to the
senior. There are books, pictures, music, educational material, videos and so much
more on iTunes. The user can pick and choose what they want to access through
iTunes which is a great way to keep them occupied.
 
35.                      Medical Apps
There are medical apps which can allow the senior to track and understand their
various medical issues. If they have conditions that need tracking, they can enter
their information as it changes and the app can help them to monitor their body
functions.
 
36.                      Medication Identifier
There are apps that can help the user to identify the different types of medication.
The features will include the identification of the tablets, the side effects, what the
tablets are good for and many other features.
 
37.                      Brain Enhancers
For a senior, one of the most important things is to keep the brain active. There are
apps that can help the senior to engage in activities that can stimulate their brain.
The activity of the brain is very important to keeping their vitality so the iPhone 6
can prove to be valuable to the senior.
 
38.                      Interests
A senior citizen will have various interests that will occupy their time. On the
iPhone 6 they can find apps or even access websites that surround that hobby. There
will be a wealth of information that can be accessed so they can keep themselves
entertained and even learn more about their selected hobby.
 

39.                      Weather apps
There are apps that can allow the senior to track the weather statistics in any location
they choose. This apps will keep them up to date with the current weather and
forecasts primarily of the area they are currently in. If desired, time zone
information can be included as well.
 
40.                      Touch Gestures
The phone can be configured to respond to the various gestures of the senior citizen.
It is customized to operate and respond exactly how they want. This makes
operating the phone easier for them as it will take less effort to get things done.
 
41.                      Keeping Fit
There are apps that can cover the physical fitness of the senior to keep them in line.
With features such as a pedometer and heart monitor they can track their progress to
ensure that they are keeping mobile and up to the required amount per day.
 
42.                      Small and Convenient
The iPhone 6 is not too big and is a convenient phone. It can be taken around
anywhere without taking up too much space and being inconvenient to the senior.
They are older and like to have things as convenient as possible without much hassle
and this will be perfect for them.
 
43.                      Finances
The iPhone 6 can download financial apps that can help the seniors manage their
money in their old age. The apps usually take the information and allow them to
organize and see their position in an easy to understand way that helps them to
figure things out.
 
44.                      On demand content
There are various on demand content providers that can allow the senior to access
various types of content such as news, sports, music, and movies. This gives them
control over their programming to watch what they want, when they want.
 
45.                      Central Hub of Information
The iPhone 6 can provide a central area that will be updated with all the information
that the senior will choose to see. This makes it easier for them to access their

updates without having to go to many different areas.
 
46.                      Locating devices
Apple devices provide a service to locate devices once they are connected to a
network. This may be useful to seniors who have had their device stolen or may
have simply lost their phone. To find it, they just have to log into their account and
find where it last connected.
 
47.                      Synching
The iPhone 6 allows the user to have all their Apple devices synchronised so all
their data will be consistent on all their devices. This will allow them to have
everything updated so they just have to enter the data on one device and it will be
updated all on the devices.
 
48.                      Blogging
The iPhone 6 has capabilities that allow the senior to create, manage, and update
their blogs. A blog can be a great way for the senior to interact with the online
community based on topics that interest them. Once they have something to
contribute it is a great way to keep them mentally stimulated.
 
49.                      Support
For an advanced phone like the iPhone 6, the senior will be able to access excellent
customer support through many channels. There is online support that can help you
directly with issues and there is an online knowledgebase with previously known
issues where information can be sought. There will also be blogs and discussion
sites that can help them as well.
 
50.                      Reading Material
With an iPhone 6, a senior citizen will never be bored. They can access many
different reading material that will keep them occupied for hours. They will never be
out of content to access as these apps are updated many times each day. This again is
another way in which the senior’s brain will stay active and stimulated with activity.

