

iPhone: The Missing Manual
The book that should have been in the box
ELEVENTH EDITION
David Pogue

iPhone: The Missing Manual, Eleventh Edition BY DAVID POGUE
Copyright © 2018 David Pogue. All rights reserved.
Printed in Canada.
Published by O’Reilly Media, Inc., 1005 Gravenstein Highway North,
Sebastopol, CA 95472.
O’Reilly books may be purchased for educational, business, or sales promotional
use. Online editions are also available for most titles (safari.oreilly.com). For
more information, contact our corporate/institutional sales department:
800.998.9938 or corporate@oreilly.com.
Copy Editor: Julie Van Keuren
Indexers: David Pogue, Julie Van Keuren Cover Designers: Monica Kamsvaag
and Phil Simpson Interior Designer: Phil Simpson (based on a design by Ron
Bilodeau) Print History:
January 2018. First Printing.
The O’Reilly logo is a registered trademark of O’Reilly Media, Inc. iPhone: The
Missing Manual and related trade dress are trademarks of O’Reilly Media, Inc.
Many of the designations used by manufacturers and sellers to distinguish their
products are claimed as trademarks. Where those designations appear in this
book, and O’Reilly Media, Inc., was aware of a trademark claim, the
designations have been printed in caps or initial caps. Adobe Photoshop™ is a
registered trademark of Adobe Systems, Inc., in the United States and other
countries. O’Reilly Media, Inc., is independent of Adobe Systems, Inc.
Photos of the iPhone courtesy of Apple, Inc.
While every precaution has been taken in the preparation of this book, the
publisher and author assume no responsibility for errors or omissions, or for
damages resulting from the use of the information contained herein.
ISBN: 978-1-491-99950-9
[TI] [1/18]

The Missing Credits
David Pogue (author, illustrator) is the tech columnist for Yahoo Finance
(yahoofinance.com), the world’s biggest business publication. He was groomed
for that job by 13 years of writing the weekly tech column for The New York
Times. He’s also a monthly columnist for Scientific American, a four-time
Emmy-winning correspondent for CBS News Sunday Morning, the host of 20
NOVA specials on PBS, and the creator of the Missing Manual series.
David has written or cowritten more than 100 books, including dozens in the
Missing Manual series, six in the For Dummies line (including Macs, Magic,
Opera, and Classical Music), two novels (one for middle-schoolers called Abby
Carnelia’s One and Only Magical Power), The World According to Twitter, and
three books of essential tips and shortcuts: Pogue’s Basics: Tech, Pogue’s Basics:
Life, and Pogue’s Basics: Money.

In his other life, David is a former Broadway show conductor, a magician, and a
funny public speaker. He lives in Connecticut with his wife, Nicki, and three
awesome children.
Links to his columns and videos await at www.davidpogue.com. He welcomes
feedback about his books by email at david@pogueman.com, and you can sign
up to get his columns by email at authory.com/davidpogue.
Julie Van Keuren (editor, indexer, layout) spent 14 years in print journalism
before deciding to upend her life, move to Montana, and live the freelancing
dream. She now works for a variety of terrific clients who understand that skilled
editing, writing, book layout, and indexing don’t have to come from inside a
cubicle. She and her husband, sci-fi writer M.H. Van Keuren, have two teenage
sons. Email: little_media@yahoo.com.
Rich Koster (technical reviewer) bought his first iPhone on the first evening it
was available. He began corresponding with David Pogue, sharing tips, tricks,
and observations; eventually, David asked him to be the beta reader for the first
edition of iPhone: The Missing Manual—and hired him as the tech editor of
subsequent editions. For this edition of the book, all the work involved was
accomplished on the iPhone X. Rich is a husband, father, graphic artist, writer,
and Disney fan (@DisneyEcho on Twitter).
Phil Simpson (book design) runs his graphic design business from Southbury,
Connecticut. His work includes corporate branding, publication design,
communications support, and advertising. He lives with his wife and several
great felines. Email: phil.simpson@pmsgraphics.com.
Acknowledgments
The Missing Manual series is a joint venture between the dream team introduced
on these pages and O’Reilly Media. I’m grateful to all of them, especially to the
core of the iPhone Missing Manual team.
The work done on previous editions lives on in this one; for that, I’m grateful to
Jude Biersdorfer, Matt Gibstein, Teresa Brewer, Brian Jepson, Apple’s Trudy
Muller, Philip Michaels, O’Reilly’s Nan Barber, and my incredible assistant Jan
Carpenter, who keeps me from falling apart like wet Kleenex. Thanks to David

Rogelberg and Tim O’Reilly for believing in the idea; to Apple’s Jacqueline Roy
for chasing down dozens of technical answers; to Kellee Katagi for her sharp-
eyed proofreading; to Judy Le for assisting with cross-references and illustrating
the iPhone’s many icons; and above all, to Nicki, Kell, Tia, and Jeffrey. They
make these books—and everything else—possible.
—David Pogue
Also by David Pogue
macOS High Sierra: The Missing Manual
Windows 10: The Missing Manual
David Pogue’s Digital Photography: The Missing Manual
The World According to Twitter
Pogue’s Basics: Tech
Pogue’s Basics: Life
Pogue’s Basics: Money

Part I. PART ONE The iPhone as
Phone
Chapter 1 The Guided Tour
Chapter 2 The Lock Screen & Notifications
Chapter 3 Typing, Editing & Searching
Chapter 4 Phone Calls & FaceTime
Chapter 5 Siri Voice Command
Chapter 6 Texting & Messages
Chapter 7 Large Type, Kid Mode & Accessibility

Chapter 1. Introduction
How do you make the point that the iPhone has changed the world? The easy
answer is “use statistics”—1 billion sold, 2.2 million apps on the App Store, 200
billion downloads…. Trouble is, those statistics get stale almost before you’ve
finished typing them.
Maybe it’s better to talk about the aftermath. How the invention of the iPhone
changed society, business, and culture forever. With the iPhone (and Google’s
imitator, Android), we became, for the first time, a society of people who are
online continuously, wherever we go. Our communications blossomed from text
messages to video calls, WhatsApp, FaceTime, and Skype. Billion-dollar
businesses like Uber, Snapchat, and Instagram sprang into existence. Distracted
driving, distracted walking, distracted eating, distracted dating, and even
distracted sex all became “things.”
Apple introduces a new iPhone model every fall. In September 2017, for
example, it introduced the 11th and 12th iPhone models, the iPhone 8, iPhone 8
Plus, and—to celebrate the iPhone’s 10th birthday—the state-of-the-art, $1,000
iPhone X.
There’s also a new, free version of the iPhone’s software, called iOS 11.
You can run iOS 11 on older iPhone models without having to buy a new phone.
This book covers all the phones that can run iOS 11, from the iPhone 5s through
the iPhone X.
About the iPhone
So what is the iPhone? Really, the better question is what isn’t the iPhone?
It’s a cellphone, obviously. But it’s also a full-blown multimedia player,
complete with a dazzling screen for watching videos. And it’s a sensational
pocket Internet viewer. It shows fully formatted email (with attachments, thank
you) and displays entire web pages with fonts and design intact. It’s tricked out
with a tilt sensor, a proximity sensor, a light sensor, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, GPS, a

gyroscope, a barometer, and that amazing multitouch screen.
The iPhone is also the most used camera in the world. Furthermore, it’s a

calendar, address book, calculator, alarm clock, stopwatch, stock tracker, traffic
reporter, and weather forecaster. It even stands in for a flashlight and, with the
screen off, a pocket mirror.
TIP
If you want a really good pocket mirror, you can also use the front camera. It’s a brighter view (and you
don’t have to actually take a selfie).
And don’t forget the App Store. Thanks to the 2.2 million add-on programs that
await there, the iPhone can also be a medical reference, a musical keyboard, a
time tracker, a remote control, a sleep monitor, a tip calculator, an ebook reader,
and more. Plus, the App Store is a portal to thousands of games, with smooth 3D
graphics and tilt control.
All of this sends the iPhone’s utility and power through the roof. Calling it a
phone is practically an insult. (Apple probably should have called it an “iPod,”
but that name was taken.)
About This Book
You don’t get a printed manual when you buy an iPhone. Online, you can find an
electronic PDF manual, but it’s largely free of details, hacks, workarounds,
tutorials, humor, and any acknowledgment of the iPhone’s flaws. You can’t
easily mark your place, underline, or read it in the bathroom.
The purpose of this book, then, is to serve as the manual that should have
accompanied the iPhone. (If you have an iPhone 5 or an earlier model, then you
really need one of this book’s earlier editions. And if you do have an iPhone 5s
or later model, this book assumes that you’ve installed iOS 11.2 or later; see
Appendix A.)
Writing a book about the iPhone is a study in exasperation, because the darned
thing is a moving target. Apple updates the iPhone’s software fairly often, piping
in new features, bug fixes, speed-ups, and so on.

About the Outline
iPhone: The Missing Manual is divided into five parts, each containing several
chapters:
Part One, The iPhone as Phone, covers everything related to phone
calls: dialing, answering, voice control, voicemail, conference calling,
text messaging, iMessages, MMS, and the Contacts (address book)
program. It’s also where you can read about FaceTime, the iPhone’s
video-calling feature; Siri, the voice-operated “virtual assistant”; and
the surprisingly rich array of features for people with disabilities—some
of which are useful even for people without them.
Part Two, Pix, Flix & Apps, is dedicated to the iPhone’s built-in
software, with a special emphasis on its multimedia abilities: playing
music, podcasts, movies, and TV shows; taking and displaying photos;
capturing photos and videos; using the Maps app; reading ebooks; and
so on. These chapters also cover some of the standard techniques that
most apps share: installing, organizing, and quitting them; switching
among them; and sharing material from within them.
Part Three, The iPhone Online, is a detailed exploration of the
iPhone’s ability to get you onto the Internet, either over a Wi-Fi hotspot
connection or via the cellular network. It’s all here: email, web
browsing, and Personal Hotspot (letting your phone serve as a sort of
Internet antenna for your laptop).
Part Four, Connections, describes the world beyond the iPhone itself—
like the copy of iTunes on your Mac or PC that can fill up the iPhone
with music, videos, and photos; and syncing the calendar, address book,
and mail settings. These chapters also cover Apple’s iCloud service,
Continuity (the wireless integration of iPhones and Macs), and the
Settings app.
Part Five, Appendixes, contains two reference chapters. Appendix A
walks you through the setup process; Appendix B is a master
compendium of troubleshooting, maintenance, and battery information.

About → These → Arrows
Throughout this book, and throughout the Missing Manual series, you’ll find
sentences like this one: Tap Settings → General → Keyboard. That’s
shorthand for a much longer instruction that directs you to open three nested
screens in sequence, like this: “Tap the Settings icon. On the next screen, tap
General. On the screen after that, tap Keyboard.” (In this book, tappable things
on the screen are printed in orange to make them stand out.)
About MissingManuals.com
Missing Manuals are witty, well-written guides to computer products that don’t
come with printed manuals (which is just about all of them). Each book features
a handcrafted index; cross-references to specific page numbers; and an ironclad
promise never to put an apostrophe in the possessive pronoun its.
To get the most out of this book, visit www.missingmanuals.com. Click the
Missing CDs link, and then click this book’s title to reveal a neat, organized list
of the shareware, freeware, and bonus articles mentioned in this book.
The website also offers corrections and updates to the book; to see them, click
the book’s title, and then click View/Submit Errata. In fact, please submit
corrections yourself! Each time we print more copies of this book, we’ll make
any confirmed corrections you’ve suggested. We’ll also note such changes on
the website, so you can mark important corrections into your own copy of the
book, if you like. And we’ll keep the book current as Apple releases more
iPhone updates.
iPhone 8 and 8 Plus: What’s New
Apple’s usual routine is to introduce a new iPhone shape every other year
(iPhone 3G, iPhone 4, iPhone 5, iPhone 6)—and then release a follow-up,
upgraded “s” model in alternate years (iPhone 3GS, iPhone 4s, iPhone 5s,
iPhone 6s). The 2017 models, though, broke the pattern. There was an iPhone 7,
but no iPhone 7s. Instead, Apple named its new phone the iPhone 8.
It looks exactly like the 7 but has a few enhancements:

Magnetic “wireless” charging. The back of the iPhone 8 and 8 Plus is
made of glass, but not for cosmetic reasons. Apple uses glass so that it
can offer magnetic inductive charging.
Apple and Samsung call it wireless charging, but what they actually
mean is “laying your phone on a special charging pad.” True, you’re no
longer plugging in a cord to the phone, but the pad itself still has to be
plugged into a power outlet.
Better guts. What else is new? A faster processor, of course. Opening
apps is faster. Pulling up web pages is faster. Opening attachments is
faster.
True Tone. The screen now adapts to the color of the ambient light,
adjusting its own white balance as necessary to make colors look right.
Better cameras. The 12-megapixel camera has what Apple calls a
“larger, faster sensor; a new color filter; deeper pixels.”
On the larger iPhone 8 Plus, there’s some fancy stuff going on with its
dual-lens setup. When in Portrait mode (which uses the camera’s dual
lenses to create a softly blurred background), the quality of the
blurriness is improved. And then, after taking a Portrait shot, you can
tap Edit and then fiddle with the lighting, experimenting with different
studio-light setups. The feature is in beta, so not quite finished, but
already, the results can be pretty amazing. One of them, Stage Light,
even cuts out the background entirely (see “Studio Lighting”).
Just between us, that’s not a lot of upgrades. Apple saved most of its innovation
juice for a radically rethought, $1,000, 10th-anniversary phone: the iPhone X
(you pronounce it “ten”).
iPhone X: What’s New
Everybody talks about the iPhone X’s face-recognition feature, but the best thing
about the iPhone X is its size.
It’s a standard-sized phone, only a hair bigger than an iPhone 7 or 8, and
therefore easy to wrap your fingers around without growing extra knuckles. Yet

the X has the screen size of the iPhone Plus models. By lopping off all the
margins that usually surround an iPhone’s screen, Apple has found a much
sweeter spot on the screen/body trade-off spectrum. It’s all screen, much like
recent Samsung smartphones.
And what a screen it is. It’s Apple’s first OLED screen, meaning that it’s got
much darker darks and brighter brights than what’s come before.
As a bonus, Apple maintains that the iPhone X gets two hours more life per
battery charge than the iPhone 7 or 8.


Facial Recognition
OK, so Apple made this phone all screen. In that case, where’s the home button?
It’s gone. On the iPhone X, there is no home button.
Wait, what? On the iPhone, we use it to open the Home screen, trigger Siri,
switch apps, pay with Apple Pay, take screenshots, turn on the screen magnifier,
force-quit an app, force-restart the whole phone when it gets locked up, and so
on. Without a home button, what happens to all of that?
You have to learn new techniques. Apple has come up with replacement gestures
for all of the above.
To return to the Home screen, you swipe up from the bottom of the screen. This
can be a tiny swipe, even a quarter of an inch upward; it quickly becomes quick
and instinctive. (Until, that is, you try to do it on someone’s iPad and feel like an
idiot.)
To open the app switcher, you make the same swipe up, but then stop with your
finger in the center. The app “cards” now appear.
You trigger Siri using the button on the right side. OK, fine. But what about the
fingerprint reader?
It’s gone, too. Instead, Apple says it’s come up with something better: Face ID.
When you get your phone, you train it to recognize your face in Settings. Now
the iPhone knows the exact contours of your face.
After that, just looking at the phone unlocks it—so fast that you may not even
realize what’s happened. There are only two clues that the phone is unlocked: a
tiny padlock icon opens, and any notification banners (“Message from: Robin”)
expand to reveal their potentially embarrassing contents.
Unlocking the phone doesn’t take you all the way to the Home screen, which
would be cool. You still have to do a little up-swipe after unlocking.
In any case, you can’t fool Face ID with a photo, a mask, or even a 3D model of
your head. It’s also not thrown off by a wig, fake mustache, hats, glasses,
scarves, or makeup. Since it uses infrared light, Face ID works even in the dark.

Face ID continues to fine-tune its mathematical model of your face every time
you use it, so things like hair growth (and wrinkle growth) won’t fool it. If you
do do something radical (like shaving off your beard), you just retrain it.
You’ll use Face ID wherever you used to use your fingerprint: triggering Apple
Pay, for example, or logging into apps. Any app that was ever unlocked by your
fingerprint automatically works with Face ID, without needing to be rewritten.
TrueDepth Camera
Face ID relies on a mass of sensors Apple calls TrueDepth. It involves an
infrared lamp, a tiny infrared projector, and a camera that read the distortion of
their spacing and shape to find the contours of your face.
That depth camera does more than just recognize your face. Because it can tell
the difference between the foreground and the background, the iPhone X can
take front-facing Portrait-mode photos, which means beautifully blurry
backgrounds.
It can also create what Apple calls Animoji—a choice of 12 animated cartoon
faces whose expressions follow and mimic your expressions in real time, by
tracking the motion of 50 different muscles in your face. Happy, sad, wink,
frown, laugh, mouth open, eyebrows up, whatever—your little cartoon-animal
avatar does the same. You can record yourself saying something and then send
the resulting animation via the Messages app. Suddenly, you’re Warner Bros.
Software companies can write apps that exploit the depth camera, too.
Snapchat’s fun superimposed-face filters (masks, glasses, and so on) now use
real-time lighting information for realistic reflections and shadows. And Apple
has built a new Scenes feature into its free Clips video-recording app that
replaces your background, green-screen style, in real time. You can shoot
yourself with a new background of your choosing, like an artsy linescape, the
bridge of the Millennium Falcon, and so on.
The Rest of the Package
Like the iPhone 8, the iPhone X is waterproof—it can tolerate 30 minutes of
being 3 feet underwater. The glass front and back are, Apple says, 50 percent
stronger. The speakers are louder. You can charge “wirelessly” on a pad, just as

on the iPhone 8.
And the iPhone X runs iOS 11, of course—with a few special tweaks just for
Xers. For example, the flashlight on/off switch is now right there on the Lock
screen, not even hiding in the Control Center anymore. And you can now move
among open apps just by dragging your finger along the bottom edge of the
screen, without even opening the app switcher first. It’s pretty great.
What’s New in iOS 11
The design for iOS 11 doesn’t look much different from iOS 10 before it (or iOS
9, or iOS 8, or iOS 7); the improvements are focused on features and flexibility.
You’d have to write an entire book to document everything that’s new or
changed in iOS 11; it’s a huge upgrade. But here’s a quick rundown.
The New Control Center
The Control Center has blossomed into the magnificence of adulthood. Now you
decide which controls should appear on it. And you no longer have to hunt
among multiple pages to find the one you want; the Control Center is once again
a single screen. If you’re a true Control freak, it even scrolls.
The Control Center can include new buttons it’s never had before, like these:
Notes. This is a great addition. The idea is to give you immediate access
to notes, so you can jump in, no matter what you were doing, to write
down something quickly: a phone number someone’s giving you,
dosage instructions your doctor’s rattling off, or a brainstorm you’ve
just had for a million-dollar product.
Screen Recording. Here’s a Control Center button for a feature you
can’t trigger in any other way (there’s no app, no Settings page). The
idea, of course, is to let you record videos of what’s happening on the
iPhone screen—with narration, if you like. It’s fantastic as a teaching
tool, if you want to capture some anomaly to send to tech support, or to
demo a new app you wrote. And it’s a first in the history of phones! The
finished video winds up in your Photos app with all your other videos.

Apple TV Remote. In case you’ve lost the physical one.
Do Not Disturb While Driving. This important new iOS feature
prevents notifications, calls, or texts from lighting up your phone or
making it ring whenever you’re behind the wheel and in motion.
Usually, you’ll want it to turn on automatically when you’re driving;
this button is primarily useful for turning DNDWD off—when you’re in
the passenger seat.
Voice Memos. The Voice Memos app is handy for recording speeches,
interviews, song ideas, and so on. Tap this button to open the Voice
Memos app, where another tap begins the recording. Better yet, a hard-
press on this Control Center button produces a menu that lists your three
most recent recordings (for instant playback)—and a New Recording
button.
Storage Help
Another category of new features is designed to assist with the chronic problem
of running out of room on the iPhone:
Camera formats. iOS 11 invites you to adopt new file formats for
photos (HEIF) and videos (HEVC, or H265), which look the same as
they did before but consume only half the space. (When you export
them to someone else, they convert to standard formats.)
Storage optimization. As your phone begins to run out of space, your
oldest files and least-used apps can be quietly and automatically stored
online, leaving Download icons in their places on your phone, so that
you can retrieve them if you ever need them.
Siri updates. Apple’s done some work on its voice assistant, too. There
are new male and female voices that sound more like actual people.
Siri can now translate phrases from English into Chinese, French,
German, Italian, or Spanish. For example, you can say, “How do you
say, ‘Where’s the bathroom?’ in French?” It works surprisingly well—
she nails the accents. Siri also does better at understanding follow-up
questions. (“Who directed Disney’s Zootopia? Who starred in it?”)

A Lot of Misc.
The rest of iOS 11 falls into the category called “Everything else.” Little nips
and tucks like these:
A file manager. A new app called Files lets you work with (and search)
files and folders, just as you do on the Mac or PC. You can tag them,
search them, sort them, and view them as a list or as icons. The Files
app shows the contents of your iCloud Drive, as well as your Box and
Dropbox files (!!). You can select files (but, alas, not folders) to share
with other people.
Redesigned apps drawer in Messages. All the stuff Apple added to
Messages last year (stickers, apps, live drawing) cluttered up the design.
The new look is cleaner, with only two icons eating up your text-typing
space instead of three.
Person-to-person payments. Now, you can send payments directly to
your friends—your share of the pizza bill, for example—right from
within the Messages app, much as people do with Venmo, PayPal, and
their ilk. (Of course, this works only if your friends have iPhones, too.)
When money comes to you, it accrues to a new, virtual Apple Pay Cash
Card; from there you can send it to your bank, buy things with it, or
send it on to other people.
App Store. The App Store has gotten a big redesign. One chief fix is
breaking out Games into its own tab, so that game and non-game
bestseller lists are kept separate.
One-handed typing. With a tap on the little globe key, you can opt for
a narrower keyboard huddled against one side, for easier one-handed
typing when you’re carrying a cup of coffee.
Improvements to Photos. The Photos app offers smarter auto-
slideshows (called Memories). Among other improvements, they now
work even when you’re holding the phone upright.
Improvements to Live Photos. Live Photos are weird, three-second
video clips, which Apple introduced in iOS 9. In iOS 11, you can

shorten one, mute its audio, or extract a single frame from its clip to use
as a still photo. The phone can also suggest a “boomerang” effect
(bounces the motion back and forth) or a loop (repeats it over and over).
And it has a new Slow Shutter filter, which (for example) blurs a
babbling brook or stars moving across the sky, as though the photo was
taken with a long exposure.
Swipe the Lock screen back down. You used to see your notifications
on two slightly different screens. There was your Lock screen, and there
was the Notifications screen (swipe down from the top of the screen).
Now it’s all the same screen. Swiping down from the top brings back
the identical list of missed notifications—and even the wallpaper and
time—that you’d see on your Lock screen. Makes a ton of sense.
Smarter typing suggestions. When you’re typing, the auto-suggestions
above the keyboard now offer movie names, song names, or place
names that you’ve recently viewed in other apps. Auto-suggestions in
Siri, too, include terms you’ve recently read. And if you book a flight or
buy a ticket online, iOS offers to add it to your calendar.
AirPlay 2. If you buy certain speakers from Bose, Marantz, and a few
other manufacturers (unfortunately not Sonos), you can use your phone
to control multiroom audio. You can start the same song playing
everywhere, or play different songs in different rooms.
Lane guidance. When you’re driving, Maps now lets you know which
lane to be in for your next turn, just as Google Maps does.
Indoor Maps. The Maps app can now show you floor plans for a few
malls and 30 airports.
Messages in iCloud. Your entire text-message history can now be auto-
synced to all your new Apple devices. (In the old days, when you
bought a new iPhone and opened Messages, it was empty.) This feature
also means that huge, multigigabyte hunk of Messages won’t have to sit
on your phone, eating up space. (This feature isn’t part of iOS 11.2; it’s
coming in an update in early 2018, Apple says.)
There are also dozens of improvements to the features for overseas iPhones

(China, Russia, India, for example). And there are many, many enhancements to
features for the disabled (like spoken captions for videos and pictures).
What It All Means
Let’s be honest: Apple is finding it harder to say “no” to new features these days.
iOS has become a very dense operating system, with more features than you
could master in years.
Then again, the public may not care about simplicity the way it once did. People
who got their first smartphones as teenagers grew up along with iOS and
Android—and evolved along with them—so the sheer complexity doesn’t bother
them much. It’s usually only their parents who complain.
But never mind. iOS 11 is better, smarter, faster, clearer, and more refined than
what came before. It takes hundreds of steps forward, and only a couple of tiny
steps back.
That’s a lot of tweaks, polishing, and finesse—and a lot to learn. Fortunately,
650 pages of instructions now await you.

Chapter 2. 1 The Guided Tour
You can’t believe how much is hidden inside this sleek, thin slab. Microphone,
speaker, cameras, battery. Processor, memory, power processing. Sensors for
brightness, tilt, and proximity. Twenty wireless radio antennas. A gyroscope,
accelerometer, and barometer. On the iPhone X, the face-recognition system
includes an infrared lamp, infrared camera, and a tiny projector.
For the rest of this book, and for the rest of your life with the iPhone, you’ll be
expected to know what’s meant by, for example, “the side button” and “the Lock
screen.” A guided tour, therefore, is in order.
Side Button (On/Off)
You could argue that knowing how to turn on your phone might be a useful skill.

For that, you use what Apple calls the side button. (It used to be called the “sleep
switch,” but it now has more responsibilities.) On the iPhone 6 and later, it’s on
the right edge; on the 5s and SE, it’s on the top. (That’s right—on those phones,
the side button is on the top. Keep up.)
The side button has several functions:
Sleep/wake. Tapping it once puts the iPhone into Sleep mode, ready for
incoming calls but consuming very little power. Tapping it again turns
on the screen so it’s ready for action.
On/off. The same switch can also turn the iPhone off completely so it
consumes no power at all; incoming calls get dumped into voicemail.
You might turn the iPhone off whenever you’re not going to use it for a
few days.

To turn the iPhone off, hold down the side button for three seconds. The
screen changes to say slide to power off.
Confirm your decision by placing a fingertip on the 
 and sliding to
the right. The device shuts off completely.
iPHONE X
Hold down the side button and the volume-up button that’s across from it. (Apple had to
redefine this button press, since holding the side button by itself triggers Siri.)
If you change your mind about turning the iPhone off, then tap the
Cancel button or do nothing; after a moment, the iPhone backs out of
the slide to power off screen automatically.
To turn the iPhone back on, press the side button again for one second.
The Apple logo appears as the phone boots up.
Answer call/Dump to voicemail. When a call comes in, you can tap
the side button once to silence the ringing or vibrating. After four rings,
the call goes to voicemail.
You can also tap it twice to dump the call to voicemail immediately. (Of
course, because they didn’t hear four rings, iPhone veterans will know
you’ve blown them off. Bruised egos may result. Welcome to the world

of iPhone etiquette.)
In combination with other buttons, the side button is also involved in turning off
fingerprint or face recognition (“Face ID (iPhone X)”) and restarting a frozen,
locked-up phone (???).
iPhone X Functions
The iPhone X has no home button, so its button assignments have gotten
rejiggered a bit. OK, rejiggered a lot. For example, here are some of the side
button’s duties on the iPhone X:
Talk to Siri by holding in the side button (see “How to Use Siri”).
Shut down the phone by holding in the side button and the volume-up
button together.
Take a screenshot by briefly pressing the side button and the volume-
up button together (“Capturing the Screen”).
Pay with Apple Pay by double-clicking the side button (“Apple Pay”).
Open the Magnifier or another accessibility feature by triple-clicking
the side button (???).
Sleep Mode
When you don’t touch the screen for one minute (or another interval you
choose), or when you press the side button, the phone goes to sleep. The screen
is dark and doesn’t respond to touch.
If you’re on a call, the call continues; if music is playing, it keeps going; if
you’re recording audio, the recording proceeds. But when the phone is asleep,
you don’t have to worry about accidental button pushes. You wouldn’t want to
discover that your iPhone has been sending texts or taking photos from the
depths of your pocket or purse. Nor would you want it to dial a random number
from your back pocket, a phenomenon that’s earned the unfortunate name butt
dialing.

The Lock Screen
In iOS 11, the iPhone has a state of being that’s somewhere between Sleep and
on. It’s the Lock screen. You can actually get a lot done here, without ever
unlocking the phone and advancing to its Home screens.
You can wake the phone by pressing the home button or the side button. Or you
can just lift the phone to a vertical position.
iPHONE X
You can also wake the phone by tapping anywhere on the screen, if Tap to Wake is turned on in
Settings → Accessibility → Tap to Wake.
The screen lights up, and you’re looking at the Lock screen. Here—even before
you’ve entered your password or used fingerprint or face recognition—you can
check the time, read your missed messages, consult your calendar, take a photo,
and more.
NOTE
You can turn off the “wake when I lift you” feature. It’s in Settings → Display & Brightness; turn off
Raise to Wake. Now you have to press the side or home buttons to wake the phone, as before.
This Lock screen is a complex, rich, busy universe; see Chapter 2.
Now then: If you want to proceed to the Home screen—to finish turning on the
phone—then click the home button at this point.
iPHONE X
Swipe up from the bottom of the screen. It can be a very short, light, quick swipe.
The Auto–Home Screen Option
iOS 11 offers a buried but powerful option: Rest Finger to Open. (It’s in
Settings → General → Accessibility → Home Button.) When you turn this on,

the second click—the one to get past the Lock screen—is no longer necessary.
If your phone is asleep, then just lifting it (with your finger touching the home
button) wakes it and unlocks it; you never even see the Lock screen. Or, if the
phone is asleep, you can click the home button and just leave your finger on it.
In each case, you save at least one home-button press.
So what if you do want to visit the Lock screen? Just raise the phone, or click the
side button, without touching the home button.
iPHONE X
Unfortunately, there’s no equivalent option on the iPhone X. Once you’ve unlocked the phone (with your
face, for example), you must do a quick swipe up from the bottom to proceed to the Home screen.
Home Button
Here it is: the single button on the front of every iPhone ever made (until the
iPhone X). Push it to summon the Home screen, your gateway to everything the
iPhone can do.
The home button is a wonderful thing. It means you can never get lost. No

matter how deeply you burrow into the iPhone software, no matter how far off-
track you find yourself, one push of the home button takes you back to the
beginning. (On the iPhone 7 and 8, this “button” doesn’t actually move, but it
feels like it does; see ???.)
iPHONE X
A swipe up from the bottom the of screen—it can be short and quick—performs the home-button
function. (A black or white bar, technically called the home indicator, appears there to remind you.)
Of course, the home button is also a fingerprint scanner.
But Apple has saddled the home button with tons of other functions, too. In
iPhone Land, you can press the home button one, two, or three times for
different features—or even hold it down or touch it lightly for others. Here’s the
rundown—with plenty of parentheticals to address the new way of doing things
on the iPhone X.
Quick Press: Wake Up
Pressing the home button once wakes the phone if it’s asleep. That’s sometimes
easier than finding the side button. It opens the Lock screen, where you can
check notifications or the time, hop into the camera, check your calendar, and
more. See Chapter 2.
iPHONE X
Press the side button to wake the phone, or just tap the screen. (That’s an option you can turn off in
Settings → General → Accessibility → Tap to Wake.)
Momentary Touch: Unlock
Whenever you’re looking at the Enter Passcode screen, just resting your finger
on the home button is enough to unlock the phone. (Teaching the iPhone to
recognize your fingerprint is described in “Fingerprint Security (Touch ID)”.)
You proceed to the Home screen. That convenience is brought to you by the

Touch ID fingerprint reader that’s built into the home button.
iPHONE X
Look at the screen, so that Face ID unlocks it instead (“Face ID (iPhone X)”).
Long Press: Siri
If you hold down the home button for about three seconds, you wake up Siri,
your virtual voice-controlled assistant. Details are in Chapter 5.
iPHONE X
You summon Siri by holding in the side button.
Two Quick Presses: App Switcher
If, once the phone is awake, you press the home button twice quickly, the current
image fades away—to reveal the app-switcher screen, the key to the iPhone’s
multitasking feature (facing page).
iPHONE X
Swipe up the screen from the bottom—but pause when your finger has traveled at least an inch up the
screen. The multitasking “cards” appear after about a second.
What you see here are currently open screens of the apps you’ve used most
recently (older ones are to the left). Swipe horizontally to bring more apps into
view; the Home screen is always at the far right.
With a single tap on a screen’s “card,” you jump right back into an app you had
open. See “The App Switcher” for more on the app switcher; for now, just
remember that it gives you a way to jump directly to another app, without a
layover at the Home screen first.


Two Touches: Reachability
Starting with the iPhone 6, the standard iPhone got bigger than previous models
—and the Plus models are even biggerer. Their screens are so big, in fact, that
your dinky human thumb may be too short to reach the top portion of the screen
(if you’re gripping the phone near the bottom).
For that reason, Apple has built a feature called Reachability into the iPhone 6
and later models.
When you tap the home button twice (don’t click it—just touch it), the entire
screen image slides halfway down the glass, so that you can reach the upper
parts of it with your thumb!
iPHONE X
Tug downward at the bottom edge of the screen—for example, on the home indicator bar. (This works
only if you’ve turned on Reachability in Settings → General → Accessibility.)
As soon as you touch anything on the screen—a link, a button, an empty area,
anything—the screen snaps back to its usual, full-height position.
TIP
Here’s a related note: On larger iPhones, the Home screen turns 90 degrees when you rotate it. The Dock
jumps to the right edge, vertically. Try it!

Three Presses: Magnifier, VoiceOver, Zoom…
In Settings → General → Accessibility, you can set up a triple-press of the
home button to turn one of several accessibility features on or off.
iPHONE X
Triple-press the side button instead.
There’s the Magnifier (turns the iPhone into a giant electronic illuminated
magnifying glass); VoiceOver (the phone speaks whatever you touch), Invert
Colors (now in Classic and Smart varieties), Color Filters (screen modes to
assist people with color-blindness), Reduce White Point (which makes all colors
less intense), Zoom (magnifies the screen), Switch Control (accommodates

external gadgets like sip-and-puff straws), and AssistiveTouch (help for people
who have trouble with physical switches).
These features are all described in Chapter 7.
Silencer Switch, Volume Keys
Praise be to the gods of technology—this phone has a silencer switch! This tiny
flipper, on the left edge near the top, means that no ringer or alert sound will
humiliate you in a meeting, at a movie, or in church. To turn off the ringer, push
the flipper toward the back of the phone.
NOTE
Even when silenced, the iPhone still makes noise in certain circumstances: when an alarm goes off;
when you’re playing music; when you’re using Find My iPhone (“Find My iPhone”); when you’re using
VoiceOver; or, sometimes, when a game is playing. Also, the phone still vibrates when the silencer is
engaged, although you can turn that off in Settings → Sounds & Haptics.
On the left edge are the volume controls. They work in five ways:

On a call, these buttons adjust the speaker or earbud volume.
When you’re listening to music, they adjust the playback volume—even
when the phone is locked and dark.
When you’re taking a photo or video, either one serves as a shutter
button or as a camcorder start/stop button.
At all other times, they adjust the volume of sound effects like the
ringer, alarms, and Siri.
When a call comes in, they silence the ringing or vibrating.
In each case, if the screen is on, a volume graphic appears to show you where
you are on the volume scale.
Screen
The touchscreen is your mouse, keyboard, dialing pad, and notepad. You might
expect it to get fingerprinty and streaky.
But the modern iPhone has an oleophobic screen. That may sound like an
irrational fear of yodeling, but it’s actually a coating that repels grease. A single
light wipe on your clothes restores the screen to its right-out-of-the-box crystal
sheen.
You can also use the screen as a mirror when the iPhone is off.
The iPhone’s Retina screen has crazy=high resolution (the number of tiny pixels
per inch). It’s really, really sharp, as you’ll discover when you try to read text or
make out the details of a map or a photo. The iPhone 5s and SE manage 1136 ×
640 pixels; the iPhone 6/6s/7 packs in 1334 × 750; the Plus models have 1920 ×
1080 (the same number of dots as a high-definition TV); and the iPhone X packs
an awe-inspiring 2436 × 1125 pixels.
The front of the iPhone is a special formulation made by Corning, to Apple’s
specifications—even better than the Gorilla Glass used on previous models,
Apple says. It’s unbelievably resistant to scratching. (You can still shatter it if
you drop it just the wrong way, though.)
If you’re nervous about protecting your iPhone, you can always get a case for it

(or a “bumper”—a silicone band that wraps the edges). But if you’re worried
about scratching the glass, you’re probably worry​ing too much. Even many
Apple employees carry the iPhone in their pockets without cases.
Status-Bar Icons
Here’s a roundup of the icons you may see in the status bar at the top of the
standard iPhone screen, from left to right.
iPHONE X
The iPhone X’s status bar is quite different; see “iPhone X: The Notch”.
Cell signal (
). As on any cellphone, the number of bars indicates
the strength of your cell signal, and thus the quality of your call audio
and the likelihood of losing the connection. If there are no bars, then the
dreaded words “No service” appear here.
Network name and type. These days, different parts of the country—
and even your street—are blanketed by cellular Internet signals of
different speeds, types, and ages. Your status bar shows you the kind of
network signal it has.

From slowest to fastest:
 or 
 means your iPhone is connected to your carrier’s slowest,
oldest Internet system. You might be able to check email, but you’ll lose
your mind waiting for a web page to load.
If you see 
, you’re in a city where your cell company has installed
a 3G network—still slow compared to 
, which offers speed in
between 3G and LTE.
And if you see 
 up there—well, get psyched. You have an iPhone
5 or later model, and you’re in a city with a 4G LTE cellular network.
And that means very fast Internet.
You may also see a notation like “T-Mobile Wi-Fi” or “VZW Wi-Fi.”
The iPhone 6 and later models, it turns out, can make free phone calls
over a Wi-Fi network—if your cellphone carrier has permitted it, and if
you’ve turned the feature in (“FaceTime Audio Calls”). It’s a great way
to make calls indoors where the cell signal is terrible.
Airplane mode (
). If you see the airplane instead of signal and
Wi-Fi bars, then the iPhone is in airplane mode (“Airplane Mode and
Wi-Fi Off Mode”).
Do Not Disturb (
). When the phone is in Do Not Disturb mode,
nothing can make it ring, buzz, or light up except calls from the most
important people. Details are in “Do Not Disturb”.
Wi-Fi signal (
). When you’re connected to a wireless Internet
hotspot, this indicator appears. The more “sound waves,” the stronger
the signal.
9:41 PM. When the iPhone is unlocked, a digital clock appears on the
status bar.

Alarm (
). You’ve got an alarm set. This reminder can be valuable,
especially when you intend to sleep late and don’t want an alarm to go
off.
Bluetooth (
). The iPhone is connected wirelessly to a Bluetooth
earpiece, speaker, or car system. (If this symbol is gray, then it means
Bluetooth is turned on but not connected to any other gear—and not
sucking down battery power.)
TTY (
). You’ve turned on Teletype mode, meaning that the iPhone
can communicate with a Teletype machine. (That’s a machine that lets
deaf people make phone calls by typing and reading text. It hooks up to
the iPhone with a special cable that Apple sells from its website.)
Call forwarding (
). You’ve told your iPhone to auto-forward any
incoming calls to a different number. This icon is awfully handy—it
explains at a glance why your iPhone never seems to get calls anymore.
VPN (
). You corporate stud, you! You’ve managed to connect
to your corporate network over a secure Internet connection, probably
with the assistance of a systems administrator—or by consulting ???.
Syncing (
). The iPhone is currently syncing with some Internet
service—iCloud, for example (Chapter 16).
Battery meter (
). When the iPhone is charging, the lightning
bolt appears. Otherwise, the battery logo “empties out” from right to left
to indicate how much charge remains. (You can even add a “% full”
indicator to this gauge; see “Emergency SOS”.)
Navigation active (
). You’re running a GPS navigation app, or
some other app that’s tracking your location, in the background (yay,
multi​tasking!). Why is a special icon necessary? Because those GPS

apps slurp down battery power like a thirsty golden retriever. Apple
wants to make sure you don’t forget you’re running it.
Rotation lock (
). This icon reminds you that you’ve deliberately
turned off the screen-rotation feature, where the screen image turns 90
degrees when you rotate the phone. Why would you want to? And how
do you turn the rotation lock on or off? See ???.
From time to time, you’ll see the entire status bar change color. That’s its way of
saying, “Hey, watch what you’re saying or doing, because an app in the
background is observing you!” For example, the whole bar turns:
Red when you’re recording in the background—either using the Voice
Memos app to record audio, or using the screen-recording feature
described in “Recording Screen Video”.
Green when you’re on a phone call or FaceTime call in the background.
They can still hearrrrrr youuuuu!
Blue when an app is actively tracking your location in the background.
If you’re using GPS or something, well, that’s fine. But if it’s some evil
app that’s tracking you, now you’ll know.
TIP
In each case, you can tap that colored status bar (or iPhone X “ear”—see below) to jump into the app
responsible.
iPhone X: The Notch
Most people adore the iPhone X—enough, in fact, to pay that handsome $1,000
for it. If anyone grumbles at all, it’s about the Notch.
That’s the dark area at the top center that contains the front-facing camera, the
earpiece, and the phone’s Face ID sensors (“Face ID (iPhone X)”). Apple
decided that, to keep the phone as small as possible, this Notch would interrupt
the standard status bar, splitting it into two “ears.”

You can’t see the Notch when the status bar is black—on a black Home screen,
for example. You don’t see it when you’re looking at photos or videos, either,
unless you zoom into them.
You do see the Notch when the status bar is white or another color, and it’s also
noticeable when you’re using an app that hasn’t been updated for the iPhone X.
Sometimes those apps try to display information right where the Notch sits!
In any case, on those ears, there’s very little room for the usual array of status
icons. The left ear shows the time and, sometimes, the location services logo (
); and the right ear shows icons for your cellular bars, Wi-Fi strength, and
battery level. (Only the left ear turns red, green, or blue to provide privacy
warnings from background apps, as described already.)
To see the full range of icons described on these pages, swipe down from the
right ear to open the Control Center (“Control Center”). Everything, including
the cell network name, appears on this screen—although if you’re having a bad
day, you’ll see the words “No Service” here instead.

Cameras and Flash
At the top of the phone, above the screen, there’s a horizontal slot. That’s the
earpiece. Just above it or beside it, the tiny pinhole is the front-facing camera.
It’s more visible on the white-faced iPhones than on the black ones.
iPHONE X
Your earpiece and front-facing camera are inside the Notch.
This camera’s primary purpose is to let you take selfies and conduct video​chats
using the FaceTime feature, but it’s also handy for checking for spinach in your
teeth.
It’s not nearly as good a camera as the one on the back, though. The front camera
is worse in low light and takes much lower-resolution shots.

A tiny LED lamp appears next to this back lens—actually, it’s two lamps on the
5s, 6, and 6s iPhones, and four on the 7, 8, and X families. That’s the flash for
the camera, the video light when you’re shooting movies, and a darned good
flashlight for reading restaurant menus and theater programs in low light. (Swipe
up from the bottom of the screen and tap the 
 icon to turn the light on and off.)
iPHONE X
Swipe down from the top right of the screen for the Control Center, where you’ll find the flashlight
control.
The tiny pinhole between the flash and the lens is a microphone. It’s used for
recording clearer sound with video, for better noise cancellation on phone calls,

and for better directional sound pickup.
The iPhone Plus and X models actually have two lenses on the back—one wide-
angle, one zoomed in. Details on this feature and everything else on the iPhone’s
cameras are in Chapter 9.
Sensors
Behind the glass, above or beside the earpiece (and in the iPhone X Notch), are
two sensors. (On the black iPhones, you can’t see them except with a flashlight.)
First, there’s an ambient-light sensor that brightens the display when you’re in
sunlight and dims it in darker places.
Second, there’s a proximity sensor. When something (like your head) is close to
the sensor, it shuts off the screen and touch sensitivity. It works only in the
Phone app. With the screen off, you save power and avoid dialing with your
cheekbone when you’re on a call.
SIM Card Slot
On the right edge of the iPhone, there’s a pinhole next to what looks like a very
thin slot cover. If you push an unfolded paper clip straight into the hole, the SIM
card tray pops out.

So what’s a SIM card?
It turns out that there are two major cellphone network types: CDMA, used by
Verizon and Sprint, and GSM, used by AT&T, T-Mobile, and most other
countries around the world.
Every GSM phone stores your phone account info—things like your phone
number and calling-plan details—on a tiny memory card known as a SIM
(subscriber identity module) card.
What’s cool is that, by removing the card and putting it into another GSM
phone, you can transplant a GSM phone’s brain. The other phone now knows
your number and account details, which can be handy when your iPhone goes in
for repair or battery replacement. For example, you can turn a Verizon iPhone 8
into a T-Mobile iPhone 8 just by swapping in a T-Mobile SIM card.

The World Phone
AT&T is a GSM network, so AT&T iPhones have always had SIM cards. But,
intriguingly enough, every iPhone has a SIM card, too—even the Verizon and
Sprint models. That’s odd, because most CDMA cellphones don’t have SIM
cards.
These iPhones contain antennas for both GSM and CDMA. It’s the same phone,
no matter which cell company you buy it from. Only the SIM card teaches it
which one it “belongs” to.
Even then, however, you can still use any company’s phone in any country.
(That’s why the latest iPhones are said to be “world phones.”) When you use the
Verizon or Sprint iPhone in the United States, it uses only the CDMA network.
But if you travel to Europe or another GSM part of the world, you can still use
your Verizon or Sprint phone; it just hooks into that country’s GSM network.
If you decide to try that, you have two ways to go. First, you can contact your
phone carrier and ask to have international roaming turned on. You’ll keep your
same phone number overseas, but you’ll pay through the nose for calls and,
especially, Internet use. (One exception: On T-Mobile, international texting and
Internet use are free.)
Second, you can rent a temporary SIM card when you get to the destination
country. That’s less expensive, but you’ll have a different phone number while
you’re there.
Apple thinks SIM cards are geeky and intimidating and that they should be
invisible. That’s why, unlike most GSM phones, your iPhone came with the card
preinstalled and ready to go. Most people never have any reason to open this
tray.
If you were curious enough to open it up, you can close the tray simply by
pushing it back into the phone until it clicks.
NOTE
Many countries offer LTE high-speed cellular Internet on all different radio frequencies. The iPhone 6
and later models can hop onto more of these networks than any other cellphones, but they still don’t
work in every country. Ask your carrier which countries your model works with.

Headphone Jack
Until the iPhone 7 came along, iPhones contained a standard jack for plugging in
the white earbuds that came with it—or any other earbuds or headphones.
It’s more than an ordinary 3.5-millimeter audio jack, however. It contains a
secret fourth pin that conducts sound into the phone from the microphone on the
earbuds’ cord. You, too, can be one of those executives who walk down the
street barking orders, apparently to nobody.
The iPhone can stay in your pocket. You hear the other person through your
earbuds, and the mike on the cord picks up your voice.
NOTE
Next to the headphone jack, inside a perforated grille, a tiny second microphone lurks. It’s the key to the
iPhone’s noise-cancellation feature. It listens to the sound of the world around you and pumps in the
opposite sound waves to cancel out all that ambient noise. It doesn’t do anything for you—the noise
cancellation affects what the other person on the phone hears.
That’s why there’s also a third microphone at the top back (between the camera and flash); it’s designed
to supply noise cancellation for you so that the other person sounds better when you’re in a noisy place.

iPhone 7, 8, X: No Headphone Jack
We, the people, may complain about how exhausting it is to keep up with the
annual flood of new smartphones. But at least we don’t have to think up a new
set of features every year. That’s their problem.
Not just because it’s increasingly difficult to think of new features, but also
because the phone makers have pretty much run out of room for new
components inside.
That, says Apple, is why it removed the headphone jack from the iPhone 7 and
later models. The headphone jack may not seem very big—but on the inside of
the phone, the corresponding receptacle occupies an unnerving amount of
nonnegotiable space.
So how are you supposed to listen to music without a headphone jack? Apple
offers three ways:
Using the adapter. In the iPhone box, Apple includes a 2-inch adapter
cord that connects any headphones to the phone’s Lightning (charging)
jack.
Use the earbuds. The phone also comes with new white earbuds that
connect to the Lightning jack.
TIP
Of course, if your headphones are plugged into the Lightning jack, you can’t charge your phone while
listening over them. Fortunately, Amazon is full of cheap adapters that let you charge and plug in
headphones simultaneously.
Use wireless headphones. You can also use any Bluetooth wireless
earbuds—from $17 plastic disposable ones to Apple’s own, super-
impressive AirPods. “FaceTime Audio Calls” has more on Bluetooth
headsets.
In theory, those three approaches should pretty much cover you whenever you
want to listen.
In practice, though, you’ll still get zapped by the occasional inconvenience.

You’ll be on a flight, for example, listening to your laptop with headphones—
and when you want to switch to the phone, you’ll realize that your adapter cord
is in the overhead bin. (Based on a true story.)
But this kind of hassle is the new reality. Motorola, Google, and LeEco (in
China) have already ditched the headphone jack on their phones, and other
phone makers will follow suit.
Microphone, Speakerphone
On the bottom of the iPhone, Apple has parked two important audio
components: the speaker and the microphone.
On the iPhone 7/8/X, actually, there are two speakers​, on the top and bottom of
the phone. Stereo sound has finally come to the iPhone.
TIP
The speakerphone isn’t super loud, because it’s aimed straight out of the iPhone’s edge, away from you.
But if you cup your hand around the bottom, you can redirect the sound toward your face, for an
immediate boost in volume and quality.
The Lightning Connector
On the bottom edge of the phone, right in the center, you’ll find the connector
that charges and syncs the iPhone with your computer.

For nearly 10 years, the charge/sync connector was identical on every iPhone,
iPod, and iPad—the famous 30-pin connector. But starting on the iPhone 5,
Apple replaced that inch-wide connector with a new, far-smaller one it calls
Lightning. The Lightning connector is a great design: It clicks nicely into place
(you can even dangle the iPhone from it), yet you can yank it right out. You can
insert the Lightning into the phone either way—there’s no “right-side up”
anymore. It’s much sturdier than the old connector. And it’s tiny, which was
Apple’s primary goal—only 0.3 inches wide (the old one was almost 0.9 inches
wide).
Unfortunately, you may still occasionally encounter a car adapter or hotel-room
alarm clock with the old kind of connector. (For $30, you can buy an adapter.)
Little by little, a new ecosystem of accessories based on the Lightning connector
is arising. We’ll enjoy a new era of standardization—until Apple changes jacks
again.

Antenna Band
Radio signals can’t pass through metal. That’s why there are strips or panels of
plastic or glass on every iPhone.
And there are a lot of radio signals in this phone. All told, there are 20 different
radio transceivers inside the modern iPhone. They tune in to the LTE and 3G
(high-speed Internet) signals used in various countries around the world, plus the
three CDMA signals used in the U.S.; and one each for Wi-Fi, Bluetooth,
American GPS, and Russian GPS.
In the Box
Inside the minimalist box, you get the iPhone and these items:
A Lightning cable. When you connect your iPhone to your computer
using this white USB cable, it simultaneously syncs and charges. See
Chapter 15.
The AC adapter. When you’re traveling without a computer, you can
plug the dock’s USB cable into the included two-prong outlet adapter,
so you can charge the iPhone directly from a wall socket.
The earbuds. Every iPhone comes with a pair of the iconic white
earbuds that announce to the world, “I have an iPhone!” These days,
they’re what Apple calls EarPods. They sound great, although their
bulbous shape may get uncomfortable in smaller ears. A volume
control/clicker is right there on the cord, so you can answer phone calls
and pause the music without even taking the phone out of your pocket.
(The EarPods that come with the iPhone 7/8/X, of course, plug into the
Lightning jack, since there’s no headphone jack. These phones also
come with that 2-inch adapter cable for existing earbuds.)
Decals and info card. iPhone essentials.

Seven Basic Finger Techniques
On the iPhone, you do everything on the touchscreen instead of with physical
buttons.
Tap
The iPhone’s onscreen buttons are big, giving your fingertip a fat target.
You can’t use a fingernail or a pen tip; only skin contact works. (You can also
buy an iPhone stylus. But a fingertip is cheaper and harder to misplace.)

Double-Tap
Double-tapping is generally reserved for two functions:
In the Safari, Photos, and Maps apps, double-tapping zooms in on
whatever you tap, magnifying it. (At that point, double-tapping means
“Restore to original size.”) Double-tapping also zooms in to formatted
email messages, PDF files, Microsoft Office files, and other things.
When you’re watching a video (or recording one), double-tapping
switches the aspect ratio (video screen shape).
Swipe
In some situations, you’re asked to confirm an action by swiping your finger
across the screen. That’s how you confirm that you want to shut off the phone,
for example. Swiping is also a great shortcut for deleting an email or a text
message.
Pinch and Spread
In apps like Photos, Mail, Safari, and Maps, you can zoom in on a photo,
message, web page, or map by spreading.
That’s when you place two fingers (usually thumb and forefinger) on the glass
and spread them. The image magically grows, as though it’s printed on a sheet of
rubber.

NOTE
The English language has failed Apple here. Moving your thumb and forefinger closer together has an
appropriate verb: pinching. But there’s no good word to describe moving them the opposite direction.
Apple uses the oxymoronic expression pinch out to describe that move (along with the redundant-
sounding pinch in). In this book, the opposite of “pinching” is “spreading.”
Once you’ve zoomed in like this, you can zoom out again by putting two fingers
on the glass and pinching them together.
Drag
When you’re zoomed into a map, web page, email, or photo, you scroll around
by sliding your finger across the glass in any direction—like a flick (described
next), but slower and more controlled. It’s a huge improvement over scroll bars,
especially when you want to scroll diagonally.

Flick
A flick is a faster, less-controlled drag. You flick vertically to scroll lists on the
iPhone. The faster you flick, the faster the list spins downward or upward. But
lists have a real-world sort of momentum; they slow down after a second or two,
so you can see where you wound up.
At any point during the scrolling of a list, you can flick again (if you didn’t go
far enough) or tap to stop the scrolling (if you see the item you want).
Edge Swipes
Swiping your finger inward from outside the screen has a few variations:
From the top edge. Opens the Notification Center, which lists all your
missed calls and texts, shows your appointments, and so on.
iPHONE X
Swipe down from either the left ear or the Notch.
From the bottom edge. Opens the Control Center, a unified miniature
control panel for brightness, volume, Wi-Fi, and so on.
iPHONE X
Swipe down from the right ear to open the Control Center.
From the left edge. In many apps, this means “Go back to the previous
screen.” It works in Mail, Settings, Notes, Messages, Safari, Facebook,
and some other apps. At the Home screen, it opens the Today screen
(“The Today Screen (Widgets)”).
It sometimes makes a difference whether you begin your swipe within the screen
or outside it. At the Home screen, for example, starting your downward swipe
within the screen area doesn’t open the Notification Center—it opens the
iPhone’s search function.

3D Touch
The screen on the iPhone 6s and later models doesn’t just detect a finger touch.
It also knows how hard your finger is pressing, thanks to a technology Apple
calls 3D Touch. This feature requires that you learn two more finger techniques.
Quick Actions
iOS interprets the pressure of your touch in various ways. On the Home screens,
you can make a shortcut menu of useful commands pop out of various app icons,
like this:
Apple calls these commands quick actions, and each is designed to save you a
couple of steps. Some examples:
The Camera app icon offers shortcut menus like Take Selfie, Record
Video, Record Slo-mo, and Take Portrait.
The Clock app gives you direct access to its Create Alarm, Start
Timer, and Start Stopwatch functions.
Notes gives you New Note, New Checklist, New Photo, and New
Sketch commands (a reference to the finger-drawing features). At the
top, you see the last note you added or edited—not, for some reason, the
note you’ve pinned to the top of the list (“The Notes List”).

Maps offers Directions Home (a great one), Mark My Location, Send
My Location, and Search Nearby (for restaurants, bars, shops, and so
on). (When you already are home, you may see your travel time to
work and the current traffic situation.)
The Phone app sprouts icons for people you’ve called recently, as well
as commands like Create New Contact and View Most Recent
Voicemail (handy!).
Calendar shows your next appointment, plus an Add Event command.
Reminders displays whatever To Do deadline is coming up next. It also
lists your reminder categories, so you can create a new To Do directly
inside one of them (for example, New in Family).
Mail and Messages offer New Message commands. Mail also offers
Search, Inbox (with a new-message counter), and VIPs (also with a
counter); Messages lists the three people with whom you text the most.
Home-screen folders sprout a Rename command at your fingertip.
The Notification Center (the list that appears when you swipe down
from the top of the screen) offers a 
 button. Hard-press it to
reveal the Clear All Notifications command.
The Control Center icons offer some very important, but very hidden
options. See “Control Center”.
Similar quick actions also sprout from these Apple apps’ icons: Photos, Video,
Wallet, iTunes Store, App Store, iBooks, News, Safari, Music, FaceTime,
Podcasts, Voice Memos, Contacts, and Find My Friends.
And, of course, you can use hard presses to respond to notifications: Reply to a
text message, accept a Calendar invitation, or see where your Uber is on a map.
Other software companies have added shortcut menus to their app icons, too—
Facebook, Fitbit, Google Maps, and so on.
If you force-press an app that doesn’t have quick actions, you just feel a buzz
and nothing else happens.

NOTE
At the outset, this force-pressing business can really throw you when you’re trying to rearrange icons on
your Home screens. As described in “Two Welcome Notes About Backups”, that usually involves long-
pressing an icon, which for most people is too similar to hard-pressing one. The trick is to long-press
very lightly. You’ll get used to it.
Peek and Pop
Hard to explain, but very cool: You hard-press something in a list—your email
Inbox, for example (below, left). Or a link in a text message, or a photo
thumbnail. You get a pop-up bubble showing you what’s inside (middle):
When you release your finger, the bubble disappears, and you’re right back

where you started. Peeking, in other words, is exactly like the Quick Look
feature on the Mac. It lets you see what’s inside a link, icon, or list item without
losing your place or changing apps.
Email is the killer app here. You can whip through your Inbox, hard-pressing one
new message after another—“What’s this one?” “Do I care?”—simply
inspecting the first paragraph of each but not actually opening any message.
Then, if you find one that you do want to read fully, you can press harder yet to
open the message normally (above, right). Apple calls that “popping.”
Here are some places where you can peek in the basic iPhone apps: Mail
(preview a message in a list), Messages (see recent exchanges with someone in
the list of people), Maps (preview information about a pushpin), Calendar (see
details of an event), Photos (preview a photo in a screenful of thumbnails),
Safari (preview the page hiding behind a link), Weather (see weather details for
a name in the list of cities), Music (see information about a song or album in a
list), Video (read details about a video in a list), Notes (see the contents of a
note’s name in a list), iBooks (view a book-cover thumbnail larger), News
(preview the body of an article in a list), and Find My Friends (see the map
identifying the location of someone in your list).
If you do nothing else, at least get to know peek and pop in Mail and Messages.
It’s really kind of awesome.
And, again, app makers can add this feature to their own apps.
Charging the iPhone
The iPhone has a built-in, rechargeable battery that fills up most of its interior.
How long a charge lasts depends on what you’re doing—music playback saps
the battery the least; games and GPS navigation sap it the most. But one thing is
for sure: You’ll have to recharge the iPhone regularly. For most people, it’s every
night.
NOTE
The iPhone’s battery isn’t user-replaceable. It’s rechargeable, but after 400 or 500 charges, it starts to
hold less juice. Eventually, you’ll have to pay Apple to install a new battery. (Apple says the added bulk

of a protective plastic battery compartment, a removable door and latch, and battery-retaining springs
would have meant a much smaller battery—or a much thicker iPhone.)
Charging with the Cable
You recharge the iPhone by connecting the white USB cable that came with it.
You can plug the far end into either of two places to supply power:
Your computer’s USB jack. In general, the iPhone charges even if
your computer is asleep. (If it’s a laptop that itself is not plugged in,
though, the phone charges only if the laptop is awake. Otherwise, you
could come home to a depleted laptop.)
The AC adapter. The little white two-prong cube that came with the
iPhone connects to the end of the cradle’s USB cable.
Unless the charge is really low, you can use the iPhone while it charges. The
battery icon in the upper-right corner displays a lightning bolt to let you know
it’s charging.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6 or later, it’ll charge much faster if you charge it with the 2.1-amp wall adapter
that comes with an iPad, instead of the 1-amp adapter that comes with the phone. How’s a 90 percent
charge in two hours sound?
Better yet: If you have an iPhone 8 or X, you can get really fast charging—along the lines of 50 percent
charge in 30 minutes—but only if you connect it to a USB-C power brick plugged into the wall. Apple
sells one for $50—but the cable you need (USB-C to Lightning) isn’t included. That’s another $25. Fast
charging is cool, but it ain’t cheap.
Charging on a Pad (iPhone 8 and X)
iPhone fans can stop looking over at Samsung owners with envy: Now you, too,
can recharge your phone just by setting it down on a Qi charging pad.
NOTE
Qi, pronounced “chee,” is the Chinese word for the life force in everyone and everything. It’s also an
extraordinarily useful word to know if you’re playing Scrabble.

You can buy one of these tabletop charging pads from any company; they cost
about $12 on Amazon. (Surprisingly, at the dawn of the iPhone 8, Apple didn’t
even offer one. The company is working on a super-wide one for release in 2018,
called the AirPower pad, that can charge an iPhone, an Apple Watch, and a
special AirPods case simultaneously.)
You have to plug the pad into a power outlet, of course—wireless charging isn’t
really wireless at all. But at least you’re spared the hassle of plugging and
unplugging a cable every night. You just place the iPhone’s back onto the pad,
and boom: The little lightning-bolt icon appears, and the little “now charging”
chime sounds.
Some fun facts about speed:
Charging a dead iPhone for two hours brings it to about 80 percent
charge if you use the Lightning cable; to about 50 percent if you use
“fast charging” (on a compatible 7.5-watt pad); and about 40 percent
with regular charging (5-watt pads).

If you plug in the Lightning cable and put the phone on the charging
pad, you don’t cut the time in half. In that situation, the cable wins. The
pad does nothing.
If you want really fast charging—a 50 percent charge in 30 minutes—
buy a USB-C power brick ($50 and up) and a USB-C to Lightning cable
(Apple’s is $25).
Battery Life Tips
For most people, the battery life of the iPhone is about a day. But if you can’t
even make it to bedtime, then knowing how to scale back your iPhone’s power
appetite should come in extremely handy.
These are the biggest wolfers of electricity: the screen and background activity
(especially Internet activity). Therefore, when you’re nervous about your battery
making it through an important day, here are your options:
Low Power mode can squeeze another three hours of life out of a
charge.
In Low Power mode, your iPhone quits doing a lot of stuff in the
background, like fetching new mail and updating apps. It also stops
playing most of iOS’s cute animations and stops listening for you to say
“Hey Siri” (“How to Use “Hey Siri””). The processor slows down, too;
it takes longer to switch between apps, for example. And the battery
indicator turns yellow, to remind you why things have suddenly slowed
down.
Unless you’ve fiddled with the settings, you get an invitation to turn on
Low Power mode when your battery sinks to 20 percent remaining, and
then again at 10 percent. You can also turn on this mode manually,
using the Control Center (“Control Center”) or the switch in Settings →
Battery (below, top right).
If your phone is plugged in, it exits Low Power mode automatically
once it has enough juice (below, lower right).

At any time, you can also shut down juice-guzzling features manually. Here they
are, roughly in order of power appetite:
Dim the screen. Turning down your screen saves a lot of battery power.
The quickest way is to open the Control Center (“Control Center”), and
then drag the brightness slider.
On a new iPhone, Auto-Brightness is turned on, too. In bright light, the
screen brightens automatically; in dim light, it darkens. That’s because
when you unlock the phone after waking it, it samples the ambient light
and adjusts the brightness.
NOTE
This works because of the ambient-light sensor near the earpiece. Apple says it experimented with
having the light sensor active all the time, but it was weird to have the screen constantly dimming and
brightening as you used it.
(You can turn this auto-brightness feature off in Settings → Display &
Brightness.)
TIP
You can set things up so that a triple-click on the home button or side button instantly dims your screen,

for use in the bedroom, movie theaters, or planetariums—without having to fuss with settings or sliders.
See “The Instant Screen-Dimming Trick” for this awesome trick.
Turn off “push” data. This is a big one. If your email, calendar, and
address book are kept constantly synced with your Macs or PCs, then
you’ve probably gotten yourself involved with Yahoo Mail, iCloud
(Chapter 16), or Microsoft Exchange. It’s pretty amazing to know that
your iPhone is constantly kept current with the mother ship.
Unfortunately, all that continual sniffing of the airwaves, looking for
updates, costs you battery life. If you can do without the immediacy,
visit Settings → Accounts & Passwords → Fetch New Data. If you
turn off the Push feature for each email account and set it to Manually
instead, then your iPhone checks for email and new appointments only
when you actually open the Mail or Calendar apps. Your battery goes a
lot further.
Beware GPS. GPS navigation, in Maps or Google Maps, drains your
battery power like a hole in a water bucket. So as you drive, once your
guidance app has led you to a place you recognize, by all means shut it
off.
But there’s more. In Settings → Privacy → Location Services, there’s
a list of all the apps on your phone that are using its location feature to
know where you are. (It’s a combination of GPS, cell-tower
triangulation, and Wi-Fi hotspot triangulation.) And it uses battery
power.
Some apps, like Maps, Find My Friends, and Yelp, don’t do you much
good unless they know your location. But plenty of others don’t really
need to know where you are. Facebook and Twitter, for example, want
that information only so that they can location-stamp your posts. In any
case, the point is to turn off Location Services for each app that doesn’t
really need to know where you are.
TIP

In the list of apps under Location Services, tiny 
 icons show you which apps are using GPS right
now and which have used it in the past 24 hours. These icons can guide you in shutting off the GPS use
of various apps.
Turn off background updating. Non-Apple apps check for frequent
updates, too: Facebook, Twitter, stock-reporting apps, and so on. Not all
of them need to be busily toiling in the background. Your best bet for
battery life, then, involves visiting Settings → General →
Background App Refresh and turning the switch off for each app
whose background activity isn’t strictly necessary.
Turn off automatic app updates. As you’ll soon discover, app
companies update their wares far more often than PC or Mac apps.
Some get updated many times a year. Your phone comes set to
download them automatically when they become available. But that
constant checking and downloading costs you battery life.
To shut that feature down, open Settings → iTunes & App Store. In
the Automatic Downloads section, turn off Updates. (The other
switches—Music, Apps, Books—are responsible for auto-downloading
things that you or your brood have downloaded on other iOS gadgets.
You might want to make sure they’re off, too, if battery life is a
concern.)
Turn off Wi-Fi. If you’re not in a wireless hotspot, you may as well
stop the thing from using its radio. Open the Control Center and tap the 
 icon to turn it off.
Or at the very least tell the iPhone to stop searching for Wi-Fi networks
it can connect to. “Sequence of Connections” has the details.
Turn off Bluetooth. If you’re not using a Bluetooth gadget (headset,
fitness band, or whatever), then for heaven’s sake shut down that
Bluetooth radio. Open the Control Center and tap the 
 icon to turn it
off.

Turn off Cellular Data. This option (in Settings → Cellular, but
there’s also a Control Center button for it) turns off the cellular Internet
features of your phone. You can still make calls, and you can still get
online in a Wi-Fi hotspot.
This feature is designed for people who have a capped data plan—a
limited amount of Internet use per month—which is a lot of people. If
you discover that you’ve used up almost all your data allotment for the
month, and you don’t want to go over your limit (and thereby trigger an
overage charge), you can use this option to shut off all data. Now your
phone is just a phone—and it uses less power.
Consider airplane mode. In airplane mode, you shut off all the
iPhone’s power-hungry radios. Even a nearly dead iPhone can hobble
on for a few hours in airplane mode—something to remember when
you’re desperate. To enter airplane mode, tap the 
 icon in the
Control Center (“Control Center”).
TIP
For sure turn on airplane mode if you’ll be someplace where you know an Internet signal won’t be
present—like on a plane, a ship at sea, or Montana. Your iPhone never burns through a battery charge
faster than when it’s hunting for a signal it can’t find; your battery will be dead within a couple of hours.
Turn off the screen. With a press of the side button, you can turn off
the screen, rendering it black and saving huge amounts of power. That
won’t interrupt audio playback, like music or podcasts, or Maps
navigation.
Of course, if you want to actually interact with the phone while the
screen is off, you’ll have to learn the VoiceOver talking-buttons
technology; see “VoiceOver”.
By the way, beware of 3D games and other graphically intensive apps, which can
be serious power hogs. And turn off EQ when playing your music (see
“Switching Among Speakers”).

If your battery still seems to be draining too fast, check out the table at right,
which shows you exactly which apps are using the most power:
To see it, open Settings → Battery. You can switch between battery readouts for
the past 24 hours, or for the past seven days.
Keep special watch for labels like these:
Low Signal. A phone uses the most power of all when it’s hunting for a
cellular signal, because the phone amplifies its radios in hopes of
finding one. If your battery seems to be running down faster than usual,
the “Low Signal” notation is a great clue—and a suggestion that maybe
you should use airplane mode when you’re on the fringes of cellular
coverage.
Background activity. As hinted on the previous pages, background
Internet connections are especially insidious. These are apps that do

online work invisibly, without your awareness—and drain the battery in
the process. Now, for the first time, you can clearly see which apps are
doing it.
Once you know the culprit app, it’s easy to shut its background work
down. Open Settings → General → Background App Refresh and
switch off each app whose background activity isn’t strictly necessary.
TIP
If you tap the little 
 in Settings → Battery (previous page, right), the screen shows you how much
time each app has spent running—both in the foreground and in the background. It’s an incredibly
informative display if you’ve been wondering where all your battery power has been going.
The Home Screen
The Home screen is the launching pad for every iPhone activity. It’s what
appears when you press the home button or swipe up on the screen (iPhone X).
It’s the immortal grid of colorful icons.
It’s such an essential software landmark, in fact, that a quick tour might be
helpful:
Icons. Each icon represents one of your iPhone apps (programs)—Mail,
Maps, Camera, and so on—or a folder that you’ve made to contain
some apps. Tap one to open that app or folder.
Your iPhone comes with a couple of dozen apps preinstalled by Apple;
you can’t remove them. The real fun, of course, comes when you
download more apps from the App Store (Chapter 10).
Badges. Every now and then, you’ll see a tiny red number “badge” (like
) on one of your app icons. It’s telling you that something new
awaits: new email, new text messages, new chat entries, new updates
for the apps on your iPhone. It’s saying, “Hey, you! Tap me!”
Home page dots. The standard Home screen can’t hold more than 20 or

24 icons. As you install more and more programs on your iPhone, you’ll
need more and more room for their icons. Fortunately, the iPhone
makes room for them by creating additional Home screens
automatically. You can spread your new programs’ icons across 11 such
launch screens.
The little white dots are your map. Each represents one Home screen. If
the third one is “lit up,” then you’re on the third Home screen.
To move among the screens, swipe horizontally—or tap to the right or
left of the little dots to change screens.
And if you ever scroll too far from the first Home screen, here’s a

handy shortcut: Press the home button (yes, even though you’re
technically already home). That takes you back to the first Home
screen.
iPHONE X
Swipe a finger up from the bottom of the screen instead.
The Dock. At the bottom of the Home screen, four exalted icons sit in a
row on a light-colored panel. This is the Dock—a place to park the most
important icons on your iPhone. These, presumably, are the ones you
use most often. Apple starts you off with the Phone, Mail, Safari, and
Music icons there.
What’s so special about this row? As you flip among Home screens, the
Dock never changes. You can never lose one of your four most
cherished icons by straying from the first page; they’re always handy.
The background. You can replace the background image (behind your
app icons) with a photo. A complicated, busy picture won’t do you any
favors—it will just make the icon names harder to read—so Apple
provides a selection of handsome, relatively subdued wallpaper photos.
But you can also choose one of your own photos.
For instructions on changing the wallpaper, see “Wallpaper”.
It’s easy (and fun!) to rearrange the icons on your Home screens. Put the most
frequently used icons on the first page, put similar apps into folders, and
reorganize your Dock. Full details are in “Two Welcome Notes About Backups”.
TIP
You can set up a nearly empty first Home screen by moving all of its app icons onto other home pages, if
you want. That’s a weird but fun arrangement for anyone with a really great wallpaper photo.
Control Center

For such a tiny device, there are an awful lot of settings you can change
—hundreds of them. Trouble is, some of them (volume, brightness) need
changing a lot more often than others (language preference, voicemail greeting).
That’s why Apple invented the Control Center: a panel that offers quick access
to the controls you need the most.
In iOS 11, the Control Center is no longer a stunted toddler; it has blossomed
into the magnificence of adulthood. Now you decide which controls should
appear on it. And you no longer have to hunt among multiple pages to find the
one you want; the Control Center is once again a single screen. If you’re a true
Control freak, it even scrolls.
To open the Control Center, no matter what app you’re using, swipe upward
from beneath the screen. You can even open it from the Lock screen (unless
you’ve turned off that feature in Settings → Control Center → Access on Lock
Screen).
iPHONE X
Swipe down from the upper-right ear. In iOS 11.2, a small horizontal bar appears there to remind you, as
shown in “iPhone X: The Notch”.
Now, it’s worth pointing out that many of the Control Center’s settings are even
faster to change using Siri, as described in Chapter 5. When it’s not socially
awkward to speak to your phone (like at the symphony or during a golf game),
you can use spoken commands to adjust settings without even touching the
screen.
The Starter Set
Yes, you can customize what appears on the Control Center. But the following
controls are nonnegotiable. They’re your starter set, and you can’t remove most
of them.
TIP
In many cases, you can hard-press or long-press one of these buttons to open a sub-panel that offers

even more controls (next page, right). Apple greatly expanded this feature in iOS 11, so the following
writeup dives into those hard-press options in detail.
Airplane mode (
). Tap to turn the icon orange. Now you’re in
airplane mode; the phone’s wireless features are all turned off. You’re
saving the battery and obeying flight attendant instructions. Tap again to
turn off airplane mode.
Sample Siri command: “Turn airplane mode on.” (Siri warns you that if
you turn airplane mode on, Siri herself will stop working. Say “OK.”)
Cellular data (
). This icon is new in iOS 11. It’s the on/off
switch for your iPhone’s connection to the Internet over the cellular
airwaves (rather than Wi-Fi). Cellular data, after all, costs you money—
especially when you’re roaming (“Cellular”)—and you may have a
monthly limit. So it’s good to be able to control when you’re using it up.
Sample Siri command: “Turn off cellular data.”
Wi-Fi (
). Tap to turn your phone’s Wi-Fi off (gray) or on (blue).
Sample Siri commands: “Turn off Wi-Fi.” “Turn Wi-Fi back on.”
Bluetooth (
). Tap to turn your Bluetooth transmitter off (gray) or on
(blue). That feature alone is a godsend to anyone who uses the iPhone
with a car’s Bluetooth audio system. Bluetooth isn’t the battery drain it
once was, but it’s still nice to be able to flick it on so easily when you
get into the car.
Sample Siri commands: “Turn Bluetooth on.” “Turn off Bluetooth.”
Hard-press options: If you hard-press or long-press anywhere in this
cluster of four wireless buttons, you pop open a new panel. It offers the
same buttons—Airplane Mode, Cellular Data, WiFi, Bluetooth—
with labels, this time, along with two more.

First, there’s AirDrop (
). This feature gives you a quick, effortless
way to shoot photos, maps, web pages, and other stuff to nearby
iPhones, iPads, iPod Touches, and even Macs. (See “AirDrop” for
details.) It used to be on the Control Center itself but has now been
buried on this sub-panel. Tap it to see the AirDrop controls described in
“AirDrop”.
Second, there’s Personal Hotspot, which lets your phone act as a Wi-Fi
hotspot for your laptop or other gadgets (“Personal Hotspot
(Tethering)”). It makes its first Control Center appearance in iOS 11.
Music. Praise the software gods: The music playback controls are no
longer hiding on a separate page of the Control Center. Right here on
this little tile, you see information about the current song, plus playback

controls (
).
These controls govern playback in whatever app is playing music or
podcasts in the background: the Music app, Pandora, Spotify, whatever
it is. You can skip a horrible song quickly and efficiently without having
to interrupt what you’re doing, or pause the music to chat with a
colleague.
Sample Siri commands: “Pause the music.” “Skip to the next song.”
“Play some Billy Joel.”
Hard-press options: The sub-panel offers a scrubber bar that shows
where you are in the song, the album art, and a little button (
) that
lets you choose what speaker you want to use. It always lists iPhone
(the built-in speakers), but it may also list things like a Bluetooth
speaker, earbuds, or AirPlay, which sends music or video to a wireless
speaker system or TV (see “TV Output”).
There’s also a volume slider. It lets you make big volume jumps faster
than you can by pressing the volume buttons on the side of the phone.
Rotation lock (
). When rotation lock is turned on (red), the screen
no longer rotates when you turn the phone 90 degrees. The idea is that
sometimes, like when you’re reading an ebook on your side in bed, you
don’t want the screen picture to turn; you want it to stay upright relative
to your eyes. (A little 
 icon appears at the top of the screen to
remind you why the usual rotating isn’t happening. On the iPhone X,
open the Control Center to see that icon.)
The whole thing isn’t quite as earth-shattering as it sounds—first,
because it locks the image in only one way: upright, in portrait
orientation. You can’t make it lock into widescreen mode. Furthermore,
many apps don’t rotate with the phone to begin with. But when that day
comes when you want to read in bed on your side with your head on the
pillow, your iPhone will be ready. (Tap the button again to turn rotating
back on.)

There are no Siri or hard-press options for this control.
Do Not Disturb (
). Do Not Disturb mode, described in “Do Not
Disturb”, means that the phone won’t ring or buzz when people call—
except a few handpicked people whose communiqués are allowed to
ring through. Perfect for sleeping hours; in fact, you can set up an
automated schedule for Do Not Disturb (midnight to 7 a.m., say).
But what if you wake up early or want to stay up late? You can tap to
turn Do Not Disturb on (blue) or off (gray).
There are no hard-press options for this control.
Sample Siri commands: “Turn on Do Not Disturb.” “Turn Do Not
Disturb off.”
Brightness (
). Hallelujah! Here’s a screen-brightness slider—now
in the form of a big, fat vertical bar that’s very easy to operate. Drag
anywhere within it, up or down, to change the brightness.
Sample Siri commands: “Make the screen brighter.” “Dim the screen.”
Hard-press options: The sub-panel presents on/off buttons for Night
Shift, which makes the screen yellower before bedtime to prevent sleep
disturbance (“Display & Brightness”), and True Tone, a feature of the
iPhone 8 and X that tweaks the screen colors to make them look
consistent in whatever ambient light you’re in (“Display &
Brightness”).
Volume (
). Here it is, next to brightness: an equally big, fat
volume slider. Slide your finger up or down to adjust the audio volume.
Hard-press options: Hard-pressing doesn’t gain you any new controls.
It does, however, open up a much bigger version of the volume slider.
It’s now easier to make finer adjustments.
AirPlay Mirroring (
). The AirPlay button lets you send your
iPhone’s video and audio to a wireless speaker system or TV—if you

have an AirPlay receiver, of which the most famous is the Apple TV.
Details are in “TV Output”.
Hard-press options: A sub-panel appears, listing any available wireless
receivers, like an Apple TV or a wireless projector.
The bottom row of the starter icons, described next, are removable. If they’re not
floating your boat, see the next section for instructions on how to get rid of them.
Flashlight (
). Tap to turn on the iPhone’s “flashlight”—actually the
LED lamp on the back that usually serves as the camera flash. Knowing
that a source of good, clean light is a few touches away makes a huge
difference if you’re trying to read in the dark, find your way along a
path at night, or fiddle with wires behind your desk.
iPHONE X
There’s also a flashlight button right on the Lock screen. Press it hard to turn it on.
Hard-press options: You get a four-segment “slider” that controls the
flashlight’s brightness. The top segment means full brightness; the
bottom one means Off. That’s super cool, especially on the iPhone
7/8/X, whose LED flashlight is enough to light up a high-school
football game at night.
Camera (
). Tap to jump directly into the Camera app. Because
photo ops don’t wait around.
Hard-press options: Handy! Here are the Take Selfie, Record Video,
Record Slo-mo, and (on Plus and X models) Take Portrait commands.
Each saves you a little fiddling in the Camera app.
Sample Siri commands: “Take a picture.” “Open the camera.”
Calculator (
). Tap to open the Calculator app—a handy shortcut if
it’s your turn to figure out how to divide up the restaurant bill.

Hard-press options: A Copy Last Result button appears, so you can
snag whatever.
Sample Siri commands: “Open the calculator.” Or, better yet, without
opening any app: “What’s a 106 divided by 5?”
Timer (
). Tap to open the Clock app—specifically, the Timer
mode, which counts down to zero. Apple figures you might appreciate
having direct access to it when you’re cooking, for example, or waiting
for your hair color to set.
There are no hard-press options for this icon.
Sample Siri commands: “Open the Timer.” Or, better yet, bypass the
Clock and Timer apps altogether: “Start the timer for three minutes.”
“Count down from six minutes.” (Siri counts down right there on the
Siri screen.)
Customizing the Control Center
This is one of the biggest chunks of good news in iOS 11: You can make Control
Center your own. You can add all kinds of new buttons to it, including some
(like recording a video of the screen) that have never been possible on the
iPhone before.
The Center for Control Center Customization, as it turns out, is Settings →
Control Center → Customize Controls. Here’s a giant list of the buttons
you’re allowed to add or remove. It’s very simple: Tap 
 to remove a button
that’s already installed. Tap 
 to install a button that’s not yet on the Control
Center.
And drag the little 
 handles up or down to choose an order for your icons
on the Control Center.
Here are your options (except as noted, none of them offer further options when
you hard-press):
Flashlight, Camera, Calculator, Stopwatch. As described previously.

Stopwatch. Tap to open the Clock app, already tuned to the Stopwatch
mode (“Stopwatch”). You’re all ready to time that 50-yard dash or
teenage room-cleaning.
Accessibility Shortcuts. Opens the same list of accessibility shortcuts
(Zoom, VoiceOver, AssistiveTouch, and so on) that you’ve chosen to
list for quick access when you triple-click the home button. These
options, and the triple-clicking business, are described in ???.


Alarm. Tap to open the Clock app, this time set to Alarm mode
(“Alarm”), where you can set (or turn off) an upcoming alarm.
Apple TV Remote. Pops open an onscreen version of your Apple TV
remote control, complete with Menu, Play, and Siri buttons—plus a
large trackpad area for scrolling around. This item is fantastic when you
can’t seem to dig your actual Apple TV remote from under the couch
cushions.
Do Not Disturb While Driving. Apple is very proud of this new iOS
11 feature, which prevents notifications, calls, or texts from lighting up
your phone or making it ring whenever you’re behind the wheel and in
motion.
You can read all about this feature in “Allowing Special Callers
Through”. There you’ll learn that you can (and probably should) set it
to turn on automatically when you’re driving. In other words, this
button is primarily useful for turning DNDWD off—when you’re in the
passenger seat.
Guided Access. Opens the on/off switch for Guided Access, otherwise
known as “kiosk mode.” It locks the phone into one particular app, so
that (for example) your toddler can play with it without wreaking any
real havoc on your phone. See “Guided Access (Kiosk Mode)”.
Low Power Mode. Here’s a one-touch way to manually switch on the
battery-saving feature known as Low Power Mode (“Battery Life
Tips”).
Magnifier. Turns the entire phone into a powerful illuminated
magnifying glass, as described in “Magnifier”.
Notes. This is a big, big deal. The idea is to give you immediate access
to Notes, so you can jump in, no matter what you were doing, to write
down something quickly: a phone number someone’s giving you,
dosage instructions your doctor’s rattling off, or a brainstorm you’ve
just had for a million-dollar product.

TIP
One tap opens directly into the Notes app. But if you hard-press instead, you get a list of
commands like New Note, New Checklist, New Photo, and New Sketch.
Now then. If you make Notes part of the Control Center, it will be
available even when the phone is locked. Clearly, that could be a
privacy disaster if your phone falls into the hands of some passing
evildoer.
Apple has given that scenario a lot of thought. First of all, if you open
Notes from the Lock screen, there’s no way to see any existing notes.
You’re stuck on a single page.
But that’s not the end of the privacy control—oh, heavens, no. Open
Settings → Notes → Access Notes from Lock Screen.
At the top, you have three choices. Off means forget it—you can’t open
Notes from the Lock screen at all. (So why bother putting the Notes
button on the Control Center? Because you can still use it when the
phone isn’t locked.)
Always Create New Note means that every time you open Notes from
the Lock screen, you wind up at another fresh, empty Notes page.
And Resume Last Note…well, if you choose this option, Settings has a
whole bunch more questions for you.
For example, if you open Notes from the Lock screen, do you want it to
reopen the last note you viewed in the app? Or just the last note you
opened from the Lock screen? That second option is another security
precaution, keeping your Lock-screen doodlings separate from your
other stuff.
You also get a bunch of time settings, like After 5 Minutes, After 15
Minutes, and so on. What Apple is saying here: “Even though you’ve
selected Resume Last Note, you’re still going to get a new, empty note
if it’s been at least five minutes since the last time you looked at it. Just
in case you wander off during a meeting and some idiot picks up your
phone six minutes later to see what you were writing.”

Once Daily here means that you’ll get a new, fresh note the first time
you open Notes from the Lock screen each day—handy for a journal or
a daily log.
Finally, Never ignores all these options. It means that every time you
open Notes from the Lock screen, you’ll return to whatever Note page
you’ve been working on.
And if all of these options make sense to you, there are fine career
opportunities awaiting you at the Internal Revenue Service.
Screen Recording. Here’s a freak of iOS nature: a Control Center
button for a feature you can’t trigger in any other way. The idea, of
course, is to let you record videos of what’s happening on the iPhone
screen—with narration, if you like. See “Recording Screen Video” for
details.
Text Size. There are all kinds of ways to make text bigger and more
readable on the iPhone’s screen (see “How to De-Sparsify iOS’s
Design”). But this new Control Center option gives you a more
immediate way of making adjustments—say, when you find yourself on
some web page in 3-point type. Tap to see a vertical slider, whose
segments indicate increasingly larger type sizes. Slide your finger
accordingly.
Voice Memos. The Voice Memos app has always been handy for
recording speeches, interviews, song ideas, and so on. What hasn’t been
handy is the long slog to get into the app and start recording.
No more! Tap this button to open the Voice Memos app, where another
tap begins the recording. Better yet, a hard-press on this Control Center
button produces a menu that lists your three most recent recordings (for
instant playback)—and a New Recording button. In other words, you
can now get the audio capture going with only one tap-and-slide in the
Control Center.
Wallet. Here’s another way to jump into your Apple Wallet—usually
because you want to use Apple Pay (“Apple Pay”). Tap this button to
open the Apple Pay screen with your preferred card selected; at this

point, you will use your fingerprint—or on the iPhone X, your face—to
complete the transaction.
If you hard-press, though, you get a list of your credit cards—handy if
you want to choose one that’s not your primary card.
Closing the Control Center
The Control Center closes when any of these things happen:
You tap one of the buttons that opens an app (Timer, Calculator,
Camera, Notes, and so on).
You tap anywhere on the gray background of the Control Center.
You swipe downward anywhere on the Control Center (except on the
brightness or volume sliders).
iPHONE X
Swipe upward.
You press the home button (or, on the iPhone X, swipe upward from the
bottom edge).
NOTE
In some apps, swiping up doesn’t open the Control Center on the first try, much to your probable
bafflement. Instead, swiping just makes a tiny 
 appear at the edge of the screen. (You’ll see this
behavior whenever the status bar—where the time and battery gauge appear—is hidden, as in the full-
screen modes of iBooks, Maps, Videos, and so on. It also happens in the Camera app.)
In those situations, Apple is trying to protect you from opening the Control Center accidentally—for
example, when what you really wanted to do was scroll up. No big deal; once the 
 appears, swipe
up again to open the Control Center panel.
If you find yourself opening the Control Center accidentally—when playing
games, for example—you can turn it off. Open Settings → Control Center.
Turn off Access Within Apps. Now swiping opens the Control Center only at

the Home screen. (You can also turn off Access on Lock Screen here, to make
sure the Control Center never appears when the phone is asleep.)
Passcode Protection
Like any smartphone, the iPhone offers a first line of defense for a phone that
winds up in the wrong hands. It’s designed to keep your stuff private from other
people in the house or the office, or to protect your information in case you lose
the iPhone.
Plenty of iPhone owners don’t bother setting up a passcode. Maybe they never
set the thing down, so they don’t worry about thieves. Or maybe there’s just not
that much personal information on the phone—and meanwhile, having to enter a
passcode every time you wake the phone can get to be a hassle.
TIP
If you ever do lose your phone, you can put a passcode on it by remote control; see ???.
The other half of people reason that the inconvenience of entering a passcode
many times a day is a small price to pay for the knowledge that nobody can get
into your stuff if you lose your phone.
Of course, you can also protect your phone with a fingerprint or (on the iPhone
X) face recognition. But both of those require that you first create a passcode,
which will always be the fallback.
Even if you usually unlock the phone with your finger or your face, you’ll still
be required to use that passcode, for added security, after any of these things
occur:
You’ve restarted or shut down the phone.
You’ve made several failed attempts to log in with a finger or face.
It’s been two days since you unlocked the phone.
It’s been six days since you last entered your passcode, and you haven’t

used your finger or face in eight hours.
None of that will be on the test. The point is that sometimes, even with finger or
face recognition, you’ll need your passcode.
Setting Up a Passcode
Now, you probably created a phone passcode the first time you turned your
iPhone on (see “Closing the Control Center”); the iPhone practically insists on it.
But if you skipped that step, here’s how to do it now.
Open Settings → Touch ID & Passcode. (On the 5c, it’s just called Passcode
Lock; on the iPhone X, it’s called Face ID & Passcode.)
Tap Turn Passcode On. iOS proposes that you make up a six-digit passcode.
But if you tap Passcode Options, you can choose instead a Custom
Alphanumeric Code (any password, any length), Custom Numeric Code (an

all-number code, any length), or 4-Digit Numeric Code (you know—ATM
style).
You’re asked to type the passcode you want twice, to make sure you didn’t make
a typo.
NOTE
Don’t kid around with this passcode. If you forget the iPhone code, you’ll have to restore your iPhone
(???), which wipes out everything on it. You’ve probably still got most of the data on your computer or
backed up on iCloud, of course (music, video, contacts, calendar), but you may lose text messages, mail,
and so on.
Once you confirm your passcode, you return to the Passcode Lock screen. Here
you have a few more options.
The Require Passcode option lets you specify how quickly the passcode is
requested before locking somebody out: immediately after the iPhone wakes or
1, 15, 30, 60, or 240 minutes later. (Those options are a convenience to you, so
you can quickly check your calendar or missed messages without having to enter
the passcode—while still protecting your data from, for example, criminals who
pick up your iPhone while you’re out getting coffee.)
Certain features are accessible on the Lock screen even before you’ve entered
your passcode: the Today and Notifications tabs of the Notification Center; the
Control Center; Siri, Wallet, Home Control, Reply with Message (the ability
to reply to text messages right from their notification bubble on the Lock
screen), and Return Missed Calls (the option to return a missed call from its
bubble, without unlocking the phone; that’s new in iOS 11).
These are huge conveniences, but also, technically, a security risk. Somebody
who finds your phone on your desk could, for example, blindly voice-dial your
colleagues or use Siri to send a text. If you turn these switches off, then nobody
can use these features until after unlocking the phone with your passcode,
fingerprint, or face.
Finally, here is Erase Data—an option that’s scary and reassuring at the same
time. When this option is on, if someone makes 10 incorrect guesses at your
passcode, your iPhone erases itself. It’s assuming that some lowlife burglar is

trying to crack into it to have a look at all your personal data.
This option, a pertinent one for professional people, provides potent protection
from patient password prospectors.
And that is all. From now on, each time you wake your iPhone (if it’s not within
the window of repeat visits you established), you’re asked for your passcode.
Fingerprint Security (Touch ID)
Most iOS 11 phones offer the option of using a more secure and convenient kind
of “passcode”: your fingertip. (The exceptions are the iPhone 5c, which has no
biometric features, and the iPhone X, which uses face recognition instead.)
The lens built right into the home button (clever!) reads your finger at any angle.
It can’t be faked out by a plastic finger or even a chopped-off finger. You can
teach it to recognize up to five fingerprints; they can all be yours, or some can
belong to other people you trust.
Before you can use your fingertip as a passcode, though, you have to teach the
phone to recognize it. Here’s how that goes:
1. Create a passcode. You can’t use a fingerprint instead of a passcode,
only in addition to one. You’ll still need a passcode from time to time to
keep the phone’s security tight. For example, you need to enter your
passcode if you can’t make your fingerprint work (maybe it got encased
in acrylic in a hideous crafts accident), or if you restart the phone, or if
you haven’t used the phone in 48 hours or more.
So open Settings → Touch ID & Passcode and create a password, as
already described.
2. Teach a fingerprint. At the top of the Touch ID & Passcode screen,
you see the on/off switches for the three things your fingerprint can do:
unlock the phone (iPhone Unlock), pay for things (Apple Pay), and
serve as your password when you buy books, music, apps, and videos
from Apple’s online stores (iTunes & App Store).
But what you really want to tap here, of course, is Add a Fingerprint.

Now comes the cool part. Place the finger you want to train onto the
home button—your thumb or index finger are the most logical
candidates. You’re asked to touch it to the home button over and over,
maybe six times. Each time, the gray lines of the onscreen fingerprint
darken a little more.
Once you’ve filled in the fingerprint, you see the Adjust Your Grip
screen. Tap Continue. Now, the iPhone wants you to touch the home
button another few times, this time tipping the finger a little each time
so the sensor gets a better view of your finger’s edges.
Once that’s done, the screen says “Success!”
You’re now ready to start using the fingerprint. Try it: Put the phone to sleep.
Then wake it by pressing the home button, and leave your finger on the button
for about a second. The phone reads your fingerprint and instantly unlocks itself.
And now, a few notes about using your fingerprint as a password:

Yes, you can touch your finger to the home button at the Lock screen.
But you can also touch it at any Enter Passcode screen.
Suppose, for example, that your Lock screen shows that you missed a
text message. And you want to reply. Well, you can swipe across that
notification to open it in its native habitat—the Messages app—but first
you’re shown the Enter Passcode screen. Ignore that. Just touch the
home button with the finger whose print you recorded.
Apple says the image of your fingerprint is encrypted and stored in the
iPhone’s processor chip. It’s never transmitted anywhere, it never goes
online, and it’s never collected by Apple.
If you return to the Touch ID & Passcode screens, you can tap Add a
Fingerprint again to teach your phone to recognize a second finger.
And a third, fourth, and fifth.
On the other hand, it makes a lot of sense to register the same finger
several times. You’ll be amazed at how much faster and more reliably
your thumb (for example) is recognized if you’ve trained it as several
different “fingerprints.”
To rename a fingerprint, tap its current name (“Finger 1” or whatever).
To delete one, tap its name and then tap Delete Fingerprint. (You can
figure out which finger label is which by touching the home button; the
corresponding label blinks. Sweet!)
You can register your toes instead of fingers, if that’s helpful. Or even
patches of your wrist or arm, if you’re patient (and weird).
The Touch ID scanner may have trouble recognizing your touch if your
finger is wet, greasy, or scarred.
The iPhone’s finger reader isn’t just a camera; it doesn’t just look for
the image of your fingerprint. It’s actually measuring the tiny
differences in electrical conductivity between the raised parts of your
fingerprint (which aren’t conductive) and the skin just beneath the
surface (which is). That’s why a plastic finger won’t work—and even
your own finger won’t work if it’s been chopped off (or if you’ve died).

Fingerprints for Apps, Websites, and Apple Pay
So if your fingerprint is such a great solution to password overload, how come it
works only to unlock the phone and to buy stuff from Apple’s online stores?
Wouldn’t it be great if your fingerprint could also log you into secure websites?
Or serve as your ID when you buy stuff online?
That dream is finally becoming a reality. Software companies can now use your
Touch ID fingerprint to log into their apps. Mint (for checking your personal
finances), Evernote (for storing notes, pictures, and to-do lists), Amazon (for
buying stuff), and other apps now permit you to substitute a fingerprint touch for
typing a password.
What’s really wild is that password-storing apps like 1Password and LastPass
have been updated, too. Those apps are designed to memorize your passwords
for all sites on the web, of every type—and now you can use your fingerprint to
unlock them.
Moreover, your fingerprint is now the key to the magical door of Apple Pay, the
wireless pay-with-your-iPhone technology described in “Apple Pay”.
All of this is great news. Most of us would be happy if we never, ever had to
type in another password.
Face ID (iPhone X)
When Apple decided to cover the entire face of the iPhone X with screen, there
was an obvious problem: the home button. Were they really going to interrupt
that gorgeous ocean of OLED screen with a cutout for the home button?
Nope. The home button went away. In place of its functions, Apple came up with
the various swipes and side-button presses described in this book. And in place
of the fingerprint reader, the iPhone X has a facial recognition system.
Basically, you unlock the phone by looking at it.
You can’t fool Face ID with a photo, a mask, or even a 3D model of your head.
It works in the dark. It works if you change hairstyles, glasses, makeup, or facial
hair. It works through most sunglasses. It works if you’re wearing a hat and scarf
(it just has to see your eyes, nose, and mouth).

If you grow fat, or skinny, or old, it will still work, because it gradually updates
its model of your face as you use it. (And if you have radical plastic surgery,
well, you’ll have to retrain it. Takes about a minute.)
It can’t be forced on you when you’re sleeping, because you have to be looking
at the phone. It can’t be forced on you by a police officer, because you can
disable it with a quick, secret button press (“Help from the Shutdown Screen”).
Whereas one in 50,000 people might be able to get into your phone with a
fingerprint, Face ID’s miss rate is one in a million. (The exception: Your
identical twin might be able to fool Face ID. You’ve been warned.)
You’ll use Face ID wherever you used to use your fingerprint: triggering Apple
Pay, for example, or logging into apps like Mint, 1Password, and E-Trade.
TrueDepth
So how does the phone recognize your face? Using a mass of sensors Apple calls
TrueDepth. They’re hiding in the Notch at the top of the iPhone X.
When you wake the phone, an infrared lamp (called the flood illuminator—but
you knew that) blasts invisible light forward to see if a face is in range. If so, a
tiny dot projector blasts 30,000 pinpoints of infrared light onto your face, and an
infrared camera reads the distortion of their spacing and shape to find its
contours. (That’s why Face ID works in the dark—it relies on infrared light.)
If the infrared camera confirms that you’re you—if the mathematical model of
your facial contours matches what it captured when you trained it—then the
phone unlocks. Only the tiny opening of a padlock on the Lock screen signifies
that facial recognition has done its thing.
Training Face ID
In most ways, Face ID works exactly like Touch ID, described earlier. For
example, you must create a passcode as a backup before you can turn on Face
ID.
You’ll need that passcode from time to time, for added security—after you’ve
restarted the phone, after five failed attempts to log in with facial recognition,
and so on (see “Closing the Control Center”).

After creating your passcode in Settings → Face ID & Passcode, tap Set Up
Face ID. Center your face in the circle, and then trace a circle in the air with
your nose, so that the frame of your face circle fills in. You’re asked to do this a
second time—and that’s all it needs to create its model of your face.
(Apple stresses that the scan of your face is never transmitted, not even to Apple,
and not part of any backup. It’s stored in a protected piece of memory called the
Secure Enclave.)
Using Face ID
From now on, you can unlock your iPhone X like this:

Wake the phone by tapping the screen, pressing the side button, or
tipping the phone upright.
Look at the phone. A white padlock at the top of the screen opens to
show you that Face ID has recognized you and unlocked the phone.
If all you wanted to do was check your notifications or something, that’s
all there is to it. In fact, what’s especially cool is that when you wake
the phone, message and mail notifications don’t reveal their contents
(below, left)—but once the phone recognizes you, they expand in place
(right)!
If you actually want to proceed—to go to the Home screen, for example
—then there’s one more step:
Swipe up from beneath the screen. It can be a short, quick swipe. The
Home screen (or whatever app you were using) appears. You’re in.
Every now and then, Face ID doesn’t unlock when you look at it, and asks that
you enter your passcode. Do so! Each time, Face ID learns from its mistake and
is more likely to recognize you the next time.
TIP
There are some useful options to change in Face ID: See “Meet Haptics”.

Chapter 3. 2 The Lock Screen &
Notifications
The Lock screen—the first thing you see when you wake the iPhone—is more
than just a big Do Not Disturb sign. It’s a lively bulletin board for up-to-date
information about your life. It’s possible to have complete work sessions right at
the Lock screen, without even fully unlocking the iPhone.
For starters, you can use the iPhone as a watch—millions of people do. Just lift
the sleeping phone, or press the side button, to consult the Lock screen’s time
and date display, and then shove the phone right back into your pocket. The
iPhone goes back to sleep after a few seconds.
Better yet, the Lock screen is a handy status screen. Here you see a record of
everything that happened while you weren’t paying attention. It’s a list of missed
calls, text messages received, notifications from your apps, and other essential
information.
Three Swipes, You’re In
The Lock screen is the centerpiece of three other important screens. You can
swipe up, left, or right to bring them into view.
Swipe left to open the Camera app (“The Camera App”).
Swipe right to reveal the Today (Widgets) screen (“The Today Screen
(Widgets)”).
Swipe up from the bottom of the screen to open the Control Center
shortcuts screen (“Control Center”).
iPHONE X
Swipe down from the upper-right corner for the Control Center.

Keep this map in your head every time you wake your phone:
Notifications
A notification is an update from an app trying to get your attention. You get one
every time a text message comes in, an alarm goes off, a calendar appointment is

imminent, your battery is running low, and so on. Almost every app can display
a notification, if you let it.
In iOS 11, Apple gave notifications a thorough makeover. The old system was
pretty complicated—three places to find them, two kinds to deal with. Now
things are simpler (mostly). Notifications now appear in only two different
places. Maybe 2½:
On your screen, while you’re working. They pop up to get your
attention, as shown on the following pages.
On the Lock screen, in a scrolling list of alerts that came in while you
were away (below, left). (Unlocking the phone wipes them away. The
next time you unlock the phone, that batch will be gone.)
On the pull-down Lock screen. Weirdly enough, if you swipe down
from the top of the screen, iOS 11 presents you with—the Lock screen!

Again! Yes, it’s exactly the same thing you see when you unlock your
phone, complete with wallpaper, day, and date. You can even swipe left
for the Camera, or swipe right for the Today screen!
There’s only one difference: On the pull-down Lock screen (above,
right), you see all the notifications that have come in recently, even ones
you’ve previously dismissed, even if they’re several days old. (On the
actual Lock screen, you have to swipe up to see these older ones.)
To close this screen, just swipe any empty area up and away, or press the home
button.
iPHONE X
To reveal the pull-down Lock screen, drag down from the left “ear” or the Notch at the top of the screen.
To dismiss it, make a small swipe upward from the very bottom of the screen—the usual home-button
gesture.
The following pages tackle these 2½ notification situations one by one.
TIP
There is one potential danger in the fact that the actual Lock screen and the pull-down Lock screen look
the same. You might pull down the Lock screen, get distracted, and then set the phone down, thinking
that it’s locked, and lose your life and secrets to the next person who walks by.
Don’t do that.
Dealing with Notifications
These days, there’s a lot more you can do with a notification than just read it and
nod. Apple has tried to make notifications as productive, customizable, and un-
interrupty as possible.
For example, you can deal with one in any of these ways, even if they’re on the
Lock screen:
Flick it away. If a notification banner appears while the phone is on,
flick it upward to make it disappear.

Answer it in place. You can take direct action on many kinds of
notifications—incoming text messages, emails, or calendar invitations,
for example. Without leaving the notification banner, you can reply to a
text message, delete an email, accept a calendar invitation, see where
your Uber car is, mark a Reminder as done, and so on.
If you have an iPhone 6s or later model, you have 3D Touch (“3D
Touch”). Just hard-press on the banner to expand it and see your action
options—to reply to a text message, for example (facing page, right).
If you have an earlier model, swipe to the left on the banner to reveal
your option buttons. For a text message, they might be View and Clear
(facing page, top left); if it’s an email, they say Trash and Mark as
Read; and so on.
Open it. Finally, here’s the obvious one: You can tap a notification to
open the app it came from. (If the phone is locked, you’ll be asked to
unlock it first.) Tap an email notification to open the message in Mail;
tap a text-message notification to open it in Messages; and so on. That’s
handy when you want to dig in and see the full context of the
notification.
(If you’ve broken your tapping finger, there are two other ways to go
about it: Swipe to the right to reveal the Open button shown below at
bottom left. Either continue swiping, all the way to the edge of the
screen, or stop and tap Open. Either way, you open the message in the
corresponding app.)
Clear it. Once you’ve tapped a banner to open it, that notification no
longer appears on either Lock screen. It’s gone.
You can also dismiss a banner without opening it by swiping all the way
to the left (or swiping slightly leftward and tapping Clear).

Dismissing Clumps of Notifications
There’s no way to clear out notifications in a bunch when you’re on the actual
Lock screen. On the pull-down Lock screen, though, you can clear all the
notifications for an entire listed day by tapping the 
 next to a day’s name
and then tapping Clear.
If you have an iPhone 6s or later, you can also erase your entire list of
notifications, like this: Hard-press the 
 next to a day’s name; tap Clear All
Notifications. (There’s no Clear All function on older iPhone models.)
Customizing Notifications

You can (and should) specify which apps are allowed to junk up your
notification screens. Open Settings → Notifications to see the master list, with
one entry for every app that might ever want your attention. (Or just tell Siri,
“Open notification settings.”)
You’ll quickly discover that every app thinks it’s important; every app wants its
notifications to blast into your face when you’re working.
You, however, may not agree. You may not consider it essential to know when
your kid’s Plants vs. Zombies score has changed, for example.
So: Tap an app’s name to open its individual Notifications screen (below—the
News app, in this example). Here you’ll find settings that vary by app, but they
generally run along these lines:
Allow Notifications. If you don’t want this app to make any
notifications pop up at all, turn this off.
Sounds. Some apps try to get your attention with a sound effect when a
notification appears. Turn this off if you think your phone makes too
many beeps and burbles as it is. (Some apps also let you choose which
sound effect plays to get your attention. You can change the sound or
choose None.)


Badge App Icon. A badge is a little red circled number (
, for
example). It appears right on an app’s icon to indicate how many
updates are waiting for you. Turn it off if you really don’t need that
reminder.
Show on Lock Screen. Here you control whether this app’s banners
appear on the actual Lock screen at all. This switch has no effect on the
pull-down Lock screen. This app’s banners still show up there, which
means that you can set up different sets of banners on each one.
Maybe you want the real Lock screen to show only missed calls, new
text messages, and new email—but you’d like the pull-down Lock
screen to be fully stocked with Twitter and Facebook updates, for
example. Or maybe you’d rather not permit passing evildoers to pick up
your phone and see your notifications without even having to unlock it.
That’s why you have this switch. It governs your ability to see this app’s
updates on the Lock screen.
Show in History. The History is a list of notifications that in theory
you’ve already seen. (On the Lock screen, you swipe up to see them. On
the pull-down Lock screen, they’re always visible.)
Once you’ve unlocked your phone, any notifications on its Lock screen
get moved into the History list. That is, the next time you look at the
Lock screen, you’ll have to swipe up to see them.
Unless, of course, you turn off Show in History for this app. Now, this
app’s notifications disappear completely after you unlock the phone.
Show as Banners. In iOS 11, there’s no more choice of banners versus
alerts. All notifications look and work alike. The only choice you have
to make, for each app, is whether they linger on your screen—or
disappear after a moment.
If you turn off Show as Banners, then nothing appears on the screen
when an app wants your attention. (You can still direct these alerts to
appear on your Lock screen, as described already.)

A Temporary banner appears at the top of the screen, holds still long
enough for you to read it, and then goes away after a few seconds.
Facebook and Twitter updates and incoming email messages do well as
temporary banners.
A Persistent banner stays on your screen until you tap or swipe it. You
might use this option for apps whose messages are too important to
miss, like alarms, flight updates, or texts.
Show Preview. This is a privacy thing. When someone sends you a text,
do you want the notification banner to include the message itself?
(That’s the Preview.) Or do you want the banner to indicate only that a
person has sent some message, which you then have to tap to read?
And it’s not just texts. Do you want the Uber information to appear in
the banner? How about the Facebook status? The name of your alarm or
reminder?
You have three choices here: Always (always show the message in the
notification banner), When Unlocked (show it only if I’m using the
phone—not when it’s locked), and Never.
As you poke around in the Notifications settings, you’ll discover that certain
oddball apps offer some options that don’t match up with the settings you see for
most apps. Don’t freak out. It’s all part of Apple’s master plan to put controls
where it hopes you’ll find them.
Locking Down the Lock Screen
Now, remember: You can enjoy any of these activities, and see any of this
information, even before you’ve entered your password or used fingerprint or
face recognition. The bad guys don’t need a password to view your Lock screen.
For privacy purposes, therefore, you can turn those features off individually in
Settings → Touch ID & Passcode (or Face ID & Passcode). Here you’ll find
on/off switches for a whole raft of Lock screen features: the Today View,
Recent Notifications, Control Center, Siri, Reply with Message (to text
messages), Home Control (of your app-controllable home-automation devices),
Wallet (for Apple Pay), and Return Missed Calls (right from the “missed call”

notification banner).
NOTE
If you turn off Recent Notifications, you eliminate the sole difference between the actual Lock screen
and the pull-down Lock screen: the listing of older notifications. Notifications will appear on the Lock
screen as they come in, but you’ll have no way to swipe to see earlier ones you’ve already seen.
There’s no way to block access to the Camera from the Lock screen. (Well, you
can open Settings → General → Restrictions and turn off Camera. That step,
however, hides the Camera completely—it even disappears from the Home
screen.)
The Today Screen (Widgets)
To the left of the Lock screen, you’ll find a motley assortment of panels that
Apple calls widgets. Some are quick-access buttons that launch related apps, like
quick-dial (or quick-text) buttons for your favorite contacts; others are info-bits
that you might want to check throughout the day, like your calendar, news,
sports, and weather.
This entire wonderland is available before you’ve even unlocked the phone—
quickly. Just swipe right from the Lock screen. Great when you want to check
your calendar for your next thing.
It’s also available when you’ve opened the pull-down Lock screen (swipe right,
above or below the notification banners), and even when you’re at the Home
screen (swipe right).
Truth is, many people don’t even know the Today screen is there; even if they
do, most people don’t use it. And sure enough, this feature doesn’t really become
useful until you customize it: Rearrange the widgets, remove the ones you’d
never touch, and install more useful ones.


The very first time you open the Widgets screen, you see things like the search
bar (“Speak!”), Up Next, Siri App Suggestions, and News. (They’re described
on these pages.) But the key to the real magic is the Edit button, which is hiding
below all the widgets, several scrolls down.
The list you find here has two parts: the widgets that are currently installed and
the ones that aren’t. Delete a widget by tapping its 
; add one by tapping its 
. Rearrange the installed ones by dragging their 
 handles. When
you’re finished, tap Done.
So what widgets are available? Here’s a rundown:
Up Next. The next couple of things on your calendar. Tap to log in and
open the Calendar app, which shows you details of the event.
Siri App Suggestions. This little row of app icons actually have
nothing to do with Siri, the voice-controlled assistant. Instead, these are
the iPhone’s suggestions of apps you may want to use right now, based
on your location, the time of day, and your typical routine. For example,
if you open the Music app every evening during your 6:30 p.m. gym

workout, then the Music app appears at that time, ready to open. If you
check your Fitbit app every morning when you wake, then this screen
offers its icon at that time of day. The idea is to save you from having to
hunt for these apps when you need them again.
If you find these icons unhelpful, you can turn off this widget (above).
You can also prevent certain apps’ icons from appearing here. Open
Settings → Siri & Search. Here, if you scroll down, you’ll find the
names of all apps that might be inclined to appear as a Siri Suggestion;
you can tap them to turn them off, one at a time.
Suggestions in Look Up means, “When I highlight text and tap Look
Up, I want to see only its definition or web results—not app
suggestions.”
News. Headlines from the News app (“News”).
Weather. You guessed it.
Batteries. Hey, it’s your phone’s current battery charge!
Maps Destinations. If you use Apple’s Maps app, and routinely enter
the addresses of your appointments on the Calendar, here’s the payoff: a
list of upcoming and predicted destinations, including your next
calendar appointment and where you parked your car (“Where You
Parked”).
Calendar. Today’s agenda. Tap an appointment to unlock your phone
and see its details screen.
Reminders. Your unfinished to-dos. You can mark one as done here,
without having to unlock the phone and open the app. That’s a big deal.
Favorites. This is your speed-dial list. The first four people you’ve
designated as favorites appear here, for quick speed-dialing.
But it’s not just about phone calls (who does that anymore?). You can
also designate a texting or email address, Skype handle, or other
communication address as a favorite (“The Favorites List”). Which
means that, using this widget, you can insta-text your spouse or your kid
without having to open the app, access the address book, choose the

person’s name, and so on. Shortcuts, baby!
Files. Here are the most recent files you’ve moved to or from your
iCloud Drive (“The Carpenter’s Level”).
Find Friends. This widget shows a map that pinpoints the location of
any loved ones you’re tracking (???).
Mail. A speed-dial list of the people you’ve designated as VIPs (“VIPs
and Flagged Messages”), for quick emailing.
Maps Nearby. These icons are shortcuts for time-appropriate searches,
like coffee in the morning, or nightlife after dark.
Maps Transit. If you use Maps’ public-transportation feature, this
widget lets you know about delays and service interruptions.
Music. Playback controls for whatever you were playing last.
Notes. You see the first couple of lines of the Notes page you most
recently edited.
Photos. Thumbnails that, after you unlock the phone, open recent
Memories (automated slideshows of recent time periods).
Reminders. Here’s where you see to-do items you’ve set up in the
Reminders app with a time and date.
Files. This widget shows the icons of any files you’ve recently added to
your iCloud Drive (“The Carpenter’s Level”).
TV. Shows any shows you’ve been watching in the TV app (“The TV
App”).
Stocks. The latest on whatever stocks you follow (““Remid Me About
This””).
Tips. This is the closest Apple comes to offering a manual for iOS 11.
You probably have many other widgets, too, installed by your apps. Waze, Yelp,
The New York Times, NPR, Google Maps, Kindle, Evernote, Dropbox, Chrome,
Amazon, and many other apps put widgets here for your quick-glancing

pleasure.
TIP
Many widgets are expandable. If you see a Show More button on a widget, it means that a larger area,
showing more information, is available to you. For example, expanding the Favorites widget shows
icons for eight speed-dial people instead of four; expanding the Notes widget shows the three notes
you’ve most recently viewed instead of one; and so on.
Widgets on the Home Screen
You don’t have to swipe onto the Today screen to view a widget you need right
now. On the recent models, you can hard-press (“3D Touch”) an app’s home-
screen icon to view not just its shortcut menu but also its widget, for quick
consultation. (This pop-up panel also includes an Add Widget button, should
you decide to install it on the Widgets screen.)
In Case of Emergency
In iOS 11, Apple has turned the iPhone into an ingenious, smart emergency
beacon. When you’re in trouble—you’re being followed, you’re being attacked,
you’ve fallen and you can’t get up—the phone can automatically dial both 911
and send text messages to specified loved ones, letting them know you have an
emergency and including your location. (If you move, they get additional texts
letting them know where.)
When you need help, trigger the automatic emergency call like this:
iPhone SE, 5s, 6, 6s, 7. Click the side button five times fast.
iPhone 8, X. Hold in the side button and either volume button
simultaneously for two seconds.
(Alternatively, press those buttons for a full second and then drag the
Emergency SOS slider on the Shut Down screen. But there’s an
advantage to doing it the other way: You can do it without looking at the
phone, or even taking it out of your pocket.)

TIP
In Settings → Emergency SOS, you’ll find a fascinating option called Also Works with 5 Clicks. If
you turn it on, then pressing the side button five times rapidly also works to trigger the emergency
dialing, just as it does on older iPhones. In times of danger, this method may be faster than pressing and
waiting.
In all cases, a whooping alarm begins, and a big red 3-second countdown starts.
At zero, the phone dials 911. (The countdowns are designed to give you a chance
to change your mind.) Then, after a 10-second countdown, it sends texts to your
designated contacts, accompanied by a little map. “Emergency SOS,” it says.
“[Your name] has made an emergency call from this approximate location. You
are receiving this message because [your name] has listed you as an emergency
contact.”
To set this up, open Settings → Emergency SOS. Here you can turn off the
countdown; you can choose who gets notified (tap Set Up Emergency Contacts
in Health, and then tap Edit); and you can turn off Auto Call. In that case,
there’s no countdown or alarm or auto-dialing. You must swipe your finger
across an Emergency SOS slider to place the call, and the call goes to the
nearest police office line (not 911).

Help from the Shutdown Screen
To turn your phone fully off, you’re supposed to hold in the side button for a few
seconds (“Side Button (On/Off)”). But if you hold in the side button and either
of the volume buttons simultaneously, you get new additional sliders:
Medical ID. Swipe to open a screenful of essential medical information
about you. And where does the Medical ID screen get this information?
You’ve filled it out in the Health app (“Health”).
Emergency SOS. This is the same auto-dialing process described
already.
Note that both of these features are available even if the phone is locked.
Anyone can hold in those buttons for a couple of seconds and get help on the
way.

The “Forcible Unlock” Situation
When the public first heard about Face ID on the iPhone X, there was panic.
“Oh, great,” they said. “So now a mugger can force me to unlock the phone by
holding it up to my face!” (There were also variants: “So now a cop can force
me to unlock the phone by holding it up to my face!”)
Apple has you covered. If anyone demands your phone under threat, bring up the
shutdown screen described above. What your antagonist probably doesn’t realize
is that once that screen appears, Touch ID and Face ID are turned off. Neither
your face nor your fingerprint will unlock the phone at this point—only the
passcode will work.
Of course, the mugger or rogue officer could still try to force you to enter your
passcode—but now you’ve got bigger problems.

Chapter 4. 3 Typing, Editing &
Searching
As a pocket computer, the iPhone faces a fundamental limitation: It has no real
keyboard or mouse. Which might be considered a drawback on a gadget that’s
capable of running millions of programs.
Fortunately, where there’s a problem, there’s software that can fix it. The modern
iPhone’s virtual keyboard is smart in all kinds of ways—automatically predicting
words and correcting typos, for example. And besides: If you don’t like the
iPhone’s onscreen keyboard, you can just choose one designed by a different
company.
This chapter covers every aspect of working with text on the iPhone: entering it,
dictating it, fixing it, and searching for it.
The Keyboard
It’s true, boys and girls: The iPhone has no physical keys. A virtual keyboard,
therefore, is the only possible built-in system for typing text. Like it or not,
you’ll be doing a lot of tapping on glass.
The keyboard appears automatically whenever you tap in a place where typing is
possible: in an outgoing email or text message, in the Notes program, in the
address bar of the web browser, and so on.
Just tap the key you want. As your finger taps the glass, a “speech balloon”
appears above your finger, showing an enlarged version of the key you actually
hit (since your finger is now blocking your view of the keyboard).
TIP
If you worry about spies nearby figuring out what you’re typing by watching those bubbles pop up over
your fingertips, you can turn them off. Open Settings → General → Keyboard, and turn off Character
Preview.

In darker gray, surrounding the letters, you’ll find these special keys:
Shift (
). When you tap this key, the arrow turns dark to indicate
that it’s in effect. The next letter you type appears as a capital. Then the 
 key returns to normal, meaning that the next letter will be
lowercase.
TIP
It used to be that the color of the Shift key was your only clue that you were about to type a capital letter;
the actual letters on the onscreen keyboard’s keys always appeared AS CAPITALS. But these days, the
key letters appear in lowercase until you press Shift. (If you prefer that old system, though, open
Settings → General → Accessibility → Keyboard. Turn off Show Lowercase Keys.
Caps Lock (
). The iPhone has a Caps Lock “key,” but it’s hidden.
To engage it, double-tap the 
 key; it changes to 
. You’re now
in Caps Lock mode, and you’ll type in ALL CAPITALS until you tap
the 
 key again (or the 123 or 
 keys). If you can’t seem to make
Caps Lock work, try double-tapping the 
 key fast. Or see if maybe
Caps Lock got turned off in Settings → General → Keyboard.


Backspace (
). This key actually has three speeds:
Tap it once to delete the letter just before the blinking insertion point.
Hold it down to “walk” backward, deleting as you go.
If you hold down the key long enough, it starts deleting words rather
than letters, one whole chunk at a time.
. Tap this button when you want to type numbers or punctuation.
The keyboard changes to offer a palette of numbers and symbols. Tap
the same key—which now says ABC—to return to the letters keyboard.
Once you’re on the numbers/symbols pad, a new dark-gray button
appears, labeled #+=. Tapping it summons a third keyboard layout,
containing the less frequently used symbols, like brackets, the # and %
symbols, bullets, and math symbols.
return. Tapping this key moves to the next line, just as on a real
keyboard. (There’s no Tab key or Enter key in iPhone Land.)
Making the Keyboard Work
Some people have no problem tapping those tiny virtual keys; others struggle for
days. Either way, here are some tips:
As you type, use the whole pad of your finger or thumb. Don’t try to tap
with only a skinny part of your finger to match the skinny keys. You’ll
be surprised at how fast and accurate this method is. (Tap, don’t mash.)
This may sound like New Age hooey, but trust the keyboard. Don’t
pause to check the result after each letter. Just plow on.
NOTE
Although you don’t see it, the sizes of the keys on the iPhone keyboard are changing all the time. That is,
the software enlarges the “landing area” of certain keys, based on probability.
For example, suppose you type tim. The iPhone knows that no word in the language begins with timw or
timr—and so, invisibly, it enlarges the “landing area” of the E key, which greatly diminishes your
chances of making a typo on that last letter.

Without a mouse, how are you supposed to correct an error you made a
few sentences ago? Easy—use the loupe.
Hold your fingertip down anywhere in the text until the magnified circle
appears. Without lifting your finger, drag anywhere in the text; the
insertion point moves along with it. Release when the cursor line is
where you want to delete or add text, just as though you’d clicked there
with a mouse.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6s or later, you may prefer to use the invisible trackpad to correct an error instead;
see “3D Touch: The Secret Trackpad”.
Don’t bother using the Shift key to capitalize a new sentence. The

iPhone does that capitalizing automatically. (To turn this feature on or
off, use Settings → General → Keyboard → Auto-Capitalization.)
Don’t type a period at the end of each sentence, either. Because the
period is such a frequently used symbol, there’s an awesome shortcut
that doesn’t require switching to the punctuation keyboard: At the end
of a sentence, tap the space bar twice. You get a period, a space, and a
capitalized letter at the beginning of the next word. (This, too, can be
turned off—in Settings → General → Keyboard → “.” Shortcut—
although it’s hard to imagine why you’d want to.)
You can save time by leaving out the apostrophe in contractions. Type
im, dont, or cant. The iPhone proposes I’m, don’t, or can’t, so you can
just tap the space bar to fix the word and continue.
Many beginners hold the phone with one hand and tap keys with the
index finger of the other. As you become more proficient, though, you
may prefer two-thumb typing—or, faster yet, type with your left thumb
(so that your left hand can grip the phone) and right index finger (which
is more agile).
Autocorrect: Your Typing Assistant from Hell
The iPhone, like all smartphones, offers a feature called autocorrect. Whenever
the software thinks you’ve made a spelling error, it automatically substitutes the
“correct” word or spelling. For example, if you type imsame, the iPhone realizes
that you meant insane and replaces it automatically.
Most of the time, that’s helpful; autocorrect even finishes long words for you
sometimes. But you have to be vigilant; many times, autocorrect substitutes the
wrong word! And sometimes you don’t notice it, and you wind up texting
gibberish to your correspondent. The Internet is filled with hilarious examples of
autocorrect gone wrong. (Pay a visit someday to damnyouautocorrect.com to
read some choice ones.)
So here’s the important thing: The iPhone always shows you the replacement it
intends to make before making it, either as one of the QuickType suggestions
(below, top left) or as a blue-type bubble (lower left). To accept its suggestion,

tap the space bar or any punctuation. To prevent the replacement, tap the first
QuickType word (the one in quotes) or the blue-type bubble.
TIP
If you turn on Speak Auto-text (in Settings → General → Accessibility → Speech → Typing
Feedback), the iPhone even speaks the suggested word out loud. That way, you can keep your focus on
the keyboard.
And by the way: If you accidentally accept an autocorrect suggestion, tap the
Backspace key. A word bubble appears, which you can tap to reinstate what
you’d originally typed (shown above at right).
TIP
If you think autocorrect is doing you more harm than good, you can turn it off in Settings → General →
Keyboard. Turn off Auto-Correction.
QuickType
What Apple calls its QuickType keyboard can save you a lot of time, tapping,
and errors.
The idea is simple: As you type a sentence, the software predicts which word
you might type next—which are the three most likely words, actually—and

displays them as three buttons above the keyboard.
If you begin the sentence by typing, “I really,” then the three suggestions might
be want, don’t, and like.
But what if you intended to say, “I really hope…”? In that case, type the first
letter of “hope.” Instantly, the three suggestions change to “h”, hope, and hate.
(The first button always shows, in quotes, whatever non-word you’ve typed so
far, just in case that’s what you intend. To place it into your text, you can tap that
button or tap the space bar or some punctuation.)
In other words, QuickType is autocomplete on steroids. (In fact, one of the three
suggestions is always the same one you would have seen in the little
autocomplete bubble.) Frankly, it’s a rush when QuickType correctly proposes
finishing a long word for you.
With QuickType, you can produce a sentence like “I’ll gladly pay you Tuesday
for a hamburger today” with 26 taps on the screen. (If you had to type out the
whole thing, you’d have tapped 50 keys.) QuickType also adds spaces for you.
QuickType is smart in several ways:
QuickType’s suggestions are different in Messages (where language
tends to be casual) than in Mail (where people write more formally).
Similarly, QuickType modifies its suggestions based on whom you’re

writing to. It learns.
Sometimes, QuickType offers you several words on a single button, to
save you even more time (for example up to or in the).
When you’re in the Messages app, QuickType suggests an emoji (a tiny
cartoon drawing) when you’ve typed a corresponding word. “Help with
Emoji and Info-Bits” has the details.
QuickType automatically adds a space after each word you select, so
you don’t have to mess with the space bar.
When someone texts you a question that ends with a choice (“Coffee,
tea, or me?”), the QuickType buttons cleverly offer those choices on the
buttons. Before you’ve even typed a single letter, the choices say coffee,
tea, and you.
New in iOS 11: QuickType’s suggestions may offer movie names, song
names, or place names that you’ve recently viewed in other apps.
If you forget to capitalize a word, double-tap to select it. Now tap Shift
once (To Initial Cap The Word) or twice (FOR ALL CAPS). Lo and
behold, the QuickType suggestions are now capitalized renditions of the
word, ready to replace it!
You can hide the QuickType bar if it’s getting on your nerves, but it’s
not as easy as it used to be. Hold down the button next to the 123 key (it
usually looks like 
 or 
); from the shortcut menu, tap Keyboard
Settings (below, left). You wind up in Settings → General →
Keyboard, where you’ll find the Predictive on/off switch (right).

QuickType does mean that you have to split your focus. You have to pay
attention to both the keys you’re tapping and the ever-changing word choices
above the keyboard. With practice, though, you’ll find that QuickType offers
impressive speed and accuracy. You won’t miss the little autocorrect bubbles of
old.
The Spelling Dictionary
If you start typing a word the iPhone doesn’t recognize, the first of the three
suggestion buttons displays your word in quotation marks. If you really do
intend to type that nonstandard word, tap its button. You’ve just allowed the
“mistake” to stand—and you’ve added it to the iPhone’s dictionary. The phone
assumes that you’ve just typed some name, bit of slang, or terminology that
wasn’t in its dictionary originally.
From now on, it will accept that bizarre new word as legitimate—and, in fact,
will even suggest it the next time you start typing it.
TIP
If you feel you’ve really made a mess of your custom dictionary, and the iPhone keeps suggesting
ridiculous alternate words, you can start fresh. From the Home screen, tap Settings → General →
Reset, and then tap Reset Keyboard Dictionary. Now the iPhone’s dictionary is the way it was when it
came from the factory, without any of the “words” it learned from you.
The Spelling Checker

Here’s the world’s friendliest typo-fixer. Apple calls it a spelling checker, but
maybe that’s stretching it.
Anytime the iPhone doesn’t recognize something you’ve typed, it draws a dotted
red underline beneath it. Tap the word to see a pop-up balloon with one, two, or
three alternate spellings. Often, one of them is what you wanted, and you can tap
it to fix the mistake. (Equally often, none of them is, and it’s time to break out
the loupe and the keyboard.)
TIP
You can also invoke the spelling checker’s suggestions even if you haven’t made a typo. Double-tap the
word; on the editing bar that appears, tap Replace.
Punctuation with One Touch
On the iPhone, the punctuation and alphabet keys appear on two different
keyboard layouts. That’s a hassle, because each time you want, say, a comma,
it’s an awkward, three-step dance: (1) Tap the 
 key to get the punctuation
layout. (2) Tap the comma. (3) Tap the ABC key or the space bar to return to the
alphabet layout.
Imagine how excruciating it is to type, for example, “a P.O. box in the U.S.A.”
That’s 34 finger taps and 10 mode changes!
Fortunately, there’s a secret way to get a punctuation mark with only a single
finger gesture. The iPhone doesn’t register most key presses until you lift your
finger. But the Shift and punctuation keys register their taps on the press down
instead.

So here’s what you can do, all in one motion:
1. Touch the 123 key, but don’t lift your finger. The punctuation layout
appears.
2. Slide your finger onto the period or comma key, and release. The
ABC layout returns automatically. You’ve typed a period or a comma
with one finger touch instead of three.
TIP
If you’re a two-thumbed typist, you can also hit the 123 key with your left thumb and then tap the
punctuation key with your right. It even works on the #+= sub-punctuation layout, although you’ll
probably visit that screen less often.

In fact, you can type any of the punctuation symbols the same way. This
technique makes a huge difference in the usability of the keyboard.
TIP
This same trick saves you a finger-press when capitalizing words. You can put your finger down on the 
 key and slide directly onto the letter you want to type in its uppercase version. Or, if you’re a two-
handed typist, you can work the Shift key just like the one on your computer: Hold it down with your left

thumb, type a letter with your right, and then release both.
Accented Characters
To produce an accented character (like é, ë, è, ê, and so on), keep your finger
pressed on that key for one second. A palette of diacritical marks appears; slide
onto the one you want.
Not all keys sprout this pop-up palette. Here’s a list of the keys that do:
Key
Alternates
A
à á â ä Æ ã å ā
C
ç ć č
E
è é ê ë ę ė ē
I
ī į í ì ï î i
L
ł
N
ń ñ
O
ō ø œ õ ó ò ö ô
S
ß ś š
U
ū ú ù ü û
Y
ÿ
Z
ź ž ż
?
¿
‘
‘ ‘ ‘
“
“ “ “ “ “
-
—
$
€ £ ¥ 
&
§
0 (zero) °
.
…
%
‰
Typing Shortcuts (Abbreviation Expanders)

Here’s a feature that hardly anyone ever talks about—probably because nobody
knows it exists. But it can be a huge time- and sanity-saver.
You can program the phone to expand abbreviations that you type. Set up addr
to type your entire mailing address, or eml to type out your email address. Create
two-letter abbreviations for big legal or technical words you have to type a lot.
Set up goaway to type out a polite rejection paragraph for use in email. And so
on.
This feature has been in Microsoft Office forever (called AutoCorrect). And it’s
always been available in add-on apps. But since it’s now built right into the
operating system, it works anywhere you can type.
You can start building your list of abbreviations in Settings → General →
Keyboard → Text Replacement. Tap the + button. On the resulting screen, type
the expanded text into the Phrase box. (It can be very long, but it has to be one
continuous blob of text; it can’t contain returns.) In the Shortcut box, type the
abbreviation you want to trigger the phrase.
TIP
The Shortcut box starts out saying, “Optional.” You might wonder: Why would you leave the shortcut
blank? Then your new shortcut will be untriggerable and pointless.
Not quite. It’s optional to enable a sneaky trick: to make the phone stop misreplacing some word (for
example, insisting that you mean PTA when you type pta, the name of a new chemical you’ve designed).
In that case, type your phrase into the Phrase box, but leave Shortcut blank.

That’s it! Now, whenever you type one of the abbreviations you’ve set up, the
iPhone proposes replacing it with your substituted text.
The One-Handed Keyboard
iOS 11 may go down in history as the first software version that acknowledged
morning coffee.
For the first time, you can carry a cup in one hand while typing on your iPhone
with the other. That’s because there’s a new, optional keyboard layout on larger
iPhones (but not the iPhone 5s or SE): an extra-skinny one that huddles against
one side, within reach of a single thumb.
To make it so, hold down the button next to the 123 key (it usually looks like 

 or 
); from the shortcut menu, choose one of the outer two keyboard
icons, as shown here. (They represent the left- and right-huddling keyboard,
respectively.)
Swype, SwiftKey, and Other Keyboards
You’re not stuck with Apple’s onscreen keyboard. You can, if you like, install
virtual keyboards from other companies. (Hey—just like on Android phones!)
Many people swear that these rival keyboard systems are superior to the standard
iOS keyboard in speed and accuracy. In particular, people like the Swype and
SwiftKey keyboards; in these systems, you don’t have to tap each key to spell
out a word. Instead, you rapidly and sloppily drag your finger across the glass,
hitting the letters you want and lifting your finger at the end of a word. The
software figures out which word you were going for.
Sounds bizarre, but it’s fast and very satisfying. And pretty—your finger leaves a
sort of fire trail as it slides across the glass.
These keyboards generally incorporate their own versions of QuickType—that
is, they offer three predictions about the word you’re going to type next.
Most don’t vary their predictions depending on the person you’re writing to or
which app you’re using, as iOS’s predictions do. But they do offer other
impressive features; for example, SwiftKey can sync what it’s learned to your
other gadgets (iOS doesn’t do that; it learns, but its education is locked on your
iPhone). The Minuum keyboard is weird-looking but very compact, leaving a lot
more room for your writing.

Then there’s Fleksy, TouchPal, Kuaiboard, and a raft of others.
Note, however, that none of them offer a 
 button. Apple doesn’t allow them
access to Siri, so you can’t use voice dictation when one of these keyboards is on
the screen. And, sometimes, you can’t use these alternate keyboards for typing
into password boxes.
Otherwise, these alternate keyboard systems are fascinating and, often, faster
than Apple’s. Many are free, so they’re well worth exploring.
To install an alternate keyboard, download it from the App Store (“Getting New
Apps”).
Then go to Settings → General → Keyboard → Keyboards (above, left).
When you tap Add New Keyboard, you’ll see your newly downloaded
keyboard’s name. Turn it on by tapping it and then turning on Full Access.
Now, when you arrive at any writing area in any app, you’ll discover that a new
icon has appeared on the keyboard: a tiny globe (
) next to the space bar. Tap
it. The keyboard changes to the new one you installed. (Each tap on the 

button summons the next keyboard you’ve installed—or you can hold your
finger down on it for a pop-up list.)
NOTE
Until iOS 11 came along, turning the iPhone 90 degrees (to landscape orientation) gave you a wider,
expanded keyboard with some extra keys on each side, like Copy, Paste, punctuation, and cursor keys.
It’s not your imagination: For some reason known only to Apple, the keyboard no longer changes when
you rotate the phone. Those useful extra keys are gone, replaced by empty gray space.
International Typing
Because the iPhone is sold around the world, it has to be equipped for non-
English languages—and even non-Roman alphabets. Fortunately, it’s ready.
To prepare the iPhone for language switching, go to Settings → General →
Language & Region. Tap iPhone Language to set the iPhone’s primary
language (for menus, button labels, and so on).
To make other keyboards available, go to Settings → General → Keyboard →
Keyboards, tap Add New Keyboard, and then turn on the keyboard layouts
you’ll want available: Russian, Italian, whatever.
If you choose Japanese or Chinese, you’re offered the chance to specify which
kind of character input you want. For Japanese, you can choose a QWERTY
layout (Romaji) or a Kana keypad. For Simplified or Traditional Chinese, your
choices include the Pinyin input method (which uses a QWERTY layout) or
handwriting recognition, where you draw your symbols onto the screen with
your fingertip; a palette of potential interpretations appears to the right. (That’s
handy, since there are thousands of characters in Chinese, and you’d need a 65-
inch iPhone to fit the keyboard on it.) Or hey—it’s a free tic-tac-toe game!

As described in the previous section, a new key now appears on the keyboard: 
 next to the space bar. (It replaces the 
 emoji key, if you had it.) Each
time you tap it, you rotate to the next keyboard you requested earlier. The new
language’s name appears briefly on the space bar to identify it.
Thanks to that 
 button, you can freely mix languages and alphabets within
the same document without having to duck back to some control panel to make
the change. And thanks to the iPhone’s virtual keyboard, the actual letters on the
“keys” change in real time.
The 
 button works in three ways:
Tap it once to restore the most recent keyboard. Great if you’re

frequently flipping back and forth between two languages.
Tap it rapidly to cycle among all the keyboards you’ve selected. (The
name of the language appears briefly on the space bar to help you out.)
If you, some United Nations translator, like to write in a lot of different
languages, you don’t have to tap that 
 key over and over again to
cycle through the keyboard layouts. Instead, hold your finger down on
the 
 key. You get a convenient pop-up menu of the languages
you’ve turned on, so you can jump directly to the one you want.
The Emoji Keyboard
Even if you speak only one language, don’t miss the emoji keyboard. It gives
you a palette of smileys and fun symbols, also known as emoticons, to use in
your correspondence.
When you tap the 
 button, you’re offered hundreds and hundreds of little
symbols. They’re spread across eight categories (plus a Frequently Used
category), each represented by a small icon below the keyboard.

Emoji are even smarter in the Messages app; see “Help with Emoji and Info-
Bits”.
TIP
To return to a category’s first page, you don’t have to swipe; just tap the category’s icon.
The bottom line is clear: Smileys are only the beginning.
NOTE
These symbols show up identically on Apple machinery (phones, tablets, Macs) but may look slightly
different on other kinds of phones.
Connecting a Real Keyboard
This iPhone feature barely merits an asterisk in Apple’s marketing materials. But
if you’re any kind of wandering journalist, blogger, or writer, you might flip
your lid over this: You can type on a real, full-sized, physical keyboard, and
watch the text magically appear on your iPhone’s screen—wirelessly.
That’s because you can use a Bluetooth keyboard (the Apple Wireless Keyboard,
for example) to type into your iPhone.
To set this up, from the Home screen, tap Settings → Bluetooth. Turn Bluetooth
on, if it’s not already.
Now turn on the wireless keyboard. After a moment, its name shows up on the
iPhone screen in the Devices list; tap it. You’ll know the pairing was successful,
because when you tap in a spot where the onscreen keyboard would usually
appear—well, it doesn’t.
Typing is a lot easier and faster with a real keyboard. As a bonus, the Apple
keyboard’s brightness, volume, and playback controls actually work to control
the iPhone’s brightness, volume, and playback.
TIP

The Apple keyboard’s 
 key even works: It makes the iPhone’s onscreen keyboard appear or
disappear. And to switch languages, press 
-space bar on the wireless keyboard. You’ll see the list of
languages. Tap the space bar again to choose a different language.
When you’re finished using the keyboard, turn it off. The iPhone goes back to
normal.
3D Touch: The Secret Trackpad
You may remember hearing about the 3D Touch screen on your iPhone (or
reading about it, in “3D Touch”). But you can also use pressure on the screen to
create a trackpad for editing text!
Whenever text is on the screen and the keyboard is open, press firmly anywhere
on the keyboard. All the keys go blank, as shown below.

You can ease up on the pressure, but don’t lift your finger from the glass. You
can now move the insertion-point cursor through the text just by dragging your
finger across the keys. If it hits the edge of the window, it scrolls automatically.
Still keep your finger down. At this point, hard presses also let you select
(highlight) text:
Hard-press twice to select an entire sentence.
Hard-press three times to select an entire paragraph.
Or use this trick: Move the insertion point to a word; if you now press hard, you
highlight that word.
At this point, you can expand the selection by doing any of these things:

Drag up or down. (Again, you don’t have to keep pressing hard, but
you do have to keep your finger on the glass.)
Hard-press twice to extend the selection to the entire sentence.
Hard-press three times to extend the selection to the entire paragraph.
Once you’ve selected text in this way, the usual command bar (Cut, Copy, Paste,
and so on) appears, for your text-manipulation pleasure.
Little by little, the iPhone is revealing its secret ambition to be a laptop.
Dictation
The iPhone’s speech-recognition feature, sometimes called Siri (even though Siri
is also the voice command feature), lets you enter text anywhere, into any
program, just by speaking. (Behind the scenes, it’s using the same Nuance
recognition technology that powers the Dragon line of dictation programs.)
It’s extremely fast and, usually, remarkably accurate. Suddenly you don’t have to
fuss with the tiny keyboard. The experience of “typing” is no longer
claustrophobic. You can blather away into an email, fire off a text message, or
draft a memo without ever looking at the screen.
Now, before you get all excited, here are the necessary footnotes:
Voice typing works best if there’s not a lot of background noise.
Voice typing isn’t always practical, since everybody around you can
hear what you’re saying.
Voice typing isn’t always accurate. Often you’ll have to correct an error
or two.
All right—expectations set? Then here’s how to type by speaking.
First, fire up someplace where you can call up the keyboard: Messages, Notes,
Mail, Safari, whatever. Tap, if necessary, so that the onscreen keyboard appears.
Tap the 
 next to the space bar.

When you hear the xylophone note, say what you have to say (below, left). If
there’s background noise, hold the phone up to your head; if it’s relatively quiet,
a couple of feet away is fine. You don’t have to speak slowly, loudly, or weirdly;
speak normally.
As you speak, the words fly onto the screen.
You have to speak your own punctuation, like this: “Dear Dad (colon): Send
money (dash)—as much as you can (comma), please (period).” The table at the
end of this section describes all the different punctuation symbols you can
dictate.
After you finish speaking, tap anywhere in the big gray sound waves area.
Another xylophone note plays—higher, this time—and you may see some of the
words change right before your eyes, as though Siri is changing her mind. In

fact, she is; she’s using the context of all the words you said to revise what she
originally thought you said, as you said it. See?
NOTE
On models before the iPhone 6s, you can’t use dictation without a good Internet signal.
In iOS 11, Apple believes that you’ll love dictating so much that you won’t often
even need the keyboard. So tapping in the gray area to stop dictating no longer
brings up the keyboard so you can make corrections.
Instead, after you’ve stopped transcribing with a tap, it takes another tap—on the
little 
 icon—to bring back the keyboard. Now you can tap with your finger
in the text to edit any mistakes, exactly as you would fix an error in something
you typed. (Make the effort; you’re simultaneously teaching your iPhone to do
better the next time.)
TIP
Here’s a thought: If you notice an error while you’re dictating, tap the 
 button to stop the
dictation (instead of tapping in the gray area). That way, you stop dictating and summon the keyboard,
saving yourself a tap.
Or, if the whole thing is a mess, you can shake your iPhone, the universal
gesture for Undo (as long as Shake to Undo is turned on in Settings → General
→ Accessibility).
NOTE
Often, the iPhone knows perfectly well when it might have gotten a word wrong—it draws a dashed
underline beneath words or phrases it’s insecure about. You can tap that word or phrase to see the
iPhone’s alternative interpretation, which is often correct.
Usually, you’ll find the accuracy pretty darned good, considering you didn’t
have to train the software to recognize your voice, and considering that your

computer is a cellphone, for crying out loud. You’ll also find that the accuracy is
better when you dictate complete sentences, and that long words fare better than
short ones.
Punctuation
Here’s a handy table that shows what punctuation you can say and how to say it.
NOTE
If you’ve ever used Dragon NaturallySpeaking (for Windows) or Dragon Dictation (for the Mac), then
you already know these commands; they’re the standard Nuance dictation-software shortcuts, because
that’s what the iPhone uses behind the scenes.
Say this:
To get this:
For example, saying
this:
Types this:
“period” or “full stop”
. [space and capital
letter follow]
“Best (period) date
(period) ever (period)”
Best. Date. Ever.
“dot” or “point”
. [no space follows]
“My email is frank
(dot) smith (at sign)
gmail (dot) com”
My email is
frank.smith@gmail.com
“comma,” “semicolon,”
“colon”
, ; :
“Mom (comma) hear
me (colon) I’m dizzy
(semicolon) tired”
Mom, hear me: I’m
dizzy; tired
“question mark,”
“exclamation point”
? ! [space and
capital letter
afterward]
“Ellen (question mark)
Hi (exclamation point)” Ellen? Hi!
“inverted question mark,”
“inverted exclamation
point”
¿ ¡
“(inverted question
mark) Que paso
(question mark)”
¿Que paso?
“ellipsis” or “dot dot dot”
…
“Just one (ellipsis)
more (ellipsis) step
(ellipsis)”
Just one… more…
step…
“space bar”
[a space, especially
when a hyphen
would normally
appear]
“He rode the merry
(space bar) go (space
bar) round”
He rode the merry go
round
“open paren” then “close
paren” (or “open
bracket/close bracket,” or
( ) or [ ] or { }
“Then she (open paren)
the doctor (close paren) Then she (the doctor)
gasped

“open brace/close brace”)
gasped”
“new line”
[a press of the
Return key]
“milk (new line) bread
(new line) quinoa”
Milk
Bread
Quinoa
“new paragraph”
[two presses of the
Return key]
“autumn leaves (new
paragraph) softly
falling”
autumn leaves
softly falling
“quote,” then “unquote”
“ ”
Her perfume screamed
(quote) available
(unquote)
Her perfume screamed
“available”
“numeral”
[writes the
following number
as a digit instead of
spelling it out]
“Next week she turns
(numeral) eight”
Next week she turns 8
“asterisk,” “plus sign,”
“minus sign,” “equals sign”
*, +, −, =
“eight (asterisk) two
(plus sign) one (minus
sign) three (equals sign)
fourteen”
8*2+1−3=14
“ampersand,” “dash”
&, —
“Logan (ampersand)
Dexter (dash) the best
(exclamation point)”
Logan & Dexter—the
best!
“hyphen”
- [without spaces]
“Don’t give me that
holier (hyphen) than
(hyphen) thou attitude”
Don’t give me that
holier-than-thou attitude
“backquote”
’
“Back in (backquote)
(numeral) fifty-two”
back in ’52
“smiley,” “frowny,”
“winky” (or “smiley face,”
“frowny face,” “winky
face”)
:-) :-( ;-)
“I think you know
where I’m going with
this (winky face)”
I think you know where
I’m going with this ;-)
You can also say “percent sign” (%), “at sign” (@), “dollar sign” ($), “cent sign”
(¢), “euro sign” (€), “yen sign” (¥), “pounds sterling sign” (£), “section sign” (§),
“copyright sign” (©), “registered sign” (®), “trademark sign” (™), “greater-than
sign” or “less-than sign” (> or <), “degree sign” (°), “caret” (^), “tilde” (~),
“vertical bar” (l), and “pound sign” (#).
The software automatically capitalizes the first new word after a period, question
mark, or exclamation point. But you can also force it to capitalize words you’re
dictating by saying “cap” right before the word, like this: “Dear (cap) Mom

(comma), I’ve run away to join (cap) The (cap) Circus (comma), a nonprofit
cooperative for runaway jugglers.”
Here’s another table—this one shows the other commands for capitalization,
plus spacing and spelling commands.
TIP
Speak each of the on/off commands as a separate utterance, with a small pause before and after.
Say this:
To get this:
For example, saying this:
Types this:
“cap” or
“capital”
Capitalize the next
word
“Give me the (cap) works”
Give me the Works
“caps on,”
then “caps
off”
Capitalize the first
letter of every word
“Next week, (caps on) the new
england chicken cooperative (caps
off) will hire me”
Next week, The New
England Chicken
Cooperative will hire me
“all caps on,”
then “all caps
off”
Capitalize
everything
“So (all caps on) please please (all
caps off) don’t tell anyone”
So PLEASE PLEASE
don’t tell anyone
“all caps”
Type just the next
word in all caps
“We (all caps) really don’t belong
here”
We REALLY don’t
belong here
“no caps”
Type the next word
in lowercase
“See you in (no caps) Texas”
See you in texas
“no caps on,”
then “no caps
off”
Prevents any capital
letters
“I’ll ask (no caps on) Santa Claus
(no caps off)”
I’ll ask santa claus
“no space”
Runs the two words
together
“Try our new mega (no space) berry
flavor”
Try our new megaberry
flavor
“no space
on,” then “no
space off”
Eliminates all
spaces
“(No space on) I can’t believe you
ate all that (no space off) (comma)
she said excitedly”
Ican’tbelieveyou
ateallthat, she said
excitedly
[alphabet
letters]
Types the letters out
(usually not very
accurately)
“The stock symbol is A P P L”
The stock symbol is
APPL
You don’t always have to dictate these formatting commands, by the way. The
iPhone automatically inserts hyphens into phone numbers (you say,
“2125561000,” and get “212-556-1000”); formats two-line street addresses

without your having to say, “New line” before the city); handles prices
automatically (“6 dollars and 32 cents” becomes “$6.32”).
It formats dates and web addresses well, too; you can even use the nerdy
shortcut “dub-dub-dub” when you want the “www” part of a web address.
The phone recognizes email addresses, too, as long as you remember to say “at
sign” at the right spot. You’d say, “harold (underscore) beanfield (at sign) gmail
(dot) com” to get harold_beanfield@gmail.com.
TIP
You can combine these formatting commands. Many iPhone owners have wondered: “How do I voice-
type the word “comma,” since saying “comma” types out only the symbol?”
The solution: Say, “No space on, no caps on, C, O, M, M, A, no space off, no caps off.” That gives you
the word “comma.”
Then again, it might just be easier to type that one with your finger.
Cut, Copy, Paste
Copy and Paste do just what you’d expect. They let you grab some text off a web
page and paste it into an email message, copy directions from email into Notes,
paste a phone number from your address book into a text message, and so on.
So how do you select text and use Cut, Copy, and Paste on a machine with no
mouse or menus? As on the Mac or PC, it takes three steps.
Step 1: Select the Text
Start by highlighting the text you want to cut or copy.
To select some. Double-tap the first word (or last word) that you want
in the selection. That word is now highlighted, with blue dots at
diagonal corners. Drag these handles to expand the selection. The
magnifying loupe helps you release the dot at just the right spot.
TIP

On a web page, you can’t very well double-tap to select a word, because double-tapping means “zoom
in.” Instead, hold your finger down on a word to produce the blue handles; the loupe helps you. (If you
highlight the wrong word, keep your finger down and slide to the correct one; the highlighting goes with
you.)
However, if you’re zoomed out to see the whole page, holding down your finger highlights the entire
block of text (a paragraph or even a whole article) instead of one word. Now you can expand the
selection to include a photo, if you like; that way, you can copy and paste the whole enchilada into an
outgoing email message.
To select all. Suppose you intend to cut or copy everything in the text
box or message. Tap anywhere in the text to place the insertion point.
Then tap the insertion point itself to summon the selection buttons—one
of which is Select All.
TIP
Selecting text is much easier on an iPhone 6s or later, because you have a built-in trackpad; see “3D
Touch: The Secret Trackpad”.
Step 2: Cut or Copy
At this point, you’ve highlighted the material you want, and the Cut and Copy

buttons are staring you in the face. They’re word buttons above your text.
Tap Cut (to remove the selected text) or Copy (to leave it but place a duplicate
on your invisible Clipboard). If you want to get rid of the text without copying it
to the Clipboard—because you want to preserve something else you copied
there, for example—just tap the 
 key.
TIP
And what if you want to copy text without the formatting (bold, italics, underlining) that it might have?
After selecting the text, tap Share and then tap Copy in the Share sheet.
Step 3: Paste
Finally, switch to a different spot in the text, even if it’s in a different window
(for example, a new email message) or a different app (for example, Calendar or
Notes). Tap in any spot where you’re allowed to type. Tap the Paste button to
paste what you cut or copied. Ta-da!
(Possible Step 4: Undo)
Everyone makes mistakes, right? Fortunately, there’s a secret Undo command,
which can come in handy when you cut, copy, or paste something by mistake.
The trick is to shake the iPhone. It then offers you an Undo button, which you
can tap to confirm the backtracking. One finger touch instead of three. (This
feature has to be turned on in Settings → General → Accessibility.)

In fact, you can even undo the Undo. Just shake the phone again; now the screen
offers you a Redo button. Fun! (Except when you shake the phone by accident
and get the Nothing to Undo message. But still.)
The “Look Up” Dictionary
In “The Spelling Dictionary”, you can read about the spelling dictionary that’s
built into iOS—but that’s just a dumb list of words. Your iPhone also has a real
dictionary, one that shows you definitions.
In many apps, you can look up any word that appears on the screen. Double-tap
it to get the editing bar shown below at left; then tap Look Up. (You may have to
tap ▸ to bring that button into view.)
TIP
You can also double-tap the blinking insertion point that’s just before a word. On the editing bar, tap ▾ to
see the Look Up button.

(If you discover that there are “No definitions found,” then tap Manage at the
bottom of this screen for a list of dictionaries that you can download: English,
French, Simplified Chinese, and so on. Tap 
 to download the ones you
think you’ll use.)
But there’s more to Look Up than definitions. Depending on what you’re
looking up, you may also see listings for Wikipedia entries, movie titles, sports
scores, App Store apps, Twitter tweets, songs from Apple Music, web videos,
and the web at large. It’s all meant to put the power of iOS search—including the
entire Internet—behind any word you see on any page of any app.
TIP
If you’d prefer just to look up definitions, open Settings → Siri & Search, and turn off Suggestions in
Look Up. Now, tapping Look Up means only “check the dictionary.” (Then again, it still offers a
Search Web button in case you change your mind).
Speak!
The iPhone can read to you, too. Visit Settings → General → Accessibility →
Speech and turn on Speak Selection and/or Speak Screen. Choose a language

(or accent), a voice, and a speaking rate. (The more realistic voices, like Ava and
her brother Alex, require you to download audio files from Apple. Just tap the 
 to begin the download.)
It’s fun to turn on Highlight Content, too. (Each word will light up in color as
the phone speaks it. Great for kids learning to read!)
From now on, among the other buttons that pop up when you select text, a
Speak button appears. Or, if you swipe down the screen with two fingers (and
you’ve turned on Speak Screen), your iPhone reads the entire screen.
You can use these features whenever you want to double-check the
pronunciation of a word, whenever you want to have a web article or email read
to you while you’re getting dressed for the day, or whenever you lose your voice
and just want to communicate with the rest of the world.
NOTE
Once you tap Speak, the button changes to say Pause. You’re in charge.
Searching Your iPhone
The iPhone’s global search feature, formerly called Spotlight, can find
information on your phone within any app—but it’s also something like a typed
version of Siri, in that it can call up information about movies, restaurants, news,
and so on.
How to Use Search
Apple has rejiggered the search bar in iOS 11; you can no longer access it from
within any app. You must start at the Home screen. From there, you have two
options:
Swipe downward on the middle of the screen. Don’t swipe down
from the top of the screen, which brings up the pull-down Lock screen
(???). Instead, drag down on the middle of a Home screen.

Swipe to the right from the first Home screen. Lurking to its left is the
Today screen (“The Today Screen (Widgets)”)—with, once again, a
search box at the top.
When you tap into the search box, the keyboard opens automatically. Begin
typing to identify what you want to find and open. For example, if you were
trying to find a file called Pokémon Fantasy League, typing just pok or leag
would probably suffice. (Spotlight doesn’t find text in the middles of words; it
searches from the beginnings of words.)
In iOS 11, there are two stages of results: what you see before you tap the
Search button on the keyboard, and what you see after.
Before you tap Search (while you’re typing), you get, just below the
typing box, a list of autocomplete suggestions. It’s composed of data
bits that are actually on your phone: app names, people’s names,
calendar appointment names, and so on. For example, if you’ve typed
app so far, the suggestions may include apple, appearance schedule,
and so on. The idea is to save you some typing.
TIP
If you tap an app’s name in this list, you get to see what folder contains that app. (We’re talking about
the text list just under the search box—not the rows of app names that display their icons.)
Below that, iOS makes additional guesses at what you’re seeking, grouped by
category: Applications, Voice Memos, Mail, Contacts, Notes, News, Safari,
Reminders, Dictionary, and so on (next page, left). In iOS 11, in fact, these
suggestions may even come from within non-Apple apps.
All of this is part of what Apple calls Siri Suggestions. You can turn them off,
either globally or one app at a time; see ???.
At the very bottom, you get buttons for Search Web, Search App Store, and
Search Maps, for the sake of completeness.
TIP

If you drag your finger to scroll the list, the keyboard helpfully vanishes so you can see more results.
After you tap Search, you get a list of results that contain exactly what
you typed as your search term (above, right). If you’ve typed app so far,
the suggestions may include App Store, Train App, and so on. (If the
search can’t find many exact matches, it may show you some
autocompleted suggestions as well, of the apple, appearance schedule
sort.)
Either way, you wind up with a list of tappable search results, each showing a
few lines of a preview, and all organized by category or app. This list may reveal
matching terms from these categories:
Apple’s apps. Music, Podcasts, Videos, Audiobooks (song, performer,

and album names, plus the names of podcasts, videos, and audiobooks);
Notes, Messages, Reminders, Voice Memos (actual text of your notes,
texts, and to-do items; names and descriptions of voice memos);
calendar events (including meeting invitees and locations); Mail (To,
From, and Subject fields of all accounts; body text in some accounts).
Other companies’ apps. Search can also find recent destinations
you’ve used in Google Maps, Uber, or Lyft; photo album names in
Flickr; and so on. (Not all apps are searchable—only those updated
since iOS 11 came along.)
Applications. For frequent downloaders, this may be the juiciest
function. If you have dozens of apps installed, this is a much more
efficient way to find one than trying to page through all the Home
screens, eyeballing the icons as you go. The search results even identify
which folder an app is in.
Siri Suggestions. The Search feature can find movies, music, apps, and
other stuff from the web. It works beautifully. The hard part is just
remembering that it’s available.
You can get results from Wikipedia (when you search for, say,
“rhubarb” or “Thomas Edison”); news (search for “SF Giants” or
“Middle East negotiations”); restaurants, shops, and businesses (“Olive
Garden” or “Apple Store”); the App Store (“Instagram” or “Angry
Birds”); the iTunes Store (“Gravity” or “Beatles”); and the iBooks Store
(“Grisham” or “Little Women”).
The results list identifies which category each hit comes from. Tapping
a result does what you’d expect: for a web article, opens the article; for
a business, opens its Maps page so you can call it or get instant
directions; for something from an Apple store, opens the appropriate
store.
Really, don’t miss this. When you hear about a cool app, don’t open the
App Store to look for it. When you want to know a sports score, don’t
start with Safari. When you need the phone number of a restaurant,
don’t call 411. Instead, use Spotlight for all those things.

Google Web Results. You can tap Search Web at the bottom of the
results list to hand off to Safari for a search. Handy to have it built right
into the Search screen.
TIP
Many apps, like Contacts, Mail, Calendar, Music, and Notes, have their own search boxes (usually
hidden until you scroll to the top of their lists). Those individual search functions are great when you’re
already in the program where you want to search. The Spotlight difference is that it searches all these
apps at once.
If you see the name and icon of whatever you were hoping to dig up, tap to open
it. The corresponding app opens automatically.
Controlling What Shows Up
Fortunately, Apple has seen fit to let you limit which apps’ data shows up in the
Search results. If you don’t ever think you’ll search your email from this screen
(and maybe, for privacy reasons, you’d rather not see email snippets show up in
the results), you can turn it off, thus hiding it from Spotlight’s tentacles.
In Settings → Siri & Search, you’ll find a master list of apps that Spotlight can
“see into.” Tap one and turn off its switch to exclude it from search results. (You
can still find that app’s icon by typing its name—you just won’t see any
information from inside that app.)

Chapter 5. 4 Phone Calls &
FaceTime
With each successive iPhone model, Apple improves the iPhone’s antennas,
circuitry, speakers, microphone, and software. And features like Siri, auto-reply,
and Do Not Disturb have turned Apple’s phone from an also-ran into one of the
most useful gadgets ever to hop onto a cellular network.
Dialing from the Phone App
Suppose you’re in luck. Suppose the bars at the top of the iPhone’s screen tell
you that you’ve got cellular reception. You’re ready to start a conversation. To
make a phone call, open the Phone app like this:
1. Go Home, if you’re not already there. Press the home button (or, on
the iPhone X, swipe up from the bottom).
2. Tap the Phone icon. It’s usually at the bottom of the Home screen.
(The tiny circled number in the corner of the Phone icon tells you how
many missed calls and voicemail messages you have.)
TIP
Using Siri is often faster. You get good results saying things like, “Call Casey Robin’s cell” or “Dial 866-
2331.”
Now you’ve arrived in the Phone app. A new row of icons appears at the bottom,
representing your voicemail (“Visual Voicemail”) and the four ways of dialing
from here:
Favorites. Here’s the iPhone’s version of speed dial: It lists up to 50
people you think you call most frequently. Tap a name to make the call.
(Details on building and editing this list begin in “The Favorites List”.)

Recents. Every call you’ve recently made, answered, missed, or even
just dialed appears in this list. Missed callers’ names appear in red
lettering, which makes it easy to spot them—and to call them back.
Tap a name or a number to dial. Or tap the 
 button to view the
details of a call—when, where, how long—and, if you like, to add this
number to your Contacts list.
Contacts. This program also has an icon of its own on the Home
screen; you don’t have to drill down to it through the Phone button. It’s
your phone book; tap somebody’s name or number to dial it.
Keypad. This dialing pad’s big, fat buttons are easy to hit even with
big, fat fingers. You can punch in any number and then tap 
 to
place the call.
Once you’ve dialed, no matter which method you used, either hold the iPhone up
to your head, put in the earbuds, turn on the speakerphone, or put on your
Bluetooth earpiece—and start talking!
This, however, is only the Quick Start Guide. Here’s a more detailed look at each
of the Phone-app modules.
The Favorites List
You may not wind up dialing much from Contacts. That’s the master list, all
right, but it’s too unwieldy when you just want to call your spouse, your boss, or
your lawyer. Dialing by voice (Chapter 5) is almost always faster. But when
silence is golden, at the very least use the Favorites list—a short, easy-to-scan
list of the people you call most often (facing page, left).
Actually, calling is only the beginning. A favorite can be any kind of “address”:
for triggering an email, a text message, a video call, or even an Internet voice
call in an app like WhatsApp, Skype, or Cisco Spark. In other words, you can set
things up so that one tap on a favorite opens an outgoing text to your beloved,
and a different tap triggers a Skype call to your boss.

TIP
Once you’ve set up these favorites, you can add them to the Today screen (“The Today Screen
(Widgets)”), so that placing one of these calls or text communications is only a swipe and a tap away.
You can add names to this list in any of three ways:
From the Favorites list itself. Tap + to view your Contacts list. Tap the
person you want. If there’s more than one phone number or email
address on the info screen, then tap the one you want to add to
Favorites.
TIP
Each favorite doesn’t represent a person; it represents a number or address. So if your best friend Chris
has both a home number and a cell number, then add two items to the Favorites list. Gray lettering in the
list lets you know whether each number or address is mobile, home, Skype, Messages, FaceTime, or
whatever.

From the Contacts list. Tap a name to open the info screen, where
you’ll find a button called Add to Favorites. It opens the Add to
Favorites panel shown above at right. For each of its four
communication methods—Message, Call, Video, Mail—you get a pop-
up menu that lists your available apps for performing that sort of human
contact.
Tap the one you want to add to Favorites.
From the Recents list. Tap 
 next to any name or number in the
Recents list. If it’s somebody who’s already in your Contacts list, then
you arrive at the Call Details screen, where one tap on Add to
Favorites does what it says.
If it’s somebody who’s not in Contacts yet, then you’ll have to put her

there first. Tap Create New Contact, and then proceed as described in
“Adding to the Contacts List”. After you hit Save, you return to the Call
Details screen so you can tap Add to Favorites.
TIP
To help you remember that a certain phone number or email address is already in your Favorites list, a
gray star appears next to it in certain spots, like the Call Details screen and the Contact Info screen.
The Favorites list holds 50 numbers. Once you’ve added 50, the Add to
Favorites and + buttons disappear.
NOTE
The face of each favorite peeks out of a round frame next to the name, and if your Contact card for that
person doesn’t have a photo, the circle shows the person’s initials instead.
Reordering Favorites
Tapping that Edit button at the top of the Favorites list offers another handy
feature, too: It lets you drag names up and down, so the most important people
appear at the top of the list. Just use the grip strip (
) as a handle to move
entire names up or down the list.


Deleting from Favorites
To delete somebody from your Favorites—the morning after a nasty political
argument, for example—use the iPhone’s standard swipe-to-delete shortcut:
Swipe leftward across the undesired name. Tap the Delete button that appears.
(If you’re paid by the hour, you can use the slow method, too. Tap Edit. Now tap
the 
 button next to the unwanted entry and tap Delete to confirm.)
The Recents List
Like any self-respecting cellphone, the iPhone maintains a list of everybody
you’ve called or who’s called you recently. The idea, of course, is to provide you
with a quick way to call someone you’ve been talking to lately.
To see the list, tap Recents at the bottom of the Phone app. You see a list of the
last 75 calls that you’ve received or placed, along with each person’s name or
number (depending on whether that name is in Contacts or not), city of the
caller’s home area code (for callers not in your Contacts), time or date of the
call, and what kind of call it was—mobile, home, work, FaceTime, FaceTime
Audio, Skype, or whatever.


Here’s what you need to know about the Recents list:
Calls that you missed (or sent to voicemail) appear in red type. If you
tap Missed at the top of the screen, you see only your missed calls. The
color-coding and separate listings are designed to make it easy for you
to return calls you missed, or to try again to reach someone who didn’t
answer when you called.
A tiny 
 icon lets you know which calls you made (to differentiate
them from calls you received).
To call someone back—regardless of whether you answered or dialed
the call—tap that name or number in the list.
Tap 
 next to any call to open the info screen. At the top of the
screen, you can see whether this was an outgoing call, an incoming call,
a missed call, or a canceled call (in which you chickened out and hung
up before your callee answered).
What else you see here depends on whether the other person is in your
Contacts list.
If so, the info screen displays the person’s whole information card
(below, left). A little table displays all the incoming and outgoing calls
to or from this person that day. A small gray star denotes a phone
number that’s also in your Favorites list, and a Recent label indicates a
recent call from that number.
If the call isn’t from someone in your Contacts, then you get to see a
handy notation at the top of the info screen: the city and state where the
calling phone is registered (below, right).

TIP
If someone who isn’t in Contacts has called you, iOS takes a guess at that person’s name—by looking
for a matching phone number in the signature portion of your email! For example, if Frank Smythe has
called you from 213-292-3344, and there’s also an email from him with his phone number as part of his
signature, then the Recents list will say: Maybe: Frank Smythe. Clever!
To save you scrolling, the Recents list thoughtfully combines
consecutive calls to or from the same person. If some obsessed ex-lover
has been calling you every 10 minutes for four hours, you’ll see “Chris
Meyerson (24)” in the Recents list. (Tap 
 to see the exact times of
the calls.)
You can erase one call from this list exactly the same way you’d delete
a favorite: Swipe leftward across the undesired name. Tap the Delete
button that appears. (Once again, there’s also a long way: Tap Edit, tap 
 next to the unwanted entry, and then tap Delete.)
You can also erase the entire list, thus preventing a coworker or
significant other from discovering your illicit activities: Tap Edit, and

then tap Clear at the top of the screen. You’re asked to confirm your
decision.
Contacts
The Phone app may offer four ways to dial—Favorites, Recents, Contacts, and
Keypad—but the Contacts list is the source from which all other lists spring.
That’s probably why it’s listed three times: once with its own icon on the Home
screen, again at the bottom of the Phone app, and also in the FaceTime app.
Contacts is your address book—your master phone book.
NOTE
Your iPhone’s own phone number appears at the top of the Contacts list. That’s a much better place for it
than deep at the end of a menu labyrinth, where it is on most phones.
If your social circle is longer than one screenful, you can navigate this list in any
of three ways:
First, you can savor the distinct pleasure of flicking through it.
Second, if you’re in a hurry to get to the T’s, use the A-to-Z index down
the right edge of the screen. Just tap the first letter of the last name
you’re looking for. Or slide your finger up or down the index. The list
scrolls with it.
Third, you can use the search box at the very top of the list, above the
A’s.
Tap to make the keyboard appear. As you type, Contacts pares down the
list, hiding everyone whose first, last, or company name doesn’t match
what you’ve typed so far. It’s a really fast way to pluck one name out of
a haystack.
(You can clear the search box by tapping the 
 at its right end or
restore the full list by tapping Cancel.)

In any case, when you see the name you want, tap it to open its information card.
Tap the number you want to dial.
Groups
Many computer address book programs, including the Mac’s Contacts app, let
you place your contacts into groups—subsets like Book Club or Fantasy League
Guys. You can’t create or delete groups on the iPhone without a special app, but
at least the groups from your Mac, PC, Exchange server, or iCloud account get
synced over to it. To see them, and to switch them all on or off at once, tap
Groups at the top of the Contacts list.
Here’s where groups come into play:
If you can’t seem to find someone in the list, you may be looking in the

wrong list. Tap Groups at the top-left corner to return to the list of
accounts. Tap All Contacts to view a single, unified list of everyone
your phone knows about.
If you’ve allowed your iPhone to display your contacts from Facebook
or Twitter, then each of those lists is a group, too. (If your Contacts list
seems hideously bloated with hundreds of people you never actually
call, it’s probably your Facebook list. Pop into Groups and touch All
Facebook, removing the checkmark, to hide them all at once.)
If you do use the Groups feature, remember to tap the group name you
want before you create a new contact. That’s how you put someone into
an existing group. (If not, tap All Contacts instead.)
Adding to the Contacts List
Every cellphone has a Contacts list, of course, but the beauty of the iPhone is
that you don’t have to type in the phone numbers one at a time. Instead, the
iPhone sucks in the entire phone book from your Mac or PC, iCloud, and/or an
Exchange server at work.
It’s infinitely easier to edit your address book on the computer, where you have
an actual keyboard and mouse. The iPhone also makes it easy to add someone’s
contact information when she calls, emails, or text messages you, thanks to a
prominent Add to Contacts button.
But if, in a pinch, on the road, at gunpoint, you have to add, edit, or remove a
contact manually, here’s how to do it:
Make sure you’ve selected the right group or account, as described already. Now,
on the Contacts screen, tap +. You arrive at the New Contact screen, which
teems with empty boxes.
It shouldn’t take you long to figure out how to fill in this form: You tap in a box
and type. But here are a few tips and tricks for data entry:
The keyboard opens automatically when you tap in a box. And the
iPhone capitalizes the first letter of each word for you.
Phone numbers are special. When you enter a phone number, the

iPhone adds parentheses and hyphens for you. (You can even enter text
phone numbers, like 1-800-GO-BROWNS; the iPhone converts the
letters to digits when it dials.)
If you need to insert a pause—for dialing access numbers, extension
numbers, or voicemail passwords—type #, which introduces a two-
second pause in the dialing. You can type several of them to create
longer pauses.
To change the label for a number (“mobile,” “home,” “work,” and so
on), tap the label that’s there now. The Label screen shows you your
choices. There’s even a label called “iPhone,” so you and your buddy
can gloat together.
TIP
If you scroll down the Label screen, you’ll see that you can also create custom labels. You might prefer
someone’s cellphone number to be identified as “cell” instead of “mobile,” for example. Or you might
want to create a label that says “Skype,” “Google Voice,” “Line 2,” “Yacht Phone,” or “Bat Phone.” The
secret: Tap Add Custom Label. (Once you’ve created a custom label, it’s there in the list of options for
your use later.)
The Custom option, by the way, is brought to you by iCloud. If your default group is any other mail
account, the Custom option doesn’t appear. To check, open Settings → Contacts → Default Accounts,
and choose iCloud.

Expand-O-Fields mean you’ll never run out of room. Almost every
field (empty box) on a Contacts card is infinitely expanding. That is, the
instant you start filling in a field, another empty box (labeled 
 add
phone or whatever) appears right below it, so you can immediately add
another phone number, email address, URL, or street address. (The
only nonexpanding fields are First name, Last name, Company,
Ringtone, Text Tone, Notes, and whatever oddball fields you add
yourself.)
For example, when you first tap add phone, the phone-number box you
get is labeled “home.” (If that’s not the right label, you can tap it to
choose from one of nine others—or add a custom label.) A new add
phone button appears so you’ll have a place to enter a second phone
number for this person. When you do that, a third add phone button
appears. And so on.
In other words, you can never run out of places to add more phone
numbers, addresses, URLs, and social media profiles.

NOTE
Tapping add field at the bottom of this screen lets you add a new miscellaneous field, like Nickname or
Department.
Relatives are here. In iCloud accounts, there’s also the social profile
field, where you can list somebody’s Twitter, LinkedIn, Flickr,
Facebook, and even Myspace addresses. There’s an instant message
field, too, where you can record addresses for chat networks like Yahoo
Messenger.
And there’s add related name. Here’s where you can list this person’s
mother, father, spouse, partner, child, manager, sibling, and so on—or
even specify a different type of relationship (tap the existing label and
then Add Custom Label).
NOTE
As you may discover in Chapter 5, Siri knows about your relationships. You can tell her to “Call my
mom” or “Text my boss.” Does the add related name feature mean that you can now ask Siri to “Call
Chris Robin’s manager”?
Alas, no. These fields are for your reference only.
You can add a photo of the person, if you like. Tap add photo. If you
have a photo of the person on your phone already, tap Choose Photo.
You’re taken to your photo collection, where you can find a good
headshot (Chapter 9).
Alternatively, tap Take Photo to activate the iPhone’s built-in camera.
Frame the person, and then tap the white camera button to snap the shot.
In any case, you wind up at the Move and Scale screen. Here you can
frame up the photo so the person’s face is nicely sized and centered.
Spread two fingers to enlarge the photo; drag your finger to move the
image within the frame. Tap Choose to commit the photo to the address
book’s memory. (Back on the info screen where you started, a miniature
version of the photo now appears. Tap edit if you want to change the

photo, take a new one, adjust the Move and Scale screen, or get rid of
the photo altogether.)
From now on, this photo will pop up whenever the person calls. It also
appears next to the person’s name in your Favorites list.
You can import photos from Facebook. Here’s a wild guess: Most of
the photo boxes in your Contacts list are empty. After all, who’s going
to go to the trouble of hunting down headshots of 500 acquaintances,
just for a fully illustrated Contacts app?
Fortunately, with one click, the iPhone can harvest headshots from the
world’s largest database of faces: Facebook.
Visit Settings → Facebook to see the magical button: Update All
Contacts. When you click it, the iPhone goes online for a massive
research mission. Using your contacts’ names and phone numbers as
matching criteria, it ventures off to Facebook, finds the profile photos of

everyone who’s also in your Contacts list, and installs them into
Contacts automatically. (If you already have a photo for somebody,
don’t worry; it doesn’t get replaced.)
As a handy bonus, this operation also adds the @facebook.com email addresses
for the people you already had in Contacts.
TIP
Actually, there’s another side effect of this operation: It adds all your Facebook friends’ names to your
main Contacts list.
Now, you may not be crazy about this. Most of these Facebook folk you’ll never call on the phone—yet
here they are, cluttering up the Contacts list within the Phone app.
Fortunately, the Update All Contacts button doesn’t really mix your Facebook friends in with your local
Contacts list. It just subscribes to your Facebook address book—adds a new group, which you can turn
off with one quick click; see “Groups”.
Even if you do choose to hide all their entries, you still get the benefit of the imported headshots and
Facebook email addresses for the people you do want to see in Contacts.
You can import Twitter addresses. In Settings → Twitter, the
Update Contacts button awaits. Its purpose is to fill in the Twitter
handles for everyone who’s already in your Contacts, matching them by
phone number or email address.
You can choose a ringtone. You can choose a different ringtone for
each person in your address book. The idea is that you’ll know by the
sound of the ring who’s calling you.
NOTE
It’s one tone per person, not per phone number. Of course, if you really want one ringtone for your
buddy’s cellphone and another for his home phone, you can always create a different Contacts card for
each one.
To choose a ringtone, tap Default. On the next screen, tap any sound in the
Ringtones or Alert Tones lists to sample them. (Despite the separate lists, in this
context, these sounds are all being offered as ringtones.) When you’ve settled on

a good one, tap Done to return to the info screen where you started.
TIP
Here, on the ringtone selection screen, you’re offered an Emergency Bypass switch. Turn it on to say,
“Whenever this person calls or texts, I want my phone to ring or vibrate even if I’ve turned on Do Not
Disturb” (“Do Not Disturb”).
You can specify a vibration pattern for incoming calls. This unsung
feature lets you assign a custom vibration pattern to each person in your
Contacts, so you know by feel who’s calling—without even removing
the phone from your pocket, even if your ringer is off. It’s a surprisingly
useful option.
To set it up, start on the Ringtone screen described already; tap Default
next to the word Vibration. You’re offered a choice of canned patterns
(Alert, Heartbeat, Quick, Rapid, and so on). But if you tap Create New
Vibration, you can then tap the screen in whatever rhythm you like. It
can be diddle diddle dee…or the opening notes to the Hallelujah
Chorus…or the actual syllables of the person’s name. (“Maryanna
Beckleheimer.” Can you feel it?)
The phone records your pattern, which you can prove to yourself by
tapping Play. If you tap Save and name that pattern, then it becomes
one of the choices when you choose a vibration pattern for someone in
your Contacts. It’s what you’ll feel whenever this person calls you. Yes,
it’s tactile caller ID. Wild.

You can also pick a text-message sound (and vibration). Just as you
can choose sounds and vibrations for incoming phone calls, you can tap
Text Tone to choose sounds and vibrations for incoming text messages
and FaceTime invitations.
You can add new fields of your own. Very cool: If you tap add field at
the bottom of the screen, then you go down the rabbit hole into Field
Land, where you can add any of 13 additional info bits about the person
whose card you’re editing: a prefix (like Mr. or Mrs.), a suffix (like
M.D. or Esq.), a nickname, a job title, a phonetic pronunciation for
people with weird names, and so on.
When you tap one of these labels, you return to the info screen, where
you’ll see that the iPhone has inserted the new, empty field in the most
intelligent spot. For example, if you add a phonetic first name, that box
appears just below the First Name box. The keyboard opens so you can
fill in the blank.
You can link and unlink Unified Contacts. As noted earlier, your
phone can sync up with different accounts. Your Contacts app might list

four sets of names and numbers: one stored on your phone, one from an
iCloud account, one from Facebook, and a fourth from your corporate
Exchange server at work. In the old days, therefore, certain names
might have shown up in the All Contacts list two or three times—not an
optimal situation.
Now, as a favor to you, the iPhone displays each person’s name only
once in that master All Contacts list. If you tap that name, you open up
a unified information screen for that person. It includes all the details
from all the underlying contact cards.
NOTE
The iPhone combines cards in the All Contacts list only if the first and last names are exactly the same.
If there’s a difference in name, suffix, prefix, or middle name, then no unifying takes place. Remember,
too, that you see the unification only if you view the All Contacts list.
To see which cards the iPhone is combining for you, scroll to the bottom of the
card. There the Linked Contacts section shows you which cards have been
unified.
You can tap a listing to open the card in the corresponding account. For that
matter, you can manually link a card, too; tap Edit, tap link contacts, and then
choose a contact to link to this unified card—even if the name isn’t a perfect
match.
NOTE
It’s OK to link Joe Carnelia’s card with Joseph Carnelia’s card—they’re probably the same person. But
don’t link up different people’s cards. Remember, the whole point is to make the iPhone combine all the
phone numbers, email addresses, and so on onto a single card—and seeing two sets on one card could
get confusing fast.
This stuff gets complex. But, in general, the iPhone tries to do the right thing.
For example, if you edit the information on the unified card, you’re changing
that information only on the card in the corresponding account. (Unless you add
information to the unified card. In that case, the new data tidbit is added to all

the underlying source-account cards.)
NOTE
To delete any info bit from a Contacts card, tap the 
 next to it, and then tap the Delete button to
confirm.
Adding a Contact on the Fly
There’s actually another way to add someone to your Contacts list—a faster, on-
the-fly method that’s more typical of cellphones. Start by bringing the phone
number up on the screen:
In the Phone app, open the Keypad. Dial the number, and then tap 
.
You can also add a number that’s in your Recents (recent calls) list,
storing it in Contacts for future use. Tap the 
 button next to the
name.
In both cases, finish up by tapping Create New Contact (to enter this person’s
name for the first time) or Add to Existing Contact (to add a new phone
number to the card of someone who’s already in your list). Off you go to the
Contacts editing screen shown in ???.
Editing Someone
To make corrections or changes, tap the person’s name in the Contacts list. In the
upper-right corner of the info card, tap Edit.
You return to the screens already described, where you can make whatever
changes you like. After you tap Done (or Cancel), you can return to the Contacts
list by swiping to the right.
Deleting Someone
Truth is, you’ll probably add people to your address book far more often than

you’ll delete them. After all, you meet new people all the time—but you delete
them primarily when they die, move away, or dump you.
To zap someone, tap the name in the Contacts list and then tap Edit. Scroll
down, tap Delete Contact, and confirm by tapping Delete Contact again.
(Weirdly, the Delete Contact option doesn’t appear if you open someone’s info
card from the Recents or Favorites lists—only from the main Contacts list.)
Sharing a Contact
There’s a lot of work involved in entering someone’s contact information. It’s a
nice touch, therefore, that you can spare the next guy all that effort—by sending
a fully formed electronic business card to him. It can be yours or that of anyone
in your Contacts list.
To do that, open the contact’s card, scroll to the bottom, and tap Share Contact.
On the Share sheet, you’re offered a choice of AirDrop, Message, Mail, and
More. (“Message” means an iMessage—“iMessages”—if it’s a fellow Apple
fan, or a text message otherwise. AirDrop is described in “AirDrop”. And More
is a place for new apps to install their sharing options.)
Tap your choice, address the message (to an email address or, for a message, a
cellphone number), and send it. The recipient, assuming he has a half-decent
smartphone or address-book program on the receiving end, can install that
person’s information with a single tap on the attachment.
The Keypad
The fourth way to place a call is to tap Keypad at the bottom of the screen. The
standard iPhone dialing pad appears. It’s just like the number pad on a normal
cellphone, except that the “keys” are much bigger and you can’t feel them.


To make a call, tap out (or paste) the phone number—use the 
 key to
backspace if you make a mistake—and then tap the 
 button.
You can also use the keypad to enter a phone number into your Contacts list,
thanks to the 
 button, as described earlier.
TIP
If you tap the 
 button before touching any digits, you call up the most recent number you dialed,
ready to call again.
Visual Voicemail
On the iPhone, you don’t dial in to check for answering-machine messages
people have left for you. You don’t enter a password. You don’t sit through some
Ambien-addled recorded voice saying, “You have…17…messages. To hear your
messages, press 1. When you have finished, you may hang up….”
Instead, whenever somebody leaves you a message, the phone wakes up, and a
notification lets you know who it’s from. You also hear a sound (unless you’ve
turned on the silencer switch).
That’s your cue to open Phone → Voicemail. There you see all your messages
in a tidy chronological list. (The list shows the callers’ names if they’re in your
Contacts list; otherwise it shows their numbers.) You can listen to them in any
order—you’re not forced to listen to three long-winded friends before
discovering that there’s an urgent message from your boss. It’s a game-changer.
iOS even makes an attempt to transcribe your voicemails—to understand them
and type out what they say. It’s pretty crude, with lots of wrong and missing
words. But it’s usually enough to get the gist.
Setup

To access your voicemail, open the Phone app; tap Voicemail.
The very first time you visit this screen, the iPhone prompts you to make up a
numeric password for your voicemail account—don’t worry, you’ll never have
to enter it again, unless you plan to actually dial in for messages (“Dialing in for
Messages”). Record a “Leave me a message” greeting.
You have two options for the outgoing greeting:
Default. If you’re microphone-shy, or if you’re famous and don’t want
stalkers calling just to hear your famous voice, then use this option. It’s
a prerecorded, somewhat uptight female voice that says, “Your call has
been forwarded to an automatic voice message system. 212-661-7837 is
not available.” Beep!
Custom. This option lets you record your own voice saying, for
example, “You’ve reached my iPhone X. You may begin drooling at the
tone.” Tap Record, hold the iPhone to your head, say your line, and
then tap Stop.
Check how it sounds by tapping Play.
Then just wait for your fans to start leaving you messages!
Using Visual Voicemail
In the voicemail list, a blue dot (
) indicates a message you haven’t yet played.
TIP
You can work through your messages even when you’re out of cellular range—on a plane, for example
—because the recordings are stored on the iPhone itself.

When you tap the name of a message, you instantly see the date and time it came
in, the person’s name (if it’s in your Contacts) or the cellphone’s registered city
and state (if not), and a rough transcription. The Play slider tells you how many
seconds long the message is.
And all the controls you need are right there, surrounding the message you
tapped:
Share (
). Yes, you can send a voicemail recording to someone else
—by email, text message, or whatever (“Dialing in for Messages”).
That’s a handy bit of record-keeping that could be very useful in, say, a
criminal trial.
The transcript. Yes, this is a crude transcript (Apple labels it beta, after
all). There’s no punctuation. There may be missing ____ and phrases.
Some words might be completely wrong. But it’s usually good enough

that you can tell if a message is some robocall asking for money, or a
message from the school nurse saying that your kid has a broken rib.
▸. Tap to listen to the message.
Speaker. As the name “Visual Voicemail” suggests, you’re looking at
your voicemail list—which means you’re not holding the phone up to
your head. The first time people try using Visual Voicemail, therefore,
they generally hear nothing!
But if you hit Speaker before you tap ▸, you can hear the playback and
continue looking over the list.
NOTE
If you’re listening through the earbuds, a Bluetooth earpiece, or a car kit, of course, then you hear the
message playing back through that. If you really want to listen through the iPhone’s speaker instead, tap
Audio and then Speaker. (You switch back the same way.)
Call Back. Tap Call Back to return the call. Very cool—you never even
encounter the person’s phone number.
Delete. You might want to keep the list manageable by deleting old
messages. To do that, tap a message’s Delete button.
If you have a lot of messages to delete, here’s a faster way: Swipe
across the first one’s name right to left, and then tap Delete. The
message disappears instantly. You can work down the list quickly this
way.
If you didn’t know that trick, you could also do it the slow way: Tap
Edit (upper right of the screen). Tap the 
 button next to a message’s
name and then tap Delete to confirm. Tap the next 
 button and
continue.
TIP
To listen to deleted messages that are still on the phone, scroll to the bottom of the list and then tap

Deleted Messages.
On the Deleted screen, you can undelete a message that you actually don’t want to lose yet (that is, move
it back to the Voicemail screen—tap it and then tap Undelete) or tap Clear All to erase these messages
for good.
Rewind, Fast Forward. Drag the little vertical line in the scrubber bar
(beneath the message) to skip backward or forward in the message. It’s
a great way to replay something you didn’t catch the first time.
To collapse the expanded message, tap another message in the list, if it’s visible,
or just tap the caller’s name.
Even before you’ve expanded a message’s row to view the Play, Speaker, Call
Back, and Delete buttons, a few other Visual Voicemail buttons are awaiting
your inspection:
Greeting. Tap Greeting (upper-left corner) to record your voicemail
greeting.
Call Details. Tap 
 to open the info screen—the Contacts card—for
the message that was left for you.
If it was left by somebody who’s in your Contacts list, you can see
which of that person’s phone numbers the call came from (indicated in
blue type), plus a 
 if that number is in your Favorites list. Oh, and
you can add this person to your Favorites list at this point by tapping
Add to Favorites (at the bottom of the screen).

If the caller’s number isn’t in Contacts, then you’re offered a Create
New Contact button and an Add to Existing Contact button, so you
can store it for future reference.
In both cases, you also have the option to return the call (right from the
info screen), fire off a text message, or place a FaceTime audio or video
call.

Dialing in for Messages
Gross and pre-iPhonish though it may sound, you can also dial in for your
messages from another phone.
To do that, dial your iPhone’s number. Wait for the voicemail system to answer.
As your own voicemail greeting plays, dial * (or # if you have Verizon), your
voicemail password, and then #.
You hear the Uptight Carrier Lady announce how many messages you have, and
then she’ll start playing them for you. After you hear each message, she’ll offer
you the following options (but you don’t have to wait for her to announce them):
To delete the message, press 7.
To save it, press 9.
To replay it, press 4. (On T-Mobile, it’s 1.)
Conveniently enough, these keystrokes are the same on Verizon, Sprint, and
AT&T.
TIP
If this whole Visual Voicemail thing freaks you out, you can also dial in for messages right from the
iPhone. Open the keypad and hold down the 1 key, just as though it were a speed-dial key on any normal
phone.
After a moment, the phone connects; you’re asked for your password, and then the messages begin to
play back, just as described already.
Answering Calls
When someone calls your iPhone, you’ll know it; three out of your five senses
are alerted. Depending on how you’ve set up your iPhone, you’ll hear a ring,
feel a vibration, and see the caller’s name and photo fill the screen. (Smell and
taste will have to wait until iOS 12.)
NOTE
For details on Vibrate mode and on choosing a ringtone, see “Sounds (or Sounds & Haptics)”.

How you answer depends on what’s happening at the time:
If you’re using the iPhone, tap the green Accept button. Tap the red
hang-up button when you’ve both said enough.
If the iPhone is asleep or locked, the screen lights up and says slide to
answer. If you slide your finger as indicated by the arrow, you
simultaneously unlock the phone and answer the call.
If you’re wearing earbuds, the music fades out and then pauses; you
hear the ring both through the phone’s speaker and through your
earbuds. Answer by squeezing the clicker on the earbud cord or by
using either of the methods already described.
When the call is over, you can click again to hang up—or just wait until
the other guy hangs up. Either way, the music fades in again and

resumes from the spot where you were so rudely interrupted.
Same thing if you were watching a video or listening to a podcast; it
pauses for the duration of the call and resumes when you hang up.
TIP
If the caller is not in your Contacts, iOS makes an educated guess as to the name. Instead of no name at
all, you’ll see something like “Maybe: Casey Robin.”
How does the iPhone do it? When a call comes in, iOS searches your email in hopes of finding a
matching phone number in somebody’s email signature. If it finds one, it extracts that person’s name and
proposes it. Apple should call it “Likely Caller ID.”
Online and on the Phone, Together
Don’t forget that the iPhone is a multitasking master. Once you’re on the phone,
you can dive into any other program—to check your calendar, for example—
without interrupting your call.
You may even be able to use the phone’s Internet functions (web, email, apps,
and so on) without interrupting the call. To be precise, you can be online and on
the phone simultaneously if any of these things is true:
You’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot.
You have AT&T or T-Mobile.
You have an iPhone 6 or later, and you’ve turned on VoLTE calling (see
“A Word About VoLTE”).
In other words, if you have Verizon (non-VoLTE) or Sprint, and if you’re not in a
Wi-Fi hotspot, then you can’t get online until the call is complete.
Not Answering Calls
Maybe you’re in a meeting. Maybe you’re driving. Maybe the call is coming
from someone you really don’t want to deal with right now. Fortunately, you
have all kinds of ways to slam the cellular door in somebody’s face.

Silencing the Ring
You might need a moment before you can answer the call, or you need to exit a
meeting or put in the earbuds. In those cases, you can stop the ringing and
vibrating by pressing one of the physical buttons on the edges (the side button or
either volume key). The caller still hears the phone ringing, and you can still
answer it within the first four rings, but at least the sound won’t be annoying
those around you.
(This assumes, of course, that you haven’t just flipped the silencer switch.)
Ignore It—or Dump It to Voicemail
If you wait long enough (four rings), the call goes to voicemail (even if you
silence the ringing as described already).
Or you can dump it to voicemail immediately (instead of waiting for the four
rings). How you do that depends on the setup:
If the iPhone is asleep or locked, tap the side button twice fast.
If you’re using the iPhone, tap the Decline button on the screen.
If you’re wearing the earbuds, squeeze the microphone clicker for two
seconds. You hear two low beeps, meaning: “OK, Master; dumped.”
Of course, if your callers know you have an iPhone, they’ll also know that
you’ve deliberately dumped them into voicemail—because they won’t hear all
four rings.
Respond with a Text Message
Whenever your phone rings, the screen bears a small white Message button
(shown in ???). If you tap it, you get a choice of three canned text messages.
Tapping one immediately dumps the caller to voicemail and sends the
corresponding text message to the phone that’s calling you. If you’re driving or
in a meeting, this feature is a lot more polite and responsive than just dumping
the poor slob to voicemail.

TIP
You can edit any of these three canned messages; they don’t have to say, “Sorry, I can’t talk right now,”
“I’m on my way,” and “Can I call you later?” forever. To do that, open Settings → Phone, tap Respond
with Text, and replace the text in the three placeholder boxes.
The fourth button, Custom, lets you type or dictate a new message on the spot.
(“I’m in a meeting and, frankly, your call isn’t worth getting fired for” comes to
mind.)
Remind Me Later
The trouble with Respond with Text, of course, is that it sends a text message.
What if the caller is using a landline that can’t receive text messages?
Fortunately, you have another option: Remind Me.
Tapping this button offers you one time-based option, In 1 Hour (which sets up
a reminder to return the call an hour from now), and up to three location-based
options (previous page, right): When I leave, When I get home, and When I
get to work. (The home and work options appear only if the iPhone knows your
home and work addresses—because you’ve entered them in your own card in
Contacts.)
These options use the phone’s GPS circuitry to detect when you’ve left your

current inconvenient-to-take-the-call location, whether it’s a job interview, a first
date, or an outhouse.
Do Not Disturb
When you turn on Do Not Disturb, the phone is quiet and dark. It doesn’t ring,
chirp, vibrate, light up, or display messages. A 
 appears on the status bar to
remind you why it seems to be so uncharacteristically depressed.
Yes, airplane mode does the same thing, but there’s a big difference: In Do Not
Disturb, the phone is still online. Calls, texts, emails, and other communications
continue to chug happily away; they just don’t draw attention to themselves.
Do Not Disturb is what you want when you’re in bed each night. You don’t
really want to be bothered with chirps for Facebook status updates and Twitter
posts, but it’s fine for the phone to collect them for the morning.
Bedtime is why Do Not Disturb comes with two fantastic additional settings: one
that turns it on and off automatically on a schedule, so that the phone goes dark
each night at the same time you do, and another that lets you designate important
people whose calls and texts are allowed to get through. You know—for
emergencies.
Turning on Do Not Disturb
To turn on Do Not Disturb manually, you have three options:
Tell Siri, “Turn on Do Not Disturb.”
Swipe upward to open the Control Center (or on the iPhone X, swipe
down from the right ear), and tap the 
 icon so that it turns blue
(facing page, right).
Open Settings, tap Do Not Disturb, and turn on Do Not Disturb
(facing page, left).

To set it up on a schedule, open Settings → Do Not Disturb. Turn on
Scheduled, and then tap the From/To block to specify starting and ending hours.
(There’s no separate setting for weekends; Do Not Disturb will turn on and off
for the same hours every day of the week.)
Locked or Unlocked
The Silence option on the settings screen works like this: If you choose Always,
then Do Not Disturb works exactly as described.
But if you choose Only while iPhone is locked, then the phone does ring and
vibrate when you’re using it. Because, obviously, if the phone is awake, so are
you. It’s a great way to ensure that you don’t miss important calls if you
happened to have awakened early today and started working.

Allowing Special Callers Through
What if your child, your boss, or your elderly parent needs you urgently in the
middle of the night? Turning the phone off completely, or putting it into airplane
mode, would leave you unreachable in an emergency.
Fortunately, you can create wormholes through your Do Not Disturb blockade
for specified callers and texters:
Allow Calls From. When you open Settings → Do Not Disturb and
then tap Allow Calls From, you’re offered options like Everyone (all
calls and texts come through), No One (the phone is still online, but
totally silent), or Favorites, which may be the most useful option of all.
That setting permits calls and texts from anybody you’ve designated as
a favorite in the Phone app (“The Favorites List”). Since those are the
people you call most often, it’s fairly likely that they’re the most
important people in your life.
You can also create an arbitrary group of people—just your mom and
sister, just your boss and nephew, whatever. You have to create these
address-book groups on your computer (“Groups”)—for example, in
Contacts on the Mac. Once you’ve done that, their names appear on the
Allow Calls From screen under Groups. You can designate any one of
them as the lucky exception to Do Not Disturb.
NOTE
Actually, there are apps that let you create groups right on your iPhone. Groups by Qbix is a free one, for
example.
Emergency Bypass. This feature lets you designate any random person
in your Contacts list as an “It’s OK to Disturb” person. That person’s
calls and texts will always go through. See the Tip in ???.
One More Safety Measure
The Do Not Disturb settings screen also offers something called Repeated

Calls. If you turn this on, then if anybody tries to call you more than once within
three minutes, he’ll ring through.
The idea here is that nobody would call you multiple times unless he needed to
reach you urgently. You certainly wouldn’t want Do Not Disturb to block
somebody who’s trying to tell you that there’s been an accident, that you’ve
overslept, or that you’ve just won the lottery.
Do Not Disturb While Driving
According to the latest statistics, 100 percent of all car accidents are caused by
people. Human beings are the worst drivers.
One of our chief idiocies is attempting to handle text messages and calls while
we’re driving. In iOS 11, Apple has tried to do something about it.
If you turn on the Do Not Disturb While Driving feature, then whenever you’re
driving, notifications from your apps don’t show up to distract you. Your phone
remains dark and silent. (Alarms and timers still ring, and you still see and hear
Maps navigation instructions. Incoming phone calls follow whatever Do Not
Disturb exceptions you’ve set up as described on the previous pages.)
You can set it up so that if someone texts you, they get an auto-response like,
“I’m driving. I’ll see your message when I get where I’m going.”
A second text from you then says, “(I’m not receiving notifications. If this is
urgent, reply “urgent” to send a notification through with your original
message.)”
Isn’t that smart? Now senders know that if this really is an emergency, they can
send an “urgent” text. Now you’ll see that and the original text, and you can pull
over to see what the issue is.
How to Turn On Do Not Disturb While Driving
The first time you drive with your iOS 11 phone, an introductory screen appears.
“Your iPhone can detect when you may be driving and automatically silence
your incoming alerts and notifications.” Tap the big fat Turn On While Driving
button to make sure that this feature is always on when you’re behind the wheel.

If you missed that opportunity (by tapping Not Now), then here’s how you set up
DND While Driving: Open Settings → Do Not Disturb → Activate. Here you
have three options:
Automatically. This is by far the best option. Let Do Not Disturb turn
itself on automatically, every time you’re driving. The phone will use its
motion sensors and its network sensors to figure out when it’s in
motion.
TIP
This setting engages DND even when you’re on a bus or a train, or in the passenger seat of a car. In those
situations, wake the phone. Hard-press the DO NOT DISTURB bubble on the Lock screen (or swipe
left on it and then tap View) to view the I’m Not Driving button. Tap it to let messages through. This
feature was intended to prevent you from being distracted behind the wheel, not to ruin your life.
When Connected to Car Bluetooth. If your car has Bluetooth—if, for
example, you make calls and play music wirelessly through its sound
system—this is a better option. It means that the phone will know it’s in
your car by recognizing its Bluetooth. As a bonus, you’ll still be able to
make and receive phone calls through the car’s audio, using the car’s
buttons.
Manually. This option means that you intend to turn DND While
Driving on and off manually, using the Control Center. See
“Customizing the Control Center” for instructions on adding the DND

While Driving button to the Control Center.
But you know what? Don’t use this option. It’s much easier and safer to
let DND While Driving switch on automatically. If you have to do it
manually, you’ll forget. You’ll fall out of the habit. You won’t enjoy its
life-saving safeguards.
Auto-Reply Settings
Who should receive those “I’m driving; I’ll get back to you later” text messages?
That’s up to you.
Open Settings → Do Not Disturb → Auto-Reply To. Here you can choose No
One (nobody gets an auto-reply), Recents, Favorites (“The Favorites List”), or
All Contacts. In other words, total strangers (people not in your Contacts,
people you’ve never communicated with before) never get the auto-reply, no
matter what you choose here.
You can also tap Auto-Reply on this screen to edit the actual message. You can
make it say, for example, “I’m sorry, my car can’t talk right now.” Or “Your text
is very important to us…”
Note, however, that you can’t edit the second text reply, the one that says “I’m
not receiving notifications. If this is urgent, reply ‘urgent’ to send a notification
through with your original message.” That one always goes out as you see it
here.
Making DND Mandatory
If you’re the parent of a teenager, you might wish that DND While Driving
weren’t quite so optional. You might wish you could require that it’s turned on
when your newbie driver is behind the wheel.
You can. Do Not Disturb While Driving is now one of the options in Settings →
General → Restrictions, which means your offspring won’t be able to turn off
DND without your special password (see “Software Updates to Come”).
Fun with Phone Calls

The iPhone makes it pitifully easy to perform stunts like turning on the
speakerphone, putting someone on hold, taking a second call, and so on. Here
are the options you get when you’re on a call.
Mute

Tap this button to mute your own microphone, so the other guy can’t hear you.
(You can still hear him, though.) Now you have a chance to yell upstairs, to clear
the phlegm from your throat, or to do anything else you’d rather the other party
not hear. Tap again to unmute.
Keypad
Sometimes you have to input touchtones, which used to be a perk only of phones
with physical dialing keys. For example, that’s usually how you operate home
answering machines when you call in for messages, and it’s often required by
automated banking, reservations, and conference-call systems.
Tap this button to produce the traditional iPhone dialing pad. Each digit you
touch generates the proper touchtone for the computer on the other end to hear.
When you’re finished, tap Hide to return to the dialing-functions screen, or tap
End if your conversation is complete.
Speaker
Tap this button to turn on the iPhone’s built-in speakerphone—a great hands-free
option when you’re caught without your earbuds or Bluetooth headset
(“Bluetooth Accessories”). (In fact, the speakerphone doesn’t work if the
earbuds are plugged in or if a Bluetooth headset is connected.)
When you tap the button, it turns white to indicate that the speaker is activated.
Now you can put the iPhone down on a table or a counter and have a
conversation with both hands free. Tap speaker again to channel the sound back
into the built-in earpiece.
TIP
On iPhones before the 7, the speaker is on the bottom edge of the phone. If you’re having trouble hearing
it, and the volume is all the way up, consider pointing the speaker toward you, or even cupping one hand
around the bottom to direct the sound. (That works on later models, too, although there’s a second
speaker in the earpiece.)
Add Call (Conference Calling)

The iPhone is all about software, baby, and that’s nowhere more apparent than in
its facility at handling multiple calls at once.
The simplicity and reliability of this feature put other cellphones to shame.
Never again, in attempting to answer a second call, will you have to tell the first
person, “If I lose you, I’ll call you back.”
As you’ll read, however, this feature is much better on a GSM phone (AT&T or
T-Mobile) than on a CDMA phone (Verizon or Sprint).
Suppose you’re on a call. Here are some of the tricks you can do:
Make an outgoing call. Tap add call. The iPhone puts the first person
on hold—neither of you can hear the other—and returns you to the
Phone app and its various phone-number lists. You can now make a
second call in any way you want. The top of the screen makes clear that
the first person is still on hold as you talk to the second.
Receive an incoming call. What happens when a second call comes in
while you’re already on a call?
To answer on a GSM phone, tap End Call + Answer. On a CDMA
phone, tap End Current Call; the new call makes the phone ring again,
at which point you can answer it normally. Weird but true.
You can also tap End Current Call (answer the incoming call, hang up
on the first) or Decline Incoming Call (send it to voicemail).
When you’re on two calls at once, the top of the screen identifies both other
parties. Two new buttons appear, too:
Swap (GSM phones only) lets you flip between the two calls. At the top
of the screen, you see the names or numbers of your callers. One says
Hold (the one who’s on hold, of course) and the other bears a time
counter, which lets you know whom you’re actually speaking to.
Think how many TV and movie comedies have relied on the old
“Whoops, I hit the wrong button and now I’m bad-mouthing somebody
directly instead of behind his back!” gag. That can’t happen on the
iPhone.

You can swap calls by tapping swap or by tapping the Hold person’s
name or number.
Merge Calls combines your two calls so all three of you can converse
at once. Now the top of the screen announces the names of your callers.
Note that on a CDMA phone, you can merge calls only if you placed the
second call—not if it was incoming.
TIP
On a GSM phone, you can tap 
 next to someone’s name; at this point, you can drop someone from
the call by tapping End, or talk privately with someone by tapping Private. Tap Merge Calls to return to
the group call.
This business of combining calls doesn’t have to stop at two. At any time, you
can tap Add Call, dial a third number, and then tap Merge to combine it with

your first two. And then a fourth call, and a fifth. With you, that makes six
people on the call.
Then your problem isn’t technological; it’s social, as you try to conduct a
meaningful conversation without interrupting one another.
FaceTime
Tap this button to switch from your current phone call into a face-to-face video
call, using the FaceTime app described starting in “FaceTime Video Calls”.
(This feature requires that both you and the other guy have iPhones, iPads, iPod
Touches, or Macs.)
Hold
The FaceTime button appears in place of what, on earlier iPhones, was the Hold
button. But you can still trigger the Hold function—by holding down the Mute
button for a couple of seconds. Now neither you nor the other guy can hear
anything. Tap again to resume the conversation.
Contacts
This button opens the address book program so you can look up a number or
place another call.
Call Waiting
Call waiting has been around for years. With a call-waiting feature, when you’re
on one phone call, you hear a beep indicating that someone else is calling. You
can tap the Flash key on your phone to answer the second call while you put the
first one on hold.
Some people don’t use call waiting because it’s rude to both callers. Others don’t
use it because they have no idea what the Flash key is.
On the iPhone, when a second call comes in, the phone rings (and/or vibrates) as
usual, and the screen displays the name or number of the caller, just as it always
does. Buttons on the screen offer you three choices:

End Current Call. Hangs up on the first call and takes the second one.
Answer (Hold Current Call). This is the traditional call-waiting effect.
You say, “Can you hold on a sec? I’ve got another call,” to the first
caller. The iPhone puts her on hold, and you connect to the second
caller.
At this point, you can jump back and forth between the two calls, or you
can merge them into a conference call.
Decline Incoming Call. The incoming call goes straight to voicemail.
Your first caller has no idea that anything has happened.
If call waiting seems a bit disruptive, you can turn it off, at least on the AT&T
iPhone (the switch is in Settings → Phone → Call Waiting). When call waiting
is turned off, incoming calls go straight to voicemail when you’re on the phone.
If you have T-Mobile, Sprint, or Verizon, then you can turn off call waiting only
one call at a time; just dial *70 before you dial the number. You won’t be
disturbed by call-waiting beeps while you’re on that important call.
Call Forwarding
Here’s a pretty cool feature you may not have known you had. It lets you route
all calls made to your iPhone number to a different number. How is this useful?
Let us count the ways:
When you’re home. You can have your cellphone’s calls ring your
home number so you can use any extension in the house, and so you
don’t miss any calls while the iPhone is turned off or charging.
When you send your iPhone to Apple for battery replacement. You
can forward the calls you would have missed to your home or work
phone number.
When you’re overseas. You can forward the number to one of the web-
based services that answers your voicemail and sends it to you as an
email attachment (like Google Voice).
When you’re going to be in a place with little or no cell coverage.

Let’s say you’re in Alaska. You can have your calls forwarded to your
hotel or to a friend’s cellphone. (Forwarded calls eat up your allotment
of minutes, though.)
You have to turn on call forwarding while you’re still in an area with cell
coverage. Here’s how:
AT&T. Tap Settings → Phone → Call Forwarding, turn call
forwarding on, and then tap in the new phone number. That’s all there is
to it—your iPhone will no longer ring. At least not until you turn the
same switch off again.
Verizon, Sprint, T-Mobile. On the dialing pad, dial *72, plus the
number you’re forwarding calls to. Then tap 
. (To turn off call
forwarding, dial *73, and then tap 
.)
Caller ID
Caller ID is another classic cellphone feature. It’s the one that displays the phone
number of the incoming call (and sometimes the name of the caller).
The only thing worth noting about the iPhone’s own implementation of caller ID
is that you can prevent your number from appearing when you call other
people’s phones:
AT&T. Tap Settings → Phone → Show My Caller ID, and then tap
the on/off switch.
Verizon, Sprint, T-Mobile. You can disable caller ID only for
individual calls. For example, if you’re calling your ex, you might not
want your number to show up on his phone. Just dial *67 before you
dial the number. (Caller ID turns on again for subsequent calls.)
Custom Ringtones
The iPhone comes with more than 50 creative and intriguing ringing sounds,

from an old car horn to a peppy marimba lick. “Sounds (or Sounds & Haptics)”
shows you how to choose the one you want to hear when your phone rings. You
can also buy ready-made pop-music ringtones from Apple for $1.29 each. (On
your iPhone, open the iTunes Store app. Tap More and then Tones).
But where’s the fun in that? Surely you don’t want to walk around listening to
the same ringtones as the millions of other iPhone owners.
Fortunately, you can also make up custom ring sounds, either to use as your
main iPhone ring or to assign to individual callers in your Contacts list. All kinds
of free or cheap apps are available for doing that, with names like Ringtone
Designer Pro and Ringtones for iPhone; they let you make ringtones out of songs
you already own, or even sounds you record yourself.
You can also use GarageBand, a free Apple program available for iOS or Mac.
For instructions, see this chapter’s free online appendix, “Making Custom
Ringtones.” It’s a PDF available on this book’s “Missing CD” page at
missingmanuals.com.
Because apps aren’t allowed to manipulate the iPhone’s ringtones list directly,
the process isn’t altogether automatic; it involves syncing the ringtone to iTunes
on your computer and then syncing it again to your phone. But the app’s
instructions will guide you. (iPhone ringtones must be in the .m4r file format.)
TIP
One feature that’s blatantly missing on the iPhone is a “vibrate, then ring” option for incoming calls.
That’s where the phone first vibrates silently to get your attention—and begins to ring only if you
haven’t responded after, say, 10 seconds.
GarageBand offers the solution: Create a ringtone that’s silent for the first 10 seconds and only then
plays a sound. Then set your iPhone to vibrate and ring. When a call comes in, the phone plays the
ringtone immediately as it vibrates—but you won’t hear anything until after the silent portion of the
ringtone has been “played.”
Get Your Ringtones Back
If you used to have custom ringtones, but they no longer show up in iOS 11, you
have two options:
If they came from the iTunes store, re-download them. (On the

phone, open Settings → Sounds & Haptics, and tap Download All
Purchased Tones.)
If they’re on your computer, reinstall them. Connect your phone to
your computer, open iTunes, and drag the ringtone files (which are in
your computer’s iTunes → iTunes → Media Tones folder) into the left-
side sidebar, where your phone’s name appears. Details are at
support.apple.com/en-us/HT201593.
FaceTime Video Calls
Your iPhone, as you’re probably aware, has two cameras—one on the back and
one on the front. And that can mean only one thing: Video calling has arrived.
The picture and audio are generally rock-solid, with very little delay. Now
Grandma can see the baby, or you can help someone shop from afar, or you can
supervise brain surgery from thousands of miles away (some medical training
recommended).
You can enjoy these Jetsons fantasies not just when calling other iPhones; you
can also make video calls between iPhones and iPads, iPod Touches, and Macs.
You can even place these calls when you’re not in a Wi-Fi hotspot, over the

cellular airwaves, when you’re out and about.
FaceTime couldn’t be easier to fire up—in many different ways:
From Siri. The quickest way to start a video call may be simply to say,
“FaceTime Mom,” “FaceTime Chris Taylor,” or whatever.
From Favorites. Whenever you designate someone’s FaceTime contact
info as a favorite, a new entry appears in the Phone app’s Favorites list
(“The Favorites List”).
When you’re already on a phone call with someone. This is a good
technique when you want to ask first if the other guy wants to do video,
or when you’ve been chatting and suddenly there’s some reason to do
video. In any case, there’s nothing to it: Just tap the FaceTime button
that’s right on the screen when you pull the phone away from your face.
(Your buddy can either accept or, if he just got out of the shower,
decline.)
From the FaceTime app. You can also start up a videochat without
placing a phone call first. That’s handy when you have Wi-Fi but no cell
signal; FaceTime can make the call even when Verizon can’t.
Of course, if you’re not already on a call, the iPhone doesn’t yet know
whom you want to call. So you have to tell it. Open the FaceTime app.
It presents a list of your recent FaceTime calls. Tap a name to place a
new call to that person, or tap 
 to view a history of your calls with
that person (and buttons for placing new ones).
Or, to find your callee from your own Contacts list, tap the + button.
Find a name, tap it, and then tap 
 to place the call.
If your future conversation partner isn’t in Contacts yet, then tap where
it says Enter name, email, or number, and do just that.
From Contacts. In the Contacts app, if you tap a person’s name, you’ll
find buttons that place FaceTime calls. Or, in the Phone app, call up
your Favorites or Recents list. Tap 
 next to a name to open the

contact’s card; tap FaceTime.
From Messages. If you’re chatting away with somebody by text and
you realize that typing is no longer appropriate for the conversation, tap 
 at the top of the screen. Tap 
.
At this point, the other guy receives an audio and video message inviting him to
a chat. If he taps Accept, you’re on. You’re on each other’s screens, seeing and
hearing each other in real time. (You appear on your own screen, too, in a little
inset window. It’s spinach-in-your-teeth protection.)
Once the chat has begun, here’s some of the fun you can have:
Show what’s in front of you. Sometimes you’ll want to show your
friend what you’re looking at. That is, you’ll want to turn on the camera
on the back of the iPhone, the one pointing away from you, to show off
the baby, the artwork, or the broken engine part.

Just tap 
. Now you and your callee can both see what you’re
seeing. Tap 
 again to return to the front camera.
Snap a commemorative photo. You can immortalize a chat by using
the screenshot keystroke (sleep + home on most iPhones; see
“Capturing the Screen”). You wind up with a still photo of your
videochat in progress, safely nestled in the Camera Roll of your Photos
app.
Rotate the screen. FaceTime works in either portrait (upright) or
landscape (widescreen) view; just turn your phone 90 degrees. Of
course, if your calling partner doesn’t also turn her gadget, she’ll see
your picture all squished and tiny, with big black areas filling the rest of
the screen. (On the Mac, the picture rotates automatically when your
partner’s gadget rotates. You don’t have to turn the monitor 90 degrees.)
TIP
The 
 (rotation lock) button described in ??? works in FaceTime, too. That is, you can stop the
picture from rotating when you turn the phone—as long as you’re happy with full-time upright (portrait)
orientation.
Mute the audio. Tap 
 to silence the audio you’re sending. Great
when you need to yell at the kids.
Mute the video. When you leave the FaceTime app for any reason
(open a different app), the other guy’s screen goes black. He can’t see
what you’re doing when you leave the FaceTime screen. He can still
hear you, though.
This feature was designed to let you check your calendar, look
something up on the web, or whatever, while you’re still chatting. But
it’s also a great trick when you need to adjust your clothing, pick at your
teeth, or otherwise shield your activity from the person on the other end.

In the meantime, the call is technically still in progress—and a green
banner at the top of the Home screen reminds you of that. Tap there, on
the green bar, to return to the video call.
When you and your buddy have had quite enough, tap the End button to
terminate the call. (Although it’s easy to jump from phone call to videochat,
there’s no way to go the other direction.)
And marvel that you were alive to see the day.
FaceTime Audio Calls
Video calling is neat and all, but be honest: Don’t you find yourself making
phone calls more often? Video calling forces us to be “on,” neatly dressed and
well behaved, because we’re on camera. Most of the time, we’re perfectly
content (in fact, more content) with audio only.
And FaceTime audio calls don’t eat into your cellphone minutes and aren’t
transmitted over your cell carrier’s voice network; instead, these are Internet
calls. (They use data, not minutes.)
When you’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot, they’re free. When you’re not, your carrier’s
data network carries your voice.
You start out exactly as you would when making a video call, as described
already. That is, you can start from the FaceTime app, the Contacts app, the
Phone app, Messages, and so on.
In each spot where FaceTime is available, you get a choice of two types of calls:
Video (
) and Audio (
). (In Messages, if you tap the 
, you get a
choice of two voice options: Voice Call and FaceTime Audio.)
When you place an audio FaceTime call, the other person’s phone rings exactly
as though you’d placed a regular call. All the usual buttons and options are
available: Remind Me, Message, Decline, Accept, and so on.
Once you accept the call, it’s just like being on a phone call, too: You have the
options Mute, Speaker, FaceTime (that is, “Switch to video”), and Contacts.
(What’s missing? The Keypad button and the Merge Calls button. You can’t

combine FaceTime audio calls with each other, or with regular cellphone calls. If
a cellphone call comes in, you’ll be offered the chance to take it—but you’ll
have to hang up on FaceTime.)
You’ll find that the audio quality is amazing—more like FM radio than cellular.
It sounds like the other person is right next to your head; you hear every breath,
sniff, and sweater rustle.
Try out FaceTime audio calls. Whenever you’re calling another iPhone, iPad,
iPod Touch, or Mac owner, you’ll save money and minutes by placing these
better-sounding free calls.
TIP
iOS even offers FaceTime Call Waiting. If you’re on a FaceTime audio or video call, and someone else
FaceTime calls you, your phone rings—and you can either tap Decline or End & Accept.
Bluetooth Accessories
Bluetooth is a short-range cable elimination technology. It’s designed to untether
you from equipment that would ordinarily require a cord.
Most people use Bluetooth for two purposes: communicating with a smartwatch
or fitness band, or transmitting audio to a wireless speaker, car stereo, or
Bluetooth earpiece.
NOTE
This discussion covers monaural Bluetooth earpieces intended for phone calls. But the iPhone can also
handle Bluetooth stereo headphones, intended for music, as well as Bluetooth speakers. Details are in
“Speakers and Headphones”.
Pairing with a Bluetooth Earpiece or Speaker
Pairing means “marrying” a phone to a Bluetooth accessory so that each works
only with the other. If you didn’t do this one-time pairing, then some other guy
passing on the sidewalk might hear your conversation through his earpiece. And
neither of you would be happy.

The pairing process is different for every cellphone and every Bluetooth
earpiece. Usually it involves a sequence like this:
1. On the earpiece, turn on Bluetooth. Make the earpiece or speaker
discoverable. Discoverable just means that your phone can “see” it.
You’ll have to consult the gadget’s instructions to learn how to do so;
it’s usually a matter of holding down some button or combination of
buttons until the earpiece blinks.
2. On the iPhone, tap Settings → Bluetooth. Turn Bluetooth on. The
iPhone immediately begins searching for nearby Bluetooth equipment.
If all goes well, you’ll see the name of your earpiece or speaker show
up on the screen.

3. Tap the gadget’s name. Type in the passcode, if necessary. The
passcode is a number, usually four or six digits, that must be typed into
the phone within about a minute. You have to enter this only once,
during the initial pairing. The idea is to prevent some evildoer sitting
nearby in the airport lounge, for example, to secretly pair his earpiece
with your iPhone.
The user’s manual for your earpiece should tell you what the passcode
is (if one is even required).
To make calls using a Bluetooth earpiece (or speaker as a speakerphone), you
dial using the iPhone itself. You usually use the iPhone’s own volume controls,
too. You generally press a button on the earpiece or speaker to answer an
incoming call, to swap call-waiting calls, or to end a call.
NOTE
When Bluetooth is turned on but the earpiece isn’t, or when the earpiece isn’t nearby, the 
 icon on
your iPhone’s status bar appears in gray. And when it’s connected and working right, the earpiece’s
battery gauge appears on the iPhone’s status bar.
If you’re having problems making a particular gadget work, Google it. Type
“iphone jambox mini,” for example. Chances are good that you’ll find a write-up
by somebody who’s successfully worked through the setup.
Bluetooth Car Systems
The iPhone works beautifully with Bluetooth car systems, too. The pairing
procedure generally goes exactly as described previously: You make the car
discoverable, enter the passcode on the iPhone, and then make the connection.
Once you’re paired up, you can answer an incoming call by pressing a button on
your steering wheel, for example. You hear the caller through the car’s speakers,
and a microphone for your own voice is hidden in the rearview mirror or
dashboard. You make calls either from the iPhone or, in some cars, by dialing the
number on the car’s own touchscreen.

Of course, studies show that it’s the act of driving while conversing that causes
accidents—not actually holding a cellphone. So the hands-free system is less for
safety than for convenience and compliance with laws.
Pairing with a Smartwatch or Fitness Band
The latest Bluetooth technology, called Bluetooth LE (for “low energy”),
Bluetooth Smart, or Bluetooth 4.0 (or 5.0), turns on only when necessary and
then turns off again to save power.
When you’ve paired your phone with a Bluetooth LE gadget, you see the
Bluetooth logo on your status bar (
) light up only when it’s actually
exchanging data. Bluetooth LE has made possible a lot of smartwatches and
fitness trackers.
As a handy bonus, you usually do the pairing right in the gadget’s companion
app, rather than fumbling around in Settings. That setup makes a lot more sense.
For example, when you’re setting up an Apple Watch, you use the Watch app to
pair the watch; when you’re setting up an Up band or Fitbit, you connect your
band wirelessly in the Up app or Fitbit app.

Chapter 6. 5 Siri Voice Command
Siri, the iPhone’s famous voice-recognition technology, is actually two features.
First, there’s dictation, where the phone types out everything you say. That’s
described in Chapter 3.
Second, there’s Siri the voice-controlled minion. You can say, “Wake me up at
7:45 a.m.,” or “What’s Chris’ work number?” or “How do I get to the airport?”
or “What’s the weather going to be like in San Francisco this weekend?”
You can also ask questions about movies, sports, and restaurants. Siri displays a
beautifully formatted response and speaks in a calm voice.
You can even ask her, “What song is that?” or “Name that tune.” She’ll identify
whatever song is playing in the background, just as the popular Shazam app
does. It’s creepy/amazing.
You can operate her hands-free, too. Instead of pressing the home button to get
her attention, you just say, “Hey Siri.” (The iPhone 6s and later models can
respond even when running on battery power.)
In the beginning, only Apple decided what Siri could understand. Now, though,
the creators of certain apps can teach Siri new vocabulary, too. For example, you
can say, “Send Nicki a message with WeChat,” “Pay Dad 20 dollars with Square
Cash,” “Book a ride with Lyft,” or “Order me an Uber.”
NOTE
The kinds of apps Apple permits to tap into Siri are in these six categories: audio or video calls,
messages, payments, photo searching, booking rides, and starting workouts. Notably absent: music apps.
You still can’t say, “Play some Dave Brubeck on Spotify,” for example. Apple Music is the only music
service Siri understands.
And hey—in iOS 11, Siri has a new voice, clearer and apparently younger.
Voice Command

In 2010, Apple bought Siri, a company that made a voice-control app (no longer
available) for the iPhone. Apple cleaned it up, beefed it up, integrated it with the
iPhone’s software, and wound up with Siri, your virtual servant.
NOTE
Believe it or not, Siri is a spinoff from a Department of Defense research project called CALO
(Cognitive Agent that Learns and Organizes). In a very real way, therefore, Siri represents your tax
dollars at work.
The spinoff was run by the Stanford Research Institute (SRI). But apparently that’s not where Siri’s
name came from. Siri, it turns out, is a Norwegian word meaning “beautiful woman who leads you to
victory.” (Cocreator Dag Kittlaus named her. He’s Norwegian.)
Siri is a crisply accurate, astonishingly understanding, uncomplaining, voice-
commanded servant. No special syntax is required; you don’t even have to hold
the phone to your head.
Many speech-recognition systems work only if you issue certain limited
commands with predictable syntax, like “Call 445-2340” or “Open Microsoft
Word.” But Siri is different. She’s been programmed to respond to casual speech,
normal speech. It doesn’t matter if you say, “What’s the weather going to be like
in Tucson this weekend?” or “Give me the Tucson weather for this weekend” or
“Will I need an umbrella in Tucson?” Siri understands almost any variation.
And she understands regular, everyday speaking. You don’t have to separate
your words or talk weirdly; you just speak normally.
It’s not Star Trek. You can’t ask Siri to clean your gutters or to teach you French.
(Well, you can ask.)
But, as you’ll soon discover, the number of things Siri can do for you is
impressive. Furthermore, Apple continues to add to Siri’s intelligence through
software updates.
NOTE
Apple also keeps increasing the number of languages that Siri understands. Already, she understands
English (in nine varieties), Arabic, Cantonese, Danish, Dutch, Finnish, French, German, Hebrew, Italian,
Japanese, Korean, Malay, Mandarin, Norwegian, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, Swedish, Thai, and
Turkish. You change the language by visiting Settings → Siri & Search.

How to Use Siri
To get Siri’s attention, you have three choices:
Hold down the home button until you see a wavy animation on the
screen. (iPhone X: Hold in the side button.) Siri no longer double-beeps
or vibrates when you trigger her, except when you trigger her remotely.
She gives a double-beep when you use CarPlay, your earbuds clicker, or
“Hey Siri” (described next). The phone doesn’t have to be unlocked or
awake, which is awesome. Just pull the phone out of your pocket and
hold down the home button.
TIP
Some people press the home (side) button to trigger Siri, and then release the button and start talking.
But you can also hold the home (side) button down the entire time you’re speaking. That way you know
Siri won’t attempt to execute your command before you’ve finished saying it.
Hold down the clicker on your earbuds cord or the Call button on
your Bluetooth earpiece.
Say, “Hey Siri.” A double-beep plays. (You have to turn this feature on
in advance. And on models before the iPhone 6s, it works only when
the phone is plugged into power, like a USB jack. Details in a moment.)
Now Siri is listening. Ask your question or say your command. You don’t have
to hold the phone up to your mouth; Siri works perfectly well at arm’s length, on
your desk in front of you, or on the car seat beside you.
NOTE
Apple insists that Siri is neither male nor female. In fact, if you ask Siri her gender, she’ll say something
noncommittal, like, “Is this relevant?” But that’s just political correctness. Any baby-name website—or a
Norwegian dictionary—will tell you that Siri is a girl’s name.

When you’re finished speaking, be quiet for a moment (or, if you’ve been
pressing the home or side button, release it). About a second after you stop
speaking, Siri connects with her master brain online and processes your request.
After a moment, she presents (and speaks) an attractively formatted response.
TIP
You generally see only the most recent question and response on the Siri screen. But you can drag
downward to see all the previous exchanges you’ve had with Siri during this session.
To rephrase your question or cancel or start over, tap the screen to interrupt Siri’s
work. (You can also cancel by saying “Cancel” or just by pressing the home or
side button.) Tap the microphone icon to trigger your new attempt.
And when you’re completely finished talking to Siri, you can either press the
home (side) button, hold down your earbuds clicker, or say something like
“Goodbye,” “See you later,” or “Adios.” You’re taken back to whatever app you
were using before.
TIP
In iOS 11, Siri is much better at understanding follow-up questions, where the subject of the second
question is the same as the first. (“Who coaches the Phillies? What’s their win record?”)
How to Use “Hey Siri”
Siri can also accept spoken commands without your touching the phone. It’s
ideal for the car, when your hands and eyes should be focused on driving. (Of
course, it’s safest not to interact with your phone at all when you’re driving—
and Apple has an answer for that, too [“One More Safety Measure”].)
The phone won’t respond to “Hey Siri” unless you’ve set it up like this:
Turn on “Hey Siri.” Open Settings → Siri & Search and turn on
Allow “Hey Siri” (it comes turned off).
Train Siri to recognize your voice. You have to do a quick training

session to teach Siri what you sound like. Otherwise, a lot of people
would be freaked out when they say things like “Jay’s weary” or
“Space? Eerie!” and the phone double-beeps in response.
As soon as you turn on Allow “Hey Siri” the training screens appear.
Hit Set Up Now. The screen asks you to say “Hey Siri” three times, and
then “Hey Siri, how’s the weather today?” and “Hey Siri, it’s me.”
That’s all Siri needs to learn your voice.
At that point, you’re good to go. Anytime you want to ask Siri something, just
say, “Hey Siri”; at the sound of the double-beep, say your thing.
Just remember that older iPhone models (before the 6s) don’t respond to “Hey
Siri” except when they’re plugged in and charging.
Thanks to “Hey Siri,” you now have a front-seat conversationalist, a little
software friend who’s always happy to listen to what you have to say—and
whose knowledge of the world, news, sports, and history can help make those
cross-country drives a little less dull.
What to Say to Siri
Siri comes with a cheat sheet to help you learn her capabilities. To produce it,
hold down the home (side) button long enough to make the “Go ahead, I’m
listening” screen appear. Then release the button.
Siri displays screen after screen of example command categories, under the
heading “Some things you can ask me.” Tap a category name (below, left) to see
sample commands within that category (right).
TIP
Or just trigger Siri and then say, “What can I say?” or “What can you do?” or “Help me!” The same
cheat sheet appears.

Here are the general categories of things you can say to Siri:
Opening apps. If you don’t learn to use Siri for anything else, for the
love of Mike, learn this one. You can say, “Open Calendar” or “Play
Angry Birds” or “Launch Calculator.”
Result: The corresponding app opens instantly. It’s exactly the same as
opening the Home screen, swiping across the screen until you find the
app you’re looking for, and then tapping its icon—but without opening
the Home screen, swiping across the screen until you find the app
you’re looking for, and then tapping its icon.
TIP
You can get apps by voice, too, with commands like, “Get the Airbnb app” or “Search the App Store for
crossword-puzzle apps.”

Camera. “Take a panorama” (or “selfie” or “photo” or “slo-mo video”).
You can even say, “Scan a QR code”—a new feature that saves you
from having to download a QR app. (QR codes are those strange, 1-
inch-square bar codes that advertisers create as quick links to their
websites.)
Result: The Camera app opens, already set to the mode you requested.
If you asked for the QR code, when you aim the lens at the bar code, a
notification banner appears, offering a link to the relevant site.
Change your settings. You can make changes to certain basic settings
just by speaking your request. You can say, for example, “Turn on
Bluetooth,” “Turn off Wi-Fi,” “Turn on Do Not Disturb,” or “Turn on
airplane mode.” (You can’t turn off airplane mode by voice, because
Siri doesn’t work without an Internet connection.)
You can also make screen adjustments: “Make the screen brighter.”
“Dim the screen.”
Result: Siri makes the requested adjustment, tells you so, and displays
the corresponding switch in case she misunderstood your intention.
NOTE
If you’ve protected your phone with a fingerprint or Face ID, you may have to unlock it before you’re
allowed to change settings. Security and all that.
Open Settings panels. When you need to make tweakier changes to
Settings, you can open the most important panels by voice: “Open Wi-
Fi settings,” “Open Cellular settings,” “Open Personal Hotspot
settings,” “Open Notification settings,” “Open Sounds settings,” “Open
wallpaper settings,” and so on.
You can open your apps’ settings this way, too: “Open Maps settings,”
“Open Netflix settings,” “Open Delta settings,” and so on.
Siri is smart enough not to open security-related settings this way;

remember that you can use Siri even from the Lock screen. She’s
protecting you from passing pranksters who might really mess up your
phone.
Result: Siri silently opens the corresponding page of Settings.
Calling. Siri can place phone calls or FaceTime calls for you. “Call
Harold.” “Call Nicole on her mobile phone.” “Call the office.” “Phone
home.” “Dial 512-444-1212.” “Start a FaceTime call with Sheila
Withins.” “FaceTime Alex.”
Result: Siri hands you off to the Phone app or FaceTime app and places
the call. At this point, it’s just as though you’d initiated the call by
tapping.
Siri also responds to questions about your voicemail, like “Do I have
any new voicemail messages?” and even “Play my voicemails.” (After
playing each message, Siri gracefully offers to let you return the call—
or to play the next one.)
Alarms. You can say, “Wake me up at 7:35.” “Change my 7:35 alarm to
8:00.” “Wake me up in six hours.” “Cancel my 6 a.m. alarm” (or
“Delete my…” or “Turn off my…”). And, gloriously: “Turn off all my
alarms.”
This is so much quicker than setting the iPhone’s alarm the usual way.
Result: When you set or change an alarm, you get a sleek digital alarm
clock, right there beneath Siri’s response, and Siri confirms what she
understood.

Timer. You can also control the Timer module of the phone’s Clock
app. It’s like a stopwatch in reverse, in that it counts down to zero—
handy when you’re baking something, limiting your kid’s video-game
time, and so on. For example: “Set the timer for 20 minutes.” Or “Show
the timer,” “Pause the timer,” “Resume,” “Reset the timer,” or “Stop it.”
Result: A cool digital timer appears. A little stopwatch icon appears on
the Lock screen to remind you that time is ticking down.
TIP
You can specify minutes and seconds: “Set the timer for 2 minutes, 30 seconds,” for example.
Clock. “What time is it?” “What time is it in San Francisco?” “What’s
today’s date?” “What’s the date a week from Friday?” Or just “Time.”
Result: When you ask about the time, you see the clock identifying the
time in question. (For dates, Siri just talks to you and writes out the
date.)
Translations. New in iOS 11: Siri can translate languages! She can
translate phrases from English into Chinese, French, German, Italian, or
Spanish. For example, you can say, “How do you say, ‘Where’s the
bathroom?’ in French?” Or “Say, ‘This is delicious’ in Mandarin.”
“Translate ‘My toe hurts’ into German.”

Result: She displays the translated phrase. Tap ▸ to hear it spoken. She
even nails the accents.
Contacts. You can ask Siri to look up information in your address book
(the Contacts app)—and not just addresses. For example, you can say,
“What’s Gary’s work number?” “Give me Sheila Jenkins’ office phone.”
“Show Tia’s home email address.” “What’s my boss’s home address?”
“When is my husband’s birthday?” “Show Larry Murgatroid.” “Find
everybody named Smith.” “Who is P.J. Frankenberg?”
Result: A half “page” from your Contacts list. You can tap it to jump
into that person’s full card in Contacts. (If Siri finds multiple listings for
the person you named—“Bob,” for example—she lists all the matches
and asks you to specify who you meant.)
You can even follow up. If you first asked, “What is Germaine’s home
address?” you can then say, “What’s his cellphone number?”
TIP
In many of the examples on these pages, you’ll see that you can identify people by their relationship to
you. You can say, “Show my mom’s work number,” for example, or “Give me directions to my boss’s

house” or “Call my girlfriend.” For details on teaching Siri about these relationships, see “Advanced
Siri,” starting in “Advanced Siri”.
Text messages. “Send a text to Alex Rybeck.” “Send a message to Peter
saying, ‘I no longer require your services.’ ” “Tell Cindy I’m running
late.” “Send a message to Janet’s mobile asking her to pick me up at the
train.” “Send a text message to 212-561-2282.” “Text Frank and Ralph:
Did you pick up the pizza?”
Result: Siri prompts you for the body of the message, if you haven’t
specified it. Then you see a miniature outgoing text message. Siri asks if
you want to send it; say, “Yes,” “Send,” or “Confirm” to proceed.
TIP
If you’re using earbuds, headphones, or a Bluetooth speaker, then Siri reads the message
back to you before asking if you want to send it. (You can ask her to read it again by saying
something like, “Review that,” “Read it again,” or “Read it back to me.”) The idea, of course,
is that if you’re wearing earbuds or using Bluetooth, you might be driving, so you should
keep your eyes on the road.
If you need to edit the message before sending it, you have a couple of
options. First, you can tap it; Siri hands you off to the Messages app for
editing and sending.
Second, you can edit it by voice. You can say, “Change it to” to re-
dictate the message; “Add” to add more to the message; “No, send it to
Frank” to change the recipient; “No” to leave the message on the screen
without sending it; or “Cancel” to forget the whole thing.
You can also ask Siri to read incoming text messages to you, which is
great if you’re driving. For example, you can say, “Read my new
messages,” and “Read that again.” Or search for past messages: “Read
my last message from Robin.”
TIP

If you’ve opted to conceal the actual contents of incoming texts so that they don’t appear on
your Lock screen (“Three Swipes, You’re In”), then Siri can read you only the senders’
names or numbers—not the messages themselves.
You can even have her reply to messages she’s just read to you. “Reply,
‘Congratulations (period). Can’t wait to see your trophy (exclamation
point)!’ ” “Call her.” “Tell him I have a flat tire and I’m going to be
late.”
Email. Siri can read your email to you. For example, if you say, “Read
my latest email” or “Read my new email,” Siri reads aloud your most
recent email message. (She then offers you the chance to dictate a
response.)
Or you can use the summary-listing commands. When you say, “Read
my email,” Siri starts walking backward through your inbox, telling you
the subject of each, plus who sent it and when.

After a few listings, Siri says: “Shall I read the rest?” That’s your
opportunity to shut down what could be a very long recitation. If you
say “Yes,” though, she goes on to read the entire list of subject lines,
dates, and senders.
Result: Siri reads aloud.
TIP
You can also use commands like “Any new mail from Chris today?” “Show new mail about
the world premiere.” “Show yesterday’s email from Jan.” All those commands produce a list
of the messages, but Siri doesn’t read them.
You can also compose a new message by voice. Anytime you use the
phrase “about,” that becomes the subject line for your new message.
“Email Mom about the reunion.” “Email my boyfriend about the dance
on Friday.” “New email to Freddie Gershon.” “Mail Mom about
Saturday’s flight.” “Email Frank and Cindy Vosshall and Peter Love
about the picnic.” “Email my assistant and say, ‘Thanks for arranging
the taxi!’ ” “Email Gertie and Eugene about their work on the surprise
party, and say, ‘I really value your friendship.’ ”
(If you’ve indicated only the subject and addressee, Siri prompts you for
the body of the message.)
TIP
You can’t send mail to canned groups of people using Siri—at least not without MailShot, an
iPhone app that exists expressly for the purpose of letting you create email addressee groups.
You can reply to a message Siri has just described, too. “Reply, ‘Dear
Robin (comma), I’m so sorry about your dog (period). I’ll be more
careful next time (period).’ ” “Call her mobile number.” “Send him a
text message saying, ‘I got your note.’ ”
Result: A miniature Mail message, showing you Siri’s handiwork
before you send it.

Calendar. Siri can make appointments for you. Considering how many
tedious finger taps it usually takes to schedule an appointment in the
Calendar app, this is an enormous improvement. “Make an appointment
with Patrick for October 17 at 3 p.m.” “Set up a haircut at 9.” “Set up a
meeting with Charlize this Friday at noon.” “Meet Danny Cooper at 6.”
“New appointment with Steve, next Sunday at 7.” “Schedule a
conference call at 5:30 tonight in my office.”
Result: A slice of that day’s calendar appears, filled in the way you
requested.
TIP
Siri may also alert you to a conflict, something like this: “Note that you already have an all-
day appointment about ‘Boston Trip’ for this Thursday. Shall I schedule this anyway?”
Amazing.
You can also move previously scheduled meetings by voice. For
example, “Move my 2:00 meeting to 2:30.” “Reschedule my meeting
with Charlize to a week from Monday at noon.” “Add Frank to my
meeting with Harry.” “Cancel the conference call on Sunday.”
You can even consult your calendar by voice. You can say, “What’s on
my calendar today?” “What’s on my calendar for September 23?”
“When’s my next appointment?” “When is my meeting with Charlize?”
“Where is my next meeting?”
Result: Siri reads you your agenda and displays a tidy Day view of the
specified date.

Directions. By consulting the phone’s GPS, Siri can set up the Maps
app to answer requests like these: “How do I get to the airport?” “Show
me 1500 Broadway, New York City.” “Directions to my assistant’s
house.” “Take me home.” “What’s my next turn?” “Are we there yet?”
TIP
You can also say, “Stop navigation”—a great way to make Maps stop harassing you when
you realize you know where you are.
You can ask for directions to the home or work address of anyone in
your Contacts list—provided those addresses are in your Contacts list.
Result: Siri fires up the Maps app, with the start and end points of your
driving directions already filled in.
Reminders. Siri is a natural match for the Reminders app. She can add
items to that list at your spoken command. For example: “Remind me to
file my IRS tax extension.” “Remind me to bring the science supplies to
school.” “Remind me to take my antibiotic tomorrow at 7 a.m.” “Create

a list called Packing List.” “Add kissing to my Bucket list.”
The location-based reminders are especially amazing. They rely on
GPS to know where you are. So you can say, “Remind me to visit the
drugstore when I leave the office.” “Remind me to water the lawn when
I get home.” “Remind me to check in with Nancy when I leave here.”
TIP
It’s pretty obvious how Siri knows to remind you when you leave “here,” because she knows
where you are right now. But she also understands “home” and “office,” both yours and other
people’s—if you’ve entered those addresses onto the corresponding people’s cards in
Contacts.
Siri can also understand the word “this” when you’re looking at an
email message, a web page, or a note. That is, you can say, “Remind me
about this at 7 p.m.” or “Remind me about this when I get home.” Sure
enough: Siri will flag you with a reminder notification at the appropriate
time—and add an entry, with a link to the original message, web page,
or note, to the Reminders app.
Result: A miniature entry from the Reminders app, showing you that

Siri has understood.
Notes. You create a new note (in the Notes app) by saying things like,
“Make a note that my shirt size is 15 and a half” or “Note: Dad will not
be coming to the reunion after all.” You can even name the note in your
request: “Create a ‘Movies to Watch’ note.”
But you can also call up a certain note to the screen, like this: “Find my
Frequent Flier note.” You can even summon a table-of-contents view of
all your notes by saying, “Show all my notes.”
Result: A miniature Notes page appears, showing your newly dictated
text (or the existing note that you’ve requested).
TIP
You can keep dictating into the note you’ve just added. Say, “Add ‘Return books to library’ ”
(or just say, “Add,” and she’ll ask you what to add). She’ll keep adding to the same note until
you say, “Note that…” or “Start a note” or “Take a note” to begin a fresh note page.
You can add text to an earlier note: “Add Titanic II: The Voyage Home to my ‘Movies to
Watch’ note.” (The first line of any note is also its title—in this case “Movies to Watch.”)
Restaurants. Siri is happy to serve as your personal concierge. Try
“Good Italian restaurants around here,” “Find a good pizza joint in
Cleveland,” or “Show me the reviews for Olive Garden in
Youngstown.” Siri displays a list of matching restaurants—with ratings,
reviews, hours, and so on.
But she’s ready to do more than just give you information. She can
actually book your reservations, thanks to her integration with the
OpenTable website. You can say, “Table for two in Belmont tonight,” or
“Make a reservation at an inexpensive Mexican restaurant Saturday
night at seven.”
Result: Siri complies by showing you the proposed reservation. Tap one
of the offered alternative time slots, if you like, and then off you go.
Everything else is tappable here, too—the ratings (tap to read customer
reviews), phone number, web address, map, and so on.

Businesses. Siri is a walking, talking (well, all right, not walking)
Yellow Pages. Go ahead, try it: “Find coffee near me.” “Where’s the
closest Walmart?” “Find some pizza places in Cincinnati.” “Search for
gas stations.” “French restaurants nearby.” “I’m in the mood for
Chinese food.” “Find me a hospital.” “I want to buy a book.”
Result: Siri displays a handsome list of businesses nearby that match
your request.
TIP
She’s a sly dog, that Siri. She’ll help you out even if your requests are, ahem, somewhat off
the straight and narrow. If you say, “I think I’m drunk,” she’ll list nearby cab companies. If
you indicate that you’re craving relief from your drug addiction, she’ll provide you with a list
of rehab centers. If you refer to certain biological urges, she’ll list escort services.
Playing music. Instead of fumbling around in your Music app, save
yourself steps and time by speaking the name of the album, song, or
band: “Play some Beatles.” “Play ‘I’m a Barbie Girl.’ ” “Play some

jazz.” “Play my jogging playlist.” “Play the party mix.” “Shuffle my
‘Dave’s Faves’ playlist.” “Play.” “Pause.” “Resume.” “Skip.”
If you’ve set up any iTunes Radio stations (Chapter 8), you can call for
them by name, too: “Play Dolly Parton Radio.” Or be more generic: Just
say, “Play iTunes Radio” and be surprised. Or be more specific: Say,
“Play some country music” (substitute your favorite genre).
Result: Siri plays (or skips, shuffles, or pauses) the music you asked for
—without ever leaving whatever app you were using.
Apple Music. If you subscribe to Apple’s $10-a-month Apple Music
service, Siri offers a huge range of even more useful voice controls. For
example, you can call for any music in Apple’s 30 million–song catalog
by song name, album, or performer: “Play ‘Mr. Blue Sky.’ ” “Show me
some Elton John albums.” “Play ‘Yesterday’ next” (or “…after this
song”). Or ask to have a singer or album played in random order:
“Shuffle Taylor Swift.”
When you hear a song you like, you can say, “Play more like this.” Or,
“Add this song (or album) to my library.” (Or, if you don’t like it, “Skip
this song.”)
If more than one person performed a song, be specific: “Play ‘Smooth
Criminal’ by Glee.” You can even ask for a song according to the movie
it was in. “Play that song from Frozen.”
Or start one of your playlists by name (“Play ‘Mellow Yoga’ ”). Or re-
listen to a song: “Play previous.” Or ask for one of Apple Music’s radio
stations: “Play Beats 1” or “Play Charting Now.”
While music is playing, Siri is happy to tell you what you’re listening
to. (“What song is this?” “Who’s the singer?” “What album is this
from?”) You can also tell her, “Like this song” or “Rate this song five
stars.” She’ll note that and offer you more songs like it on the For You
screen of the Apple Music app.
You can ask her to play the top hits of any year or decade (“Play the top
song from 1990”; “Play the top 35 songs of the 1960s”).
Even if you’re not an Apple Music subscriber, you’re still welcome to

say, “Buy ‘Mr. Blue Sky’ ” or “Download the new Taylor Swift album.”
Apple welcomes your expenditures in any form.
Result: Just what you’d expect!
Identifying music. Siri can listen to the music playing in the room and
try to identify it (song name, singer, album, and so on). Whenever
there’s music playing, you can say things like, “What’s that song?”
“What’s playing right now?” “What song is this?” or “Name that tune!”
Result: Siri listens to the music playing at your
home/office/bar/restaurant/picnic—and identifies the song by name and
performer. There is also, needless to say, a Buy button.
Weather. “What’s the weather going to be today?” “What’s the forecast
for tomorrow?” “Show me the weather this week.” “Will it snow in
Dallas this weekend?” “Check the forecast for Memphis on Friday.”
“What’s the forecast for tonight?” “Can you give me the wind speed in
Kansas City?” “Tell me the windchill in Chicago.” “What’s the
humidity right now?” “Is it nighttime in Cairo?” “How’s the weather in
Paris?” “What’s the high for Washington on Friday?” “When will
Jupiter rise tomorrow?” “When’s the moonrise?” “How cold will it be
in Houston tomorrow?” “What’s the temperature outside?” “Is it windy
out there?” “When does the sun rise in London?” “When will the sun
set today?” “Should I wear a jacket?”

Result: A convenient miniature Weather display for the date and place
you specified.
Stocks. “What’s Google’s stock price?” “What did Ford close at
today?” “How’s the Dow doing?” “What’s Microsoft’s P/E ratio?”
“What’s Amazon’s average volume?” “How are the markets doing?”
Result: A tidy little stock graph, bearing a wealth of up-to-date
statistics.
Find My Friends. You see this category only if you’ve installed
Apple’s Find My Friends app. “Where’s Ferd?” “Is my dad home?”
“Where are my friends?” “Who’s here?” “Who is nearby?” “Is Mom at
work?”
Result: Siri shows you a beautiful little map with the requested person’s
location clearly indicated by a blue pushpin. (She does, that is, if you’ve
set up Find My Friends, you’ve logged in, and your friends have made
their locations available.)
Search the web. “Search the web for a 2016 Ford Mustang.” “Search

for healthy smoothie recipes.” “Search Wikipedia for the
Thunderbirds.” “Search for news about the Netflix-Amazon merger.”
TIP
Siri uses Google to perform its web searches. If you prefer Microsoft’s Bing search service,
just say so. Say, “Bing Benjamin Franklin.” (For that matter, you can also ask Siri to “Yahoo”
something—for example, “Yahoo blueberry dessert recipes.”)
Wikipedia is a search type all its own. “Search Wikipedia for Harold
Edgerton.” “Look up Mariah Carey on Wikipedia.” Pictures get special
treatment, too: “I want to see pictures of cows.” You can also say,
“Show me pictures of…” or “Find me…” or “Search for…”
Result: Siri displays the results of your search right on her screen. Tap
one of the results to open the corresponding web page in Safari.
Sports scores. At last you have a buddy who’s just as obsessed with
sports trivia as you are. Siri knows everything about everything when it
comes to professional and college sports scores, schedules, standings,
player details, and team stats.
You can say things like, “How did the Indians do last night?” “What
was the score of the last Yankees game?” “When’s the next Cowboys
game?” “What baseball games are on today?”

You can also ask questions about individual players, like “Who has the
best batting average?” “Who has scored the most runs against the Red
Sox?” “Who has scored the most goals in British soccer?” “Which
quarterback had the most sacks last year?”
And, of course, team stats are fair game, like “Show me the roster for
the Giants,” “Who is pitching for Tampa this season?” and “Is anyone
on the Marlins injured right now?”
Result: Neat little box scores or factoids, complete with team logos.
Movies in theaters. Siri is also the virtual equivalent of an insufferable
film buff. She knows everything. “Who was the star of Groundhog
Day?” “Who directed Chinatown?” “What is Waterworld rated?” “What
movie won Best Picture in 1952?” “How are the reviews for The Emoji
Movie?”
It’s not just about old movies, either. Siri also knows everything about
current showtimes in theaters. “What movies are opening this week?”
“What’s playing at the Watton Cineplex?” “Give me the reviews for
Doctor Strange.” “What are today’s showtimes for The Last Jedi?”

Result: Tidy tables of movies, theaters, or showtimes. (Tap one for
details.) Sometimes you get a movie poster filled with facts. In the U.S.,
you can even buy tickets by voice: “Two tickets to see Titanic 2,” for
example, or “Four tickets to Pelicans at City Center at 7:30 pm.”
Movies on iTunes. Siri also helps you find flicks in online services
(Netflix, Hulu, HBO Go, and so on) or on Apple’s own movie store.
You know: “Find movies about football.” “Play Jurassic World.” “Find
new action movies on Netflix.” “Get me documentaries on Hulu.” “Find
free movies for kids.”
Result: Thumbnails of the movies you seek.
TIP
Once you’re playing a video, you can then ask Siri things like, “Who’s in this?” or “Who
directed this?” Kind of handy. And if you’re binge watching, you can manage your Up Next
queue verbally, too: “What’s next on my Up Next?” “Add Arrested Development to my Up
Next.” “Remove Big Little Lies from my Up Next.”
iBooks. Apple runs an ebook store, too, of course. Therefore, these
commands are fair game: “Find books by Ian Fleming.” “Buy the book
Purity.” “Show me Jonathan Franzen books.”
Result: The iBooks app opens, listing the book(s) you mentioned.
Podcasts. While we’re on the subject of entertainment: Apple’s
Podcasts app is Siri-controllable, too. “Play ‘S-Town.’ ” “Play it twice
as fast.” “Skip ahead 30 seconds.” “Pause.” “Play.” “Listen to the TED
Radio Hour.”
Result: The app obeys.
Facts and figures. This is a huge category. It represents Siri’s
partnership with the Wolfram Alpha factual search engine
(www.wolfram​alpha.com). The possibilities here could fill an entire
chapter—or an entire encyclopedia.

You can say things like, “How many days until Valentine’s Day?”
“When was Abraham Lincoln born?” “How many teaspoons are in a
gallon?” “What’s the exchange rate between dollars and euros?”
“What’s the capital of Belgium?” “What’s a 17 percent tip on 62 dollars
for three people?” “When is the next solar eclipse?” “Show me the Big
Dipper.” “What’s the tallest mountain in the world?” “What’s the price
of gold?” “What’s the definition of schadenfreude?” “How much is six
dollars in pesos?” “Generate a random number.” “Graph x equals 3y
plus 12.” “What flights are overhead?”
Result: For simple math and conversions, Siri just shows you the
answer. For more complex questions, you get a specially formatted
table, ripped right out of Wolfram Alpha’s knowledge base.

TIP
Siri can also harness the entire wisdom of Wikipedia. You can say, for example, “Search
Wikipedia for Tim Kaine” or “Tell me about Alexander Hamilton” or “Show me the
Wikipedia page about Richard Branson.”
Search Twitter. If you say something like, “What are people saying?”
or “What’s happening on Twitter?” you see a list of tweets on the
trending topics on Twitter. (Tap a tweet in the list to open it into a new
window that contains more information and a View in Twitter button.)
Or ask, “What are people saying about the Chicago Bears?” to read
tweets on that subject. Or, conversely, you can ask, “What is Samantha
Bee saying on Twitter?” to see her most recent tweets. (You can
substitute the names of other people or companies.) Or, “Search Twitter
for the hashtag ‘FirstWorldProblems.’ ” (A hashtag is a searchable
phrase like #toofunny or #iPhoneX, which makes finding relevant
tweets on Twitter much easier.)
Result: Siri displays 10 or so tweets that match your query.
Round up photos or videos. This trick can save you a lot of time and
fussing. You can ask Siri to show you all photos or videos according to
the time or place you shot them, or according to the album name they’re
in. “Show me the videos from Halloween last year,” you can say. “Get
me the videos from Utah.” “Show me the Disney World album.” “Open
the Panoramas album.” “Show me the Slo-mo videos from Oberlin
College.” “Give me the pictures from last summer.”
Result: You get a screenful of little square thumbnails of photos or
videos that match your request. Tap one to open it, or tap Show All to
see all the photos/videos in that batch.
Non-Apple Apps
These days, Apple permits Siri to control apps from other companies. Once you
find out what these commands are, they can accelerate other apps just as much
as Siri already accelerates Apple’s.

Here are a few examples:
Lyft, Uber. “Order a Lyft.” “Call me an Uber.” Siri asks you to tap the
kind of car you want to order; one further tap orders the ride.
Pinterest. “Find toddler bedroom idea pins on Pinterest.” The Pinterest
app opens, displaying pins that match your search query (from all of
Pinterest, not just your pages).
Square Cash. “Pay Casey two dollars with Square Cash.” Boom:
You’ve just sent money to lucky, lucky Casey.
LinkedIn. “Send a LinkedIn message to Robin that says, ‘Can you
vouch for me?’ ”
WhatsApp, WeChat, Skype. All of these chat apps work exactly like
iOS’s own Messages app, in that you can send “text messages” entirely
by voice. Just say, “with [name of app]” at the end of your command, or
use the messaging app’s name as a noun.
For example: “Tell Eric, ‘I think I left my wallet in your car’ with
WhatsApp.” “Send a WeChat to Phoebe saying, ‘Are we still going
out?” “Let Marge know, ‘I accidentally left your front door open this
morning’ in Skype.”
To see a list of all your apps that understand Siri commands, open Settings →
Siri & Search. There they are: all the Siri-compatible apps, with on/off
switches.
You may never find the end of the things Siri understands, or the ways she can
help you. If her repertoire seems intimidating at first, start simple—use her to
open apps, dial by voice, send text messages, and set alarms. You can build up
your bag of tricks as your confidence grows.
NOTE
Remember that you can use Siri without even unlocking your phone—and therefore without any
security, like your passcode. Among certain juvenile circles, therefore, Siri is the source of some
interesting pranks. Someone who finds your phone lying on a table could change your calendar
appointments, send texts or emails, or even change what Siri calls you (“Call me ‘you idiot’ ”), without
having to enter the phone’s passcode!

The solution is simple. Open Settings → Touch ID & Passcode (or Face ID & Passcode on the iPhone
X). If you scroll way down, you can turn off Siri. Of course, you’ve now lost the convenience of using
Siri when the phone is locked. But at least you’ve prevented having your own phone call you an idiot.
When Things Go Wrong
If Siri misrecognizes your instructions, you’ll know it, because you can see her
interpretation of what you said. And, as indicated by the little hint tap to edit,
you can tap Siri’s interpretation to open up an editing screen so that you can
make corrections by typing.
TIP
You can also correct a misheard command just by speaking the correct version, like this, “I meant
Chicago.” Siri gets what you mean.
If Siri recognizes what you said but it isn’t within her world of comprehension,
she offers you a Search the web button as a last resort.
Siri’s Personality
Siri’s understanding of casual spoken commands is so impressive that you might
sometimes think she’s almost human. And that, of course, is exactly what Apple
wants.
You can say all kinds of off-kilter things to Siri. After you’ve encountered a few
of her answers, you won’t be surprised to learn that Apple actually employs a
comedy-writing team exclusively for Siri-humor purposes.
For example, if you ask her, “What is the meaning of life?” she responds with
one of more than a dozen different answers. She might say, “I can’t answer that
now, but give me some time to write a very long play in which nothing
happens.” Or “It’s nothing Nietzsche couldn’t teach ya.” Or: “All evidence to
date suggests it’s chocolate.”
Siri is full of such comebacks, and there are whole websites dedicated to her
snark. Here are a few examples (this list won’t ruin the fun, because Siri actually
has several different comebacks to most of these questions):

You: “Who’s your daddy?” Siri: “You are. Can we get back to work now?”
You: “Open the pod bay doors, Hal.” Siri: “I’m sorry, I’m afraid I can’t do that.”
(Then: “Are you happy now?”)
You: “Knock knock.” Siri: “Knock knock. Who’s there? Joshua. Joshua who?
Joshua, I don’t do knock-knock jokes.”
You: “What are you wearing?” Siri: “You have the wrong personal assistant,
Carl.”
You: “Who’s the boss?” Siri: (Presents the vital statistics of Bruce Springsteen.)
You: “Beam me up, Siri!” Siri: “Please remove your belt, shoes, and jacket, and
empty your pockets.”
You: “Show me the money.” Siri: “I’ve found 23 ATMs that are fairly close to
you…”
You, in the evening: “Good morning, Siri.” Siri: “Good morning? It’s 9:24
p.m.!”
You: “How much wood would a woodchuck chuck if a woodchuck could chuck
wood?” Siri: “42 cords of wood, to be exact. Everyone knows that.”
You: “Guess what.” Siri: “You won the lottery?”
You: “Talk dirty to me.” Siri: “Humus. Compost. Pumice. Silt. Gravel.”
You: “Why did the chicken cross the road?” Siri: “I am not perspicacious about
the peregrinations of poultry.”
You: “Do you have a religion?” Siri: “My policy is the separation of spirit and
silicon.”
You: “Klaatu barada nikto.” Siri: “OK, I’ll pass the message on to Gort.” (You
kind of have to know The Day the Earth Stood Still to get it.)
Here are a few other things to say to Siri when you get bored:
What do you think of Google Now?
OK, Glass.
OK, Google.

What’s the best cellphone?
What’s the best computer?
How much do you cost?
What are you doing later?
Make me a sandwich.
Does Santa Claus exist?
Do you believe in Santa Claus?
Should I give you a female or male voice?
I don’t like your voice.
Are you serious?
Are you kidding me?
Blah blah blah.
LOL.
Who’s your boss?
You are good to me.
You are boring.
Give me a kiss.
What are the three laws of robotics?
Let’s play a game.
Read me a haiku.
Take me to your leader.
Can I borrow some money?
Siri, rap.
Siri, beatbox.

Testing 1, 2, 3
When will hell freeze over?
Which came first, the chicken or the egg?
Trick or treat!
What do you want?
What’s your favorite animal?
Do you have children?
Do you have a boyfriend?
What are the lottery numbers going to be tomorrow?
What did you do last night?
What are you doing this weekend?
What’s your favorite movie (…TV show, song, color, book, computer,
phone, operating system, app)?
What should I ask Tim Cook?
Are you smart?
How do I look?
Have you ever loved anyone?
Do you have any pets?
Do I look good in this outfit?
Flip a coin.
Roll a die.
Rock paper scissors.
Yes or no?
Pick a card.

Tell me a riddle.
What’s 0 divided by 0?
What’s infinity times infinity?
What is the passcode?
When is the world going to end?
Stop it, Siri.
TIP
Siri addresses you by name in her typed answers, but she doesn’t always speak it when she reads those
answers out loud.
Ordinarily, she calls you whatever you’re called in Contacts. But you can make her call you whatever
you like. Say, “Call me Master” or “Call me Frank” or “Call me Ishmael.” If you confirm when she asks,
from now on, that’s what Siri will call you in her typed responses.
Typing to Siri
In iOS 11, for the first time, you can type your questionsa and commands to Siri
instead of speaking them. Every now and then, that silent method could be
preferable to the talk-aloud method—when you’re in church or a movie, for
example, or when your query is of a delicate nature.
To set this up, open Settings → General → Accessibility → Siri. Turn on Type
to Siri.
From now on, when you hold down the home (or side) button, you get a Type to
Siri box and a keyboard. Tap out your query and then hit Done; Siri shows her
response, exactly as though you had spoken.

Even with this feature turned on, your voice isn’t completely useless. “Hey Siri”
still works just as it always has, thus giving you the best of both worlds.
And even if you press the home (side) button and find yourself staring at the
keyboard, you can still speak your request—by tapping the 
 and dictating.
It’s the best of all three worlds.
Advanced Siri
With a little setup, you can extend Siri’s powers in some intriguing ways.
Teach Siri About Your Relationships

When you say, “Text my mom” or “Call my fiancée,” how does Siri know whom
you’re talking about? Sure, Siri is powerful artificial intelligence, but she’s not
actually magic.
Turns out you teach her by referring to somebody in your Contacts list. Say to
her something like, “My assistant is Jan Carpenter” or “Tad Cooper is my
boyfriend.” When Siri asks for confirmation, say “Yes” or tap Confirm.
Or wait for Siri to ask you herself. If you say, “Email my dad,” Siri asks, “What
is your dad’s name?” Just say his name; Siri remembers that relationship from
now on. (The available relationships include mother, father, grandmother,
grandfather, brother, sister, child, son, daughter, spouse, wife, husband, boss,
partner, manager, assistant, girlfriend, boyfriend, and friend.)
Behind the scenes, Siri lists these relationships on your card in Contacts. Now
that you know that, you can figure out how to edit or delete these relationships as
well. Which is handy—not all relationships, as we know, last forever.
Fix Siri’s Name Comprehension
Siri easily understands common names—but if someone in your family, work, or
social circle has an unusual name, you may quickly become frustrated. After all,
you can’t text, call, email, or get directions to someone’s house unless Siri
understands the person’s name when you say it.
One workaround is to use a relationship, as described in the previous section.
That way, you can say, “Call my brother” instead of “Call Ilyich” (or whatever).
Another is to use Siri’s pronunciation-learning feature. It fires up in several
different situations:
When you’re texting. If Siri offers the wrong person’s name when you
try to text someone by voice, say, “Someone else.” After you’ve sent
the message, Siri apologetically says, “By the way, sorry I didn’t
recognize that name. Can you teach me how to say it?”
After Siri botches a pronunciation. Tell her, “That’s not how to
pronounce his name.”
Whenever it occurs to you. You can start the process by saying, “Learn
to pronounce Reagann Tsuki’s name” or “Learn to pronounce my

mom’s name.”
In Contacts. Open somebody’s “card” in Contacts; start Siri and say,
“Learn to pronounce her name.”
In each case, with tremendous courtesy, Siri walks you through the process of
teaching her the correct pronunciation. She offers you several ▸ buttons; each
triggers a different pronunciation. Tap Select next to the correct one (or tap Tell
Siri again if none of the options is correct).
By the end of the process, Siri knows two things: how to say that person’s name
aloud, and how to recognize that name when you say it.
Siri Settings
In Settings → Siri & Search, you can fiddle with two Siri on/off switches:
Listen for “Hey Siri.” If you don’t want Siri to respond to “Hey Siri,”
(see “How to Use “Hey Siri””), you can turn her listening off here. Now
Siri works only when you hold down the home (or side) button.
Press Home for Siri/Press Side Button for Siri. If you turn this off,
then holding down the home (or side) button no longer summons Siri.
(If Listen for “Hey Siri” is also turned off, then you can’t use Siri at
all. In essence, you’ve just turned your modern iPhone into an iPhone 4.
NOTE
Why would anyone turn off Siri? One reason: Using Siri involves transmitting a lot of data to Apple,
which gives some people the privacy willies. Apple collects everything you say to Siri, your song and
playlist names, plus all the names in Contacts (so that Siri can recognize them when you refer to them).
Allow Siri When Locked. Lets you turn off Siri at the Lock screen.
Language. What language do you want Siri to speak and recognize?
The options here include dozens of languages and dialects, including
English in nine flavors (Australian, Canadian, Indian, and so on).
Siri Voice. Siri can have either a man’s voice or a woman’s voice—in a

choice of accents. Even if you’re American, it’s fun to give Siri a cute
Australian accent.
Voice Feedback asks: Do you want to hear Siri’s “I’m listening!” beep
and her spoken responses even if the ringer switch is off? How about
when you’re going hands-free (using “Hey Siri” or a Bluetooth
earpiece, car, or headphones)?
Always On: Siri always replies to queries with a synthesized voice (in
addition to a text response).
Control with Ring Switch: Siri speaks her answers only when the
phone isn’t silenced (“Silencer Switch, Volume Keys”).
Hands-Free Only: You’re telling Siri not to bother speaking when
you’re looking at the screen and can read the responses for yourself.
She’ll speak only if you’re on speakerphone, using a headset, listening
through your car’s Bluetooth system, and so on.
My Information. Siri needs to know which card in Contacts contains
your information and lists your relationships. That’s how she’s able to
respond to queries like “Call my mom,” “Remind me to shower when I
get home,” and so on.
Suggestions in Search, Suggestions in Look Up. You get to control
when iOS provides outside results it considers helpful when you Search
(“Searching Your iPhone”) and when you use the Look Up button
(“Notes, Bookmarks, Highlighting, Dictionary”).
Apps list. Finally, this screen contains a scrolling list of Siri-compatible
apps. Turn them on or off at will.

Chapter 7. 6 Texting & Messages
The term “iPhone” has never seemed especially appropriate for a gadget with so
much power and flexibility. Statistics show, in fact, that making phone calls is
one of the iPhone’s least-used functions! In fact, 57 percent of us never use the
iPhone to make phone calls at all.
But texting—now we’re talking. Texting is the single most used function of the
modern cellphone. In the U.S., we send 6 billion texts a day; half of Americans
send at least 50 texts a day. Worldwide, we send 8.3 trillion texts a year. That’s a
lot of “how r u”s and “LOL”s.
Apple—wary of losing customers to creative messaging apps like WhatsApp,
Snapchat, and Facebook Messenger—is trying to compete with its Messages
app. Its special effects and cool interactions match most offerings of rival apps—
and, thanks to a Messages app store, even surpass them. Text-message
conversations no longer look like a tidy screenplay. Now they can be overrun
with graphics, cartoons, animations, and typographic fun.
In iOS 10, all that gadgetry made Messages feel cluttered. The big news in iOS
11 is that Apple has cleaned this up, and made Messages cleaner without losing
its expandability.
Text Messages and iMessages
So why is texting so crazy popular? For reasons like these:
Like a phone call, a text message is immediate. You get the message
off your chest right now.
And yet, as with email, the recipient doesn’t have to answer
immediately. The message waits for him even when his phone is turned
off.
Unlike a phone call, a text is nondisruptive. You can send someone a
text message without worrying that he’s in a movie, a meeting, or

anywhere else where holding a phone up to his head and talking would
be frowned upon. (And the other person can answer non​disruptively,
too, by sending a text message back.)
You have a written record of the exchange. There’s no mistaking
what the person meant. (Well, at least not because of sound quality.
Understanding the texting shorthand that’s evolved—“C U 2mrO,” and
so on—is another matter entirely.)
Now, the first thing to learn about texting on the iPhone is that there are two
kinds of messages. There are regular text messages (SMS), which any cellphone
can send to any cellphone. And there are iMessages, which only Apple
equipment (iPhones, iPads, Macs) can exchange.
The Messages app can send and receive both kinds of messages—but iMessages
offer much greater creative freedom.
Standard Texting (SMS)
SMS stands for Short Message Service, but it’s commonly just called texting. An
SMS is a very short note (under 160 characters—a sentence or two) that you
shoot from one cellphone to another. What’s so great about it?
Most iPhone plans include unlimited texts. Picture and video messages (known
as MMS, or Multimedia Messaging Service) count as regular text messages.
But whenever you’re texting another Apple person (using an iPhone, iPad, iPod
Touch, or Mac), you have another choice, as described next.
iMessages
An iMessage looks and works exactly like a text message. You send iMessages
and receive them in the same app (Messages). They show up in the same
window. You can send the same kinds of things: text, photos, videos, contacts,
map locations, whatever. You send and receive them using exactly the same
techniques.
The big difference? iMessages go exclusively between Apple products. If your
iPhone determines that the address belongs to any other kind of phone, it sends

regular old text messages.
iMessages offer some huge advantages over regular text messages:
No 160-character limit. A single message can be many pages long.
(The actual limit is 18,996 characters per message, in case you’re
counting.)
iMessages don’t count as text messages. You don’t have to pay for
them. They look and work exactly like text messages, but they’re
transferred over the Internet (Wi-Fi or cellular) instead of your cell
company’s voice airwaves. You can send and receive an unlimited
number of them and never have to pay a penny more.
You know then they’re typing. When you’re typing back and forth

with somebody, you don’t have to wonder whether, during a silence,
they’re typing a response to you or just ignoring you; when they’re
typing a response, you see an ellipsis (•••) in their speech bubble.
TIP
The ellipsis dots appear as soon as the other guy starts typing—and remain on your screen for 60
seconds, even if he stopped typing a long time ago. Conversely, they disappear from your screen after 60
seconds, even if he’s still typing! Often you’ll see the dots disappear shortly before you get a huge, long
paragraph—because the other guy took longer than 60 seconds to write it.
You don’t wonder if the other guy has received your message. A
tiny, light-gray word “delivered” appears under each message you send,
briefly, to let you know that the other device received it.
Read receipts. You can even turn on a “read receipt” feature that lets
the other person know when you’ve actually seen a message she sent.
She’ll see a notation that says, for example, ”Read 2:34 PM.” (See
“Messages”.)
Your history of iMessages shows up on all your i-gadgets. They’re
synchronized through your iCloud account. You can start a chat on your
iPhone, and later pick up your Mac laptop at home and carry right on
from where you stopped (in its Messages program).
As a result, you always have a record of your iMessages. You have a
copyable, searchable transcript on your computer.
iMessages can be more than text. They can be audio recordings, video
recordings, photos, sketches you make with your finger, games,
“stickers,” emoji symbols, animations, and much more.
iMessages happen automatically. All you do is open Messages and create a text
message as usual. If your recipient is using an Apple gadget with iOS 5 or later,
or a Mac using OS X Mountain Lion or later…and has an iCloud account…and
hasn’t turned off iMessages, then your iPhone sends your message as an
iMessage automatically. It somehow knows.
You’ll know, too, because the light-gray text in the typing box says “iMessage”

instead of “Text Message.” And each message you send shows up in a blue
speech bubble instead of a green one. The 
 button is blue, too.
In fact, when you’re addressing a new text message, the names that appear in
blue represent people with iMessages gadgets, so you know in advance who’s
cool and who’s not. (The green names are those who do not have iMessage. The
gray ones—well, your iPhone doesn’t know yet.)
The actual mechanics of sending and receiving messages are essentially the
same, whether it’s SMS messages or iMessages. So the rest of this chapter
applies equally well to both, with a few exceptions.
Receiving Texts
When you get a text, the iPhone plays a sound. It’s a shiny glockenspiel ding,
unless you’ve changed it in Settings → Sounds & Haptics.
The phone also displays the name or number of the sender and the message—
though If you have Face ID set up, your messages don’t show themselves until
the phone is sure it’s really you looking at them (“Using Face ID”). Unless
you’ve fooled around with the Notifications settings, the message appears as a
banner on your screen (???), disappearing momentarily on its own, so as not to
interrupt what you’re doing. (You can flick it up and away if it’s blocking your
screen.)

If the iPhone was asleep, it lights up long enough to display the message on its
Lock screen. At that point, you have a few options:
Ignore it. After a moment, the screen goes dark again. The incoming-
text notification bubble will be there the next time you wake it.

Answer it. On an iPhone 6s or later, hard-press right on the banner to
expand it into a full keyboard, so that you can respond without even
unlocking the phone; on an earlier model, swipe to the left on the
notification bubble to reveal View and Clear buttons.
Open it. If you swipe a notification bubble to the right, you’re asked to
unlock your phone; you wind up looking at the message in the Messages
app.
TIP
On the Home screen, the Messages icon bears a little circled number “badge” letting you know how
many new text messages are waiting for you.
Once you tap a message notification to open it, you see the text-message
conversation displayed as cartoon speech balloons.
To respond to the message, tap in the text box at the bottom of the screen. The
iPhone keyboard appears. Type away, or dictate a response, and then tap 
—
that’s your Send button. As long as your phone has cellular or Wi-Fi coverage,
the message goes out immediately.
If your buddy replies, then the balloon-chat continues, scrolling up the screen.
And now, a selection of juicy Message tips:
The last 50 exchanges appear here. If you want to see even older ones,
scroll to the very top and then drag downward.
TIP
This business about having to scroll to the top, wait, and then drag downward gets old fast, especially
when you’re trying to dig up a message you exchanged a few weeks back. Fortunately, there’s a glorious
shortcut: Tap the very top of the screen (where the clock appears) over and over again. Each time you
tap, you load another batch of older messages and scroll to the oldest one.
And by the way—if the keyboard is blocking your view of the conversation,

swipe downward on the messages to hide it.
Links actually work. If someone sends you a web address, tap it to open
it in Safari. If someone sends a street address, tap it to open it in Maps.
And if someone sends a phone number, tap it to dial.
A web address in iMessages shows up as a little logo and graphic of the
website (below, left). (Sometimes you have to Tap to Load Preview to
see it.) Then tap that preview thumbnail to open the web page.
If someone sends you a link to a video on YouTube or Vimeo, you can
play the video without leaving the Messages window; just tap the
thumbnail (below, right). (To open the video at full size, on YouTube or
Vimeo, tap the thumbnail’s name.)
Once you’ve opened a text conversation, you see that each flurry of
messages is time-stamped when it begins (“Sat, Nov 10, 2:18 pm,” for
example). But at this point, you can also drag leftward anywhere on the
screen to reveal the exact time stamps of every message within the chat.
TIP
When typing a message, if you decide that it would be faster just to call, trigger Siri and say, “Call her”
or “Call him.”
The List of Conversations
What’s cool is that the iPhone retains all these exchanges. The Messages screen

(of the Messages app) is a list of all your correspondents, like a table of contents.
A blue dot indicates a conversation with new messages (“The List of
Conversations”, right).
Tap a person’s listing to open the actual messages you’ve exchanged, going back
in time to your very first texts.
These listings represent people, not conversations. For example, if you had a text
message exchange with Chris last week, then a quick way to send a new text
message to Chris (even on a different subject) is to open that “conversation” and
simply send a “reply.” The iPhone saves you the administrative work of creating
a new message, choosing a recipient, and so on.
Similarly, if you’ve sent a message to a certain group of people, you can address
a new note to the same group by tapping the old message’s row.
TIP
Hey, you can search text messages! At the very top of the list, there’s a search box. You can actually find
text within your texts.
To return to the Messages list from the actual chat view, tap < at top left—or
swipe inward from the left edge of the screen.
If having these old exchanges hanging around presents a security (or marital)
risk, you can delete them in either of two ways:
Delete an entire conversation. Swipe away the conversation. At the list
of conversations, swipe your finger leftward across the conversation’s
name. The Delete button appears.
Alternate method: Above the Messages list, tap Edit, tap to select (
)
the conversations you want to ditch, and then tap Delete.
Delete just one text. Open the conversation. This technique is a little
weird, but here goes: Hold down your finger on the individual message
you want to delete. When the options panel appears, tap More.
Now you can delete all the exchanges simultaneously (tap Delete All)

or vaporize only particularly incriminating messages. To do that, tap the
selection circles for the balloons you want to nuke, putting checks (
) by them; then tap the 
 to delete them all at once. Tap Delete
Message to confirm. (You can’t delete a message from anyone else’s
phone; you’re just deleting it from your copy of the conversation.)
TIP
You can also forward some messages you’ve selected in this way. When you tap the Forward button (
), a new outgoing text message appears, ready for you to specify the new recipient.
Mark All as Read
Here’s a handy option: When you get off the plane, home from your honeymoon,
you might see Messages bristling with notifications about texts you missed. Now
you can mark them all as read at once, so the blue dots don’t distract you
anymore.
To do that, on the Messages screen, tap Edit and then Read All.
NOTE
One real hassle of Messages is picking up one Apple gadget after doing a lot of texting on another—for
example, switching on your iPhone after doing a lot of texting on your Mac during a flight. You
sometimes have to wait a very long time for your phone’s copy of Messages to catch up—to download
all the conversations you had on your Mac.
Apple promised to fix that problem in iOS 11. Your message history would be saved online, on iCloud.
That way, (a) you’d save space on your phone, (b) you’d have a backup of your chats, and (c) you
wouldn’t wait nearly as long for a gadget to update itself on past conversations.
In the end, this feature didn’t make the cut, but Apple intends to add it in some future version.
The Details Screen
The Details screen offers six options that you may find handy in the midst of a

chat. To see them, tap 
 at the top of the screen. Here’s what you see now:
The map. If your buddy has chosen to share her location with you,
you’ll see (after a few seconds) her little dot on a map.
Call. If all this fussy typing is driving you nuts, you can jump onto a
phone or video call. At the top of the Details screen, hit 
 (place a
FaceTime video call) or 
 (conclude the transaction by voice, with a
phone call or FaceTime audio call). You can also tap this person’s name
to open the corresponding Contacts card, loaded with different ways to
call, text, or email.
Send My Current Location. Hit this button to transmit a map to the
other person, showing exactly where you are, so that person can come
and pick you up, meet you for drinks, or whatever.


If your correspondent has an iPhone, iPad, or Mac, he can open the map
you’ve sent in Maps, ready to guide him with driving directions. If he’s
one of the unenlightened—he owns some non-Apple phone—then he
gets what’s called a Location vCard, which he may be able to open into
a mapping app on his own phone.
NOTE
If Location Services isn’t turned on (“Privacy”), the phone asks you to turn it on now. After all, you can’t
very well share your location if your phone has no idea where you are.
Share My Location. If you’re moving around, you may prefer this
option. It sends your whereabouts to your correspondent—and keeps
that location updated as you meander, for a period of time that you
specify (One Hour, Until End of Day, or Indefinitely). That’s great
when you’re club-hopping, say, and trying to help some buddies catch
up with you. As your location changes, the map you sent to your
recipient updates itself.
At any time, you can stop broadcasting your location to this person; just
open the Details screen again and tap Stop Sharing My Location.
Hide Alerts. Otherwise known as “mute,” “enough already,” or “shut
up.” It makes your phone stop ringing or vibrating with every new
message from this person or group. Handy when you’re trying to get
work done, when you’re being bombarded by silly group chitchat, or
when someone’s stalking you.
Send Read Receipts. You can turn read receipts (“Messages”) on or off
independently for each chat partner, using this switch.
Images/Attachments. Crazy cool! Here are all the photos and other
attachments you’ve ever exchanged with this texting correspondent,
going back to forever. (Tap Images to see only photos and videos;
Attachments shows everything else.)
You can tap one of these tiles to open it; hard-press one to “peek” at it

(“Peek and Pop”); or hold your finger down lightly to get choices like
Copy, Delete, and More. (There’s usually nothing under More but
Save Image, which copies the texted photo into your Photos collection,
and a 
 button.)
Capturing Messages and Files
In general, text messages are fleeting; most people have no idea how they might
capture them and save them forever. Copy and Paste help with that.
Some of the stuff in those text messages is easy to save, though. For example, if
you’re on the receiving end of a photo or a video, tap the small preview in the
speech bubble. It opens at full-screen size so you can have a better look at it—
and if it’s a video, there’s a 
 button so you can play it. Either way, if the
picture or video is good enough to preserve, tap 
. You’re offered a Save
Image or Save Video button; tap to add the photo or video to your iPhone’s
collection.
If someone sends you contact information (a phone number, for example), you
can add it to your address book. Just tap inside that bubble and then tap either
Create New Contact or Add to Existing Contact.
If you’d like to preserve the actual text messages, you have a few options:
Copy them individually. Hold your finger down lightly on a text
bubble, and then tap Copy. At this point, you can paste that one
message into, for example, an outgoing email.
Forward them. Hold your finger down lightly on a text bubble; tap
More, and then tap the selection checkmarks beside all the messages
you want to pass on. Now you can tap the Forward (
) button. All
the selected messages go along for the ride in a single consolidated
message to a new text-message addressee.
Save the iMessages. If you have a Mac, then your iMessages (that is,
notes to and from other Apple gadgets) show up in the Messages chat

program. You can save them or copy them there.
TIP
Behind the scenes, the Mac stores all your chat transcripts in a hidden folder as special text files. To get
there, press the Option key as you open the Go menu; choose Go → Library. The transcripts are in
date-stamped folders in the Messages → Archive folder.
Use an app. There’s no built-in way to save regular text messages in
bulk. There are, however, apps that can do this for you, like iMazing
(for Windows) or iBackup Viewer (free for the Mac). They work from
the invisible backup files that you create when you sync your phone
with iTunes.
Tapbacks (iMessages Only)
How many trillions of times a day do people respond to texts with repetitive
reactions like “LOL” and “Awww” and “!!!!!”? Many. It’s how you demonstrate
that you appreciate the import of the other person’s text.
If you and your buddy are both using iOS 10 (or later) or macOS Sierra (or
later), though, you’ve now got a quicker, less cluttery, more visual way to
indicate those sorts of standard emotional reactions: what Apple calls tapbacks.
If you double-tap a message you’ve been sent, you’re offered a tapback palette:
six little reaction symbols: a heart, a thumbs up, a thumbs down, “ha ha,” two
exclamation points, and a question mark. When you choose one, it appears
instantly on your screen and your buddy’s. You can use them to stamp your
reaction onto the other person’s text (or one of your own, if you’re weird).
In short, the tapback palette lets you react to a text without having to type
anything.
TIP
What’s cool is that you can change your tapback icon later, if new information affects your reaction. Just
double-tap again to bring up the same palette.

Sending Messages
If you want to text somebody you’ve texted before, the quickest way is simply to
resume one of the “conversations” already listed in the Messages list.
You can also tap a person’s name in Contacts, or 
 next to a listing in
Recents or Favorites, to open the Info screen; tap Send Message.
NOTE
In some cases, the iPhone shows you your entire Contacts list, even people with no cellphone numbers.
But you can’t text somebody who doesn’t have a cellphone.
Actually, options to fire off text messages lurk all over the iPhone—anytime you
see the Share (
) button, which is frequently. The resulting Share screen
includes options like Email, Twitter, Facebook—and Message. Tapping
Message sends you back to Messages, where the photo, video, page, or other
item is ready to send. (More on multimedia messages shortly.)
In other words, sending a text message to anyone who lives in your iPhone is
only a couple of taps away.

NOTE
You can tap that 
 to add another recipient for this same message (or tap the 123 button to type in a
phone number). Repeat as necessary; they’ll all get the same message.
Yet another way to start: Tap 
 at the top of the Messages screen. Or, easiest
of all, use Siri. Say, “Text Casey” or whatever.
In any case, the text message composition screen is waiting for you now. You’re
ready to type (or dictate) and send!
Audio Texting (iMessages Only)
Sometimes an audio recording is just better than a typed message, especially
when music, children, animals, or a lot of emotion in your voice are involved.
You could probably argue that audio texting is also better than typed texting
when you’re driving, jogging, or operating industrial machinery.
If you and your friend are both Apple people, your phone can become a sort of
walkie-talkie.
Hold down the 
 button at the right end of the Messages text box. Once the
sound-level meter appears, say something. When you’re finished, release your
finger. Now you can tap 
 to cancel, 
 to play it back, or 
 to send
what you said to your buddy as an audio recording.
TIP
If you’re pretty confident that what you’ve said is correct, you can slide your thumb directly from the 
 button straight up to the 
 to send it.

The guy on the receiving end doesn’t even have to touch the screen to listen. He
just holds the phone up to his head! Your audio message plays automatically.
(This works even if his phone is asleep and locked.)
And then get this: To reply, he doesn’t have to touch anything or look at the
screen, either. He just holds the phone to his head again and speaks! Once he
lowers the phone, his recording shoots back to you.
Throughout all of this, you don’t have to look at the phone, put your glasses on,
or touch the screen. It’s a whole new form of quick exchanges—something that
combines the best of a walkie-talkie (instant audio) with the best of text
messages (you can listen and reply at your leisure).
The off switch for the Raise to Listen/Raise to Speak feature is in Settings →
Messages. But why would you want to disable such a cool feature?

TIP
Audio eats up a lot more space on your phone than text. If you do a lot of audio messaging, those audio
snippets can fill up your storage over time.
That’s why iOS comes set to delete each audio message two minutes after you receive it. If that prospect
worries you, then visit Settings → Messages. Under Audio Messages, you can tap Expire and change
that setting to Never.
Even if you leave it set to two minutes, you’re free to preserve especially good audio messages forever;
just tap the tiny Keep button that appears below each one.
Help with Emoji and Info-Bits
Messages is a card-carrying fan of emoji—those little icons once known as
smileys or emoticons. Now there are thousands of them, representing people,
places, things, food, emotions, household objects, and on and on.
How easy is it to use emoji in iOS 11? Very:
Auto-emoji. If iOS has an emoji symbol for a word you’ve just typed, it
appears in the row of autocomplete suggestions (below, left). If you tap
that emoji before tapping the space bar, you replace the typed word
with the emoji. If you tap space and then the emoji, you get both the
word and the emoji.

Auto-emoji part 2. When you tap the 
 button on your keyboard,
Messages highlights, in color, any words in your typed (but not yet sent)
message that can be replaced with an emoji (facing page, right). Tap any
highlighted word to swap in the icon. That spares you the ritual of
scrolling to find the one you want.
Jumbo emoji. When you send one, two, or three emoji symbols as
your entire response, they appear three times as large as normal (at least
if the recipient has iOS 10 or macOS Sierra—or later).
Auto-info. You know the QuickType word suggestions above the
keyboard (“QuickType”)? In Messages, those suggestions include
information you might want to type.
If you type “I’m available at,” then one of the suggestion buttons
includes the next open slot on your calendar. If you say “Stacy’s number
is,” then the button offers her phone number (if she’s in your Contacts).
If someone texts you, “Where are you?” then one of the buttons offers
to drop a Map button.
In iOS 11, in fact, you may also see things like movie, song, and place
names as auto-suggestions, based on stuff you’ve recently looked up on
your phone. If you’re driving somewhere, you might even see an
estimated arrival time.
Quite handy, actually.
The Finger-Sketch Pad
If you turn the phone 90 degrees, the screen becomes a whiteboard. What you
scribble with your finger looks like real ink on paper and gets sent as a graphic.
(You also see your previous masterpieces displayed here for quick reuse.) Just so

cool.
Of course, this whiteboard business may drive you crazy. For example, on Plus-
sized iPhones and the iPhone X, it deprives you of the separate column that lists
your various chats in progress.
Fortunately, you can turn off the whiteboard screen. Once it appears, tap the 
 button in the corner. The keyboard pops up. This isn’t a temporary
change, either—from now on, rotating the phone to landscape orientation will
always present the keyboard. Until you change your mind, that is—by tapping
the 
 button to bring back the whiteboard.
Sending with Animated Fun
If you’re used to older versions of the Messages app, the first thing you might
notice is that the Send button no longer says “Send.” It’s now a blue up-arrow (
). And it’s more than a button.
If you hard-press (or long-press) the blue arrow, you get a palette of four sending
styles.

The first three—Slam, Loud, and Gentle—animate the typography of your text
to make it bang down, swell up, and so on, at least when you’re sending to
fellow iOS 10/11 or Mac fans. For example, Slam makes your text fly across the
screen and then thud into the ground, making a shock wave ripple through the
other messages.
The fourth special “Send with effect” is called Invisible Ink. It obscures your
message with animated glitter dust until your recipient drags a finger across it
(as shown at bottom on the facing page).
This idea is great for guessing games and revealing dramatic news, of course.
But when you’re sending, ahem, spicy text messages, it also prevents
embarrassment if the recipient’s phone is lying in public view.
When you hard-press (or long-press) the 
, the fifth option is Screen. It opens
pages of full-screen animations. These, upon sending, fill the entire background
of the Messages window to indicate your reaction to something: a swelling heart,
ascending balloons, a laser show, fireworks, a shooting star, falling confetti, and
so on. Swipe horizontally to preview each style before you commit to it.

If your text says “Congrats,” “Happy birthday,” or “Happy New Year,” Messages
fills the screen with a corresponding animation automatically. Which may or
may not get old fast.
NOTE
The full juiciness of these text and screen styles is available only if your recipient also has iOS 10 or 11.
So what if you’re sending to an Android phone, an older iPhone, or a Mac?
In that case, the animation you’ve so carefully picked out doesn’t show up. Instead, the other guy can
only read about what you intended. He’ll see the somewhat baffling written notation “sent with Slam
effect,” “sent with Balloons,” or whatever.

Photos and Videos
Depending on the age of your correspondents, typed text may be your least used
form of communication.
Next to the typing box, iOS presents the Photos button (
). Tap it to open
the Photos picker. It consists of a simplified Camera app and a simplified
Camera Roll of your existing pictures—but it also gives you access to your
actual Camera app and your actual Camera Roll.
To take a new photo, tap the white round shutter button in the live
preview. (Feel free to tap the 
 if you want to take a selfie.) Wait
until your snapshot appears in the Messages text box, ready to send.

The Photos browser also displays two scrolling rows of photos and
videos you’ve taken recently. Tap one (or more) that you want to send.
To take a video, panorama, time-lapse video, slo-mo video, or any other
fancier shot, tap Camera to open the regular Camera app.
If you tap Photos, you open the regular Photos app, where you can find
your albums, videos, and other organ​izational structures, for ease in
finding an older picture or video to send.
Once you’ve inserted a photo into the text box, you can edit it, draw on it with
your finger, and even type text on it. Just tap it to open the editing window, and
then tap Edit (to edit using the photo-editing tools described in “Editing
Photos”) or Markup (to draw or type on it, as described in “Marking Up Your
Photos”).

NOTE
The Markup features are mostly described in Chapter 9 of this book, but they’re super-useful in
Messages. It can be amusing and educational to make notes on a photo, draw a little mustache on
someone you don’t like, or enlarge a certain detail for your chat partner’s enlightenment.
You now return to your SMS conversation in progress—but now that photo or
video appears inside the Send box. Type a caption or a comment, if you like.
Then tap 
 to fire it off to your buddy. Or you can tap the × if you change
your mind about sending this photo.
The Apps Drawer
Messages offers a universe of expressive possibilities that go far beyond typed
text and photos. Apple welcomes software companies to add their own new
modules—miniature apps—that let you transmit everything from movie
schedules and restaurant reservations to cash.
To see your options, tap the 
 that hugs the left side of the typing box.

Messages sprouts a new row of tiny icons at the very bottom of the screen. These
are your apps, made far easier to navigate in iOS 11.
This app mechanism has a few basic guidelines:
To see the apps’ names, scroll them horizontally. The apps drawer
grows taller—tall enough to show their names (below, right).
To use an app, tap it. Now the bottom half of Messages presents you
with the app’s offerings. (Feeling claustrophobic? Tap the 
 at the
top edge of the app area. It now expands to fill your screen.)
To delete an app, scroll all the way to the right; tap More (below, left).
Now you see the management screen. Swipe left across an app’s name
to reveal the Delete button.

To rearrange the apps, tap Edit on the management screen; now you
can drag the apps around with their grip handles (
) or hide an app
by turning off its switch (above, right).
Here, too, you can manipulate the special list called Favorites; these are
the apps that appear first, at the left end of the app drawer. You can drag
an app’s grip handles up or down to rearrange its position among your
favorites. Tap 
 to de-favorite an app, moving it into the list of also-
rans. Or tap one of the 
 buttons to elevate an app into the Favorites
list.
To hide the apps, tap the 
 again.
Here’s what you’ll find in the apps drawer on a new phone.
TIP

To move from one app to another, you can tap a different icon in the apps drawer—or you can swipe
horizontally across the half-screen app area.
The App Store
The first icon (
) presents you with a Visit Store button. It takes you down
the rabbit hole into a world of options beyond belief.
In this store for Messages add-ons, you can download all kinds of tiny apps that
work within Messages. Some are free; some cost a couple of bucks.
Some are “stickers” or animations that you can drag up onto other people’s texts
(or your own), thereby adding your own sarcastic or emotional commentary to it
(shown below at right).

Others simply give you access, while you’re chatting, to popular apps like Yelp
or OpenTable (so that you can research or book restaurants), Airbnb (to book
lodging), Square Cash or Circle Pay or Venmo (to send money directly to
friends), Fandango (to research and book movies), iTranslate (to convert your
texts to or from another language), Kayak (to book flights), Doodle (to find a
mutually free time to meet), hundreds of popular games, and on and on. The idea
is that you can do all of this right there in Messages, collaboratively with your
buddy on the other end.
You can search or browse this store just as you do the regular App Store. For
example, you can inspect the apps Apple is promoting today, or you can look
through the bestseller lists.
When you find an app that looks appealing, tap Get (if it’s free) or its price (if
it’s not), and then Install to install it. The new app appears in your app drawer,
ready to use. (It shows up first in line after your Favorites.)
Apple starts you out with several such apps:
Music
This mini-app, greatly stripped down in iOS 11, lists songs you’ve recently
played on your phone. Tap one to send a text saying, “I’m listening to [name of
song].” That’s it.
Animoji (iPhone X)
Some people probably bought an iPhone X just for this feature.
The iPhone X’s TrueDepth camera (“Face ID (iPhone X)”) can create what
Apple calls Animoji: animated cartoon faces whose expressions follow and
mimic your expressions in real time, tracking the motion of 50 different muscles
in your face. Smile, frown, wink, frown, laugh, nod, shake, open your mouth,
raise your eyebrows, whatever—your little cartoon-animal avatar does the same.
Suddenly, you’re Warner Bros. It’s crazy fun.
Once you’ve tapped the Animoji icon, you get a choice of 12 Animoji. Most are
cute animals (bunny, piggy, panda, unicorn, and so on), but you also get an alien,
a robot, and—of course—an animated poop pile.

Look at your phone and start talking, moving, or expressing, and marvel as your
onscreen doppelgänger impersonates you like a mirror.
TIP
A much larger, full-screen canvas awaits if you tap the 
 at the top edge of the app area. The app
now expands to fill your screen.
Here are a few more things you can try:
Send a picture. When you’ve got a great expression on your critter’s
face, tap it to paste it into the Messages text box, ready to send as a
picture.
Stamp a sticker. You can also use your critter as a sticker, stamping it
onto something somebody has already said in your chat. Hold your
finger down on the Animoji until it quivers; then, without lifting your
finger, drag the image upward onto the appropriate text bubble.

Send a video. If you tap 
, you create a 10-second recording of
your little cartoon, complete with sound—so don’t forget to talk! When
you then hit 
, the phone sends your recording as a standard video
file. In other words, your recipients can play it even if they don’t have
an iPhone X—or even an iPhone.
TIP
Once you’ve made a recording, you can tap a different Animoji character from the scrolling list. Without
having to rerecord, you can now see what the effect is of that character speaking.
Digital Touch

This app opens a palette of crazy interactive art features, mostly inherited from
the Apple Watch.
Here’s what all these controls do:
Color picker. Tap to open a palette of seven colors, which will
determine your “paint” color in the next step.
TIP
You’re not limited to those seven colors. You can hard-press or long-press one of those swatches to open
a complete color wheel, from which you can dial up any shade you like. (Tap Done when done.)
Doodle with your finger. Once you’ve got a color, you can start
drawing. There’s no eraser and no Undo, but it’s fine for quick scrawls,
comic exasperated faces, or technical blueprints.
Tap 
 to send your sketch. What’s cool is that if your recipient is an
iMessage customer, she’ll see the actual playback of your drawing,
recreated before her eyes. (If you’re corresponding with someone who
doesn’t have iOS 10 or 11, she’ll receive your doodle as a finished piece
of artwork, without seeing its animated creation.)

Shoot a photo or video, and then deface it. Tap 
 to open a
camera mode. (The app expands to full screen height, if it wasn’t
already.) Here you’ll find both a white “take a still” shutter button and a
red “record a video” button. (The 
 button is here, too, in case you
want to flip between the phone’s front and back cameras.)
You can draw on the photo after you’ve taken it; in fact, you can even
draw on a video, or stamp a Digital Touch graphic onto it (see previous
page), while you’re recording it. Your iMessages recipients will see the
doodle “played back” on their screens, recreated line by line as you
drew it. (Non-iMessages folk simply receive the finished sketch
superimposed on the video or photo.)
Send animated feelings. In iOS 11, there’s not even a hint that you can
create animated-feeling videos—you just have to know that they’re

there.
To generate one, you tap or press your fingers on the black canvas. You
can generate any of these: a ring of fire (tap—as many times as you
want); a flaming fireball (hold down your finger); a lip-kiss (do a two-
finger tap); a red, beating heart (hold with two fingers); and an animated
breaking heart (tap-and-hold/drag-downward).
No, the heart doesn’t beat at the speed of your pulse, as it does on the
Apple Watch; the iPhone doesn’t have a heart-rate sensor.
TIP
You can perform any of these special taps while you’re recording a video, too.
As you explore these Digital Touch options, you’ll gradually become aware of
how fluid and intermixable they are. You can draw or stamp fire/kiss/heart
animations on top of a photo or video you’re recording, for example. Or you can
draw something—for example, a hand-sketched frame—and then take a photo
or video that goes inside it.
As usual, fellow iMessages people will see all these glorious animations played
back just as you made them—but non-Apple people receive only a finished
image or video.
#Images
This app is a searchable database of “reaction GIFs,” which are very short, silent
video loops, usually swiped from popular movies or TV shows. People (well, the
young ones) use reaction GIFs to respond to something someone says. For
example, if you text your friend about a disastrous decision you made today, you
might get, in response, a two-second loop of Ben Stiller sarcastically slow-
clapping.
Recents
This “app” is a collection of stickers and handwritings you’ve sent recently,

presented here for easy reuse.
Messages Prefs
You might not think that something as simple as text messaging would involve a
lot of fine print, but you’d be wrong.
Settings for Texts and iMessages
Tap Settings → Messages to find some intriguing options:
iMessage. This is the on/off switch for the entire iMessages feature. It’s
hard to imagine why you would want to, but you know—whatever
floats your boat.
Show Contact Photos. If you turn this on, you’ll see a little round
photo next to each texting correspondent in the chat list and at the top of
a chat window—or the person’s initials, if there’s no photo available. If
you turn this off, then you see the person’s name at the top of Messages
instead.
Text Message Forwarding. This switch is the gateway to the cool
Continuity feature described in “Texting from the Mac”, in which you
can use your Mac to send regular text messages to non-Apple phones.
Send Read Receipts. When you turn this option on, your iMessage
correspondents will know when you’ve seen their messages. The word
“Read” will appear beneath each sent message that you’ve actually
seen. Turn this off only if it deprives you of the excuse for not
responding promptly (“Hey, I never even saw your message!”).
TIP
You can turn read receipts on or off independently for each chat partner; see “Capturing Messages and
Files”.
Send as SMS. If iMessages is unavailable (meaning that you have no

Internet connection at all), then your phone will send your message as a
regular text message, via the regular cellphone voice network.
Send & Receive. Tap here to specify what cellphone numbers and
email addresses you want to register with iMessages. (Your laptop,
obviously, does not have a phone number, which is why iMessages
gives you the option of using an email address.)
When people send iMessages to you, they can use any of the numbers
or addresses you turn on here. That’s the only time these numbers and
addresses matter. You see the same messages exactly the same way on
all your Apple gadgets, no matter what email address or phone number
the sender used for you.
(If you scroll down on this Settings screen, you’ll see the Start new
conversations from options. This is where you specify which number
or address others will see when you initiate the message. It really
doesn’t make much difference which one you choose.)
MMS Messaging. MMS messages are like text messages—except that
they can also include audio clips, video clips, or photos, as already
described. In the rare event that your cell company charges extra for
these messages, you have an on/off switch here. If you turn it off, then
you can send only plain text messages.
Group Messaging. Suppose you’re sending a message to three friends.
When they reply to your message, the responses will appear in a
Messages thread that’s dedicated to this particular group. It works only
if all of you have turned on Group Messaging. (Note to the paranoid: It
also means that everyone sees everyone else’s phone numbers or email
addresses.)
Messages tries to help you keep everybody straight by displaying their
headshots (if you have them in Contacts), or their initials (if you don’t).
Show Subject Field. If email messages can have subject lines, why not
text messages? Now, on certain newfangled phones (like yours), they
can; the message arrives with a little dividing line between the subject
and the body, offering your recipient a hint as to what it’s about.

NOTE
It’s OK to leave the subject line blank. But if you leave the body blank, the message won’t send.
(Incidentally, when you do fill in the subject line, what you’re sending is an MMS message, rather than a
plain old text message.)
Character Count. If a text message (one sent to a non-Apple device) is
longer than 160 characters, the iPhone breaks it up into multiple
messages. That’s convenient, sure. But if your cellphone plan permits
only a fixed number of messages a month, you could wind up sending
(and spending) more than you intended.
The Character Count feature can help. When it’s on, after your typing
wraps to a second line, a little counter appears just above the Send
button (“71/160,” for example). It tracks how many characters remain
within your 160-character limit for one message. (Of course, if you’re
sending an iMessage, you don’t care how long it is; there’s no length
limit.)
Blocked. You can block people who are harassing or depressing you
with their texts or calls. Tap here to view the list of people in your
Contacts app you’ve decided to block; tap Add New to add new people
to the list.
Keep Messages. How long do you want your text messages to hang
around on your phone? This is a question of privacy, of storage, and of
your personality. In any case, here’s where you get a choice of 30 Days,
1 Year, or Forever.
Filter Unknown Senders. When you turn this on, the iPhone turns off
notifications for senders not in your Contacts and sorts them into a
separate list, which you can find in the “Unknown Senders” section of
the Messages app.
Expire. The iPhone ordinarily deletes audio and video messages a
couple of minutes after they arrive, to avoid filling up your phone with
old, no-longer-relevant audio and video files. The two Expire controls
here let you turn off that automatic deletion (by choosing Never).

Raise to Listen. Here’s the on/off switch for the “raise to listen”/“raise
to talk” features described earlier, where the phone plays back audio
messages, and sends your spoken replies, automatically when you hold
it up to your head. You might want to turn that feature off if you
discover that the phone is playing back audio messages unexpectedly—
or, worse, recording and sending them when you didn’t mean to.
Low Quality Image Mode. This feature, new in iOS 10, is a gift to
anyone who has to pay for cellular service. It automatically reduces the
size (resolution) and quality (compression) of any photo you send to
around 100 kilobytes. At this point, sending 50 low-quality photos uses
about the same amount of cellular data as one full-blown iPhone photo.
Not only do you save a lot of money in the form of cellular data, but
you save a lot of time, too, because these photos are fast to send.
And here’s the best part: The photo looks exactly the same to the
recipients at the other end (at least until they zoom in).
Bonus Settings in a Place You Didn’t Expect
Apple has stashed a few important text-messaging settings in Settings →
Notifications → Messages:
Allow Notifications. If, in a cranky burst of sensory overload, you want
your phone to stop telling you when new texts come in (with a banner
or sound, for example), then turn this off.
Sounds. Tap here to choose a sound for incoming texts to play. (You
can also choose a different sound for each person in your address book,
as described in ???.)
Badge App Icon. Turning this on makes the Messages icon show a
little red badge to let you know when you have a new text message.
Show on Lock Screen. Do you want received text messages and
iMessages to appear on the screen when it’s locked? If yes, then you can
sneak reassuring glances at your phone without turning it fully on. If no,
then you maintain better protection against snoopers who find your
phone on your desk.

Show in History. Do you want recent messages to appear in the
notification history (???)?
Show in CarPlay. If your newish car has Apple’s CarPlay software in
its dashboard, here’s where you control whether or not incoming texts
appear on it.
Show Previews. Usually, when a text message arrives, it wakes up your
phone and shows the message contents. Which is great, as long as the
message isn’t private and the phone isn’t lying on the table where
everyone can see it. If you turn off Show Previews, though, you’ll see
who the message is from but not the actual text of the message (until
you tap the notification banner or bubble).
Repeat Alerts. If someone sends you a text message but you don’t tap
or swipe to read it, the iPhone waits two minutes and then plays the
notification sound again. That second chance helps when, for example,
you were in a noisy place and missed the original chime.
But for some people, even one additional reminder isn’t enough. Here
you can specify that you want to be re-alerted Twice, 3 Times, 5 Times,
or 10 Times. (Or Never, if you don’t want repeated alerts at all.)

Part II. PART TWO Pix, Flix &
Apps
Chapter 8 Music & Videos
Chapter 9 The Camera
Chapter 10 All About Apps
Chapter 11 The Built-In Apps

Chapter 8. 7 Large Type, Kid
Mode & Accessibility
If you were told that the iPhone was one of the easiest phones in the world for a
disabled person to use, you might spew your coffee. The thing has almost no
physical keys! How would a blind person use it? It’s a phone that rings! How
would a deaf person use it?
But it’s true. Apple has gone to incredible lengths to make the iPhone usable for
people with vision, hearing, or other physical impairments. As a handy side
effect, these features also can be fantastically useful to people whose only
impairment is being under 10 or over 40.
If you’re deaf, you can have the LED flash to get your attention. If you’re blind,
you can turn the screen off and operate everything by letting the phone speak
what you’re touching. It’s pretty amazing (and it doubles the battery life).
You can also magnify the screen, reverse black for white (for better-contrast
reading), set up custom vibrations for each person who might call you, and
convert stereo music to mono (if you’re deaf in one ear).
The kiosk mode is great for kids; it prevents them from exiting whatever app
they’re using. And if you have aging eyes, you might find the Large Text option
handy. (You may also be interested in using the LED flash, custom vibrations,
and zooming.)
Here’s a rundown of the accessibility options in iOS 11. To turn on any of the
features described here, open Settings → General → Accessibility. (And don’t
forget about Siri, described in Chapter 5. She may be the best friend a blind
person’s phone ever had—and, because you can now type commands to her
instead of speaking them [“Typing to Siri”], she’s even useful if you have trouble
speaking.)
TIP
You can turn many of the iPhone’s accessibility features on and off with a triple-click of the home button

or side button. See ??? for details.
VoiceOver
VoiceOver is a screen reader—software that makes the iPhone speak everything
you touch. It’s a fairly important feature if you’re blind.
On the VoiceOver settings pane, tap the on/off switch to turn VoiceOver on.
Because VoiceOver radically changes the way you control your phone, you get a
warning to confirm that you know what you’re doing. If you proceed, you hear a
female voice begin reading the names of the controls she sees on the screen. You
can adjust the Speaking Rate of the synthesized voice (read on).
iPHONE X
A message appears to let you know that vibrations will help you navigate. As you swipe up from the
bottom edge, the first vibration means “stop here to go to the Home screen”; the second means, “stop
here to open the app switcher” (“The App Switcher”).
There’s a lot to learn in VoiceOver mode, and practice makes perfect, but here’s
the overview:
Touch something to hear it. Tap icons, words, even status icons at the
top; as you go, the voice tells you what you’re tapping. “Messages.”
“Calendar.” “Mail—14 new items.” “45 percent battery power.” You
can tap the dots on the Home screen, and you’ll hear, ““About This
Book” of “Storage Help”.”
Once you’ve tapped a screen element, you can also flick your finger left
or right—anywhere on the screen—to “walk” through everything on the
screen, left to right, top to bottom.
TIP
A thin black rectangle appears around whatever the voice is identifying. That’s for the benefit of sighted
people who might be helping you.

Double-tap something to “tap” it. Ordinarily, you tap something on
the screen to open it. But since single-tapping now means “speak this,”
you need a new way to open everything. So: To open something you’ve
just heard identified, double-tap anywhere on the screen. (You don’t
have to wait for the voice to finish talking.)
TIP
Or do a split tap. Tap something to hear what it is—and with that finger still down, tap somewhere else
with a different finger to open it.
There are all kinds of other special gestures in VoiceOver. Make the voice stop
speaking with a two-finger tap; read everything, in sequence, from the top of the
screen with a two-finger upward flick; scroll one page at a time with a three-
finger flick up or down; go to the next or previous screen (Home, Stocks, and so
on) with a three-finger flick left or right; and more.
Or try turning on Screen Curtain with a three-finger triple-tap; it blacks out the
screen, giving you visual privacy as well as a heck of a battery boost. (Repeat to
turn the screen back on.)
On the VoiceOver settings screen, you’ll find a wealth of options for using the
iPhone sightlessly. For example:
Speaking rate slider controls how fast VoiceOver speaks to you, on a
scale of tortoise to hare.
Speech is where you choose a voice for VoiceOver’s speaking. If you
have enough free space, you can install Alex, Allison, Ava, or Nicky,
which are more realistic options.
Here, too, is the Pronunciation feature, which is described in “Speech”.
Use Pitch Change makes the phone talk in a higher voice when you’re
entering characters and a lower voice when you’re deleting them. It also
uses a higher pitch when speaking the first item of a list and a lower one
when speaking the last item. In both cases, this option is a great way to
help you understand where you are in a list.
Finally, here’s where you choose the language you want for the Rotor

(next page).
Verbosity makes the phone speak more to help you out more. For
example, Speak Hints gives you additional suggestions for operating
something you’ve tapped. For example, instead of just saying, “Safari,”
it says, “Safari. Double-tap to open.” And Emoji Suffix makes the
phone say (for example) “pizza emoji” instead of just “pizza” when
encountering an emoji symbol.
Braille, of course, is the system that represents letters as combinations
of dots on a six- or eight-cell grid. Blind people can read Braille by
touching embossed paper with their fingers. But in iOS they can type in
Braille, too. For many, that may be faster than trying to type on the
onscreen keyboard, and more accurate than dictation.
On this Settings screen, you specify, among other things, whether you
want to use the six- or eight-dot system.
When you’re ready to type, you use the Rotor (described in a moment)
to choose Braille Screen Input, which is usually the last item on the list.
If the phone is flat on a table (“desktop mode”), the “keys” for typing
Braille are arrayed in a loose, flattened V pattern.
If you’re holding the phone, you grip it with your pinkies and thumbs,
with the screen facing away from you (“Screen away” mode).
Audio gives you three options. Mute Sound Effects turns off the little
clicks and chirps that ordinarily help you navigate as you scroll, tap, and
so on. Audio Ducking makes music or video soundtracks get
momentarily softer when the phone is speaking. And Auto-select
Speaker in Call is ingenious: It switches the phone to the speakerphone
automatically whenever you’re not holding it to your head.
NOTE
That Auto-select Speaker in Call thing would be useful to almost anyone—but note that these features
kick in only when VoiceOver itself is turned on.
The Rotor is a brilliant solution to a thorny problem. If you’re blind,

how are you supposed to control how VoiceOver reads to you? Do you
have to keep burrowing into Settings to change the volume, speaking
speed, verbosity, and so on?
Nope. The Rotor is an imaginary dial. It appears when you twist two
fingers on the screen as if you were turning an actual dial.
And what are the options on this dial? That’s up to you. Tap Rotor in
the VoiceOver settings screen to get a huge list of choices: Characters,
Words, Speaking Rate, Volume, Punctuation, Zoom, and so on.
Once you’ve dialed up a setting, you can get VoiceOver to move from
one item to another by flicking a finger up or down. For example, if
you’ve chosen Volume from the Rotor, then you make the playback
volume louder or quieter with each flick up or down. If you’ve chosen
Zoom, then each flick adjusts the screen magnification.
The Rotor is especially important if you’re using the web. It lets you
jump among web page elements like pictures, headings, links, text
boxes, and so on. Use the Rotor to choose, for example, images—then
you can flick up and down from one picture to the next on that page.
Typing Style. In Standard Typing, you drag your finger around the
screen until VoiceOver speaks the key you want; then simultaneously
tap anywhere with a second finger to type the letter.

In Touch Typing, you can slide your finger around the keyboard until
you hear the key you want; lift your finger to type that letter.
There’s also Direct Touch Typing, which is a faster method intended
for people who are more confident about typing. If you tap a letter, you
type it instantly. If you hold the key down, VoiceOver speaks its name
but doesn’t type it, just to make sure you know where you are.
Phonetic Feedback refers to what VoiceOver says as you type or touch
each keyboard letter. Character and Phonetics means that it says the
letter’s name plus its pilot’s alphabet equivalent: “A—Alpha,” “B—
Bravo,” “C—Charlie,” and so on. Phonetics Only says the pilot’s-
alphabet word alone.
Typing Feedback governs how the phone helps you figure out what
you’re typing. It can speak the individual letters you’re striking, the
words you’ve completed, or both.
Modifier Keys. You can trigger some VoiceOver commands from a
physical Bluetooth keyboard; all of them use Control-Option as the
basis. (For example, Control-Option-A means “read all from the current
position.” A complete list of these shortcuts is at http://j.mp/1kZRSOz).
The Modifier Keys option lets you use the Caps Lock key instead of
the Control-Option business, which simplifies the keyboard shortcuts at
least a little bit.
Always Speak Notifications makes the phone announce, with a spoken
voice, when an alert or update message has appeared. (If you turn this
off, then VoiceOver announces only incoming text messages.)
Navigate Images. As VoiceOver reads to you what’s on a web page,
how do you want it to handle pictures? It can say nothing about them
(Never), it can read their names (Always), or it can read their names
and whatever hidden Descriptions savvy web designers have attached
to them for the benefit of blind visitors.
Large Cursor fattens up the borders of the VoiceOver “cursor” (the box
around whatever is highlighted) so you can see it better.

Double-tap Timeout lets you give yourself more time to complete a
double-tap when you want to trigger some VoiceOver reading. Handy if
you have motor difficulties.
VoiceOver and Braille input take practice and involve learning a lot of new
techniques. If you need these features to use your iPhone, then visit the more
complete guide at support.apple.com/kb/HT3598.
Or spend a few minutes (or weeks) at applevis.com, a website dedicated to
helping the blind use Apple gear.
TIP
VoiceOver is especially great at reading your iBooks titles out loud. Details are in “BooksThat Read to
You”.
Zooming
Compared with a computer, an iPhone’s screen is pretty tiny. Every now and
then, you might need a little help reading small text or inspecting those tiny
graphics.
The Zoom command is just the ticket; it lets you magnify the screen whenever
it’s convenient, up to 500 percent. Of course, at that point, the screen image is
too big to fit the physical glass of the iPhone, so you need a way to scroll
around.
To begin, you have to turn on the master Zoom switch in Settings → General
→ Accessibility. Immediately, this magnifying lens appears:

Scroll down and look at the Zoom Region control. If it’s set to Window Zoom,
then zooming produces this movable rectangular magnifying lens. If it’s set to
Full Screen Zoom, then zooming magnifies the entire screen. (And that, as
many Apple Genius Bar employees can tell you, freaks out a lot of people who
don’t know what’s happened.)
Now then. Next time you need to magnify things, do this:
Start zooming by double-tapping the screen with three fingers. You’ve
either opened up the magnifying lens or magnified the entire screen.
The magnification is 200 percent of original size. (Another method:
Triple-press the home button—on the iPhone X, the side button—and
then tap Zoom.)
TIP
You can move the rectangular lens around the screen by dragging the white oval handle on its lower
edge.
Pan around inside the lens (or pan the entire virtual jumbo screen)
by dragging with three fingers.

Zoom in more or less by double-tap/dragging with three fingers. It’s
like double-tapping, except that you leave your fingers down on the
second tap—and drag them upward to zoom in more (up to 500 percent)
or down to zoom out again.
You can lift two of your three fingers after the dragging has begun. That
way, it’s easier to see what you’re doing.
Open the Zoom menu by tapping the white handle on the magnifying
lens. Up pops a black menu of choices like Zoom Out (puts away the
lens and stops zooming), Full Screen Zoom (magnifies the entire
screen, hides the lens), Resize Lens (adds handles so you can change
the lens’s shape), Choose Filter (lets you make the area inside the lens
grayscale or inverted colors, to help people with poor vision), and Show
Controller (the little joystick described in a moment).
There’s also a slider that controls the degree of magnification—handy.
That’s the big-picture description of Zoom. But back in Settings → General →
Accessibility → Zoom, a few more controls await:
Follow Focus. When this option is turned on, the image inside the
magnifying lens scrolls automatically when you’re entering text. Your
point of typing is always centered.

Smart Typing. When this option is turned on, a couple of things
happen whenever the onscreen keyboard appears. First, you get full-
screen zooming (instead of just the magnifying lens); second, the
keyboard itself isn’t magnified, so you can see all the keys.
Show Controller. The controller is this weird little onscreen joystick:
You can drag it with your finger to move the magnifying lens, or the
entire magnified screen, in any direction. (It grows when you’re
touching it; the farther your finger moves from center, the faster the
scrolling.) It’s an alternative to having to drag the magnified screen with
three fingers, which isn’t precise and also blocks your view.
You can tap the center dot of the Controller to open the Zoom menu
described already. Or double-tap the center to stop or start zooming.
TIP
On iPhone 6s and later models, you can hard-press the controller for a pop-up magnifying lens. It
remains open only as long as you’re pressing.
Idle Visibility. After you’ve stopped using the joystick for a while, it
stays on the screen but becomes partly transparent, to avoid blocking

your view. This slider controls how transparent it gets.
Zoom Region controls whether you’re zooming the entire screen or just
a window (that is, a magnifying lens).
Zoom Filter gives you options for how you want the text in the zoom
window to appear—for example, black on gray for viewing in low light.
(See the super-cool Zoom Filter tip in “The Instant Screen-Dimming
Trick”.)
Maximum Zoom Level. This slider controls just how magnified that
lens, or screen, can get.
NOTE
When VoiceOver is turned on, three-finger tapping has its own meaning—“jump to top of screen.”
Originally, therefore, you couldn’t use Zoom while VoiceOver was on.
You can these days, but you have to add an extra finger or tap for VoiceOver gestures. For example,
ordinarily, double-tapping with three fingers makes VoiceOver stop talking, but since that’s the “zoom
in” gesture, you must now triple-tap with three fingers to mute VoiceOver.
And what about VoiceOver’s existing triple/three gesture, which turns the screen off? If Zoom is turned
on, you must now triple-tap with four fingers to turn the screen off.
Magnifier
Oh man, this is great: You can triple-click the home button to turn the iPhone
into the world’s best electronic magnifying glass (on the iPhone X, you triple-
click the side button). It’s perfect for dim restaurants, tiny type on pill bottles,
and theater programs.
Once you’ve summoned the Magnifier, you can zoom in, turn on the flashlight,
or tweak the contrast.
To set this up, open Settings → General → Accessibility → Magnifier. Turn
on Magnifier. Turn on Auto-Brightness, too; it’ll help the picture look best.
Then, next time you need a magnifying glass, triple-click the home (side) button.
Instantly, the top part of the screen becomes a zoomed-in view of whatever is in
front of the camera.

At this point, you gain a wealth of options for making that image even clearer
(next page, left):
Zoom slider. Adjusts the degree of magnification.
. Turns on the flashlight, to illuminate the subject.
. Locks the focus, so that the phone quits trying to refocus as you
move the phone. (You can also tap the screen for this function.)
. Freezes the frame. That way, once you’ve finally focused on
what you want to read, you can actually read it, without your own hand
jiggles ruining the view.

. Opens the Filters screen (above, right).
The Filters screen offers even more tools for making things clear:
Filter. Swipe horizontally across the screen (you don’t have to aim for
the little row of filter names) to cycle among the Magnifier’s color
filters: None, White/Blue, Yellow/Blue, Grayscale, Yellow/Black,
Red/Black. Each may be helpful in a different circumstance to make
your subject more legible.
 and 
 sliders. Adjust the brightness and contrast of the image.
. Swaps the two filter colors (black for white, blue for yellow, and
so on).
To exit the Filters screen, tap 
 again; to exit the Magnifier, press the home
or side button.
Display Accommodations
These options affect the color schemes of the entire screen, in hopes of making it
easier for you to see.
Invert Colors. By reversing the screen’s colors like a film negative
(black for white, red for green, blue for yellow), you create a higher-
contrast effect that some people find is easier on the eyes.
In iOS 11, you have a choice. Classic Invert inverts every single pixel
(below, center), which can create some bizarre-looking photos and
videos. The new Smart Invert doesn’t touch photos, videos, app icons,
or dark backgrounds (below, right). It inverts only light-colored iOS
screen elements, making them dark; some people turn on this “dark
theme” just because it looks cool and soothing.

Color Filters. The iPhone can help you if you’re color-blind. The Color
Filters option gives you special screen modes that substitute colors you
can see for colors you can’t, everywhere on the screen. Tap the various
color-blindness types in the list (Red/Green, Blue/Yellow, and so on) to
see how each affects the crayons or color swatches at the top of the
screen. Use the Intensity slider to govern the degree of the effect.
The Color Tint option washes the entire screen with a certain shade
(which you choose using the Hue slider that appears); it’s designed to
help people with Irlen syndrome (visual stress), who have trouble
reading. The Grayscale option removes all color from the screen so that
every​thing looks like a black-and-white photo.
The new Intensity slider lets you dial back (or dial up) the color-
swapping effect.

The phone’s colors may now look funny to other people, but you should
have an easier time distinguishing colors when it counts. (You may even
be able to pass some of those Ishihara dot-pattern color-blindness tests
online.)
Auto-Brightness. This option has moved from its old address (in
Settings → Display & Brightness). Auto-Brightness makes the screen
brighten automatically when you’re in bright light; in dim light, it
darkens. That’s because when you unlock the phone after waking it, it
samples the ambient light and adjusts the brightness.
NOTE
This works because of the ambient-light sensor near the earpiece. Apple says it experimented with
having the light sensor active all the time, but it was weird to have the screen constantly dimming and
brightening as you used it.
You can use this information to your advantage. By covering up the sensor as
you unlock the phone, you force it into a low-power, dim-screen setting (because
the phone believes it’s in a dark room). Or by holding it up to a light as you
wake it, you get more brightness. In either case, you’ve saved the navigation it
would have taken you to find the manual brightness slider in Settings or in the
Control Center.
TIP
You can set things up so that a triple-click on the home button (or the iPhone X’s side button) instantly
dims your screen, for use in the bedroom, movie theaters, or planetariums—without having to fuss with
Settings or sliders. See “The Instant Screen-Dimming Trick” for this awesome trick.
Reduce White Point makes all colors ever depicted on the screen less
intense—including the white of the background, which becomes a little
yellowish. This might be nice if staring at your phone all day is causing
you eyestrain.

Speech
Your phone can read to you aloud: an email message, a web page, a text message
—anything. Your choices here go like this:
Speak Selection puts a Speak command into the button bar that
appears whenever you highlight text in any app. Tap that button to make
the phone read the selected text.
Speak Screen simply reads everything on the screen, top to bottom,
when you swipe down from the top of the screen with two fingers.
Great for hearing an ebook page or email read to you.
Highlight Content. Great for dyslexic or beginner readers. If you turn
this on, the phone underlines or uses a highlight color on each word or
sentence as it’s spoken, depending on your settings here.
Typing Feedback. The phone can speak each Character as you type it
(“T,” “O,” “P,” and so on), with or without Character Hints (“T—
Tango,” “O—Oscar,” “P—Papa”). Here you can also specify how much
delay elapses before the spoken feedback plays; whether you want
finished words and autocorrect suggestions spoken, too; and whether
you want to hear QuickType suggestions (“QuickType”) pronounced
when you hold your finger down on them.
This feature, of course, helps blind people know what they’re typing.
But it also means you don’t have to take your eyes off the keyboard,
which is great for speed and concentration. And if you’re zoomed in,
you may not be able to see the suggested word appear under your typed
text—but now you’ll still know what the suggestion is.
Voices gives you a choice of languages and accents for the spoken
voice. Try Australian; it’s really cute.
Speaking Rate controls how fast the voice talks.
Pronunciations. You can correct the phone’s pronunciation of certain
words it always gets wrong. Type the word into the Phrase box; tap the 
 and speak how it should be pronounced; and then, from the list of

weird phonetic symbol-written alternatives, tap the one that sounds
correct. This technique corrects how your phone pronounces those
words or names whenever it speaks, including Siri and the text-to-
speech feature described in “Dictation”.
How to De-Sparsify iOS’s Design
When Apple introduced the sparse, clean design of iOS 7 (which carries over
into iOS 11), thousands blogged out in dismay: “It’s too lightweight! The fonts
are too spindly! The background is too bright! There aren’t rectangles around
buttons—we don’t know what’s a button and what’s not! You moved our cheese
—we hate this!”
Well, Apple may not agree with you about the super-lightweight design, but it
has given you options to change it. You can make the type bigger and bolder, the
colors heavier, the background dimmer. You can restore outlines around buttons.
And so much more.
All of these options await in Settings → General → Accessibility.
Larger Text
This option is the central control panel for iOS’s Dynamic Type feature. It’s a
game-changer if you, a person with several decades of life experience, often find
type on the screen too small.
Using the slider, you can choose a larger type size for all text the iPhone displays
in apps like Mail, iBooks, Messages, and so on. This slider doesn’t affect all the
world’s other apps—at least until their software companies update them to make
them Dynamic Type–compatible. That day, when it comes, will be glorious. One
slider to scale them all.
Bold Text
The iOS system font is fairly light. Its strokes are very thin; in some sizes and
lighting conditions, it can even be hard to read.
But if you turn on Bold Text (and then tap Continue in the confirmation box),

your iPhone restarts—and when it comes to, the fonts everywhere are slightly
heavier: at the Home screen, in email, everywhere. And much easier to read in
low light or with aging eyesight.
It’s one of the most useful features in iOS—and something almost nobody
knows about.
Button Shapes
Among the criticisms of iOS’s design: You can’t tell what’s a button anymore!
Everything is just words floating on the screen, without border rectangles to tell
you what’s tappable!
That’s not quite true; any text in blue type is a tappable button. But never mind
that; if you want shapes around your buttons, you shall have them—when you
turn on this switch (below, right).

Increase Contrast
There are two switches in here. Reduce Transparency adds opacity to screens
like the Dock and the Notification Center. Their backgrounds are now solid,
rather than slightly see-through, so that text on them is much easier to read. (You
can see the before and after below.)
Darken Colors makes type in some spots a little darker and heavier. You notice
it in the fonts for buttons, in the Calendar, and in Safari, for example.
Reduce Motion
What kind of killjoy would want to turn off the subtle “parallax motion” of the
Home screen background behind your icons, or the zooming-in animation when
you open an app?
In any case, you can if you want, thanks to this button.
On/Off Labels

The Settings app teems with little tappable on/off switches, including this one.
When something is turned on, the background of the switch is green; when it’s
off, the background is white.
But if you’re having trouble remembering that distinction, turn on this option.
Now the background of each switch sprouts visible symbols to help you
remember that green means On (you see a | marking) and white means Off.
Face ID & Attention
The iPhone X offers two bonus features that have to do with your attention,
which Apple defines as “looking at the phone”; see “Emergency SOS”.
Reachability
Reachability is the feature described in “Two Touches: Reachability”, the one
that brings the top half of the screen downward. It’s designed to let you reach
things on the top of the screen while holding one of the larger iPhones with only
one hand. If you find yourself triggering this feature accidentally, you’ll be
happy to know that this Off switch awaits.
Switch Control
Suppose your physical skills are limited to very simple gestures: puffing on an
air pipe, pressing a foot switch, blinking an eye, or turning your head, for
example. A hardware accessory called a switch lets you operate certain gadgets
this way.
When you turn on Switch Control, the iPhone warns you that things are about to
get very different. Tap OK.
Now the phone sequentially highlights one object on the screen after another;
you’re supposed to puff, tap, or blink at the right moment to say, “Yes, this one.”
If you don’t have a physical switch apparatus, you can use the one nature gave
you: your head. The iPhone’s camera can detect when you turn your head left or
right and can trigger various functions accordingly.
If you’d like to try it out, get to Settings → General → Accessibility → Switch

Control. Tap Switches → Add New Switch → Camera → Left Head
Movement.
On this screen, you choose what a left head-turn will mean to your phone. The
most obvious option is Select Item, which you could use in conjunction with the
sequential highlighting of controls on the screen. But you can also make it mean
“Press the home button,” “Activate Siri,” “Adjust the volume,” and so on.
Once you’ve made your selection, repeat that business for Right Head
Movement.
When you return to the Switch Control screen, turn on Switch Control. Now
your phone is watching you; whenever you turn your head left or right, it
activates the control you set up.
The controls here let you specify how fast the sequential highlighting proceeds,
whether or not it pauses on the screen’s first item, how many times the
highlighting cycles through each screenful, and so on.
To turn off Switch Control, tap the on/off switch again. Or, if you’re using some
other app, triple-press the home button to open the Accessibility shortcut panel.
If you had the foresight to add Switch Control to its options (???), then one tap
does the trick.
Switch Control is a broad (and specialized) feature. To read more about it, open
the Accessibility chapter of Apple’s iPhone User Guide:
help.apple.com/iphone/11/.
AssistiveTouch
If you can’t hold the phone, you might have trouble shaking it (a shortcut for
“Undo”); if you can’t move your fingers, adjusting the volume might be a
challenge.
This feature is Apple’s accessibility team at its most creative. When you turn
AssistiveTouch on, you get a new, glowing white circle in a corner of the screen
(next page at top).
You can drag this magic white ball anywhere on the edges of the screen; it
remains onscreen all the time.

When you tap it, it expands into the special palette shown on the next page. It’s
offering six ways to trigger motions and gestures on the iPhone screen without
requiring hand or multiple-finger movement. All you have to be able to do is tap
with a single finger—or even a stylus held in your teeth or toes.
You can add more buttons to this main menu, or switch around which buttons
appear here. To do that, open Settings → General → Accessibility → Assistive
Touch → Customize Top Level Menu.
Meanwhile, here are the six starter icons:
Notifications, Control Center. As far as most people know, the usual
way to open the Notifications pane and Control Center is to swipe up or
down the screen. These buttons, however, give you another way—one
that doesn’t require any hand movement. (Tap the same button again to
close whichever center you opened.)

Rotate Screen. You can tap this instead of turning the phone 90
degrees.
Siri. Touch here when you want to speak to Siri. If you do, in fact, have
trouble manipulating the phone, Siri is probably your best friend
already. This option, as well as the “Hey Siri” voice command, mean
that you don’t even have to hold down a button to start her up.
Home. You can tap here, instead of pressing the physical home button,
to get to your Home screen. (That’s handy if your home button gets
sticky, too.)
Device. Tap this button to open a palette of six functions that would
otherwise require you to grasp the phone or push its tiny physical
buttons (facing page, right). There’s Lock Screen (instead of pressing
the side button), Volume Up and Volume Down (instead of pressing the
volume keys), another Rotate Screen, and Mute/Unmute (instead of
flipping the small silencer switch on the side).
If you tap More, you get some bonus buttons. They include Shake
(does the same as shaking the phone to undo typing), Screenshot
(“Capturing the Screen”), Multitasking (brings up the app switcher, as
described in “The App Switcher”), Apple Pay (instead of using the
home or side button), Restart, SOS (“Widgets on the Home Screen”),
and Gestures.
That Gestures button opens up a peculiar palette that depicts a hand
holding up two, three, four, or five fingers. When you tap, for example,
the three-finger icon, you get three blue circles on the screen. They
move together. Drag one of them (with a stylus, for example), and the
phone thinks you’re dragging three fingers on its surface. Using this
technique, you can operate apps that require multiple fingers dragging
on the screen.
Custom. Impressively enough, you can actually define your own
gestures. On the AssistiveTouch screen, tap one of the + buttons, and
then tap Create New Gesture to draw your own gesture right on the
screen, using one, two, three, four, or five fingers.

For example, suppose you’re frustrated in Maps because you can’t do
the two-finger double-tap that means “zoom out.” On the Create New
Gesture screen, get somebody to do the two-finger double-tap for you.
Tap Save and give the gesture a name—“2 double tap,” say.
From now on, “2 double tap” shows up on the Custom screen, ready to
trigger with a single tap by a single finger or stylus.
TIP
Apple starts you off with some useful predefined Custom Actions gestures, each of which might be
difficult for some people to trigger in the usual ways. There’s Single-Tap, Double-Tap, Long Press, and
3D Touch, for example. You can install any of these on the AssistiveTouch palette for quick access.
Touch Accommodations
These options are intended to accommodate people who find it difficult to
trigger precise taps on the touchscreen. Touch Accommodations is the master
switch for all three of the following options:
Hold Duration requires that you keep your finger on the screen for an
amount of time that you specify (for example, one second) before the
iPhone registers a tap. That feature neatly eliminates accidental taps
when your finger happens to bump the screen.
When Hold Duration is turned on, a countdown cursor appears at your
fingertip, showing with a circular graph how much longer you have to
wait before your touch “counts.”
Ignore Repeat ignores multiple taps that the screen detects within a
certain window—say, one second. If you have, for example, a tremor,
this is a great way to screen out accidental repeated touches or repeated
letter-presses on the onscreen keyboard.
Tap Assistance lets you indicate whether the location of a tap should be
the first spot you touch or the last spot. The Use Final Touch Location
option means you can put your finger down in one spot and then fine-
tune its position on the glass anytime within the countdown period

indicated by the timer cursor. Feel free to adjust the timer window using
the controls here.
Home Button (or Side Button)
If you have motor-control problems of any kind, you might welcome this
enhancement. It’s an option to widen the time window for registering a double-
press or triple-press of the home button (or, on the iPhone X, the side button). If
you choose Slow or Slowest, the phone accepts double- and triple-presses
spaced far and even farther apart, rather than interpreting them as individual
presses a few seconds apart.
This is also a place where you can remove the triggering of Siri from the home
button/side button’s duties. If you choose Off here, then you can trigger Siri only
by voice (“Hey Siri”). If you choose Voice Control, then holding in the button
lets you speak only music-control and phone-dialing commands.
If your phone has a home button, this screen also lets you turn off the Rest
Finger to Open feature, which saves you a click when you’re unlocking the
phone (“The Auto–Home Screen Option”).
Siri
In iOS 11, for the first time, you can type your questions and commands to Siri
instead of speaking them, which can be a tremendous help if you have trouble
speaking. (It’s also a tremendous help if you’re using Siri from the sidelines of a
golf or chess tournament.) Here’s the Type to Siri on/off switch; see “Typing to
Siri”.
3D Touch
The 3D Touch option (“3D Touch”) may be the hot feature of the iPhone 6s and
later models. But it may also drive you crazy.
Here you can turn the feature off, or just adjust the threshold of pressure (Light,
Medium, Firm) required to trigger a “3D touch.” (Apple even gives you a

sample photo thumbnail to practice on, right on this screen, so you can gauge
which degree of pressure you like best.)
Tap to Wake (iPhone X)
The iPhone X doesn’t have a home button to press for waking it, so it offers a
consolation prize: this option, which lets you tap anywhere on the screen to
wake the phone.
Keyboard
The first option here controls whether or not the onscreen keyboard’s keys turn
into CAPITALS when the Shift key is pressed; see ???.
The others control what happens when you’ve hooked up a physical keyboard to
your iPhone—a Bluetooth keyboard, for example:
Key Repeat. Ordinarily, holding down a key makes it repeat, so that
you can type things like “auuuuuuuuuuugggggh!” or “zzzzz.” These
two sliders govern the repeating behavior: how long you must hold
down a key before it starts repeating (to prevent triggering repetitions
accidentally), and how fast each key spits out characters once the
spitting has begun.
Sticky Keys lets you press multikey shortcuts (involving keys like
Shift, Option, Control, and 
) one at a time instead of all together.
(The Sound option ensures that you’ll get an audio beep to confirm that
the keyboard has understood.)
Toggle With Shift Key gives you the flexibility of turning Sticky Keys
on and off at will. Whenever you want to turn on Sticky Keys, press the
Shift key five times in succession. You’ll hear a special clacking sound
effect alerting you that you just turned on Sticky Keys. (Repeat the five
presses to turn Sticky Keys off again.)
With Slow Keys turned on, the phone doesn’t register a key press at all
until you’ve held down the key for more than a second or so—a feature

designed to screen out accidental key presses.
Shake to Undo
In most of Apple’s apps, you can undo your most recent typing or editing by
giving the iPhone a quick shake. (You’re always asked to confirm.) This is the
On/Off switch for that feature—handy if you find yourself triggering Undo
accidentally.
Vibration
Here’s a master Off switch for all vibrations the phone makes. Alarms,
notifications, confirmations—all of it.
As Apple’s lawyers cheerfully point out on this screen, turning off vibrations
also means you won’t get buzzy notifications of “earthquake, tsunami, and other
emergency alerts.” Goodness!
Call Audio Routing
When a call comes in, where do you want it to go? To your headset? Directly to
the speakerphone? Or the usual (headset unless there is no headset)? Here’s
where you make a choice that sticks, so you don’t have to make it each time a
call rings.
Hearing Assistance
The next options in Settings → General → Accessibility are all dedicated to
helping people with hearing loss. (Further details are at
www.apple.com/accessibility/iphone/hearing.)
MFi Hearing Aids
A cellphone is bristling with wireless transmitters, which can cause interference
and static if you wear a hearing aid. But Apple has been working with hearing-

aid manufacturers to solve these problems.
MFi stands for “Made for iPhone.” Hearing aids with this logo are designed to
sound great without draining the battery. Better yet, you can triple-click the
home button (or, on the iPhone X, the side button) to view the hearing aids’
battery status, change the left and right volume, or switch to one of your
audiologist’s environmental presets—outdoors, restaurants, and so on.
TTY
A TTY is a teletype or text telephone. It’s a machine that lets deaf people make
phone calls by typing instead of speaking.
iOS offers a built-in software TTY that requires no hardware to haul around. It
resembles a chat app, and it works like this: When you place a phone call (using
the standard Phone app), the iPhone gives you a choice of what kind of call you
want to place:
Voice call. Voice-to-voice, as usual.
TTY call. You’re calling another person who also has a TTY machine
(or iOS 10 or later). You’ll type back and forth.
TTY relay call. This option means you can call a person who doesn’t
have a TTY setup. A human operator will speak (to the other guy)
everything you type, and will type (to you) everything the other guy
speaks. This, of course, requires a relay service, whose phone number
you enter here on this Settings panel.
For more on using TTY on the iPhone, visit support.apple.com/en-us/HT207033.
LED Flash for Alerts
If you’re deaf, you know when the phone is ringing—because it vibrates, of
course. But what if it’s sitting on the desk, or it’s over there charging? This
option lets you know when you’re getting a call, text, or notification by blinking
the flash on the back of the phone—the very bright LED light.
Mono Audio

If you’re deaf in one ear, then listening to any music that’s a stereo mix can be
frustrating; you might be missing half the orchestration or the vocals. When you
turn on Mono Audio, the iPhone mixes everything down so that the left and
right channels contain the same monaural playback. Now you can hear the entire
mix in one ear.
TIP
This is also a great feature when you’re sharing an earbud with a friend, or when one of your earbuds is
broken.
Phone Noise Cancellation
iPhone models 5 and later have three microphones scattered around the body. In
combination, they offer extremely good background-noise reduction when
you’re on a phone call. The microphones on the top and back, for example, listen
to the wind, music, crowd noise, or other ambient sound and subtract that
ambient noise from the sound going into the main phone mike.
You can turn that feature off here—if, for example, you experience a “pressure”
in your ear when it’s operating.
Balance Slider
The L/R slider lets you adjust the phone’s stereo mix, in case one of your ears
has better hearing than the other.
Hearing Aid Compatibility
When you try to talk on the phone, your hearing aid may conduct sound into
your ear using either of two modes. There’s acoustic coupling, where the
hearing aid simply amplifies the sound coming out of your phone’s earpiece
(along with all background noise, unfortunately); and there’s telecoil (inductive)
coupling, where the phone transmits sound to the hearing aid magnetically. That
way your hearing aid isn’t amplifying ambient background noise, too.
Most hearing aids have telecoils (a “T” model), but not all. If yours does, turn on
Hearing Aid Compatibility for added clarity when talking on your iPhone.

Media (Subtitle Options)
These options govern Internet videos that you play in the iPhone’s Videos app
(primarily those from Apple’s own iTunes Store).
Subtitles & Captioning. The iPhone’s Videos app lets you tap the 
button to see a list of available subtitles and captions. Occasionally, a
movie also comes with specially written Subtitles for the Deaf and Hard
of Hearing (SDH). Tap Subtitles & Captioning → Closed Captions +
SDH if you want that 
 menu to list them whenever they’re
available.
The Style option gives you control over the font, size, and background
of those captions, complete with a preview. (Tap the 
 button to view
the preview, and the sample caption, at full-screen size.) The Custom
option even lets you dream up your own font, size, and color for the
type; a new color and opacity of the caption background; and so on.
Audio Descriptions. This option is for Internet movies that come, or
may someday come, with a narration track that describes the action for
the blind.
Guided Access (Kiosk Mode)
It’s amazing how quickly even tiny tots can master the iPhone—and how easily
they can muck things up with accidental taps.
Guided Access solves that problem rather tidily. It’s kiosk mode. That is, you
can lock the phone into one app; the victim cannot switch out of it. You can even
specify which features of that app are permitted. Never again will you find your
Home screen icons rearranged or text messages deleted.
Guided Access is also great for helping out people with motor-control
difficulties—or teenagers with self-control difficulties.
To turn on Guided Access, open Settings → General → Accessibility →

Guided Access; turn the switch On.
Now a Passcode Settings button appears. Here’s where you protect Guided
Access so the little scamp can’t shut it off—at least not without a six-digit
passcode (Set Guided Access Passcode) or your fingerprint, or—on an iPhone
X—your face.
You can also set a time limit for your kid’s Guided Access. Tap Time Limit to
set up an alarm or a spoken warning when time is running out.
Finally, the moment of truth arrives: Your kid is screaming for your phone.
Open whatever app you’ll want to lock in place. Press the home button three
times fast (on the iPhone X, it’s the side button). The Guided Access screen
appears. At this point, you can proceed in any of three ways:
Declare some features off-limits. With your finger, draw a circle
around each button, slider, and control you want to deactivate. The
phone converts your circle into a tidy rectangle; you can drag its corners
to adjust its size, drag inside the rectangle to move it, or tap the 
to remove it if you change your mind or want to start again.
Once you enter Guided Access mode, the controls you’ve enclosed
appear darkened (next page, right). They no longer respond—and your
phone borrower can’t get into trouble.
Change settings. If you tap Options, you get additional controls. You
can decide whether or not your little urchin is allowed to press the
Sleep/Wake Button or the Volume Buttons when in Guided Access
mode. If you want to hand the phone to your 3-year-old in the back seat
to watch baby videos, you’ll probably want to disable the touchscreen
altogether (turn off Touch) and prevent the picture from rotating when
the phone does (turn off Motion).

Here, too, is the Time Limit switch. Turn it on to view hours/minutes
dials. At the end of this time, it’s no more fun for Junior.
Begin kiosk mode. Tap Start.
Later, when you get the phone back and you want to use it normally, triple-press
the home (or side) button again; enter your passcode or offer your fingerprint or
face. At this point, you can tap Options to change them, Resume to go back into
kiosk mode, or End to return to the iPhone as you know it.
TIP
If you use any of the other accessibility features described in this chapter, you may be dismayed to
discover that you can no longer use the triple-clicking of the home or side button to open the on/off
buttons for those features. The triple-click has been taken over by Guided Access!
Fortunately, Apple has anticipated this problem. If you turn on Accessibility Shortcut on the Guided
Access screen of Settings (see ???), then triple-clicking produces the usual list of accessibility features—
and Guided Access is on that list, too, ready to tap.

The Instant Screen-Dimming Trick
The Accessibility settings offer one of the greatest shortcuts of all time: the
ability to dim your screen, instantly, with a triple-click. You don’t have to open
the Control Center, visit Settings, or fuss with a slider; it’s instantaneous. It’s a
gift to people who go to movies, plays, nighttime drives, or anywhere else where
full screen brightness isn’t appropriate, pleasant, or comfortable—and digging
around in the Control Center or Settings takes too much time.
It’s a bunch of steps to set up, but you have to take them only once. After that,
the magic is yours whenever you want it.
Ready? Here’s the setup.
1. Open Settings → General → Accessibility. Turn on Zoom.
If the magnifying lens appears, tap the white handle at the bottom of it;
in the shortcut menu, tap Zoom Out (below, left).
Now the magnifying lens is gone.
2. Scroll down to Zoom Region and set it to Full Screen Zoom.
3. Tap Zoom Filter; tap Low Light (above, right). Tap Zoom (in the
upper left) to return to the previous panel.
You’ve just set up the phone to dim the screen whenever zooming is
turned on. Now all you have to do is teach the phone to enable zooming

whenever you triple-click the home (or side) button.
4. In the top-left corner, tap Accessibility.
You return to the main Accessibility screen. Scroll to the very bottom.
5. Tap Accessibility Shortcut; make sure Zoom is the only selected
item.
At this point, you can go back to the Home screen.
From now on, whenever you triple-click the home button (on the iPhone X, the
side button), you turn on a gray filter that cuts the brightness of the screen by 30
percent. (Feel free to fine-tune the dimness of your new Insta-Dim setting at that
point, using the Control Center; see “Control Center”.) It doesn’t save you any
battery power, since the screen doesn’t think it’s putting out any less light. But it
does give you instant darkening when you need it in a hurry—like when a
potentially important text comes in while you’re in the movie theater.
Triple-click again to restore the original brightness, and be glad.
Accessibility Shortcut
Burrowing all the way into the Settings → General → Accessibility screen is
quite a slog when all you want to do is flip some feature on or off. Therefore,
you get this handy shortcut: a fast triple-press of the home button or (on the
iPhone X) the side button.

That action produces a little menu, in whatever app you’re using, with on/off
switches for the iPhone’s various accessibility features.
It’s up to you, however, to indicate which ones you want on that menu. That’s
why you’re on this screen—to turn on the features you want to appear on the
triple-press menu. Your options are AssistiveTouch, Classic Invert Colors,
Color Filters, Magnifier, Reduce White Point, Smart Invert Colors, Switch
Control, VoiceOver, and Zoom. (To see Guided Access in the list, refer to the
Tip in ???.)
TIP
If you choose only one item here, then triple-pressing the home or side button doesn’t produce the menu
of choices. It just turns that one feature on or off.

Chapter 9. 8 Music & Videos
Of all the iPhone’s talents, its iPoddishness may be its most successful. This
function, after all, gets the most impressive battery life (40 to 80 hours of
playback, depending on the model). There’s enough room on your phone to store
thousands of songs.
In the Music app, five tabs greet you across the bottom: Library, For You,
Browse, Radio, and Search.
Some of the app’s features are useful only if you’ve subscribed to Apple Music,
Apple’s $10-a-month music service—but not all of them. The Internet radio
stations, for example, mean that you’ll never run out of music to listen to—and
you’ll never pay a penny for it.
NOTE
If you’re not interested in paying for an Apple Music subscription, you can hide the two tabs you’ll
never use (For You and Browse). To do that, open Settings → Music and turn off Show Apple Music.
The For You and Browse tabs disappear—and a new tab, Connect, takes their place. This is the mini-
rock-band Instagram service described in ???.
The bottom line: Your Music app might show you either of two different sets of tabs. Complicated? Yes.
Anyway, this chapter is written as though you haven’t hidden the Apple Music tabs.
Apple Music
The Apple Music service, which debuted in 2015, is a rich stew of components.
For $10 a month (or $15 for a family of six), you get all of the following.
TIP
You can give Apple Music a free 90-day trial. After that, you’re charged $10 a month—unless you turn
off the auto-renewal feature now, while you’re still thinking about it. To do that, tap the 
 (on the
For You tab in the Music app), and then View Apple ID → Subscriptions. Tap Apple Music
Membership, and then Cancel Subscription. You’ll still be a member until the trial is up.

Unlimited Streaming Music. You can listen to any band, album, or
song in the Apple Music library of 40 million songs—on demand, no
ads. It’s not like listening to a radio station, where someone else is
programming the music; you program the music.
On the other hand, this is not like Apple’s traditional music store, where
you pay $1 per download and then own the song. If you ever stop
paying, the music stops. You’re left with nothing.
If you do subscribe, you can tell Siri things like, “Play the top songs of
2005” or “Play some good running music” or “Play some Taylor Swift.”
Nor are you obligated to do all your music programming manually.
Apple Music comes equipped with ready-made playlists, prepared by
human editors, in all kinds of categories. There are sets of starter songs
by various singers (“Intro to Sarah McLachlan”), playlists by genre and
era, and playlists for specific activities like Waking Up, Running,
Getting It On, and even Breaking Up.
You can freely mix the songs you’re renting with the music you actually
own. You can even download songs that you don’t own for playback
when you have no Internet connection (as long as you’re still paying
your $10 a month).
Beats 1 Radio. Apple runs a “global, 24-hour Internet radio station”
called Beats 1. (It actually broadcasts live for 12 hours a day, and then
repeats.)
Listening is free, even to nonpayers.
Live DJs introduce songs and comment on the singers, just as on FM
radio stations. Of course, you have no input on the style of music you
hear on Beats 1, and you can’t pause, rewind, fast-forward, or save
anything you hear for later listening. It’s old-style radio, offering the
magic of serendipity.
Connect. Connect is an Instagram-like service run by Apple. Here
bands that Apple thinks you’ll like (or that you choose manually) can

promote themselves by posting songs, videos, and other material. You
can 
 these posts, share them, or comment on them.
iTunes Match. iTunes Match, which dates back to 2011, is a cloud-
based version of your iTunes library, available to any of your Apple
devices. For $25 a year, you can stream Apple’s copies of any song files
you actually own—ripped from CDs or even acquired illegally. The
advantages: First, you save a lot of space on your phone. Second, you
can play them on any Apple gadget you own. Third, the versions Apple
plays are often of higher quality than your originals.
iTunes Match continues as a separate service for non–Apple Music
subscribers (the song limit is now 100,000 songs). But if you do
subscribe to Apple Music, in effect you get iTunes Match automatically.
iCloud Music Library. This is a newer service—a descendant of
iTunes Match. This feature, too, matches all the songs on your phone
with songs that Apple has online, so you can play any of them on an
Apple machine anywhere (once you’ve signed in). And if you have
some songs that Apple doesn’t have, you can upload them to Apple and
thereby add them to your locker.
NOTE
Apple’s matching algorithms aren’t flawless; sometimes they don’t recognize and match a song that you
and Apple both, in fact, have.
Another note: When you turn on iCloud Music Library, you’re offered the opportunity to delete all the
music on your phone and replace it with what’s in your online locker. Back up your phone’s music
before you do this (“Backing Up the iPhone”). There are occasional stories of people losing their entire
music collections.
The Library Tab
Here’s all the music you’ve actually chosen yourself.
In the old days, this meant “music files that are actually on your phone.” If you
have an Apple Music membership, though, you’ll also see online songs listed

here that you’ve added to your personal catalog.
You can view them grouped in any of the lists you see here: Playlists, Artists,
Albums, Songs, or (if you subscribe to Apple Music) Downloaded Music.
Below all that, in the Recently Added section, you get thumbnails for albums
and playlists you’ve recently downloaded or built.
TIP
There are other categories you could be seeing here, too, like Genres, Compilations, Composers, TV &
Movies, and Music Videos. To add them to the list of headings—or to remove some of the ones that start
out there—tap Edit next to the bold Library heading.
As you could probably guess, you operate the Music app by drilling down—by
tapping from category to album to song or whatever. (Tap the top-left corner of
the screen to backtrack.)

Playback Control
When you tap the name of a song, album, playlist, or whatever, it plays. You can
control playback—skip, rewind, and so on—in any of several ways.
The Mini-Player
On almost every screen of the Music app, you get a miniature controller at the
bottom of the screen, like the one shown above at left (very bottom).
It identifies the current song, provides a “next song” button (
), and offers
the most important playback control of all: 
.

The Now Playing Screen
If you tap (or drag upward on) the mini-player, though, the Now Playing screen
appears (facing page, right). This time, there’s room for all the controls you need
to control music playback. Here are its contents, from top to bottom:
TIP
Swipe down to close this screen.
Album art. Most of the screen is filled with a bright, colorful shot of
the original CD’s album art. (If none is available—if you’re listening to
a song you wrote, for example—you see a big, gray, generic musical-
note picture. You can drag or paste in an album-art graphic—one you
found on the web, for example—in iTunes.)
Scrubber. This slider reveals two useful statistics: how much of the
song you’ve heard, in minutes and seconds (at the left end) and how
much time remains (at the right end).
To operate the slider, drag the tiny round handle with your finger. You
can jump to any spot in the song this way. (Tapping directly on the
slider doesn’t work.)
Song info. The artist name, track name, and album name.
, 
 (Previous, Next). These buttons work exactly as they do
on an iPod: Tap 
 to skip to the beginning of this song (or, if
you’re already at the beginning, to the previous song). Tap 
 to skip
to the next song.
TIP
If you’re wearing the earbuds, then you can pinch the clicker twice to skip to the next song.
If you hold down one of these buttons, you rewind or fast-forward. You hear the

music speeding by, without turning the singer into a chipmunk. The rewinding or
fast-forwarding accelerates if you keep holding the button down.
Play/Pause button. The Pause button beneath the album photo looks
like this 
 when the music is playing. If you do pause, then the button
turns into the Play button (▸).
TIP
If you’re wearing the earbuds, then pinching the microphone clicker serves the same purpose: It’s a
Play/Pause control.
Incidentally, when you plug in headphones, the iPhone’s built-in speaker turns off, but when you unplug
the headphones, your music pauses instead of switching abruptly back to the speaker.
Download (
). If this song is on Apple Music online (and not
physically on your phone), then tap to download it for playability when
you’re not on the Internet.
Add (
). This button appears only when you’re playing an Apple
Music song; it adds the current song to your iCloud Music Library
(“The Library Tab”).
Volume. You can drag the round handle of this slider (bottom of the
screen) to adjust the volume—or you can use the volume buttons on the
left side of the phone.
AirPlay (
). Tap to send playback to an external speaker using
AirPlay (“Switching Among Speakers”).
Options (
). As always in this app, this button is like a shortcut
menu of options that might apply at the moment, described next.
Incidentally, people go batty trying to find three important controls in the Music
app’s current version: Shuffle, Repeat, and the Up Next queue (“Up Next”).
They’re all there—but you have to swipe up from the Now Playing screen to see

them.
The Options Panel
The ellipsis (
) awaits on every Now Playing screen. Its choices depend on
whether you’ve tapped some music that you own (facing page, left) or that
you’ve found in Apple Music’s collection (right). But here are some of the
commands you might see there:
Delete. If you’ve downloaded a copy of this song from Apple Music,
well, here’s where you change your mind.
Download. Grab the song off of Apple’s servers, so you’ll be able to
play it without an Internet connection (for Apple Music or iTunes
Match subscribers only).
Delete from Library. Gets rid of a song you actually own.
Add to Library. Adds the current song to your iCloud Music Library
(“The Library Tab”).
Add to a Playlist. Lets you add this item to a playlist you’ve made.
Create Station. Makes a “radio station” full of music that sounds like
this one (“Free Stations”) (Apple Music only).
Share Song. Opens the Share sheet (“The Share Sheet”), so that you
can send a link to this song via email, text message, Facebook or Twitter
post, and so on. (The recipients can listen to the full song if they’re
Apple Music subscribers.)

Lyrics. Holy smokes. Apple Music can show you a screen containing
the lyrics of the song you’re playing. Who’da thought?
Rate Song. Tap to give this song a rating, from one to five stars.
(Unfortunately, you can’t do much with these ratings—you can’t sort by
rating, or make smart playlists by rating, or use your ratings to affect the
suggestions Apple menu makes. Ah, well.)
Love, Dislike. As you listen to a song, tap these buttons to tell Apple
when there’s a song you particularly love or loathe. When Apple’s
magical computers suggest new music for you later, they’ll take these
hints into account.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6s or later, you can hard-press a song in a list (for example, a playlist) to open the
same Options menu. That is, you don’t have to burrow all the way to its Now Playing screen.

Control Center
The Control Center, of course, is the panel that appears when you swipe up from
the bottom of the screen, or down from the top right of an iPhone X (“Control
Center”). It includes playback controls, too. That means you never have to go to
the Music app just to change tracks if you’re busy doing something else on the
phone.
Playback While Locked
Once you’re playing music, it keeps right on playing, even if you change apps.
After all, the only thing more pleasurable than surfing the web is surfing it with a
Beach Boys soundtrack.
If you’ve got something else to do—like jogging, driving, or performing surgery
—tap the side button to turn off the screen. The music keeps playing, but you
save battery power.
TIP
Even with the screen off, you can still adjust the music volume (use the volume buttons on the earbud
clicker or the buttons on the side of the phone), pause the music (pinch the earbud clicker once), or
advance to the next song (pinch it twice).
What’s cool is that if you wake the phone, the Lock screen looks like the Now
Playing screen. It has all the same controls, so you can manage the playback
without even having to fully wake the phone.
If a phone call comes in, the music fades, and you hear your chosen ringtone—
through your earbuds, if you’re wearing them. Squeeze the clicker on the earbud
cord or tap the Sleep switch to answer the call. When the call ends, the music
fades back in, right where it left off.
Voice Control
There’s one more way to control your playback—a way that doesn’t involve
taking your eyes off the road or leaving whatever app you’re using. You can
control your music playback by voice, using Siri. See Chapter 5.

Playlists
A playlist is a group of songs you’ve placed together, in a sequence that makes
sense to you. One might consist of party tunes; another might hold romantic
dinnertime music; a third might be drum-heavy workout cuts.
Creating Playlists on the Phone
To play with playlists, start on the Library tab. Tap Playlists. Here are all the
playlists you’ve ever created—which might be zero (below, left).
To create one, do like this:
1. Click the giant New Playlist button.
A new screen appears, where you can name and set up your new playlist
(below, middle).
2. Tap Playlist Name; type a name for your playlist.
You can also, at this moment, tap the little 
 button to take, or
choose, a photo to represent this playlist. Or even type a description.
3. Tap Add Music.

The Add Music screen appears (below, right). It offers the usual ways
to view your collection: Playlists (that is, existing ones), Artists,
Albums, Songs, Videos, Genres, Compilations, Composers, and
Downloaded Music. (A compilation is one of those albums that’s been
put together from many different performers. You know: “Zither Hits of
the 1600s,” “Kazoo Classics,” and so on.)
4. Tap the category you want for finding your first song; drill down
until you find the music you want to add.
For example, if you first tap Albums, you then see a list of your
albums; tap 
 to add the entire album to the new playlist. Or tap the
album’s name to view the songs on it—and then 
 next to a song’s
name to add it to the list.

5. Keep adding music to the playlist until you’re satisfied.
You can keep tapping 
 buttons, without leaving this screen; each
turns into a checkmark to indicate that you’ve added it (previous page,
right). A playlist can be infinitely long; we’re way past the days of
worrying about how much will fit on a cassette tape or a CD.
6. Tap every Done button until you’re back on the Playlists screen.
Your newly minted playlist is ready to play!
Using Playlists
To see what songs or videos are in a playlist, tap its name or picture. You now
arrive at a Playlist details screen, where your tracks are listed for your
inspection. To start playing a song once you see it in the Playlist list, tap its
name; you’ll hear that song and all those that follow it, in order.
Or tap the Shuffle button (
) to start random-order playback.
TIP
Here you can use a standard iOS convention: Anywhere you’re asked to drill down from one list to
another—from a playlist to the songs inside, for example—you can backtrack by swiping from the left
edge of the phone into the screen.
Or do it the long way: Tap < at the upper-left corner of the screen. That button’s name always tells you
what screen you just came from (My Music, for example).
Once you’re here, you can have all kinds of fun:
To delete or rearrange songs: Tap Edit. Use the 
 handles to
drag the songs into a new sequence. Hit 
 to make one disappear.
(You’re not deleting it from your phone—only from this playlist.) Tap
Done.
To add more songs to the playlist: Tap Edit. Tap Add Music.
To rename the open playlist: Tap Edit. Tap the current title and edit

away. (Tap Done.)
To delete the playlist: Open the playlist; tap the ••• to open the Options
panel; tap Delete from Library. Confirm by tapping Delete Playlist.
(Scary though that wording may sound, no music is actually deleted
from your library—only the playlist that contains it.)
Up Next
Unless you’re a professional DJ, you’re probably happy to hear song after song
played automatically, according to whatever album, playlist, or radio station
they’re in.
But the Up Next playlist gives you a degree of control without requiring the full
project of programming a playlist.
The Up Next playlist always exists. If you tell Music to play an album, then Up
Next autofills with the songs on that album; if you’re listening to all the music
from a certain performer, then Up Next displays what else you’ll hear from that
artist. And if you tap any song in your Library, then everything after it gets
added to the Up Next queue automatically.
But you can also queue up music yourself, adding songs to Up Next on your own
schedule. The playback will plow through them in order.

Add a song to Up Next. Hard-press (or long-press) a song, album, or
playlist to open the Options panel (below, left). Tap Play Next to put
this song at the beginning of the Up Next queue, or Play Later to put it
at the end of the queue.
Play a song now. Suppose you find some music you want to play right
now. You don’t care about the Up Next playlist.
When you tap that item’s name, the iPhone asks: “After playing this, do
you want to play the songs you’ve added to Up Next?” If you hit Keep
Up Next, then you hear the new song without disturbing the Up Next
list that will play afterward. If you hit Clear Up Next, then the new
song plays and then the music stops; you’ve nuked the current Up Next
list.
View, Edit, or Clear the Up Next List

Most people probably never realize it, but you can actually look over the Up
Next playlist in progress. You can rearrange or delete anything in it.
There’s only one way to see the Up Next playlist, and it’s pretty buried. You
have to open the full-height Now Playing screen described in “The Now Playing
Screen”, and then scroll up.
Once the list appears (previous page, right), you can remove a song from the
queue by swiping left on it to reveal the Remove button; tap it. Rearrange the list
by dragging the little “grip strip” handles up or down. (If you don’t see them, it’s
because you’ve got your music on Repeat.)
NOTE
Other than the Clear Up Next option mentioned above, the only way to clear the entire list at once is to
force-quit the Music app (???) and then reopen it.
“For You” Tab
40 million is a lot of songs. You won’t live long enough to hear them all. So
Apple has supplied the For You tab of the Music app to present new songs,
performers, and albums its algorithms think you’ll like. (If you’re not a paying
subscriber, then this tab is just an ad for Apple Music.)
Scroll horizontally to see more tiles in a category; scroll vertically to see the
playlists, albums, artists, and new releases Apple thinks you’ll like.
And how does the app guess what kind of music you’ll like? When you sign up
for the service, you’re shown dancing red circles bearing music-genre names.
You’re supposed to tap the ones you like, double-tap the ones you really like,
and hold your finger down on the ones you don’t like.
Then, of course, as you go through your life listening to music, you can always
turn the 
 button on or off to further fine-tune Apple’s understanding of your
tastes.

Browse Tab
The Browse tab is also for paying subscribers only. It’s lists of lists.
Scroll down long enough, and you’ll find lists like New Music, Curated
Playlists (music lists, created by Apple’s editors, for particular genres, activities,
and moods), Videos, Top Charts, and Genres. Once again, the idea is to help
you find new stuff you like.
iTunes Radio
Your iPhone includes an amazing gift: your own radio station. Your own empire
of radio stations, in fact.

They come in two categories: Free and Custom.
Free Stations
What you see on the Radio screen depends on whether or not you’ve turned off
Show Apple Music, as described in “Apple Music”.
If that’s turned off, then you see only free stations here: Beats 1 (the Apple live
station described in ???) and some streaming stations like CBS, NPR, ESPN, and
Bloomberg. These are free Internet radio stations.
Subscriber Stations
If Show Apple Music is turned on, then this screen offers ready-made “radio
stations” that Apple has supplied for you. If you’re a subscriber, they play; if not,
they give you an ad to sign up.
Tap Radio Stations to find more ready-to-play, software-curated “radio stations”
in every conceivable category: Country, NPR, ESPN, Oldies, Soul/Funk,
Chill, Indie, Classic Metal, Pop Workout, Kids & Family, Lullabies, Latin
Pop, Classical, Reggae, and on and on.
You can hit 
 to skip a song you’re not enjoying. And you don’t hear any
ads.
Custom Stations
If you’re a paid subscriber, the iTunes Radio service offers more than canned
stations; you can create a new “station” instantly, based on any “seed” song you
choose.
You don’t get to choose the exact songs or singers you want to hear; you have to
trust iTunes Radio to choose songs based on your chosen song, singer, or music
genre. For example, if you choose Billy Joel as your “seed,” you’ll hear a lot of
Billy Joel, but also a lot of other music that sounds more or less like his.
To set up a new “radio station” of your own, find a song, band, or album. Hard-
press or long-press it to open the Options menu (“3D Touch”)—and tap Create
Station.

You’ve just created a new station, and it begins instantly.
TIP
While a custom station plays, you can tap the 
 on its Now Playing screen to see two new buttons:
Play More Like This and Play Less Like This. That kind of feedback fine-tunes your custom station
for future use.
The idea of a “seed song”–based radio service isn’t new, of course. It’s the same
idea as Pandora, a website and app that has offered precisely the same features
for years. But iTunes Radio is built in, it’s incorporated with Siri and the Control
Center, and it’s part of Apple’s larger ecosystem; that is, you can see your same
set of “radio stations” on your Mac or PC (in the iTunes app), iPad, and Apple
TV.
Returning to a Custom Station
On the main Radio screen, the Recently Played list shows all the stations you’ve
listened to. Tap to start playing.
Siri and iTunes Radio
Truth is, there’s an easier way to create a custom radio station: Just let Siri do the
work. No matter what you’re doing on the iPhone, you can hold down the home
button (or, on the iPhone X, the side button) and say, for example, “Play ‘Just the
Way You Are’ by Billy Joel” or “Play some Beatles.” Boom: The music begins.
Actually, Siri comes equipped to recognize a whole slew of commands
pertaining to iTunes Radio. Here’s a sampler; you don’t have to use these precise
wordings:
Start a station from Whitney Houston (or any song, album, or artist).
Play the radio.
What song is this?
Play more like this.

Don’t play this song again.
Pause the music. (Resume the music.)
Skip this song.
Add this song to my Wish List.
Stop the radio.
Speakers and Headphones
The iPhone’s speaker is pretty darned good for such a tiny machine. But the
world is full of better speakers—Bluetooth wireless speakers, car stereo systems,
hi-fi TVs, and fancy earbuds and headphones. The iPhone is especially easy to
use with them.
Bluetooth Wireless Speakers
You can buy amazingly small, powerful Bluetooth stereo speakers that receive
your iPhone’s music from as far as 20 or 30 feet away—made by JBL, Bose, and
others.
There are also wireless Bluetooth headphones and earbuds—an especially useful
fact if your iPhone lacks a headphone jack (iPhone 7 and later).
Once you’ve bought your headphones or speakers, you have to introduce them to
the iPhone—a process called pairing.
From the Home screen, tap Settings → Bluetooth. Turn Bluetooth on (below,
left); you see the Searching 
 animation as the iPhone wirelessly hunts for
your headphones or speakers.

Grab them, turn them on, and start the pairing procedure, as described in the
manual. Usually that means holding down a certain button until a tiny light starts
flashing. At that point, the headphones’ or speaker’s name appears on the
iPhone’s screen.
TIP
If the headphones or speakers require a one-time passcode—it’s usually 0000, but check the manual—
the iPhone’s keyboard appears, so you can type it in.
A few seconds later, it says Connected; now any sound the iPhone would
ordinarily play through its speakers or earbuds now plays through the wireless
headphones or speakers. Not just music, but chirps, game sounds, and so on. Oh,
and phone calls.
If your headset has a microphone, too, then you can even answer and make
phone calls wirelessly. (There’s an Answer button right on the headphones.)
Using Bluetooth wireless stereo does eat up your battery charge faster. But come
on: listening to your music without wires, with the iPhone still in your pocket or

bag? How cool is that?
Switching Among Speakers
When your iPhone has a connection to a wireless sound source—Bluetooth
speakers/earbuds or an AirPlay receiver, for example—you need some way to
direct the music playback to it.
The answer is the 
 button. It’s on the Control Center (“Control Center”), but
it’s hidden: You have to hard-press or long-press the music-playback controls to
see it.
When you tap 
, the iPhone offers a button for each speaker or set of earbuds
or headphone (facing page, right). Tap the one you want.
Instantly, the sound begins flowing from your other source. Use the same
method to switch back to the iPhone’s speakers when the time comes.
AirPlay
There’s another way to transmit audio wirelessly from the iPhone (and video,
too): the Apple technology called AirPlay. You can buy AirPlay speakers,
amplifiers, and TV sets. The Apple TV, of course, is the best-known AirPlay
machine; Apple’s HomePod is another one.
AirPlay is described in “TV Output”, because most people use it to transmit
video, not just audio. But the steps for transmitting to an AirPlay audio gadget
are the same.
Music Settings
The iPhone has a long list of traditional iPod features for music playback. Most
of these options await in Settings → Music. (Shortcut: Tell Siri, “Open Music
settings.”)
EQ (Equalization)

Like any good music player, the iPhone offers an EQ function: a long list of
presets, each of which affects your music by boosting or throttling various
frequencies. One might bring out the bass to goose up your hip-hop tunes;
another might emphasize the midrange for clearer vocals; and so on. (“Late
Night” is especially handy; it lowers the bass so it thuds less. Your downstairs
neighbors will love it.)
You’ll find the EQ feature way down the Music Settings page.
Volume Limit
It’s now established fact: Listening to a lot of loud music through earphones can
damage your hearing. Pump it up today, pay for it tomorrow.
Portable music players can be sinister that way, because in noisy places like
planes and city streets, people turn up the volume much louder than they would
in a quiet place, and they don’t even realize how high they’ve cranked it. That’s
why Apple created this volume slider. It lets you limit the maximum volume
level of the music.
In fact, if you’re a parent, you can even lock down this control on your child’s
iPhone; it can be bypassed only with a password. Set the volume slider here, and
then, in Settings → General → Restrictions, turn on Volume Limit.
Sound Check
This feature smooths out the master volume levels of tracks from different
albums, helping to compensate for differences in their recording levels. It
doesn’t deprive you of peaks and valleys in the music volume, of course—it
affects only the baseline level.
Playing Music from Your Computer
Here’s a trick you weren’t expecting: You can store many terabytes of music on
your Mac or PC upstairs—and play it on your phone in the kitchen downstairs.
Or anywhere on the same Wi-Fi network, actually.
This nifty bit of wireless magic is brought to you by Home Sharing, a feature of
the iTunes program.

Here’s the setup: In iTunes on the Mac or PC, open Edit → Preferences. Click
Sharing, and turn on Share my library on my local network. (You can share
only certain playlists, if you like.) Turn on Require password and enter your
Apple account (iCloud) password. Click OK.
Now pick up your phone. At the bottom of the Settings → Music screen, log
into Home Sharing using the same Apple ID and password.
Now you’re ready to view the contents of your computer on the phone. You’d
never guess where it’s hiding.
In the Music app, on the Library tab, tap Home Sharing; on the next screen,
choose your computer’s name. (Note that the Home Sharing heading doesn’t
appear unless your computer is turned on and iTunes is open.)
That’s it! Suddenly, your entire Music app is filled with the music from your
computer’s collection, rather than the music on the phone.
The iTunes Store
Just as you can buy apps using the App Store app, you can browse, buy, and
download songs, TV shows, and movies using the iTunes Store app. Anything
you buy gets autosynced back to your computer’s copy of iTunes when you get
home. Whenever you hear somebody mention a buy-worthy song, you can have
it within a minute.
To begin, open the iTunes Store app. The store you see here (below, left) is
modeled on the App Store described in Chapter 10. This time, the buttons at the
bottom of the screen include Music, Movies, TV Shows, Search, and More.
When you tap Music, Movies, or TV Shows, the screen offers further buttons.
For Music, for example, the scrolling horizontal rows of options might include
New Releases, Recent Releases, Singles, and Pre-Orders.
(Beneath each list is a Redeem button, which you can tap if you’ve been given
an iTunes gift certificate or a promo code; a Send Gift button, which lets you
buy a song or video for someone else; and an Apple ID button, which can show
you your current credit balance.)

TIP
You can’t buy TV shows or movies on the cellular network—just in Wi-Fi hotspots. That’s your cell
company’s way of saying, “We don’t want you jamming up our precious cellular network with your
hefty video downloads, bucko.”
Note, by the way, that you can rent movies from the store instead of buying them outright. You pay only
$3, $4, or $5 to rent (instead of $10 to $16 to buy). But once you start watching, you have just 48 hours
to finish; after that, the movie deletes itself from your phone. (If you like, you can sync it to your Mac or
PC to continue watching in iTunes—but still within 48 hours.)
To search for something in particular, tap Search. The keyboard appears. Type
what you’re looking for: the name of a song, movie, show, performer, or album,
for example. At any time, you can stop typing and tap the name of a match to see
its details. You can use the buttons across the top to restrict the search to one

category (just songs or movies, for example).
TIP
Sometimes it’s quicker to search directly from the search bar, which can search the iTunes Store directly.
All these tools eventually take you to the details page of an album, song, or
movie. For a song, tap its name to hear an instant 90-second preview (tap again
to stop). For a TV show or movie, tap ▸ to watch the ad or the sneak preview.
If you’re sold, then tap the price button to buy the song, show, or album (and tap
Buy to confirm). Enter your Apple ID password when you’re asked. (For
movies, you can choose either Buy or Rent, priced accordingly.) At this point,
your iPhone downloads the music or video you bought.
Purchased Items
Anything you buy from the iTunes Store winds up in the appropriate app on your
iPhone: the TV app for TV shows and movies, the Music app for songs. (Within
the Music app, you can see everything you’ve bought: Tap Playlists and then
Purchased.)
In the iTunes Store app, you can tap More and then Purchased to see what
you’ve bought. Once you tap a category (Music, Movies, TV Shows), you get a
pair of tabs:
All. Here’s a list of everything you’ve bought from iTunes, on your
iPhone or any other Apple machine.
Not on This iPhone. This is the cool part. Here you see not just the
files on the iPhone in your hand, but things you’ve bought on other
Apple gadgets—an album you bought on your iPad, for example, or a
song you downloaded to your iPod Touch. (This assumes that you’re
using the same Apple ID on all your gizmos.)
The beauty of this arrangement, of course, is that you can tap the name
of something that’s Not on This iPhone—and then download it (tap 

). No extra charge.
TIP
If you prefer, you can direct your phone to download those purchases that you make on other gadgets
automatically, without your having to tap Not on This iPhone. Visit Settings → iTunes & App Store,
and turn on the switches for Music, Apps, and/or Books under Automatic Downloads. If you also turn
on Use Cellular Data, then your phone will do this auto-downloading when you’re in any 3G or LTE
cellular Internet area, not just in a Wi-Fi hotspot.
More in “More”
Tapping More at the bottom of the screen offers these options:

Tones. You can buy ready-made ringtones on this page—30-second
slices of pop songs. (Don’t ask what sense it makes to pay $1.29 for 30
seconds of a song when you could buy the whole song for the same
price.)
Genius. Apple offers a list of music, movies, and TV shows for sale
that it thinks you’ll like, based on stuff you already have.
Purchased. Here’s another way to examine the stuff you’ve bought on
all your devices. If you’ve turned on Apple’s Family Sharing feature
(“Family Sharing”), you can also examine the stuff your family
members have bought.
Downloads. Shows you a progress bar for anything you’ve started to
download.
TIP
If you tap Edit, you’ll see that you can replace any of the four iTunes Store bottom-row icons with one
of the More buttons (Tones, Genius, Purchased, or whatever). Just drag one of these icons directly
downward on top of an existing icon.
So you’ve downloaded one of the store’s millions of songs, podcasts, TV shows,
music videos, ringtones, or movies directly to your phone. Next time you sync,
that song will swim upstream to your Mac or PC, where it will be safely backed
up in iTunes. (And if you lost your connection before the iPhone was finished
downloading, your Mac or PC will finish the job automatically. Cool.)
The TV App
This weird hybrid app is intended to serve as a single repository for paid TV
shows and movies online, in these three categories:
Videos you’ve bought or rented from Apple’s iTunes Store. In this
regard, the TV app takes over the functions of the old Videos app.
Paid video-service apps like Showtime, Hulu, and HBO Go. A few
of these apps work with the TV app’s “single sign-on” feature, meaning

that you can enter the name and password for your cable account once,
and thereafter you’re spared having to enter it into each individual app.
Channels your cable package provides. Or at least those that have
apps: ABC, A&E, AMC, TBS, and so on. Each one requires that you
provide your cable or satellite TV account name and password. (Here
again, a few may work with the single sign-on feature, meaning that you
don’t have to sign in individually.)
TIP
Even if you don’t have a cable subscription, there’s some free stuff you can watch in this app. Visit Store
→ Buy or Rent on iTunes → Free Episodes.
There are also some channel apps that are free to watch without a subscription, including PBS, PBS
Kids, CBS Sports, ABC News, and The Weather Channel.

That’s the shiny future concept of the TV app. In this early incarnation, though,
it’s of less use, because it works only with a handful of lesser cable companies
and only a handful of channel apps. Netflix, for example, is not among them.
(Although, if you have the Netflix app, the TV app may offer to redirect you
there to watch something you’ve searched for.)
Until more players join the party, here’s how to use the TV app.
Four Tabs
The buttons across the bottom clearly exhibit the TV app’s split personality (split
between iTunes purchases and cable-channel apps).
iTunes Store. Find TV shows and movies to rent or buy using Search.
Watch the ones you’ve bought or rented in Library.

Channel apps. Find channel apps using the Store. Watch the shows
available from the apps you’ve installed in Watch Now.
How to Play a Video
Tap a video’s thumbnail to see its plot summary, year of release, and so on. If it’s
a TV series, tap an episode in that series, if necessary. Either way, tap ▸ to begin
watching.
NOTE
If you see a 
 on this screen, it means that this bought or rented movie is not actually on your
phone. If you have a good Wi-Fi signal, you can watch it right now by streaming it (instead of
downloading it to your phone).
If you don’t see that icon, then the video file is actually on your phone. An Edit button appears, which
you can tap (and then tap 
) to delete the video.
When you’re playing video, anything else on the screen is distracting, so Apple
hides the video playback controls. Tap the screen once to make them appear and
again to make them disappear.
Here’s what they do:
Done. Tap this button, in the top-left corner, to stop playback and return
to the master list of videos.
Scroll slider. This progress indicator (top of the screen) is exactly like
the one you see when you’re playing music. You see the elapsed time,
the remaining time, and a white, round handle that you can drag to jump
forward or back in the video.
TIP
Drag your finger farther (up or down) from the handle to choose a faster or slower scrubbing speed.

Zoom/Unzoom. In the top-right corner, a little 
 or 
 button
appears if the video’s shape doesn’t exactly match your screen. Tap it to
adjust the zoom level of the video, as described in a moment.
Play/Pause (
/
). These buttons (and the earbud clicker) do the
same thing to video as they do to music: alternate playing and pausing.
Previous, Next (
, 
). Hold down your finger to rewind or
fast-forward the video. The longer you hold, the faster the zipping.
(When you fast-forward, you even get to hear the sped-up audio.)
If you’re watching a movie from the iTunes Store, you may be surprised
to discover that it comes with what were once called DVD Extras:
chapter markers, deleted scenes, and so on. To see the buttons for these
goodies, tap the screen (shown above).
TIP
If you’re wearing the earbuds, you can pinch the clicker twice to skip to the next chapter, or three times
to go back a chapter.

Volume. You can drag the round handle of this slider (bottom of the
screen) to adjust the volume—or you can use the volume buttons on the
left side of the phone.
Language (
). You don’t see this button often. But when you do, it
summons subtitle and alternate-language soundtrack options, just like a
DVD player.
AirPlay (
). This symbol appears if you have an Apple TV (or
another AirPlay-compatible device). Tap it to send your video playback
to the TV, as described in “TV Output”.
TIP
If you don’t see a video that you know you purchased through iTunes, then open the iTunes Store app on
your phone. Tap More → Purchased, and then select the person who bought the movie or TV show.
Next tap either Movies or TV Shows; look under All and Not on This iPhone. When you find what you
want, tap its name and re-download it by tapping 
. That puts it back into the TV app’s library.
And to delete a video from the library, swipe leftward across its name in the Videos list; tap Delete to
confirm. (You can always re-download it, of course.)
Zoom/Unzoom
The iPhone’s screen is bright, vibrant, and stunningly sharp. Sometimes,
however, it’s not the right shape for videos.
Pre-HDTV shows are squarish, not rectangular. So when you watch older TV
shows on a rectangular screen, you get black letterbox columns on either side of
the picture.
Movies have the opposite problem. They’re usually too wide for the iPhone
screen. So when you watch movies, you may wind up with horizontal letterbox
bars above and below the picture.

Some people are fine with that. After all, HDTVs have the same problem. At
least when letterbox bars are onscreen, you know you’re seeing the complete
composition of the scene the director intended.
Other people can’t stand letterboxing. You’re already watching on a pretty small
screen; why sacrifice some of that precious area to black bars?
Fortunately, the iPhone gives you a choice. If you double-tap the video as it
plays, you zoom in, magnifying the image so it fills the entire screen. Or, if the
playback controls are visible, you can also tap 
 or 
. Of course, now
you’re not seeing the entire original composition. You lose the top and bottom of
old TV scenes, or the left and right edges of movie scenes.
Fortunately, if this effect chops off something important—some text, for
example—the original letterbox view is just another double-tap away. (No
zooming happens if the source material is already a perfect fit for the iPhone’s
screen shape.)
iPHONE X
Ordinarily, videos don’t extend into the area occupied by the Notch (“iPhone X: The Notch”). When you
double-tap to zoom a video, though, playback fills the entire screen—and part of it is now obscured by
the Notch. You get used to it.
TV Output
When you crave a screen bigger than a few inches, you can play your iPhone’s
videos on a regular TV. All you need is the right cable: the Apple Digital AV

Adapter. It carries both audio and video over a single HDMI cable.
It mirrors what’s on the phone: your Home screen, email, Safari, and everything
else. (Photos and presentations appear on your TV in pure, “video outputted”
form, without any controls or other window clutter.)
AirPlay
Your iPhone also offers wireless projection, thanks to a feature called AirPlay. It
transmits music or high-def video (with audio) from your iPhone to an Apple TV
(or another AirPlay-equipped receiver) across the room. It’s a fantastic way to
send slideshows, movies, presentations, games, FaceTime calls, and websites to
your TV for a larger audience to enjoy. Whatever is on the screen gets
transmitted.
AirPlay receivers include the Apple TV (version 2 or later) and speakers,
stereos, and receivers from Denon, Marantz, JBL, iHome, and so on. The phone
and recent AirPlay receivers no longer have to be on the same Wi-Fi network,
thanks to a feature called peer-to-peer AirPlay.
When you’re playing a video or some music, open the Control Center (“Control
Center”), and tap 
 to see a list of available AirPlay receivers. If you have an
Apple TV, tap its name. (If this is your first time, then enter the four-digit code
you see on the TV.)

That’s it! Everything on the iPhone screen now appears on the TV or sound
system. (The phone’s status bar displays the 
 icon, so you don’t wander off
and forget that every move you make is visible to the entire crowd in the living
room.)
How to Project or Record the iPhone’s Screen
If you’re a teacher, trainer, or product demonstrator, you might find it useful to
be able to project the iPhone’s activity on a much larger screen, or to record it as
a QuickTime movie to use in presentations or to post online. Here are three ways
to go about it:
The built-in way. You can now create video recordings of your
iPhone’s screen, using the Control Center. See “Control Center”. Once
captured, you can move the movie to a computer, and project it from
there.
The Mac way. If your Mac has OS X Yosemite or later, then connect

the phone to the Mac with its white USB charging cable. Open the Mac
app called QuickTime Player. Choose File → New Movie Recording.
From the little 
 menu next to the 
 button, choose iPhone.
Now you’re seeing the iPhone’s screen on your Mac—and you can
record it, project it, or screen-capture it for future generations!
The wireless way. A $13 program called Reflector (reflectorapp.com)
lets you view the iPhone’s live image on the Mac’s screen—and hear its
sound. (It actually turns the Mac into an AirPlay receiver.) There’s also
a Record command, so you can create a movie of whatever you’re
doing on the phone.

Chapter 10. 9 The Camera
Incredible though it sounds, the iPhone is the number-one most popular camera
model in the world. More photos are posted online from this phone than from
any other machine in existence.
And no wonder; you’ve probably never seen pictures and movies look this good
on a pocket gadget. With each new version of the iPhone, Apple improves its
camera—and on the iPhone 8 and X models, it’s unbelievably good.
And the videos look amazing. They’re auto-stabilized. The 6s and later models
shoot in 4K (four times the resolution of high-def video), and the iPhone X can
even play back high dynamic range videos (incredibly dark darks and bright
brights).
This chapter is all about the iPhone’s ability to display photos, take new ones
with its camera, and capture videos.
The Camera App
The little hole(s) on the back of the iPhone, in the upper-left corner, is its
camera.
On the latest iPhones, it’s pretty impressive, at least for a cellphone cam. The
iPhone 7 and later, for example, have four LED flashes, manual exposure
controls, optical stabilization, and phase-detection auto​focus (the same kind of
very fast refocusing found in professional SLR cameras). These phones can
manage 10 shots a second and do amazingly well in low light.
Now that you know what you’re in for, here’s how it works.
Firing Up the Camera
Photographic opportunities are frequently fleeting; by the time you fish the
phone from your pocket, wake it up, unlock it, find the Camera app, and wait for
it to load, the magic moment may be gone forever.

Fortunately, there’s a much quicker way to get to the Camera app: Once the
phone is awake, at the Lock screen, swipe to the left. (Drag the background—not
one of the notification banners.)
The Camera app opens directly. Over time, the wake-and-swipe ritual becomes
natural, fluid—and fast.
iPHONE X
On your Lock screen, a new camera button appears at lower right. As an alternative to swiping, you can
hard-press it to open the Camera app.
By the way: This shortcut bypasses the Lock screen. Any random stranger who
picks up your phone can, therefore, jump directly into picture-taking mode,
without your password, fingerprint, or Face ID.
That stranger can’t do much damage, though. She can take new photos, or delete
the new photos taken during her session—but the photos you’ve already taken
are off-limits, and the features that could damage your reputation (editing,
emailing, and posting photos) are unavailable. She would have to be able to open
the Photos app to get to those.
TIP
Of course, there’s a hands-free way to fire up the Camera app, too: Tell Siri, “Open camera.”
Camera Modes
The Camera app can capture six or seven kinds of photo and video, depending
on your phone model. By swiping your finger horizontally anywhere on the
screen, you switch among its modes. Here they are, from left to right:
Time-Lapse. This mode speeds up your video, yet somehow keeps it
stable. You can reduce a two-hour bike ride into 20 seconds of superfast
playback.
Slo-Mo. Wow, what gorgeousness! You get a video filmed at 120 or 240

frames a second—so it plays back at one-quarter or one-eighth speed,
incredibly smoothly. Fantastic for sports, tender smiles, and cannonballs
into the pool.
Video. Here’s your basic camcorder mode: 4K video on the 6s and later
models, high definition on earlier ones.
Photo. This is the primary mode for taking pictures.
Portrait. Available only on the iPhone 7 Plus, 8 Plus, and X models,
whose two camera lenses create a softly blurred background that looks
super-professional.
Square. Why would Apple go to the trouble of designating a whole
special camera mode to taking square, not rectangular, pictures?
Answer: Instagram, the crazy-popular app that features square pictures
and was sold to Facebook for nearly $1 billion.
Pano. Captures super-wide-angle panoramic photos.
TIP
If you tend to stick to one of these modes (like Square because you’re an Instagram junkie, for example),
you can make the iPhone’s camera stay in your favorite mode, rather than resetting itself to Photo mode
every time you reopen it. That switch is in Settings → Camera → Preserve Settings → Camera
Mode.
All of these modes are described in this chapter, but in a more logical order: still
photos first, and then video modes.
Photo Mode
Most people, most of the time, use the Camera app to take still photos. It’s a
pretty great experience. The iPhone’s screen is a huge digital-camera viewfinder.
You can turn it 90 degrees for a wider or taller shot.
Tap to Focus

All right: You’ve opened the Camera app, and the mode is set to Photo. See the
yellow box that appears briefly on the screen?
It’s telling you where the iPhone will focus, the area it examines to calculate the
overall brightness of the photo (exposure), and the portion that will determine
the overall white balance of the scene (the color cast).
If you’re taking a picture of people, the iPhone tries to lock in on a face—up to
10 faces, actually—and calculate the focus and exposure so that they look right.
But sometimes there are no faces—and dead center may not be the most
important part of the photo. The cool thing is that you can tap somewhere else in
the scene to move that yellow square—to recalculate the focus, exposure, and
white balance.
Here’s when you might want to do this tapping:
When the whole image looks too dark or too bright. If you tap a dark
part of the scene, the whole photo brightens up; if you tap a bright part,
the whole photo darkens a bit. You’re telling the camera, “Redo your
calculations so this part has the best exposure; I don’t care if the rest of
the picture gets brighter or darker.” At that point, you can override the
phone’s exposure decision.

When the scene has a color cast. If the photo looks, for example, a
little bluish or yellowish, tap a different spot—the one you care most
about. The iPhone recomputes its assessment of the white balance.
When you’re in macro mode. If the foreground object is very close to
the lens—4 to 8 inches away—the iPhone automatically goes into
macro (super-closeup) mode. In this mode, you can do something really
cool: You can defocus the background. The background goes soft,
slightly blurry, just like the professional photos you see in magazines.
No, not as well or as flexibly as in Portrait mode (“Portrait Mode”), but
it’s something. Just make sure you tap the foreground object.

Adjust Exposure
When you tap the screen to set the focus point, a new control appears: a little
yellow sun slider. That’s your exposure control. Slide it up to brighten the whole
photo or down to make things darker. Often, just a small adjustment is all it takes
to add a splash of light to a dim scene, or to dial the details back into a photo
that’s bright white.

To reset the slider to the iPhone’s original proposed setting, tap somewhere else,
or just aim the phone at something different for a second.
The point is that the Camera app lets you fuss with the focus point and the
exposure level independently.
Focus Lock/Exposure Lock
The iPhone likes to focus and calculate the exposure before it shoots. Cameras
are funny that way.
That tendency, however, can get in your way when you’re shooting something
that moves fast. Horse races, divers. Pets. Kids on merry-go-rounds, kids on
slides, kids eating breakfast. By the time the camera has calculated the focus and
exposure, which takes about a second, you’ve lost the shot.
Therefore, Apple provides a feature that’s common on professional cameras:
auto-exposure lock and autofocus lock. They let you set up the focus and
exposure in advance so that there’s zero lag when you finally snap the shot.
To use this feature, point the camera at something that has the same distance and
lighting as the subject-to-be. For example, focus at the base of the merry-go-
round, directly below where your daughter’s horse will be. Or point at the
bottom of the waterslide before your son is ready to go.
Now hold your finger down on that spot on the iPhone’s screen until you see the
yellow square blink twice. When you lift your finger, the phrase “AE/AF Lock”
tells you that you’ve now locked in exposure and auto-focus. (You can tap again
to unlock it if you change your mind.)
At this point, you can drag the yellow sun slider to adjust that locked exposure,
if you like.
Now you can snap photos, rapid-fire, without ever having to wait while your
iPhone rethinks focus and exposure.
The LED Flash
As on most phones, the iPhone’s “flash” is actually just a very bright LED light
on the back. You can make it turn on momentarily, providing a small boost of

illumination when the lights are low. (That’s a small boost—it won’t do anything
for subjects more than a few feet away.)
The iPhone 5s, 6, and 6s models, in fact, have two LED flashes: one white, one
amber. The 7 and later models take that a step further, with four flashes, together
producing 50 percent more light output.
The flashes go off simultaneously, with their strengths mixed so that their light
matches the color temperature of the scene. (You might notice that the phone
flashes once before it captures the shot. That’s the camera’s opportunity to
measure the light color of the scene.)
This multi-flash trick makes a huge difference in the quality of your flash
photos. (Especially in skin tones, which may be why Apple calls the feature
“True Tone.”)
No matter which model you have, the flash comes set to Auto. It turns on
automatically when, in the iPhone’s opinion, the scene is too dark. But if you tap
the 
 when it says Auto, two other options pop out: On (the flash will fire no
matter what the lighting conditions) and Off (the flash will not fire, no matter
what).

The Screen Flash
The iPhone 6s and later models offer a “flash” on the front, too, for taking
selfies. But it’s not an LED like the one on the back.
Instead, at the moment you take the shot, the screen lights up to illuminate your
face. Better yet: It adjusts the color of the screen’s “flash” to give your face the
best flesh tones, based on a check of the ambient light color.
Of course, the normal iPhone screen is too tiny to supply much light, even at full
brightness. So Apple developed a custom chip with a single purpose: to
overclock the screen. In selfie situations, the screen blasts at three times its usual
full brightness for a fraction of a second. It is crazy bright.
It works fantastically well. Here you can see the nuked-looking result from a
traditional back LED “flash” (left) side-by-side with the more nuanced screen
flash (right).
Zooming In
The iPhone has a zoom, which can help bring you “closer” to the subject—but

(unless it’s a 7 Plus, 8 Plus, or X) it’s a digital zoom. It doesn’t work like a real
camera’s optical zoom, which actually moves lenses to blow up the scene.
Instead, it basically just blows up the image, making everything bigger, and
slightly degrading the picture quality in the process.
To zoom in like this, spread two fingers on the screen. As you spread, a zoom
slider appears; you can also drag the handle in the slider, or tap + or −, for more
precise zooming.
Sometimes, getting closer to the action is worth the subtle image-quality
sacrifice.
True Optical Zoom
On the iPhone 7 Plus, 8 Plus, and X, there was enough room for Apple to install
two lenses, right next to each other. One is wide-angle; one is telephoto. With
one tap on the little 1x button (below, left), you can zoom in 2x (middle). This is
true optical zoom, not the cruddy digital zoom on most previous phones (which
degrades the quality).
2x zoom isn’t a huge amount, but it’s 2x more than any other thin smartphone
can handle. And it’s a triumphant first step toward eliminating a key drawback of
phone cameras: They can’t actually zoom.

You can also dial up any amount of zoom between 1x and 2x, again without
losing any quality. The iPhone performs that stunt by seamlessly combining the
zoom lens’s image (in the center of the photo) with a margin provided by the
wide lens. Just plant your finger on the 1x and drag it to the left. You’ll see the
circular scale of zooming appear (previous page, right).
You can even zoom while shooting a video, which is very cool.
Even on these phones, by the way, you can keep dragging your finger to the left,
past 2x—all the way up to a really blotchy 10x (or 6x for video). Beyond 2x, of
course, you’re invoking digital zoom. But sometimes it’s just what you need.
TIP

Once you’ve dragged your finger to open the zooming scale, you can tap the current magnification
button (“2.5x” or whatever) to reset the zooming to 1x.
The “Rule of Thirds” Grid
The Rule of Thirds, long held as gospel by painters and photographers, suggests
that you imagine a tic-tac-toe grid superimposed on your frame. As you frame
the shot, position the important parts of the photo on those lines or, better yet, at
their intersections. Supposedly, this setup creates a stronger composition than
putting everything in dead center.
Now, it’s really a Consideration of Thirds; plenty of photographs are, in fact,
strongest when the subject is centered.
But if you want to know where those magic intersections are, duck into Settings
→ Camera. Scroll down; turn on Grid. Now the phone displays the tic-tac-toe
grid, for your composition pleasure (it’s not part of the photo). You turn it off the
same way.
TIP
New in iOS 11, this grid also features a carpenter’s level, which is handy if you’re using your phone to

scan a document on the table. If you hold the phone parallel to the floor, a special + indicator floats
around the center of the screen. Once it’s aligned with the nonmoving +, you’ll know you’re holding it
perfectly flat.
High Dynamic Range (HDR)
In one regard, digital cameras are still pathetic: Compared with the human eye,
they have terrible dynamic range.
That’s the range from the brightest to darkest spots in a single scene. If you
photograph someone standing in front of a bright window, you’ll just get a solid-
black silhouette. The camera doesn’t have enough dynamic range to handle both
the bright background and the person standing in front of it.
You could brighten up the exposure so that the person’s face is lit—but then
you’d brighten the background to a nuclear-white rectangle.
A partial solution: HDR (high dynamic range) photography. That’s when the
camera takes three (or even more) photos—one each at dark, medium, and light
exposure settings. Its software combines the best parts of all three, bringing
details to both the shadows and the highlights.
Your iPhone has a built-in HDR feature. It’s not as amazing as what an HDR
guru can do in Photoshop—for one thing, you have zero control over how the
images are combined. But, often, an HDR photo does show more detail in both
bright and dark areas than a single shot would. In this shot (left), the sky is
blown out—pure white. On the right, the HDR feature brings back the streaks of
color.

Until iOS 11 came along, you had to choose when to use HDR, using the HDR
button in the Camera app. It produced three choices: On, Off, and Auto. (Auto
means “Use your judgment, iPhone. If you think this scene would benefit, then
please use HDR automatically.”)
Nowadays, Apple thinks its HDR smarts are good enough that you’ll always get
the best results with Auto. In other words, the Camera always uses HDR when it
thinks it’s necessary.
If you miss having manual control, though, all is not lost: Open Settings →
Camera and turn off Auto HDR.
TIP
Should the phone save a standard shot in addition to the HDR shot? That’s up to you. Also in Settings →
Camera, you’ll find the on/off switch for Keep Normal Photo.
When you inspect your photos later in the Photos app, you’ll know which ones
were taken with HDR turned on; when you tap the photo, you’ll see a tiny HDR

logo in the upper-left corner.
Taking the Shot
All right. You’ve opened the Camera app. You’ve set up the focus, exposure,
flash, grid, HDR, and zoom. If, in fact, your subject hasn’t already left the scene,
you can now take the picture. You can do that in any of three ways:
Tap the shutter button (
).
Press either of the physical volume buttons on the left edge of the
phone.
This option is fantastic. If you hold the phone with the volume buttons
at the top, then they’re right where the shutter would be on a real
camera. Pressing one feels more natural than, and doesn’t shake the
camera as much as, tapping the screen.
Press a volume button on your earbuds clicker—a great way to trigger
the shutter without jiggling the phone at all, and a more convenient way
to take selfies when the phone is at arm’s length.
Either way, if the phone isn’t muted, you hear the snap! sound of a picture
successfully taken.
You get to admire your work for only about half a second—and then the photo
slurps itself into the thumbnail icon at the lower-left corner of the screen. To
review the photo you just took, tap that thumbnail icon.
At this point, to look at other pictures you’ve taken, tap the screen and then tap
All Photos.
This is your opportunity to choose a photo (or many) for emailing, texting,
posting to Facebook, and so on; tap Select, tap the photos you want, and then tap
the Share button (
). See “The Share Sheet”.
TIP

For details on copying your iPhone photos and videos back to your Mac or PC, see “Syncing Photos and
Videos (iPhone → Computer)”.
Burst Mode
The iPhone snaps many photos—10 shots a second—if you keep your finger
pressed on the 
 button or a volume key. That’s a fantastic feature when
you’re trying to capture a moment that will be over in a flash: a golf swing, a pet
trick, a toddler sitting still.
As you press the 
 button or the volume key, a counter rapidly increments,
showing you how many shots you’ve fired off.
TIP
The front-facing camera can capture bursts, too.
Better yet, the phone helps you clean up the mess afterward—the hassle of
inspecting all 130 photos you shot, to find the ones worth keeping.

Tap the lower-left thumbnail. To help keep you sane, the iPhone depicts your
burst as a single photo, with the phrase “Burst (72 photos)” (or whatever) in the
corner of the screen. (Its thumbnail bears multiple frames, as though it were a
stack of slides.)
Here’s where it gets cool. If you tap Select, you see all frames of the burst in a
horizontally scrolling row. Underneath, you see an even smaller “filmstrip” of
them—and a few of them are marked with dots.
These are the ones the iPhone has decided are the keepers. It does that by
studying the clarity or blur of each shot, examining how much one frame is
different from those around it, and even skipping past shots where somebody’s
eyes are closed. Tap the marked thumbnails to see if you approve of the iPhone’s
selections.

Whether you do or not, you should work through the larger thumbnails in the
burst, tapping each one you want to keep. (The circle in the corner sprouts a blue
checkmark.)
When you tap Done, the phone asks: “Would you like to keep the other photos in
this burst?” Tap Keep Everything to preserve all the shots in the burst, so you
can return later to extract a different set of frames; tap Keep Only 2 Favorites
(or whatever number you selected) to discard the ones you skipped.
Self-Portraits (the Front Camera)
The iPhone has a second camera on the front, above the screen. It lets you use
the screen itself as a viewfinder to frame yourself, experiment with your
expression, and check your teeth.
To activate the front camera, tap the 
. Suddenly, you see yourself on the
screen. Frame the shot, and then tap 
 to take the photo.
Now, the front camera is not the back camera. It’s OK on the 6s and later models
(5 megapixels, plus that cool screen flash)—but older models offer lower
resolution, lower quality, and no flash.
But when your goal is a well-framed self-portrait that you’ll use on the screen—
email or the web, for example, where resolution isn’t very important—then
having the front-camera option is better than not having it.
The Self-Timer
A self-timer is essential when you want to be in the picture yourself; you can
prop the phone on something and then run into the scene. It’s also a great way to
prevent camera shake (which produces blurry photos), because your finger
doesn’t touch the phone. Just tap the 
, and then 3s (three-second
countdown) or 10s (10 seconds).
Now, when you tap 
 or press a volume key, you get a countdown: huge

digits on the screen if you’re using the front camera, a blinking flash if you‘re
using the rear camera. After the countdown, the phone takes the picture all by
itself. (If the sound is on, you’ll hear the shutter noise.)
Correction: In its regular, non-Live modes, the phone takes 10 pictures, in burst
mode. The phone assumes that if you’re using the self-timer, then you won’t be
able to see when everybody’s eyes are open. So it takes 10 shots in a row; you
can weed through them later to find the best one.
TIP
The self-timer is available for both the front and back cameras. In other words, it’s also handy for selfies.
Filters
The success of Instagram made it clear to Apple that the masses want filters,
special effects that tweak the color of your photo in artsy ways. You, too, can
make your pictures look old, washed-out, or oversaturated. In fact, in iOS 11,
you have more options at your disposal—nine in all.
To filter before you shoot. Tap 
 to view your options (below,
left). You see a scrolling strip of color and black-and-white filters. The
first one always represents “no filter.”

Tap a filter thumbnail to try it. Each turns your photo into a variation of
black-and-white or plays with its saturation (color intensity), as shown
on the previous page at right. When you’ve decided, take the shot as
usual. (To turn off the filters, tap 
 again.)
To filter after you shoot. You can also apply a filter to any photo
you’ve already taken (previous page, right); see “Snagging (or Sending)
a Graphic”.
TIP
And if you love one particular filter, you can keep it turned on all the time. Open Settings → Camera →
Preserve Settings and turn on Photo Filter.

Live Photos
A Live Photo is a weird hybrid entity: a still photo with a three-second video
attached (with sound). You can take one with the SE, 6s, and later iPhones, but
you can play it back on any iPhone or the Mac.
What you’re getting is 1.5 seconds before the moment you snapped the photo,
plus 1.5 seconds after. In the Camera app, the 
 icon lets you know whether
or not you’re about to capture the three-second video portion when you take a
still. (The factory setting, yellow, means On.)
TIP
When you take a Live Photo, remember to hold the phone still both before and after you tap the 
button! That’s when the phone is recording video.
A yellow “Live” label appears while the video is being captured. That’s a warning to keep the phone still
longer than you ordinarily would. (If you forget, and you drop your hand too soon, iOS is smart enough
to auto-delete the blurry garbage that results at the end of the shot.)
Now, your obvious concern might be file size. “The iPhone takes 12-megapixel
photos,” you might say. “Well, video has 30 frames a second! One Live Photo
must take up 90 times as much storage as a still image!”
Fortunately, no. The actual photo is a full 12-megapixel shot. But the other
frames of the Live Photo are video frames with much lower resolution. (And a
Live Photo stores only 15 frames a second, not 30.) Overall, an entire Live Photo
takes up about twice as much space as a still photo.
That’s still from 2 to 4 megabytes a shot, though, so be careful about leaving
Live Photos turned on for everyday shooting. To prevent it from turning itself
back on again every time you open the Camera app, open Settings → Camera
→ Preserve Settings and turn on Live Photo.

Reviewing Live Photos
As you flick through the photos in the Photos app, you’ll know when a photo is a
Live Photo; you’ll see it animate for a half-second.
To play the full three-second video with sound, hard-press or long-press it with
your finger. (See “3D Touch” for more on force-touching.)
Editing Live Photos
In iOS 11, you can edit Live Photos in all kinds of interesting ways—both as
photos and as little videos. See “Editing Live Photos”.
Sharing Live Photos
What happens if you try to send a Live Photo to some other device? Well, first of
all, you’ll know that you’re about to share a Live Photo. After you tap 
, a
special 
 icon reminds you.
You can tap to turn off that logo before you send, so that you’re sharing only the

still photo.
NOTE
You can’t email a Live Photo with its video intact. Even if you send it to another iPhone, only the still
image survives the journey.
On the other hand, you can post Live Photos to Facebook and Tumblr, where they “play” just fine. And a
free app called Motion Stills turns Live Photos into GIFs or movies that you can edit outside the Photos
app—and even import into iMovie for more advanced editing.
If you proceed with Live Photos turned on, what happens next depends on what
kind of device receives it.
If it’s running recent Apple software (iOS 9 or later, OS X El Capitan or later),
then the Live Photo plays on that gadget, too. On the Mac, in Photos, click Live
Photo to play it. On an iPad or older iPhone, hold your finger down on it to play
it back.
What if it’s a device or software program that doesn’t know about Live Photos—
if you send it as a text message, for example, or open it in Photoshop? Behind
the scenes, a Live Photo has two elements: a 12-megapixel JPEG still image and
a three-second QuickTime movie. In these situations, only the JPEG image
arrives at the other end.
Portrait Mode
The 7 Plus, 8 Plus, and X all have two camera lenses: one wider angle, the other
a 2x zoom. Clever software lets you blend the zoom to any degree between them
(“True Optical Zoom”).
But the two-lens setup has a second benefit: It lets the camera tell the foreground
subject apart from its background. And with that knowledge, the phone can
create a soft, blurry-background look. Shown below at left, the original shot; at
right, the blurred one:

Ordinarily, you see that look only in professional photos, or at least photos taken
with big black SLR cameras using high-aperture lenses (f/1.8, for example). But
now you can do it with your phone.
The blur in this case is not optically created, the way an SLR makes it. This is a
glorified Photoshop filter; it’s done with software. Still, the effect generally
looks fantastic—it’s been improved in iOS 11—even when the outline of the
subject is complex (like frizzy hair).
Once you’ve scrolled through the Camera app’s modes to Portrait, point the
camera at someone between 15 inches and 8 feet away. You see the background
blur, right in the preview image. Take the shot.
If a second person is standing within the range, you can tap the screen to make
that person the subject.
Now, Portrait mode doesn’t always work. It occasionally gets confused when the
light is dim, like in a bar or restaurant; when the subject is covered with a
repeating pattern; when the subject is reflective, like a shiny bottle; or when the
subject is not in that 15-inches-to-8-feet range. In those instances, you may get
bleed blur, where the blurriness leaks into the subject like some kind of hideous,
detail-eating virus.
As long as the light and the distance are right, though, the results are surprisingly
good. Already, the Flickrs and Facebooks of the world are teeming with great-

looking, blurry-background photos—taken by iPhones.
Studio Lighting
On the iPhone 8 Plus and the iPhone X, a further refinement to Portrait mode
awaits, something Apple calls studio lighting.
When you’re examining a Portrait shot, you can tap Edit to summon a set of five
lighting effects that scroll by as though on a disc. Natural Light is the original
shot. Studio Light brightens your subjects as though they were lit from the front
with pro studio lighting. Contour Light deepens shadows, as though there were
more light above the person. Stage Light, incredibly, cuts out the background,
making it black (previous page, right). And Studio Light Mono does the same,
but in black-and-white.
This little phone’s photos are getting scarily close to looking like professional

ones.
Square Mode
No longer do you have to download a special app (*cough* Instagram *cough*)
just to take perfectly square photos, the way all the cool kids do these days. Just
swipe across the screen until you enter Square mode.
Square mode is exactly like Photo mode, except that the photos are square
instead of rectangular (4 × 3 proportions).
Pano Mode
Here’s one of the best camera features of the iPhone: panoramic photographs.
The iPhone lets you capture a 240-degree, ultra-wide-angle photo (63
megapixels on the 6s and later!) by swinging the phone around you in an arc.
The phone creates the panorama in real time; you don’t have to line up the
sections yourself.
TIP
The Panorama mode smoothly adjusts the exposure of the scene as you pan. That fixes one of the most
frustrating aspects of other cameras, which use the same exposure all the way across their panoramas;
you soon discover that the sunlit part of the scene is blown out and the shadowy parts are way too dark.
Next time you’re standing at the edge of the Grand Canyon—or anything else
that requires a really wide or tall angle—keep this feature in mind.
In the Camera app, swipe leftward until you reach Pano mode.
TIP
The big white arrow tells you which way to move the phone. But you can reverse it (the direction) just
by tapping it (the arrow) before you begin.

Tap 
 (or press a volume key). Now, as instructed by the screen, swing the
phone around you—smoothly and slowly, please. You can pan either
horizontally or (to capture something very tall) vertically.
As you go, the screen gives you feedback. It may say “Slow down” if you’re
swinging too fast, or “Keep the arrow on the center line” if you’re not keeping
the phone level. Use the big white arrow itself like a level; you’ll leave the
center line if you’re moving your arm up and down.
The preview of your panorama builds itself as you move. That is, you’re seeing
the final product, in miniature, while you’re still taking it.
You’ll probably find that 240 degrees—the maximum—is a really wide angle.
You’ll feel twisted at the waist. But you can end the panorama at any stage, just

by tapping the 
 button.
At that point, you’ll find that the iPhone has taken a very wide, amazingly
seamless photograph at very high resolution (over 16,000 pixels wide). If a
panorama is too wide, you can crop it, as described later in this chapter.
If you snap a real winner, you can print it out at a local or online graphics shop,
frame it, and hang it above the entire length of your living-room couch.
Video Mode
The iPhone can record sharp, colorful video. It’s at the best flavor of high
definition (1080p), or even 4K (on the 6s and later models)—and it’s stabilized
to prevent hand jerkiness, just like a real camcorder. You can even shoot in
gorgeous, 120-frames-per-second slow-motion that turns even frenzied action
into graceful, liquidy visual ballet; the 6 and later models can manage 240
frames per second, for even more fluid, slowed-down videos.
Shooting video is almost exactly like taking stills. Open the Camera app. Swipe
until you’ve selected Video mode. You can hold the iPhone either vertically or
horizontally while you film. But if you hold it upright, most people on the
Internet will spit on you; tall-and-thin videos don’t fit the world’s horizontal
screens, including YouTube, laptops, and TVs.
TIP
When you switch from still-photo mode to video, you may notice that the video image on the screen
suddenly jumps bigger, as though it’s zooming in. And it’s true: The iPhone is oddly more “zoomed in”
in camcorder mode than in camera mode.

Tap to compute focus, exposure, and white balance, as described for still photos.
(You can even hold your finger down to trigger the exposure and focus locks, or
drag the tiny yellow sun to adjust exposure manually, as described earlier.)
Then tap Record (
)—or press a volume key—and you’re rolling! As you
film, a time counter ticks away at the top.
A Note About Resolution—and 4K Video
Video generally plays back at 30 frames a second. But the iPhone 6 and later can
do something only expensive cameras do: They can record and play back 60
frames a second. Video you shoot this way has a smoothness and clarity that’s
almost surreal. (It also takes up twice as much space on your phone.)
You choose the video quality you want in Settings → Camera → Record
Video. Experiment with 60 fps; see if you feel the result is worth the sacrifice of
storage space.
This is also, by the way, where you turn on 4K video recording on the 6s and
later models. 4K televisions, also called Ultra HD, are TV sets with four times as
many tiny pixels as an HDTV set, for four times the clarity.

4K shooting is not the factory setting, and that’s a good thing; 4K takes up a
huge amount of storage space (375 megabytes a minute).
Furthermore, you probably don’t have anywhere to play back 4K video you’ve
captured with this phone! Paradoxically, the iPhone itself (even the 2436 × 1125
pixel iPhone X) doesn’t have enough pixels to play 4K video. To see the
difference, you need a big 4K television or 4K computer screen, and you have to
sit very close.
(You can post 4K video to YouTube—but even then, few people have computer
screens capable of playing it back in 4K.)
Things to Do While You’re Rolling
Once you’ve begun capturing video, don’t think your work is done. You can
have all kinds of fun during the recording. For example:
Change focus. You can change focus while you’re filming, which is
great when you’re panning from a nearby object to a distant one.
Refocusing is automatic, just as it is on camcorders. But you can also
force a refocusing (for example, when the phone is focusing on the
wrong thing) by tapping to specify a new focus point. The iPhone
recalculates the focus, white balance, and exposure at that point, just as
it does when you’re taking stills.
Change exposure. While you’re recording, you can drag your finger up
or down to make the scene brighter or dimmer.
Zoom in. You can zoom in while you’re rolling, up to 3x actual size.
Just spread two fingers on the screen, like you would to magnify a
photo. Pinch two fingers to zoom out again. (On the iPhone 7 Plus, 8
Plus, or X, you can either do that two-finger spreading or drag the little
1x button to the left, as described in “The “Rule of Thirds” Grid”.)
TIP
Once you start to zoom, a zoom slider appears on the screen. It’s much easier to zoom smoothly by
dragging its handle than it is to use a two-finger pinch or spread.
So here’s a smart idea: Zoom in slightly before you start recording, so that the zoom slider appears on the

screen. Then, during the shot, drag its handle to zoom in, as smoothly as you like.
Take a still photo. Yes, you can even snap still photos while you’re
capturing video. Just tap the 
 that appears while you’re filming.
Awesome.
NOTE
The pictures you take while filming don’t have the same dimensions as the ones you take in Photo mode.
These have 16:9 proportions, just like the video; they’re not as tall as still photos.
When you’re finished recording, tap Stop (
). The iPhone stops recording
and plays a chime; it’s ready to record another shot.
There’s no easier-to-use camcorder on earth. And what a lot of capacity! Each
individual shot can be an hour long—and on the 256-gigabyte iPhone, you can
record 136 hours of video. Just long enough to capture the entire elementary-
school talent show.
The Front Camera
You can film yourself, too. Just tap 
 before you film to make the iPhone use
its front-mounted camera, so that the screen shows you. The resolution isn’t as
high (the video isn’t as sharp) as what the back camera captures, but it’s still
high definition.
The Video Light
You know the LED “flash” on the back of the phone? You can use it as a video
light, too, supplying some illumination to subjects within about 5 feet or so. Just
tap the 
 icon and then tap On before you start capturing. (Alas, you have to
turn the light on before you start rolling. You can’t turn it on or off in the middle

of a shot.)
Slo-Mo Mode
The Camera app’s Slo-Mo mode is exactly like its video mode—but, behind the
scenes, the phone is recording 120 or 240 frames a second instead of the usual
30.
NOTE
The iPhone 5s records at 120 frames a second. The iPhone 6 and later, however, can record at either 120
or 240 frames per second. You make your choice in Settings → Camera → Record Slo-mo.
When you open the captured movie to watch it, you’ll see something startling
and beautiful: The clip plays at full speed for one second, slows down to one-
quarter or one-eighth speed, and, for the final second, accelerates back to full
speed. It’s a great way to study sports action, cannonball dives, and shades of
expression in a growing smile.
What you may not realize, however, is that you can adjust where the slow-
motion effect begins and ends in the clip. When you open the video for playback
and then hit Edit, a strange kind of ruler track appears just below it. Drag the
vertical handles inward or outward to change the spot where the slow motion
begins and ends.
At the very bottom of the screen is a second, taller strip; you use this one to trim
the ends off the video (see below) or to scroll quickly through the clip to see
where you are.

Time-Lapse Mode
Whereas Slo-Mo mode is great for slowing down fast scenes, the Time-Lapse
mode speeds up slow scenes: flowers growing, ice melting, candles burning, and
so on.
Actually, this mode might better be called hyperlapse. Time-lapse implies that
the camera is locked down while recording. But in a hyperlapse video, the
camera is moving. This mode works great for bike rides, hikes, drives, plane
trips, and so on; it compresses even multihour events down to under a minute of
playback, with impressive smoothness.
So how much does the Time-Lapse mode speed up the playback? Answer: It
varies. The longer you shoot, the greater the speed-up. The app accelerates every
recording enough to play back in 20 to 40 seconds, whether you film for 1
minute, 100 minutes, or 1,000 minutes.
If you film for less than 20 seconds, your video plays back at 15 times original
speed. But you can film for much, much longer, like 30 hours or more. Time-
Lapse mode speeds up the result from 15x, 240x, 960x—whatever it takes to
produce a 20- to 40-second playback.

Trimming a Video
To review whatever video you’ve just shot, tap the 
 thumbnail icon at the
lower corner of the screen. You’ve just opened up the video-playback screen.
Tap 
 to play the video.
At this point, if you tap the Edit button, you can trim off the dead air at the
beginning and the end.
To do that, drag the  and  markers (currently at the outer ends of the little
filmstrip) inward so that they turn yellow, as shown on the previous page. Adjust
them, hitting 
 to see the effect as you go.
TIP
You can drag the playback cursor—the vertical white bar that indicates your position in the clip—with
your finger. That’s the closest thing you get to Rewind and Fast-Forward buttons. (In fact, you may have
to move it out of the way before you can move the end handles for trimming.)
When you’ve positioned the handles so that they isolate the good stuff, tap
Done. Finally, tap either Trim Original (meaning “Shorten the original clip
permanently”) or Save as New Clip (meaning “Leave the original untouched,
and spin out the shortened version as a separate video, just in case”).
NOTE
If you use iCloud Photo Library (“iCloud Photo Library”), you don’t get the Trim Original option.
iMovie for iPhone
Of course, there’s more to editing than just snipping dead air from the ends of a
clip. That’s why Apple made iMovie for iPhone. It’s free on a new iPhone or $5
if it didn’t come with your phone.

Editing Photos
Yes, kids, it’s true: You can crop and edit your pictures right on the phone. The
tools Apple gives you in the Photos app aren’t exactly Photoshop, but they come
surprisingly close.
TIP
Whenever you’re in editing mode, touch the screen for a momentary flashback to the original image.
Great for A/B comparisons.
To edit a photo, tap its thumbnail (anywhere in the Photos app) to open it. Tap
Edit.
Now you get a set of unlabeled buttons. Between Cancel and Done, you’ll find
the Crop/Straighten, Filters, and Adjust Color buttons; on the opposite side of
the photo, there’s Auto-Enhance and, on Live Photos (“Live Photos”), on/off
icons for sound and Live. Read on.
NOTE
All the changes described on these pages are nondestructive. That is, the Photos app never forgets the
original photo. At any time, hours or years later, you can return to the Edit screen and undo the changes
you’ve made (tap Revert). You can recrop the photo back to its original size, for example, or turn off the
Auto-Enhance button. In other words, your changes are never really permanent.
Auto-Enhance (
)
When you tap this magical button, the iPhone analyzes the relative brightness of
all the pixels in your photo and attempts to “balance” it. After a moment, the app
adjusts the brightness and contrast and intensifies dull or grayish-looking areas.
Usually, the pictures look richer and more vivid as a result.
You may find that Auto-Enhance has little effect on some photos, only
minimally improves others, and totally rescues a few. In any case, if you don’t
care for the result, you can tap the 
 button again to turn Auto-Enhance off.

Adjust Color (
)
The people have spoken: They want control over color, white balance, tint, and
so on.
So when you tap 
, you’re offered three adjustment categories: Light, Color,
and B&W.
When you tap one of these categories, you see a “filmstrip” below or beside your
photo. You can drag your finger across it, watching the effect on your photo.
As it turns out, each of these sliders controls a handful of variables, all of which
it’s changing simultaneously. For example, adjusting the Light slider affects the
exposure, contrast, brights, and darks all at once (below, left).
Intriguingly, you can tap 
 or 
 to see how the master slider has affected
these qualities—or even adjust these sub-sliders yourself (above, right). For

example:
Light. When you drag your finger along the Light filmstrip, you’re
adjusting the exposure and contrast of the photo. Often, a slight tweak is
all it takes to bring a lot more detail out of the shot.
TIP
Actually, when you’re making any of the adjustments described on these pages, you don’t have to drag
across the filmstrip. You can drag your finger left or right across the photo itself—a bigger target.
For much finer control, tap the 
 or 
 icon. You open your “drawer” of
additional controls: Brilliance (a slider that, Apple says, “brightens dark areas
and pulls in highlights to reveal hidden detail”), Exposure (adjusts the
brightness of all pixels), Highlights (pulls lost details out of very bright areas),
Shadows (pulls lost details out of very dark areas), Brightness (like Exposure,
but doesn’t brighten parts that are already bright), Contrast (heightens the
difference between the brightest and darkest areas), and Black Point (determines
what is “black,” shifting the entire dark/light range upward or downward). Once
again, you drag your finger along the “film strip” to watch the effect on your
photo.
Color. The Color filmstrip adjusts the tint and intensity of the photos’
colors. Here again, just a nudge can sometimes liven a dull photo or
make blue skies “pop” a little more.
Tap 
 or 
 to see the three sliders that make up the master
Color control. They are Saturation (intensity of the colors—from vivid
fake-looking Disney all the way down to black and white), Contrast
(deepens the most saturated colors), and Cast (adjusts the color tint of
the photo, making it warmer or cooler overall).

B&W stands for black and white. The instant you touch this filmstrip,
your photo goes monochrome, like a black-and-white photo. It’s hard to
describe exactly what happens when you drag your finger—you just
have to try it—except to note that the app plays with the relative tones
of blacks, grays, and whites, creating variations on the black-and-white
theme.
Tap 
 or 
 to see the component sliders: Intensity (the strength
of the lightening/darkening effect), Neutrals (brightness of the middle
grays), Tone (intensifies the brightest and darkest areas), and Grain
(simulates the “grain”—the texture—of film prints; the farther you
move the slider, the higher the “speed of the film” and the more visible
the grain).
TIP
You can perform all these adjustments with the phone held either horizontally or vertically. The filmstrip
jumps to the side or the bottom of the screen accordingly.

At any point, you can back out of what you’re doing by tapping 
. For
example, if you’re fiddling with one of the Color sub-sliders (Contrast or
Saturation, for example), tapping 
 returns you to the view of the three
master sliders (Light, Color, and B&W).
And, of course, you can tap Cancel to abandon your editing altogether, or Done
to save the edited photo and close the editing controls.
It might seem a little silly trying to perform these Photoshop-like tweaks on a
tiny phone screen, but the power is here if you need it.
Filters (
)
Filters are effects that make a photo black and white, oversaturated, or washed
out. As noted in “Live Photos”, you can apply a filter either as you take the
picture or afterward.
Tap 
 to view a scrolling row of filter buttons. Tap each to see what it looks
like on your photo; finish up by tapping Done or Cancel.
(Don’t these filters more or less duplicate the effects of the Light, Color, and
B&W sliders described already? Yes. But filters produce canned, one-tap,
instant changes that don’t require as much tweaking.)
TIP
It may look like you’ve just filtered that picture forever. But in fact you can return to it later and apply
the Original filter to it, thereby restoring it to its original, pristine condition.
Remove Red Eye (
)
Red eye—devilish, glowing-red pupils in your subjects’ eyes—has ruined many
an otherwise great photo.
Red eye is caused when the bright light of your flash illuminates the blood-red

retinal tissue at the back of the eyes. That’s why red-eye problems are worse
when you shoot pictures in a dim room: Your subjects’ pupils are dilated,
allowing even more light from your flash to reach their retinas.
When you tap this button, a message says, “Tap each red-eye.” Do what it says:
Tap with your finger inside each eye that has the problem. A little white ring
appears around the pupil (unless you missed, in which case the ring shudders
side to side, as though saying, “Nope”)—and the app turns the red in each eye to
black.
TIP
It helps to zoom in first. Use the usual two-finger spread technique.
Crop/Straighten (
)
This button opens a crazy editing screen where you can adjust the size, shape,
and angle of the photo.
When you tap 
, iOS analyzes whatever horizontal lines it finds in the photo
—the horizon, for example—and uses it as a guide to straightening the photo
automatically.
It’s very smart. See how the photo has been tilted slightly—and enlarged slightly
to fill the frame without leaving triangular gaps?

You can reject the iPhone’s proposal (tap Reset). Or you can tilt the photo more
or less (drag your finger across the round scale).
If you want to rotate the photo more than 90 degrees—for example, if the
camera took it sideways—tap 
 as many times as necessary to turn the
picture upright.
The other work you can do in this mode is cropping.
Cropping means shaving off unnecessary portions of a photo. Usually, you crop
a photo to improve its composition—adjusting where the subject appears within
the frame of the picture. Often, a photo has more impact if it’s cropped tightly
around the subject, especially in portraits. Or maybe you want to crop out wasted
space, like big expanses of background sky. If necessary, you can even chop a
former romantic interest out of an otherwise perfect family portrait.
Cropping is also very useful if your photo needs to have a certain aspect ratio
(length-to-width proportion), like 8 × 10 or 5 × 7.
To crop a photo you’ve opened, tap the 
. A white border appears around
your photo. Drag inward on any edge or corner. The part of the photo that the

iPhone will eventually trim away is darkened. You can recenter the photo within
your cropping frame by dragging any part of the photo, inside or outside the
white box. Adjust the frame and drag the photo until everything looks just right.
Ordinarily, you can create a cropping rectangle of any size and proportions,
freehand. But if you tap 
, you get a choice of eight canned proportions:
Square, 3 × 2, 3 × 5, 4 × 3, and so on. They make the app limit the cropping
frame to preset proportions.
This aspect-ratio feature is important if you plan to order prints of your photos.
Prints come only in standard photo sizes: 4 × 6, 5 × 7, 8 × 10, and so on. But
unless you crop them, the iPhone’s photos are all 3 × 2, which doesn’t divide
evenly into most standard print sizes. Limiting your cropping to one of these
standard sizes guarantees that your cropped photos will fit perfectly into Kodak
prints. (If you don’t constrain your cropping this way, then Kodak—not you—
will decide how to crop them to fit.)
TIP
The Original option here maintains the proportions of the original photo even as you make the grid
smaller.

When you tap one of the preset sizes, the cropping frame stays in those
proportions as you drag its edges. It’s locked in those proportions unless you tap 
 and choose a different setting.
Marking Up Your Photos
Here’s a feature that nobody saw coming: You can draw or type on your photos,
right from within the Photos app.
Once you’re in editing mode, tap 
 and then Markup. You get a rather
confusing assemblage of tools that fall into two categories.
Draw. You get a pen (opaque lines, variable thickness as you press
harder), a highlighter (translucent fat lines, variable opacity as you press
harder), a pencil (very thin line), an eraser (tap a line to erase the whole
thing), a lasso (select a line you’ve drawn to move it), and a dot for
choosing the drawing color. (Those variable thicknesses and darknesses
work only if you have an iPhone 6s or later.) You can use the Undo
button (
) as often as you mess up.
Text or objects. See the 
 button? It produces a palette of options
for adding shapes (square, circle, speech bubble, arrow, magnified
“loupe”) or text (typed text, or a signature) to your photo.
Here’s how to operate these tools.
Text: A text box appears on the photo, saying “Text.” Drag the tiny blue
handles to adjust the shape of the box; drag inside to move the box.
Double-tap it (or tap it and then tap Edit) to open the keyboard; type
what you want it to say. Tap the photo to put away the keyboard. Tap
the text box and then tap 
 to choose font, size, and paragraph
justification options.
Signature: Tap to insert a handwritten signature. (And where do these
stored signatures come from? You’ve tapped Add or Remove
Signature and then +, and then used your finger to write your name.)

Magnifier: Tap to slap a magnified circular area onto your photo—great
for calling out a detail. Drag the blue handle to adjust the circle’s size;
drag the green one to adjust the degree of magnification inside it. And
drag inside the circle to move it.
NOTE
You’re not enlarging this for your own editing purposes; this magnified area will stay
magnified when you send the photo. It’s for calling your correspondent’s attention to some
detail.
Square, circle, speech bubble, arrow: Tap one to place it on your
photo. Then tap 
 to see some choices for line thickness and filled-
inness. Drag blue dots to change size, or green ones to change shape—
for example, the angle and direction of the speech balloon’s “where it’s
coming from” angle, or the curvature of the arrow.
Editing Live Photos
Live Photos, as you now know, are a strange hybrid of videos and stills. In iOS
11, Apple has decided to turn that weirdness into a virtue—by letting you create
entertaining videos from your Live Photos.

When you tap Edit on a Live Photo, you get a few unusual new controls. There’s
a 
 button, which lets you turn off the sound; a 
 button, which
eliminates the three-second video and creates a plain old photo; and a sort of
film strip along the bottom. You can use it for two things:
Drag the  and  markers (currently at the outer ends of the little
filmstrip) inward, exactly as shown in “Time-Lapse Mode”. You’re
trimming the Live Photo so that it’s shorter.
Tap a different “frame” of the filmstrip, and then tap Make Key Photo,
to designate that frame as the new face of this Live Photo—the one that
shows up as its thumbnail in, for example, the Photos app.
TIP
If you change the key photo and then export the Live Photo, remember that you’re sending out what used
to be a frame of video. It may be blurrier than the actual photo, and it has lower resolution—but not
much lower. Sometimes it may be just what you need.
But in iOS 11, there’s even more fun to be had with Live Photos—and not in the
Edit mode, either. (Hit Done or Cancel to get out of there if necessary.)
On the Live Photo’s normal viewing page, the one with the > and Edit buttons,
you can swipe upward to reveal a choice of four special video-playback effects,
which used to require separate apps to achieve:
Live. That’s the normal Live Photo as you know it.
Loop makes the three-second video play over and over again, with a
crossfade to conceal the seam. Great for funny expressions, cat yawns,
pratfalls.
Bounce plays start → finish → start → finish, and so on, playing
forward and then backward. Use it on a Live Photo of a kid doing a
cannonball into a pool. Pure comedy.

Long Exposure simulates the effect of leaving the camera on a tripod
with the lens open for a long time. In “real” photography, the result
might produce the milky, softly blurred surface of a babbling brook, or
cool-looking red streaks of taillights.
Realistically, this effect works only on scenes where the background
doesn’t move, but the subject does. Classic examples include moving
water, moving traffic, and moving people—in crowds or on teams.
Unlike the other effects, the result of this one is a still image; the effect
more or less superimposes all the frames in the Live Photo. (The video
element is still there, looking like a standard Live Photo—hard-press
the screen to see it.) But the goal here is to export the finished still
image. Every now and then, the result is surprising and delightful.

Handing Off to Other Editing Apps
OK, Apple: Who are you, and what have you done with the company that used
to believe in closed systems?
Maybe you’re a fan of Camera+, Fragment, or some other photo app. They now
work so well with the Photos app that it can seem as though their tools are built
right into it.
Here’s the drill: Open a photo in Photos. Tap Edit. Tap 
. Now you see the
icons of all apps on your phone that have been updated to work with this feature,
which Apple calls Extensibility.
The photo opens immediately in the app you choose, with all of its editing
features available. You can freely bounce back and forth between Apple’s editor
and its competitors’.
Saving Your Changes

Once you’ve rotated, cropped, auto-enhanced, or de-red-eyed a photo, tap the
Done button. You’ve just made your changes permanent.
Or, rather, you’ve made them temporarily permanent. Remember: You can
return to an edited photo at any time to undo the changes you’ve made (tap
Revert). When you send the photo off the phone (by email, to your computer,
whatever), that copy freezes the edits in place—but the copy on your phone is
still revertable.
TIP
If you sync your photos to Photos on the Mac (over a cable or via iCloud Photo Library), they show up
in their edited condition. Yet, amazingly, you can undo or modify the edits there! The original photo is
still lurking behind the edited version. You can use your Mac’s Crop tool to adjust the crop, for example.
Or you can use Photos’ Revert to Original command to throw away all the edits you made to the photo
while it was on the iPhone.
(If you transfer the photos using email, AirDrop, or Messages, however, you get only the finished JPEG
image; you can’t rewind the changes.)
Managing and Sharing Photos
Once you’ve got some photos, the Photos app has another job: presenting them,
sharing them, and slideshowing them for all your fans.
TIP
The Photos app is fully rotational. That is, you can turn the phone 90 degrees. Whether you’re viewing a
list, a screen full of thumbnails, or an individual photo, the image on the screen rotates, too, for easier
admiring. (Unless, of course, you’ve turned on the rotation lock, as described in ???.)
At the bottom of the Photos app screen, four tabs lie in wait: Photos, Memories,
Shared, and Albums. The next few sections explain what they do.
The Photos Tab
iOS groups your photos intelligently into sets that are easy to navigate. Here they
are, from smallest to largest:

Moments. A Moment is a group of photos you took in one place at one
time—for example, all the shots at the picnic by the lake. The phone
even uses its GPS to give each Moment a name: “San Francisco,
California (Union Square),” for example.
TIP
If you tap a Moment’s name, you get a details page that includes a ready-to-play Memory (“The
Memories Tab”) and a map, showing exactly where these pictures were taken. Slick!
Collections. Put a bunch of Moments together, and what do you get? A
Collection. Here again, the phone tries to study the times and places of
your photo taking—but this time it puts them into groups that might
span a few days and several locations. You might discover that your
entire spring vacation is a single Collection, for example.
Years. If you “zoom out” of your photos far enough, you wind up
viewing them by year: 2016, 2017, 2018, and so on.
To “zoom in” from larger groupings to smaller ones (Years → Collections →
Moments), just tap each pile of thumbnails. If you tap a thumbnail on the
Moments screen, you open that photo for viewing.
TIP
When you first open a photo, it appears on a white background. Tap the photo to change the background
to black (and hide the controls), which gives the photo the attention it deserves.

To “zoom out” again, tap the grouping name at top left (Years, for example).

TIP
If you’ve opened a single photo for examination, you can retreat to the Moment it came from by
pinching with two fingers.
The last technique worth knowing is the Finger Browse. Whenever you’re
looking at a grid of tiny thumbnail images (in a Year or a Collection, say), hold
your finger down within the batch. A larger thumbnail sprouts from your finger.
At this point, you can slide your finger around within the mosaic to find a
particular photo, or a batch of them.
The Memories Tab
Memories are automatically selected groups of pix and videos from certain time
periods or trips, which, with a tap, become gorgeous, musical slideshows. Most
people are pleasantly surprised at how coherent and well-created these are, even
though they’re totally automatic. Photos, short pieces of your videos, and even
scrolling panoramas are all first-class citizens in these slideshows.
Right off the bat, you see a few of Photos’ suggestions, represented as clearly
labeled billboards (“Cape Cod Summer,” “Best of Last Week”…).

Tap to open a Memory; at this point, you can scroll down to see more about
what’s in this Memory. You’ll see the photos that will be in it, as well as who’s
in it (People), and where the photos came from (Places).
At the very bottom, you’ll see the option to Delete Memory or Add to Favorite
Memories; that command adds this slideshow to a new folder on the Albums tab
called Favorite Memories, for quick access later.
Anyway, the real fun begins when you tap 
 to start an instant slideshow.
They’re usually fantastic.
When you come back to your senses, note that you can tap the screen for some
quick editing options. Drag horizontally to change the animation/music style
(Dreamy, Sentimental, Gentle, Chill, and so on) or the slideshow length
(Short, Medium, Long).

For more detailed editing, tap Edit. Now you can edit the Memory’s Title (name
and its typographical style), Music (either the app’s selections or anything from
your music library), Duration (dial up any length you want), or Photos &
Videos (tap + to add one, 
 to delete one).
TIP
When you tap +, the resulting Select Photos screen shows you thumbnails of all candidate shots;
checkmarks indicate the ones that Photos has chosen to include. Not only does this screen make it quick
and easy to adjust which photos and videos appear in the Memory, but it also shows you how clever and
selective Photos has been in the first place.
Once you’ve got a really killer Memory on your hands, by the way, don’t miss

the option to send it to other people as a standalone video. While a Memory
slideshow is playing, tap it to reveal the 
 button at the top.
The Albums Tab
(The third tab of your Photos app may actually be the Shared tab, but we’re
skipping over it for now; see “iCloud Photo Sharing”.)
The Albums tab is a scrolling list of specialized photo “folders” like these:
All Photos. Yup—everything on your phone, including videos (This
may also be labeled “Camera Roll”; see “iCloud Photo Library”.)
Favorites. This folder gives you quick access to your favorite photos.
And how does the phone know which photos are your favorites? Easy:
You’ve told it. You’ve tapped the 
 icon under a photo, anywhere
within the Photos app. (Favorites must be photos you’ve taken with the
phone, not transferred from your computer.)
Favorite Memories appears only if you have, in fact, designated a
Memory slideshow as a favorite (“The Memories Tab”).
People. Impressively enough, Photos can auto-group the people in your
photos, using facial recognition. Once you’ve given the software a
running start, it can find those people in the rest of your photo collection
automatically. That’s handy every now and then—when you need a
photo of your kid for a school project, for example.
To see it at work, tap People. Here are thumbnails representing the faces
Photos has found and grouped, complete with a tally of how many
photos Photos has found. At the top, you see people you’ve designated
as favorites.
Tap a thumbnail to see all the photos of this person. Scroll wayyyyy
down to Confirm Additional Photos (Photos shows you other photos
one at a time and asks, “Is this the same person?”); Favorite (or
Unfavorite) This Person, and Add to Memories (creates a new
Memory slideshow just of this person).

TIP
This feature doesn’t work until the iPhone has analyzed your photos, which can take at least
a day and requires that the phone be plugged in. Apple proudly points out that all this
analysis is done on your phone. (That’s in contrast to a service like Google Photos, which
offers similar features but requires Google to access your photo library.)
If you don’t see a thumbnail for a certain someone, scroll down and tap
+ to start the process of rounding up her pictures.
Places. Every photo you take with a smartphone (and a few very fancy
cameras) gets geotagged—stamped, behind the scenes, with its
geographic coordinates. When you tap Places in the Albums list, you
see a map, dotted with clusters of photos you took in each place. Tap
one to see the photos you took there.
Videos, Selfies, Live Photos, Portrait, Long Exposure, Panoramas,

Time-Lapse, Slo-Mo, Bursts, Screenshots, Animated. As a
convenience to you, these categories give you one-tap shopping for
everything you’ve captured using the Camera app’s specialized picture
and video modes. (Portrait appears only on the iPhone 7 Plus, 8 Plus,
and X; it contains shots you’ve taken using Portrait mode [“Portrait
Mode”]. Long Exposure and Animated are Live Photos to which
you’ve applied the effects described in ???.)
Super handy when you’re trying to show someone your latest time-lapse
masterpiece, for example; now you know where to look for it.
Recently Deleted. Even after you think you’ve deleted a photo or video
from your phone, you have 30 days to change your mind. Deleted
pictures and videos sit in this folder, quietly counting down to their own
doomsdays.
If you wind up changing your mind, you can open Recently Deleted,
tap the photo you’d condemned, and tap Recover. It pops back into its
rightful place in the Photos app, saved from termination.
On the other hand, you can also zap a photo into oblivion immediately.
Tap to open one of your recently deleted photos, tap Delete, and then
confirm with Delete Photo. If you tap Select, you can also hit Delete
All or Recover All.
My Albums. Here you get a list of albums you’ve created (or copied to
the phone from your Mac or PC).
As you’d guess, you can drill down from any of these groupings to a screen full
of thumbnails, and from there to an individual photo.
Creating and Deleting Albums
You can manually add selected photos into new albums—a great way to organize
a huge batch you’ve shot on vacation, for example.
To do that, open any one of your existing albums (including All Photos or
Camera Roll); tap Select; and then tap (or drag through) all the photos you want
to move to a new or different album. Tap Add To at the bottom of the screen.

You’re now offered an Add to Album screen. Tap the album into which you
want to move these pictures. (If albums are dimmed, that’s because they’ve been
synced from your Mac or PC. You’re not allowed to mess with those. The
canned specialty-photo folders, like Panorama and Time-Lapse, are also
dimmed, because only iOS can put things into those folders, and it does that
automatically.)
This list also includes a New Album button; you’re asked to type the name you
want for the new album and then tap Save.
NOTE
These buttons don’t actually move photos out of their original albums. You’re creating aliases of them—
pointers to the original photos. If you edit a photo from one album, it’s edited in all of them.
To delete an album you created on the phone, start on the main Albums tab. Tap
Edit, and then tap the 
 button next to the album you want to delete.
TIP
Once you’ve scrolled down the Albums screen a long way, you may find it a relief that tapping the very
top of the iPhone screen (where the time and gauges appear) returns you to the top of the page.
Hide a Photo
Here’s a quirky little feature: It’s possible to hide a photo from the Photos tab
(Moments, Collections, and Years), so that it appears only in a special Hidden
folder.
Apple noticed that lots of people use their phones to take screenshots of apps,
pictures of whiteboards or diagrams, shots of package labels or parking-garage
signs, and so on. These images aren’t scenic or lovely; they’re not memories;
you don’t want a slideshow of them; they don’t look good (or serve much
purpose) when they appear nestled in with your shots-to-remember in Moments,
Collections, and Years.

Open the photo and then tap the 
 button; in the Sharing options that appear,
tap Hide. To confirm, tap Hide Photo.
Whatever photos you hide go to a new folder on the Albums tab—called, of
course, Hidden, so that you can find them easily. From here, you can unhide a
shot the same way: Hit 
 and then Unhide.
Flicking, Rotating, Zooming, Panning
Once a photo is open at full size, you have your chance to perform the four most
famous and dazzling tricks of the iPhone: flicking, rotating, zooming, and
panning a photo.
Flicking horizontally is how you advance to the next/previous picture
or movie in the batch.
Zooming a photo means magnifying it, and it’s a blast. One quick way
is to double-tap the photo; the iPhone zooms in on the portion you
tapped, doubling its size.
Another technique is to use the two-finger spread, which gives you
more control over what gets magnified and by how much.
NOTE
If you’ve brought in photos from your computer, the iPhone doesn’t store the giganto 20-
megapixel originals you took with your fancy camera. It keeps only scaled-down, iPhone-
sized versions—so you can’t zoom in more than about three times the original size.
Once you’ve spread a photo bigger, you can then pinch to scale it down
again. Or just double-tap to restore the original size. (You don’t have to
restore a photo to original size before advancing to the next one,
though; if you flick enough times, you’ll pull the next photo onto the
screen.)
Panning is moving a photo around on the screen after you’ve zoomed

in. Just drag your finger to do that; no scroll bars are necessary.
Rotating is what you do when a horizontal photo or video appears on
the upright iPhone, which makes the photo look small and fills most of
the screen with blackness.
Just turn the iPhone 90 degrees in either direction. Like magic, the
photo rotates and enlarges to fill its new, wider canvas. No taps
required. (This doesn’t work when the phone is flat on its back—on a
table, for example. It has to be more or less upright. It also doesn’t work
when portrait orientation is locked.)
This trick also works the other way: You can make a vertical photo fit
better by turning the iPhone upright.
When the iPhone is rotated, all the controls and gestures reorient
themselves. For example, flicking right to left still brings on the next
photo, even if you’re now holding the iPhone the wide way.
TIP
Every now and then, the phone’s accelerometer gets confused about what is “upright” as you take a shot.
You wind up with a photo that always rotates the wrong way, even as you turn the phone in your hand. In
those situations, you’ll have to tap Edit and rotate the photo upright manually, as described in
“Crop/Straighten (
)”.
Finding Photos
There’s a search icon (
) in Photos, which might seem odd. How can you
search for a blob of pixels? How does the phone know what’s in a picture?
Artificial intelligence, people. Apple has given Photos the ability to recognize
what’s in your pictures and videos. You can search your photos for “dog,” or
“beach,” or whatever.
To try it out, tap 
 at the top of the Photos or Albums screens. Right off the
bat, the phone offers some one-tap canned searches based on locations and dates

(like One Year Ago and Home). Tap to see the photos and videos that match.
To search for something more specific, you can type either of two kinds of
things:
A place, date, name, or album. Try typing september or tucson or bay
area or 2016, for example. As you type, iOS displays all the photo
groupings that match what you’ve typed so far. Tap that grouping to see
the photo thumbnails within.
TIP
Then again, it’s usually faster to request such photos by voice, using Siri: “Show me all the
photos from Texas in 2017.” See “Non-Apple Apps”.
A noun. Type the photographic subject you’re seeking, like forest, girl,
plane, piano, food, pizza, mountain, or whatever. In the results list,
Photos lists matching pictures under a Category heading, like Pizza
Category or Cat Category (below, left). Tap to see what the phone has
rounded up for you (right).
As you’ll soon discover, Apple’s image recognition software makes a

lot of mistakes; you may well find a bar code or a picket fence in your
Piano category, or a truck in your Cars category. But hey—it’s just
software. Cut it some slack.
TIP
You can also search for the data associated with a photo (time, place, album name), and combine that
with a noun search to pinpoint a certain photo.
Deleting Photos
If some photo no longer meets your exacting standards, you can delete it. But
this action is trickier than you may think.
If you took the picture using the iPhone, no sweat. Open the photo;
tap 
. When you tap Delete Photo, that picture is gone. Or, rather,
it’s moved to the Recently Deleted folder described in “Creating and
Deleting Albums”; you have 30 days to change your mind.
(If you open the photo from the Albums tab instead, you’re just taking
the picture out of that album—not actually deleting it from the phone.)
If the photo was synced to the iPhone from your computer, well,
that’s life. The iPhone remains a mirror of what’s on the computer. In
other words, you can’t delete the photo from the phone. Instead, delete
it from the original album on your computer (which does not mean
deleting it from the computer altogether). The next time you sync the
iPhone, the photo disappears from it, too.
The exception: If you use iCloud Photo Library (“iCloud Photo
Library”), you’re warned that you’re about to delete the photo from all
your devices—and that’s what happens.
Photo Controls
When you first open a photo, some useful controls appear, in blue against the
white background. They show up either at the top or bottom of the screen,

depending on how you’re holding the phone. (Tap again to hide them and
summon a black background, for a more impressive photo presentation.)
Album name. Here’s the group this photo came from.
Favorite (
). When you find a picture you really love—enough that
you might want to call it up later to show people—tap 
. This photo
or video now appears in the Favorites folder (in the Albums tab of the
Photos app, described earlier), so that it’s easy to find with your other
prize-winners. (The 
 appears only on photos you’ve taken with the
phone—not pictures you’ve imported from computers or other
cameras.)
Share (
). Tap 
 if you want to do something more with this photo
than just stare at it. You can use it as your iPhone’s wallpaper, print it,
copy it, text it, send it by email, use it as some​body’s headshot in your
Contacts list, post it on Twitter or Facebook, and so on. These options
are all described on the following pages.
Date and time. The top of the screen says “September 13, 12:52 pm,”
for example, letting you know when this photo was taken.
Edit. This button is the gateway to the iPhone’s photo-editing features,
described starting in “Editing Photos”.
Delete ( 
 ). Gets rid of this photo, as described earlier.
Other photos. Immediately below the picture, Photos thoughtfully
displays a ribbon of tiny thumbnail images (actually, more like
pinkynail images). They represent the previous and following photos in
this batch. By tapping or dragging, you can jump to another photo
without having to back out of the opened-photo screen.
There’s one more huge element of the photo screen that you might miss. To see
it, drag upward. Here’s a vast, scrolling screen that explodes with resources for
this photo, like a map of where it was taken (and the address); links to “related”

shots (taken in the same place, or of the same people); and even a Show Photos
from This Day link, which calls up all the other pictures you took that day.
753 Ways to Share Photos and Videos
It’s great that the iPhone has a superb camera. But what’s even greater is that it’s
also a cellphone. It’s online. So once you’ve taken a picture, you can do
something with it right away. Mail it, text it, post it to Facebook or Twitter, use it
as wallpaper—right from the iPhone.
Step 1: Choose the Photos
Before you can send or post a photo or video, you have to tell iOS which one (or
ones) you want to work with.
To send just one, well, no big mystery; tap its thumbnail and then tap 
.
But you can also send a bunch of them in a group—whenever you see a Select
button. Tap it and then tap the photos you want to send. With each tap, a 
appears, meaning, “OK, this one will be included.” (Tap again to remove the
checkmark.)
Step 2: Preparing to Send
Once you’ve opened a photo (or selected a few), tap 
.
Now you have a huge array of “send my photo here” options, displayed in rows
(below, left).

At the top of the Share screen, a scrolling row of other pictures appears. It lets
you add more to the one(s) you’ve already selected, or deselect some that you
already did. That’s a lot less crazymaking than having to cancel out of the Share
screen in order to change your selection.
TIP
If you’re holding the phone horizontally, select the photos first and then tap Next to see the sharing
icons.
All right. Here’s an overview of the options available on the Share screen.
NOTE

Which icons appear depend on how you’ve opened the photo. For example, the choices you see when
you open a photo in Messages aren’t the same as the ones you see when you open a photo from an
album. The following pages cover everything you might see.
AirDrop
So very cool: You can shoot a photo, or several, to any nearby iPhone, iPad, iPod
Touch, or Mac—wirelessly, securely, conveniently, and instantly. See “AirDrop”
for the step-by-steps.
Message
This row of options lists apps that can receive your photos and videos.
The Message icon lets you send a photo or video as a picture or video message.
It winds up on the screen of the other guy’s cellphone.
That’s a delicious feature, which people exploit millions of times a day.
NOTE
If you’re sending to another Apple gadget, like an iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch, or Mac, it will be sent as a
free iMessage (assuming that the recipient has an iCloud account). If you’re sending to a non-Apple
cellphone, it will be a regular MMS message. All of this is described in Chapter 6.
Tap Message and then specify the phone number of the recipient; if you’re
sending by iMessage, the email address also works. Or choose someone from
your Contacts list. Then type a little note, tap Send, and off it goes.
NOTE
If you’re sending a video, the iPhone compresses it first so that it’s small enough to send as a text-
message attachment (smaller dimensions, lower picture quality). Then it attaches the clip to an outgoing
text message; it’s your job to address it.
Mail
The iPhone attaches your photos or video clips to a new outgoing message. All

you have to do is address it and hit Send. If it’s a big file, you may be asked how
much you want the photo scaled down from its original size. Tap Small,
Medium, Large, or Actual Size, using the megabyte indicator as a guide. (Some
email systems don’t accept attachments larger than 5 megabytes.)
(Any video clip you send by email gets compressed—smaller, lower quality—
for the same reason.)
iCloud Photo Sharing
You can share batches of photos or videos with other people, either directly to
their Apple gadgets or to a private web page. What’s more, they can (with your
permission) contribute their own pictures to the album.
This is a big topic, though, so it gets its own write-up in “iCloud Photo Sharing”.
Add to Notes
Since the Notes app (“Notes”) can accommodate pasted pix or vids, why not?
A little box appears, inviting you to type some text into the newly illustrated
photo note. You can also plop this picture into either a new note page or an
existing one, using the pop-up menu at lower right.
Twitter, Facebook, Flickr
If you’ve told your iPhone what your name and password are (in Settings →
Twitter or Settings → Facebook or Settings → Flickr), then posting a photo
from your phone to your Twitter feed, Facebook timeline, or Flickr collection is
ridiculously simple.
Open the photo; tap the 
 button; tap Twitter, Facebook, or Flickr. You’re
offered the chance to type a message that accompanies your photo. (As usual
with Twitter, you have a maximum of 140 or 280 characters for your message.)
You can also tap Add Location if you want Twitterites or Facebookers to know
where the photo was taken.
NOTE

The Add Location option is available only if you’ve permitted Twitter or Facebook to use your location
information, which you set up in Settings → Privacy → Location Services.
If you’re posting to Facebook, you can also indicate which people you’re sharing
this item with—just your friends, everyone, and so on—by tapping Audience
beneath the photo thumbnail. Flickr also offers a chance to specify which of your
Flickr photo sets you want to post to.
When you tap Send or Post, your photo, and your accompanying tweet or post,
zoom off to Twitter, Facebook, or Flickr for all to enjoy.
YouTube, Vimeo
Call up a video, if it’s not already on the screen before you. Tap 
. The Share
sheet offers these video-specific buttons:
YouTube. The iPhone asks for your Google account name and
password (Google owns YouTube). Next it wants a title, description,
and tags (searchable keywords like “funny” or “babies”).
It then wants to know if the video will be in standard definition or high
definition (and it gives the approximate size of the file). You should also

pick a Category (Autos & Vehicles, Comedy, Education, or whatever).
Finally, choose from Public (anyone online can search for and view
your video), Unlisted (only people who have the link can view this
video), or Private (only specific YouTubers can view it). When
everything looks good, tap Publish.
After the upload is complete, you’re offered the chance to see the video
as it now appears on YouTube, or to Tell a Friend (that is, to email the
YouTube link to a pal). Both are excellent ways to make sure your
masterful cinematography gets admired.
Vimeo. You’re supposed to have set up your name and password in
Settings for Vimeo (a video site a lot like YouTube, but classier, with a
greater emphasis on quality and artistry).
If you’ve done that, then all you have to do, when posting a video, is to
specify a caption or a description, and then tap Details to choose a
video size and your audience (public, private, and so on). Once you tap
Post, your video gets sent on to the great cinema on the web.
Save PDF to iBooks
This button converts whatever photos you’ve selected into a single, multi​page
PDF document that opens in iBooks (“iBook”). In effect, it creates an ebook of
your pictures.
After a moment of conversion, iBooks opens so you can inspect the results. You
can now use all the tools available in iBooks (bookmarking, annotating, and so
on). Better yet, you can send the resulting PDF document to someone else—a
handy way to share a no-frills batch of pictures.
More
In the modern, extendable iOS, you can hand off a photo to other apps and
services—beyond the set that Apple provides. If you tap More, you get the
screen shown in “Step 2: Preparing to Send” at right.
That screen is basically a setup headquarters for the row of “where you can send
photos” icons. Here you can rearrange them (put the ones you use most often at

the top by dragging the 
 handle); add to the list (turn on the switches for
new, non-Apple photo-sharing apps you’ve installed); or hide the services you
don’t use (turn off the switches). (You can’t turn off the switches for Message,
Mail, and iCloud Photo Sharing.)
Save Image
Suppose you’re looking at a photo that you didn’t take with the phone. Maybe
someone texted or emailed it to you. This button saves it into your own photo
collection, so you’ll be able to cherish it for years.
Assign to Contact
If you’re viewing a photo of somebody who’s listed in Contacts, then you can
use it (or part of it) as her headshot. After that, her photo appears on your screen
every time she calls. Just tap Assign to Contact.
Your address book list pops up. Tap the name of the person who goes with this
photo.
Now you see a preview of what the photo will look like when that person calls.
This is the Move and Scale screen. You want to crop the photo and shift it in the
frame so only that person is visible (if it’s a group shot)—in fact, probably just
the face.
Start by enlarging the photo: Spread your thumb and forefinger against the glass.
As you go, shift the photo’s placement in the round frame with a one-finger
drag. When you’ve got the person centered, tap Choose.
Copy
The bottom row of sharing options lists things you can do to the selected photos.
The Copy button, for example, puts the photo(s) onto the Clipboard, ready for
pasting into another app (an outgoing Mail message, for example). Once you’ve
opened an app that can accept pasted graphics, double-tap to make the Paste
button appear.
Slideshow

This button instantly generates a gorgeous, musically accompanied, animated
slideshow.
After the slideshow has begun, tap Options to see controls like these:
Theme. A theme is a canned presentation style, incorporating
animations, crossfades, and music. Each makes the photos appear,
interact, overlap, and flow away in a different way. You’re offered five
choices—Origami, Dissolve, Push, Magazine, and Ken Burns. (Some
of these display more than one photo at a time.)
Music. Choose one of the five pieces of background music here, opt for
None, or tap iTunes Music to choose a song from your music
collection.
Repeat. Makes the slideshow play over and over again until you stop it
manually.
Speed. The slider controls how much time each photo gets.
The slideshow incorporates both photos and videos (with sound; the background
music actually gets softer so you can hear the audio).
While the show is playing, here’s what you can do:
Tap to summon the 
 button.
Turn the iPhone 90 degrees to accommodate landscape-orientation
photos as they come up; the slideshow keeps right on going.
Swipe leftward to blow past a photo or video that’s taking too long.
AirPlay
This button offers a list of nearby AirPlay gadgets—the only one you’ve
probably heard of is Apple TV—so you can display the current photo on your
TV or another screen.
Add to Album

If this is a photo you’ve taken with the phone, you’re now free to file it away
into one of the albums you’ve made (“The Albums Tab”).
Create Watch Face
This one’s for you, Apple Watch owners! Now a picture you took can become
the background for a watch-face design.
Hide
Here’s the option to hide a photo, as described in “Hide a Photo”.
Save to Files
The iPhone now has a filing system, complete with folders (“The Carpenter’s
Level”). Here you can plop the selected photo(s) into one of your iPhone
“desktop folders.”
Use as Wallpaper
Wallpaper is the background photo that appears in either of two places: the
Home screen (plastered behind your app icons) or the Lock screen (which
appears every time you wake the iPhone).
This button lets you replace Apple’s standard photos with one of your photos. It
opens the Move and Scale screen, which lets you fit your photo within the
wallpaper “frame.” Pinch or spread to enlarge the shot; drag your finger on the
screen to scroll and center it.
Finally, tap Set. You now specify where you want to use this wallpaper; tap Set
Lock Screen, Set Home Screen, or Set Both (if you want the same picture in
both places).
You can also change your wallpaper within Settings, as described in
“Wallpaper”.
Duplicate
Make a copy of the photo, which you can doctor beyond all recognition.

Print
You can print a photo easily enough, provided that you’ve hooked up your
iPhone to a compatible printer. Once you’ve opened the photo, tap the 
button and then tap Print. The rest goes down as described in “AirPrint: Printing
from the Phone”.
More
Once again, iOS offers a way to rearrange the Share buttons (this time, the
bottom row)—or to add new buttons. If you don’t have an Apple Watch, you
may as well turn off the Create Watch Face option.
My Photo Stream
The concept of My Photo Stream is simple: Every time a new photo enters your
life—when you take a picture with your iPhone or import one onto your
computer—it gets added to your Photo Stream. From there, it appears
automatically on all your other Apple machines.
NOTE
Photo Stream doesn’t sync over the cellular airwaves. It sends photos around only when you’re in a Wi-
Fi hotspot.

Using Photo Stream means all kinds of good things:
Your photos are always backed up. Lose your iPhone? No biggie—
when you buy a new one, your latest 1,000 photos appear on it
automatically.
Any pictures you take with your iPhone appear automatically on your
computer. You don’t have to connect any cables or sync anything
yourself.
TIP
There’s one exception. If you take a photo and then delete it while still in the Camera app, that photo
won’t enter your Photo Stream.
A similar rule holds true with edits: If you edit a photo you’ve just taken, then those edits become part of
the Photo Stream copy. But if you take a photo, leave the Camera app, and later edit it, then the Photo
Stream gets the original copy only.
Truth is, Photo Stream is a very old feature, one that Apple has long since
expanded and replaced with iCloud Photo Library (“iCloud Photo Library”). But
since Photo Stream is free, a lot of people still use it—as follows.

To turn on My Photo Stream, go to Settings → Photos → Upload to My Photo
Stream. (You should also turn it on using the iCloud control panel on your
computers. That’s in System Preferences on your Mac, or in the Control Panel of
Windows.) Give your phone some time in a Wi-Fi hotspot to form its initial
slurping-in of all your most recent photos.
Once Photo Stream is up and running, you’ll find a new album called My Photo
Stream. It’s in the Photos app on every iOS device, Mac, or Apple TV you own
(or have signed into using iCloud). Inside are the photos that have entered your
life most recently.
NOTE
If you don’t see this album, it’s probably because you’ve turned on iCloud Photo Library, described in
“iCloud Photo Library”. In that case, all your recent photos are in the All Photos album. There’s no My
Photo Stream album.
Now, your iPhone doesn’t have nearly as much storage available as your Mac or
PC; you can’t yet buy an iPhone with 4 terabytes of storage. That’s why, on your
phone, your My Photo Stream consists of just the last 1,000 photos. (There’s
another limitation, too: The iCloud servers store your photos for 30 days. As
long as your gadgets go online at least once a month, they’ll remain current with
the Photo Stream.)
TIP
Ordinarily, the oldest of the 1,000 photos in your Photo Stream scroll away forever as new photos come
in. But you can rescue the best ones from that fate—by saving them onto your phone, where they’re free
from the risk of automatic deletion. Use the Save Images button. Or, if you’re viewing one open picture
in My Photo Stream, tap 
 and then tap Save to Camera Roll.
Deleting Photos from the Photo Stream
Here’s the thing about Photo Stream: You might think you’re taking a private
picture with your phone, forgetting that your spouse or parent will see it seconds
later on the family iPad. It’s only a matter of time before Photo Stream gets some

politician in big trouble.
Fortunately, you can delete certain incriminating photos from your Photo
Stream. Just select the thumbnail of the photo you want to delete, and then tap
the Trash icon (
). The confirmation box warns you that you’re about to
delete the photo from all your Apple machines (and, for shared streams, the
machines of everyone who’s subscribed to your photographic output).
If you haven’t saved it to a different album or roll, it’s gone for good when you
tap Delete Photo.
iCloud Photo Sharing
iCloud Photo Sharing is like having a tiny Instagram network of your very own,
consisting solely of people you invite. You send photos or videos to other
people’s gadgets. After a party or some other get-together, you could send your
best shots to everyone who attended; after a trip, you could post your
photographic memories for anyone who might care.
The lucky recipients can post comments about your photos, click a “like” button
to indicate their enthusiasm, or even submit pictures and videos of their own.
In designing this feature, Apple had quite a challenge. There’s a lot of back-and-
forth among multiple people, sharing multiple photos, so iCloud Photo Sharing
can get complicated. Stay calm and keep your hands and feet inside the tram at
all times. Here’s how it works.
TIP
Well, here’s how it works if your software is fairly recent (iOS 7 or later, OS X Mavericks 10.9 or later,
for example).
You also have to turn on the Photo Album feature. On an iOS gadget, the switch is in Settings →
Photos. On the Mac, open System Preferences → iCloud. Make sure Photos is turned on; click
Options and confirm that Photo Sharing is on, too. On a Windows PC, it’s in the iCloud Control Panel
for Windows (a free download from Apple’s website).

Create a Shared Photo Album
To share some of your masterpieces with your adoring fans, do this:
1. Create the empty album. Open the Photos app. On the Shared tab,
scroll to the top (if necessary) and tap +.
2. Name the new album. In the Shared Album box, name the photo
album (“Bday Fun” or whatever). Tap Next.
3. Specify the audience. You’re asked for the email addresses of your
lucky audience members; enter their addresses in the “To:” box just as
you would address an outgoing email.
For your convenience, a list of recent sharees appears below the “To:”
box.
When that’s done, tap Create. You return to the list of shared albums,
where your newly named album appears at the top. It is, however,
completely empty.

4. Pour some photos or movies into the album. Tap your new, empty
album’s name. Then, on the next screen, tap the + to burrow through
your photos and videos—you can use any of the three tabs (Photos,
Shared, Albums)—to select the material you want to share. Tap their
thumbnails so that they sprout checkmarks, and then tap Done.
A little box appears so that you can type up a description.
5. Type a description of the new batch. In theory, you and other people
can add to this album later. That’s why you’re offered the chance to
caption each new batch.
Once that’s done, tap Post.
The thumbnails of the shared photos and videos appear before you—and the +
button is there, too, in case you want to add more pictures later.
TIP
You can easily remove photos from the album, too. On this screen of thumbnails, tap Select; tap the
thumbnails you want to nuke; tap 
; and confirm by tapping Delete Photo.
Adjusting an Album’s Settings
Before you set your album free, tap the People tab at the bottom of the screen.
Here are a few important options to establish for this album:
Invite People. This list identifies everyone with whom you’ve shared
the album. To add a new subscriber, tap Invite People. To delete a
subscriber, tap the name and then (at the bottom of the contact card) tap
Remove Subscriber.
Subscribers Can Post. Your subscribers can contribute photos and
videos to your album. That’s a fantastic feature when it contains
pictures of an event where there was a crowd: a wedding, show,
political rally, picnic, badminton tournament. Everyone who was there
can enhance the gallery with shots taken from their own points of view

with their own phones or cameras.
Public Website. If you turn on Public Website, then even people who
aren’t members of the Apple cult will be able to see these photos. The
invitees will get an email containing a web address. It links to a hidden
page on the iCloud website that contains your published photos.
When you turn this switch on, the web address of your new gallery
appears in light-gray type. Tap Share Link for a selection of methods
for sending the link to people: by Message, Mail, Twitter, Facebook,
AirDrop, and so on.
What they’ll see is a mosaic of pictures, laid out in a grid on a single
sort of web poster. Your fans can download their favorites by clicking
the 
 button. (You can’t add comments or “like” photos on the web,
however.)
TIP
If you click one of these medium-sized photos, you enter slideshow mode, in which one photo at a time
fills your web browser window. Click the arrow buttons to move through them.
Notifications. If this switch is on, then your phone will show a banner
each time someone adds photos or videos to your album, clicks the
“Like” button for a photo, or leaves a comment.
Delete Shared Album. That’s right: If the whole thing gets out of hand,
you can slam the door in your subscribers’ faces by making the entire
album disappear.
Read on to see what it’s like to be the person whose email address you entered.
Receiving a Photo Album on Your Gadget
When other people share photo albums with you, your phone makes a little
warble, and a notification banner appears: “[Your buddy’s name] invited you to
join ‘[name of shared photo batch]’.”

Simultaneously, a badge like (
) appears on the Photos app icon and on the
Shared tab within Photos, letting you know how many albums have come your
way.
TIP
If you have iPhoto, Photos, or Aperture on a Mac, an invitation to accept the album appears there, too.
You can tap the new album’s name to see what’s inside it; tap Accept.
Once you’re subscribed, you view the photos and movies as you would any
album—with a couple of differences. First, you can tap Add a comment to
make worshipful or snarky remarks, or tap Like to offer your silent support.

TIP
Either you or the photo’s owner can delete one of your comments. To do that, hold your finger down on
the comment itself and then tap the Delete button that appears.
You can also snag a copy of somebody’s published photo or video for yourself.
With the photo before you, tap the 
 button to see the usual sharing options—
and tap Save Image. Now the picture or video isn’t some virtual online wisp—
it’s a solid, tangible electronic copy in your own photo pool.
If your buddy has turned on Subscribers Can Post for this album, then you can
send your own photos and clips into the album; everybody who’s subscribed to it
(and, of course, its owner) will see them.
To do that, tap the + on the album’s page of thumbnails; choose your photos and
movies; tap Done; add a comment; and tap Post.
Fun with Shared Photo Albums
Once you’ve created a shared photo album, you can update it or modify it in all
kinds of ways:
Add new photos or movies to it. In Photos, open the shared photo
album, whether it’s one you created or one you’ve subscribed to. Tap +.
Now you can browse your whole world of photos, tapping to add them
to the photo album already in progress.
Remove things from it. In Photos, open the shared photo album. Tap
Select, tap the item(s) you want to delete, and then tap 
—and
confirm with a tap on Delete Photo(s).
Delete an entire shared photo album. Tap the People tab below an
open photo album, scroll down, tap Delete Shared Album, and confirm
by tapping Delete.
Change who’s invited, change the name. The People tab is also where

you can add to the list of email addresses (tap Invite People), remove
someone (tap the name, and then tap Remove Subscriber), rename the
album, or turn off Public Website to dismantle the web version of this
gallery.
At any time, you can tap the Activity “folder” at the top of the Shared tab in the
Photos app. Here, for your amusement, is a visual record of everything that’s
gone on in Shared Photo Album Land: photos you’ve posted, photos other
people have posted, comments back and forth, likes, and so on. It’s your
personal photographic Facebook.
iCloud Photo Library
If learning the difference between My Photo Stream, iCloud Photo Sharing, and
Shared Photo Streams isn’t hard enough, then hold onto your lens cap. Apple
offers yet another online photo feature: the iCloud Photo Library.
The idea this time is that all your Apple gadgets will keep all your photos and
videos backed up online and synced. The advantages:
All your photos and videos are always backed up—not just the last
1,000.
All your photos and videos appear identically on all your Apple
machines.
You can reclaim a lot of space on your phone. There’s an option that
offloads the original photos and videos to iCloud but leaves small,
phone-sized copies on your phone.
There are a couple of sizable downsides to iCloud Photo Library, too:
Your entire iCloud account comes with only 5 gigabytes of free storage.
If you start backing up your photo library to it, too, you’ll almost
certainly have to pay to expand your iCloud storage. Photos and videos
eat up a lot of storage space.
Things get a little complicated. The structure of the Photos app
described in this chapter changes, for example; the albums usually

called Camera Roll and My Photo Stream go away. They’re replaced
by a new album called All Photos. (Camera Roll and My Photo Stream
were just subsets of your whole photographic life anyway.)
If you decide to dive in, then open Settings → Photos → iCloud Photo
Library.
Once iCloud Photo Library is on, you won’t be able to copy pictures from your
computer to your phone using iTunes anymore; iTunes will be completely
removed from the photo-management loop. That’s why, at this point, you may be
warned that your phone is about to delete any photos and videos that you’ve
synced to it from iTunes (Chapter 15). (Don’t worry—they’ll be safe in iCloud.)
And, of course, you might be warned that you need to buy more iCloud storage
space.
Now the Settings panel expands and offers this important choice:
Optimize iPhone Storage. If you turn this on, your original photos and
videos get backed up to iCloud—but on your phone, you’ll be left with
much smaller versions that are just right for viewing on the phone’s
screen (but not high enough resolution to, for example, print). This
arrangement saves you a ton of space on your phone.
Download and Keep Originals leaves the big original files on your
phone.
Cellular Data lets you decide if it’s worth eating into your data plan for
syncing photos.
Finally, the uploading process begins. If you have a lot of photos and videos, it
can take a very long time. But when it’s all over, you’ll have instant access to all
your photos and videos in any of these places:
On the iPhone (or other iOS gadgets). In the Photos app, on the
Albums tab, the new “album” called All Photos represents your new
online photo library. Add to, delete from, or edit pictures in this set, and
you’ll find the same changes made on all your other Apple gear.
On the web. You can sign into iCloud.com and click Photos to view

your photos and videos, no matter what machine you’re using. The
Moments and Albums tabs here correspond to the tabs in the phone’s
Photos app. Click a photo to open it full size, whereupon the icons at the
top of the screen let you delete, download, or favorite it.
On the Mac. Everything appears in the All Photos heading in the
Photos app. (There’s no way to see your iCloud Photo Library’s
contents in the older iPhoto and Aperture programs, alas.)
Geotagging
Mention to a geek that a gadget has both GPS and a camera, and there’s only one
possible reaction: “Does it do geotagging?”
Geotagging means “embedding your latitude and longitude information into a
photo or video when you take it.” After all, every digital picture you’ve ever
taken comes with its time and date embedded in its file; why not its location?
The good news is that the iPhone can geotag every photo and movie you take.
How you use this information, however, is a bit trickier. The iPhone doesn’t
geotag unless all the following conditions are true:
The location feature on your phone is turned on. On the Home
screen, tap Settings → Privacy → Location Services. Make sure
Camera is set to While Using the App. (The rest of the time, the
camera does not record your location.)
The phone knows where it is. If you’re indoors, the GPS chip in the
iPhone probably can’t get a fix on the satellites overhead. And if you’re
not near cellular towers or Wi-Fi base stations, then even the pseudo-
GPS may not be able to triangulate your location.
You’ve given permission. The first time you use the iPhone’s camera, a
peculiar message appears, asking if it’s allowed to use your location
information. In this case, it’s asking, “Do you want to geotag your
pictures?” If you tap OK, then the iPhone’s geographic coordinates will
be embedded in each photo you take.
OK, so suppose all of this is true, and the geotagging feature is working. How

will you know? Well, the Moments feature can put geotagging to work right on
the phone. You can open a map and see all the photos you took in that spot.
You can also transfer the photos to your computer, where your likelihood of
being able to see the geotag information depends on what photo-viewing
software you’re using. For example:
When you’ve selected a photo in iPhoto or Photos (on the Mac), you
can press 
-I for the Info panel. It shows the photo’s spot on a map.
Once you’ve posted your geotagged photos on Flickr.com (the
world’s largest photo-sharing site), people can use the Explore menu to
search for them by location or even see them clustered on a world map.
If you use Google Photos (photos.google.com), then you can open any
photo and click the Info button (
) to see a picture’s location on the
map.
Capturing the Screen
Let’s say you want to write a book about the iPhone (hey, it could happen). How
are you supposed to illustrate that book? How can you take pictures of what’s on
the screen?
The trick is very simple: Get the screen just the way you want it, even if that
means holding your finger down on an onscreen button or a keyboard key. Now

hold down the screenshot buttons:
iPhone X: Simultaneously press the side button and volume-up button.
They’re directly across from each other.
Earlier models: Press the home button, and while it’s down, press the
side button (which may be on the top). You might need to invite some
friends over to help you execute this multiple-finger move.
The screen flashes white—and now, in iOS 11, something kind of great happens.
The screenshot you just took appears as a miniature at the lower-left corner of
the screen, and waits there for six seconds (facing page, left). If you do nothing
(or if you swipe it away to the left), the thumbnail slides away, and the
screenshot winds up in the Photos app, in the Screenshots folder. There you’ll
find a perfect image, in PNG format, of whatever was on the screen. (Its
resolution matches the screen: 1136 × 640 on the iPhone 5s, for example, or
1242 × 2208 on the Plus models.)
At this point, you can send it by email (to illustrate a request for help, for
example); sync it with your computer; or designate it as the iPhone’s wallpaper
(to confuse the heck out of its owner).
But if you tap the miniature before it slides away, you get a brand-new
screenshot-editing window (facing page, right).
TIP
If you press the screenshot buttons more than once within six seconds, you get multiple thumbnails,
stacked up in the corner of the screen. When you tap there, you see all your screenshots in a horizontally
scrolling row, so that you can edit, or send, all of them at once.
You can drag the thickened corners (or edge segments) to crop in on the shot, or
use any of the Markup tools (pen, highlighter, pencil, eraser, lasso, color
selector) to draw on it. Or you can tap the 
 to add text, a signature, a shape,
an arrow, or a magnified area.
These Markup tools work exactly as described in “Marking Up Your Photos”.

When you’re finished annotating your shot, tap 
 to send it, or Done to close it
—at which point the phone asks if you want to save the screenshot or, having
made your point by sending it to someone, just delete it.
TIP
In some corners of iOS, there’s no way to take a screenshot like this. For example, when the phone is
ringing, pressing the screenshot button combination sends the call to voicemail instead of capturing the
screen image.
In those situations, you may have to rely on the Mac’s ability to display the iPhone’s screen (“How to
Project or Record the iPhone’s Screen”) or the new iPhone screen-recording feature (see below).
Recording Screen Video

For the first time in cellphone history, you can create video recordings of the
screen—with narration, if you like. It’s fantastic as a teaching tool, if you want
to capture some anomaly to send to tech support, or to demo your new app.
There’s only one way to get to this feature, and that’s using the Control Center.
There’s no app, no Settings page, that even mentions it otherwise.
Once you’ve installed the Record Screen button onto the Control Center
(“Customizing the Control Center”), tap it. (If you’d like to record narration,
hard-press or long-press the button instead, and then tap the 
. Then hit Start
Recording.)
You see a 3-2-1 countdown, which is intended to give you time to get out of the

Control Center and into whatever app you’re trying to record.
Now do whatever it is you’re trying to capture. (The phone’s status bar turns red
to remind you that you’re rolling; unfortunately that red bar will be part of the
finished video, too.)
To stop recording, tap that red bar, or open the Control Center again and tap the
Screen Recording button.
The finished video lands in your Photos app with all your other videos—with
pristine quality and smooth motion, ready to share as you see fit.

Chapter 11. 10 All About Apps
App is short for application, meaning software program, and the App Store is a
single, centralized catalog of every authorized iPhone add-on program in the
world. In fact, it’s the only place where you can get new programs (at least
without hacking your phone).
You hear people talking about the downsides to this approach: Apple’s stifling
the competition; Apple’s taking a 30 percent cut of every program sold; Apple’s
maintaining veto power over apps it doesn’t like.
But there are some huge benefits, too. First, there’s one central place to look for
apps. Second, Apple checks out every program to make sure it’s decent and runs
decently. Third, the store is beautifully integrated with the iPhone itself.
There’s an incredible wealth of software in the App Store. These programs can
turn the iPhone into an instant-messaging tool, a pocket Internet radio, a medical
reference, a musical keyboard, a time and expense tracker, a TV remote control,
a photo editor, a recipe box, a tip calculator, a restaurant finder, a teleprompter,
and so on. And games—thousands of dazzling handheld games, some with
smooth 3D graphics and tilt control.
It’s so much stuff—2.2 million apps, 200 billion downloads—that the challenge
is just finding your way through it. Thank goodness for those Most Popular lists.
Getting New Apps
To check out the App Store, tap the App Store icon on your phone. You arrive at
the colorful, scrolling wonder of the store itself.
NOTE
Until 2017, you could shop the App Store, and organize your apps into folders, on your computer, using
the iTunes program. That method offered a much easier browsing and shopping experience, because you
had a mouse, a keyboard, and that big screen. As of iTunes 12.7, however, Apple removed all app-
management tools. Now your phone is the only way to get to the App Store.

The App Store app, totally redesigned in iOS 11, has five tabs at the bottom.
Here they are, in order:
Today. The big problem with the App Store has always been finding the
good stuff among the millions of apps. On this tab, Apple starts you off
with a kind of blog, featuring mini-profiles of apps Apple finds
interesting. Tap and read. Needless to say, downloading the app that’s
being described is always one tap away.
Games. Games! Listed by category, by bestselling status, by Apple
promotion.
Apps. Here’s everything else—again, listed by category, bestselling
status, and Apple promotion.
Updates. Unlike its buddies, this button isn’t intended to help you
navigate the catalog. Instead, it lets you know when one of the programs
you’ve already installed is available in a newer version. Read on for

details.
Search. As the number of apps grows into the many millions, viewing
by scrolling through lists begins to get awfully unwieldy.
Fortunately, you can also search the catalog, which is efficient if you
know what you’re looking for (either the name of a program, the kind of
program it is, or the software company that made it).
Before you even begin to type, this screen shows you a list of trending
searches—that is, the most popular searches right now. Odds are pretty
good that if you want to download the latest hot app you keep hearing
about, you’ll see its name here (because, after all, it’s hot).
Or tap in the search box to make the keyboard appear. As you type, the
list shrinks so that it’s showing you only the matches. You might type
tetris, or piano, or Disney, or whatever.
Tap anything in the results list to see matching apps. You can swipe
vertically to scroll through them. Tap one to view its details screen, as
described in the next section.
About a third of the App Store’s programs are free; the rest are usually under $5.
A few, intended for professionals (pilots, for example), can cost a lot more.
NOTE
You can’t use the App Store without an Apple ID—your email address and password—even if you’re
just downloading free stuff. If you’ve ever bought anything from the iTunes Store, signed up for an
iCloud account, or bought anything from Apple online, then you already have an Apple ID.
The App Details Page
No matter which button was your starting point, eventually you wind up at an
app’s details screen. There’s a description, a scrolling set of screenshots, info
about the author, the date posted, the version number, a page of related and
similar apps, the all-important reviews from fellow iPhoners, and so on.
Why are the ratings so important? Because the App Store’s goodies aren’t
equally good. Remember, these programs come from a huge variety of people—

professional firms in Silicon Valley, college kids goofing around on weekends,
teenagers in Hungary—and just because they made it into the store doesn’t mean
they’re worth the money (or even the time to download).
Sometimes an app has a low score because it’s just not designed well or it
doesn’t do what it’s advertised to do. And sometimes, of course, it’s a little
buggy.
If you decide something is worth getting, you’re ready to download and install it.
You may see any of these buttons:

Get. Good news: This is a free app! Download away, conscience-free.
$0.99 (or whatever). This app costs money. If you proceed, your Apple
account will be charged automatically.
. This button means that you’ve previously bought an app, either
on this iPhone or on another Apple touchscreen gadget. You don’t have
to pay for it again. Just tap to re-download.
Open. This app is already on your iPhone! Tap to open the app.
TIP
A little + sign on the price button means that the app works well on both the iPad and the iPhone.
Once you tap Get or the price, you’ve committed to downloading the program.
The final step is to confirm that you’re you, using one of these three techniques:
Apple ID. The first time you access the App Store, and periodically
thereafter, you have to enter your Apple ID and password. That’s
Apple’s way of making sure some marauding child in your household
isn’t trying to run up your bill without your knowledge. (Mercifully, you
don’t have to enter your Apple ID just to download an update to an app
you already own.)
Use your fingerprint. If you’ve allowed the App Store to accept your
fingerprint on the home button (in Settings → Touch ID & Passcode
→ iTunes & App Store), then you can skip the name-and-password
business.
Use your face. If you’ve got an iPhone X and allowed the App Store to
use face recognition (in Settings → Face ID & Passcode → iTunes &
App Store), then you can skip the name-and-password business.
Instead, you’re prompted to double-press the side button to commence
the download.
The download begins!

NOTE
If an app is over 100 MB, you can’t download it over the cellular airwaves, a policy no doubt intended to
soothe nerves at AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, and Verizon. You have to use Wi-Fi instead.
Once you begin downloading an app, a pie chart on its home-screen icon fills in
to indicate the download’s progress. (Tap the icon to pause or unpause the
download. If you have an iPhone 6s or later, you can hard-press the icon for a
shortcut menu offering buttons for Cancel Download, Pause Download, and
Prioritize Download—in other words, finish ahead of any other downloading
apps.)
TIP
You don’t have to sit there and stare at the progress bar. You can go on using the iPhone. In fact, you can
even go back to the App Store and start downloading something else simultaneously. You can easily spot
your fresh downloads on the Home screens: Their icons fill in with color as the download proceeds.
If you’re still on the app’s App Store page when the downloading is done, then
tap the Open button to launch it and try it out.
Two Welcome Notes About Backups
Especially when you’ve paid good money for your iPhone apps, you might
worry about what would happen if your phone got lost or stolen, or if someone
(maybe you) accidentally deleted one of them.
You don’t have to worry. The App Store remembers everything you’ve already
bought. You can re-download a purchased app at any time, on any of your
iPhones, iPads, or iPod Touches, without having to pay for it again. Plus, of
course, your iPhone has a backup (“Backing Up the iPhone”)—right?
Organizing Your Apps
As you add new apps to your iPhone, it sprouts new Home screens as necessary
to accommodate them all, up to a grand total of 15 screens. That’s 364 icons

(and yet you can actually go all the way up to many thousands of apps, thanks to
the miracle of folders).
That multiple–Home screen business can get a little unwieldy, but a couple of
tools can help you manage. First, you can just use Siri to open an app, without
even knowing where it is. Just say, “Open Angry Birds” (or whatever).
Second, a search can pluck the program you want out of your haystack, as
described in “Speak!”.
Third, you can organize your apps into folders, which greatly alleviates the
agony of TMHSS (Too Many Home Screens Syndrome).
It’s worth taking the time to arrange the icons on your Home screens into logical
categories, tidy folders, or at least a sensible sequence.
Rearranging Apps on the Home Screen
To enter Home-screen editing mode, hold your finger down lightly on any icon
until, after about a second, the icons begin to—what’s the correct term?—wiggle.
(If you press too hard, you may trigger 3D Touch—see “3D Touch”—and get
frustrated.)
At this point, you can rearrange your icons by dragging them around the glass
into a new order; other icons scoot aside to make room.
TIP
You can even move an icon onto the Dock (???). Just make room for it first, if necessary, by dragging an
existing Dock icon to another spot on the screen.


You can drag a single icon across multiple Home screens without ever having to
lift your finger. Just drag the icon against the right or left margin of the screen to
“turn the page.”
TIP
In iOS 11, for the first time, you can drag multiple icons simultaneously. It’s a great timesaver—but
you’d never in a million years guess how to do it.
Once you’re in wiggle mode, start dragging icon #1, just far enough for its 
 to disappear. Now,
with another finger, tap icon #2; it flies beneath your finger and becomes part of a “stack” bearing a tally,
like 
. You can keep tapping other icons to add them, all the while keeping that first finger down.
When you’re ready, drag your first finger; the entire stack goes along for the ride. You can drop them
onto a folder, or onto another icon (to create a folder), or onto a new page, where they’ll land in reverse
order (the last icon you tapped winds up in the first open slot).
To create an additional Home screen, drag a wiggling icon to the right edge of
the rightmost Home screen; keep your finger down. That Home screen slides off
to the left, leaving you on a new, blank one, where you can deposit the icon.
NOTE
You can no longer organize your Home screens on the computer, in the iTunes program. You must do
this work on the phone itself.
Deleting Apps
While your icons are wiggling, most of them also sprout 
’s. That’s how
you delete an app you don’t need anymore: Tap that 
. You’re asked if
you’re sure; if so, it says bye-bye.
You can use this technique to delete Apple’s less important preinstalled apps,

like Stocks and Watch. You no longer have to hide them in a folder just to get
them out of your face.
NOTE
You’re actually not deleting them—only hiding them. They still occupy, all told, 150 megabytes. (To
“reinstall” them to your phone, download them from the App Store as usual.)
When everything looks good, press the home button—or, on the iPhone X, the
Done button on the right ear—to stop all the wiggling.
Restoring the Home Screen
If you ever need to undo all the damage you’ve done, tap Settings → General
→ Reset → Reset Home Screen Layout. That function preserves any new
programs you’ve installed, but it consolidates them. If you’d put 10 apps on each
of four Home screens, you’ll wind up with only two screens, each packed with
20 icons. Leftover blank pages are eliminated. This function also places all your
downloaded apps in alphabetical order.
Folders
Just as on a computer, folders let you organize your apps, deemphasize the ones
you rarely use, and restore order to that dizzying display of icons.
Each folder can have many pages of its own, each displaying nine icons. A
single folder, in other words, can contain as many apps as you want. Only
memory limits how many apps you can fit onto your phone.
To create and edit folders, begin by entering Home-screen editing mode. That is,
hold your finger down on any app (lightly) until all apps wiggle.
Now, to create a folder, drag one app’s icon on top of another. iOS puts both of
them into a new folder—and, if they’re the same kind of app, even tries to figure
out what category they both belong to and names the new folder accordingly
(“Music,” “Photos,” “Kid Games,” or whatever). You can type in your own
preferred name at this point.

You’re welcome to add more apps to this folder. Tap the Home screen
background to close the folder, and then (while the icons are still wiggling) drag
another app onto the folder’s icon. Lather, rinse, repeat.
If one of your folders has more than nine apps in it, iOS creates a second “page”
for the folder—and a third, a fourth, and so on. You can move apps around
within the pages and otherwise master your new multipage folder domain.
You can scroll the folder “pages” by swiping sideways (see the next page), just
as you scroll the full-size Home pages. The only limit to how many icons a
folder can hold is your tolerance for absurdity.

Once you’ve created a folder or two, they’re easy to rename, move, delete, and
so on. (Again, you can do all of the following only in icon-wiggling editing
mode.) Like this:
Take an app out of a folder by dragging its icon anywhere else on the
Home screen. The other icons scoot aside to make room, just as they do
when you move them from one Home screen to another.
Move a folder around by dragging, as you would any other icon.
TIP
You can drag a folder icon onto the Dock, too, just as you would any app. Now you’ve got a pop-up
subfolder full of your favorite apps—on the Dock, which is present on every Home screen. That’s a
useful feature; it multiplies the handiness of the Dock.
Rename a folder by opening it (tapping it). At this point, the folder’s
name box is ready for editing.

TIP
On an iPhone 6s or later, you can hard-press a folder icon—even when you’re not in wiggling-icon
mode—to reveal the Rename command.
Move an icon from one folder “page” to another by dragging it to the
edge of the folder, waiting with your finger down until the page
“changes,” and then releasing your finger in the right spot.
Delete a folder by removing all of its contents. The folder disappears
automatically.
When you’re finished manipulating your folders, press the home button (or, on
the iPhone X, Done at top right) to exit Home screen editing mode and stop the
wiggling madness.
App Preferences
If you’re wondering where you can change an iPhone app’s settings, consider
backing out to the Home screen and then tapping Settings. Apple encourages
programmers to add their programs’ settings here, way down below the bottom
of the iPhone’s own settings.
Some programmers ignore the advice and build the settings right into their apps,
where they’re a little easier to find. But if you don’t see them there, now you
know where else to look.
App Updates
When a circled number (like 
) appears on the App Store’s icon on the Home
screen, or on the Updates icon within the App Store program, that’s Apple’s way
of letting you know that an app you already own has been updated. Apple knows
which programs you’ve bought—and notifies you when new, improved versions
are released. Which is remarkably often; software companies are constantly
fixing bugs and adding new features.

Manual Updates
When you tap Updates, you’re shown a list of the programs with waiting
updates. A tiny What’s New arrow lets you know what the changes are—new
features, perhaps, or some bug fixes. And when you tap a program’s name, you
go to its details screen, where you can remind yourself of what the app does and
read other people’s reviews of the new version.
You can download one app’s update, or, with a tap on the Update All button, all
of them…no charge.
Automatic Updates
If you have a lot of apps, you may come to feel as though you’re spending your
whole life downloading updates. They descend like locusts, every single day,
demanding your attention.
That’s why Apple offers an automatic update-downloading option. Your phone
can install updated versions of your apps quietly and automatically in the
background.
To turn on this feature, open Settings → iTunes & App Store. Under
Automatic Downloads, turn on Updates. (If you’d prefer that the phone wait to
do this downloading until it’s in a Wi-Fi hotspot—to avoid eating up your
monthly cellular data-plan allotment—then turn off Use Cellular Data.)
From now on, the task of manually approving each app’s update is off your to-do
list forever.
TIP
Fortunately, the iPhone also keeps a tidy record of every app it’s updated and what that update gives you.
Open the App Store app; tap the Updates tab. There’s your list, sorted chronologically. Tap an app’s row
to read what was new in the update you’ve already received.
How to Find Good Apps
If the bestseller lists and editorial promotions in the App Store app aren’t
inspiring you, there are all kinds of websites dedicated to reviewing iPhone apps.

There’s appadvice.com and whatsoniphone.com and on and on.
But if you’ve never dug into iPhone apps before, you should at least try out some
of the superstars, the big dogs that almost everybody has.
Many of the most popular apps are designed to deliver big-name websites in the
best-looking way possible. That’s why there are apps for Facebook, Twitter,
LinkedIn, Spotify, Pandora, Flickr, Yelp, Netflix, YouTube, Wikipedia, and so
on.
Here are a very few more examples—a drop in the bucket at the tip of the
iceberg—of the infinite app variety beyond those basics:
Apple Apps (free). Apple offers all kinds of free apps: Clips, Podcasts,
Find My Friends, Find My iPhone, and so on. You can find them by
searching the App Store for Apple apps and then choosing the
Developer apps.
Google Maps (free). Google Maps is a replacement for the built-in
Maps app. It’s much, much better than Maps—even Apple has admitted
that. Among other things, it offers Street View (you can actually see a
photo of almost any address and “look around” you), it incorporates the
Zagat guides for restaurants, and it’s unbelievably smart about knowing
what you’re trying to type into the search box. Usually, about three
letters is all you need to type before the app guesses what you mean.
Waze. Here’s another driving-directions app, also owned by Google.
The genius here is that fellow drivers take note when they pass an
accident, a police car, construction, a broken-down car, and so on; all of
these anomalies show up on your Waze screen, and Waze takes those
slowdowns into account. As a result, Waze is better than Google Maps
at working the back roads when the main route is compromised.
Flight Update Pro ($10). Shows every detail of every flight: gate, time
delayed, airline phone number, where the flight is on the map, and
more. Knows more—and knows it sooner—than the actual airlines do.
Instagram (free) is like a photographic Twitter feed. Seeing what other
people are doing every day with their cameraphones and creative urges
can be really inspirational.

Other essentials: Angry Birds. Uber and Lyft. Skype. Hipmunk (finds flights).
The New York Times. The Amazon Kindle book reader. Dictionary. TED.
Mint.com. Scrabble. Keynote Remote (controls your Keynote presentations from
the phone). Facebook Messenger. Yahoo Weather (gorgeous). Snapchat (the
millennials’ go-to app for sending selfies that self-destruct after viewing).
Augmented Reality (AR) Apps
In iOS 11, Apple has embraced AR in a big way, and some of the results are
thrilling.
AR is where you use your phone as a viewer for the world around you—and the
computer superimposes graphics on it. As you move the phone, the sizes, angles,
and distances of the simulated objects smoothly change in real time as though
they really exist. (Pokémon Go is an AR app. So is Snapchat when it adds goofy
glasses and antennas to your live image.)

Apple gave AR a huge boost with its release of ARKit, a set of tools for software
companies that has made it easier to develop AR apps. Here are a few of the
early results:
Ikea Place (free). You inspect a catalog of living-room furniture. You
tap the item you want, choose a color for it, and then tap the iPhone
screen to plop it down on the floor. Now you can walk around the room,
checking out how it looks from various angles and in various positions.
The idea, of course, is to let you try out furniture at home before hauling
it in from a store. (Houzz, Overstock, Amazon, and other companies
have similar apps.)
Porsche AR (free). As a sales tool, this app is pure genius: It lets you
see exactly what a $90,000 red Porsche Boxster convertible would look
like in your driveway. Or garage. Or bedroom, for that matter.
AR MeasureKit (free) is a virtual tape measure. Point at one corner of
a table or TV, tap to anchor the “tape measure,” and then point at the
opposite corner, and boom: An onscreen line, drawn crisply in white,
shows you that distance in feet and inches (or meters and centimeters).
For a couple of bucks, you can unlock additional modes, like the
person-height measurer. Similar: PLNAR (generates floor plans of a
room quickly and easily), MagicPlan, ARuler, AirMeasure.
Hair Color by ModiFace (free). Use your phone like a magic mirror.
Tap a new hair color from the scrolling palette at the bottom of the
screen, and see how you’d look with that dye job.
Night Sky 5. Point your phone at the sky, and see the stars—labeled
and, in the case of constellations, conveniently connected by line
segments. Works in the daytime or the nighttime. It’s a perfect use of
AR, because it provides ordinarily invisible information about whatever
you’re looking at. Similar: Sky Guide.
The world is full of people, places, and things with a story to tell. Imagine an
app that identifies the repair history of a used car you’re considering. Or an app
that you can hold up to your airplane window that labels the cities and streets
below. Or an app that shows how you’ll look after plastic surgery. Or one for

house hunters that shows your furniture in a candidate house. Or a navigation
app that shows you, with arrows floating above the real-world sidewalk, which
way to walk. (No more emerging from a building or a subway, baffled at Google
Maps’ instructions because you’re not sure which way you’re facing.)
The mind reels.
The Abandoned Apps
Here’s the bad news: 32-bit apps don’t run in iOS 11. Only 64-bit apps do.
What that means is that 64-bit apps, on a 64-bit iPhone, can theoretically run
faster and can handle more complex tasks. What it means practically is that in
one fell swoop, Apple is killing off the 15 percent of App Store apps that haven’t
been updated since 2015.
If you’ve been an iPhoner for a long time, you may feel it in the gut: Apps like
Flappy Bird, the original Tetris, and Dora’s Great Big World no longer run in
iOS 11.
But as you grieve, remember that their software companies have had three years
to update those apps—and chose not to bother.
Re-Downloading Apps
The App Store remembers what apps you’ve downloaded, even years later. Next
time you’re in one of those, “What was that crazy app that, you know, had the
frog in a grocery store, and you’re supposed to make it eat its way through
produce and stuff?” moments, this feature can save you a lot of hunting.
Open the App Store app. Tap [your icon at top right] → Purchased → My
Purchases. Here you’re offered two tabs: All (every app you’ve ever grabbed)
and Not on This Phone (apps you’ve grabbed but don’t currently have installed.
Tap 
 to reinstall the app you want.
TIP
What if that My Purchases list is full of apps you tried once in 2009, and now they’re just cluttering up

the list?
In the modern App Store app, you can hide it. Swipe left across its name and tap Hide. You can always
search the App Store if you want that app again, but in the meantime, it’s not polluting the list of apps
you do want to see.
The App Switcher
Often, it’s handy to switch among open apps. Maybe you want to copy
something from Safari (on the web) into Mail (in a message you’re writing).
Maybe you want to refer to your frequent-flier number (in Notes) as you’re
using an airline’s check-in app. Maybe you want to adjust something in Settings
and then get back to whatever you were doing. Here’s how to call up the app
switcher:
Home-button phones. On iPhones that preceded the iPhone X, the key
to switching apps is to double-click the home button.
iPhone X. Swipe up from the bottom of the screen (it doesn’t have to be
far), and stop with your finger still touching.
In each case, whatever is on the screen gets replaced by the app switcher (shown
on below as it appears on the iPhone X).

TIP
On the iPhone 6s and later models, there’s another way to reach this screen: Hard-swipe from the left
edge of the screen. This method has one advantage: It lets you peek at whatever apps are in the
background, and then, without ever lifting your thumb, slide back to the left. You’ve had a glance
without ever fully entering the app switcher.
You see a scrolling series of “cards” that represent the open apps, in
chronological order. They’re big enough that you can actually see what’s going
on in each open app. In fact, sometimes, that’s all you need; you can refer to

another app’s screen in this view, without actually having to switch into that app.
TIP
Thoughtfully enough, the app switcher always puts the previous app front and center when you first
open the app switcher. For example, if you’re in Safari but you were using Mail a minute ago, Mail
appears centered in the app switcher. That makes life easier if you’re doing a lot of jumping back and
forth between two apps; one tap takes you into the previous app.
When you tap an app’s mini-screen in the app switcher, that app opens.
Force-Quitting an App
The app switcher lets you manually exit an app, closing it down. To do that, hold
your finger down on the app’s card until a 
 appears (facing page, right). Tap
that symbol—or flick the unwanted app’s mini-screen upward, so that it flies up
off the top of the screen. In either case, you’ve just exited the app.
You’ll need this gesture only rarely (which is why, Apple says, quitting an app
requires an extra step in iOS 11). You’re not supposed to quit every app when
you’re finished. Force-quit an app only if it’s frozen or acting glitchy and needs
to be restarted.
TIP
There may be one more element on the app-switcher screen, too: a faint app icon at the far left. That’s a
document, email, or web page being sent to your phone by your Mac, using Handoff (see “Handoff”).
A Word About Background Apps
Switching out of an app doesn’t actually close it; apps continue running in the
background.
Of course, if every app ran full-tilt simultaneously, your phone would guzzle
down battery power. To solve that problem, Apple has put two kinds of limits in
place:

iOS’s limits. Not all apps run full speed in the background. Apps that
really need constant updating, like Facebook or Twitter, get refreshed
every few seconds; apps that don’t rely on constant Internet updates get
to nap in the background when they’re not in use.
In deciding which apps get background attention, iOS studies things
like how good your phone’s Internet connection is and what time of day
you traditionally use a certain app (so that your newspaper’s app is
ready with the latest articles when you open it).
Your own limits. You can’t control which apps run in the background,
but you can control which ones download new data in the background.
In Settings → General → Background App Refresh, you’ll find a list
of every app that may want to update itself in the background. To make
your battery last longer, you can turn off background updating for the
apps you don’t really care about; you can even turn off all background
updating using the master switch at the top.
The bottom line: There’s no need to quit apps you’re not using, ever. Contrary to
certain Internet rumors, they generally don’t use enough battery power to matter.
You may see dozens of apps in the app switcher, but you’ll never sense that your
phone is bogging down as a result.
Back to App (
)
This humble button may become your favorite feature. It’s a Back button that
appears when you’ve tapped a link of some kind that takes you into a different
app. For example:
You’re in Messages, and you tap a web link (below, left) that takes you
into Safari. A 
 Messages button appears at top left (right).

You’re on Twitter or Facebook, and you tap a link that opens a web
page. Sure enough: The top-left button says 
 Twitter or 
Facebook.
You’re in Mail, and you tap an underlined date or time that takes you
into the Calendar app. A 
 Mail button appears in the corner.
You’re in Safari, and you tap a link that opens in YouTube. Sure
enough: The button says 
 Safari.
And so on. This tiny enhancement can save you literally minutes a week.
iPhone X: Bypass the App Switcher
If you have an iPhone X, a delightful surprise awaits. You can switch apps
directly, without a layover at the app switcher.
All you have to do is swipe horizontally on the home indicator bar, the black or
white horizontal line at the bottom of almost every app screen. Your first swipe
should generally be to the right, because the app you’re using now is always at
the far right of the lineup.
NOTE
There’s one exception. If you’re in App A, and you swipe to the right to check App B (your second-to-
last app), you have six seconds to swipe left, back to App A. After that, App B becomes the new
rightmost app. Apple always wants “the most recent app” to be at far right, but it doesn’t want to confuse

you if you’re hopping back and forth between two apps.
As you do so, the next most recent app heaves into view—full size, already
running. No need to tap it or select it from among some cards: You’re there.
Keep swiping that bar to the right to summon older and older open apps; swipe
to the left to return to the ones you’ve used more recently.
This feature makes the iPhone X’s weird, rounded-bottom screen seem
worthwhile.
AirPrint: Printing from the Phone
The very phrase “printing from the phone” might seem peculiar. How do you
print from a gadget that’s smaller than a Hershey bar—a gadget without any
jacks for connecting a printer?
Wirelessly, of course.

You can send printouts from your phone to any printer that’s connected to your
Mac or PC on the same Wi-Fi network if you have a piece of software like
Printopia ($20).
Or you can use the iPhone’s built-in AirPrint technology, which can send
printouts directly to a Wi-Fi printer without requiring a Mac or a PC.
Not just any Wi-Fi printer, though—only those that recognize AirPrint. Most

recent Canon, Epson, HP, and Lexmark printers work with AirPrint; you can see
a list of them on Apple’s website, here: support.apple.com/kb/HT4356.
Not all apps can print. Of the built-in Apple programs, only iBooks, Mail,
Photos, Notes, and Safari offer Print commands. Those apps contain what most
people want to print most of the time: PDF documents, email messages, driving
directions from the web, and so on. Plenty of non-Apple apps work with
AirPrint, too.
TIP
Of course, you can always take a screenshot of what you want to print (see “Capturing the Screen”) and
then print that from the Photos app.
To use AirPrint, start by tapping the 
; tap Print. You’re offered a Select
Printer option. Tap it to introduce the phone to your printer, whose name should
appear automatically. Now you can adjust the printing options (number of
copies, page range)—and when you finally tap Print, your printout shoots
wirelessly to the printer, exactly as though your phone and printer were wired
together.
The Share Sheet
Every app is different, of course. But all of them have certain things in common;
otherwise, you’d go out of your mind.
One of those things is the Share sheet. It’s your headquarters for sending stuff off
your phone: to other apps, to other phones, to the Internet, to a printer. It’s made
up of several icon rows, each of which scrolls horizontally. (From top to bottom,
you could title these rows “What to Share,” “Send by AirDrop,” “Send to an
App,” and “Act on This Data Directly.”)
The Share sheet pops up whenever you tap the Share button (
) that appears in
many, many apps: Maps, Photos, Safari, Notes, Voice Memos, Contacts, and so
on.

The buttons you see depend on the app; you may see only two options here, or
you may see a dozen. Starting in “AirDrop”, for example, you can read
descriptions of the icons that appear when you’re sending a photo: AirDrop,
Message, Mail, Twitter, Facebook, Copy, AirPlay, Print, and so on. The options
vary by app.
Moreover, there’s a More button at the end of each row. That’s an invitation for
other, non-Apple apps to install their own “send to” options into the Share sheet.
When you tap More, you can see the full list of apps that have inserted
themselves here. Now you can perform these tasks:
Hide a sharing option. Flip the switch to make one of the sharing
options disappear from the Share sheet. (You can’t hide the sharing
options that Apple considers essential, like Messages or Mail.)
Rearrange the sharing options. Use the handle to move these items up
or down the list, which affects their left-to-right order on the Share
sheet.
AirDrop
It’s a headline feature: AirDrop, a way to shoot things from one Apple phone,
tablet, or Mac to another—wirelessly, instantly, easily, encryptedly, without
requiring names, passwords, or setup. It’s much faster than emailing or text
messaging, since you don’t have to know (or type) the other person’s address.
NOTE
If the Mac is running OS X Yosemite or later, then you can shoot files between it and your phone, too.
You can transmit pictures and videos from the Photos app, people’s info cards
from Contacts, directions (or your current location) from Maps, pages from
Notes, web addresses from Safari, electronic tickets from Wallet, apps you like
in the App Store, song and video listings from the iTunes app, radio stations
from iTunes Radio, and so on. As time goes on, more and more non-Apple apps
offer AirDrop, too.

Behind the scenes, AirDrop uses Bluetooth (to find nearby gadgets within about
30 feet) and a private, temporary Wi-Fi mini-network (to transfer the file). Both
sender and receiver must have Bluetooth and Wi-Fi turned on.
The process goes like this:
1. Find a willing recipient.
You can’t send anything with AirDrop unless the receiving machine is
awake.
2. Open the item you want to share. Tap the Share button (
).
If your app doesn’t have a 
 button, then you can’t use AirDrop.
When the Share sheet appears, within a few seconds, you see something
that would have awed the masses in 1995: small circular photos of

everyone nearby (facing page, left). (Or at least everyone nearby who’s
open to receiving AirDrop transmissions, as described in a moment.)
TIP
When you send a photo, the top row of the Share sheet shows your other photos and videos
so that you can select additional items to go along for the ride. A blue checkmark identifies
each item you’ve selected to send.
3. Tap the icon of the person you want to share with.
In about a second, a message appears on the recipient’s screen,
conveying your offer to transmit something good—and, when it makes
sense, showing a picture of it (facing page, right).
TIP
Actually, you can select more than one person’s icon. In that case, you’ll send this item to
everyone at once.
At this point, it’s up to your recipients. If they tap Accept, then the
transfer begins (and ends); whatever you sent them opens up
automatically in the relevant app. You’ll know that AirDrop was
successful because the word “Sent” appears on your screen.
If they tap Decline, then you must have misunderstood their willingness
to accept your item (or they tapped the wrong button). In that case,
you’ll see the word “Declined” on your screen.
The One AirDrop Setting
Realistically, you won’t be bombarded by AirDrop requests from strangers
around you who want to show you family pictures. Even so, Apple has given
you some control over who’s allowed to try to send you things by AirDrop.
To see the settings, open Settings → General → AirDrop.

TIP
Before iOS 11 happened, you could change your AirDrop settings right on the Control Center (“Control
Center”). Actually, you still can. Hard-press or long-press the upper-left control cluster, the one that
contains the 
 button. Boom: The cluster expands to reveal the hidden AirDrop button. Tap it to
reveal the options described below.
You have these three choices:
Receiving Off. Nobody can send anything to you by AirDrop. You’ll
never be disturbed by an incoming “Accept?” message.
Contacts Only. Only people in your Contacts app—your own address
book—can send you things by AirDrop. Your phone is invisible to
strangers. (Of course, even when someone you know tries to send
something, you still have to approve the transfer.)
NOTE
The Contacts Only option requires that both you and your recipient have iCloud accounts and
are logged in. Your Contacts card for the other person has to include that person’s registered
iCloud email address.
Everyone. Anyone, even strangers, can try to send you things. You can
still accept or decline each transfer.
NOTE
OK, there’s one other AirDrop setting to fiddle with: In Settings → Sounds & Haptics, you
can specify the sound effect that means “AirDrop file received.”
(OK, OK, there’s one more setting. Deep in General → Restrictions, you can turn off
AirDrop altogether. Now your youngster—or whomever you’re trying to restrict with
restrictions—can’t get into trouble in a debauched frenzy of sending and receiving files.)

Part III. PART THREE The iPhone
Online
Chapter 12 Getting Online
Chapter 13 Safari
Chapter 14 Email

Chapter 12. 11 The Built-In Apps
Your iPhone comes already loaded with the icons of about 25 apps. Eventually,
of course, you’ll fill it up with apps you install yourself, but Apple starts you off
with the essentials. They include gateways to the Internet (Safari),
communications tools (Phone, Messages, Mail, Contacts), visual records of your
life (Photos, Camera), shopping centers (iTunes Store, App Store), and
entertainment (Music, TV, Podcasts).
Those core apps get special treatment in the other chapters. This chapter covers
the secondary programs, in alphabetical order: Calculator, Calendar, Clock,
Compass, Files, Health, Home, iBooks, Maps, News, Notes, Podcasts,
Reminders, Stocks, Tips, TV, Voice Memos, Wallet, Watch, and Weather.
TIP
You can open any of these apps by hunting it down and tapping its icon. But it’s usually much faster to
tell Siri to do it. Say, “Open Calculator,” for example.
Calculator
The iPhone wouldn’t be much of a computer without a calculator, now, would it?
And here it is, your everyday calculator—with a secret twist.
In Calculator’s basic four-function mode, you can tap out equations (like 15.4 ×
300 =) to see the answer at the top. (You can paste things you’ve copied into
here, too; just hold your finger down until the Paste button appears.) There’s no
memory function in the basic calculator, but you do get a +/– button; its function
is to change the currently displayed number from positive to negative, or vice
versa.
TIP
When you tap one of the operators (like ×, +, –, or ÷) it turns from orange to white to help you remember
which operation is in progress. Let’s see an ordinary calculator do that!

Now here’s the twist: If you rotate the iPhone 90 degrees in either direction, the
Calculator morphs into a full-blown HP scientific calculator, complete with
trigonometry, logarithmic functions, a memory function, exponents, and roots
beyond the square root. Go wild, ye engineers and physicists!
If you make a mistake while entering a number, swipe horizontally across the
numerical display (either direction). Each swipe backspaces over the rightmost
digit. And if you mistakenly touch the wrong operator (× when you meant –, for
example), there’s no need to start over. Just tap the correct operator before
tapping the number. The app ignores the errant tap.

TIP
You can use the Calculator instantly, at any time, even without waking or unlocking the phone—from the
Control Center (“Control Center”). And you can make a calculation without opening the Calculator app
at all—by asking Siri to do it for you.
Calendar
The iPhone’s calendar syncs, automatically and wirelessly, with whatever online
calendar you keep: iCloud, Google Calendar, a corporate Exchange calendar, and
so on. Everything’s kept in sync with your computers and tablets, too. Make a
change in one place, and it changes everywhere else. Then again, you can also
use Calendar all by itself.
TIP
The Calendar icon on the Home screen shows what looks like one of those paper Page-a-Day calendar
pads. But if you look closely, you’ll see a sweet touch: It actually shows today’s day and date.
Day View
When you open Calendar, you see today’s schedule, broken down by time slot
(next page, right). You can navigate to other days’ schedules in any of three
ways: Swipe horizontally across the Day screen to see the previous or next day.
Tap a date at the top to see another day this week. Swipe across the dates at the
top to jump to another week. If the date you want to check is further away than a
week or two, though, it might make more sense to pop into Month view,
described next.
Month View
Month view, of course, shows an entire month at a glance (next page, center).
You can scroll the months vertically, thereby scanning the entire year in a few
seconds. To get there from Day view, tap the name of the month at the top left.
Of course, your little phone screen is too small to show you what’s written on
each calendar square; all you get is a gray dot on any date when you’ve

scheduled an appointment. Tap that dot to jump back into Day view and read
your schedule.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6s or later model, a delicious shortcut awaits: Hard-press any gray dot. A pop-up
bubble appears, showing you the appointments that day as though it’s a peephole into the Day view. You
can then press even harder to open the Day view for that day, or lift your finger away to return to the
Month view. You’ve just used peek and pop, described in “Peek and Pop”.

Year View
If you’re in Month view, you can “zoom out” yet another level—to Year view.
It’s a simple, vertically scrolling map of the year’s months. Tap the name of the
year (top left) to see it. From there, tap a month block to open it back into Month
view.

TIP
In all three of these views—Day, Month, Year—you can tap Today (bottom left) to return to today’s
date.
The Rotated Calendar
Some cool things happen when you turn the phone into landscape view (facing
page, top). You get an interactive, four-day slice of the week: Swipe sideways to
move to earlier or later dates. Swipe up or down to move through the hours of
the day.
Plus Model Views
If you have a Plus model—one with the Jumbotron screen—then there’s room
for extra information (the front illustration above). On a Plus, the Day and
Month views offer a split screen, showing the calendar on the left and details on
the right. You also get a row of view buttons (Day, Week, Month, Year)—
something the owners of puny regular iPhones never see.

Subscribing to Your Online Calendars
To set up real-time, wireless connections to your calendars online, tap your way
to Settings → Accounts & Passwords → Add Account. Here you can tap
iCloud, Exchange, Google, Yahoo, AOL, or Outlook.com to set up your
account. (You can also tap Other → Add CalDAV Account to fill in the details
of a less well-known calendar server, or Other → Add Subscribed Calendar to
connect to an online calendar subscription service—from TripIt or your favorite
sports team, for example.
Making an Appointment (Day or Month View)
Recording an event on this calendar is quite a bit more flexible than entering one
on, say, one of those “Hunks of the Midwest Police Stations” paper calendars.
Start by tapping + (top-right corner of the screen). The New Event screen pops
up, filled with tappable lines of information. Tap one (like Starts or Repeat) to
open a configuration screen for that element.
For example:
Title/Location. Name your appointment here. For example, you might
type Fly to Phoenix.
The second line, called Location, makes a lot of sense. If you think
about it, almost everyone needs to record where a meeting is to take
place. You might type a reminder for yourself like My place, a specific
address like 212 East 23rd, a contact phone, or a flight number. Use the
keyboard as usual.
Starts/Ends. Tap Starts, and then indicate the starting time for this
appointment, using the four spinning dials that appear at the bottom of
the screen (below, right). The first sets the date; the second, the hour;
the third, the minute; the fourth, AM or PM.

Then tap Ends, and repeat the process to schedule the ending time. (The
iPhone helpfully presets the Ends time to one hour later.)
An All-day event, of course, has no specific time of day: a holiday, a
birthday, a book deadline. When you turn this option on, the Starts and
Ends times disappear. The event appears at the top of the list for that
day.
TIP
Calendar can handle multiday appointments, too, like trips away. Turn on All-day—and then
use the Starts and Ends controls to specify beginning and ending dates. On the iPhone,
you’ll see the appointment as a list item that repeats on every day’s square. Back on your
computer, you’ll see it as a banner stretching across the Month view.
Repeat. The screen here contains common options for recurring events:
every day, every week, and so on. It starts out saying Never.
Once you tap a selection, you return to the Edit screen. Now you can tap

the End Repeat button to specify when this event should stop
repeating. If you leave the setting at Never, then you’re stuck seeing
this event repeating on your calendar until the end of time (a good
choice for recording, say, your anniversary, especially if your spouse
might be consulting the same calendar).
In other situations, you may prefer to tap On Date and spin the three
dials (month, day, year) to specify an ending date, which is useful for
car payments or a season’s worth of soccer games.
Tap New Event to return to the editing screen.
Travel Time. If you turn on this switch, you can indicate how long it’ll
take you to get to this appointment.

You get six canned choices, from five minutes to two hours. Or you can
tap Starting Location and specify your starting point, and marvel as the
iPhone calculates the driving time automatically. (Walking time, too, if
it’s close enough.)

Two things then happen. First, the travel time is blocked off on your
calendar, so you don’t accidentally schedule things during your driving
time. (The travel time is depicted as a dotted extension of the
appointment.)
Second, if you’ve set up an alarm reminder, it will go off that much
earlier, so you have time to get where you’re going.
Calendar. Tap here to specify which color-coded calendar (category,
like Home, Kids, or Work) this appointment belongs to. Turn to
“Editing and Rescheduling Events (Fun Way)” for details on the
calendar concept.
Inviees. If you have an iCloud, Exchange, or CalDAV account, you can
invite people to an event—a meeting, a party, whatever—and track their
responses, right there on your phone (or any iCloud gadget). When you
tap Invitees, you get an Add Invitees screen, where you can type in the
email addresses of your lucky guests. (Or tap 
 to choose them from
your Contacts list.)
Later, when you tap Done, the phone fires off email invitations to those
guests. It contains buttons for them to click: Accept, Decline, and
Maybe. You get to see their responses right here in the details of your
calendar event.
As icing on the cake, your guests will see a pop-up reminder on their
phones when the time comes for the party to get started.
Alert. This screen tells Calendar how to notify you when a certain
appointment is about to begin. Calendar can send any of four kinds of
flags to get your attention. Tap how much notice you want: 5, 15, or 30
minutes before the big moment; an hour or two before; a day or two
before; a week before; or on the day of the event.
NOTE
For all-day events like birthdays, you get a smaller but very useful list of choices: “On day of event (9
AM),” “1 day before (9 AM),” “2 days before (9 AM),” and “1 week before.”

When you tap Add Event and return to the main Add Event screen, you see that
a new line, called Second Alert, has sprouted up beneath the first Alert line.
This line lets you schedule a second warning for your appointment, which can
occur either before or after the first one. Think of it as a backup alarm for events
of extra urgency.
Once you’ve scheduled these alerts, you’ll see a message appear on the screen at
the appointed time(s). (Even if the phone was asleep, it appears briefly.) You’ll
also hear a chirpy alarm sound.
TIP
The iPhone doesn’t play the sound if you turned off Calendar Alerts in Settings → Sounds or Settings
→ Sounds & Haptics. It also doesn’t play if you’ve silenced the phone with the silencer switch on the
side.
Show as. If you work in the business world, it’s courteous to mark your
new appointments as either Busy or Free. That way, other people who
see your calendar, trying to schedule a meeting when you can attend,
will know which events on your calendar are movable and which are
nonnegotiable. If you’re just indicating “Keeping Up with the
Kardashians TV marathon,” maybe that one should be marked as Free.
URL. Here’s a spot where you can record the web address of some
online site that provides more information about this event.
Notes. Here’s your chance to customize your calendar event. You can
type any text you want in the Notes area—driving directions, contact
phone numbers, a call history, or whatever. Tap Done.
When you’re done filling in all these blanks, tap Add. Your newly scheduled
event now shows up on the calendar.
Making an Appointment (Day View, Week View)
As noted earlier, turning the phone 90 degrees opens up a widescreen, scrolling
Week view of your life.

In both Day view and Week view, you can hold your finger down on a time slot
to add a new, one-hour appointment right there. You’re asked to enter a name
and, if you like, location for this new appointment. Tap Add. You can always
edit this appointment’s details or duration later, as described next—but this
quick-and-dirty technique saves the effort of tapping in Starts and Ends times.
Editing, Rescheduling, Deleting Events (Long Way)
To examine the details of an appointment in the calendar, tap it once. The Event
Details screen appears, filled with the details you previously established.
To edit any of these characteristics, tap Edit. You return to what looks like a
clone of the New Event screen. Here you can change the name, time, alarm,
repeat schedule, calendar category, or any other detail of the event, just the way
you set them up to begin with.
This time, there’s a red Delete Event button at the bottom. That’s the only way
to erase an appointment from your calendar. (You can’t erase events created by
other people—Facebook birthdays, meetings on shared calendars, and so on—
only appointments you created.)
Editing and Rescheduling Events (Fun Way)
In Day or Week views, you can drag an appointment’s block to another time
slot or even another day. Just hold your finger down on the appointment’s bubble
for about a second—until it darkens—before you start to drag. It’s a lot quicker
and more fluid than having to edit in a dialog box.
You can also change the duration of an appointment in Day and Week views.
Hold your finger down on its colored block for about a second; when you let go,
round handles appear.
You can drag those tiny handles up or down to make the block taller or shorter,
in effect making it start or end at a different time.
Whether you drag the whole block, the top edge, or the bottom edge, the iPhone
thoughtfully displays “:15,” “:30,” or “:45” on the left-side time ruler to let you
know where you’ll be when you let go.

The Clendar (Category) Concept
A calendar, in Apple’s somewhat confusing terminology, is a color-coded subset
—a category—into which you can place various appointments. They can be
anything you like. One person might have calendars called Home, Work, and TV
Reminders. Another might have Me, Spouse ’n’ Me, and The Kidz. A small
business could have categories called Deductible Travel, R&D, and R&R.
You can create and edit calendar categories right on the iPhone, in your desktop
calendar program, or (if you’re an iCloud member) at www.icloud.com when
you’re at your computer; all your categories and color-codings show up on the
iPhone automatically.
At any time, on the iPhone, you can choose which subset of categories you want
to see. Just tap Calendars at the bottom of Day, Month, or Year view. You arrive
at the big color-coded list of your categories (below, left). As you can see, it’s
subdivided according to your accounts: your Gmail categories, your Yahoo
categories, your iCloud categories, and so on. There’s even a Facebook option, if
you’ve set up your Facebook account, so that you can see your Facebook
calendar entries and friends’ birthdays right on the main calendar.

This screen exists partly as a reference, a cheat sheet to help you remember what
color goes with which category, and partly as a tappable subset chooser. That is,
you can tap a category’s name to hide or show all of its appointments on the
calendar. A checkmark means you’re seeing its appointments. (The All [Account
Name] button turns on or off all that account’s categories at once.)
If you tap 
 next to a calendar’s name, you’re offered a screen where you can
change the calendar’s name; list of people who can see it (“Shared With:”);
whether or not you get notified when one of those people changes events in this
category (Show Changes); what color you want this category’s events to have
(“Color”); whether you want to get notifications of items in this calendar (Event
Alerts); and if you want other people to be able to see (but not edit) this category
(Public Calendar, described in the Tip below).

Or scroll all the way down to see the Delete Calendar button.
The Edit Calendars screen also offers an Add Calendar button. It’s the key to
creating, naming, and colorizing a new calendar on the phone. (Whatever
changes you make to your calendar categories on the phone will be synced back
to your Mac or PC.)
TIP
You can share an iCloud calendar with other iCloud members (previous page, right), which is fantastic
for families and small businesses who need to coordinate. Tap Calendars, and then tap 
 next to
the calendar’s name. Tap Add Person and enter the person’s name. Your invitees get invitations by
email; with one click, they’ve added your appointments to their calendars. They can make changes, too.
You can also share a calendar with anyone (not just iCloud members) in a “Look, don’t touch” condition.
Tap Calendars, and then tap 
 next to the calendar’s name. Turn on Public Calendar; tap Share
Link to open the Share sheet for sending the link. The recipients have but to tap that link and then tap
Subscribe to see your Public calendar’s events in their own Calendar apps.
Search
If you tap 
 and type into the search box, you pare down the list of all
calendar events from all time; only events whose names match what you’ve
typed show up. Tap one to jump to its block on the corresponding Day view.
Next time you’re sure you made an appointment with Robin but you can’t
remember the date, keep this search feature in mind.
TIP
The iOS calendar is pretty basic. For more features and power, consider calendar apps like Fantastical or
BusyCal.
Invitations
Invitations are electronic invitations that coworkers send you from Outlook or
other calendar apps. If you click Accept, the meeting gets dropped onto the

proper date in your calendar, and your name gets added to the list of attendees
maintained by the person who invited you. If you click Maybe, the meeting is
flagged that way, on both your calendar and the sender’s.
You’ll know when you have an invite. You get a standard notification, a
numbered “badge” on Calendar’s icon on the Home screen, and a similar badge
on the Inbox at the lower-right corner. Tapping Inbox shows the Invitations list,
which summarizes all invitations you’ve accepted, maybe’d, or not responded to
yet.
NOTE
Invitations you haven’t dealt with also show up on the Calendar’s List view or Day view with dotted
shading. That’s the iPhone’s clever way of showing you just how severely your workday will be ruined.
You can also generate invitations. When you’re filling out the Info form for a
new appointment, tap the field called Invitees; enter the email addresses of the
people you’d like to invite. Your invitation will show up in whatever calendar
programs your invitees use, and they’ll never know you didn’t send it from some
corporate copy of Microsoft Outlook.
Clock
It’s not just a clock—it’s more like a time factory. Hiding behind this icon on the
Home screen are five programs: a world clock, an alarm clock, a stopwatch, a
countdown timer, and a bedtime-management module.
NOTE
The app icon itself on the Home screen shows the current time! Isn’t that cute?
World Clock
When you tap World Clock on the Clock screen, you start out with only one
clock, showing the current time in Apple’s own Cupertino, California.

You can open up several of these clocks and set each one to show the time in a
different city. Now you’ll know what time it is in some remote city, so you don’t
wake somebody up at what turns out to be 3 a.m.
To specify which city’s time appears on the clock, tap + at the upper-right corner.
Scroll to the city you want, or tap its first letter in the index at the right side to
save scrolling, or tap in the search box at the top and type the name of a major
city. As you type, matching city names appear; tap the one whose time you want
to track.
As soon as you tap a city name, you return to the World Clock display.


You can scroll the list of clocks. You’re not limited by the number that fit on
your screen at once.
TIP
Only the world’s major cities are in the iPhone’s database. If you’re trying to track the time in Squirrel
Cheeks, New Mexico, add a major city in the same time zone instead—like Albuquerque.
To edit the list of clocks, tap Edit. Delete a city clock by tapping 
 and then
Delete, or drag clocks up and down using the 
 as a handle. Then tap
Done.
Alarm
If you travel much, this feature could turn out to be one of your iPhone’s most
useful functions. It’s reliable, it’s programmable, and it even wakes the phone
first, if necessary, to wake you.
To set an alarm, tap Alarm at the bottom of the Clock screen. You’re shown the
list of alarms you’ve already created (facing page, left), even if none are
currently set to go off. You could create a 6:30 a.m. alarm for weekdays and an
11:30 a.m. alarm for weekends.
To create a new alarm, tap + to open the Add Alarm screen.
TIP
But really, you should not bother setting alarms using this manual technique. Instead, you’ll save a lot of
time and steps by using Siri. Just say, “Set my alarm for 7:30 a.m.” (or whatever time you want).
And while we’re at it: You can also say, “Change my 7:30 a.m. alarm to 8 a.m.” And if you get really
lucky with your life karma, you may even have the opportunity to say the greatest thing you can possibly
say to Siri: “Turn off my alarm.”

You have several options here:
Time dials. Spin these three vertical wheels—hour, minute, AM/PM—
to specify the time you want the alarm to go off.
Repeat. Tap to specify what days this alarm rings. You can specify, for
example, Mondays, Wednesdays, and Fridays by tapping those three
buttons. (Tap a day-of-the-week button again to turn off its checkmark.)
Tap Back when you’re done. (If you choose Saturdays and Sundays,
iOS is smart enough to call that “Weekends.” And it knows that
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Thursday, and Friday are “Weekdays.”)
Label. Tap to give this alarm a description, like “Get dressed for
wedding.” That message appears on the screen when the alarm goes off.
Sound. Choose what sound you want to ring. You can choose from any
of the iPhone’s ringtone sounds, any you’ve added yourself—or, best of
all, Pick a Song. That’s right—you can wake to the music of your

choice.
Snooze. If this option is on, then at the appointed time the alarm
message on the screen offers you a Snooze button. Tap it for nine more
minutes of sleep, at which point the iPhone tries again. (If your phone
was in Sleep mode, it gives you a countdown to the next rude
awakening.)
When you finally tap Save, you return to the Alarm screen, which lists your new
alarm. Just tap the on/off switch to cancel an alarm. It stays in the list, though, so
you can quickly reactivate it another day, without having to redo the whole thing.
You can tap + to set another alarm, if you like.
Now the 
 icon appears in the status bar at the top of the iPhone screen (or,
on the iPhone X, just in the Control Center). That’s your indicator that the alarm
is set.
To delete an alarm, swipe left across its name and then tap Delete. To make
changes to the time, name, sound, and so on, tap Edit, and then tap the alarm.
TIP
The iPhone never deletes an alarm after using it; over time, therefore, your list of alarms may grow
alarmingly large. Fortunately, you can tell Siri to clean them up for you in one fell swoop. Just say,
“Delete all my alarms.”
So what happens when the alarm goes off? The iPhone wakes itself up, if it was
asleep. A message appears, identifying the alarm and the time.
And, of course, the sound rings. This alarm is one of the only iPhone sounds that
you’ll hear even if the silencer switch is turned on. Apple figures that if you’ve
gone to the trouble of setting an alarm, you probably want to know about it, even
if you forget to turn the ringer back on.
To stop the alarm, tap Stop or press the home button. To snooze it, tap the
Snooze button or press the side button or a volume key. (In other words, in your
sleepy haze, just grab the phone with your whole hand and squeeze. You’ll hit
something that shuts the thing off.)

Bedtime
Medical research tells us that sleep deprivation and inconsistent sleep schedules
take a terrible toll on our health, mood, and productivity. So iOS’s Clock app
offers a new Bedtime tab. If you answer a few questions about your sleep habits,
the app will attempt to keep your sleep regular—prompting you when it’s time to
get ready for bed, waking you at a consistent time, and keeping a graph of your
sleep consistency.
The first time you open this panel, the interview begins. On successive screens,
it asks: What time would you like to wake up? Which days of the week should
the alarm go off? How many hours of sleep do you need each night? When
would you like a bedtime reminder? (That is, how many minutes do you need
between the reminder and lights out?) What ringtone or sound do you want to
hear when you wake up?
TIP
You can change your answers to any of these questions later by tapping Options at top left.
At this point, you see the master Bedtime graph shown below at left. It’s a
handy visualization of the mental math millions of people perform every night
anyway: “If I go to bed now, I’ll get five hours of sleep!”
The real point of Bedtime, though, is the Sleep Analysis graph below all of this.
Your goal is to keep the bars consistent over time—both in length and vertical
position. It’s not enough to get enough sleep; you should also try to sleep during
the same period each night.
If you care about your health, mood, and productivity, that is.

TIP
The More history button you may see here opens the Health app described later in this chapter. Behind
the scenes, the Health app is doing the actual work for the Bedtime module.
Stopwatch
You’ve never met a more beautiful stopwatch than this one. Tap Start to begin
timing something: a runner, a train, a person who’s arguing with you.
While the digits are flying by, you can tap Lap as often as you like. Each time,
the list at the bottom identifies how much time elapsed since the last time you
tapped Lap. It’s a way for you to compare, for example, how much time a runner
is spending on each lap around a track. You see the numbered laps and the time

for each.
NOTE
If you prefer an old-timey analog stopwatch display, slide the digital readout to the left. Slide right to
bring back the digital stopwatch.
You can work in other apps while the stopwatch is counting. In fact, the timer
keeps ticking away even when the iPhone is asleep! As a result, you can time
long-term events, like how long it takes an ice sculpture to melt, the time it takes
for a bean seed to sprout, or the length of a Michael Bay movie.
Tap Stop to freeze the counter; tap Start to resume it. If you tap Reset, you reset
the counter to zero and erase all the lap times.
Timer

The fourth Clock mini-app is a countdown timer. You input a starting time, and it
counts down to zero. (New—now with seconds!)
Countdown timers are everywhere in life. They measure the periods in sports
and games, cooking times in the kitchen, penalties on The Amazing Race. But on
the iPhone, the timer has an especially handy function: It can turn off the music
or video after a specified amount of time. In short, it’s a sleep timer that plays
you to sleep and then shuts off to save power.
To set the timer, open the Clock app and then tap Timer. Spin the three dials to
specify the number of hours, minutes, and seconds you want to count down.
Then tap When Timer Ends to set up what happens when the timer reaches
0:00. Most of the options here are ringtone sounds, so you’ll have an audible cue
that the time’s up. The last one, though, Stop Playing, is that sleep timer. It stops
audio and video playback at the appointed time, so that you (and the iPhone) can
sleep. Tap Set.
Finally, tap Start. Big clock digits count down toward zero. While it’s in
progress, you can do other things on the iPhone, change the When Timer Ends
settings, or just hit Cancel to forget the whole thing.
TIP
It’s much faster and simpler to use Siri to start, pause, and resume the Timer. See ???.
You can also open the Control Center (“Control Center”) and long-press or hard-press the Timer icon. Its
shortcut menu offers instant options for 12 increments, from one minute to two hours.
Compass
The iPhone has something very few other phones offer: a magnetic-field sensor
known as a magnetometer—even better known as a compass.
When you open the Compass app, you get exactly what you’d expect: a classic
Boy Scout wilderness compass that always points north.

Except it does a few things the Boy Scout compasses never did. Like displaying
a digital readout of your heading, altitude, city name, and precise geographic
coordinates at the bottom. And offering a choice of true north (the “top” point of
the Earth’s rotational axis) or magnetic north (the spot that traditional compasses
point to, which is about 11 degrees away from true north). You choose in
Settings → Compass.
To use the compass, hold it roughly parallel to the ground, and then read it like…
a compass. Tap the center of the compass to lock in your current heading; a red
strip shows how far you are off course. Tap again to unlock the heading.
TIP
For many people, the real power of the compass is in the Maps app. (You can jump directly from
Compass to Maps by tapping the coordinates below the compass dial.)
The compass lets Maps know which way you’re facing. That’s a critical detail when you’re lost in a city,
trying to find a new address, or emerging from the subway with no idea which way to walk.

People who write iPhone programs can tap into the compass, too. There’s an
“augmented reality” app called New York Nearest Subway, for example. By
using the compass, GPS, and tilt-sensor information, it knows where you are and
how you’re holding the phone—and so it superimposes arrows that show where
to find the nearest subway stop and which line it’s on.
The Carpenter’s Level
The Compass app has a secret identity: It doubles as a carpenter’s level. The next
time you need to hang a picture, or prop up a wobbly table, or raise a barn, you’ll
now know when you’ve got things perfectly horizontal or vertical.
From the Compass screen, swipe to the left to reveal the level. It measures all
three dimensions:
Right/left. Hold the iPhone upright (against a picture you’re hanging,
say), and tilt it left and right. When it’s perfectly upright, the readout
says 0 degrees and the bottom half of the screen turns green.
Forward/back. Hold the phone upright and tip it away from or toward
you. Once again, “0 degrees” and green mean “level.”
Perfectly flat. Hold the phone on its back, screen facing the sky. When
the two circles merge (previous page, right), you’ll know you’ve got it
perfectly level. You could, for example, put the iPhone on a table you’re
trying to adjust, using its gauge to know how close you’re getting as
you wedge something under its short leg.
TIP
Level doesn’t have to be the zero point. You can tilt the phone to any angle and declare that to be the
zero point—by tapping the screen.
Files
The new Files is one of the most useful new iOS 11 features. But explaining it

might take a few paragraphs.
Meet iCloud Drive…
For a few years now, Apple has offered a convenient service called iCloud
Drive. Once you’ve switched it on (in Settings → [your name] → iCloud),
your phone has a magic folder. Whatever you put into it appears, almost
instantly, in the iCloud Drive folders on all your other machines: Macs, iPhones,
iPads, and even Windows PCs. In fact, your files are even available at
iCloud.com, so you can grab them when you’re stranded on a desert island with
nothing but somebody else’s computer. (And Internet access.)
This is an incredibly useful feature. No more emailing files to yourself. No more
carrying things around on a flash drive. After working on some document at the
office, you can go home and resume from right where you stopped; the same file
is waiting for you, exactly as you left it.

The iCloud Drive is a great backup, too, because of its automatic duplication on
multiple machines. Even if your phone is stolen or burned to aluminum dust,
your iCloud Drive files are safe.
…And Its Rivals
Ah, but iCloud Drive is not the only magic-folder syncing service. There’s also
Dropbox, Google Drive, OneDrive (Microsoft), Creative Cloud (Adobe), and
Box. They all work essentially alike.
NOTE
For example, they all offer a certain amount of free storage—5 GB, in Apple’s case—and if you outgrow

that, you can pay monthly for more room.
So in iOS 11, Apple thought it might be cool to create one single app that can
access all of these services. You can search all of them at once, too!
Working with Files
On the Browse tab, tap Locations to hook up your various accounts (Google
Drive, Dropbox, and so on). Tap Edit, and then turn on the services you use.
Each will require you to log in with your name and password for that service.
You can also drag the 
 handle to rearrange them in the list. Tap Done.
To see your actual files, tap one of the services’ names—say, iCloud Drive. And
boom: You’re looking at a tidy list of all the files and folders on that “drive.”
Here’s what you can do with them:
To download a file to your phone, tap its name (or the 
 button).
To open a file, tap it. Now, iOS is not macOS or Windows; still, it can
open many kinds of documents right on the phone. Graphics, music and
video files, Microsoft Office documents, and PDFs all open right up—at
least once they’ve been downloaded. Other kinds of computer files may
open in their associated apps on the phone—or not at all. In those cases,
Files is still useful, though, because it lets you forward those documents
by email to a machine that can open them.
TIP
If you’ve opened a photo or PDF file, you can annotate it using the Markup tools described
in “Marking Up Your Photos”. Tap the 
.
To see what’s in a file without fully opening it, use the peek and pop
finger-pressure technique described in “Peek and Pop”.

To delete a file or folder, swipe to the left across it, and then tap
Delete.
To manipulate a file, lightly touch it for one second. Buttons appear
for Copy, Duplicate, Rename, Move, Delete, Share, Tags (or
Favorite), and Info.
Those are fairly self-explanatory, but don’t miss the Share feature. It
lets you send anyone in the world a copy of anything on any of your
virtual drives, just by sending a link to it.
To operate on multiple files simultaneously, tap Select, and then tap
the files you want. Now you can use the 
 (Share), 
 (Duplicate), 
 (Move to different folder), and 
 (Delete) buttons at the bottom.
TIP
There’s a second way to select multiple files, in readiness for moving into a folder. It’s tricky, but faster
once you get it. Start dragging one file or folder, and then pause. Without releasing your finger, use other
fingers to tap other icons. You’ll see those additional icons jump to your original finger, ready to
complete the drag into a folder’s icon.
If you tug downward on the display of files and folders, you reveal three new
blue controls at the top:
To create a new folder, tap 
 at the top-left corner.
To change the sorting order, tap Sorted by at the top; choose Name,
Date, Size, or Tags.
To switch from list view to icon view, tap the 
 icon at top right.
Tagging Files
The Browse tab also lets you round up all files with a particular tag (a color-
coded label that you make up, like Important or Smithers Project). What’s

especially powerful is that your tagged files can come from all different services
—one from Dropbox, a few from Google Drive, and so on. They all appear in
one unified, harmonious “tagged” list, without reference to creed, color, or place
of origin.
To apply a tag, select a file, or several. Now tap 
 (or tap the Share button that
appears in the scrollable black command bar when you long-press the icon). Tap
+Tag, and then tap the tag name(s) that you want to apply. This, by the way, is
your only chance to create a new tag (Add New Tag).
Thereafter, you can see all the files bearing a certain tag in either of two ways:
On the main Browse screen, tap a tag name to see all the files you’ve
tagged that way.
On the Recents screen, scroll down to the tag headings; there are your
tagged files. (As you could probably figure out, the Recents screen’s
other purpose is to display the icons of files you’ve opened recently.)
(To remove a tag, long-press to select the file or files, and then tap Tags in the
black command bar. Tap the tag name to remove the checkmark.)
Favorites Folders
Tags work only on files. What about folders?
For those, Apple has supplied a Favorites feature. Select a folder (or several);
then, from the command bar that appears when you long-press an icon, tap
Favorite. Those folders now appear beneath the Favorites heading on the main
Browse tab, for quick access.
Here again, your Favorites folders can come from all different syncing services.
They’re just happy to be your favorites.
TIP
Your iCloud Drive folder contains inner folders named for Apple apps like Pages, Numbers, and so on.
Yes, these folders hold the corresponding kinds of documents, for ease of finding later.
But Pages, Keynote, and Numbers offer a new feature in iOS 11: real-time, simultaneous editing across
the Internet. You and your colleagues can collaborate on one of these kinds of documents live. (If you’ve

ever used Google Docs, you’re familiar with the process.)
There’s a lot of fine print to making this work; fortunately, Apple has created a guide here:
https://support.apple.com/en-us/HT206181.
In all these apps, there’s an Open button or icon that presents the iCloud Drive’s
contents. In Pages, for example, when you’re viewing your list of documents, tap
Locations, and then tap iCloud. There’s the list of folders on your iCloud Drive,
corresponding perfectly to what you would have seen on a Mac or a PC. Tap a
folder to open it and see what’s in it.
Health
This app is a dashboard for all the health data—activity, sleep, nutrition,
relaxation—generated by your fitness apps. But even if you don’t have an app or
a band, you have the iPhone itself; unbeknownst to you, it’s been quietly
tracking the steps you’ve been taking and the flights of stairs you’ve been
climbing, just by measuring the jostling of the phone in your pocket or bag! (If
that creeps you out just a bit, you can turn it off in Settings → Privacy →
Motion & Fitness.)
Lots of apps and fitness bands share their data with Health: the Apple Watch,
MyFitnessPal, Strava, MapMyRun, WebMD, MotionX-24/7, 7 Minute Workout,
Nokia Health Mate, Garmin Connect Mobile, Lark, Lose It!, Sleepio, Weight
Watchers, and so on. Fitness tracking is a big, big deal these days, now that your
phone and/or your fitness band can measure your steps, exercise, and sleep.
TIP
The one fitness brand that’s screamingly missing from this list is Fitbit. Your Fitbit band can’t share its
data with the Health app—at least not without the help of a $3 app called Sync Solver or a free one
called Power Sync for Fitbit.
If you have one of those bands or apps, you’ll have to fish around in its settings
until you find the option to connect with Health. At that point, you must turn on
the kinds of data you want it to share with Health.

Now open the Health app. The next bit of setup is to specify what kind of data
you want staring you in the face on its Dashboard screen. This is the
motivational aspect of Health: The more you’re forced to look at and think
about your weight, activity, sleep, or calories, the more likely you are to
improve.
The Four Biggies
In Apple’s mind, the Big Four ingredients for health are activity, mindfulness,
nutrition, and sleep. Health offers four tabs at the bottom that help you keep tabs
on these:
The Today Tab. Here’s a single summary screen of the Big Four, all in
one place. You can tap any one of these summary bubbles to view it in
more detail—for example, to switch among Day, Week, Month, or
Year graphs.
Health Data. An introductory video appears when you tap each of
these, explaining with charming British narration the importance of that
life factor. On each screen, you can see the latest graphs of your efforts
in that category. (For some, like mindfulness, you won’t see anything
unless you’ve installed an app that generates that kind of data.)

Below those tiles, you’ll find places to record health data, like your
body measurements, electronic medical records, reproductive data, and
so on.
Sources. This screen lists all the fitness apps and gadgets you’ve
hooked up to Health (including the Apple Watch, if you have one), so
that you know where your data is going.
Medical ID. This screen offers a reason to use the Health app even if
you don’t use any fitness apps and don’t track any medical statistics. It’s
the electronic equivalent of an emergency medical ID bracelet. You can
record your name, age, blood type, weight, height, medical conditions,
and emergency contact information. This screen also makes it easy to
do something noble: to offer to donate your organs after you pass away.
If you tap Edit and turn on Show When Locked, then this information
will be available on your phone’s Lock screen. If you pass out, have a
seizure, or otherwise become medically inconvenienced, a passerby or

medical pro can get that critical information without needing your
password (or your awareness).
If that person is technically savvy, that is. Finding the Medical ID
screen can be tricky. It’s available on the Enter Passcode screen, for
example; tap Emergency; tap Medical ID. It’s also available on the
special Emergency shutdown screen (“Widgets on the Home Screen”).
Home
HomeKit is Apple’s home-automation standard. The Home app lets you control
any product whose box says “Works with HomeKit”—all those “smart” or
“connected” door locks, security cameras, power outlets, thermostats, doorbells,
lightbulbs, leak/freeze/temperature/humidity/air-quality sensors, and so on.
Once you’ve installed the gadget, you can turn it on and off, monitor its
readouts, or adjust its settings (a thermostat is shown on the next page at right).
You can do all of that from the Home app, from the Control Center, or by using
Siri voice commands (“Lock the front door,” “Turn on the downstairs lights,”
and so on). You can automate those actions based on the time or your location,
or hand off control of certain devices to other people’s iPhones.

iBook
iBooks is Apple’s ebook reading program. It turns the iPhone into a sort of
pocket-sized Kindle. With iBooks, you can carry around dozens or hundreds of
books in your pocket, which, in the pre-ebook days, would have drawn some
funny looks in public.
Most people think of iBooks as a reader for books that Apple sells on its iTunes
bookstore—bestsellers and current fiction, for example—and it does that very
well. But you can also load it up with your own PDF documents, as well as
thousands of free, older, out-of-copyright books.
TIP

iBooks is very cool and all. But, in the interest of fairness, it’s worth noting that Amazon’s free Kindle
app, and Barnes & Noble’s free B&N Nook app, are much the same thing—but offer much bigger book
libraries at lower prices than Apple’s.
Downloading Books
To shop the iBooks bookstore, open the iBooks app. If this is your first time
diving in, you might be offered a selection of free starter books to download
right now. Go for it; they’re brand-name books by famous authors.
If, at any time, you want to buy another book—it could happen—well, the icons
across the bottom are the literary equivalent of the App Store. Tap Featured to
see what Apple is plugging this week; Top Charts to see this week’s bestsellers,
including what’s on The New York Times Best Sellers list (note that there’s a
special row for free books); Search to search by name; and Purchased to see
what you’ve bought.
TIP
Once you’ve bought a book from Apple, you can download it again on other iPhones, iPod Touches,
iPads, and Macs. Buy once, read many times. That’s the purpose of the Not on This iPhone tab, which
appears when you tap Purchased.
Once you find a book that looks good, you can tap Sample to download a free
chapter, read ratings and reviews, or tap the price itself to buy the book and
download it straight to the phone.
PDFs and ePub Files
You can also load up your ebook reader from your computer, feeding it with
PDF documents and ePub files.
NOTE
ePub is the normal iBooks format. It’s a very popular standard for ebook readers, Apple’s and otherwise.
The only difference between the ePub documents you create and the ones Apple sells is that Apple’s are
copy-protected.

Your Mac or PC is the most convenient loading dock for files bound for your
iPhone. If you have a Mac, open the iBooks program. If not, open iTunes, click
your iPhone’s icon at the top (when it’s connected), and then click Books.
Either way, you now see all the books, PDF documents, and ePub files that
you’ve slated for transfer. To add to this set, just drag files off your desktop and
directly into this window.
And where are you supposed to get all these files? Well, PDF documents are
everywhere—people send them as attachments, and you can turn any document
into a PDF file. (For example, on the Mac, in any program, choose File →
Print; in the resulting dialog box, click PDF → Save as PDF.)
TIP
If you get a PDF document as an email attachment on the phone, then adding it to iBooks is even easier.
Tap the attachment to open it; now tap Open in iBooks in the corner of the page.

But free ebooks in ePub format are everywhere, too. There are 33,000 free
downloadable books at gutenberg.org, for example, and over a million at
books.google.com—oldies, but classic oldies, with lots of Mark Twain, Agatha
Christie, Herman Melville, H.G. Wells, and so on. (Lots of these are available in
the Free pages of Apple’s own iBooks Store, too.)
TIP
You’ll discover that these freebie books usually come with generic-looking covers. But once you’ve
dragged them into iTunes on your computer, it’s easy to add good-looking covers. Use
images.google.com to search for the book’s title. Right-click (or Control-click) the cover image in your
web browser; from the shortcut menu, choose Copy Image. In iTunes, in Library mode, choose Books
from the top-left pop-up menu. Right-click (or Control-click) the generic book; choose Get Info; click
Artwork; and paste the cover you copied. Now that cover will sync over to the iPhone along with the
book.

Once you’ve got books in iTunes, connect the iPhone, choose its name at top
right, click the Books tab at top, and turn on the checkboxes of the books you
want to transfer.
Your Library
Once you’ve supplied your iBooks app with some reading material, the fun
begins. When you open the app, its My Books tab shows a futuristic, shaded
bookshelf with your library represented as little book covers. Mostly what you’ll
do here is tap a book to open it. But there are other activities waiting for you:
Tap the 
 icon, which switches the book-cover view to a much
more boring (but more compact) list view. Buttons at the top let you sort
the list by author, title, category, and so on.
Tap Select if you want to delete a book, or a bunch of them. To do that,
tap each book thumbnail that you want to target for termination; observe
how they sprout 
 marks. Then tap Delete. Of course, deleting a
book from the phone doesn’t delete your safety copy in iTunes or
online.
The Search button at the bottom of the iBooks screen lets you search by
author or title—not just your books, but the entire iBooks Store.
When you first start using a new iPhone, iPad, or Mac, your book
covers bear the 
 symbol. It means: “Our records show that you’ve
bought this book, but it’s still online, in the great Apple locker in the
sky. Tap to download it to your phone so you can start reading.”
Collections
You can create subfolders for your books called collections. You might have one
for school and one for work, or one for you and one for somebody who shares
your phone, for example.
To switch your view to a different collection, tap the collection’s name. It’s the

top-center button, which starts out saying All Books. (If you’ve loaded some
PDF documents, then you’ll find a collection called “PDFs,” already set up.) To
create a new collection, open that top-center menu and hit New Collection.
And to move a book into a different collection: Tap Select, tap a book (or
several), and then tap Move. It opens the Collections screen shown on the next
page, so that you can choose a new collection for the selected items.
TIP
You can reorganize your bookshelf in a collection (which you can’t do in the All Books view). Hold
down your finger on a book until it swells with pride, and then drag it into a new spot.

Reading
Open the book or PDF by tapping the book cover. Now the book opens, ready
for you to read. Looks great, doesn’t it? (If you’re returning to a book you’ve
been reading, iBooks remembers your place.)
If the phone detects that it’s nighttime (or just dark where you are), the screen

appears with white text against a black background. That’s to prevent the bright
white light of your phone from disturbing other people in, for example, the
movie theater. (This is the Night theme, and you can turn it off.)
TIP
Turn the phone 90 degrees for a wider column of text.
In general, reading is simple: Just read. Turn the page by tapping the edge of the
page—or swiping your finger across the page. (If you swipe slowly, you can
actually see the “paper” bending over—in fact, you can see through to the “ink”
on the other side of the page! Amaze your friends.) You can tap or swipe the left
edge (to go back a page) or the right edge (to go forward).
TIP
This is rotation lock’s big moment. When you want to read lying down, you can prevent the text from
rotating 90 degrees using rotation lock (???).
But if you tap a page, a row of additional controls appears:
< takes you back to the bookshelf view.
 opens the table of contents. The chapter or page names are
“live”—you can tap one to jump there.
 lets you change the look of the page. For example, this panel
offers a screen-brightness slider for the whole phone. (This is the same
control you’d find in the Control Center or in Settings.)
The A and 
 buttons control the type size—a huge feature for people
with tired or over-40 eyes. Tap the larger one repeatedly to enlarge the
text; tap the smaller one to shrink it.
The same panel offers a Fonts button, where you can choose from eight
typefaces for your book, as well as a Themes button, which lets you

specify whether the page itself is White, Sepia (off-white), or Night
(black page, white text, for nighttime reading). And there’s an Auto-
Night Theme button; if you don’t care for the white-on-black theme,
then turn off this switch. Finally, there’s a Scrolling View switch. In
scrolling view, you don’t turn book “pages.” Instead, the book scrolls
vertically, as though printed on an infinite roll of Charmin.
 lets you search for text within the book you’re reading, which can
be extremely useful. As a bonus, there are also Search Web and Search
Wikipedia buttons so you can hop online to learn more about
something you’ve just read.
 adds a bookmark to the current page. You can flag as many pages,
for as many reasons, as you like.
Chaptr slider. At the bottom of the screen, a slider represents the pages
of your book. Tap or drag it to jump around in the book; as you drag, a
pop-up indicator shows you what chapter and page number you’re

scrolling to. (If you’ve magnified the font size, of course, then your
book consumes more pages.)
TIP
An iBooks book can include pictures and even videos. Double-tap a picture in a book to zoom in on it.
When you’re reading a PDF document, by the way, you can do something you
can’t do when reading regular iBooks titles: zoom in and out using the usual
two-finger pinch-and-spread gestures. Very handy indeed.
NOTE
On the other hand, here are some features that don’t work in PDF files (only in ebooks): font and type-
size changes, page-turn animations, sepia or black backgrounds, and notes.
And if you want highlights, you’ll have to draw them on manually with the Markup tools (“Marking Up
Your Photos”).
Notes, Bookmarks, Highlighting, Dictionary
Here are some more stunts that you’d have trouble pulling off in a printed book.
If you double-tap a word, or hold your finger down on a word, you get a bar
that offers these options:
Speak reads the highlighted passage aloud. (This button appears only if
you’ve turned on Speak Selection in Settings → General →
Accessibility → Speech.) Thank you, Siri!
Copy. You can probably guess this one.
Look Up. Opens up a page from iBooks’ built-in dictionary. You know
—in the unlikely event that you encounter a word you don’t know.
Highlight. Adds tinted, transparent highlighting, or underlining, to the
word you tapped. For best results, don’t tap the Highlight button until
you’ve first grabbed the blue-dot handles and dragged them to enclose
the entire passage you want highlighted.

Once you tap Highlight, the buttons change into a special Highlight bar
(facing page, middle). The first button (
) opens a third row of
buttons (bottom), so that you can specify which highlight color you
want. (The final button in this row designates underlining.)
To remove highlighting, tap 
. The 
 button adds a note, as
described next. The 
 button opens the Share sheet, also described
momentarily.
Note (
) creates highlighting and opens an empty, colored sticky

note so you can type in your own annotations. When you tap Done,
your note collapses down to a tiny yellow Post-it peeking out from the
right edge of the margin. Tap to reopen it.
To delete a note, tap the highlighted text. Tap 
.
Search opens the same search box that you’d get by tapping the 
icon—except this time the highlighted word is already filled in, saving
you a bit of typing.
Share opens the Share sheet (“The Share Sheet”) so you can send the
highlighted material to somebody else, post it to Facebook or Twitter, or
copy it to your Clipboard for pasting into another app.
NOTE
If you’ve highlighted a single word, and if you have Speak Selection turned on in Settings → General
→ Accessibility → Speech, then there’s one more option: Spell. It spells the word aloud for you, one
letter at a time.
There are a couple of cool things going on with your bookmarks, notes, and
highlighting, by the way. Once you’ve added them to your book, they’re
magically and wirelessly synced to any other copies of that book—on other
gadgets, like the iPad or iPod Touch, your other iPhones, or even Mac computers
running OS X Mavericks or later. Very handy indeed.
Furthermore, if you tap the 
 to open the Table of Contents, you’ll see the
Bookmarks and Notes tabs. Each presents a tidy list of all your bookmarked
pages, notes, and highlighted passages. You can tap 
 (and then Share Notes)
to print or email your notes, or tap one of the listings to jump to the relevant
page.
BooksThat Read to You

iBooks can actually read to you! It’s a great feature when you’re driving or
jogging, when someone’s just learning to read, or when you’re having trouble
falling asleep. There’s even a special control panel just for managing your free
audiobook reader.
To get started, open Settings → General → Accessibility → Speech. Turn on
Speak Screen.
Then open a book in iBooks. Swipe down the page with two fingers to make the
iPhone start reading the book to you, out loud, with a synthesized voice. At the
same time, a palette appears, offering the speech controls shown on the facing
page:
After a few seconds, the palette shrinks into a > button at the edge of the screen
—and, after that, it becomes transparent, as though trying to make itself as
invisible as possible. You can, of course, tap it to reopen it.

Yes, this is exactly the feature that debuted in the Amazon Kindle and was then
removed when publishers screamed bloody murder—but, somehow, so far,
Apple has gotten away with it.
iBooks Settings
If you’ve embraced the simple joy of reading electronic books the size of a
chalkboard eraser, then you deserve to know where to make settings changes: in
Settings → iBooks. Here are the options waiting there:
Use Cellular Data. Do you want to be able to download books using
your carrier’s cellular data network (which eats up your monthly data
allotment)? If you turn this off, then you can download books only
when you’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot.
Full Justification. Ordinarily, iBooks presents text with fully justified
margins (below, left). Turn this off if you prefer ragged right margins
(right).
Auto-hyphenation. Sometimes, typesetting looks better if hyphens
allow partial words to appear at the right edge of each line. Especially if
you’ve also turned on Full Justification.
Both Margins Advance. Usually, tapping the right edge of the screen
turns to the next page, and tapping the left edge turns back a page. If
you turn on this option, then tapping either edge of the screen opens the
next page. That can be handy if you’re a lefty, for example.

Sync Bookmarks, Sync Collections. Turn these on if you’d like your
bookmarks and book collections to be synced with your other Apple
gadgets.
Online Content. A few books contain links to video or audio clips
online. This option comes set to Off, because video and audio can eat up
your monthly cellular data allotment like a hungry teenager.
There are even a couple of controls here that apply to audiobooks. They govern
how much time skips when you tap one of the back or forward Skip buttons—15
seconds, for example.
Maps
From its birth in 2007, the iPhone always came with Google Maps—an excellent
mapping and navigation app. (Apple wrote it, but Google provided the maps and
navigation data.) But in iOS 6, Apple replaced Google Maps with a new
mapping system of its own.
Unfortunately, in its initial version, the databases underlying the Maps app had
serious errors and problems. Apple promised to keep working on Maps until it
was all fixed, but in the meantime, in a remarkable apology letter, CEO Tim
Cook recommended using one of Maps’ rivals.
By far the best one is Google Maps. It’s free, it’s amazingly smart (it knows
what address you mean after you type only a few letters), it has public-
transportation details, live traffic reports, Street View (you can see photos of
most addresses, and even “look around” you), and of course Google’s far
superior maps and data.
All right—you’ve been warned.
But while Apple’s cartographical elves keep cleaning up the underlying maps,
some of its features are pretty great.
Meet Maps
The underlying geographical database may need work, but Maps, the app itself,
is a thing of beauty.

It lets you type in any address or point of interest and see it plotted on a map,
with turn-by-turn driving directions, just like a $300 windshield GPS unit. It also
gives you a live national Yellow Pages business directory and real-time traffic-
jam alerts. You can get bus and train schedules for a few U.S. cities. You have a
choice of a street-map diagram or actual aerial photos, taken by satellite.
Maps Basics
When you open Maps, a blue dot represents your current location. Tap 
 to
zoom to your current spot. Or, for more controlled zooming, try double-tapping,
or “pinching out” with two fingers, or (in iOS 11) double-tapping/dragging with
a single finger. (That is, double-tap and, with your finger still down, drag up or
down.) Eventually, you zoom in enough to see actual city blocks.
To zoom out again, you can use the rare two-finger double-tap.
Drag or flick to scroll around the map, or twist two fingers to rotate the map. (A
compass icon at top right helps you keep your bearings; you can tap it to restore
the map’s usual north-is-up orientation.) And if you drag two fingers up the
screen, you tilt the map into 3D view, which makes it look like you’re surveying
the map at an angle instead of straight down.

At any time, you can tap 
 to open a secret panel. Here’s how you switch
among Maps’ three views of the world: Map, Transit, or Satellite.
You can set up some preferences, too. Tap Map to decide if you want to see
color-coded roads that show the current traffic situation. Tap Satellite to tell
Maps whether you want street names and/or traffic colors superimposed on the
aerial views.
Each of these tabs offers buttons that let you Mark My Location (drop a pin for
your current spot, add it to your Favorites, add it to your Contacts, and so on),
Add a Place (record the address and other details of a business, thereby adding
it to Apple’s database), and Report an Issue (tell Apple about a bug).
Finding Yourself

If any phone can tell you where you are, it’s the iPhone. It has not one, not two,
but three ways to determine your location:
GPS. First, the iPhone contains a traditional GPS chip, of the sort that
was found in windshield navigation units of old.
Wi-Fi Positioning System. Metropolitan areas today are blanketed by
overlapping Wi-Fi signals. At a typical Manhattan intersection, you
might be in range of 20 base stations. Each one broadcasts its own name
and unique network address (its MAC address—nothing to do with Mac
computers) once every second. A laptop or phone can detect this beacon
signal from up to 1,500 feet away.
Imagine if you could correlate all those beacon signals with their
physical locations. Why, you’d be able to simulate GPS!
For years, millions of iPhones have been quietly logging all those Wi-Fi
signals, noting their network addresses and locations. (The phones
never connect to these base stations—they just read the one-way beacon
signals.) At this point, Apple’s database knows about millions of
hotspots—and the precise longitude and latitude of each.
So, if the iPhone can’t get a fix on GPS, it sniffs for Wi-Fi base stations.
If it finds any, it looks up those network addresses and learns the
coordinates. This system fails once you’re out of populated areas. On
the other hand, it works indoors, which GPS definitely doesn’t.
The cellular triangulation system. As a last resort, the iPhone can
check its proximity to the cellphone towers around you. The software
works a lot like the Wi-Fi location system, but it relies upon its
knowledge of cellular towers’ locations rather than Wi-Fi base stations.
The first Maps trick is to show you where you are: Tap the 
 at the top of the
Maps screen. The button turns solid blue, indicating that the iPhone is consulting
its various references to figure out where you are. You show up as a blue dot that
moves with you. It keeps tracking until you tap the 
 enough times to turn it
off.

Orienting Maps
It’s great to see a blue pin on the map, and all—but how do you know which way
you’re facing?
Just tap the 
 until it points straight up. The map spins so that the direction
you’re facing is upward, and a “flashlight beam” emanates from your blue dot;
its width indicates the iPhone’s degree of confidence. (The narrower the beam,
the surer it is.)
Searching Maps
The following paragraphs guide you through using the search box in Maps. But
it’s much quicker to use Siri to specify what you want to find.
You can say, for example, “Show me the map of Detroit” or “Show me the
closest Starbucks” or “Directions to 200 West 79th Street in New York.” Siri
shows you that spot on a map; tap to jump into the Maps app.
If you must use the search box, here’s how it works. It shouldn’t be hard to find,
since it opens when you open Maps (below, left).

Business Categories. When you first tap into an empty search box, you
get icons for Food, Drinks, Shopping, Travel, Services, Fun, Health,
and Transport. Each expands into eight more icons for further
refinement (Travel offers Airports, Hotels, Banks & ATMs, and so
on). Keep tapping to drill down to the place you want; it’s all designed
to save you typing when you’re in a hurry.
TIP
Don’t miss the scrollable list of subcategories or establishments at the very bottom of some
of these screens. When you tap Drinks, for example, this ticker may list Sports Bars,
Cocktail Bars, Pubs, and so on. Oh—and see the little temperature indicator (previous page,
left)? If you press firmly (iPhone 6 or later), it sprouts an hourly weather forecast; press
harder to open the Weather app for that place.

Recents. Below the box, there’s a list of searches you’ve recently
conducted. You’d be surprised at how often you want to call up the
same spot again later—and now you can, just by tapping its name in this
list.
TIP
If you swipe a listing to the left, you reveal two buttons: Share (send the location info to
someone) and Remove (if you intend to elope and don’t want your parents to find out).
Favorites. One nice thing about Maps is the way it tries to eliminate
typing at every step. The Favorites are a great example. They’re
addresses you’ve flagged for later use by tapping the 
, an option
that appears on every place’s Location card. For sure, you should
bookmark your home and workplace. That will make it much easier to
request driving directions.
Then, to see your list of favorites, scroll all the way to the bottom of the
Recents list and tap Favorites. Tap one to jump to its spot on the map,
or swipe to the left to reveal Share, Edit Name, and Remove buttons.
Most people, though, most of the time, wind up typing what they want to find.
You can type all kinds of things into the search box:
An adress. You can skip the periods (and usually the commas, too).
And you can use abbreviations. Typing 710 w end ave ny ny will find
710 West End Avenue, New York, New York. (In this and any of the
other examples, you can type a zip code instead of a city and a state.)
An intersection. Type 57th and lexington, ny ny. Maps finds the spot
where East 57th Street crosses Lexington Avenue in New York City.
A city. Type chicago il to see that city. You can zoom in from there.
A zip code or a neighborhood. Type 10014 or greenwich village.
Latitude and longitude coordinates. Type 40.7484° N, 73.9857° W.

A point of interest. Type washington monument or niagara falls.
A business type. Type drugstores in albany ny or hospitals in roanoke
va.
A contact’s name. Maps is tied into Contacts, your master address book
(“Contacts”). Start typing a person’s name to see the matches.
A business category. Maps is a glori​fied national Yellow Pages. If you
type, for example, pharmacy 60609, then red bubbles show you all the
drugstores in that Chicago zip code. It’s a great way to find a gas
station, a cash machine, or a hospital in a pinch. Tap a pushpin to see
the name of the corresponding business.
As usual, you can tap the map pin’s label bubble to open a details screen. If
you’ve searched for a friend, then you see the corresponding Contacts card. If
you’ve searched for a business, then you get a screen containing its phone
number, address, website, and so on; often, you get a beautiful page of Yelp
information (photos, reviews, ratings).
Remember that you can tap a web address to open it or tap a phone number to
dial it. (“Hello, what time do you close today?”)
Add a New Place
Once you’ve found something on the map—your current position, say, or
something you’ve searched for—you can drop a pin there for future reference.
Tap the 
 button; when the page slides up, tap Mark My Location. A
pushpin appears. (If your aim wasn’t exact, you can tap Edit Location and then
scroll the map to adjust its position relative to the pin.)
TIP
You can also drop a pin by holding your finger down on the spot.
Scroll the new place’s “card” to reveal its address, a Share button (so you can let
someone else know where you are), an Add to Favorites button, and an option

to add this location to somebody’s card in Contacts (or to create a new contact).
The Location Card
Whenever you’ve tapped the name of some place in Apple’s massive database
(like a store, restaurant, or point of interest), the bottom part of the screen lists its
information screen—its location “card.”
The visible portion of this card already shows the all-important Directions
button (above, left). But you can also hide the card by swiping down on it, or
expand it to full screen by tapping or swiping up (right).
If this is the location for a restaurant or a business, you might strike gold: The
Location page might offer several screens full of useful information, courtesy of
Yelp.com. You’ll see the place’s hours of operation, plus one-tap links for placing
a phone call to the place or visiting its website. Then there may be customer

reviews, photos, delivery and reservation information, and so on.
Links here let you bookmark the spot, get directions, add it to Contacts, or share
it with other people (via AirDrop, email, text message, Facebook, or Twitter).
TIP
The Location card for a restaurant may even offer a Reservations button, so that you can book a table on
the spot—if, that is, that eatery participates in OpenTable’s online booking system.
Directions
Suppose you’ve just searched for a place. The top part of its location card is
open on the screen. At this point, you can tap Directions for instant directions,
using four modes of transportation (below, left):
Drive. You’ll get the traditional turn-by-turn driving directions.
Walk. The app will guide you to this place by foot. You get an estimate
of the time it’ll take, too.
Transit. This button appears if you’re in one of the 33 major U.S. cities
(or 30 overseas cities) for which Apple has public-transportation
schedules. More are coming, Apple says.

If you’re lucky enough to be in one of those cities, you’ll discover that
the public-transport directions are surprisingly clear and detailed. You
even see the color, letter, and number schemes of that city’s bus or rail
system right there in the app.
TIP
iOS can warn you when there’s a disruption on your favorite commuter bus or rail system. To
tell it which one you want it to monitor, tap 
 and then Transit. Tap the map, and then
zoom in on the transit line until you can tap its name or number. Its Details screen appears;
scroll to the bottom and tap Add to Favorites.
At this point, you can add the Map Transit widget to your Today screen (see “The Today
Screen (Widgets)”). Without even unlocking your phone, with one quick swipe, you can see
if the train is on time—and if not, what kind of delay you have to look forward to.

Ride means calling an Uber or Lyft driver. (This feature requires that
you have the Uber or Lyft app installed and set up.) One tap on Ride
shows you the time and price estimates—and offers you a Book button.
In each case, Maps displays an overview of the route you’re about to drive. In
fact, it usually proposes several different routes. They’re labeled with little tags
that identify how long each will take you: 3 hrs 37 min, 4 hrs 11 min, and 4 hrs
33 min, for example.
If you tap one of these tags, the app lets you know the distance and estimated
time for that option and identifies the main roads you’ll be on.
In each case, tap Start to see the first instruction. The map zooms in, and
Navigation mode begins.
Navigation Mode
When the iPhone is guiding you to a location, you see a simplified map of the
world around you, complete with the outlines of buildings, with huge banners
that tell you how to turn next, and onto what street. Siri’s familiar voice speaks
the same information at the right times, so you don’t even have to look at the
screen.
Even if you hit the side button to lock the phone, the voice guidance continues.
(It continues even if you switch to another app; return to Maps by tapping the
banner at the top of the screen.)
iPHONE X
Tap the blue button in the left “ear” to return to Maps.
The bottom bar shows your projected arrival time, plus the remaining distance
and time. It also offers the End button, which makes the navigation stop.
While Maps is guiding you, you can zoom in and out; you can also pan the map
to look ahead at upcoming turns or to inspect alternate routes. You can twist two
fingers to turn the map, too.

Once you’ve shifted the view in these ways, a 
 button appears. Tap it to
restore Maps’ usual centered view.
While you’re navigating, you can also tap (or swipe up on) the bottom bar to
reveal quick-tap buttons like these:
Gas Stations, Lunch, Coffee. Perform instant searches for these
frequent-favorite driver stops.
Overview. Your entire planned route shrinks down to fit on a single
screen. Now you can see where you’re going—and can zoom, turn, and
pan the view. To return to the navigation screen, tap 
.
Details. Tap to get a written list of turn-by-turn instructions.
Audio. You can adjust the volume of Siri’s speaking voice as she gives
you driving directions by tapping here. Choose Low, Medium, or Loud
Volume, or turn off her voice prompts altogether with No Voice.
Here, too, is the Pause Spoken Audio switch. It means “When Maps
speaks an instruction, momentarily pause playback of any background
recordings, like podcasts and audiobooks. Because it’d get really
confusing to hear two robo-people speaking at once.”
Tap the screen (or just wait) to hide these additional controls once again.
Directions Between Two Other Points
The redesign of Maps seems to suggest that you’ll always want to navigate
somewhere from your current location. And usually, that’s true.
Sometimes, though, you might want directions between two points—when
you’re not currently at either one.
First, select your starting point. For example, add a pushpin marker as described
in “Add a New Place”, or tap a point-of-interest icon. Tap Directions, and then
tap My Location.
Now you can change the From box (where it currently says My Location), using

the same address-searching tactics described in “Orienting Maps”. (At this point,
you can also swap your start and end points by tapping the double arrow.)
Finally, tap Route to see the fastest route and get going.
Night Mode
If the phone’s light sensor decides that it’s dark in your car, it switches to a
dimmer, grayer version of the map. It wouldn’t want to distract you, after all.
When there’s enough light, it brightens back up again.
Where You Parked
Maps automatically remembers where you parked, and can afterward guide you
back to your car.
How does the phone know when you’ve parked? Because it connects wirelessly
to your car over Bluetooth or CarPlay. (If your car doesn’t have Bluetooth or
CarPlay, then you don’t get this feature.)
When you turn off the car, the phone assumes that you’ve parked it, checks its
GPS location, and makes a notification appear to let you know that it’s
memorized the spot. (If, that is, this feature is turned on in Settings → Maps →
Show Parked Location.)
TIP
If you tap the notification, you get a chance to take a photo of the parking spot or to record notes about it.
You also see how long you’ve been parked—handy if you have to feed a meter.

When the time comes to return to your car, the phone makes life as easy as
possible. Wake the phone and swipe to the right to view the Maps widget or the
Maps Destinations widget. Once you know where you parked, a swipe or a hard-
press gets you started finding your way back. (See “The Today Screen
(Widgets)” for more on widgets.)
The car’s location also appears in the Maps app itself, right there in the list of
recent locations, and as a reminder in the Today tab of the Notification Center.
Tap to begin your journey home.
Traffic
How’s this for a cool feature? Free, real-time traffic reporting. Just tap the 
button (it’s visible whenever you’re not in Navigation mode), and then turn on

Traffic. Now traffic jams appear as red lines on the relevant roads, for your
stressing pleasure; less severe slowdowns show up in orange.
Better yet, tiny icons appear, representing accidents, closures, and construction.
Tap to see a description bar at the bottom of the screen (like “Accident, Park Ave
at State St”); tap that bar to read the details.
If you don’t see any colored lines, it’s either because traffic is moving fine or
because Apple doesn’t have any information for those roads. Usually, you get
traffic info only for highways, and only in metropolitan areas.
3D Mode
Apple spent two years filming cities in helicopters to create 3D models of major
cities and landmarks: San Francisco, New York, Tokyo, London, Paris, Rome,
Madrid, Vancouver, San Jose, Cape Town, and Stockholm, for example. Or
places like Yosemite National Park, Sydney Opera House, Stonehenge, St.
Peter’s Basilica, or the Brooklyn Bridge. These city models are responsible for
three cool Maps features: 3D view, Flyover, and Flyover Tours.
When you’ve called up one of these chosen places, a new 3D button appears at
top right. Tap it to make the map tilt into a more, yes, 3D view. Now you can go
nuts, conducting your own virtual chopper tour of the city. You can look over
and around buildings to see what’s behind them, using the usual techniques:
Drag with one finger to move around the map.
Pinch or spread two fingers to zoom out or in.
Drag two fingers up or down to change your camera angle relative to
the ground.
Twist two fingers to turn the world before you.
Flyover (iPhone 8, iPhone X)
Flyover is a 3D, augmented-reality, aerial view of the cities and places Apple has
scanned as described above. You can use your phone like a viewer, turning your
body and moving the phone around in space to change your view.

Wait for a moment as the phone downloads the photographic models. It’s
immersing, completely amazing, and very unlikely to make you airsick.
Flyover Tours
Apple wasn’t satisfied with letting you pan around virtual 3D city models using
your finger. Now it’s prepared to give you city tours in 3D.
When you tap the search results, a new button appears on the bar at the bottom
of the iPhone 8 and X: Flyover. That’s a 360-degree, augmented-reality, aerial
view of the city: As you move, lift, and turn the phone, the view moves with
you.
At this point on the 8 and X, you get a Start City Tour button. It starts a crazy
treat: a fully automated video tour of that city or place. The San Francisco tour
shows you the baseball park, the famous Transamerica Pyramid, the Alcatraz
prison island, and so on. It’s slow, soothing, cool, and definitely something paper
maps never did. Tap the screen to open the Pause Tour button; tap the 
 to
end the tour.

Extensions
There’s one more goody in Maps: Extensions. These are add-on features made
by other companies—auto-installed into Maps by their full-blown apps—like
Uber, Lyft, Yelp, and OpenTable. The point, of course, is to let you order cars,
read restaurant reviews, reserve tables, or buy tickets right from within Maps.
Extensions, for example, are responsible for adding the Ride button described in
“Navigation Mode”.
You’ll probably find them quite handy, but maybe not all of them. Fortunately,
you can turn off individual extensions in Settings → Maps → Extensions.
News
The News app does just what Apple promises: It “collects all the stories you
want to read, from top news sources, based on topics you’re most interested in.”
When you open the News app and tap Customize Your News, the setup process
goes like this:
Choose your mags. First, you’re presented with a very tall scrolling list
of favorite online publications (The New York Times, Wired, The New
Yorker, and hundreds more) and topics (Movie Actors, Science…).
You’re supposed to tap the ones you want to use as News fodder. You
can search for topics, too.
Notifications. On the next screen, you’re invited to specify which of
those publications and topics are allowed to trigger notifications.
Email. The News app is delighted to send you notifications of articles
by email, too. Tap Sign Me Up to make it so.
And that’s it: Suddenly, you have a beautiful, infinite, constantly updated, free
magazine stand, teeming with stories that have been collated according to your
tastes. All of it is free, although you’re not getting the listed publications in full
—usually, you’re offered just a few selected stories.
The tabs across the bottom are designed to offer multiple entry points into the
eternal tsunami of web news:

For You is the main thing. It’s constantly updated with new articles that
Apple’s algorithms think you’ll like, based on (a) your selections the
first time you used the app, (b) the stories you favorited by tapping 
, (c) the stories you indicated you didn’t like by tapping 
, (d)
which stories you actually wound up reading, and (e) topics you’ve
searched for in Safari.
Spotlight, new in iOS 11, is a deep dive into a story of the day. These
news items have been handpicked by human editors.
Following displays the publications and topics you’ve said you’re
interested in. Same stories, different starting point.
Search. Oh, yes—you can search for articles by topic or publication.
This screen also offers a list of trending topics—subjects other people
are making popular.
Saved. Most of the time, you can’t use News without an Internet
connection. If you anticipate that you’ll be spending time in the living
hell known as Offline mode (like on a subway, sailboat, or airplane),
you can save some stories for reading later. To do that, tap 
 and then
Save. You’ll find your saved stories here, on the Saved tab.
TIP
The Saved tab also offers a sub-tab called History. It lets you jump back to an article you’d already read.

Once you’ve tapped to open a story, using News is simplicity itself. Swipe
vertically to scroll through an article, or horizontally to pull the next article into
view.
Notes

The iPhone has always had a Notes app—great for jotting down (or dictating)
lists, reminders, brainstorms, recipes, directions, serial numbers, and so on.
But with each successive version of iOS, this ancient, text-only notepad becomes
more complete. A Notes page can now include a checklist of to-dos, a photo, a
map, a web link, or a sketch you draw with your finger. You can even share
notes wirelessly with another iPhone fan, so that you can collaborate.
In iOS 11, Notes continues its evolution. Now you have full font and paragraph
formatting. You can create tables. You can scan documents and then annotate
them, right from within a note. And, of course, the powerful new Access Notes
from Lock Screen option means that your phone is now ready, at a finger-tap’s
notice, to receive your jotted or scanned wisdom—without even having to
unlock the phone first. See ???.
As always, any changes you make in Notes are automatically synchronized to all
your other Apple gadgets.
NOTE
The first time you open Notes, you may be invited to upgrade your existing notes to the new Notes
format. If you don’t, you don’t get any of the new features. But if you do, you can’t open your notes on
any gadget that doesn’t have iOS 9 (or later) or OS X El Capitan (or later) for the Mac.
To get started, tap 
 to start a new blank note. The keyboard appears so you
can begin typing.
TIP
You can also send text from other apps into Notes. For example, in Mail, select some text you’ve typed
into an outgoing message; in the command bar, tap Share. Similarly, you can tap a Mail attachment’s
icon; once again, tap Add to Notes in the Share sheet. In each case, your selection magically appears on
a new Notes page.
When you tap Done, the keyboard goes away, and a handy row of icons appears
at the bottom of your Notes page. You can trash the note (
); add a checklist

to it (
); add a graphic to it—photo, video, or scanned document (
); add
a sketch (
); or start a new note (
).
The Share button is always available too, at the upper right. Tap 
 to print your
note, copy it, or send it to someone by email, text message, AirDrop, and so on.
For example, if you tap Mail, the iPhone creates a new outgoing message, pastes
the first line of the note into the subject line, and pastes the note’s text into the
body. Address the note, edit if necessary, and hit Send. The iPhone returns you
to Notes. (See “The Share Sheet” for more on the sharing options.)
Herewith: A tour of the five buttons that appear above the keyboard. They’re
your gateway to everything you can put on a note: tables, text and paragraph
formatting, lists, photos, sketches, and scanned documents.

Tables
When you tap 
, you get a table with two columns and two rows. Tap in a
cell and then start typing. To move to the next cell, tap Next on the keyboard (or
tap with your finger).
Poke around long enough, and you can find controls for just about every
formatting tool you’d ever need in a table (except the ability to manually adjust
column widths and the ability to format the cell borders).
The keys to most of it are the tiny handles (
 and 
) that appear when you
tap inside a cell:
Add or delete columns. Tap inside a cell to make the 
 and 
buttons appear. Tap 
 to make the command bar appear, including
Add Column and Delete Column; tap 
 to make the Add Row and
Delete Row buttons appear. (If you’re typing in the lower-right cell,
tapping Return also makes a new row.)
Move a row or column. Tap 
 or 
 to highlight the
corresponding row or column; now you can drag it to a new spot.
Copy or paste cells. Double-tap (or hold your finger down on) a cell to
make the Select button appear. Once you’ve tapped it, you can drag the
selection handles to expand the highlighting. The Cut, Copy, and Paste
buttons appear in the command bar, along with the 
 (bold, italic,
underline) control, Look Up, Spell, and other controls.

Convert text into a table. Select the text, and then tap the table (
)
button. The selected text winds up in the first column—one cell per
paragraph.
Convert table into text. Tap inside a cell, and then tap the 
button. Choose Convert to Text. (This menu also includes Copy Table,
Delete Table, and Share Table.)
Text and Paragraph Formatting
As you can see at right on the previous page, a whole new realm of text-
formatting options await in the revamped Notes app. Once you’ve tapped Aa to
open the formatting panel, you can try out any of these options:
Paragraph styles. Hey, there are style sheets! You can create Titles
(big and bold type), Headings (bold), Body text (normal), and
Monospaced (every character is the same width, even I and W—useful

when you’re trying to line up characters on different rows).
Character formatting. The B, I, U, and S refer to bold, italic,
underline, and strikethrough styles.
Lists. The first buttons on the bottom row create dashed lists, auto-
numbered lists, and automatically bulleted lists.
Paragraph indentation. The final two buttons move the entire selected
paragraph to the right or to the left, indenting or outdenting it.
Checklists
The 
 button creates a checklist (shown at left in “Tables”). Every paragraph
you type sprouts a circle—which is actually a checkbox. Tap it to place a
checkmark in there. This feature is fantastic for lists: to-do lists, packing lists,
movies to see, gift tracking, party planning, job hunting, homework
management, and so on.
Each time you press Return, you create a new checklist item. But you can also
select some existing paragraphs and then tap 
, turning them into a checklist
after the fact.
Scan a Document
Here’s where things get good. You can now use your iPhone as a high-
resolution, supersmart document scanner. You can capture a letter, an article, a
receipt. If you scan a contract, you can add your signature to it and send it back.
The fun begins when, on any Notes page, you tap the 
 button. Then:
1. From the pop-up menu, tap Scan Documents.
The camera springs into action, with the instruction that you should
“Position the document in view.”
2. Tap the 
, and choose the type of scan you want.

Your options are Color, Grayscale (shades of gray), Black & White
(no shades of gray), and Photo (a regular snapshot, without any
document features). For most printed documents, Grayscale is the
cleanest, most space-efficient choice.
3. Hold the phone up high enough that you can see the entire page.
The document scanner can snap pages of any size, from little receipts to
whole newspaper sheets that would be tough to feed into a scanner.
Using yellow highlighting (below, left), the iPhone tries to find the
edges of the page. Take a moment to marvel as it automatically
straightens the image and fixes any perspective errors. In other words,
even if you’re shooting the page at an angle (to avoid shadows, for
example), the app is smart enough to produce a perfectly crisp,
rectangular page image.
When you’re holding the phone steady, the camera snaps automatically.
(If you can’t wait, tap the 
 button or press one of the volume keys.
The app displays the cropping screen shown below, so that you can
adjust the page boundaries yourself.)

The captured image appears briefly, and then shrinks down to the lower-
left thumbnail corner—and you’re instantly ready to snap another page.
Thanks to the automatic snapping, you can chug through a multipage
document pretty quickly.
When you’ve scanned enough, tap Save. Your work here is done.
Or, if you’d like to fine-tune the results, proceed:
4. Tap the thumbnail (lower-left corner of the screen).
The scanned image opens so that you can make adjustments. For
example, the 
 button lets you change your mind about the decision
you made in step 2 (previous page, center). If you tap 
, you can

use the four round handles to adjust the page boundaries, cropping out
more or less background (previous page, right). If you snapped the page
at a slight angle, this is your chance to correct the perspective.
Here, too, you can tap 
 to rotate the scan 90 degrees—or 
 to
delete it. Or tap Retake to reshoot just this page.
Tap Done and then Save. You return to the Note that now contains the
scanned images.
If you tap a scanned page thumbnail to open it, you can have endless fun:
Use the 
, 
, 
, and 
 icons to revisit the choices you
made in step 4.
Tap + to scan a new page to add to the existing ones.
Tap 
 and then Markup to annotate the scan (adding your signature
or highlighting, for example), using the tools described in “Marking Up
Your Photos”.
Tap 
 and then Create PDF to convert the finished scan into a PDF
page, ready to send (by tapping 
 again).
Once you’ve given the new Scan feature a try, you may well consider it one of
iOS 11’s finest achievements.
Add a Photo to a Note
There are more goodies hiding behind the 
 button on every Notes page,
above the keyboard. The pop-up menu offers Take Photo or Video, which opens
the Camera app, and Photo Library, which opens your Photos app. Either way,
the resulting photo or video lands right there in the Notes page you’re working
on. Incredibly handy. (Try inserting labeled face shots of people whose names

you keep forgetting at work!)
TIP
Should new photos and videos you take also wind up in your Photos app? That’s up to you, thanks to the
Settings → Notes → Save to Photos option.
Add a Sketch
Sometimes, only a freehand drawing will do—and in Notes, you can draw with
your finger!
If you tap the 
 icon, you wind up in the land of markers, highlighters, and
pencils described in “Marking Up Your Photos”, and shown below at left.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6s or later model, then all the drawing tools (and the eraser) are pressure-sensitive!
They make fatter or darker lines when you press harder with your finger.
But here’s a little secret: For reasons known only to the minds of Apple
engineers, there’s a second, more complete set of sketching tools (below, right).
It’s hiding behind the 
 button above the Notes keyboard; tap Add Sketch.

This time, the colored dot opens a much wider palette of color choices (swipe to
the right to view additional “pages” of them, including eight shades of gray).
You also get a ruler, which is a surprisingly sophisticated tool.
To use it, put two fingers on the “ruler” on the screen, and twist them to the
angle you want. (As you twist, the app shows you the current angle off the
horizontal.) Then you can “draw against” it for perfect straight lines.
TIP
In Settings → Notes, you can set up a lined background for new sketches. You can ask that they start out
with lines (three different spacings) or graph-paper grids (three grid sizes).
Sharing Notes

You and a buddy (or several) can edit a page in Notes simultaneously, over the
Internet. It’s great when you and your friends are planning a party and
brainstorming about guests and the menu, for example. Also great for adding
items to the grocery or to-do list even after your spouse has left the house to get
them taken care of.
Just tap 
 at the top of the screen. On the Add People screen, specify how
you want to send the invitation: by message, email, Facebook, Twitter, or
whatever.
Once your collaborators receive and accept the invite, they can begin editing the
note as though it’s their own.
The live editing isn’t as animated as it is in, for example, Google Docs—you
don’t see letter-by-letter typing—but other peoples’ edits do appear briefly in
yellow highlighting.
Once you’ve shared a note, the icon at the top changes to 
, and a
matching icon appears next to the note’s name in the master list. At any time,
you can stop sharing the note—or add more people to its collaboration—by
tapping that 
 icon again and editing the sharing panel that appears.
Locking Notes
You can password-protect individual notes—a great feature, suitable for listing
birthday presents you intend to get for your nosy kid, the formula for your top-
secret invisibility potion, or your illicit lovers’ names.
Note that you generally hide and show all your locked notes with a single
password. You don’t have to make up a different password for every note.
TIP
You can make up multiple passwords, though. Each time you want to start using a new password, open
Settings → Notes → Password and tap Reset Password. After supplying your iCloud password, you’re
offered the chance to make up a password for any new notes you lock. All existing locked notes are still
protected by the previous password.

And if you’ve forgotten the password? Unless you’ve turned on Touch ID or Face ID (you’re asked the
first time you try to open a locked note), then all those old notes are locked forever. But you can still
make up a new password to protect your latest secrets.
To lock a note, tap 
; on the Share screen, tap Lock Note (below, left). (Why
is locking a note sharing it? Never mind.) Make up a password for
locking/unlocking all your notes (or, if you’ve done this before, enter the
password).
Once your locked notes are all unlocked, you can still see and edit them. But
when there’s any risk of somebody else coming along and seeing them (on your
Mac, iPhone, iPad, or any other synced gadget), click the 
 to lock all your
notes. (They also all lock when the phone goes to sleep.)

Now all you see of the locked notes are their titles. Everything on them is
replaced by a “This note is locked” message, as shown on the previous page at
right. Tap View Note to unlock them with your fingerprint or password.
TIP
To remove the padlock from a note, tap 
 and then tap Remove Lock.
Use your power wisely.

The Notes List
As you create more pages, the < iCloud button (top left corner of the screen)
becomes more useful. (It may not say “iCloud”; it bears the name of whatever
online account stores your notes: Gmail, Exchange, or whatever. Or, if your
notes exist only on the phone, you just see an unlabeled < symbol.)
It opens your table of contents for the Notes pad. It’s the only way to jump from
one note to another.
TIP
You can swipe rightward to jump from an open note back to the list.
Here’s what this list displays:
The first lines of your notes, along with the time or date you last edited
them. If there’s a photo or sketch on a note—an unlocked one, anyway
—you see its thumbnail, too (facing page, left).
To open a note, tap its name. To delete a note, swipe across its name in
the list, right to left, and then confirm by tapping 
.
NOTE
On iPhone Plus models, rotating the phone produces a whole new two-column layout. The
left column shows your table of contents (first line of every note); the right column shows the
selected note itself.
Pinned notes. Ordinarily, your notes appear chronologically, most
recent at the top. But in Settings → Notes, you can specify that they be
sorted by Date Changed or Title instead.
But you may have a couple of notes—things you refer to a lot—that you
want to appear at the top all the time. Passwords, credit card numbers,
or frequent-flyer numbers, for example.

That’s why, in iOS 11, you can now pin an individual note to the top of
the list, where it won’t move. To do that, swipe across its name in the
list, left to right, and then confirm by tapping the 
 button.
A search box. Tug down on the list to bring the search box into view.
Tap it to open the keyboard. You can now search all your notes instantly
—not just their titles, but also the text inside them.
NOTE
Don’t worry about your locked notes. iOS can search their titles, but not their contents—even
if the notes are currently unlocked.
. This is the Attachments Browser. It brings up a tidy display of

every photo, sketch, website, audio recording, and document that’s ever
been inserted into any of your notes. All in one place (above, right).
The beauty is that you don’t have to remember what you called a note;
just tap one of these items to open it. (At that point, you can tap Show
in Note to open the note that contains it.)
NOTE
Attachments in locked notes (whether or not they are locked right now) don’t show up here.
Syncing Notes
Notes can synchronize with all kinds of other Apple gear—other iPhones, iPads,
iPod Touches, and Macs—so the same notes are waiting for you everywhere you
look. Just make sure Notes is turned on in Settings → [your name] → iCloud
on each phone or tablet, and in System Preferences → iCloud on your Mac.
The rest is automatic—and awesome.
Notes Accounts
Your notes can also sync wirelessly with the Notes modules on Google, Yahoo,
AOL, Exchange, or another IMAP email account. To set this up, open Settings
→ Accounts & Passwords. Tap the account you want (iCloud, Gmail, AOL, or
whatever); turn the Notes switch On.
Now your notes are synced nearly instantly, wirelessly, both directions.
NOTE
One catch: Notes that you create at gmail.com, aol.com, or yahoo.com don’t wind up on the phone.
Those accounts sync wirelessly in one direction only: from the iPhone to the website, where the notes
arrive in a Notes folder. (There’s no problem, however, if you get your AOL or Gmail mail in an email
program like Outlook, Entourage, or Apple Mail. Then it’s two-way syncing as usual.)
At this point, a < bracket appears at the top-left corner of the table of contents
screen. Tap it to see your note sets from various accounts.

If you’ve created Notes folders on your Mac (Mountain Lion or later), then you
see those folders here, too.
TIP
In Settings → Notes, you can specify which of your different Notes accounts you want to be the main
one—the one that new notes fall into if you haven’t specified otherwise.
All of this makes life a little more complex, of course. For example, when you
create a note, you have to worry about which account it’s about to go into. To do
that, be sure to specify an account name (and a folder within it, if necessary)
before you create the new note.
TIP
In Settings → Notes, you can turn on the “On My Phone” Account. Any notes you add to this “folder”
are super-private. They don’t get synced or sent online, ever.
Podcasts
A podcast is a “radio” show that’s distributed online. Lots of podcasts begin life
as actual radio and TV shows; most of NPR’s shows are available as podcasts,
for example, so that you can listen to them whenever and wherever you like.
But thousands more are recorded just for downloading. They range from
recordings made by professionals in studios to amateurs talking into their
phones. Some have thousands of listeners; some have only a handful. One
thing’s for sure: There’s a podcast out there that precisely matches whatever
weird, narrow interests you have.
The Podcasts app helps you find, subscribe to, organize, and listen to podcasts.
It’s designed just like Apple’s online stores for apps, music, movies, and so on.
Tap Browse to see recommended podcasts and Top Charts to see what the rest
of the world is listening to these days (below, right). Or use Search to look for
something specific.

There are video podcasts, too, although they’re much less common. The most
popular are clips from network or cable TV shows, but there are plenty of
quirky, offbeat, funny video podcasts that will never be seen except on pocket
screens.
In any case, once you’ve drilled down to a particular episode that seems worthy,
you can listen to it in either of two ways:
Stream it. Tap Play to play it directly from the Internet. It’s never
stored on your iPhone and doesn’t take up any space, but it does require
an Internet connection. Generally no good for plane rides.

Download it. If you tap 
 instead, you download it to your phone.
It takes up space there (and podcasts can be big)—but you can play it
back anytime, anywhere. And, of course, you can delete it when you’re
done.
Subscribing
Most podcasts are series. Their creators crank them out every week or whatever.
If you find one you love, subscribe to it, so that your phone downloads each new
episode automatically. Just tap Subscribe on its details page.
The episodes wind up on the Library screen (previous page, left), under Shows.
Tap a podcast’s icon to open the My Episodes screen, where you can find listings
for further episodes, controls for deleting an episode or adding them to the
playback queue, and sharing links to this podcast by Messages, Mail, Twitter,
Facebook, and so on).
Settings
There’s a lot to control when it comes to podcasts. Do you want new episodes
downloaded automatically? Do you want them auto-deleted when you’re
finished?
You make these choices in Settings → Podcasts. Those are the global setting for
podcasts.
But you can also override them for individual shows. On any podcast’s details
screen, tap 
 and then Settings to see those options, and many more. You
can limit how many episodes of this show are stored on your phone; specify the
playback order—oldest first or newest first; and much more.
Listening
The Podcasts app offers two ways to dive in. The Listen Now tab shows you the
next episode of each podcast series—the one you’re up to. The Library tab offers
icons for each podcast, so that you can drill down to a particular episode. Tap the

playback strip at the bottom to reveal all the usual audio-playback controls
(“Playback Control”)—with the handy addition of a button to toggle the talking
speed (½x, 1x, 1½x, or 2x regular speed).
TIP
There are 15-second skip-forward and skip-backward buttons here, too. Handy!
If you press the side button to turn off the screen, the podcast continues playing.
And even if the phone is locked, you can open the Control Center (“Control
Center”) to access the playback controls.
TIP
Don’t forget to use Siri! You can say things like “Play ‘Fresh Air’ podcast,” “Play my latest podcasts,”
“Play my podcast” (to resume what you were listening to last), “Play latest TED podcast,” and so on.
Reminders
Reminders not only records your life’s little tasks, but it also reminds you about
them at the right time or right place. For example, it can remind you to water the
plants as soon as you get home.
Thanks to iCloud, your reminders sync across all your gadgets. Create or check
off a task on your iPhone, and you’ll also find it created or checked off on your
iPad, iPod Touch, Mac, PC, and so on.
TIP
Reminders sync wirelessly with anything your iCloud account knows about: Calendar or BusyCal on
your Mac, Outlook on the PC, and so on.
Siri and Reminders are a match made in heaven. “Remind me to file the Jenkins
report when I get to work.” “Remind me to set the TiVo for tonight at 8.”
“Remind me about Timmy’s soccer game a week from Saturday.” “When I get

home, remind me to take a shower.”
The List of Lists
When you open Reminders, it’s clear that you can create more than one to-do
list, each with its own name: a groceries list, kids’ chores, a running tally of
expenses, and so on. It’s a great way to log what you eat if you’re on a diet, or to
keep a list of movies people recommend.
They show up as file-folder tabs; tap one to open the to-do list within.
If you have an Exchange account, one of your lists can be synced to your
corporate Tasks list. It doesn’t offer all the features of the other lists in
Reminders, but at least it’s kept tidy and separate.
TIP
You can use Siri to add things to individual lists by name. You can say, for example, “Add avocados to
my Groceries list.” “Add Titanic 2 to my Movies list.”
Siri can also find these reminders, saving you a lot of navigation. You can say, “Find my reminder about
dosage instructions,” for example.
Once you’ve created some lists, you can easily switch among them. Just tap an
open list’s name to collapse it, returning to the list of lists. At that point you can
tap the title of a different list to open it.
TIP
When you’re viewing the list of lists, you can rearrange them by dragging their title bars up or down.
To create a new list, begin at the list of lists (facing page, left). Tap + at the top
right. The app asks if you’re trying to create a new Reminder (that is, one To Do
item) or a new List; tap List.
If you have multiple accounts that offer reminders, you’re asked to specify
which one will receive the new list at this point, too.
Now your jobs begin:

1. Enter a name for the list. When you tap the light-gray letters New
List, the keyboard appears to help you out.
2. Tap a colored dot. This will be the color of the list’s title font and also
of the “checked-off” circles once the list is under way.
3. Tap Done. Now you can tap the first blank line and enter the first item
in the list.
NOTE
After that first line, you can’t create new items in the list by tapping the blank line below the existing
items. As you type, tapping the Return key is the only way to move to the next line. (Tap Done when
you’re finished adding to the list.)
To delete a list, tap Edit and then tap Delete List.
Later you can assign a task to a different list by tapping List on its Details
screen.
To return to the list of lists, tap the current list’s name. Or tap the bottom edge of
the screen. Or swipe down from the top of it.

The Scheduled List
If you really do wind up using Reminders as a to-do list, you might be gratified
to discover that the app also offers an automatically generated Scheduled list: a
consolidated list of every item, from all your lists, to which you’ve given a
deadline. It’s always the topmost tab, marked by an alarm-clock icon.
Recording a Reminder
Once you’ve opened a list, here’s how you record a new task the manual way:
Tap the blank line beneath your existing reminders. Type your reminder (or
dictate it). Tap the 
 to set up the details, described next; tap Done when
you’re finished.

As you go through life completing tasks, tap the circle next to each one. A
checked-off to-do remains in place until the next time you visit its list. At that
point, it disappears. It’s moved into a separate list called Completed.
But when you want to take pride in how much you’ve accomplished, you can tap
Show Completed to bring your checked-off tasks back into view.
Other stuff you can do:
Delete a to-do item altogether, as though it never existed. Swipe
leftward across its name; tap Delete to confirm (previous page, right).
Delete a bunch of items in a row. Tap Edit. Tap each 
 icon, and
then tap Delete to confirm.
Rearrange a list so the items appear in a different order. Tap Edit,
and then drag the 
 handle up or down.
The Details Screen
If you tap 
 next to an item’s name, you arrive at the Details screen (below,
left). Here you can set up a reminder that will pop up at a certain time or place,
create an auto-repeating schedule, file this item into a different to-do list with its
own name, add notes to this item, or delete it.

Here are your options, one by one:
Remind me on a day. Here you can set up the phone to chime at a
certain date and time. Turn on the switch to see two new lines: Alarm
and Repeat. Tap Alarm to bring up the “time wheel” for setting the
deadline.
Tap Repeat if you want this reminder to appear every day, week, two
weeks, month, or year—great for reminding you about things that recur,
like quarterly tax payments, haircuts, and anniver​saries.
Remind me at a location. If you turn on this amazing feature, then the
phone will use its GPS to remind you of this item when you arrive at a
certain place or leave a certain place. When you tap the Location line,
you’ll see that the phone offers “Current Location”—wherever you are
at the moment. That’s handy if, for example, you’re dropping off your
dry cleaning and want to remember to pick it up the next time you’re

driving by.
But you can also choose Home or Work (your home or work addresses,
as you’ve set them up in Contacts). Or you can use the search box at the
top, either to type or dictate a street address, or to search your own
Contacts list.
NOTE
If you use Bluetooth to pair your phone to your car, you have a couple of other helpful
choices: Getting in the car (to get a reminder when the iPhone connects to your car) and
Getting out of the car (to get one when it disconnects).
Once you’ve specified an address, the Location screen shows a map
(facing page, right). The diameter of the blue circle shows the area
where your presence will trigger the appearance of the reminder on your
screen.
TIP
You can adjust the size of this “geofence” by dragging the black handle to adjust the circle.
In effect, you’re telling the iPhone how close you have to be to the specified address for the
reminder to pop up. You can adjust the circle’s radius anywhere from 328 feet (“Remind me
when I’m in that store”) to 1,500 miles (“Remind me when I’m in that country”).
The final step here is to tap either When I Leave or When I Arrive.
Later, the phone will remind you at the appointed time or as you
approach (or leave) the address, which is fairly mind-blowing the first
few times it happens.
NOTE
If you set up both a time reminder and a location reminder, then your iPhone uses whichever
event happens first.

Priority. Tap to specify whether this item has low, medium, or high
priority—or None. In some of the calendar programs that sync with
Reminders, you can sort your task list by priority.
List. Tap to assign this to-do to a different reminder list, if necessary.
Notes. Here’s a handy box where you can record freehand notes about
this item: an address, a phone number, details of any kind.
To exit the Details screen, tap Done.
“Remid Me About This”
Here’s a reminder about a fantastic Reminders feature.
When you’re looking at something in one of Apple’s apps, you can tell Siri,
“Remind me about this later.” That might be a text message in Messages, a web
page in Safari, an email in Mail, a document in Pages, or whatever. (This
command works in Calendar, Clock, Contacts, iBooks, Health, Mail, Maps,
Messages, Notes, Numbers, Pages, Phone, Podcasts, Reminders, and Safari.
Software companies can upgrade their apps to work with “Remind me about
this,” too.)
Instantly, Siri creates a new item on your main Reminders list—named for the
precise message, location, web page, document, or thing you were looking at—
complete with the icon of the app you were using.
Later, you can tap that icon to open the original app—to the exact spot you were
at when you issued the command.
You don’t have to be as vague as “later,” either. You can also say things like
“Remind me about this tomorrow night at 7” or “Remind me about this when I
get home.”
Put it all together, and you’ve got an amazingly effective system for
bookmarking your life. Maybe this trick will, once and for all, end the practice
of people emailing stuff to themselves, just so they’ll remember it.
Stocks

This one’s for you, big-time day trader. The Stocks app tracks the rise and fall of
the stocks in your portfolio by downloading the very latest stock prices.
(All right, maybe not the very latest. The price info may be delayed as much as
20 minutes, which is typical of free stock-info services.)
When you first fire it up, Stocks shows you a handful of sample high-tech stocks
—or, rather, their abbreviations. (They stand for the Dow Jones Industrial
Average, the NASDAQ Composite Index, the S&P 500 Index, Apple, Google,
and Yahoo.)
Next to each, you see its current share price, and next to that, you see how much
that price has gone up or down today. As a handy visual gauge to how elated or
depressed you should be, this final number appears on a green background if it’s
gone up, or a red one if it’s gone down. Tap this number to cycle the display

from a percentage to a dollar amount to current market capitalization (“120.3B,”
meaning $120.3 billion in total corporate value).
When you tap a stock, the bottom part of the screen shows some handy data.
Swipe horizontally to cycle among three different displays:
A table of statistics. A capsule summary of today’s price and volume
statistics for this stock.
A graph of the stock’s price. It starts out showing you the graph of the
current year. But by tapping the headings above the chart, you can zoom
in or out from one day (1D) to three months (3M) to two years (2Y).
A table of relevant headlines, courtesy of Yahoo Finance. Tap a
headline to read the article—or tap and hold to add it, or all the articles,
to your Safari Reading List (“The Reading List (
)”).
Landscape View
If you turn the iPhone sideways, you get a much bigger, more detailed,
widescreen graph of the stock in question. (Flick horizontally to view the
previous or next stock.)
TIP
On a Plus model, there’s room for both your list of stocks and the graph of the one you’ve tapped, all on
the same screen.
Better yet, you can pinch with two fingers or two thumbs to isolate a certain time
period; a pop-up label shows you how much of a bath you took (or how much of
a windfall you received) during the interval you highlighted. Cool!

Customizing Your Portfolio
It’s fairly unlikely that your stock portfolio contains just Apple, Google, and
Yahoo. Fortunately, you can customize the list of stocks to reflect the companies
you do own (or want to track).
To edit the list, tap 
 in the lower-right corner. You arrive at the editing
screen (previous page, right), where these choices await:
Delete a stock by tapping the 
 button and then the Delete
confirmation button.
Rearrange the list by dragging the grip strips on the right side.
Add a stock by tapping + in the top-left corner; the Add Stock screen
and the keyboard appear.
You’re not expected to know every stock-symbol abbreviation. Type in
the company’s name, and then tap Search. The iPhone shows you,
above the keyboard, a scrolling list of companies with matching names.

Tap the one you want to track. You return to the stocks-list editing
screen.
Choose Percentage, Price, or Market Cap. By tapping the buttons at
the bottom, you can specify how you want to see the changes in stock
prices in the far-right column: as percentages (“+0.65%”), as dollar
figures (“+2.23”) or as market cap. (Here you’re simply choosing which
number starts out appearing on the main stock screen. As noted earlier,
you can easily cycle among these three stats by tapping them.)
When you’re finished setting up your stock list, tap Done.
Tips
Hey, check it out—Apple’s getting into the how-to game!
This app is designed to show you tips and tricks for getting the most from your
iPhone. Each Collection (Fantastic Photos, Everyday Essentials, and so on)
screen offers a set of tips—a paragraph of text apiece—explaining one of iOS’s
marvels. Swipe leftward to see the next tip, and the next, and the next.
It’s not exactly, you know, a handsome, printed book. But it’s something.
TV
This app lets you find and play videos from two sources: the iTunes store, and
individual video apps. It’s described in “The TV App”.
Voice Memos
This audio app is ideal for recording lectures, musical performances, notes to
self, and cute child utterances. You’ll probably be very surprised at how good the
microphone is, even from a distance.
The best part: When you sync your iPhone with iTunes on your Mac or PC, all
your voice recordings get copied back to the computer automatically. You’ll find
them in the iTunes folder called Voice Memos.

Tap 
 (or click your earbud clicker) to start recording. A little ding signals
the start (and stop) of the session—unless you’ve turned the phone’s volume all
the way down (you sneak!).
You get to watch the actual sound waves as the recording proceeds (above, left).
You can pause at any time by pressing the Stop button (
)—and then resume
the same recording with another tap on the 
.
TIP
The built-in mike records in mono. But you can record in stereo if you connect a stereo mike (to the
headphone jack or charging jack).

You can also switch out of the app to do other work. A red banner across the top
of the screen (or, on the iPhone X, the left “ear”) reminds you that you’re still
recording. You can even switch the screen off; the recording goes on!
You can make very long recordings with this thing. Let it run all day, if you like.
Even your most long-winded friends can be immortalized.
Tap Done when you’re sure the recording session is over. You’re asked to type a
name for the new recording (“Baby’s First Words,” “Orch Concert,” whatever);
then you can tap Save or, if it wasn’t worth saving, Delete.
Below the recording controls, you see the list of your recordings (facing page,
right). When you tap one, a convenient set of controls appears. (They look a lot
like the ones that appear when you tap a voicemail message in the Phone app.)
TIP
If you have an iPhone Plus model, you can turn the screen 90 degrees—and see both the list of
recordings and the editing screen, in two columns.
Here’s what you can do here:
[Recording name]. Tap the name to edit or rename it.
. Tap to play the recording. You can pause with the 
 button.
TIP
As a recording plays back, you can tap 
 at the top of the screen to turn the speaker
on or off, so that you don’t have to hold the phone up to your ear.
Rewind, Fast Forward. Drag the little vertical line in the scrubber bar
to skip backward or forward in the recording. It’s a great way to skip
over the boring pleasantries.

. Tap to get rid of a recording (you’ll be asked to confirm).
. Tap to open the standard Share sheet. It gives you the chance to
send your recording to someone else by AirDrop, email, or MMS.
Trimming Your Recording
You might not guess that such a tiny, self-effacing app actually offers some basic
editing functions, but it does. Tap a recording and then tap Edit to open its Edit
screen.
The main thing you’ll do here is trim off the beginning or end of your audio clip.
That, of course, is where you’ll usually find “dead air” or microphone fumbling
before the good stuff starts playing. (You can’t otherwise edit the sound; for
example, you can’t copy or paste bits or cut a chunk out of the middle.)
To trim the bookends of your clip, tap the Trim button (
). At this point, the
beginning and end of the recording are marked by vertical red lines; these are
your trim points. Drag them inward to isolate the part of the clip you want to
keep. The app thoughtfully magnifies the sound waves whenever you’re
dragging, to help with precision. Play the sound as necessary to guide you (
).

Tap Trim to lock in your changes. You’ll be asked to tap either Trim Original
(meaning “shorten the original clip permanently”) or Save as New Recording
(meaning “leave the original untouched, and spin out the shortened version as a
separate audio file, just in case”).
Wallet
This app was originally called Passbook. And it was originally designed to store,
in one place, every form of ticket that uses a barcode. For most people, that
meant airline boarding passes.

Wallet still does that. And, occasionally, you may find a Wallet-compatible
theater or sports-admission pass, loyalty card, coupon, movie ticket, and so on.
Beats having a separate app for each one of these.
Wallet holds down a second job, too. It’s the key to Apple Pay, the magical “pay
by waving your iPhone” feature described in “Apple Pay”.
TIP
You can rearrange the items in Wallet; just hold still briefly before you start moving your finger up or
down. (That order syncs to your other iOS gadgets, for what it’s worth.)
What’s cool is that Wallet uses both its own clock and GPS to know when the
time and place are right. For example, when you arrive at the airport, a
notification appears on your Lock screen. Each time you have to show your
boarding pass as you work through the stages of airport security, you can wake
your phone and swipe across that notification; your boarding-pass barcode
appears instantly. You’re spared having to unlock your phone (enter its
password), hunt for the airline app, log in, and fiddle your way to the boarding
pass.

The hardest part might be finding things to put into Wallet. You can visit the
App Store and search for “passbook” to find apps that work with Wallet—big
airlines, Fandango (movie tickets), Starbucks, Walgreens, Ticketmaster, and
Major League Baseball are among the compatible apps. In some, you’re
supposed to open the app to view the barcode first and put it into Wallet from
there. For example, in most airline apps, you call up the boarding-pass screen
and then tap Add.
Once your barcodes have successfully landed in Wallet, the rest is pure fun.
When you arrive at the theater or stadium or airport, the Lock screen displays an
alert. Swipe it to open the barcode in Wallet. You can put the entire phone under

the ticket-taker’s scanner.
Tap the 
 button in the corner to read the details—and to delete a ticket after
you’ve used it (tap Remove Pass). That details screen also offers a Show On
Lock Screen on/off switch, in case you don’t want Wallet to hand you your
ticket as you arrive.
Finally, Wallet is one of the two places you can enter your credit card
information for Apple Pay on an iPhone 6 or later model, as described in “Apple
Pay”. (Settings is the other.)
Watch
If you own an Apple Watch, you use this little app to set up its settings. (OK, big
app—there are 90 screens of settings!)
So why do you have the Watch app on your phone even if you don’t have an
Apple Watch? You’ll have to ask someone in Marketing.
If it bugs you, you can get rid of it (“Deleting Apps”).
Weather
This app shows a handy current-conditions display for your city (or any other
city). Handy and lovely; the weather display is animated. Clouds drift by, rain
falls gently. If it’s nighttime in the city you’re looking up, you might see a
beautiful starscape.
The current temperature is shown nice and big; the table below it shows the
cloud-versus-sun forecast, as well as the high and low temperatures.
You don’t even have to tell the app what weather you want; it uses your location
and assumes you want the local weather forecast.
There are three places you can tap or swipe:
Scroll up to see a table of stats: humidity, chance of rain, sunrise time,
wind speed, “feels like” (chill or heat index), and so on.

Swipe horizontally across the hourly forecast to scroll later in the
day.
Swipe horizontally anywhere else to view the weather for other cities
(if you’ve set them up). The tiny dots beneath the display correspond to
the cities you’ve set up—and the white bold one indicates where you
are in the sequence.
TIP
The dots are really tiny. Don’t try to aim for a specific one—it’s a lot easier to tap the row of dots on
either the right or left side to move backward or forward among the cities.
The first city—the screen at far left—is always the city you’re in right now. The
iPhone uses GPS to figure out where you are.
The City List
It’s easy to get the weather for other cities—great if you’re going to be traveling,
or if you’re wondering how life is for distant relations.
When you tap 
 at the lower-right corner (or pinch with two fingers), the
screen collapses into a list of your preprogrammed cities (below, right).

You can tap one to open its weather screen. You can delete one by swiping
leftward across it (and then tapping Delete). You can drag them up or down into
a new order (leave your finger down for about a second before each time you
drag). You can switch between Celsius and Fahrenheit by tapping the ��C/
��F button.
Or you can scroll to the bottom (if necessary) and tap 
 to enter a new city.
Here you’re asked to type a city, a zip code, or an airport abbreviation (like JFK
for New York’s John F. Kennedy airport). You can specify any reasonably sized
city on earth.
When you tap Search, you’re shown a list of matching cities; tap the one you
want to track. When you return to the configuration screen, you can also specify
whether you prefer degrees Celsius or Fahrenheit. Tap Done.

There’s nothing else to tap here except the Weather Channel icon at the bottom.
It fires up the Safari browser, which loads itself with an information page about
that city from weather.com.
If you’ve added more than one city to the list, by the way, just flick your finger
right or left to flip through the weather screens for the cities.
More Standard Apps
This book describes every app that comes on every iPhone. But Apple has
another suite of useful programs for you. And they’re free.
NOTE
If you have an iPhone model with 64 or more gigabytes of storage, then most of these apps come already
installed.
To find them, search the App Store app for these goodies: Pages is, believe it or
not, a word-processing/page-layout program. Numbers is Apple’s spreadsheet
program. Keynote is Apple’s version of PowerPoint. It lets you make slideshow
presentations from your iPhone. iMovie is, yes, a video-editing program on your
cellphone, with all the basics: rearranging clips; adding music, crossfades, and
credits. GarageBand is a pocket music studio. Find My Friends lets you see
where your friends and family members are on a map (with their permission, of
course). Find My iPhone is useful when you want to find other missing Apple
gadgets (Macs, iPads, iPod Touches, iPhones).
NOTE
And where, you may ask, is the iTunes U app?
iTunes U is a catalog of 600,000 free courses by professors at colleges, museums, and libraries all over
the world; the dearly departed app let you browse the catalog, and watch and read the course materials.
Those courses are still available—but they’ve been merged into the Podcasts app described earlier in this
chapter. You find them by searching for the name of the institution or collection.

Chapter 13. 12 Getting Online
The name “iPhone” grows less appropriate every year, as making phone calls
fades in importance. Today, Americans send texts five times more often than
they make phone calls. Among teenagers, 92 percent never make calls with their
smartphones.
What do they do with them, then? Go online—and use apps that go online.
The iPhone can get onto the Internet using either of two kinds of wireless
networks: cellular or Wi-Fi. Which kind you’re on makes a huge difference to
your iPhone experience.
Cellular Networks
Once you’ve accepted the miracle that a cellphone can transmit your voice
wirelessly, it’s not much of a stretch to realize that it can also transmit your data.
Cellphone carriers (Verizon, AT&T, and so on) maintain separate networks for
voice and Internet data—and they spend billions of dollars trying to make those
networks faster. Over the years, they’ve come up with data networks like these:
Old, slow cellular network. The earliest, slowest cellular Internet
connections were called things like EDGE (AT&T) or 1xRTT (Verizon
and Sprint). The good part is that these networks are almost
everywhere, so your iPhone can get online almost anywhere you can
make a phone call. You’ll know when you’re on one of these networks
because your status bar bears a symbol like 
 or 
.
The bad news is that it’s slow. Dog slow—dial-up slow.
You can’t be on a phone call while you’re online using EDGE or
1xRTT, either.
3G cellular networks. 3G stands for “third generation.” (The ancient
analog cellphones were the first generation; EDGE-type networks were

the second.) Geeks refer to the 3G network standard by its official
name: HSDPA, for High-Speed Downlink Packet Access.
Web pages that take two minutes to appear using EDGE or 1xRTT show
up in about 20 seconds on 3G. Voice calls sound better, too, even when
the signal strength is very low, since the iPhone’s 3G radio can
communicate with multiple towers at once.
Oh, and on AT&T and T-Mobile, you can talk on the phone and use the
Internet simultaneously, which can be very handy indeed.
4G networks. AT&T enhanced HSDPA, making it faster using a
technology called HSPA+ (High-Speed Packet Access), and now calls it
4G. (You’ll know when you’re on one; your status bar says 
.) But
nobody else recognizes HSPA+ as real 4G, which is why AT&T feels
justified in advertising “the nation’s largest 4G network.” The other
carriers aren’t even measuring that network type.
4G LTE networks. Now this is 4G.
An LTE network (Long-Term Evolution) gives you amazing speeds—in
some cases, faster than your broadband Internet at home. When your
status bar says 
, it’s fantastic.
But LTE is not all sunshine and bunnies; it has two huge downsides.
First: coverage. LTE coverage is available in hundreds of U.S. cities,
which is a good start. But that still leaves most of the country, including
huge chunks of several entire states, without any 4G coverage at all (hi
there, Montana!). Whenever you’re outside the high-speed areas, your
iPhone falls back to the slower speeds.
The second big problem with LTE is that, to receive its signal, a phone’s
circuitry uses a lot of power. That’s why the latest iPhones are bigger
than their predecessors; they need beefier batteries.
A Word About VoLTE
If you have an iPhone 6 or later model, the dawn of LTE cellphone networks

brings another benefit: You can use Voice over LTE, or VoLTE (“volty”). That’s
a delightful new cellular feature that promises amazing voice quality—sounds
more like FM radio than cellphone—and simultaneous calling/Internetting, even
on Verizon. (Behind the scenes, it sends your voice over the carrier’s Internet
network instead of the voice network. That’s why it’s called “Voice over LTE.”)
To make this work, every link in the chain has to be compatible with VoLTE:
your phone and your cellphone network, and (for that great sound quality) the
phone and network of the person you’re calling.
All four big U.S. carriers offer VoLTE, but you generally get the high-quality
sound only when you’re calling someone on the same cellphone carrier—not if,
for example, you have Verizon and the other guy has T-Mobile. (Cross-carrier
calling is supposed to be coming soon.)
Wi-Fi Hotspots
Wi-Fi, known to geeks as 802.11, is wireless networking, the same technology
that gets laptops online at high speed in any Wi-Fi hotspot.
Hotspots are everywhere these days: in homes, offices, coffee shops, hotels,
airports, and thousands of other places. When you’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot, your
iPhone usually gets a fast connection to the Internet, as though it’s connected to
a cable modem or DSL. And when you’re online this way, you can make phone
calls and surf the Internet simultaneously. And why not? Your iPhone’s Wi-Fi
and cellular antennas are independent.
(Over cellular connections, only the AT&T and T-Mobile iPhones let you talk
and get online simultaneously. Verizon and Sprint can do that only when you’re
on a VoLTE call, as described previously.)
The iPhone always looks for a Wi-Fi connection first. It considers connecting to
a cellular network only if there’s no Wi-Fi. You’ll always know which kind of
network you’re on, thanks to the icons on the status bar: You’ll see either 
for Wi-Fi, or one of the cellular icons (
, 
, 
, 
, or 
).
Or “No service” if there’s nothing available at all.

iPHONE X
Instead of “No Service,” you see five square periods (
) where the signal bars would
be.
In terms of speed, LTE and Wi-Fi are awesome. EDGE/1xRTT and even 3G—
not so much.
Sequence of Connections
The iPhone isn’t online all the time. To save battery power, it opens the
connection only on demand: when you check email, request a web page, and so
on. At that point, the iPhone tries to get online following this sequence:
First, it sniffs around for a Wi-Fi network that you’ve used before. If
it finds one, it connects quietly and automatically. You’re not asked for
permission, a password, or anything else.
If the iPhone can’t find a previous hotspot but it detects a new
hotspot, a message appears (below, left). It displays any new hotspots’
names; tap the one you want. (If you see a 
 icon, then that hotspot is
password-protected.)

If the iPhone can’t find any Wi-Fi hotspots to join, or if you don’t
join any, it connects to the cellular network, like 3G or LTE.
Silencing the “Want to Join?” Messages
Sometimes, you might be bombarded by those “Select a Wireless Network”
messages at a time when you have no need to be online. You might want the
iPhone to stop bugging you—to stop offering Wi-Fi hotspots. In that situation,
from the Home screen, tap Settings → Wi-Fi (or tell Siri, “Open Wi-Fi
settings”), and then turn off Ask to Join Networks. When this option is off, the
iPhone never interrupts you by dropping the name of every new network at your
feet. In this case, to get onto a new network, you have to visit the
aforementioned settings screen and select it.
The List of Hotspots

At some street corners in big cities, Wi-Fi signals bleeding out of apartment
buildings sometimes give you a choice of 20 or 30 hotspots to join. But
whenever the iPhone invites you to join a hotspot, it suggests only a couple of
them: the ones with the strongest signal and, if possible, no password
requirement.
But you might sometimes want to see the complete list of available hotspots—
maybe because the iPhone-suggested hotspot is flaky. To see the full list, from
the Home screen, open Settings → Wi-Fi. Tap the one you want to join, as
shown on the facing page at right.
TIP
Tap 
 next to a hotspot’s name to view an info sheet for techies. It shows your IP address, subnet
mask, router address, and other delicious stats. Even mere mortals, however, will sometimes enjoy the
Forget This Network button. It removes this hotspot from the list, which is handy if you’ve moved
away and don’t need to be reminded of the high speed that was once yours.
Commercial Hotspots

Tapping the name of the hotspot you want to join is generally all you have to do
—if it’s a home Wi-Fi network. Unfortunately, joining a commercial Wi-Fi
hotspot—one that requires a credit card number (in a hotel room or an airport,
for example)—requires more than just connecting to it. You also have to sign

into it, exactly as you’d do if you were using a laptop.
In general, the iPhone prompts you to do that automatically. A login screen pops
up on its own, interrupting whatever else you’re doing; that’s where you supply
your credit card information or (if you have a membership to this Wi-Fi chain,
like Boingo or T-Mobile) your name and password. Tap Submit or Proceed and
enjoy your surfing.
Mercifully, the iPhone memorizes your password. The next time you use this
hotspot, you won’t have to enter it again.
Airplane Mode and Wi-Fi Off Mode
When battery power is precious, you can turn off all three of the iPhone’s
network connections in one fell swoop. You can also turn off Wi-Fi alone.
To turn all radios off. In airplane mode, you turn off all wireless
circuitry: Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, and cellular. Now you can’t make calls or
get onto the Internet. You’re saving an amazing amount of power,
however, and also complying with regulations that ban cellphones in
flight.
The short way: Open the Control Center (“Control Center”); tap 
so it turns orange. (The long way: Open Settings; turn on Airplane
Mode.)
To turn Wi-Fi on or off. Open the Control Center; tap 
. (When
it’s blue, it’s on.) You can also switch it in Settings → Wi-Fi.
TIP
Once you’ve turned on airplane mode, you can turn Wi-Fi back on again. Why? To use Wi-Fi on a
flight. This is how you turn Wi-Fi on, but your cellular circuitry off.
Conversely, you sometimes might want to do the opposite: turn off Wi-Fi, but leave cellular on. Why?
Because, sometimes, the iPhone bizarrely won’t get online at all. It’s struggling to use a Wi-Fi network
that, for one reason or another, isn’t connecting to the Internet. By turning Wi-Fi off, you force the
iPhone to use its cellular connection—which may be slower, but at least it works!

In airplane mode, anything that requires voice or Internet access—text messages,
web, email, and so on—triggers a message: “Turn Off Airplane Mode or Use
Wi-Fi to Access Data.” Tap either OK (to back out of your decision) or Settings
(to turn off airplane mode and get online).
You can, however, enjoy all the other iPhone features: Music, Camera, and so
on. You can also work with stuff you’ve already downloaded to the phone, like
email, voicemail messages, and web pages you’ve saved in the Reading List.
Personal Hotspot (Tethering)
Tethering means using your iPhone as an Internet antenna, so that your laptops,
iPads, game consoles, and other Internet-connectables can get online. (The other

gadgets can connect to the phone over a Wi-Fi connection, a Bluetooth
connection, or a USB cable.) In fact, several laptops and other gadgets can all
share the iPhone’s connection simultaneously. Your phone becomes a personal
cellular router.
That’s incredibly convenient, and Apple’s execution is especially nice. For
example, the hotspot shuts itself off 90 seconds after the last laptop disconnects.
That’s hugely important, because a personal hotspot is a merciless battery drain.
The hotspot feature may be included with your data plan (T-Mobile), or it may
cost something like $20 a month extra, which buys only 2 gigabytes of data
(Verizon). Think email, not YouTube.
To get this feature, you have to sign up for it by calling your cellular company or
visiting its website.
TIP
If you have a Mac running OS X Yosemite or later, you’re in for a real treat: a much more streamlined
way to set up Personal Hotspot called Instant Hotspot. Skip the instructions below and jump
immediately to “Instant Hotspot”.
Turning On the Hotspot
On the phone, open Settings → Cellular → Set Up Personal Hotspot (or tell
Siri, “Open cellular settings”).
TIP
Once you’ve turned on Personal Hotspot for the first time, you won’t have to drill down as far to get to
it. A new Personal Hotspot item appears right there on the main Settings screen from now on.
The Personal Hotspot screen contains details on connecting other computers. It
also has the master on/off switch. Turn Personal Hotspot On.

(If you see a button that says Set Up Personal Hotspot, it means you haven’t
yet added the monthly tethering fee to your cellular plan. Contact your wireless
carrier to get that change made to your account.)
You have to use a password for your personal hotspot; it’s to ensure that people
sitting nearby can’t surf using your connection and run up your cell bill. The
software proposes a password, but you can edit it and make up one of your own.
(It has to be at least eight characters long and contain letters, numbers, and
punctuation. Don’t worry—your laptop or other Wi-Fi gadget can memorize it
for you.)
Your laptops and other gadgets can connect to the Internet using any of three
connections to the iPhone: Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, or a USB cable. If either Wi-Fi or
Bluetooth are turned off, then a message appears to let you know—and offers to
turn them on for you. To save battery power, turn on only what you need.
Connecting via Wi-Fi
After about 30 seconds, the iPhone shows up on your laptop or other gadget as
though it were a Wi-Fi network. Just choose the iPhone’s name from your
computer’s Wi-Fi hotspot menu (on the Mac, it’s the 
 menu). Enter the

password, and bam—your laptop is now online, using the iPhone as an antenna.
On the Mac or an iPad, the 
 changes to look like this: 
.
You can leave the iPhone in your pocket or purse while connected. Your laptop
can now use email, the web, chat programs—anything it could do in a real Wi-Fi
hotspot (just a little slower).
Connecting via Bluetooth
There’s no compelling reason to use Bluetooth instead of Wi-Fi, especially since
Bluetooth slows your Internet connection. But if you’re interested, see the free
downloadable PDF appendix “Bluetooth Tethering” on this book’s “Missing
CD” page at www.missingmanuals.com.
Connecting via USB Cable
If you can connect your laptop to your iPhone using the white charging cable,
you should. Tethering eats up a lot of the phone’s battery power, so keeping it
plugged into the laptop means you won’t wind up with a dead phone when
you’re finished surfing.
Once You’re Connected
On the iPhone, a blue bar appears at the top of the screen to make you aware that
the laptop is connected (facing page, right); in fact, it shows how many laptops
or other gadgets are connected at the moment, via any of the three connection
methods. You can tap that bar to open the Personal Hotspot screen in Settings.
Most carriers won’t let more than five people connect through a single iPhone.
Turning Off Personal Hotspot
Personal Hotspot is a battery hog. It’ll cut your iPhone’s battery longevity in
half. That’s why, if no laptops are connected for 90 seconds, the iPhone turns the
hotspot off automatically.
You can also turn off the hotspot manually, just the way you’d expect: In
Settings → Personal Hotspot, tap Off.

Turning Personal Hotspot Back On
To fire Personal Hotspot back up again, open Settings and tap Personal
Hotspot. That’s it—just visit the Personal Hotspot screen to make the iPhone
resume broadcasting its Wi-Fi or Bluetooth network to your laptops and other
gadgets.
Share Your Wi-Fi Password
It happens in homes and apartments all over the world. A friend comes over and
asks: “Hey, what’s your Wi-Fi password?”
And then you crawl behind the water heater to find the password sticker on the
router. Or the evening grinds to a halt as you try to dictate it: “Capital P,
lowercase u, capital M, number 1....”
For the first time, iOS 11 eases that everyday pain point. Now, you can allow a
buddy to hop onto your network without having to spell out your password—or
even reveal it! It works like this:
1. The buddy opens Settings → Wi-Fi and taps your network name. He’s
staring at the box where he’s supposed to enter the password. He brings
his phone near your iPhone (or your iPad, or your Mac).
NOTE
This trick requires that you both have Bluetooth and Wi-Fi turned on, and that your buddy is
someone in your Contacts.
2. You see a Wi-Fi Password screen. You tap Share Password.

3. Your buddy marvels as the password appears in the Password box
before his eyes.
He can tap Join and dive right in, ready to enjoy the Internet instead of
paying attention to you.

Chapter 14. 13 Safari
The iPhone’s web browser is Safari, a lite version of the same one that comes on
the Mac. It’s fast, simple to use, and very pretty. On the web pages you visit, you
see the real deal—the actual fonts, graphics, and layouts—not the stripped-down
mini-web on cellphones of years gone by.
Using Safari on the iPhone is still not quite as good as surfing the web on, you
know, a laptop. But it’s getting closer.
Safari Tour
Safari has most of the features of a desktop web browser: bookmarks,
autocomplete (for web addresses), scrolling shortcuts, cookies, a pop-up ad
blocker, password memorization, and so on. (It’s missing niceties like streaming
music, Java, Flash, and other plug-ins.) Now, don’t be freaked out: The main
screen elements disappear shortly after you start reading a page. That’s
supposed to give you more screen space to do your surfing. To bring them back,
scroll to the top, scroll to the bottom, or just scroll up a little. At that point, you
see the controls again. Here they are, as they appear from the top left:
Reader view (
). In this delightful view, all the ads, boxes, banners,
and other junk disappear. Only text and pictures remain, for your sanity-
in-reading pleasure. See “Reader View”.
Address/search bar. A single, unified box serves as both the address
bar and the search bar at the top of the screen. (That’s the trend these
days. Desktop-computer browsers like Chrome and Safari on the Mac
work that way, too.) This box is where you enter the URL (web address)
for a page you want to visit. (“URL” is short for the even-less-self-
explanatory Uniform Resource Locator.) For example, if you type
amazon.com, tapping Go takes you to that website.
But this is also where you search the web. If you type anything else, like

cashmere sweaters or just amazon, then tapping Go gives you the
Google search results for that phrase.
TIP
If you hold your finger down briefly on the keyboard’s period key, you get a pop-up palette
of web-address suffixes (.org, .edu, and so on). Luckily, .com starts out selected—so just
release your finger to type it in. In other words, the entire process for typing .com goes like
this: Hold finger on period key; release.
Stop, Reload (
, 
). Tap 
 to interrupt the downloading of a
web page you’ve just requested (if you’ve made a mistake, for instance,
or if it’s taking too long).
TIP
You don’t have to wait for a web page to load entirely. You can zoom in, scroll, and begin
reading the text even when only part of the page has appeared.
Once a page has finished loading, the 
 button turns into a 

(reload) button. Click it if a page doesn’t look or work quite right. Safari
re-downloads the web page and reinterprets its text and graphics.
Back, Forward (<, >). Tap < to revisit the page you were just on. Once
you’ve tapped <, you can then tap > to return to the page you were on
before you tapped the < button. You can also hold down these buttons
to see the complete history list of this tab.
TIP
Since these buttons disappear as soon as you scroll down a page, how are you supposed to
move back and forward among pages?
By swiping in from outside the screen. Start your swipe on the edge of the phone’s front
glass and whisk inward. Swiping rightward like this means “back”; leftward means “forward
again.” Do it slowly, and you can actually see the page sliding in.
Share/Bookmark (
). When you’re on an especially useful page, tap
this button. It offers every conceivable choice for commemorating or
sharing the page. See “Creating New Bookmarks” for details.
View Bookmarks (
). This button brings up your list of saved
bookmarks—plus your History list, Favorites, Reading List, and links
recommended by the people you follow on Twitter. You can read about
these elements later in this chapter.
Page Juggler (
). Safari can keep multiple web pages open, just like
any other browser. “Manipulating Multiple Pages” has the details.
Zooming and Scrolling
When you first open a web page, you get to see the entire thing, so you can get
the lay of the land. At this point, of course, you’re looking at .004-point type,
which is too small to read unless you’re a microbe. So the next step is to
magnify the part of the page you want to read.

The iPhone offers three ways to do that:
Double-tap. Safari can recognize different chunks of a web page—
each block of text, each photo. When you double-tap a chunk, Safari
magnifies just that chunk to fill the whole screen. It’s smart and useful.
Double-tap again to zoom back out.
Rotate the iPhone. Turn the device 90 degrees in either direction. The
iPhone rotates and magnifies the image to fill the wider view. Often,
this simple act is enough to make tiny type big enough to read.
Do the two-finger spread. Put two fingers on the glass and slide them
apart. The Safari page stretches before your very eyes, growing larger.
Then you can pinch to shrink the page back down again. (Most people
do several spreads or pinches in a row to achieve the degree of zoom
they want.)
Once you’ve zoomed out to the proper degree, you can then scroll around the
page by dragging or flicking with a finger. You don’t have to worry about
“clicking a link” by accident; if your finger is in motion, Safari ignores the
tapping action, even if you happen to land on a link.
TIP
Once you’ve double-tapped to zoom in on a page, you can use this little-known trick: Double-tap
anywhere on the upper half of the screen to scroll up or the lower half to scroll down. The closer you are
to the top or bottom of the screen, the more you scroll.

Full-Screen Mode
On a phone, the screen is pretty small to begin with; most people would rather
dedicate that space to showing more web.
So on the iPhone, Safari enters full-screen mode the instant you start to scroll
down a page. In full-screen mode, all the controls and toolbars vanish. Now the
entire iPhone screen is filled with web goodness. You can bring the controls
back in any of these ways:
Scroll up a little bit.
Return to the top or bottom of a web page.
Navigate to a different page.
And enjoy Safari’s dedication to trying to get out of your way.

TIP
You can jump directly to the address bar, no matter how far down a page you’ve scrolled, just by tapping
the very top edge of the screen (the status bar, or the “ears” of the iPhone X). That “tap the top” trick is
timely, too, when a website is designed to hide the address bar.
Typing a Web Address
The address/search bar is the strip at the top of the screen where you type in a
page’s address. And some of the iPhone’s greatest tips and shortcuts all have to
do with this important navigational tool:
Your favorites await. When you tap in the address bar but haven’t yet
typed anything, the icons of a few very special, most favorite websites
appear (below, top). These are the favorites; see “The Favorites Icons”.
Don’t delete. There is a 
 button at the right end of the address bar
whose purpose is to erase the current address so you can type another
one. (Tap inside the address bar to make it, and the keyboard, appear.)
But the 
 button is for suckers.
Instead, whenever the address bar is open for typing, just type. Forget
that there’s already a URL there. The iPhone is smart enough to figure
out that you want to replace that web address with a new one.

Don’t type http://www. You can leave that stuff out; Safari will supply
it automatically. Instead of http://www.cnn.com, for example, just type
cnn.com (or tap its name in the suggestions list) and hit Go.
Type .com, .net, .org, or .edu the easy way. Safari’s canned URL
choices can save you four keyboard taps apiece. To see their secret
menu, hold your finger down on the period key on the keyboard
(previous page, bottom). Then tap the common suffix you want. (Or, if
you want .com, just release your finger without moving it.)
Otherwise, this address bar works just like the one in any other web browser. Tap
inside it to make the keyboard appear.
Tap the blue Go key when you’re finished typing the address. That’s your Enter
key. (Or tap Cancel to hide the keyboard without “pressing Enter.”)
TIP
If you hold your finger on a link for a moment—touching rather than tapping—a
handy panel appears. At the top, you see the full web address that link will open.
And there are some useful buttons: Open, Open in New Tab, Add to Reading
List, Copy (meaning “copy the link address”), and Share. Oh, and there’s also

Cancel.
The Favorites Icons
You can never close all your Safari windows. The app will never let you get past
the final page, always lurking behind the others: the Favorites page (previous
page, top).
This is the starting point. It’s what you first see when you tap the + button. It’s
like a page of visual bookmarks.
In fact, if you see a bunch of icons here already, it’s because your phone has
synced them over from Safari on a Mac; whatever sites are on your bookmarks
bar become icons on this bookmarks page.
You can edit this Favorites page, of course:
Rearrange them as you would Home screen icons. That is, hold your
finger down on an icon momentarily and then drag it to a new spot.
Remove or rename a favorites icon. Favorites are just bookmarks. So
you can edit, move, or delete them just as you would any bookmark.
(Tap 
 to open your Bookmarks screen. Make sure that you’re on
the 
 tab, so that your list of folders is showing. Tap Favorites, and
then Edit. Tap 
 for a site you want to delete, and then tap Delete.)
TIP
You can create folders inside the Favorites folder, too. Whenever the
Favorites screen appears, you’ll see these subfolders listed as further
sources of speed-dial websites.
Add a Favorites icon. When you find a page you’d like to add to the
Favorites screen, tap 
. On the Share sheet, tap Add Bookmark. The phone
usually proposes putting the new bookmark into the Favorites folder, which
means that it will show up on the Favorites screen. (If it proposes some other
folder on the Location line, tap the folder’s name and then tap Favorites.) Tap

Save.
TIP
You don’t have to use the Favorites folder of bookmarks as the one whose contents appear on the
Favorites screen. In Settings → Safari → Favorites, a list of all your Bookmarks folders appears.
Whichever one you select there becomes your new Favorites folder, even if its name isn’t “Favorites.”
Request Desktop Site
In an effort to conserve time and bandwidth (yours and theirs), many websites
supply mobile versions to your iPhone—smaller, stripped-down sites that
transfer faster than (but lack some features of) the full-blown sites. You
generally have no control over which version you’re sent.
Until now. Suppose you’re in Safari, and some site has dished up its mobile
version, and you’re gnashing your teeth. Hold down the 
 in the address box;
tap Request Desktop Site. (The same button appears when you tap 
 and
scroll the bottom row to the right.) As you’ve requested, the full-blown desktop
version of that site now appears.
Searching in Safari
The address bar is also the search box. Just tap into it and type your search
phrase (or speak it, using the 
 button).
To save you time and fiddling, Safari instantly produces a menu filled with
suggestions that could spare you some typing—things it guesses you might be
looking for. If you see the address you’re trying to type, then by all means tap it
instead of typing out the rest of the URL. The time you save could be your own:
Top Hits. The Top Hits are Safari’s best guesses at what you’re looking
for. They’re the sites on your bookmarks and History lists that you’ve
visited most often (and that match what you’ve typed so far).

Try tapping one of the Top Hits sometime. You’ll discover, to your
amazement, that the site appears almost instantly. It doesn’t seem to
have to load. That’s because, as a favor to you, Safari quietly downloads
the Top Hits in the background, while you’re still entering your search
term, all to save you time.


NOTE
If you’re concerned that this feature is sucking down some of your monthly cellular data
allowance unnecessarily, you can turn it off in Settings → Safari → Preload Top Hit.
Suggested Sites. Occasionally, you’ll see another proposed site or two
here: Suggested Sites. It’s yet another site that Safari supposes you
might be trying to reach, based on what you’ve typed so far and what
sites other people visit.
Google Search. The next category of suggestions: a list of search terms
you might be typing, based on how popular those searches are on
Google (or whatever search service you’re using). For example, if you
type chick, then this section proposes things like chicken recipes, chick
fil a, and chicken pox. It’s just trying to save you a little typing; if none
of these tappable choices is the one you want, then ignore them.
NOTE
You can turn this feature off, too, if it makes you feel spied upon. (Behind the scenes, it’s
transmitting your search term to Apple.) You do that in Settings → Safari → Search Engine
Suggestions.
Bookmarks and History. Here Safari offers matching selections from
websites you’ve bookmarked or recently visited. Again, it’s trying to
save you typing if it can.
On This Page. Here’s how you search for certain text on the page
you’re reading.
Once you’ve started typing, under the On This Page heading, you see a
listing called Find “chic” (or whatever you’ve typed so far), shown
below at left. Tap that line to jump to the first appearance of that text on
the page. (There’s a less hidden way to start this process, too: Tap 

and then Find on Page.)
Use the < and > buttons to jump from one match to the next. Tap Done
to return to your regularly scheduled browsing.
TIP
Suppose you’ve started typing a search term. Safari pipes up with its usual list of suggestions. At this
point, if you drag up or down the screen, you hide the keyboard—so you can see the suggestions that
were hidden behind it.
You can tell the iPhone to use a Yahoo, Bing, or DuckDuckGo search instead of
Google, if you like, in Settings → Safari → Search Engine. (DuckDuckGo is a
search service dedicated to privacy. It doesn’t store your searches or tailor the
results to you. On the other hand, it’s capable of searching only about 50 web
sources—Wikipedia, Wolfram Alpha, and so on.)
TIP

If you’ve set your search options to use Google, then there are all kinds of cool
things you can type here—special terms that tell Google, “I want information,
not web page matches.”
You can type a movie name and zip code or city/state (Titanic Returns 10024) to
get a list of today’s showtimes in theaters near you. Get the forecast by typing
weather chicago or weather 60609. Stock quotes: Type the symbol (AMZN).
Dictionary definitions: define schadenfreude. Unit conversions: liters in 5
gallons. Currency conversions: 25 usd in euros. Then tap Go to get instant
results.
Quick Website Search
This crazy feature lets you search within a certain site (like Amazon or Reddit or
Wikipedia) using Safari’s regular search bar. For example, typing wiki mollusk
can search Wikipedia for its entry on mollusks. Typing amazon ipad can offer
links to buy an iPad from Amazon. Typing reddit sitcoms opens reddit.com to its
search results for sitcoms.
None of this will work, however, until (a) you’ve turned the feature on (Settings
→ Safari → Quick Website Search), and (b) you’ve manually taught Safari
how to search those sites one time each.
To do that, pull up the site you’ll want to search (let’s say it’s reddit.com) and
use its regular search bar. Search for anything.
That site’s name now appears in the list at Settings → Safari → Quick Website
Search. (Usually. Many sites don’t work with Quick Website Search.) From now
on, you can search that site by typing, for example, reddit sitcoms. You’ll jump
directly to that site’s search results.
Bookmarks (
)
Bookmarks, of course, are links to websites you might want to visit again
without having to remember and type their URLs.
To see the list of bookmarks on your phone, tap 
 at the bottom of the

screen. You see the master list of bookmarks. They’re organized in folders, or
even folders within folders.
Tapping a folder shows you what’s inside, and tapping a bookmark begins
opening the corresponding website.
NOTE
Actually, what you see when you tap 
 are three tabs at the top: 
 (Bookmarks), 
 (Reading List), and 
 (History). The latter two are described later in this chapter.
You may be surprised to discover that Safari already seems to be prestocked with
bookmarks—that, amazingly, are interesting and useful to you in particular!
How did it know?
Easy—it copied your existing desktop computer’s browser bookmarks from
Safari on the Mac when you synced the iPhone (Chapter 15), or when you turned
on Safari syncing through iCloud. Sneaky, eh?
Creating New Bookmarks
You can add new bookmarks right on the phone. Any work you do here is copied
back to your computer the next time you sync the two machines—or
instantaneously, if you’ve turned on iCloud bookmark syncing.
When you find a web page you might like to visit again, hold down the 
icon; from the shortcut menu, choose Add Bookmark. (Or do it the long way:
Tap the 
 to reveal the Share options, one of which is Add Bookmark.) The
Add Bookmark screen appears (below, right).

You have two tasks here:
Type a better name. In the top box, you can type a shorter or clearer
name for the page. Instead of “Bass, Trout & Tackle—the web’s
Premier Resource for the Avid Outdoorsman,” you can just call it
“Fish.”
Below that: The page’s underlying URL, which is independent of what
you’ve named your bookmark. You can’t edit this one.
Specify where to file this bookmark. If you tap Favorites, then you
open Safari’s hierarchical list of bookmark folders, which organize your
bookmarked sites. Tap the folder where you want to file the new
bookmark so you’ll know where to find it later.
Editing Bookmarks and Folders
It’s easy enough to massage your Bookmarks list within Safari—to delete

favorites that aren’t so favorite anymore, to make new folders, to rearrange the
list, to rename a folder or a bookmark, and so on.
The techniques are the same for editing bookmark folders as editing the
bookmarks themselves—after the first step. To edit the folder list, start by
opening the Bookmarks (tap 
), and then tap Edit.
To edit the bookmarks themselves, tap 
, tap a folder, and then tap Edit.
Now you can get organized:
Delete something. Tap 
 next to a folder or a bookmark, and then
tap Delete to confirm.
Rearrange the list. Drag the grip strip (
) up or down in the list to
move the folders or bookmarks around. (You can’t move or delete the
top two folders—Favorites and History.)
Edit a name and location. Tap a folder or a bookmark name. If you tap
a folder, you arrive at the Edit Folder screen; you can edit the folder’s
name and which folder it’s inside of. If you tap a bookmark, Edit
Bookmark lets you edit the name and the URL it points to.
Tap Done when you’re finished.
Create a folder. Tap New Folder in the lower-left corner of the Edit
Folders screen. You’re offered the chance to type a name for it and to
specify where you want to file it (that is, in which other folder).
Tap Done when you’re finished.
TIP
As you’ve just read, preserving a bookmark requires quite a few taps. That’s why it’s extra important for
you to remember iOS’s gift to busy people: the “Remind me about this later” command to Siri (““Remid
Me About This””). You’ve just added a new item in your Reminders list, complete with a link to
whatever page you’re looking at now. (Feel free to be more specific, as in “Remind me about this when I
get home.”)

The Reading List (
)
The Reading List is a handy list of web pages you want to read later. Unlike a
bookmark, it stores entire pages, so you can read them even when you don’t
have an Internet connection (on the subway or on a plane, for example).
The Reading List also keeps track of what you’ve read. You can use the Show
All/Show Unread button at the bottom of the screen to view everything—or just
what you haven’t yet read.
TIP
To make matters even sweeter, iCloud synchronizes your Reading List on your Mac, iPhone, iPad, and
so on—as long as you’ve turned on bookmark syncing. It’s as though the web always keeps your place.

To add a page to the Reading List, tap 
 and then tap Add to Reading List
(below, left). Or just hold your finger down on a link until a set of buttons
appears, including Add to Reading List. (At this point, iOS politely asks if you
want all future Reading List stories to be downloaded to your phone, rather than
simply bookmarked.)
Once you’ve added a page to the Reading List, you can get to it by tapping 
and then tapping the Reading List tab at the top (
). Tap an item on
your list to open and read it (above, right).
TIP

When you get to the bottom of a Reading List item you’ve just read, keep scrolling down. The phone is
nice enough to offer up the next article in your Reading List, as though they were all vertically
connected.
By the way, some web pages require a hefty amount of data to download, what
with photos and all. If you’re worried about Reading List downloads eating up
your monthly data allotment, you can visit Settings → Safari and turn off Use
Cellular Data.
Now you’ll be able to download Reading List pages only when you’re on Wi-Fi,
but at least there’s no risk of going over your monthly cellular-data allotment.
The History List (
)
Behind the scenes, Safari keeps track of the websites you’ve visited in the past
week or so, neatly organized into subfolders like This Evening and Yesterday.
It’s a great feature when you can’t recall the address for a website you visited
recently—or when you remember it had a long, complicated address and you get
the psychiatric condition known as iPhone Keyboard Dread.
To see the list of recent sites, tap 
, and then 
. Once the History list
appears, just tap a bookmark to revisit that web page.
Erasing the History List
Some people find it creepy that Safari maintains a History list, right there in
plain view of any family member or coworker who wanders by. They’d just as
soon their wife/husband/boss/parent/kid not know what websites they’ve been
visiting.
You can delete just one particularly incriminating History listing easily enough;
swipe leftward across its name and then tap Delete. You can also delete the
entire History menu, erasing all your tracks. To do that, tap Clear; confirm by
tapping Clear History. You’ve just rewritten History.

Link-Tapping Tricks
Link-tapping, of course, is the primary activity of the web. But in Safari, those
blue underlined links (or not blue, even not underlined links) harbor special
powers:
Long-press a link to open a handy panel. Its options include Open,
Open in New Tab, Add to Reading List, Copy, and Share.
Hard-press a link (iPhone 6s and later models) to peek at whatever
page that link opens, like this: This, of course, is part of the peek and
pop feature described in “Peek and Pop”. Once you’ve opened the
preview bubble, you can either retreat (lift your finger; remain where
you were) or advance (press even harder to fully open that page).
Quite handy, really.
Saving Graphics
If you find a picture online that you wish you could keep forever, you have two
choices: You could stare at it until you’ve memorized it, or you could save it.
To do that, touch the image for about a second. A sheet appears, just like the one
that appears when you hold your finger down on a regular link.

If you tap Save Image, then the iPhone thoughtfully deposits a copy of the
image in Photos so it will be copied back to your Mac or PC at the next sync
opportunity. If you tap Copy, then you nab a link to that graphic, which you can
now paste into another program.
TIP
If Save Image isn’t one of the choices, there’s a workaround: Tap Open in New Tab, touch the image in
its new tab for about a second, and then choose Save Image from the sheet that appears.
Saved Passwords and Credit Cards
On desktop web browsers, a feature called AutoFill saves you an awful lot of
typing. It fills out your name and address automatically when you’re ordering
something online. It stores your passwords so you don’t have to re-enter them
every time you visit passworded sites.

But on the iPhone, where you’re typing on glass, the convenience of AutoFill
goes to a whole new level.
The phone can memorize your credit card information, too, making it much
easier to buy stuff online; in fact, it can even store this information by taking a
picture of your credit card.
And thanks to iCloud syncing, all those passwords and credit cards can auto-
store themselves on all your other Apple gadgetry.
To turn on AutoFill, visit Settings → Safari → AutoFill. Here’s what you find
(below, left):
Use Contact Info. Turn this On. Then tap My Info. From the address
book, find your own listing. You’ve just told Safari which name,
address, city, state, zip code, and phone number belong to you.
From now on, whenever you’re asked to input your address, phone
number, and so on, you’ll see an AutoFill button at the top of the
keyboard. Tap it to make Safari auto-enter all those details, saving you
no end of typing. (It works on most sites.) If there are extra blanks that
AutoFill doesn’t fill, then you can tap the Previous and Next buttons to
move your cursor from one to the next instead of tapping and scrolling
manually.

TIP
If your contact card contains a secondary address (like a work address), or even a third, then
tapping AutoFill produces a pop-up panel listing both (or all three). Just tap the one you
want.
Names & Passwords lets Safari fill in your user name and passwords
when you visit sites that require you to log in (Google, Amazon, and so
on). On each website, you’ll be able to choose Yes (a good idea for your
PTA or library account), Never for this Website (a good idea for your
bank), or Not Now (you’ll be asked again next time).
(To view a list of the actual memorized names and passwords, open
Settings → Safari → Passwords.)
TIP
On this screen, you can delete or edit saved passwords. If a login no
longer pleases you, swipe leftward across it, and then tap Delete.
To add a password manually, scroll to the bottom of the screen and tap
Add Password.
And to make an edit, tap the errant password and then tap Edit. You can
touch the problematic password or user name to call up the iPhone’s
keyboard and make your changes.
Credit Cards. Turn on Credit Cards, of course, if you’d like Safari to
memorize your charge card info. To enter your card details, tap Saved Credit
Cards (where you see a list of them) and then Add Credit Card. You can type
in your name, card number, expiration date, and a description—or you can save
yourself a little tedium by tapping Use Camera. Aim the camera at your credit
card; the phone magically recognizes your name, the card number, and the
expiration date, and proposes a description of the card.

When you buy something online, iOS offers an AutoFill Credit Card button.
When you tap it, Safari asks you first which credit card you want to use, if
you’ve stored more than one (it displays the last four digits for your reference).
Tap it, and boom: Safari cheerfully fills in the credit card information, saving
you time and hassle.

Unfortunately, there’s nowhere to store the little three- or four-digit security
code, sometimes called the CSC, CVV, or CV2 code. Safari makes no attempt to
fill that in; you always have to enter it manually. That’s one last safeguard
against a kid, a spouse, a parent, or a thief using your phone for an online
shopping spree when you’re not around.
TIP
You don’t have to enter all your stored passwords and credit cards into other Apple gadgets. They sync
via iCloud (“iCloud Sync”).
Manipulating Multiple Pages
Like any other self-respecting browser, Safari can keep multiple pages open at

once, making it easy for you to switch among them. You can think of it as a
miniature version of tabbed browsing, a feature of browsers like Safari Senior,
Firefox, Chrome, and Microsoft Edge. Tabbed browsing keeps a bunch of web
pages open simultaneously.
One advantage of this arrangement is that you can start reading one web page
while the others load into their own tabs in the background.
To Open a New Window
Tap the 
 in the lower right. The Safari page seems to duck backward,
bowing to you in 3D space. Tap +.
You now arrive at the Favorites page (below, left). Here are icons for all the sites
you’ve designated as Favorites (see “The Favorites Icons”). Tap to open one. Or,
in the address bar, enter an address. Or use a bookmark.
To Switch Among Windows
Tap 
 again. Now you see something like the 3D floating pages shown below
at right. These are all your open tabs (windows). You work with them like this:
Close a window by tapping the 
 in the corner—or by swiping a
page away horizontally. It slides away into the void.

Rearrange these windows by dragging them up or down.
Open a window to full screen by tapping it.
You can open a third window, and a fourth, and so on, and jump among them,
using these two techniques.
TIP
Although not one person in a thousand realizes it, you can search your open Safari tabs’ website titles
and URLs. Tap the 
 button and either drag down from the top or hold the phone horizontally
(landscape mode). There’s your secret search box.
iCloud Tabs
Thanks to the miracle of iCloud syncing, the last windows and tabs you had

open on that other gadget (even if the gadget is turned off) show up here, at the
bottom of the page-juggling screen (tap 
 to see it). They’re sorted into
headings that correspond to your other Apple gadgets.


The concept is to unify your Macs and i-gadgets. You’re reading three browser
windows and tabs on your phone—why not resume on the big screen when you
get home and sit down in front of your Mac?
You won’t see these tabs unless the Macs have OS X Mountain Lion or later.
And, of course, Safari has to be turned on in System Preferences → iCloud on
the Mac, and Settings → iCloud on the phone or tablet.
Reader View
How can people read web articles when there’s Times Square blinking all around
them? Fortunately, you’ll never have to put up with that again.
The Reader button in the address bar (
) is amazing. With one tap, it
eliminates everything from the page you’re reading except the text and photos.
No ads, toolbars, blinking, links, banners, or anything else.
The text is also changed to a clean, clear font and size, and the background is
made plain white. Basically, it makes any web page look like a printed book
page, and it’s glorious. Shown below: the before and after. Which looks easier to
read?
To exit Reader, tap 
 again. Best. Feature. Ever.

TIP
Once you’re in Reader view, a tiny 
 button appears at the right end of the address bar. It opens
the same font panel that’s built into iBooks (illustrated in ???). That is, it offers you a choice of type size,
font, and background color.
The fine print: Reader doesn’t appear until the page has fully loaded. It doesn’t
appear on “front page” pages, like the nytimes.com home page—only when
you’ve opened an article within. And it may not appear on sites that are already
specially designed for access by cellphones.

Web Security
Safari on the iPhone isn’t meant to be a full-blown web browser like the one on
your desktop computer, but it comes surprisingly close—especially when it
comes to privacy and security. Cookies, pop-up blockers, parental controls…
they’re all here, for your paranoid pleasure.
Pop-Up Blocker
The world’s smarmiest advertisers like to inundate us with pop-up and pop-
under ads—nasty little windows that appear in front of the browser window or,
worse, behind it, waiting to jump out the moment you close your window.
Fortunately, Safari comes set to block those pop-ups so you don’t see them. It’s a
war out there—but at least you now have some ammunition.
The thing is, though, pop-ups are sometimes useful (and not ads)—notices of
new banking features, seating charts on ticket-sales sites, warnings that the
instructions for using a site have changed, and so on. Safari can’t tell these from
ads—and it stifles them, too. So if a site you trust says “Please turn off pop-up
blockers and reload this page,” then you know you’re probably missing out on a
useful pop-up message.
In those situations, you can turn off the pop-up blocker. The on/off switch is in
Settings → Safari.
TIP
Of course, you can also install other companies’ ad blockers. Search the App Store for, for example,
1Blocker or Crystal.
Password Suggestions
When you’re signing up for a new account on some website, and you tap inside
the box where you’re supposed to make up a password, Safari offers to make up
a password for you. It’s a doozy, too, along the lines of 23k2k4-29cs8-58384-
ckk3322.
Now, don’t freak out. You’re not expected to remember that. Safari will, of

course, memorize it for you (and sync it to your other Apple computers, if
they’re on the same iCloud account). Meanwhile, you’ve got yourself a unique,
nearly uncrackable password.
Cookies
Cookies are something like preference files. Certain websites—particularly
commercial ones like Amazon—deposit them on your hard drive so that they’ll
remember you the next time you visit. That’s how Amazon is able to greet you
with, “Welcome, Chris” (or whatever your name is). It’s reading its own cookie.
Most cookies are perfectly innocuous—and, in fact, extremely useful, because
they help websites remember your tastes (and contact info).
But fear is widespread, and the media fan the flames with tales of sinister
cookies that track your movement on the web. If you’re worried about invasions
of privacy, Safari is ready to protect you.
If you turn on Settings → Safari → Block All Cookies (and confirm in the
“Are you sure” box), then you create an acrylic shield around your iPhone. No
cookies can come in, and no cookie information can go out. You’ll probably find
the web a very inconvenient place; you’ll have to reenter your information upon
every visit, and some websites may not work properly at all.
When this option is off, Safari accepts cookies from sites you want to visit, but
blocks cookies deposited on your phone by sites you’re not actually visiting—
cookies an especially evil banner ad gives you, for example.
The Settings → Safari screen offers a slew of additional privacy and security
settings; see “General”, right.
Private Browsing
Private browsing lets you surf without adding any pages to your History list,
searches to your Google search suggestions, passwords to Safari’s saved
password list, or autofill entries to Safari’s memory. You might want to turn on
private browsing before you visit websites that would raise interesting questions
with your spouse, parents, or boss.

When you want to start leaving no tracks, tap 
 to open the page-juggler
screen; tap Private at the bottom-left corner.
Suddenly the light-gray accents of Safari turn jet-black—a reminder that you’re
now in Private mode. Tap + to open a new page, and proceed as usual. From
now on, Safari records nothing while you surf.
When you’re ready to browse “publicly” again, turn private browsing off once
more (tap 
, and then tap Private). Safari resumes taking note of the pages
you visit—but it never remembers the ones you opened while in Private mode.
In other words, what happens in private browsing stays in private browsing.
Parental Controls
If your child (or employee) is old enough to have an iPhone but not old enough
for the seedier side of the web, then don’t miss the Restrictions feature in
Settings. The iPhone can remove the Safari icon from the iPhone altogether so
that no web browsing is possible at all. See “Software Updates to Come” for
instructions.

Happy Surprises in the 
 Panel
So far in this chapter, you’ve learned the first step in bookmarking a page (tap 
); in designating a new Favorite (tap 
); and in saving a web article to your
offline Reading List (tap 
). That’s right: All these features await on the Share
sheet.
But that same panel hosts a wealth of equally useful buttons that nobody ever
talks about; here are a few highlights.
AirDrop, Message, Mail, Twitter, and Facebook. Pretty obvious; they
share the link of your current page with other people.
Reminders. Remember how you can say to Siri, about a web page
you’re on, “Remind me about this later?” (If not, see ““Remid Me
About This””.) There’s a button for that here on the Share sheet. Great
when speaking to your phone would be socially awkward.
Add to Notes. You can send a link to a web article (complete with
opening sentences and an image) directly to a note in the Notes app—no
copy and paste required. You’re invited to annotate the note before
hitting Save, or even add it to an existing Notes page.
Save PDF to iBooks. You can turn anything you find on the web into an
iBook—an electronic book that you can read later in iBooks (“iBook”)!
That way, you gain a wide variety of reading tools (notes, highlighting,
dictionary) and organizational tools (collections) that aren’t available in
Safari.
Copy. Copies the page’s address, to paste it into some other app.
Open in News. Turns the article you’re reading into a nicely formatted
“magazine” page in the News app (“News”). If it’s not an article-style
post, you just get an error message.
Add to Home Screen. Is there a certain website you visit every day?
This button adds that page’s icon right to your Home screen. It’s a

shortcut that Apple calls a web clip. You’re offered the chance to edit
the icon’s name; tap Add. When you return to your Home screen, you’ll
see the icon; you can move or delete it as you would any app.
TIP
You can turn part of a web page into one of these web clips, too—say, The New York Times’ “Most
emailed” list, or the box scores for a certain sports league. All you have to do is zoom and scroll the page
in Safari before you tap 
, isolating the section you want. Later, when you open the web clip, you’ll
see exactly the part of the web page you wanted.
Find on Page. Here’s your search command.
Create PDF. Converts the page into a PDF document with only a single
button: the 
 button, so that you can send it to someone. And the
Markup button (
) is here, too, for adding annotations first.
Request Desktop Site. Here’s a less-hidden version of the button
described in “Request Desktop Site”.
TIP
You can rearrange these buttons, if you like. Tap More and then drag their “grip strips” up or down in
the list.

Part IV. PART FOUR Connections
Chapter 15 Syncing with iTunes
Chapter 16 iCloud & Apple Pay
Chapter 17 Continuity: iPhone Meets Mac
Chapter 18 Settings

Chapter 15. 14 Email
Email on your iPhone offers full formatting, fonts, graphics, and choice of type
size; file attachments like Word, Excel, PowerPoint, PDF, Pages, Numbers,
photos, and even .zip compressed files; and compatibility with Yahoo Mail,
Gmail, AOL Mail, iCloud mail, corporate Exchange mail, and any standard
email account.
Dude, if you want a more satisfying portable email machine than this one, buy a
laptop.
This chapter covers the basic email experience. If you’ve gotten yourself hooked
up with iCloud, see Chapter 16 for details.
Setting Up Your Account
If you have a free email account from Google, AOL, Outlook, or Yahoo; an
iCloud account (Chapter 16); or a Microsoft Exchange account run by your
employer, then setup on the iPhone is easy.
From the Home screen, tap Settings → Account & Passwords → Add
Account. Tap the colorful logo that corresponds to the kind of account you have
(Google, Yahoo, or whatever).
On the page that appears, sign into your account. Tap Next.
Now you may see the list of non-email data that the iPhone can show you (from
iCloud, Google, Yahoo, Exchange, and so on): contacts, calendars, reminders,
and notes. Turn off the ones you don’t want synced to your phone, and then tap
Save.
Your email account is ready to go!
TIP
If you don’t have one of these free accounts, they’re worth having, if only as a backup to your regular
account. They can help with spam filtering, too, since the iPhone doesn’t offer any. To sign up, go to
Google.com, Yahoo.com, AOL.com, or iCloud.com.

POP3 and IMAP Accounts
Those freebie, brand-name, web-based accounts are super-easy to set up. But
millions of people have more generic email accounts, perhaps supplied by their
employers or Internet providers. They’re generally one of two types:
POP accounts are the oldest and most compatible type on the Internet.
(POP stands for Post Office Protocol, but this won’t be on the test.) A
POP account can make life complicated if you check your mail on more
than one machine (say, a PC and an iPhone), as you’ll discover shortly.
A POP server transfers incoming mail to your computer or phone before

you read it, which works fine as long as you’re using only that machine
to access your email.
IMAP accounts (Internet Message Access Protocol) are newer and
have more features than POP servers, and they’re quickly putting POP
out to pasture. IMAP servers keep all your mail online, rather than
making you store it on your computer; as a result, you can access the
same mail from any computer (or phone). IMAP servers remember
which messages you’ve read and sent, and they even keep track of how
you’ve filed messages into mail folders. (Those free Yahoo email
accounts are IMAP accounts, and so are Apple’s iCloud accounts and
corporate Exchange accounts. Gmail accounts can be IMAP, too.)
TIP
The iPhone copies your IMAP messages onto the phone itself, so you can work on your email even when
you’re not online. You can, in fact, control where these messages are stored (in which mail folder). To
see this, open Settings → Accounts & Passwords → [your IMAP account name] → [your IMAP
account name again] → Advanced. See? You can specify where your drafts, sent messages, and
deleted messages wind up on the phone.
The iPhone can communicate with both kinds of accounts.
Tap your way to Settings → Accounts & Passwords → Add Account. Tap
Other, tap Add Mail Account, and then enter your name, email address,
password, and an optional description. Tap Next.
Apple’s software attempts to figure out which kind of account you have (POP or
IMAP) by the email address. If it can’t make that determination, then you arrive
at a second screen, where you’re asked for such juicy details as the host name for
incoming and outgoing mail servers. (This is also where you tap either IMAP or
POP, to tell the iPhone what sort of account it’s dealing with.) If you don’t know
this stuff offhand, you’ll have to ask your Internet provider, corporate tech-
support person, or next-door teenager to help you. When you’re finished, tap
Save.
To delete an account, open Settings → Accounts & Passwords → [account
name]. At the bottom of the screen, you’ll find the Delete Account button.

TIP
You can make, rename, or delete IMAP or Exchange mailboxes (mail folders) right on the phone.
In the Mail app, view the mailbox list for the account and then tap Edit. Tap New Mailbox to create a
new folder. To edit an existing mailbox, tap its name; you can then rename it, tap the Mailbox Location
folder to move it, or tap Delete Mailbox. Tap Save to finish up.
Downloading Mail
If you have “push” email (Yahoo, iCloud, or Exchange), then your iPhone
doesn’t have to check for messages; new messages show up on your iPhone as
they arrive, around the clock.
If you have any other kind of account, then the iPhone checks for new messages
automatically on a schedule—every 15, 30, or 60 minutes. It also checks for new
messages each time you open the Mail program, or whenever you drag
downward on the Inbox list.
You can adjust the frequency of these automatic checks or turn off the “push”
feature (because it uses up your battery faster) in Settings; see “Mail”.
When new mail arrives, you’ll know it. You hear the iPhone’s little “You’ve got
mail” sound, unless you’ve turned that off in Settings (or have the phone
silenced).
A notification appears, too, even on the Lock screen (“iPhone X Functions”).
You can actually process a message right from its notification banner. If you see
at a glance that it’s junk, or if no response is necessary, then drag your finger
down on it (or, if you have an iPhone 6s or later, hard-press it) to reveal two new
buttons: Mark as Read (leave it in your inbox, no longer appearing as a new
message) and Trash.

At the Home screen, Mail’s icon sprouts a circled number that tells you how
many new messages are waiting. If you have more than one email account, it
shows you the total number of new messages, from all accounts.
If you routinely leave a lot of unread messages in your inbox, and you don’t
really care about this “badge,” you can turn it off. In fact, you can turn it off on a
per-account basis, which is great if one of your accounts is sort of a junk account
that you keep as a spare. Tap Settings → Notifications → Mail → [account
name] → Badge App Icon.
In any case, once you know you have mail, tap Mail on the Home screen to start
reading it.

TIP
The Mail app, more than any other app, is designed to be a series of nested lists. You start out seeing a
list of accounts; tap one to see a list of folders; tap one for a list of messages; tap one to open the actual
message.
To backtrack through these lists, you can tap the button in the upper-left corner over and over again—or
you can swipe rightward across the screen. That’s a bigger target and more fun.
The Unified Inbox
If you have more than one email address, you’re in luck. The iPhone offers a
unified inbox—an option that displays all the incoming messages from all your
accounts in a single place. (If you don’t see it—if Mail opened up to some other
screen—keep swiping rightward, backing up one screen at a time, until you do.)
This Mailboxes page has two sections:
Unified inboxes (and other unified folders). To see all the incoming
messages in one unified box, tap All Inboxes. Below that, you see the
Inboxes for each of the individual accounts (next page, left).
This part of the main Mail list also offers unified folders for VIPs and
Flagged messages, which are described in this chapter.
But what you may not realize is that you can add other unified folders
to this section. You can, for example, add a folder called Unread, which
contains only new messages from all accounts. (That’s not the same
thing as All Inboxes, because your inbox can contain messages you
have read but haven’t deleted or filed. Maybe a lot of them.) You can
also add a unified folder showing all messages where you were either
the To or CC addressee; this folder won’t include any mail where your
name appeared on the BCC (blind carbon-copy) line, like mailing lists
and, often, spam.
You can also add an Attachments folder here (messages with files
attached), a Today folder, or unified folders that contain All Drafts, All
Sent, or All Trash. (“All” means “from all accounts.”) To hide or show
these special uni-folders, tap Edit, and then tap the selection circles
beside the names of the folders you want to appear. (You can also take
this opportunity to drag them up or down into a pleasing sequence.) Tap

Done.
Accounts. Farther down the Mailboxes screen, you see your accounts
listed again. You can tap an account’s name to expand or collapse its list
of traditional mail folders: Inbox, Drafts (emails written but not sent),
Sent, Trash, and any folders you’ve created yourself (Family, Little
League, Old Stuff, whatever), as shown above at right. If you have a
Yahoo, iCloud, Exchange, or another IMAP account, then the iPhone
automatically creates these folders to match what you’ve set up online.
NOTE
Not all kinds of email accounts permit the creation of your own filing folders, so you might not see
anything but Inbox, Sent, and Trash.
The Message List—and Threading

If you tap an inbox’s name, you wind up face to face with the list of incoming
messages. (To return to the mailboxes list, tap ” < Mailboxes, or swipe inward
from the left edge of the screen.) At first, you see only the subject lines of your
messages, plus, in gray type, the first few lines of their contents; that way, you
can scan through new messages to see if there’s anything important. You can
flick upward to scroll this list. Blue dots indicate messages you haven’t yet
opened.
Each message bears a gray > at the right side. That means “Tap this message’s
row to read it in all its formatted glory.”
Here and there, though, you may spot a double arrow at the right side of the
message list, like this: >> That means you’re looking at some threaded
messages.
That’s where several related messages—back-and-forths on the same subject—
appear only once, in a single, consolidated entry. The idea is to reduce inbox
clutter and to help you remember what people were talking about.

When you tap a threaded message, you open what appears to be all the messages
in this topic, scrolling and attached vertically as though they’re sheets of paper
towel. Messages you’ve already seen, in iOS 11, appear collapsed, as shown at
right on the previous page, to help you keep your bearings.
In general, threading is a nice feature. But if it bugs you, you can turn it off.
Open Settings → Mail, scroll down, and turn off Organize By Thread. (While
you’re there, notice the new option called Collapse Read Messages. It’s
responsible for the collapsing effect described above.) (If you have an iPhone
Plus model, you can turn the phone 90 degrees to see the mini-tablet-like view
shown below, with the message list and open message visible simultaneously.)

Filters
The iPhone offers one-click filters that hide or show all messages in the list of a
certain kind—like ones you haven’t yet read.
See the 
 button below the list of messages? When you tap it, you
automatically turn on the first filter: Unread. All the messages in the list that
you’ve read are hidden—until you hit 
 again to turn the filter off.
When the filter is on, you can click the word “Unread” to see a list of other ways
to filter the list. You can tell Mail to show you only messages you’ve flagged;
only messages to you (or that you were copied on); only the ones with
attachments; or only the ones from people in your VIP list.

VIPs and Flagged Messages
You might notice, in your master Inbox, two “email accounts” that you didn’t set
up: VIP and Flagged. They’re both intended to help you round up important
messages from the thousands that flood you every day.
Each one magically rounds up messages from all your account inboxes, so you
don’t have to go wading through lots of accounts to find the really important
mail. (Note: That’s inboxes. Messages in other mail folders don’t wind up in
these special inboxes, even if they’re flagged or are from VIPs.)
VIPs
In the real world, VIPs are people who get backstage passes to concerts or
special treatment at business functions (it stands for “very important person”). In
iOS, it means “somebody whose mail is important enough that I want it brought
to my attention immediately when it arrives.”

So who should your VIPs be? That’s up to you. Your spouse, your boss, and
your doctor come to mind.
To designate someone as a VIP, proceed in either of these two ways:
On the accounts screen, carefully tap the 
 next to the VIP item.
Your master list of all VIPs appears (below, left). Tap Add VIP to
choose a lucky new member from Contacts.
This is also where you delete people from your VIP list when they’ve
annoyed you. Swipe leftward across a name, and then tap Delete. Or tap
Edit and then tap each 
 button; tap Delete to confirm.
TIP
You can set things up so that when a new message from a VIP comes in, the iPhone lets you know with a
sound, a banner, an alert bubble, a vibration, and so on. Tap VIP Alerts to set them up. (That’s a shortcut
to the Settings → Notifications → Mail → VIP screen.)

In a message from the lucky individual, tap his name in the From, To,
or Cc/Bcc box. His Contact screen appears, complete with an Add to
VIP button.
Once you’ve established who’s important, lots of interesting things happen:
The VIP inbox automatically collects messages from your VIPs.
VIP names in every mail list sprout a gray star (above, right).
If you use iCloud, the same person is now a VIP on all your other
iPhones and iPads (running iOS 6 or later) and Macs (running OS X
Mountain Lion or later).
TIP
You can hide the VIP inbox on the main Mailboxes screen—handy if you don’t really use this feature.
Tap Edit, and then 
. Tap Done.
Flag It
Sometimes you receive email that prompts you to some sort of action, but you
may not have the time (or the fortitude) to face the task at the moment. (“Hi
there, it’s me, your accountant. Would you mind rounding up your expenses for
2006 through 2016 and sending me a list by email?”) That’s why Mail lets you
flag a message, summoning a little flag icon or a little orange dot in a new
column next to the message’s name. It can mean anything you like—it simply
calls attention to certain messages.
TIP
The flag marker can be either a 
 icon or an orange dot. You make your choice in Settings → Mail
→ Flag Style.

To flag an open message, tap 
 at the bottom of the screen. When the
confirmation sheet slides up (below, left), tap Flag.
You can also rapidly flag messages directly in a list (the Inbox, for example).
Just swipe leftward across the message—half an inch of finger sliding does the
trick—to reveal the set of buttons shown above at right: Tap Flag. (If you tap
More, you get the option to Unflag.)

The dot or 
 icon appears in the body of the message, next to the message’s
name in your message list. (In the image above, the top dot looks more like a
bull’s-eye; that’s because it’s flagged and unread.) The flag appears even on the
corresponding message in your Mac or PC email program, thanks to the miracle
of wireless syncing.

Finally, the Flagged mailbox appears in your list of accounts, making it easy to
work with all flagged messages, from all accounts, in one place.
TIP
If you don’t really use this feature, you can hide the Flagged folder. Tap Edit, and then tap the 
 to
turn it off. Tap Done.
This might be a good time to point out another, newer way to draw attention to a
message: Tell Siri to “Remind me about this later.” See ““Remid Me About
This”” for details.
What to Do with a Message
Once you’ve opened a message, you can respond to it, delete it, file it, and so on.
Here’s the drill.
TIP
If you have an iPhone 6s or later, the first thing to learn is that you can see what’s in a message without
ever leaving the Inbox list—just by hard-pressing it. See “Peek and Pop” for more on peek and pop.
List View: Flag, Trash, Mark as Unread
It’s easy to plow through a teeming Inbox, processing messages as you go,
without ever having to open them. All you have to do is swipe across a message
in the list horizontally.
Full left-swipe delete. Swipe your finger leftward all the way across
the message to delete it. That’s it: No confirmation tap required.
Partial left-swipe options. If you don’t swipe leftward all the way, you
reveal a set of three buttons on the right: Trash (same as before, but
now you have to tap again to confirm); Flag (described in the previous
section); and More (opens up a raft of options like Reply, Forward,

Flag, Move to Junk, and so on).
Full right-swipe. Swipe your finger to the right all the way across the
message to mark it as new (unread). Great for reminding yourself to
look at this message again later. Or, if it’s already unread, that swipe
marks it as read.
To a certain extent, you can customize these gestures. You can turn off the right-
swipe gesture. Or swap the positions of the Flag and Read options, for example,
so that you flag a message when you swipe fully to the right and Read appears
as a button when you swipe to the left. Or you can put the Archive button into
the place of Flag when you swipe to the left.
To check out your options, open Settings → Mail → Swipe Options.
Tap Swipe Left to specify which button appears in the center of the three when
you swipe partway leftward: None, Mark as Read, Flag, or Move Message.
Tap Swipe Right to choose which function you want to trigger with a full
rightward swipe (None, Mark as Read, Flag, Move Message, or Archive).
Read It
The type size in email messages can be pretty small. Fortunately, you have some
great iPhoney enlargement tricks at your disposal. For example:

Spread two fingers to enlarge the entire email message.
Double-tap a narrow block of text to make it fill the screen, if it
doesn’t already.
Drag or flick your finger to scroll through or around the message.
Choose a larger type size for all messages. See ???.
Links are “live” in email messages. Tap a phone number to call it, a web address
to open it, a YouTube link to watch the video, an email address to write to it, a
time and date to add it to your calendar, and so on.
Reply to It
To answer a message, tap the Reply/Forward icon (
) at the bottom of the
screen; tap Reply. If the message was originally addressed to multiple recipients,
then you can choose Reply All to send your reply to everyone simultaneously.
A new message window opens, already addressed. As a courtesy to your
correspondents, Mail pastes the original message at the bottom of the window.

If you’d like to splice your own comments into the paragraphs of the original
message, replying point by point, then use the Return key to create blank lines in
the original message. (Use the loupe—“Making the Keyboard Work”—to
position the insertion point at the proper spot.) The brackets by each line of the
original message help your correspondent keep straight what’s yours and what’s
hers.
TIP
If you select some text before you tap Reply or Reply All, then the iPhone pastes only that selected bit

into the new, outgoing message. In other words, you’re quoting back only a portion.
Before you tap Send, you can add or delete recipients, edit the subject line or the
original message, and so on.
Forward It
Instead of replying to the sender, you may sometimes want to pass the note on to
a third person. To do so, tap 
. This time, tap Forward.
TIP
If there’s a file attached to the inbound message, the iPhone says, “Include attachments from original
message?” and offers Include and Don’t Include buttons. Rather thoughtful, actually—the phone can
forward files it can’t even open.
A new message opens, looking like the one that appears when you reply. You can
precede the original message with a comment of your own, like, “Frank: I
thought you’d be interested in this joke about your mom.” Finally, address and
send it as usual.
Follow It
Your phone can notify you when anyone responds to a certain email
conversation.
If you’re composing or replying to a message, tap in the subject line to make the 
 appear; tap it. If you’re reading a message, tap 
 at the bottom of the
screen, tap Notify Me, and confirm by tapping Notify Me again (previous page,
left). In a list, swipe leftward, partly across a message; tap More; tap Notify Me.
In each case, a 
 icon appears beside the message (or thread) in the list
(previous page, right).

When anybody replies, a notification banner appears on your screen, ready for
swiping and reading.
Filing or Deleting One Message
Once you’ve opened a message that’s worth keeping, you can file it into one of
your account’s folders (“mailboxes”) by tapping the 
 at the bottom of the
screen. Up pops the list of your folders; tap the one you want.
It’s a snap to delete a message you no longer want, too. If it’s open in front of
you, tap 
 or 
 at the bottom of the screen. The message rapidly shrinks
into the icon and disappears.
NOTE
If that one-touch deletion method makes you a little nervous, by the way, you can ask the iPhone to
display a confirmation box before trashing the message forever. Visit Settings → Mail → Ask Before
Deleting.
You can also delete a message from the message list—the Inbox, for example.
TIP
Gmail doesn’t want you to throw anything away. That’s why swiping like this produces a button that
says Archive, not Delete, and why the usual 
 button in a message looks like a filing box. If you

prefer to delete a message for good, hold down the 
 until the Trash Message and Archive
Message buttons appear.
There’s a long way to delete messages from the list, too, as described next. But
for single messages, the finger-swipe method is much more fun.
TIP
There’s a handy Undo shortcut, too: Shake the phone lightly. Tap Undo Trash. The deleted message
jumps back to the folder it just came from. (You can then shake again to undo the Undo!)
Filing or Deleting Batches of Messages
You can also file or delete a bunch of messages at once. In the message list, tap
Edit. A circle appears beside each message title. You can tap as many of these
circles as you like, scrolling as necessary, adding a 
 with each touch.
Finally, when you’ve selected all the messages in question, tap either Trash
(Archive) or Move.

If you tap Move, then you’re shown the folder list so you can say where you
want them moved. If you tap Trash, the messages disappear.
If you decide you’ve made a mistake, just shake the phone lightly—the iPhone’s
“Undo” gesture. Tap Undo Move to put the filed messages back where they just
came from.
NOTE
When you delete a message, it goes into the Deleted folder. In other words, it works like the Macintosh
Trash or the Windows Recycle Bin. You have a safety net.
Email doesn’t have to stay in the Deleted folder forever, though. You can ask the iPhone to empty that
folder every day, week, or month. From the Home screen, tap Settings → Mail. Tap your account name
and then Advanced → Remove. Now you can change the setting from “Never” to “After one day” (or
week, or month).
Add the Sender to Contacts
When you get a message from someone new who’s worth adding to your
iPhone’s Contacts address book, tap that person’s name (in blue, on the From
line). You’re offered buttons for Create New Contact and Add to Existing
Contact. Use the second button to add an email address to an existing person’s
“card.”
Open an Attachment
The Mail program downloads and displays the icons for any kind of attachment
—but it can open only documents from Microsoft Office (Word, Excel,
PowerPoint), those from Apple iWork (Pages, Keynote, Numbers), PDFs, text,
RTFs, VCFs, graphics, .zip files, and un-copy-protected audio and video files.
Just scroll down, tap the attachment’s icon, wait a moment for downloading, and
then marvel as the document opens up, full screen. You can zoom in and out,
flick, rotate the phone 90 degrees, and scroll just as though it were a web page or
a photo.
TIP
If you hold your finger down on the attachment’s name, the Share sheet appears. It offers a list of ways

you can send this attachment directly from your phone to someone else (by AirDrop or Mail)—or open it
in other apps.
If you tap a Word document, for example, you may be offered buttons for Mail, Dropbox, Evernote, and
other apps that can open Word docs. If you tap a PDF document, you’ll see a button for Open in iBooks.
(Quick Look means the same non-editable preview as you’d get with a quick tap.)
When you’re finished admiring the attachment, swipe rightward to return to the
original email message.
TIP
iOS can handle the compressed folders known as .zip files, just as Macs and Windows computers can.
When you tap a .zip attachment’s icon, the first file in it opens up. At that point, though, if you tap the 
 icon, you get a list of every document in that zipped folder. You can tap each to view or share it.
Snagging (or Sending) a Graphic
If you get sent a particularly good picture, just hold your finger on it. You’re
offered the Save sheet, filled with options like Save (into your Photo app’s
Camera Roll), Copy, Print, and Assign to Contact (as a person’s face photo).
All the usual sending methods are represented here, too, so that you can fire off
this photo via AirDrop, Messages, Mail, Twitter, and Facebook.
Snagging a Contact or a Date
Mail can recognize contact information or calendar information from an
incoming email message—and can dump it directly into Contacts or Calendar
for you.
You’ll know when it’s found something—the block of contact information below
somebody’s signature, for example—because you see a special gray banner at
the top of the screen (shown on the facing page).
You can click Ignore if you don’t particularly need this person bulking up your
address book. But if it’s somebody worth tracking, tap Add to Contacts. A new
Contacts screen appears, ready to save.


Similarly, if the message contains a reference to a date and time, the same sort of
banner appears, offering to pop the appointment onto your calendar. (This banner
appears only when it’s really sure you’re being offered a date and time: e-
invitations and airline-ticket confirmations, for example.) iOS: saving you time
since 2016.
Unsubscribing
Every now and then, when you open a piece of junk mail, Mail offers you an
Unsubscribe button at the top. And sure enough: Tapping it gets you off that
mailing list.
Now, before you uncork the champagne, keep in mind that this button appears
only on some pieces of spam—from only the kind-hearted, legitimate senders
who include an Unsubscribe link at the bottom of their messages. All Mail does
is automate that process (and move the Unsubscribe button to the top).
View the To/From Details
When your computer’s screen is only a few inches tall, there’s not a lot of extra
space. So Apple designed Mail to conceal header details (To, From, and so on)
that you might need only occasionally. For example, you usually don’t actually
see the word “From:”—you usually see only the sender’s name, in blue. The To
and Cc lines (???) may show only first names, to save space. And if there’s a
long list of addresses, you may see only “Michael (& 15 more)”—not the actual
list of names.
You get last names, full lists, and full sender labels when you tap More
following the header information. Tap Hide to collapse these details.
TIP
When you tap a sender’s name in blue, you open the corresponding info card in Contacts. It contains
one-touch buttons for calling someone back, sending a text message, or placing a FaceTime audio or
video call—which can be very handy if the email message you just received is urgent.

Mark as Unread
In the inbox, any message you haven’t yet read is marked by a blue dot (
).
Once you’ve opened the message, the blue dot goes away.
If you slide your finger to the right across a message in the list, you trigger the
Unread command—you make that blue dot reappear. It’s a great way to flag a
message for later, to call it to your own attention. The blue dot can mean not so
much “unread” as “un–dealt with.”
Move On
Once you’ve had a good look at a message and processed it to your satisfaction,
you can move on to the next (or previous) message in the list by tapping < or >
in the upper-right corner. Or you can swipe rightward to return to the inbox (or
whatever mailbox you’re in).
Searching
Praise be—there’s a search box in Mail. The search box is hiding above the top
of every mail list, like your inbox. To see it, scroll up, or just tap the status strip
at the top of the screen.


Tap inside the search box to make the keyboard appear, along with helpful
canned searches like Flagged Messages and Messages with Attachments. As
you type, Mail hides all but the matching messages; tap any one of the results to
open it.
You don’t have to specify which fields to search (From, To, Subject, Body), or
which folder. You’re searching everywhere.
TIP
If you want to restrict the search to just the folder you’re in, you can. After the search results begin to
appear, tug downward on the screen. Two new buttons appear: All Mailboxes and Current Mailbox.
Wait long enough, and the search continues with messages that are still out there
on the Internet but are so old that they’ve scrolled off your phone.
TIP
If, after typing a few letters, you tap Search, the keyboard goes away and an Edit button appears.
Tapping it lets you select a whole bunch of the search results—and then Mark, Move, or Trash them
simultaneously.
Writing Messages
To compose a new piece of outgoing mail, open the Mail app, and then tap 
in the lower-right corner. A blank new outgoing message appears, and the iPhone
keyboard pops up.
Here’s how you go about writing a message:
1. In the To field, type the recipient’s email address—or grab it from
Contacts.
Often, you won’t have to type much more than the first couple of letters
of the name or email address. As you type, Mail displays all matching
names and addresses so you can tap one instead of typing. (It

thoughtfully derives these suggestions by analyzing both your Contacts
and people you’ve recently exchanged email with.)
As you go, the iPhone displays a list of everyone whose name matches
what you’re typing (above, left). The ones bearing 
 buttons are the
people you’ve recently corresponded with but who are not in your
Contacts. Tap the 
 to open a screen where you can add them to
Contacts—or remove them from the list of recent correspondents, so
Mail’s autocomplete suggestions will no longer include those lowlifes.
TIP
When you address an email message, Mail even suggests clusters of people you tend to
email together—“Erin and Sam,” “Erin and Andy,” and so on—to save you the trouble of
reassembling these teams (facing page, right).
Similarly, if you type a subject you’ve used, Mail suggests the names of people who’ve
received this subject line before. (For example, if you send “This month’s traffic stats” every
month to three coworkers, then their names appear automatically when you type out that
subject line.) You’ll get to go home from work that much quicker.
If you hold your finger down on the period (.) key, you get a pop-up
palette of common email-address suffixes, like .com, .edu, .org, and so

on, just as in Safari.
Alternatively, tap the 
 to open your Contacts list. Tap the name of
the person you want. You can add as many addressees as you like; just
repeat the procedure.
TIP
There’s no Group mail feature on the iPhone, which would let you send one message to a
predefined set of friends. But at http://groups.yahoo.com, you can create free email groups.
You can send a single email message to the group’s address, and everyone in the group will
get a copy. (You have to set up one of these groups in a web browser—but lo and behold,
your iPhone has one!)
2. To send a copy to other recipients, enter the address(es) in the Cc or
Bcc fields. If you tap Cc/Bcc, From, the screen expands to reveal two
new lines beneath the To line: Cc and Bcc.
Cc stands for carbon copy. Getting an email message where your name
is in the Cc line implies: “I sent you a copy because I thought you’d
want to know about this correspondence, but I’m not expecting you to
reply.”
Bcc stands for blind carbon copy. It’s a copy that goes to a third party
secretly—the primary addressee never knows who else you sent it to.
For example, if you send your coworker a message that says, “Chris, it
bothers me that you’ve been cheating the customers,” you could Bcc
your supervisor to clue her in without getting into trouble with Chris.
Each of these lines behaves exactly like the To line. You fill each one up
with email addresses in the same way.
TIP
You can drag people’s names around—from the To line to the Cc line, for example. Just hold
your finger down briefly on the name before dragging it. (It puffs and darkens once it’s ready
for transit.)

3. Change the email account you’re using, if you like. If you have more
than one email account set up on your iPhone, you can tap Cc/Bcc,
From to expand the form and then tap From to open up a spinning list
of your accounts. Tap the one you want to use for sending this message.
4. Type the topic of the message in the Subject field. Leaving it blank
only annoys your recipient. On the other hand, don’t put the entire
message into the subject line, either.
5. Type your message in the message box. All the usual iPhone keyboard
and dictation tricks apply (Chapter 3). Don’t forget that you can use
Copy and Paste, within Mail or from other programs. Both text and
graphics can appear in your message.
And here’s a fantastic trick: As you’re composing a message, you can
refer to another email—maybe the one you’re responding to—without
losing your place.

To do that, drag downward on the title bar, where it says New Message
or whatever the reply’s title is; your message in progress collapses to the
bottom of the screen. Now you can scroll through the message behind it
—or you can navigate to any message in any Mail account or folder.
This is a great trick when, for example, you want to copy some text out
of an earlier message.
Actually, you can collapse multiple outgoing messages like this, leaving
them unfinished but still open. They pile up at the bottom of the screen.
(Hold your finger down on them to “fan” them open.) When you’re
ready to resume writing, tap the title bar at the bottom of the screen;
your composition window opens right back up.
6. Attach a photo, video, or drawing, if you like. Hold down your finger
lightly anywhere in the body of the message until the Select buttons

appear. Tap 
 to reveal the Insert Photo or Video button (below,
left).
When you tap it, you’re shown your iPhone’s usual photo browser so
that you can choose the photos and videos you want to attach (below,
middle). Tap the collection you want; you’re shown all the thumbnails
inside. Tap the photo or video, and then tap Choose.
You return to your message in progress, with the photo or video neatly
inserted (previous page, right). You can repeat this step to add
additional photo or video attachments. When you tap Send, you’re
offered the opportunity to scale down the photo to a more reasonable
(emailable) size.
TIP

You can also email a photo or a video from within the Photos program; you can forward a
file attached to an incoming piece of mail; and you can paste a copied photo or video (or
several) into an open email message.
In iOS 11, you can also insert a freehand drawing (or maybe the term is
freefinger). Once again, hold down your finger until the Select buttons
appear. Tap 
 a couple of times, to reveal the Insert Drawing button.
When you tap it, you open the standard Markup tools—pen, highlighter,
pencil, eraser, lasso, color picker, text box, arrows, geometrical shapes,
and Undo—exactly as described in “Marking Up Your Photos”.
Tap Insert Sketch once your masterpiece is complete; it appears as an
inserted image in your outgoing message.
7. Format the text, if you like. You can apply bold, italic, or underlining.
The trick is to select the text first (“Step 1: Select the Text”). When the
button bar appears, tap the 
 button. Tap that to make the Bold,
Italics, and Underline buttons appear on the button bar; tap away. Not
terribly efficient, but it works.
You can use the same trick to summon the Quote Level controls. Select
some text or move the cursor to the paragraph you want; tap the 
until you bring the Quote Level button into view; and tap it to reveal

the Increase and Decrease buttons. These buttons indent or un-indent
those cluttery blocks of quoted and re-quoted text that often appear
when you’re replying to a message. (One tap affects the entire
paragraph.) If you really can’t stand those quote indentations, you can
stop the iPhone from adding them in the first place when you forward or
reply to a message. The on/off switch for that feature is in Settings →
Mail → Increase Quote Level.
8. Tap Send (to send the message) or Cancel (to back out of it). If you
tap Cancel, the iPhone asks if you want to save the message. If you tap
Save Draft, then the message lands in your Drafts folder.
Later you can open the Drafts folder, tap the aborted message, finish it
up, and send it.
TIP
If you hold down the 
 button for a moment, the iPhone presents a list of your saved drafts. Clever
stuff—if you remember it!
Oh, and by the way: You can begin composing a message on your phone, and
then continue writing it on your Mac, without ever having to save it as a draft.
Or go the other way. See “Handoff” for details on Handoff.
Signatures
A signature is a bit of text that gets stamped at the bottom of your outgoing
messages. It can be your name, a postal address, or a pithy quote.
Unless you intervene, the iPhone stamps “Sent from my iPhone” at the bottom of
every message. You may be just fine with that, or you may consider it the
equivalent of free advertising for Apple (or it may just feel like gloating). In any
case, you can change the signature if you want to.
From the Home screen, tap Settings → Mail → Sig​nature. You can make up
one signature for All Accounts, or a different one for each account (tap Per
Account). A Signature text area appears, complete with a keyboard, so you can

compose the signature you want. It can even include emoji!
TIP
You can use bold, italic, or underline formatting in your signature, too. Just follow the steps on the
previous page for formatting a message: Select the text, tap the 
 to bring the 
 button into
view, and so on.
Finish with a Phone Call
If you’re typing out some reply, and you realize that it’d be faster to wrap this up
by phone, hold down the home button (or iPhone X side button) to trigger Siri
and just say, “Call him” or “Call her.”
If the addressee has a phone number in Contacts, Siri knows who you mean; she
dials the number for you, right from the Mail app!
Four Settings Worth Tweaking
The options awaiting you in Settings → Mail cover a huge range of email
behaviors. Here are a few of the most useful.
Preview. Messages in your inbox are listed with the subject line in bold
type and a couple of lines, in light-gray text, that preview the message
itself. You can control how many lines of the preview show up here,
from None (you see more message titles on each screen without
scrolling) to 5 Lines..
Show To/Cc labels. The iPhone can display a 
 or 
 logo on
each message. At a glance, it helps you identify which messages are
actually intended for you. Messages without those logos are probably
spam, newsletters, mailing lists, or other messages that weren’t
specifically addressed to you.
Default Account. If you have several accounts, which one does the
iPhone use when you send mail from other apps—like when you email

a photo from Photos or a link from Safari?
It uses the default account, of course. You determine which one is the
default account in Settings → Mail → Default Account.
Settings by account. In iOS 11, the options that may differ by account
are stored in a separate location: Settings → Accounts & Passwords. If
you have more than one email account, here’s where you can tap one to
delete it or just temporarily deactivate it (turn off Mail)—for example,
to accommodate your travel schedule, or just because you’re really tired
of dealing with email.

Chapter 16. 15 Syncing with
iTunes
Apple’s iTunes program began life as a loading dock for iPods way back in
2001. Eventually, it became an essential partner for our iPhones; we used iTunes
to shop for, organize, and sync movies, photos, apps, ebooks, and music to our
phones.
Today, though, it’s perfectly possible to use all of an iPhone’s features without
iTunes—and even without a computer. You can download all your apps, music,
movies, and books right from the Internet, and you can back up your phone
using iCloud (see the next chapter).
In fact, you can’t use iTunes anymore for apps and ringtones. In the latest
version, Apple stripped out those functions. (When you first open iTunes 12.7 or
later, a message lets you know that “iTunes has been updated to focus on music,
movies, TV shows, podcasts, and audiobooks.”)
Why? Because, after years of listening to consumer complaints that iTunes has
become too overloaded with functions, Apple felt that this was one task iTunes
didn’t need to handle. Today you have to buy and organize apps and ringtones
directly from your phone.
TIP
So wait—without iTunes storing app and ringtone backups on your computer, how do you re-download
apps and ringtones you’ve bought but don’t currently have on your phone? Like this. On the phone, open
the App Store app, and then tap Today → [your icon in the top-right corner] → Purchased → Not on
This iPhone.
For ringtones, open Settings → Sounds & Haptics. Tap Ringtone; at the top of the page, tap Download
All Purchased Tones. (If you don’t see that button, it’s because you haven’t bought any Apple ringtones,
or you’ve already re-downloaded them.)
Still, for managing music and videos, iTunes is an efficient tool. And for
backups, it’s nice to know that your stuff is all stored on a machine that’s within

your control.
Connecting the iPhone
iTunes is designed to load up, and back up, your iPhone. You can connect it to
your computer either wirelessly over Wi-Fi, or wirefully, with the white USB
cable that came with the iPhone.
Connecting the phone with a cable. Plug one end of the iPhone’s
white charging cable into your computer’s USB jack. Connect the other
end to the phone.
NOTE
If you have a 2016-or-later MacBook Pro (which has only USB-C jacks), you’ll need either a
USB-C adapter or a USB-C–to–Lightning cable to connect your phone.
Connecting over Wi-Fi. The iPhone can be charging in its bedside
alarm clock dock, happily and automatically syncing with your laptop
somewhere else in the house. It transfers all the same stuff to and from
your computer—apps, music, books, contacts, calendars, movies,
photos, ringtones—but through the air instead of a cable.
Your computer has to be on and running iTunes. The phone and the
computer have to be on the same Wi-Fi network.
To set up wireless sync, connect the phone using the white USB cable,
one last time. Ironic, but true.
Now open iTunes and click the 
 (iPhone) button near the top-left
corner of the iTunes screen. Now you can look over the iPhone’s
contents or sync it (read on).

NOTE
If you have more than one iPhone, and they’re all connected, then this button is a pop-up menu. Choose
the name of the one you want to manipulate.
On the Summary tab, scroll down; turn on Sync with this iPhone over Wi-Fi.
Click Apply. You can now detach the phone.
From now on, whenever the phone is on the Wi-Fi network, it’s automatically
connected to your computer, wirelessly. You don’t even have to think about it.
(Well, OK—you have to think about leaving the computer turned on with iTunes
open, which is something of a buzzkill.)
All About Syncing
In general, syncing (transferring data between the iPhone and the computer)
begins automatically when you connect the phone. The 
 icon whirls in the
top-left corner of the screen, but you’re welcome to keep using your iPhone

while it syncs.
Truth is, most people these days don’t bother with iTunes for syncing; they let
the phone sync with their computers wirelessly, via free iCloud accounts.
If you’re a little queasy about letting a third party (Apple) store your personal
data, though, you can also do this task manually. You can let the iPhone and
computer sync directly—no Internet is involved.
Ordinarily, the iPhone-iTunes relationship is automatic, according to this
scheme:
Bidirectional copying (iPhone ↔ computer). Contacts, calendars, and
web bookmarks get copied in both directions. After a sync, your
computer and phone contain exactly the same information.
One-way sync (computer → iPhone). All of the following gets copied
in one direction: computer to phone. Music, TV, movies, ringtones, and
ebooks you bought on your computer; photos from your computer; and
email account information.
One-way sync (iPhone → computer). Photos and videos taken with
the iPhone’s camera; music, videos, apps, ringtones, and ebooks you
bought right from the phone—it all gets copied the other way, from the
phone to the computer.
A complete backup. iTunes also backs up everything else on your
iPhone: settings, text messages, call history, and so on. Details on this
backup business are covered starting in “Backing Up the iPhone”.
TIP
If you’re in a hurry, you can skip the time-consuming backup portion of the sync. Just click 
 at the
top of the iTunes window whenever it says “Backing up.” iTunes gets the message and skips right ahead
to the next phase of the sync—transferring contacts, calendars, music, and so on.
Manual Syncing
OK, but what if you don’t want iTunes to start syncing every time you connect

your iPhone? What if, for example, you want to change the assortment of music
and video that gets copied to it? Or what if you just want to connect the USB
cable to charge the phone, not to sync it?
In that case, you can stop the autosyncing in any of these ways:
Interrupt a sync in progress. Click 
 in the iTunes status window.
Stop iTunes from syncing with the iPhone just this time. As you plug
in the iPhone’s cable, hold down the Shift+Ctrl keys (Windows) or the 
-Option keys (Mac) until the iPhone pops up in the iTunes window.
Now you can see what’s on the iPhone and change what will be synced
to it—but no syncing takes place until you command it.
Stop iTunes from auto-syncing with this iPhone. Connect the iPhone.
Click 
 in the upper-left corner of iTunes. On the Summary tab, turn
off Automatically sync when this iPhone is connected.
Stop iTunes from autosyncing any iPhone, ever. In iTunes, choose
Edit → Preferences (Windows) or iTunes → Preferences (Mac). Click
the Devices tab and turn on Prevent iPods, iPhones, and iPads from
syncing automatically. You can still trigger a sync on command when
the iPhone is wired up—by clicking the Sync button.
Of course, you must have turned off autosyncing for a reason. And that reason
might be that you want to control what gets copied onto your iPhone. Maybe
you’re in a hurry to leave for the airport, and you don’t have time to sit there for
an hour while six downloaded movies get copied to it. Maybe you have 50
gigabytes of music but only 16 gigs of iPhone storage.
In any case, here are the two ways you can sync manually:
Use the tabs in iTunes. With the iPhone connected, you can specify
exactly what you want copied to it—which songs, which TV shows,
which apps, and so on—using the various tabs in iTunes, as described
on the following pages. Once you’ve made your selections, click the
Summary tab and then click Apply. (The Apply button says Sync

instead if you haven’t actually changed any settings.)
Drag files onto the iPhone icon. Once your iPhone is connected to
your computer, you can click its icon and then turn on Manually
manage music and videos (on the Summary screen). Click Apply.
Now you can drag songs and videos directly onto the iPhone’s icon to
copy them there. Wilder yet, you can bypass iTunes entirely by
dragging music and video files from your computer’s desktop onto the
iPhone’s icon. That’s handy when you’ve just inherited or downloaded a
bunch of song files, converted a DVD to the iPhone’s video format, or
whatever.
Just two notes of warning here. First, the iPhone accommodates dragged
material from a single computer only. Second, if you ever turn off this
option, then all those manually dragged songs and videos will disappear
from your iPhone at the next sync opportunity.
TIP
Also on the Summary tab, you’ll find the baffling little option called Sync only checked songs and
videos. This is a global override—a last-ditch “Keep the embarrassing songs off my iPhone” option.
When this option is turned on, iTunes consults the tiny checkboxes next to every single song and video
in your iTunes library. If you turn off a song’s checkbox, it won’t get synced to your iPhone, no matter
what—even if you use the Music tab to sync All songs or playlists, or explicitly turn on a playlist that
contains this song. If the song’s or video’s checkbox isn’t checked in your Library list, then it will be left
behind on your computer.
The Eight Tabs of iTunes
Once your iPhone is connected to the computer, and you’ve clicked its icon in
the upper-left corner of iTunes, the left side of the iTunes window reveals a
column of word buttons: Summary, Music, Movies, TV Shows, Podcasts,
Books, Photos, and Info. Below that is a second, duplicate listing, labeled On
My Device. For the most part, these represent the categories of stuff you can
sync to your iPhone.
The following pages cover each of these tabs, in sequence, and detail how to

sync each kind of iPhone-friendly material.
TIP
At the bottom of the screen, a colorful graph shows you the number and types of files: Audio, Video,
Photos, Apps, Books, Documents & Data, and Other (for your personal data). More importantly, it also
shows you how much room you have left, so you won’t get overzealous in trying to load the thing up.
Point to each color block without clicking to see how many of each item there are (“2031 photos”) and
how much space they take up.
Summary Tab
This screen gives basic stats on your iPhone, like its serial number, capacity, and
phone number. Buttons in the middle control how and where the iPhone gets
backed up. Checkboxes at the bottom of the screen let you set up manual
syncing, as described previously.
Serial Number, UDID
If you click your phone’s serial number, it changes to reveal the unique device
identifier (UDID). That’s Apple’s behind-the-scenes ID for your exact product,
used primarily by software companies (developers). You may, during times of
beta testing a new app or troubleshooting an existing one, be asked to supply
your phone’s UDID.

You can click the same label again to see your phone’s Product Type and ECID.
Or click your phone number to see your various cellular identifiers like the
MEID, IMEI, and ICCID. Or click the iOS version to see your iOS version’s
build number.
Right-click (on the Mac, Control-click) any of these numbers to get the Copy
command. It copies those long strings of letters and numbers onto your
computer’s Clipboard, ready to paste into an email or a text.
Music Tab
Turn on Sync Music. Now decide what music to put on your phone.
NOTE
If you’re using iCloud Music Library (“The Library Tab”), this Music tab appears empty except for a
note that you can play all your music wirelessly from the Internet. In other words, since all your music is
online, there’s no point in choosing some subset of it to sync to your phone.

If you have a big iPhone and a small music library, you can opt to sync
the Entire music library.
If you have a big music collection and a small iPhone, you’ll have to
take only some of it along for the iPhone ride. In that case, click
Selected play​lists, artists, albums, and genres. In the lists below, turn
on the checkboxes for the playlists, artists, albums, and music genres
you want to transfer. (These are cumulative. If there’s no Electric Light
Orchestra in any of your selected playlists, but you turn on ELO in the
Artists list, you’ll get all your ELO anyway.)
TIP
Playlists make it fast and easy to sync whole batches of tunes over to your iPhone. But don’t forget that
you can add individual songs, too, even if they’re not in any playlist. Just turn on Manually manage
music and videos. Now you can drag individual songs and videos from your iTunes library onto the
iPhone icon to install them there.
Music videos and voice memos (recorded by the iPhone and now residing on
your computer) get their own checkboxes.

Making It All Fit
An iPhone holds a finite amount of music and video. If you turn on Sync All
checkboxes, a message may say that it won’t all fit on the iPhone. One solution:
Tiptoe through the tabs, turning off checkboxes and trying to sync until the “too
much” error message goes away.
If you don’t have quite so much time, turn on Automatically fill free space with
songs. It uses artificial intelligence to load up your phone automatically, using
your most played and most recent music as a guide. (It does not, in fact, fill the
phone completely; it leaves a few hundred megabytes for safety—so you can
download more stuff on the road, for example.)
Another helpful approach is to use the smart playlist, a music playlist that
assembles itself based on criteria that you supply. For example:
1. In iTunes, choose Music from the top-left pop-up menu. Choose File
→ New Smart Playlist. The Smart Playlist dialog box appears.
2. Specify the category. Use the pop-up menus to choose, for example, a
musical genre, songs you’ve played recently, songs you haven’t played
recently, or ones you’ve rated highly.
3. Turn on the “Limit to” checkbox, and set up the constraints. For
example, you could limit the amount of music in this playlist to 2
gigabytes, chosen at random. That way, every time you sync, you’ll get
a fresh, random supply of songs on your iPhone, with enough room left
for some videos.
4. Click OK. The new Smart Playlist appears in the list of playlists at left;
you can rename it. Click it to look it over, if you like. Then, on the
Music tab, choose this playlist for syncing to the iPhone.
Movies and TV Shows Tabs
TV shows and movies you’ve bought or rented from the iTunes Store look great
on the iPhone. (And if you start watching a rented movie on your computer, the
iPhone can begin playing it from right where you left off.)

Syncing TV shows and movies works just like syncing music or podcasts. You
can have iTunes copy all your stuff to the iPhone, but video fills up your storage
fast. That’s why you can turn on the checkboxes of just the individual movies or
shows (either seasons or episodes) you want—or, using the Automatically
include pop-up menu, request only the most recent, or the most recent ones you
haven’t seen yet.
Podcasts Tab
The iTunes Store lists thousands of free amateur and professional podcasts
(“Podcasts”). On this tab, you can choose to sync all episodes, selected shows,
all unplayed episodes—or just a certain number of episodes per sync.
Checkboxes let you choose which podcast series get to come along for the ride,
so you can sync to suit your mood.
This tab also includes your iTunes U recordings (educational seminars that used
to get their own tab).
Books Tab
Here are thumbnails of your audiobooks and your ebooks—those you’ve bought
from Apple, downloaded from the web, or dragged into iTunes from your
desktop (PDF files, for example). You can ask iTunes to send them all to your
phone—or only the ones whose checkboxes you turn on.

Photos Tab
If you’ve turned on iCloud Photo Library (“iCloud Photo Library”), this tab
appears blank, except for a note that “iCloud Photos is On.” After all, your
photos are already syncing. If not…read on.
Syncing Photos and Videos (Computer → iPhone)
iTunes can sync the photos from your hard drive onto your iPhone. You can even
select individual albums of images that you’ve already assembled on your
computer.
Here are your photo-filling options for the iPhone:
Windows: You can sync with Photoshop Elements, Photoshop Album,
or any folder of photos, like Pictures (in Windows).
Mac: You can sync with Photos, iPhoto, or Aperture.
When you’re ready to sync your photos, click the Photos tab in iTunes. Turn on
Sync photos from, and then indicate where you’d like to sync them from
(Photoshop Elements, the Mac’s program Photos, or whatever).
If you’ve chosen a photo-shoebox program’s name (and not a folder’s name),
you can then click Selected albums, Events, and Faces. Turn on the
checkboxes of the albums, events, and faces you want synced. (The “faces”
option is available only if you’re syncing from Photos or Aperture on the Mac,
and only if you’ve used the Faces feature, which groups your photos according
to who’s in them.)
This option also offers to tack on recent Events (photos taken the same day).
Indicate whether or not you want videos included (Include videos).
Once you make your selections and click Apply, the program computes for a
time, “optimizing” copies of your photos to make them look great on the iPhone
(for example, downsizing them from 20-megapixel overkill to something more
appropriate for a 0.6-megapixel screen), and then ports them over.
After the sync is complete, you’ll be able to wave your iPhone around, and
people will beg to see your photos.

Syncing Photos and Videos (iPhone → Computer)
You can go the opposite direction, too: You can send photos and videos you took
with the iPhone’s camera to the computer. You can rest easy, knowing that
they’re backed up to your computer for safekeeping.
Now, it’s important to understand that iTunes is not involved in this process. It
doesn’t know anything about photos or videos from the iPhone.
So what’s handling the iPhone-to-computer transfer? Your operating system. It
treats the iPhone as though it’s a digital camera and suggests importing them just
as it would from a camera’s memory card.
Here’s how it goes: Plug the iPhone into the computer with the USB cable. What
you’ll see is probably something like this:
On the Mac. Photos opens. This free photo-organizing/editing program
comes on every Mac. Shortly after the program notices that the iPhone
is on the premises, it goes into Import mode. Click Import All, or select
some thumbnails from the iPhone and then click Import Selected.
In Windows. When you attach a camera (or an iPhone), a dialog box
asks how you want its contents handled. It lists any photo-management
program you might have installed (Photoshop Elements, Photoshop
Album, and so on), as well as Windows’ own camera-management
software. Click the program you want to handle importing the iPhone
pictures and videos.
You’ll probably also want to turn on Always do this for this device, so
it’ll happen automatically the next time.
Info Tab
This tab is unnecessary if you’re using iCloud (Chapter 16) to sync your phone’s
contacts, calendar, email settings, and web bookmarks with your computer.
Instead, this tab is exclusively for the six people who still use iTunes to sync
these data types with a Windows program like Outlook, Outlook Express, or
Windows Mail; a Mac program like Contacts or Entourage/Outlook for Mac; or
an online address book like Google Contacts or Yahoo Address Book.

Similarly, you can sync the phone’s calendar with a program like Outlook (for
Windows) or Calendar or Outlook (on the Mac).
File Sharing
Some iPhone apps create documents that you can open in similar apps on your
computer—and vice versa. You can edit the same iMovie videos on both the
Mac and the iPhone. Similarly, scanning apps can share their scanned image
files.
This tab lists all iOS apps that can share their documents, and lets you copy them
to or from your computer.
NOTE
Actually, though, using the new Files app—and a virtual disk like iCloud Drive or Dropbox—is actually
a far simpler, more useful way to move these files back and forth. Why? Because you don’t have to
move them back and forth. They’re always available, in their latest versions, to all your machines. See
“The Carpenter’s Level”.
If you still decide to use this clunky method, here’s how it goes:
From phone to computer. Click the app’s name. In the rightmost
column, drag the files you want out of the iTunes window onto your
desktop. (Or click Save To and choose a folder location.)
From computer to phone. Click the app’s name. Drag the files you
want out of a desktop window into the rightmost iTunes column. (Or
click Add and choose the file manually.)
Next time you sync, those files will move the way you’ve specified.
On My Device
Below those Settings tabs at the left side of the iTunes window, there’s a second,
similar set labeled On My Device. It’s a tidy list of everything that is, in fact, on
your device, organized by type (Music, Movies, and so on). There’s not really
much you can do here—you can get more information about some items by

pointing to them—but just seeing your multimedia empire arrayed before you
can be very satisfying.
The Purchased category, in particular, can be handy; it shows everything on your
phone that you’ve bought with the phone.
One iPhone, Multiple Computers
You can actually sync an iPhone with multiple Macs or PCs. You might want,
for example, to fill it up with music and video from a Mac at home; contacts,
calendar, ebooks, and iPhone applications from your Windows PC at work; and
maybe even the photos from your laptop. All you have to do is set up the tabs of
each computer’s copy of iTunes to sync only certain kinds of material.
On the Mac, for example, you’d turn on the Sync checkboxes for only the
Music, Podcasts, and Video tabs. Sync away. Next, take the iPhone to the office;
on your PC, turn on the Sync checkboxes on only the Info, Books, and Apps
tabs. Sync away once more. Then, on the laptop, turn off Sync on all tabs except
Photos.
Each time you connect the iPhone to one of the computers, it syncs that data
according to the preferences set in that copy of iTunes.
One Computer, Multiple iPhones
It’s fine to sync multiple iPhones with a single computer, too. iTunes cheerfully
fills each one up, and can back each one up, as they come. In fact, if you open
the Preferences box (in the iTunes menu on the Mac, the Edit menu in
Windows), the Devices tab lists all the iPhones that iTunes is tracking (and iPads
and iPod Touches).
Backing Up the iPhone
iTunes can back up everything your computer doesn’t already have a copy of:
stuff you downloaded straight to the phone (music, ebooks, apps, and so on),
plus less visible things, like your iPhone’s mail and network settings, your call

history, contact favorites, notes, text messages, and other personal preferences
that are hard or impossible to recreate.
TIP
If you turn on Encrypted iPhone Backup, then your backup will also include all your passwords: for
Wi-Fi hotspots, websites, email accounts, and so on. That can save you tons of time when you have to
restore the phone from the backup. (The one downside: You have to make up a password for the backup
itself. Don’t forget it!)
You can create your backups in either of two places:
On your computer. You get a backup every time the iPhone syncs with
iTunes. The backup also happens before you install a new iPhone
firmware version from Apple or restore your phone.
In iCloud. You can also back up your phone wirelessly and
automatically—to iCloud. That kind of backup will be available even if
your computer croaks. On the other hand, since your free iCloud storage
holds only 5 gigabytes, and your phone holds 16 gigabytes or more, the
free iCloud account usually isn’t enough. See the next chapter for
details.
You make this choice on the Summary tab.
Using That Backup
Maybe you lost your phone, or maybe you’ve upgraded to a new phone.
To restore your data and settings, connect the iPhone to the computer you
normally use to sync with. Click the 
 (iPhone) button; click the Summary
tab; click Restore iPhone.
A message announces that you can’t erase the phone without first turning off
Find My iPhone. This is a security measure to stop a thief from erasing a stolen
phone. He can’t restore the phone without turning off Find My iPhone, which
requires your iCloud password. Go to the phone and do that (in Settings→[your
name]→iCloud).

Take iTunes up on its offer to restore all your settings and stuff from the backup.
If you see multiple backup files listed from other iPhones (or an iPod Touch), be
sure to pick the backup file for your phone. Let the backup restore your phone
settings and info. Exhale.
NOTE
An iPhone backup no longer includes your apps. Instead, the backup remembers which apps you had,
and where their icons were on your Home screens—but the actual multi-gigabyte wad of the apps
themselves is not part of the backup. That’s why backups take much less time than before, and much less
space on your computer.
It does mean, though, that after a restore, you see only dimmed copies of your apps. It takes some time in
a Wi-Fi hotspot for iOS to re-download them all. Little pie charts on the icons let you know how it’s
doing.
Deleting a Backup File
To save disk space, you can delete old backups (especially for i-gadgets you no
longer own). Go to the iTunes preferences (Edit → Preferences in Windows or
iTunes → Preferences on the Mac) and click the Devices tab.

Click the dated backup file you don’t want and hit Delete Backup.

Chapter 17. 16 iCloud & Apple
Pay
The free iCloud service stems from Apple’s brainstorm that, since it controls
both ends of the connection between a Mac and the Apple website, it should be
able to create some pretty clever Internet-based features.
This chapter concerns what iCloud can do for you, the iPhone owner.
NOTE
To get a free iCloud account if you don’t already have one, sign up in Settings → iCloud.
What iCloud Giveth
So what is iCloud? Mainly, it’s these things:
iCloud Sync. It keeps your calendar, address book, and documents
updated and identical on all your gadgets: Mac, PC, iPhone, iPad, iPod
Touch. Also your web passwords, credit card numbers, AirPod (wireless
earbud) pairing, and all kinds of other things. That’s a huge convenience
—almost magical.
Find My iPhone. Find My iPhone pinpoints the current location of
your iPhone (or iPad, or Mac, or AirPods) on a map. In other words, it’s
great for helping you find your gadgets if they’ve been stolen or lost.
You can also make a lost device make a loud pinging sound for a couple
of minutes by remote control—even if it was silenced. That’s brilliantly
effective when your phone has slipped between the couch cushions.
Automatic backup. iCloud can back up your iPhone—automatically
and wirelessly (over Wi-Fi, not over cellular connections). It’s a quick
backup, since iCloud backs up only the changed data.

If you ever want to set up a new i-gadget, or if you want to restore
everything to an existing one, life is sweet. Once you’re in a Wi-Fi
hotspot, all you have to do is re-enter your Apple ID and password in
the setup assistant that appears when you turn the thing on. Magically,
your gadget is refilled with everything that used to be on it.
Well, almost everything. An iCloud backup stores everything you’ve
bought from Apple (music, books); photos and videos in your Photos
app; settings, including the layout of your Home screen; text messages;
and ringtones. You’ll have to reestablish your passwords (for hotspots,
websites, and so on) and anything that came from your computer (like
music/ringtones/videos from iTunes and photos from the Photos app).
NOTE
A backup no longer stores actual copies of all your apps. Instead, to make the backup faster
and smaller, it stores only references to your apps—bookmarks, basically. See “Deleting a
Backup File” for details.
iCloud Drive is Apple’s version of Dropbox. It’s a folder, present on
every Mac, iPhone, iPad, and iPod Touch, that lists whatever you’ve put
into it—an online “disk” that holds 5 gigabytes (more, if you’re willing
to pay for it).
The iCloud Drive is a perfect place to put stuff you want to be able to
access from any Apple gadget, wherever you go. It’s a great backup,
too.
An email account. Handy, really: An iCloud account gives you a new
email address, ending with @icloud.com or @me.com. If you already
have an email address, great! This new one can be a backup account,
one you never enter on websites so that it never gets overrun with spam.
Or vice versa: Let this be your junk account, the address you use for
online forms. Either way, it’s great to have a second account.
An online locker. Anything you buy from Apple—music, TV shows,
ebooks, apps—is stored online for easy access at any time. For example,

whenever you buy a song or a TV show from the online iTunes Store, it
appears automatically on your iPhone and computers. Your photos are
stored online, too.
Apple Pay is the feature that lets you pay for things just by waving your
phone at them, or send money to friends and family, phone-to-phone.
No wallet, no credit card needed.
Family Sharing is a broad category of features intended for families
(up to six people).
First, everyone can share stuff bought from Apple’s online stores:
movies, TV shows, music, ebooks, and so on. It’s all on a single credit
card, but you, the all-knowing parent, can approve each person’s
purchases—without having to share your account password. That’s a
great solution to a long-standing problem.
There’s also a shared family photo album and an auto-shared Family

category on the calendar. Any family member can see the location of
any other family member, and they can find one another’s lost iPhones
or iPads using Find My iPhone.
Continuity. If you have a Mac, and it’s running OS X Yosemite or later,
you’re in for a treat. The set of features Apple calls Continuity turn the
iPhone into a part of the Mac. They let you make calls from your Mac
as though it were a speakerphone. They let you send and receive text
messages from your Mac—to any cellphone on earth. They let you
AirDrop files between computer and phone, wirelessly. And more.
That was the quick overview. The rest of this chapter covers each of these
iCloud-related features in greater depth, in the same order—except for
Continuity, which gets its own chapter right after this one.
iCloud Sync
For many people, this is the killer app for iCloud: The iCloud website, acting as
the master control center, can keep multiple Macs, Windows PCs, and
iPhones/iPads/iPod Touches synchronized. That offers both a huge convenience
factor—all your stuff is always on all your gadgets—and a safety/backup factor,
since you have duplicates everywhere.
It works by storing the master copies of your stuff—email, notes, contacts,
calendars, web bookmarks, and documents—on the web. (Or “in the cloud,” as
the product managers would say.)
Whenever your Macs, PCs, or i-gadgets are online—over Wi-Fi or cellular—
they connect to the mother ship and update themselves. Edit an address on your
iPhone, and shortly thereafter you’ll find the same change in Contacts (on your
Mac) and Outlook (on your PC). Send an email reply from your PC at the office,
and you’ll find it in your Sent Mail folder on the Mac at home. Add a web
bookmark anywhere and find it everywhere else. Edit a spreadsheet in Numbers
on your iPad and find the same numbers updated on your Mac.
NOTE
Actually, there’s yet another place where you can work with your data: on the web. Using any computer,

you can log into icloud.com to find web-based clones of Calendar, Contacts, Mail, Notes, Reminders,
and Photos. In fact, there are even web-based versions of Pages, Numbers, and Keynote!
To control the syncing, tap Settings → [your name]→ iCloud on your iPhone.
Turn on the checkboxes of the stuff you want to be synchronized all the way
around:
Photos. Tap to see a subset of the controls described in “Photos”—only
the switches that control iCloud photo features. Namely:
iCloud Photo Library is Apple’s online photo storage feature. It stores
all your photos and videos online, so you can access them from any
Apple gadget. See “iCloud Photo Library”.
Optimize iPhone Storage is an ingenious way to save space on your
phone; see “Geotagging”.
Upload to My Photo Stream and iCloud Photo Sharing are the
master switches for Photo Streams, which are among iCloud’s marquee
features (“Hide”).
When you hold your finger down on the shutter button, the iPhone 5s
and later models can snap 10 frames a second. That’s burst mode—and
all those photos can fill up your iCloud storage. So Apple gives you the
Upload Burst Photos option so you can decide whether you want them
to be part of the backup.
Mail. “Mail” refers to your actual email messages, plus your account
settings and preferences from iOS’s Mail program.
Messages. In iOS 11, all those text messages and iMessages, once
stored only in the Messages app, can be stored on iCloud. That way, you
don’t wind up with missing chunks of conversation histories as you
move from device to device—and you save a ton of space on your
phone. (Apple added this feature in iOS 11.2.)
Contacts, Calendars. This option keeps all your address books and
calendars synchronized. Delete a phone number on your computer at
home, and you’ll find it gone from your phone. Enter an appointment on

your iPhone, and you’ll find the calendar updated everywhere else.
Reminders refers to the to-do items you create in the phone’s
Reminders app; very shortly, those reminders will show up on your Mac
(in Reminders, Calendar, or BusyCal) or PC (in Outlook). How great to
make a reminder for yourself in one place and have it reminding you
later in another one!
Notes syncs the notes from your phone’s Notes app into the Notes app
on the Mac, the email program on your PC, your other i-gadgets, and, of
course, the iCloud website.
Safari. If a website is important enough to merit bookmarking on your
phone, why shouldn’t it also show up in the Bookmarks menu on your
desktop PC at home, your Mac laptop, or your iPad? This option syncs
your Safari Reading List (“The Reading List (
)”), too.
News refers to the sources and topics you’ve set up in the News app
(“News”).
Home refers to the setups for any home-automation gear you’ve
installed (“Home”).
Health can sync via iCloud for the first time in iOS 11. It includes all
the fitness and medical stats.
Wallet. If you’ve bought tickets for a movie, show, game, or flight, you
sure as heck don’t want to be stuck without them because you left the
barcode on your other gadget.
Keychain. The login information for your websites (names and
passwords), and even your credit card information, can be stored right
on your phone—and synced to your other iPhones, iPads, and Macs
(running OS X Mavericks or later).
Having your passwords and credit cards magically synced across your
computers and mobile gadgets saves you unending headaches. This is a
truly great feature, and it’s worth enduring the setup.

NOTE
You may notice that there are no switches here for syncing stuff you buy from Apple, like
books, movies, apps, and music. They’re not so much synced as they are stored for you
online. You can download them at any time to any of your machines.
Other apps’ data. If you’ve turned on iCloud Drive, then you also see a
list of apps that would like permission to save their data onto it—so that
your apps’ data is synced across devices, too.
Look Me Up by Email is a list of apps that permit other iCloud
members to find you by looking up your address.
Find My iPhone
Did you leave your iPhone somewhere? Did it get stolen? Has that mischievous
5-year-old left it somewhere in the house again? Sounds like you’re ready to use
one of Apple’s finest creations: Find My iPhone.
Log into iCloud.com and click Find My iPhone. Immediately, the website
updates to show you, on a map, the current location of your phone—and Macs,
iPod Touches, iPads, and even AirPod earbuds. (If they’re not online, or if
they’re turned all the way off, you won’t see their current locations.)
If you own more than one, click All Devices and, from the list, choose the one
you’re looking for.

If just knowing where the thing is isn’t enough to satisfy you, then click the dot
representing your phone, click the 
 next to its name, and marvel at the
appearance of these three buttons:
Play Sound. When you click this button, the phone starts dinging and
vibrating loudly for two minutes, wherever it is, so you can figure out
which jacket pocket you left it in. It beeps even if the ringer switch is
off, and even if the phone is asleep. Once you find the phone, just wake
it in the usual way to make the dinging stop.
Lost Mode. When you lose your phone for real, proceed immediately to
Lost Mode. Its first step: prompting you to password-protect it, if you
haven’t already. Without the password, a sleazy crook can’t get into
your phone without erasing it. (If your phone is already password-
protected, you don’t see this step.)
The passcode you dream up here works just as though you’d created
one yourself on the phone. That is, it remains in place until you, with
the phone in hand, manually turn it off in Settings.
Next, the website asks for a phone number where you can be reached,
and (when you click Next) a message you want displayed on the
iPhone’s Lock screen. If you left the thing in a taxi or on some

restaurant table, you can use this feature to plead for its return.
When you click Done, your message appears on the phone’s screen,
wherever it is, no matter what app was running, and the phone locks.
Whoever finds it can’t miss the message, can’t miss the Call button
that’s right there on the Lock screen, and can’t do anything without
dismissing the message first.
If the finder of your phone really isn’t such a nice person, at least you’ll
get an automatic email every time the phone moves from place to place,
so you can track the thief’s whereabouts. (Apple sends these messages
to your iCloud email address.)
Erase iPhone. This is the last-ditch security option, for when your
immediate concern isn’t so much the phone as all the private stuff that’s
on it. Click this button, confirm the dire warning box, enter your iCloud

ID, and click Erase. By remote control, you’ve just erased everything
from your phone, wherever it may be. (If it’s ever returned, you can
restore it from your backup.)
Once you’ve wiped the phone, you can no longer find it or send
messages to it using Find My iPhone.
TIP
There’s an app for that. Download the Find My iPhone app from the App Store. It lets you do everything
described here from another iPhone, in a tidy, simple control panel.
Send Last Location
Find My iPhone works great—as long as your lost phone has power, is turned
on, and is online. Often, though, it’s lying dead somewhere, or it’s been turned
off, or there’s no Internet service. In those situations, you might think Find My
iPhone can’t help you.
But, thanks to Send Last Location, you still have a prayer of finding your phone
again. Before it dies, your phone will send Apple its location. You have 24 hours
to log into iCloud.com and use the Find My iPhone feature to see where it was at
the time of death. (After that, Apple deletes the location information.)
You definitely want to turn this switch on.
Activation Lock
Thousands of people have found their lost or stolen iPhones by using Find My
iPhone. Yay!
But until recently, Find My iPhone had a back door the size of Montana: The
thief could simply erase the phone and sell it on the black market, which was his
goal all along. Suddenly, your phone was lost in the wilderness, and you had no
way to track or recover it.
That’s why Apple offers the ingenious Activation Lock feature. It’s very simple:
Nobody can erase your phone, or even turn off Find My iPhone, without entering
your iCloud password (your Apple ID). This isn’t a switch you can turn on or

off; it’s always on.
So even if the bad guy has your phone and tries to sell it, the thing is useless. It’s
still registered to you, you can still track it, and it still displays your message and
phone number on the Lock screen. Without your iCloud password, your iPhone
is just a worthless brick. Suddenly, stealing iPhones is a much less attractive
prospect. (Fun fact: In New York City reported iPhone thefts are down 90
percent since Activation Lock came along.)
iCloud Backup
Your phone can back itself up online, automatically, so that you’ll never worry
about losing your files along with your phone.
Of course, most of the important stuff is already backed up by iCloud, in the
process of syncing it (calendar, contacts—all the stuff described on these pages).
So this option just backs up everything else: all your settings, your Health app
data, your documents, your account settings, and your photo library.
There are some footnotes. The wireless backing-up happens only when your
phone is charging and in a Wi-Fi hotspot (because in a cellular area all that data
would eat up your data limit each month). And a free iCloud account includes
only 5 gigabytes of storage; your phone may require a lot more space than that.
Using iCloud Backup generally means paying for more iCloud storage.
iCloud Drive
iCloud Drive is Apple’s version of Dropbox. It’s a single folder whose contents
are replicated on every Apple machine you own—Mac, iPhone, iPad,
iCloud.com—and even Windows PCs. See “The Carpenter’s Level” for details.
Email
Apple offers an email address as part of each iCloud account. Of course, you
already have an email account. So why bother? The first advantage is the simple
address: YourName@me.com or YourName@icloud.com.

Second, you can read your me.com email from any computer anywhere in the
world, via the iCloud website, or on your iPhone/Mac/iPad.
To make things even sweeter, your me.com or icloud.com mail is completely
synced. Delete a message on one gadget, and you’ll find it in the Deleted Mail
folder on another. Send a message from your iPhone, and you’ll find it in the
Sent Mail folder on your Mac. And so on.
Video, Music, Apps: Locker in the Sky
Apple, if you hadn’t noticed, has become a big seller of multimedia files. It has
the biggest music store in the world. It has the biggest app store, for both i-
gadgets and Macs. It sells an awful lot of TV shows and movies. Its ebook store,
iBooks, is no Amazon, but it’s chugging along.
Once you buy a song, movie, app, or book, you can download it again as often as
you like—no charge. In fact, you can download it to your other Apple
equipment, too. iCloud automates, or at least formalizes, that process. Once you
buy something, it’s added to a list of items that you can download to all your
other machines.
Here’s how to grab them:
iPhone, iPad, iPod Touch. For apps: Open the App Store icon. Tap
Updates. Tap Purchased and then My Purchases. Tap Not on This
iPhone.
For music, movies, and TV shows: Open the iTunes Store app. Tap
More and then Purchased; enter your password; tap the category you
want. Tap Not on This iPhone.
There they are: all the items you’ve ever bought, even on your other
machines using the same Apple ID. To download anything listed here
onto this machine, tap the 
 button. Or tap an album name to see
the list of songs on it so you can download just some of those songs.
You can save yourself all that tapping by opening Settings → iTunes &
App Store and turning on Automatic Downloads (for music, apps,

books, and audiobooks). From now on, whenever you’re on Wi-Fi, stuff
you’ve bought on other Apple machines gets downloaded to this one
automatically.
Mac or PC. Open the Mac App Store program (for Mac apps) and click
Purchases. Or open the iTunes app (for songs, TV shows, books, and
movies). Click Store and then, under Quick Links, click Purchased.
There are all your purchases, ready to open or re-download.
TIP
To make this automatic, open iTunes. Choose iTunes → Preferences → Downloads. Under Automatic
Downloads, turn on Music, Movies, or TV Shows, as you see fit. Click OK. From now on, iTunes will
auto-import any of those items that you buy on any of your other machines.
Any bookmark you set in an iBooks book is synced to your other gadgets, too.

The idea, of course, is that you can read a few pages on your phone in the
doctor’s waiting room and then continue from the same page on your iPad on the
train ride home.
The Price of Free
A free iCloud account gives you 5 gigabytes of online storage. That may not
sound like much, especially when you consider how big some music, photo, and
video files are. Fortunately, anything you buy from Apple—like music, apps,
books, and TV shows—doesn’t count against that 5-gigabyte limit. Neither do
the photos in your Photo Stream.
So what’s left? Some things that don’t take up much space, like settings and
documents—and some things that take up a lot of it, like photos and videos,
backups, email, TV shows, and movies. Anything you put on your iCloud Drive
eats up your allotment, too.
When you open Settings → [your name] → iCloud, you get a colorful graph
showing how full your iCloud storage is, and what’s filling it (???, right).
Tap Manage Storage to open a comprehensive screen that shows where all your
iCloud space is going. For example, you’ll see how much of it your iCloud
Photo Library occupies (tap for the option to turn it off); how much each
phone/tablet’s Backups are eating up (tap a device’s name to view the size and
date of the last backup—and, if you like, to delete them); a list of apps you’ve
permitted to save their Documents & Data onto your Drive (tap one to see what
it’s storing; swipe leftward to delete it); and how much space your iCloud Mail
account is eating up.
Change Storage Plan lets you upgrade or downgrade the amount you’re paying
Apple for iCloud storage. For example, if you find 5 gigs constricting, you can
expand it to 50 GB, 200 GB, or 2 TB—for $1, $3, or $10 a month.
Apple Pay
Breathe a sigh of relief. Now you can pay for things without cash, without cards,
without signing anything, without your wallet: Just hold the phone. You don’t
have to open some app, don’t have to enter a code, don’t even have to wake the

phone up. Touch ID or Face ID confirms that it’s really you making the
purchase; you’ve just paid.
You can’t pay for things everywhere; the merchant has to have a wireless
terminal attached to the register. You’ll know, because you’ll see one of two
logos near the register, as shown here.
Apple says more than 2 million stores and restaurants accept Apple Pay,
including chains like McDonald’s, Walgreens, Starbucks, Macy’s, Subway,
Panera Bread, Best Buy, Duane Reade, Bloomingdale’s, Staples, Chevron, and
Whole Foods. The list grows all the time.
Apple Pay depends on a special chip in the phone: the NFC chip (near-field
communication), and models before the iPhone 6 don’t have it. Stores whose
terminals don’t speak NFC—like Walmart—don’t work with Apple Pay, either.
The Setup
To set up Apple Pay, you have to teach your phone about your credit card. To do
that, open the Wallet app. You can also start this process in Settings → Wallet &
Apple Pay.
Tap Add credit or debit card. Tap Next.
Now, on the Add Card screen, you’re asked to aim the phone’s camera at
whatever Visa, Mastercard, or American Express card you use most often. Hold
steady until the digits of your card, your name, and the expiration date blink onto
the screen, autorecognized. Cool! The phone even suggests a card description.

You can manually edit any of those four fields before tapping Done.
NOTE
If you don’t have the card with you, you can also choose Enter Card Details Manually and type in the
numbers yourself.
Check over the phone’s interpretation of the card’s information, and then hit
Next.
Now you have to type in the security code. Hit Next again. Then agree to the
legalese screen.
Next, your bank has to verify that all systems are go for Apple Pay. That may
involve responding to an email or a text, or typing in a verification code. In any

case, it’s generally instantaneous.
NOTE
Right now, Apple Pay works only with Mastercard, Visa, or American Express, and only the ones issued
by certain banks. The big ones are all on board—Citibank, Chase, Bank of America, and so on—and
more are signing on all the time.
You can record your store loyalty and rewards cards, too—and when you’re in
that store, the phone chooses the correct card automatically. When you’re in
Dunkin’ Donuts, it automatically uses your Dunkin’ Donuts card to pay.
TIP
To change which card is your default (main) credit card, open Settings → Wallet & Apple Pay. That’s
where you can add and remove cards, too.
The Shopping
Once the cashier has rung up your total, here comes the magic. The exact steps
depend on whether or not your phone has a home button:
With a home button. Rest your finger on the home button—no need to
wake the phone—and bring it within an inch of the terminal. The phone
buzzes, beeps, and says “Done”; it’s all over. It takes about two seconds.
NOTE
That’s how you pay with your primary (default) credit card. If you’ve stored more than one,
and you want to choose a different one today, the procedure is slightly different: Bring the
phone near the terminal (without involving the home button). When your main card appears,
tap it, tap a different card, and then touch the home button.
With an iPhone X. The procedure is different: You’re supposed to
confirm your identity before you bring the phone near the Apple Pay
terminal.


So begin by double-clicking the side button to make the Apple Pay
screen appear. (At this point, you can tap the picture of your default
card to choose a different one.)
Authenticate either by looking at the phone (Face ID) or entering your
passcode (boring). Now bring the phone within an inch of the terminal.
The phone buzzes, beeps, and says “Done”; it’s all over.
NOTE
If you find that you’re often bringing up the Apple Pay screen with accidental double-presses of your
side button, you can turn off Settings → Wallet & Apple Pay → Double-Click Side Button. Don’t
worry; you can still use Apple Pay—by tapping its icon on your Control Center (“Control Center”).
An Apple Pay purchase is just a regular credit card purchase. So you still get
your rewards points, frequent-flier miles, and so on. (Returning something works
the same way: At the moment when you’d swipe your card, you bring the phone
near the reader until it beeps. Slick.)
Apple points out that Apple Pay is much more secure than using a credit card,
because the store never sees, receives, or stores your card number, or even your
name. Instead, the phone transmits a temporary, one-time, encoded number that
means nothing to the merchant. It incorporates verification codes that only the
card issuer (your bank) can translate and verify.
Apple never sees what you’ve bought or where, either. You can open Wallet and
tap a card’s picture to see the last few transactions, but that info exists only on
your iPhone.
And what if your phone gets stolen? Too bad—for the thief. He can’t buy
anything without your fingerprint or face. If you’re still worried, you can always
visit iCloud.com, click Settings, tap your phone’s name, and click Remove All
to de-register your cards from the phone by remote control.
Apple Pay Online
You can buy things online, too, using iPhone apps that have been upgraded to
work with Apple Pay. The time savings: no typing your name, address, and

phone number every time you buy something.
Instead, when you’re staring at the checkout screen for some app, just tap Buy
with Apple Pay.
There’s Apple Pay on websites, too. For example, if you’re shopping on a Mac
(and it doesn’t have its own fingerprint reader), you can authenticate with your
phone’s fingerprint reader or Face ID. The “OK, all clear” signal gets sent to
your Mac automatically.
Apple Pay Cash
You can now send cash to other members of the great, global Apple family with
just a couple of taps, directly from your phone. Pay the piano teacher. Pay your
share of the bill at a restaurant. Send money to your kid at college. It’s like
writing a check or handing over cash—without the checks or the cash. It’s just
like Venmo, Square Cash, or PayPal Cash, only…it’s Apple’s.
To use Apple Pay Cash, you need iOS 11.2 or later, with two-factor
authentication turned on (“Privacy”). Then:
Set up Apple Pay Cash. The Apple Pay Cash card is, of course, an
electronic fiction—there’s no actual plastic card you slip into your
physical purse or wallet. (That didn’t stop Apple from trying to make it
look like a real card with anti-piracy features—try shifting your phone
around, and marvel at the iridescent, color-changing “anti-piracy”
design!)
So you can’t use Cash until you’ve first set up Apple Pay, which
requires a real credit or debit card. Whenever you pay somebody, your
Cash card draws money from that actual card. (If you link to a debit
card, using Apple Pay cash is always free—nobody takes a cut. If you
link it to a credit card, you get hit with a 3 percent fee each time.)
Once that’s done, open Settings → Wallet & Apple Pay. Tap the little
Apple Pay Cash card to begin the activation process, which mostly
involves reading legalese. (Along the way, you’re prompted to tap Add
Debit Card; if you’ve already got a card set up, you can skip this step.)
One more thing: If you tap Verify Identity and supply your contact info

and driver’s license, you raise your maximum balance from $500 to
$20,000.
You have the option of tapping Add Money to preload money (between
$10 and $3,000) onto the Cash card—but there’s no good reason to do
so. The card automatically pulls money from your linked debit or credit
card as needed.
NOTE
In Settings → Wallet & Apple Pay, a master Apple Pay Cash on/off switch awaits. It’s a
quick way to shut down the whole thing if your sending-money addiction starts becoming a
problem.
Pay someone. Open Messages; open a chat with the lucky recipient
(somebody who also has Apple Pay Cash set up). In the apps drawer

(“The Apps Drawer”), tap Apple Pay.
TIP
Or—here’s that old Apple magic at work—tap any underlined dollar amount in a text message you’ve
recently exchanged. The Apple Pay app opens automatically in the bottom part of the screen, with that
amount already entered.
Similarly, if somebody writes in text a request for money (“Hey, do you want to split the bill? It’s $30”),
the QuickType bar above the keyboard offers a 
 button. Tap for insta-prep of the
payment.
Enter an amount from $1 to $3,000, either by tapping the + and - buttons or by
tapping the large dollar amount (or Show Keypad) and typing an amount.
When the amount looks good, tap Pay, and then tap 
. (That Send button,
usually blue, appears in black as a visual reminder that you are about to spend
money.)
A confirmation screen appears, showing which real card will be funding this
amount. (Tap 
 to change to a different card, if you like.) You’re asked to
confirm that you’re really you, either by fingerprint or, on the iPhone X, face
recognition (and a double-click of the side button).
If, at this point, you return to the Wallet app, you’ll see a screen full of details—
time and date, amount, payee, and so on.
TIP
You don’t have to bother with Messages. You can just tell Siri, “Send 35 bucks to Robin,” or “Ask Casey
for 80 dollars,” or whatever. Siri shows you what she’s about to do; say “Send” to confirm.
You can also tap the 
 next to somebody’s name in Contacts to begin the process, but that’s a lot
less fun.
Request payment. You can also operate Pay Cash in reverse. That is,

you can generate what amounts to an invoice for the person who owes
you money.
To do that, in a Messages thread with the ower, tap an underlined dollar
amount in a text message—or open the Apple Pay app. Here’s the
Request button; enter the amount and hit 
. Of course, there’s no
guarantee you’re actually going to get that money; the Request function
mainly saves the other person the effort of (a) entering the amount, and
(b) remembering.
NOTE
For some reason, Apple gives you a choice of whether or not to receive these incoming
amounts automatically. Open the Wallet app, tap the Apple Pay Cash card, then tap 
.
Here you can select Manually Accept Payments. Which means that when someone sends
you money, you don’t get it unless you tap Accept in the notification. If you wait seven days
without doing that (or if you tap the Transactions tab and tap Reject Payment), then you
never get the money. What’s wrong with you?
Track the payment. If you open your Wallet and tap the Apple Pay
card, you’ll see that the amount you sent is “Pending”; the other guy
hasn’t yet accepted your generous gift of money. Until he does, you can
cancel the payment on the Transactions tab. When he accepts, you’ll get
a notification letting you know. The transaction, in the Wallet app,
appears with all others you’ve made on the Transactions tab. Here you
can also request a statement by email.
Cash out. At any point, you can dump money (up to $3,000 at a time,
up to $20,000 a week) from the Cash card into your bank account with
just a couple of taps. On the Cash info screen, tap Transfer to Bank.
(You’ll be asked to enter your bank’s tracking number the first time you
try.) The funds will show up in your bank account in “one to three
business days,” says Apple.
Incidentally, A.P. Cash goes beyond person-to-person payments. You can treat
your new Cash card as just another credit card for use with regular Apple Pay

(“Apple Pay”), and you can also send and receive person-to-person cash with an
Apple Watch.
Family Sharing
It used to be a hassle to manage your Apple life with kids. What if they wanted
to buy a book, movie, or app? They had to use your credit card—and you had to
reveal your iCloud password to them. Or what if they wanted to see a movie that
you bought? Did they really have to buy it again?
Not anymore. Once you’ve turned on Family Sharing and invited your family
members, here’s how your life will be different:
One credit card to rule them all. Up to six of you can buy books,
movies, apps, and music on your master credit card.
Buying permissions. When your kids try to buy stuff, your phone pops
up a permission request. You have to approve each purchase.
Younger Appleheads. You can create Apple accounts for tiny tots. (For
regular Apple accounts, 13 is the age minimum.)
Shared everything. All of you get instant access to one another’s
music, video, iBooks books, and app purchases—again, without having
to know one another’s Apple passwords.
Shared storage. In iOS 11, you can share any extra iCloud storage
you’ve bought (“The Carpenter’s Level”) with your fellow family
members.
Find one another. You can use your phone to see where your kids are,
and vice versa (with permission, of course).
Find one another’s phones. The miraculous Find My iPhone feature
(“Find My iPhone”) now works for every phone in the family. If your
daughter can’t find her phone, you can find it for her with your phone.
Mutual photo album, mutual calendar, and mutual reminders.
When you turn on Family Sharing, your Photos, Calendar, and
Reminders apps each sprout a new category that’s preconfigured to

permit access by everyone in your family.
Setting Up Family Sharing
The setup process means wading through a lot of screens, but at least you’ll have
to do it only once. You can start either on the Mac (in System Preferences →
iCloud →Set Up Family) or on the phone. Since this book is about the iPhone,
what follows are the steps to do it there.
Tap Settings → [your name] → Set Up Family Sharing. Click Get Started.
Now the phone announces that you, the sage adult, are going to be the Organizer
—the one with the power, the wisdom, and the credit card. Continue (unless it’s
listing the wrong Apple ID, in which case fix it now).
On successive screens, you read about the idea of shared Apple Store purchases;
you’re shown the credit card Apple believes you want to use; you’re offered the
chance to share your location with the others. Each time, read and tap Continue.
Finally, you’re ready to introduce the software to your family.
If the kid is under 13: Scroll wayyyyy down and tap Create an Apple
ID for a Child. On the screens that follow, you’ll enter the kid’s birth
date; agree to a Parent Privacy Disclosure screen; enter the security
code for your credit card (to prove that you’re you, and not, for
example, your naughty kid); type the kid’s name; set up an iCloud
account (name, password, three security questions); decide whether or
not to turn on Ask To Buy (each time your youngster tries to buy
something online from Apple, you’ll be asked for permission in a
notification on your phone); decide whether you want the family to be
able to see where the kid is at all times; and accept a bunch of legalese.

When it’s all over, the lucky kid’s name appears on the Family screen.
If the kid already has an iCloud account and is standing right there
with you in person: Tap Add Family Member. Type in her name or
email address. (Your child’s name must already be in your Contacts; if
not, go add her first. By the way, you’re a terrible parent.)
She can now enter her iCloud password on your phone to complete her
setup. (That doesn’t mean you’ll learn what her password is; your phone
stores it but hides it from you.) On the subsequent screens, you get to
confirm her email address and let her turn on location sharing. In other
words: The rest of the family will be able to see where she is.
If the kid isn’t with you at the moment: Click Send an Invitation.

Your little darling gets an email at that address. He must open it on his
Apple gadget (Mac or iPhone, for example).
When he hits View Invitation, he can either enter his iCloud name and
password (if he has an iCloud account), or get an Apple ID (if he
doesn’t). Once he accepts the invitation, he can choose a picture to
represent himself; tap Confirm to agree to be in your family; enter his
iCloud password to share the stuff he’s bought from Apple; agree to
Apple’s lawyers’ demands; and, finally, opt in to sharing his location
with the rest of the family.
You can repeat this cycle to add additional family members, up to a maximum of
six. Their names and ages appear on the Family screen.
From here, you can tap someone’s name to perform stunts like these:
Delete a family member. Man, you guys really don’t get along, do
you? Anyway, tap Remove.
Turn Ask To Buy on or off. This option appears when you’ve tapped a
child’s name on your phone. If you decide your kid is responsible
enough not to need your permission for each purchase, you can turn this
option off.
NOTE
If you turn off Ask To Buy for someone after she turns 18, you can’t turn it on again.
Turn Parent/Guardian on or off. This option appears when you’ve
tapped an adult’s name. It gives Ask To Buy approval privileges to
someone else besides you—your spouse, for example.
Once kids turn 13, by the way, Apple automatically gives them more control
over their lives. They can, for example, turn off Ask To Buy themselves, on their
own phones. They can even express their disgust for you by leaving the Family
Sharing group. (On her own phone, for example, your daughter can visit
Settings → iCloud → Family, tap her name, and then tap Leave Family.
Harsh!)

Life in Family Sharing
Once everything is set up, here’s how you and your kids will get along:
Purchases. Whenever one of your kids (for whom you’ve turned on
Ask To Buy) tries to buy music, videos, apps, or books from Apple—
even free items—he has to ask you (facing page, left). On your phone,
you’re notified about the purchase—and you can decline it or tap
Review to read about it on its Store page. If it seems OK, you can tap
Approve. You also have to enter your iCloud password, or supply your
face or fingerprint, to prevent your kid from finding your phone and
approving his own request.
(If you don’t respond within 24 hours, the request expires. Your kid has
to ask again.)
Furthermore, each of you can see and download everything that
everyone else has bought. To do that, open the appropriate app: App
Store, iTunes Store, or iBooks. Tap Purchased and then tap the family
member’s name to see what she’s got; tap the 
 to download any of
it yourself.

TIP
Anything you buy, your kids will see. Keep that in mind when you download a book like
Sending the Unruly Child to Military School.
However, you have two lines of defense. First, you can hide your purchases. On your
computer, in iTunes (Chapter 15), click iTunes Store; click the relevant category (
, 
, whatever). Click Purchased. Point to the thing you want to hide, click the 
, and
click Hide. (On the phone, you can hide only one category: apps. In the App Store app, tap
Updates, then Purchased, and then My Purchases. Swipe to the left across an app’s name to
reveal a Hide button.)
Second, remember that you can set up parental control on each kid’s phone, shielding their
impressionable eyes from R-rated movies and stuff. See “Allow”.
Where are you? Open the Find My Friends app to see where your
posse is right now. Or go to the Find My iPhone app (or web page; see
“Find My iPhone”) to see where just their phones are right now.
NOTE
If one of you needs secrecy for the afternoon (Apple sweetly gives, as an example, shopping
for a gift for your spouse), open Settings → iCloud → Share My Location, and turn off the
switch. Now you’re untrackable until you turn the switch on again.
Photos, appointments, and reminders. In Calendar, Photos, and
Reminders, each of you will find a new category, called Family, that’s
auto-shared among you all. (In Photos, it’s on the Shared tab.) You’re
all free to make and edit appointments in this calendar, to set up
reminders in Reminders (“Flu shots after school!”), or to add photos or
videos (or comments) to this album; everyone else will see the changes
instantly.

Chapter 18. 17 Continuity: iPhone
Meets Mac
Apple products have always been designed to work together. Macs, phones,
tablets, watches: similar software, design, wording, philosophy. That’s nice for
you, of course, because you have less to learn and to troubleshoot. But it’s also
nice for Apple, because it keeps you in velvet handcuffs; pretty soon, you’ve got
too much invested in its product “ecosystem” to consider wandering over to a
rival.
Apple has taken this gadget symbiosis to an astonishing extreme. If your Mac is
running Yosemite (Mac OS X 10.10) or a later Mac OS version, it can be an
accessory to your iPhone. Suddenly the Mac can be a speakerphone, using the
iPhone as a wireless antenna. Suddenly the Mac can send and receive regular
text messages. Suddenly AirDrop lets you drag files back and forth, wirelessly,
from phone to computer. Suddenly you can copy material on the phone, and
paste it on the Mac (or vice versa).
Apple’s name for this suite of symbiosis is Continuity. And once you’ve got it
set up, the game changes in a big way.
Continuity Setup
For many people, all of this just works. For many others, there’s a certain degree
of setting up and troubleshooting. These are the primary rules:
You need a Mac running OS X Yosemite or later.
The Mac and the phone have to be signed into the same iCloud
account. (That’s a security thing—it proves that you’re the owner of
both machines and therefore unlikely to pose a risk to yourself.) On the
Mac, you do that in System Preferences→iCloud. On the phone, you
do that in Settings→[your name]→iCloud. But you should also make
sure you’ve entered the same iCloud address in Settings→Messages

and Settings→FaceTime.
For some of these features, Bluetooth must be turned on. On the
Mac, you can do that in System Preferences→Bluetooth. On the
phone, it’s Settings→Bluetooth.
Modern Bluetooth doesn’t drain your battery the way Bluetooth once
did, so it’s fine to leave it on. But older Macs don’t have Bluetooth LE,
so most Continuity features work only on 2012 and later Macs.
All right. Setup ready? Time to experience some integration!
Mac as Speakerphone
You can make and take phone calls on your Mac. The iPhone, sitting anywhere
in your house, can be the cellular module for your Mac—even if that iPhone is
asleep and locked. As usual, the Mac and the phone must be signed into the
same iCloud account. And they must be on the same network.
NOTE
Actually, there’s a mind-blowing exception to that statement: Continuity over cellular. In this scenario,
your Mac and iPhone don’t have to be on the same Wi-Fi network! Even if you left your phone at home,
you can still make calls and send texts from your Mac, wherever you are in the country!
This amazing feature requires participation by the cellular carrier, and so far, T-Mobile is the only
company offering it. (How do you know? Open Settings→Phone→ Wi-Fi Calling; if you see an option
called Allow Calls on Other Devices, you’re golden.)
Ready? Here’s the setup.
On the phone, turn on Settings→ Phone→ Calls on Other Devices→
Allow Calls on Other Devices.
On the Mac, open the FaceTime program, weird as that sounds. Turn
on FaceTime→ Preferences→ Settings→ Calls from iPhone.
Once you’ve set things up as described, it just works. When a call comes in to
your iPhone’s number, your Mac plays whatever ringtone your phone is playing.

A notice appears on your Mac screen, as shown on the facing page. You can
click Accept to answer it (or Decline it); your Mac’s microphone and speaker
become your speakerphone.
You can place a call the same way. Just click any phone number you find on the
Mac: in Contacts, in Safari, in an email message, and so on.
Even call-waiting works—if a second call comes in, your Mac notifies you and
offers you the chance to put the first one on hold. And on the Mac, the Contacts
app offers Ringtone and Texttone menus, so you can assign custom sounds that
play when your Mac rings.
Crazy.
TIP
If you own a bunch of Apple machines, it might drive you crazy that they all now ring at once when a
call comes in. Fortunately, you can turn off the ringing on each device that you’d rather be peaceful.

To make one of your iPads or iPod Touches stop ringing, turn off Settings→FaceTime→Calls from
iPhone. To make a Mac stop ringing, open the FaceTime program; choose
FaceTime→Preferences→Settings, and turn off Calls from iPhone.
Texting from the Mac
You can send and receive text messages (as well as picture, audio, and video
messages) on your Mac, too.
We’re not talking about sending texts to other Apple people (with iCloud
accounts). Those are called iMessages, and they’re a special, Apple-only kind of
message (“Standard Texting (SMS)”). We’re talking about something much
better: You can type any cellphone number and send a regular SMS text message
to anyone. Or receive them at your iPhone number.
Or you can initiate the text conversation by clicking a phone number in Contacts,
Calendar, or Safari to send an SMS message. Once again, your iPhone acts as a
relay station between the cellular world and your Mac.
Here’s how to set it up. First, as usual, the Mac and the phone must be on the
same Wi-Fi network and signed into the same iCloud account.
On the phone, open Settings→ Messages→ Send & Receive; make
sure that both your phone number and email address are turned on.
Next, still on the iPhone, open Settings→Messages. Tap Text Message
Forwarding. Your Mac’s name appears. Turn on the switch. (If you’re
using two-factor authentication—see “Privacy”—you’ll have to type in
a six-digit code now.)
On the Mac, open Messages; choose Messages→ Preferences→
Accounts. Confirm that the Apple ID shown here matches what you
saw on the phone in the previous step.

All of this is to prove that you’re the owner of both devices. You wouldn’t want
some bad guy reading your text messages, would you?
That’s it—your gadgets are paired. You can now use Messages to send standard
text messages to any cellphone. You can also click and hold on a phone number
wherever it appears—in Contacts, in a search result, in Safari, in Mail—and
choose Send Message from there. And when a text message comes in, a
standard Mac notification bubble appears at top right.
The beauty of this is that your back-and-forths are kept in sync between the Mac
and the phone. You can jump between them and continue the text​ing
conversation. (You’ll note that, as usual, the bubbles containing your utterances

are green. Blue is reserved for iMessages—that is, messages to other people with
iCloud accounts.)
Instant Hotspot
As you know from “Personal Hotspot (Tethering)”, paying your cell carrier
another $20 or so every month entitles you to use the iPhone’s Personal Hotspot
feature. That’s where the phone itself acts as a portable Wi-Fi hotspot, so that
your laptop (or any other gadgets) can get online almost anywhere.
As you also know from “Personal Hotspot (Tethering)”, it’s kind of a pain to get
going. Each time you want your laptop to get online, you have to wake your
iPhone, unlock it, open Settings, and turn on Personal Hotspot. Then you wait
about 20 seconds, until the phone’s name shows up in your 
 menu.
Not with Continuity.
Now, the phone can stay in your pocket. Its name appears in your 
 menu,
ready for choosing at any time—even if the phone is asleep and locked, and even
if Personal Hotspot is turned off! Handily enough, the 
 menu also shows
the phone’s battery and signal status.

Once your Mac is online through your iPhone’s cellular connection, it tries to
save you money by suspending data-intensive jobs like full backups and
software updates. And it closes down the connection when you no longer need it,
to save your iPhone’s battery.
As usual, this works only if the iPhone and Mac both have Bluetooth turned on
and are signed into the same iCloud account.
Handoff
Handoff passes half-finished documents between the phone and the Mac,
wirelessly and automatically.
For example, suppose you’ve been writing an email message on your iPhone
(below, left). When you arrive home and sit down at the Mac, a new icon
appears at the left end of the Mac’s Dock (top right). When you click it, the
Mac’s Mail program opens, and the half-finished message is there for you to
complete (lower right).
It doesn’t have to be an email message, either. If you were reading a web page or
a Map on your phone, then that icon on the Mac opens the same web page or
map. If you were working on a Reminder; a Calendar entry; a Contacts entry; a
note in Notes; or a document in Keynote, Numbers, or Pages; you can open the

same in-progress item on the Mac.
And all of it works in the other direction, too. If you’re working on something on
the Mac, but you’re called away, an icon appears on the lower-left corner of your
iPhone’s Lock screen that opens the same item (facing page, left).
TIP
There’s another way to find the Handoff icon: It’s in the app switcher on both devices. On the phone, for
example, double-press the home button (or, on the iPhone X, swipe up from the bottom) and notice the
new strip at the bottom, identifying the document you’re handing off from the Mac. (The illustration
below shows the app switcher from both a home-button phone and an iPhone X.) On the Mac, press 
-Tab to open the app switcher; there, too, is the icon for the app being handed off from the phone.
Here’s the setup: Once again, both gadgets must be signed into your iCloud
account. Both must have Bluetooth turned on, and the Mac and phone have to be
within Bluetooth range of each other (about 30 feet).
On the Mac, open System Preferences→General; turn on Allow Handoff
between this Mac and your iCloud devices.
On the iPhone, the on/off switch is in Settings→General→Handoff.
Now try it out. Start an email message on your iPhone. Have a look at the Dock
on your Mac: There, at the left end, pops up the little icon of whatever program
can finish the job.
AirDrop

AirDrop is pretty great. As described in “AirDrop”, it lets you shoot photos,
videos, maps, Contacts cards, PDF files, Word documents, and other stuff
between iPhones. Wirelessly. Without names, passwords, permissions, or even
an Internet connection. What “AirDrop” doesn’t cover, though, is how you can
use AirDrop between a phone and a Mac.
From iPhone to Mac
Open whatever it is you want to send to the Mac: a photo, map, website,
contact…anything with a 
 button.
When you tap 
, you see the AirDrop panel—and, after a moment, the icons
of any nearby Macs show up, too. Including yours.
If the Mac’s icon doesn’t show up, it’s probably because its owner hasn’t made
the Mac discoverable by AirDrop.
Instruct him to open the AirDrop window on his Mac. (Click AirDrop in the
sidebar of any Finder window.) See the small blue control at the bottom? It
governs who can “see” this Mac for AirDrop purposes: No One, Contacts Only
(that is, people in the Mac’s address book), or Everyone.
Once that’s set up right, that Mac shows up in the iPhone’s AirDrop panel
(“David” here at left). Send away.

The receiving Mac displays a notification. Click Accept to download the
incoming item to your Mac’s Downloads folder (or Decline to reject it).
TIP
If the phone and the Mac are both signed into the same iCloud account, then you don’t encounter that
Accept/Decline thing. The file goes directly into your Downloads folder without asking. You do get a
notification on the Mac that lets you know how many files arrived, and it offers an Open button (above,
right).
Apple figures that, since you own both the phone and the Mac, the usual permission routine isn’t
necessary. You’re probably not trying to send yourself some evil virus of death.
Universal Clipboard
Now, this is magic—and useful magic, at that. You can copy some text, a
picture, or a video on your phone—and then, without any further steps, turn to
your Mac and paste it. Or go the other way. Somehow, the contents of the
Clipboard transfer themselves wirelessly between the two machines.
In this example, you copy something on the iPhone, in Safari (below, top)—and

then paste it instantly in Mail on the Mac.
There’s no on/off switch, no extra steps, no visible sign of this feature in Settings
or System Preferences. It just works. (Provided, of course, that you’ve obeyed
the Three Laws of Continuity Setup: The Mac and phone have to be on the same
Wi-Fi network, both have to have Bluetooth turned on, and both have to be
signed into the same iCloud account.) If you don’t paste within two minutes of
copying, then whatever was already on the Clipboard gets restored, so you don’t
get confused later.

Part V. PART FIVE Appendixes
Appendix A Signup & Setup
Appendix B Troubleshooting & Maintenance

Chapter 19. 18 Settings
The Settings app is like the Control Panel in Windows or System Preferences on
the Mac. It houses hundreds of settings for every aspect of the iPhone and its
apps.
Almost everything in the list of Settings is a doorway to another screen, where
you make the actual changes.

TIP
Settings has a search box at the top! You don’t need a photographic memory (or this chapter) to find a
certain setting.
In this book, you can read about the iPhone’s preference settings in the
appropriate spots—wherever they’re relevant. And the Control Center, of course,
is designed to eliminate trips into Settings.
But so you’ll have it all in one place, here’s an item-by-item walk-through of the
Settings app and its structure in iOS 11.
Three Important Settings Tricks
The Settings app is many screens deep. You might “drill down” by tapping, for
example, General, then Keyboard, and then Text Replacement. It’s a lot of
tapping, a lot of navigation. Fortunately, you have three kinds of shortcuts.
First, you can jump directly to a particular Settings screen using Siri (Chapter 5).
You can say, for example, “Open Sound settings,” “Open Notifications settings,”
“Open Wi-Fi settings,” and so on. Siri promptly takes you to the corresponding
screen—no tapping required.
NOTE
Unless Siri thinks you are driving (see “One More Safety Measure”).

Second, you can jump directly to the four most frequently adjusted panels—
Bluetooth, Wi-Fi, Cellular, and Battery—by hard-pressing the Settings app icon
on the Home screen (6s and later models). The shortcut menu offers direct

access to those panes.
Finally, on any model, you can swipe to go back (facing page). Once you’ve
drilled down to, say, General → Keyboard → Text Replacement, you can
“drill up” again by swiping across the screen to the right (start from the edge).
[Your Name]
At the top of Settings screen, a tappable banner displaying your name and photo
appears. Tap it to open a screen that summarizes everything Apple knows about
you: your phone numbers; email addresses; passwords; credit card information;
iCloud account info; and even the list of iPhones, iPads, iPod Touches, and Macs
you own. Tap one of these items to edit it.
Airplane Mode
As you’re probably aware, you’re not allowed to make cellphone calls on U.S.
airplanes. According to legend (if not science), a cellphone’s radio can interfere
with a plane’s navigation equipment.
But the iPhone does a lot more than make calls. Are you supposed to deprive
yourself of all the music, videos, movies, and email that you could be using in
flight, just because calling is forbidden?
Nope. Just turn on airplane mode by tapping the switch at the top of the Settings
list (so the switch background turns green). The word Cellular dims there in
Settings (you’ve turned off your cellular circuitry); but the Wi-Fi and Bluetooth
switches are still available, though turned off; you’re now welcome to switch
them back on, even in airplane mode.
Now it’s safe (and permitted) to use the iPhone in flight, even with Wi-Fi on,
because its cellular features are turned off completely. You can’t make calls, but
you can do anything else in the iPhone’s bag of tricks.
TIP
Turning airplane mode on and off is faster if you use the Control Center (“Control Center”) or Siri
(“Turn on airplane mode”). Same for Wi-Fi, described next.

Wi-Fi
This item in Settings opens the Wi-Fi Networks screen:
Wi-Fi On/Off. If you don’t plan to use Wi-Fi, then turning it off gets
you a lot more life out of each battery charge. Tap anywhere on this
switch to change its status.
TIP
Turning on airplane mode automatically turns off the Wi-Fi antenna—but you can turn Wi-Fi back on.
That’s handy when you’re on a flight with Wi-Fi on board.


Choose a Network. Here’s a list of all nearby Wi-Fi networks. See
“Wi-Fi Hotspots” for details on using Wi-Fi with the iPhone.
Ask to Join Networks. See “Silencing the “Want to Join?” Messages”.
Bluetooth
Here’s the on/off switch for the iPhone’s Bluetooth transmitter, which is required
to communicate with a Bluetooth fitness band, earpiece, keyboard, or hands-free
system in a car. When the switch is on, you’re offered the chance to pair the
iPhone with other Bluetooth equipment; the paired gadgets are listed here for
ease of connecting and disconnecting.
TIP
The Control Center (“Control Center”) has a Bluetooth button. It’s faster to use that than to visit Settings.
Cellular
These days, all major cell carriers are pushing their unlimited data plans.
(They’re not actually unlimitedly unlimited; after you’ve used a certain amount
of data, your Internet speed slows way down until the end of the month.) But
most people still have capped plans, where, for example, you pay $50 a month
for 8 gigabytes of Internet data use.
That’s why iOS offers so many settings to help you control how much Internet
data your phone uses.
Cellular Data. This is the on/off switch for Internet data. If you’re
traveling overseas, you might want to turn this off to avoid racking up
insanely high roaming charges. Your smartphone becomes a
dumbphone, suitable for making calls but not for getting online. (You
can still get online in Wi-Fi hotspots.)
Cellular Data Options. These controls can prevent staggering
international roaming fees. Enable LTE lets you turn off LTE—just for

voice calls, or for both voice and data—for situations when LTE costs
extra.
TIP
Every now and then, you’ll be in some area where you can’t connect to the Internet even though you
seem to have an LTE signal; forcing your phone to the 4G or 3G network often gives you at least some
connection. Turning LTE off does just that.
On AT&T or T-Mobile, you can turn off Data Roaming (when you’re out of the
country, you won’t get slapped with outrageous Internet fees). On Verizon and
Sprint, once you tap Roaming, you have separate controls for Data Roaming
and Voice Roaming. Turning off the last item, International CDMA, forces the
phone to use only the more common GSM networks while roaming; sometimes
you get better call and data quality that way, and you may save money.
Wi-Fi Calling. How would you like crisp, solid phone calls even
indoors, even where the cell signal barely reaches? That’s what Wi-Fi
calling can do for you (“FaceTime Audio Calls”).
Of course, if you’re on Wi-Fi and you dial 911, the operators won’t
know where you are, since cellular transmits your location but Wi-Fi
doesn’t. That’s why turning on Wi-Fi Calling requires you to enter your
address.
Once that’s done, you can also turn on Prefer Wi-Fi While Roaming—
and you should. When you’re traveling abroad, incoming and outgoing
calls will use Wi-Fi, if you’re in a hotspot, instead of the outrageously
priced cellular network.
Allow Calls on Other Devices is part of Continuity, and it’s described
in “Mac as Speakerphone”.
Carrier Services is just a bunch of stuff inserted here by your
cellphone carrier. For Verizon, it’s a list of phone numbers (411 for
directory assistance, #3282 to see how much data you’ve used so far
this month, and so on); for T-Mobile, it’s links to customer service and
apps. You get the idea.

Personal Hotspot. Here’s the setup and on/off switch for Personal
Hotspot (“Personal Hotspot (Tethering)”). Once you’ve turned it on, a
new Personal Hotspot on/off switch appears on the main Settings
screen, so you won’t have to dig this deep in the future.
Cellular Data. The phone tracks how much Internet data you’ve used
this month, expressed in megabytes: email messages, web page
material, iMessages, Facebook updates, and so on. Your iPhone plan is
probably capped—for example at 8 gigabytes a month. If you exceed
your monthly maximum, then you’re instantly charged $15 or $20 for
another chunk of data. So keeping an eye on these statistics is a very
good idea.
(The Current Period means so far this month; Current Period
Roaming means overseas or in places where your cell company doesn’t
have service.)
Next, you see an amazingly useful list. It shows every Internet-using

app on your phone and how much data it’s used. Better yet, it offers
individual on/off switches for every app on your phone. Each one is an
item that could consume data without your awareness. You can shut off
the data hogs you really don’t feel like spending megabytes on, and you
can find out where the heck all your data is going.
Wi-Fi Assist. Thousands of iPhone fans know about The Old Flaky Wi-
Fi Trick. If the phone is struggling and struggling to load a web page or
download an email message on a Wi-Fi network, it often helps to turn
off Wi-Fi. The phone hops over to the cellular network, where it’s
usually got a better connection.
That’s why Apple offers Wi-Fi Assist: a feature that’s supposed to do all
that automatically. If the phone is having trouble with its Wi-Fi
connection, it just hops over to cellular data. (You’ll know when that’s
happened because of the appearance of the cellular-network indicator on
your status bar, like 
,or 
, instead of the 
 Wi-Fi
symbol.)
If you’re worried about this feature eating up your data allowance, you
can, of course, turn Wi-Fi Assist off. Apple notes, however, that Wi-Fi
Assist doesn’t kick in (a) when you’re data roaming, (b) for background
apps (it helps only the app that’s in front), or (c) if large amounts of data
would be consumed. For example, it doesn’t kick in for audio or video
streaming or email attachments.
iCloud Drive. Is the phone allowed to use data (if no Wi-Fi is available)
for syncing with your iCloud Drive (“The Carpenter’s Level”)?
Call Time. The statistics here break down how much time you’ve spent
talking on the iPhone, both in the Current Period (that is, this billing
month) and in the iPhone’s entire Lifetime. That’s right, folks: You own
a cellphone that keeps track of your minutes, to help you avoid
exceeding the number you’ve signed up for (and therefore racking up
overage minutes).
Reset Statistics resets the Call Time and Data Usage counters to zero.

Personal Hotspot
Once you’ve turned this feature on (“Personal Hotspot (Tethering)”) in Cellular,
this switch appears here, too—on the main Settings screen for your convenience.
Notifications
This panel lists all the apps that think they have the right to nag for your
attention. Flight-tracking programs alert you that there’s an hour before takeoff.
Social-networking programs ping you when someone’s trying to reach you.
Instant-messaging apps ding to let you know that you have a new message. It
can add up to a lot of interruption.
On this panel, you can tailor, to an almost ridiculous degree, how you want to be
nagged. See “Notifications” for a complete description.
Control Center
The Control Center is written up in “Control Center”. There are two settings to
change here. If you turn off Access Within Apps, then you won’t land in the
Control Center by accident when you’re playing some game that involves a lot
of swiping. And Customize Controls, of course, is iOS 11’s shining
achievement: It’s where you decide which buttons appear on the Control Center,
and in which order.
Do Not Disturb
This is one of iOS’s most brilliant and useful features. See “Do Not Disturb”.
General
The General pages offer a huge, motley assortment of settings governing the
behavior of the virtual keyboard, the search feature, and about 6 trillion other
things:
About. Here you can find out how many songs, videos, and photos your

iPhone holds; how much storage your iPhone has; techie details like the
iPhone’s software and firmware versions, serial number, model, Wi-Fi
and Bluetooth addresses; and so on. (It’s kind of cool to see how many
apps you’ve installed.)
At the very top, you can tap the phone’s name to rename it.
Software Update. When Apple releases a new operating system update,
you can download it directly to the phone.
You’ll know when an update is waiting for you, because you’ll see a
little number badge on the Settings icon, as well as on the word
“General” in Settings. Tap it, and then tap Software Update, to see and
install the update (above, right). (If no number badge is waiting, then
tapping Software Update just shows you your current iOS version.)
AirDrop. Do you want strangers to be able to send you photos? (See
“AirDrop”.)
Handoff. Handoff is for people who own both a Mac and an iPhone; it
automatically passes half-finished documents between them, as
described in “Handoff”. This is the on/off switch.
CarPlay. Many car models come equipped with a technology called
CarPlay, which displays a few of your iPhone’s icons—Phone, Music,
Maps, Messages, Music, Podcasts, and Audiobooks—on the car’s
dashboard touchscreen. The idea is to make them big and simple and
limited to things you’ll need while you’re driving, to avoid distracting
you. Here’s where you connect your phone to your CarPlay system and,
if you like, rearrange the icons on the CarPlay screen.
Home Button appears on the iPhone 7 and 8 models. The home button

on these phones, believe it or not, doesn’t actually move. It doesn’t
actually click. Instead, a tiny speaker makes the button feel as though
you’ve clicked it by producing a little twitch vibration. That helps with
the iPhone’s water resistance, of course, but it also permits features like
this one: You can actually specify how big the phony click feels, using
the settings Apple calls 1, 2, or 3 (and then try it out, right on this
screen).
Accessibility. These options are intended for people with visual,
hearing, and motor impairments, but they might come in handy now and
then for almost anyone. All these features are described in Chapter 7.
iPhone Storage. Handy (and new in iOS 11)! Here’s a clean graph
showing how full your phone is—and some recommendations. One
suggests deleting all text messages and attachments older than one year.
Another proposes offloading apps you don’t use much. (That is, their
dimmed icons remain on your Home screen, but they’re just bookmarks
that download the real apps when tapped.)
Then comes a list of all your apps, complete with the dates you last used
them and how much storage they (and their documents) are eating up on
your phone. (Biggest apps are at the top.) Tap an app’s name to review
more details, along with Offload App and Delete App buttons. This is
an amazing tool if you’re constantly running out of space.
TIP
If you tap Messages, you’re offered some especially helpful space-saving options. Review
Large Attachments shows an actual list of every attachment (usually photos and videos)
people have ever sent you. They’re listed with the biggest first, and identified by date.
They’re all still here, taking up space; you can tap one to see it at full size, swipe left to
delete one, or tap Edit and then tap many rows (and then hit 
) to do the job faster.
Depending on what version of iOS you have, you may also see Messages in iCloud listed
here. Once Apple actually turns on this long-promised iOS 11 feature, your messages and
attachments from Messages will all be stored online, freeing up that space on your phone.

Background App Refresh. The list that appears here identifies apps
that try to access the Internet, even when they’re in the background.

Since such apps can drain your battery, you have the option here to
block their background updating.
You can also turn off the master Background App Refresh switch.
Now the only apps that can get online in the background are a standard
limited suite (music playback and GPS, for example).
Restrictions. This means “parental controls.” (Apple called it
“Restrictions” instead so as not to turn off potential corporate
customers. Can’t you just hear it? “ ‘Parental controls?’ This thing is for
consumers?! ”) Complete details appear on “Software Updates to
Come”.
Date & Time. Here you can turn on 24-hour time, also known as
military time, in which you see “1700” instead of “5:00 PM.” (You’ll
see this change everywhere times appear, including at the top of the
screen.)
Set Automatically refers to the iPhone’s built-in clock. If this item is
turned on, then the iPhone finds out what time it is from an atomic
clock out on the Internet. If not, then you have to set the clock yourself.
(Turning this option off produces two more rows of controls: The Time
Zone option becomes available, so you can specify your time zone, and
a “number spinner” appears so you can set the clock.)
Keyboard. Here you can turn off some of the very best features of the
iPhone’s virtual keyboard. (All these shortcuts are described in Chapter
3.)
It’s hard to imagine why you wouldn’t want any of these tools working
for you and saving you time and keystrokes, but here you go:
Keyboards lets you add keyboards suited to all the different languages
you speak. Text Replacement is where you set up auto-expanding
abbreviations for longer words and phrases you type often. One
Handed Keyboard is described in “The One-Handed Keyboard”.
Auto-Capitalization is where the iPhone thoughtfully capitalizes the
first letter of every new sentence for you. Auto-Correction is where the
iPhone suggests spelling corrections as you type. Check Spelling refers

to the pop-up spelling suggestions. Enable Caps Lock is the on/off
switch for the Caps Lock feature, in which a fast double-tap on the Shift
key turns on Caps Lock.
Predictive refers to QuickType, the row of three word candidates that
appears above the keyboard when you’re typing. Smart Punctuation,
new in iOS 11, automatically replaces two hyphens (--) with an em dash
(—), and straight quotes (“like this”) with typographically proper curly
ones (“like this”) as you type. (This feature can interfere if you’re a
programmer typing code; you’ve been warned.)
Character Preview is the little bubble that pops up, showing the letter,
when you tap a key. The “.” Shortcut switch turns on or off the “type
two spaces to make a period” shortcut for the ends of sentences, and
Enable Dictation is the on/off switch for the ability to dictate text. (If
you never use dictation, turning this switch off hides the 
 button on
the keyboard, giving the space bar more room to breathe.)
Language & Region. The iPhone: It’s not just for Americans anymore.
The iPhone Language screen lets you choose a language for the
iPhone’s menus and messages. Region Format controls how the iPhone
displays dates, times, and numbers. (For example, in the U.S.,
Christmas is on 12/25; in Europe, it’s 25/12.) Calendar lets you choose
which kind of calendar system you want to use: Gregorian (that is,
“normal”), Japanese, or Buddhist. Temperature unit—well, you know.
Dictionary. Which dictionaries (which languages) should the phone use
when looking up definitions and checking your spelling?
iTunes Wi-Fi Sync. You can sync your iPhone with a computer
wirelessly, as long as the phone is plugged in and on Wi-Fi. Details are
in “Connecting the iPhone”.
VPN. The typical corporate network is guarded by a team of steely-
eyed administrators for whom Job One is preventing access by
unauthorized visitors. They perform this job primarily with the aid of a
super-secure firewall that seals off the company’s network from the

Internet.
So how can you tap into the network from the road? Only one solution
is both secure and cheap: the virtual private network, or VPN. Running
a VPN lets you create a super-secure, encrypted “tunnel” from your
iPhone straight into your corporate network. Your company’s tech staff
can tell you whether or not there’s a VPN server set up for you to use.
If so, they’ll tell you what settings to plug in here. (If this is a company
phone, you may see that your overlords have already set up some VPN
connections; tap the one you want to use.)
Once everything is in place, the iPhone can connect to the corporate
network and fetch your corporate mail. You don’t have to do anything
special on your end when you try to access your corporate email or
calendar; the VPN is automatic. When your iPhone goes to sleep, it
terminates the VPN connection, both for security purposes and to save
battery power.
TIP
Once you’ve set up a VPN connection, it appears on the main Settings page, too—the “front
door” of Settings—to save you having to burrow into General.
Profiles & Device Management. This item shows up only if your
company issued you this phone. It shows what profile the system
administrators have installed on it—the set of restrictions that govern
what you’re allowed to change without the company’s permission.
Regulatory. A bunch of legal logos you don’t care about.
Reset. On the all-powerful Reset screen, you’ll find six ways to erase
your phone:
Reset All Settings takes all the iPhone’s settings back to the way they
were when it came from Apple. Your data, music, and videos remain in
place, but the settings all go back to their factory settings.
Erase All Content and Settings is the one you want when you sell

your iPhone, or when you’re captured by the enemy and want to make
sure they will learn nothing from it.
NOTE
This feature takes awhile to complete—and that’s a good thing. The iPhone doesn’t just
delete your data; it also overwrites the newly erased memory with gibberish to make sure the
bad guys can’t see any of your deleted info, even with special hacking tools.
Reset Network Settings makes the iPhone forget all the memorized
Wi-Fi networks it currently autorecognizes.
Reset Keyboard Dictionary has to do with the iPhone’s autocorrection
feature, which kicks in whenever you’re trying to input text. Ordinarily,
every time you type something the iPhone doesn’t recognize—some
name or foreign word, for example—and you don’t accept the iPhone’s
suggestion, it adds the word you typed to its dictionary so it doesn’t
bother you with a suggestion again the next time. If you think you’ve
entered too many misspellings into it, you can delete from its little brain
all the new “words” you’ve taught it.
Reset Home Screen Layout undoes any icon moving you’ve done on
the Home screen. It also consolidates your Home screen icons, fitting
them onto as few screens as possible.
Finally, Reset Location & Privacy refers to the “OK to use location
services?” warning that appears whenever an iPhone program, like
Maps or Camera, tries to figure out where you are. This button makes
the iPhone forget all your responses to those permission boxes. In other
words, you’ll be asked for permission all over again the next time you
use each of those programs.
Shut Down. This item, new in iOS 11, offers a visual button for turning
off the phone—just in case you don’t know or can’t remember the
holding-in-the-buttons trick described in “Side Button (On/Off)”. (You
still have to swipe the “slide to power off” message to confirm.)

Display & Brightness
Ordinarily, the iPhone controls its own screen brightness. An ambient-light
sensor hidden behind the glass at the top of the iPhone’s face samples the room
brightness each time you wake the phone and adjusts the screen: brighter in
bright rooms, dimmer in darker ones.
When you prefer more manual control, here’s what you can do:
Brightness slider. Drag the handle on this slider to control the screen
brightness manually, keeping in mind that more brightness means
shorter battery life.
If True Tone (see below) or Auto-Brightness is turned on, then the
changes you make here are relative to the iPhone’s self-chosen
brightness. In other words, if you goose the brightness by 20 percent,
then the screen will always be 20 percent brighter than the iPhone
would have chosen for itself.
TIP
The Control Center (“Control Center”) gives you a much quicker road to the brightness
slider. And, of course, you can also tell Siri, “Make the screen brighter” (or “dimmer”). This
version in Settings is just for old-timers.
True Tone. New in iOS 11 (for iPhone 8 models and later): This on/off
switch goes beyond the old Auto-Brightness setting. Now it’s Auto-
Brightness and Auto-Tint. That is, the screen colors actually shift, based
on the current lighting color of the room or place you’re in. The idea is
to make colors on the screen seem consistent from one lighting
condition to another.
If you find the result off-putting, you can always turn True Tone off.
Now the brightness of the screen is under complete manual control, and
the tint never shifts.
Night Shift. “Many studies have shown that exposure to bright blue
light in the evening can affect your circadian rhythms and make it

harder to fall asleep,” Apple says. You can therefore use this function to
give your screen a warmer, less blue tint, either automatically (Sunset
to Sunrise), on a bedtime schedule (for example, from 11 p.m. to 6
a.m.), or right now (Manually Enable Until Tomorrow). You can also
tweak the slider to adjust the color temperature (yellowness) of the
screen when Night Shift kicks in.
You can also turn on Night Shift by telling Siri, “Turn on Night Shift.”
Or you can hard-press the brightness slider on the Control Center to find
the on/off switch.
NOTE
Truth is, there’s not much research indicating that blue light from screens affects your
circadian rhythm, let alone little screens like your phone. (If using a gadget before bed makes
it hard to sleep, it’s more likely that it’s the brain stimulation of what you’re doing or
reading.) Sleep scientists have a more universally effective suggestion: Turn off all your
screens a couple of hours before bedtime.
Auto-Lock. As you may have noticed, the iPhone locks itself (goes to
sleep) after a few minutes of inactivity on your part, to save battery
power and to prevent accidental screen taps in your pocket.
On the Auto-Lock screen, you can change the interval of inactivity
before the auto-lock occurs (30 seconds, one minute, two minutes, and
so on), or you can tap Never. In that case, the iPhone locks only when
you click it to sleep.
Raise to Wake. This on/off switch is available only on the iPhone SE,
6s, and later models. It makes the phone light up when you pick it up—
no button-pressing required. The ramifications are huge, because the
Lock screen now has many more functions than it did before. There’s a
lot you can accomplish on the iPhone before you enter your password to
unlock it; see Chapter 2.
Text Size. As you age, small type becomes harder to read. This
universal text-size slider can boost the text size in every app on your
phone.

Technically, what you’re seeing is the front end for Apple’s Dynamic
Type feature. And, even more technically, not all apps work with
Dynamic Type. But most of the built-in Apple apps do—Contacts, Mail,
Maps, Messages, Notes, Phone, Reminders, and Safari Reader—and
many other software companies follow suit.
Bold Text. If the spindly fonts of iOS are a little too light for your
reading tastes, you can flip this switch on (see “How to De-Sparsify
iOS’s Design”).
Display Zoom. The iPhone 6 and later models have bigger screens than
the iPhones that came before them. The question here is: How do you
want to use that extra space? If you tap View and choose Standard,
then icons and controls remain the size they always were; the bigger
screen fits more on a page. If you choose Zoomed, then those elements
appear slightly larger, for the benefit of people who don’t have bionic
eyes.
iPHONE X
The iPhone X doesn’t offer Display Zoom; it’s too skinny. It does, however, have the Zoom and
Magnifier features found in Settings → General → Accessibility.
Wallpaper
Wallpaper can mean either the photo on the Lock screen (what you see when
you wake the iPhone up), or the background picture behind the icons on your
Home screen. On this panel, you can change the image used for either one.
It shows miniatures of the two places you can install wallpaper—the Lock screen
and the Home screen. Each shows what you’ve got installed there as wallpaper
at the moment.
TIP
You can tap either screen miniature to open a Set screen, where you can adjust the current photo’s size
and positioning.

When you tap Choose a New Wallpaper, you’re shown a list of photo sources
you can use as backgrounds. At the top, you get three categories worth noticing.
Dynamic wallpapers look like soft-focus bubbles against solid
backgrounds. Once you’ve installed the wallpaper, these bubbles
actually move, rising and falling on your Lock screen or Home screen
behind your icons. Yes, animated wallpaper has come to the iPhone.
Stills are lovely nature photographs. They don’t move.
Live wallpapers (iPhone 6s and later), once installed as your Lock
screen, behave like the Live Photos described in “Live Photos”: When
you press the screen hard, they play as three-second movies. (It’s not
immediately clear what that gains you.) Note that live wallpapers play
back only on the Lock screen (not the Home screen).
TIP
You can install your own Live Photos as Lock-screen backgrounds. They, too, will play their little three-
second loops when you hard-press the Lock screen.
Scroll down a little, and you’ll find your own photos, nestled in categories like
All Photos, Favorites, Selfies, My Panoramas, and so on. Tap one to see what
it looks like at full size.
TIP
Complicated, “busy” photos make it harder to read icons and icon names on the Home screen.
Once you’ve spotted a worthy wallpaper—in any of the flavors described
already—tap it. You’re offered a choice of two installation methods: Still, which
is what you’d expect, and Perspective, which means that the photo will shift
slightly when you tilt the phone, as though it’s several inches under the glass. (If
you’ve chosen a Live Photo, you’ll see a third choice, Live Photo, meaning that
it will “play” when it’s on the Lock screen and you hard-press the glass.)

Finally, tap Set. Now the iPhone wants to know which of the two places you
want to use this wallpaper; tap Set Lock Screen, Set Home Screen, or Set Both
(if you want the same picture in both places).
Sounds (or Sounds & Haptics)
Here’s a more traditional cellphone-settings screen: the place where you choose
a ringtone sound for incoming calls.
Vibrate on Ring, Vibrate on Silent. Like any self-respecting
cellphone, the iPhone has a Vibrate mode—a little shudder in your
pocket that might get your attention when you can’t hear the ringing.
There are two on/off controls for the vibration: one for when the phone
is in Silent mode and one for when the ringer is on.

Ringer and Alerts. The slider here controls the volume of the phone’s
ringing.
Of course, it’s usually faster to adjust the ring volume by pressing the
up/down buttons on the left edge whenever you’re not on a call or
playing music or a video. But if you find that your volume buttons are
getting pressed accidentally in your pocket, you can also turn off
Change with Buttons. Now you can adjust the volume only with this
slider, here in Settings.
Sounds and Vibration Patterns. The iPhone is, of course, a cell​phone
—and therefore it sometimes rings. The sound it makes when it rings is
up to you; by tapping Ringtone, you can view the iPhone’s list of 25
built-in ringtones; 25 more ringtones from iOS versions past (tap
Classic to see them); 27 “alert tones”; plus any you’ve added yourself.
You can use any of them as a ringtone or an alert tone, no matter how
it’s listed.
Tap a ring sound to hear it. After you’ve tapped one you like, confirm
your choice by tapping Sounds to return to the Sounds (or Sounds &
Haptics) screen.
NOTE
Remember, you can choose a different ringtone for each listing in your phone book (???).
But why stop with a ringtone? The iPhone can make all kinds of other sounds to
alert you: to the arrival of a voicemail, text, or email; to the sending of an email
message, tweet, or Facebook post; to Calendar or Reminders alarms; to the
arrival of AirDrop files; and so on.
This is a big deal—not just because you can express your individuality through
your choice of ringtones, text tones, reminder tones, and so on, but also because
you can distinguish your iPhone’s blips and bleeps from somebody else’s in the
same family or workplace.
For each of these events, tap the light-gray text that identifies the current sound
for that event (“Tri-tone” or “Ding,” for example). On the resulting screen, tap

the different sound options to find one you like; then tap Sounds to return to the
main screen.
On that Sounds screen, you can also turn on or off Lock Sounds (the sounds you
get when you tap the side button) and the Keyboard Clicks that play when you
type on the virtual keyboard.
Meet Haptics
If you have an iPhone 7 or later, there’s one more switch at the very bottom:
System Haptics. Haptics are the tiny, click-like vibrations that Apple has
scattered throughout iOS to accentuate the animations that make the iPhone fun
to use.
These little bumps mark the maximum positions for things like pinch zooming,
sliders, and panels that slide onto the screen (Control Center, search, Notification
Center). You’ll also feel these clicks when you spin the “dials” that specify times
and dates (in Calendar, Clock, and so on), when you turn a Settings switch on or
off, when your icons start wiggling on the Home screen (“The Home Screen”),
and when you send or receive iMessage screen effects like lasers and fireworks
(“Sending with Animated Fun”).
Haptics are subtle but effective—but if you disagree, here’s where you turn them
off.
Siri & Search
Here are the on/off switches for Siri and a whole slew of options for her
behavior; see “Siri Settings”.
Touch ID (Face ID) & Passcode
Here’s where you set up a password for your phone, or where you teach the
phone to recognize your fingerprints or (on the iPhone X) your face. Details on
training the phone start in “Fingerprint Security (Touch ID)”.
The rest of the settings include controls like these:

Use Touch ID (Face ID) For: As it turns out, your fingerprint or face
can do more than unlock the phone (iPhone Unlock). You can also use
them to authenticate your identity when using Apple Pay (“Apple Pay”)
or buying songs, movies, and apps (iTunes & App Store).
On the iPhone X, your face can also unlock the auto-typing of
memorized website passwords (Safari AutoFill). Other Apps reveals a
list of other apps that can use Face ID as authentication, including
Notes (to unlock notes you’ve password-protected), Twitter, Dropbox,
and so on. In those situations, you’ll see the little Face ID icon on the
screen, and a message will instruct you to double-click the side button
to seal the deal.
Allow Access When Locked. At the bottom of this Settings page, a list
of iPhone features awaits—features that you can use at the Lock screen
(Chapter 2), before you’ve unlocked the phone. Depending on your
paranoia tolerance, you may not be comfortable with the notion that
somebody picking your phone up from your desk could dive into some
of these things—so you can turn them off here.
Erase Data. The note says it all: “Erase all data on this iPhone after 10
failed passcode attempts.” (That’s passcode, not fingerprint or Face ID
attempts.) Clearly, if somebody needs that many guesses, he’s not you
—he’s a spy trying to get in. Useful if you work for the CIA, NSA, or
DMV.
The iPhone X offers a couple of important additional settings:
Require Attention for Face ID. Ordinarily, the iPhone X’s face
recognition system unlocks the phone only when you’re looking at the
phone. That way, no evildoing relative or coworker can unlock your
phone when you’re asleep by holding it in front of your snoozing face.
But if you’re blind, wear opaque sunglasses all day, or have no eyes,
what then? In that case, you can turn off this option. Now the phone will
unlock whenever it recognizes you, even if your eyes aren’t open and
looking at it.
Attention Aware Features. Apple hasn’t said much about this option,

but it’s very cool. The TrueDepth camera will prevent the screen from
turning off after 30 seconds (or whatever your auto-sleep setting
is)while you’re looking at it—and it will make your morning alarm
quieter if you’re looking at it.
Emergency SOS
This is the beating heart of iOS 11’s new emergency calling feature, which is
described in “Widgets on the Home Screen”.
Battery
This panel offers these goodies:
Low Power Mode. See “Battery Life Tips”.
Battery Percentage. Instead of just a “filling-up-battery” fuel-gauge
icon at the top of your screen, how would you like a digital percentage
readout, too (“75%”)?
iPHONE X
This option isn’t available in Settings, because there’s no room for the percentage on the right
ear. But if you ever do want to see the battery percentage, just swipe down on that ear to see
the Control Center; there it is.
Battery Usage. Here’s the readout for all your apps, showing their
battery appetite over the past day or week; see ???.
TIP
Tap 
 to see exactly how much time you wasted using that app over the given time
period—either the past 24 hours or the past seven days.

Usage, Standby. These stats show you how many hours and minutes of
life you’ve gotten from your current battery charge. (Usage = you using
the phone. Standby = phone asleep.)
Privacy
By “privacy,” Apple means “the ability of apps and Apple to access your data.”
Many an app works better, or claims to, when it has access to your address book,
calendar, photos, and so on. Generally, when you run such an app for the first
time, it explicitly asks you for permission to access each kind of data. But here,
on this panel, you have a central dashboard—and on/off switches—for each data
type and the apps that want it.
Location Services
Suppose, for example, that you tap Location Services. At the top of the next
screen, you’ll find the master on/off switch for all location services. If you turn it
off, then the iPhone can no longer determine where you are on a map, geotag
your photos, find the closest ATM, tell your friends where you’re hanging out,
and so on. Below this master switch, you’ll find these options:
Share My Location. Apple has designed plenty of ways for you to
broadcast your phone’s location—and, by extension, your own. For
example, Find My Friends, Messages, and Family Sharing all have
features that let certain other people see (with your permission) where
you are right now.
Here’s the on/off switch for the whole feature. If it’s off, nobody can
find you right now. If Share My Location is on, then you can tap From
to see every iPhone you’ve ever owned, so that you can specify which
one should be transmitting its location (the one you’re carrying now).
The Family section lists any members of your family with whom
you’re sharing your location; similarly, the Friends list identifies
anyone else who has permission to track you. These are handy
reminders—and you can tap a name to reveal its Stop Sharing My
Location button.

List of apps. Here’s every single app that uses your location
information, so that you can turn off this feature on a by-app basis. You
might want to do that for privacy’s sake—or you might want to do that
to save battery power, since the location searches sap away a little juice
every time.
Tap an app’s name to see when it wants access to your location. You
might see Always, Never, or While Using the App (the app can’t use
your location when it’s in the background). On the same screen, you
may see a description of why the app thinks it needs your location. Why
does the Calendar need it, for example? “To estimate travel times to
events.”
The little 
 icon indicates which apps have actually used your
location data. If it’s gray, that app has checked your location in the past
24 hours; if it’s purple, it’s locating you right now; if it’s hollow, that
app is using a geofence—it’s waiting for you to enter or leave a certain
location, like home or work. The Reminders app uses the geofencing
feature, for example.
System Services. Here are the on/off switches for the iPhone’s own
features that use your location.
For example, there’s Cell Network Search (lets your phone tap into
Apple’s database of cellular frequencies by location, which speeds up
connections); Compass Calibration (lets the Compass app know where
you are, so that it can accurately tell you which way is north);
Emergency SOS (finds the nearest police station if you’ve turned off
the 911 feature, as described in “Help from the Shutdown Screen”);
Location-Based Apple Ads (advertisements that Apple slaps at the
bottom of certain apps—or, rather, their ability to self-customize based
on your current location); Setting Time Zone (permits the iPhone to set
its own clock when you arrive in a new time zone); and so on.
Under the Product Improvement heading, you also get iPhone
Analytics (sends location information back to Apple, along with
diagnostic information so that, for example, Apple can see where calls

are being dropped); Popular Near Me (the section of the App Store that
lists apps downloaded by people around your current spot); Routing &
Traffic (sends anonymous speed/location data from your phone, which
is how Maps knows where there are traffic tie-ups); and Improve Maps
(sends Apple details of your driving, so it can improve its Maps
database).
Contacts, Calendars, Reminders…
This list (on the main Privacy screen) identifies the kinds of data that your apps
might wish to access; we’re going way beyond location here. For example, your
apps might want to access your address book or your calendar.
Tap a category—Contacts, for example—to see a list of the apps that are merrily
tapping into its data. And to see the on/off switch, which you can use to block
that app’s access.
Analytics
Do you give Apple permission to collect information about how you’re using
your phone and how well the phone is behaving each day? On this screen, you
can turn Share iPhone Analytics off or on. (You can even tap Analytics Data to
see the data your phone has sent, although it’s gibberish unless you’re a
programmer.)
Share With App Developers gives the phone permission to send non-Apple app
writers the details of any crashes you experience while using their apps, so that,
presumably, they can get busy analyzing and fixing those bugs. Share iCloud
Analytics—same deal, but about your iCloud activity. Improve Health &
Activity and Improve Wheelchair Mode share your activity and—if you have
an Apple Watch—wheelchair-motion data with Apple, for similar reasons.
Deciding whether to share this data all boils down to where you land on the great
paranoia-to-generosity scale.
Advertising
The final Privacy option gives you a Limit Ad Tracking switch. Turning it on
doesn’t affect how many ads you see within your apps—but it does prevent

advertisers from delivering ads based on your interests. You’ll just get generic
ads.
There’s a Reset Advertising Identifier button here, too. You may not realize
that, behind the scenes, you have an Ad Identifier number. It’s “a non-
permanent, non-personal device identifier” that advertisers can associate with
you and your habits—the things you buy, the apps you use, and so on. That way,
advertisers can insert ads into your apps that pertain to your interests—without
ever knowing your name.
But suppose you’ve been getting a lot of ads that seem to mischaracterize your
interests. Maybe you’re a shepherd, and you keep seeing ads for hyperviolent
games. Or maybe you’re a nun, and you keep getting ads for marital aids.
In those cases, you might want to reset your Ad ID with this button, thus starting
from scratch as a brand-new person about whom the advertisers know nothing.
iTunes & App Store
If you’ve indulged in a few downloads (or a few hundred) from the App Store or
iTunes music store, then you may well find some settings of use here. For
example, when you tap your Apple ID at the top of the panel, you get these
buttons:
View Apple ID. This takes you to the web, where you can look over
your Apple account information, including credit card details.
Sign Out. Tap when, for example, a friend wants to use her own iTunes
account to buy something on your iPhone. As a gift, maybe.
iForgot. If you’ve forgotten your password, tap here. You’ll be offered
a couple of different ways of establishing your identity—and you’ll be
given the chance to make up a new password.
Automatic Downloads
If you have an iCloud account, then a very convenient option is available to you:
automatic downloads of music, apps, and ebooks you’ve bought on other iOS
gadgets. For example, if you buy a new album on your iPad, then turning on

Music here means that your iPhone will download the same album automatically
next time it’s in a Wi-Fi hotspot.
Updates means that if you accept an updated version of an app on one of your
other Apple gadgets, it will be auto-updated on this phone, too.
Those downloads are, however, big. They can eat up your phone’s monthly data
allotment right quick and send you deep into Surcharge Land. That’s why the
iPhone does that automatic downloading only when you’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot—
unless you turn on Use Cellular Data. Hope you know what you’re doing.
Video Autoplay
On the App Store, many apps offer little videos as part of their description. You
may object to their tendency to start playing automatically—either because video
eats up cellular data, or because they’re annoying.
Your choices are On (videos play), Off (they don’t play until you tap), or Wi-Fi
Only (they won’t play when you’re on a cellular-only connection).
In-App Ratings & Reviews
Don’t you hate it when you’re happily using some app—and then it ruins
everything by interrupting you, begging you to rate it on the App Store? If you
turn off In-App Ratings & Reviews, those groveling little messages won’t
appear.
Offload Unused Apps
Finally, hiding way down here is the powerful Offload Unused Apps master
switch. It’s new in iOS 11, and a great way to fight “my iPhone is always full”
syndrome. If you turn it on, then iOS will automatically delete apps you never
use to make space (but not their settings and data). Their icons remain on your
Home screen as dimmed ghosts. If you ever need that app again, just tap to re-
download it.
Wallet & Apple Pay

This panel, available on the iPhone 6 and later, sets all the preferences for Apple
Pay (“Apple Pay”), including the master switch for Apple Pay Cash (“Apple
Pay Online”). You see any credit cards you’ve enrolled, plus Add Credit or
Debit Card to enroll another.
Double-Click Home Button (or, on the iPhone X, Side Button) is the on/off
switch for using Apple Pay when the phone is locked.
Allow Payments on Mac is the on/off switch for the option to use your iPhone’s
fingerprint reader (or iPhone X face recognition) to approve purchases you make
on the web using your Mac (an option on sites that offer Apple Pay online).
Finally, Transaction Defaults sets up the card, address, email account, and
phone number you prefer to use when buying stuff online.
Accounts & Passwords
That’s iOS’s new name for what used to be called “Internet Accounts,” which
before that was “Mail, Contacts & Calendars.” It’s a central clearinghouse for
your email accounts—and the associated calendar, contacts, notes, and reminder
accounts. (Yahoo, Google, iCloud, Microsoft, and others all offer such unified
suites of services.)
At the top, App & Website Passwords (after requiring Touch ID, Face ID, or
your passcode) shows a complete list of every password that your iPhone has
memorized for you. Tap one to look up the password itself, or swipe leftward to
delete it. You can also select one and Edit it, if the phone has somehow gotten it
wrong.
Accounts
Your email accounts are listed here; this is also where you set up new ones.
Chapter 15 covers most of the options here, but one important item is worth
noting: Fetch New Data.
The beauty of “push” email is that new email appears on your phone
immediately after it was sent. You get push email if you have, for example, a
Yahoo Mail account, iCloud account (Chapter 16), or Microsoft Exchange
account.

Having an iPhone that’s updated with these critical life details in real time is
amazingly useful, but there are several reasons why you might want to turn off
the Push feature. You’ll save battery power, save money when you’re traveling
abroad (where every “roaming” Internet use can run up your cellular bill), and
avoid the constant “new mail” jingle when you’re trying to concentrate.
And what if you don’t have a push email service, or if you turn it off? In that
case, your iPhone can still do a pretty decent job of keeping you up to date. It
can check your email every 15 minutes, every half-hour, every hour, or only on
command (Manually). That’s the decision you make in the Fetch New Data
panel. (Keep in mind that more frequent checking means shorter battery life.)
TIP
The iPhone always checks email each time you open the Mail app, regardless of your setting here. If you
have a push service like iCloud or Exchange, it also checks for changes to your schedule or address book
each time you open Calendar or Contacts—again, no matter what your setting here.
Mail
In iOS 11, you don’t set up your email accounts here anymore; you do that in
Accounts & Passwords, described above.
What you do do here is specify how often you want the iPhone to check for new
messages, how you want your Mail app to look, and more.
Preview. It’s cool that the iPhone shows you the first few lines of text in
every message. Here you can specify how many lines. More lines mean
you can skim your inbound messages without having to open many of
them; fewer lines mean more messages fit without scrolling.
Show To/Cc Label. If you turn this option on, then a tiny, light-gray
logo appears next to many of the messages in your inbox. The 
logo indicates that this message was addressed directly to you; the 
 logo means you were merely “copied” on a message primarily
intended for someone else.

If there’s no logo at all, then the message is in some other category.
Maybe it came from a mailing list, or it’s an email blast (a Bcc), or the
message is from you, or it’s a bounced message.
Swipe Options. Which colorful insta-tap buttons would you like to
appear when you swipe across a message in a list? See “Control Center”
for details.
Flag Style. You can flag messages to draw your own attention to them,
either with the old-style flag icon—or, for visual spark, with an orange
dot. Here’s where you choose.
Ask Before Deleting. Ordinarily, you can delete an open message
quickly and easily, just by tapping the 
 icon. But if you’d prefer to
encounter an additional confirmation step before the email message
disappears, then turn this option on.
NOTE
The confirmation box appears only when you’re deleting an open message—not when you
delete a message from the inbox list.
Load Remote Images. Spammers, the vile undercrust of lowlife
society, have a trick. When they send you email that includes a picture,
they don’t actually paste the picture into the message. Instead, they
include a “bug”—a piece of code that instructs your email program to
fetch the missing graphic from the Internet. Why? Because that gives
the spammer the ability to track who has actually opened the junk mail,
making those email addresses much more valuable for reselling to other
spammers.
If you turn this option off, then the iPhone does not fetch “bug” image
files at all. You’re not flagged as a sucker by the spammers. You’ll see
empty squares in the email where the images ought to be. (Graphics
sent by normal people and legitimate companies are generally pasted
right into the email, so they’ll still show up just fine.)

Organize by Thread. This is the on/off switch for the feature that
clumps related back-and-forths into individual items in your Mail inbox.
Collapse Read Messages. See “The Message List—and Threading” for
details.
Most Recent Message on Top. The messages in a conversation usually
appear chronologically, newest at the top. (The latest message still
appears when you click the thread’s name.) If you prefer oldest at the
top, then turn off this setting.
Complete Threads. What if, during a particular back-and-forth, you’ve
filed away certain messages into other folders? Should they still show
up in a conversation thread? They will, if this switch is on. (The moved
messages are actually sitting in those other folders; they just appear
here for your convenience.) Now your conversations seamlessly
combine related messages from all mailboxes.
Always Bcc Myself. If this option is on, then you’ll get a secret copy of
any message you send. Some people use this feature to make sure their
computers have records of replies sent from the phone.
Mark Addresses. Your phone can warn you when you’re addressing an
email to somebody outside your company—just type in its email suffix
here (@widgets.com). Whenever you address a message to anyone else,
it appears in red in the “To:” line.
Increase Quote Level. Each time you reply to a reply, it gets indented
more, so you and your correspondents can easily distinguish one reply
from the next.
Signature. A signature is a bit of text that gets stamped at the bottom of
your outgoing messages. Here’s where you can change yours.
Default Account. Your iPhone can manage an unlimited number of
email accounts. Here you can tap the account you want to be your
default—the one that’s used when you create a new message from
another program, like a Safari link, or when you’re on the All Inboxes
screen of Mail.

Contacts
Contacts gets its own little set of options in Settings:
Sort Order, Display Order. How do you want the names in your
Contacts list sorted—by first name or by last name?
Note that you can have them sorted one way but displayed another way.
Also note that not all those combinations make sense.
Short Name. When this switch is on, the Mail app may fit more email
addressees’ names into its narrow To box by shortening them. It may
display “M. Mouse,” for example, or “Mickey,” or even “M.M.”—
whatever you select here.
Prefer Nicknames is similar. It instructs Mail to display the nicknames
for your friends (as determined in Contacts) instead of their real names.
My Info. Tap here to tell the phone which card in Contacts represents
you. Knowing who you are is useful to the phone in a number of places
—for example, it’s how Siri knows what you mean when you say, “Give
me directions home.”
Default Account. Here again, the iPhone can manage multiple address
books—from iCloud, Gmail, Yahoo, and so on. Tap the account you
want new contacts to fall into, if you haven’t specified one in advance.
(This item doesn’t appear unless you have multiple accounts with
Contacts turned on.)
Import SIM Contacts. If you came to the iPhone from another, lesser
GSM phone, your phone book may be stored on its little SIM card
instead of in the phone itself. In that case, you don’t have to retype all
those names and numbers to bring them into your iPhone. This button
can do the job for you. (The results may not be pretty. For example,
some phones store all address book data in CAPITAL LETTERS.)
Calendar
Your iPhone’s calendar can be updated by remote control, wirelessly, through the

air, either by your company (via Exchange) or by somebody at home using your
computer (via iCloud, Chapter 16).
Time Zone Override. Whenever you arrive in a new city, the iPhone
actually learns (from the local cell towers) what time zone it’s in and
changes its own clock automatically.
So here’s a mind-teaser. Suppose there’s a big meeting in California at 2
p.m. tomorrow—but you’re in New York right now. How should that
event appear on your calendar? Should it appear as 2 p.m. (that is, its
local time)? Or should it appear as 5 p.m. (your East Coast time)?
It’s not an idle question, because it also affects reminders and alarms.
Out of the box, Time Zone Override is turned off. The phone slides
appointments around on your calendar as you travel to different time
zones. If you’re in California, that 2 p.m. meeting appears at 2 p.m.
When you return to New York, it says 5 p.m. Handy—but dangerous if
you forget what you’ve done.
If you turn on the Override, though, the iPhone leaves all your
appointments at the hours you record them—in the time zone you
specify with the pop-up menu here. This option is great if you like to
record events at the times you’ll be experiencing them; they’ll never
slosh around as you travel. If you, a New Yorker, will travel to San
Francisco next week for a 2 p.m. meeting, write it down as 2 p.m.; it
will still say 2 p.m. when you land there.
Alternate Calendars. If you prefer to use the Chinese, Hebrew, or
Islamic calendar system, go nuts here.
Week Numbers. This option makes Calendar display a little gray
notation that identifies which week you’re in (out of the 52 this year). It
might say, for example, “W42.” Because, you know, some people aren’t
aware enough of time racing by.
Show Invitee Declines. You can invite someone to a meeting, as
described in ???. If they click Decline (they can’t make it), maybe you
don’t need your phone to alert you. In that case, turn this switch off.

Sync. If you’re like most people, you refer to your calendar more often
to see what events are coming up than to see the ones you’ve already
lived through. Ordinarily, therefore, the iPhone saves you some syncing
time and storage space by updating only relatively recent events on your
iPhone calendar. It doesn’t bother with events that are older than two
weeks, or six months, or whatever you choose here. (Or you can turn on
All Events if you want your entire life, past and future, synced each
time—storage and wait time be damned.)
Default Alert Times. This is where you tell the iPhone how much
warning you need in advance of birthdays and events you’ve put on
your calendar. Tailor it to your level of absentmindedness.
Start Week On. This option specifies which day of the week appears at
the left edge of the screen in the calendar’s Day and Month views. For
most people, that’s Sunday, or maybe Monday—but, for all iOS cares,
your week could start on a Thursday.
Default Calendar. This option lets you answer the question: “When I
add a new appointment to my calendar on the iPhone, which calendar
(category) should it belong to?” You can choose Home, Work, Kids, or
whatever category you use most often.
Location Suggestions. You may have noticed that if you enter the
location for a calendar appointment (???), the phone proposes a list of
full street addresses that match what you’re typing. That’s to save you
data entry, and also to calculate travel times. Here’s the on/off switch.
Notes
Notes can sync with various online services: iCloud, Gmail, Yahoo, and so on.
Tap Default Account to indicate which account you use mainly—the one that
should contain any new note.
In iOS 11, you can also turn on an “On My iPhone” Account—a completely
private one that’s not synced to any online service, or even your Mac. That data
lives only on your phone—handy if you have deeply personal information, or if
you just don’t trust those online services.

Until iOS 11 came along, your notes were always sorted with the most recently
edited ones at the top. Now, using Sort Notes By, you can specify that you want
them listed alphabetically by title, or chronologically by date created.
Notes comes with ready-to-use type styles like Title, Heading, and Body. So you
can use the New Notes Start With option to choose which of those is the first
line when you create a new note. If you usually start with a title for your note
“card,” then choose Title, for example.
Lines & Grids lets you choose “lined paper” or “graph paper”; see “Sharing
Notes”.
Password is the command center for the new locked notes feature (“Sharing
Notes”). You can change your password here, or create an additional one—or
allow your fingerprint or face to unlock your locked notes.
You can take photos, scans, and videos right from within Notes. If you turn on
Save to Photos, then you’ll also get a copy of those images and videos in your
Photos app, just as though you’d taken them with the Camera app.
Finally, here are all the options for creating Notes from the Lock screen (on the
Control Center); they’re described in ???.
Reminders
Hey, it’s the preference settings for the Reminders app!
Sync. How far back to you want Reminders to look when showing you
reminders? At All of them? Or only those up to 6 months old? (Or 3
Months, 1 Month, or 2 Weeks?) It’s a question of storage and lifestyle.
Default List. Suppose you’ve created multiple Reminder lists
(Groceries, Movies to Rent, To Do, and so on). When you create a new
item—for example, by telling Siri, “Remind me to fix the sink”—which
list should it go on? Here’s where you specify.
Phone
These settings have to do with your address book, call management, and other

phone-related preferences.
My Number. Here’s where you can see your iPhone’s own phone
number. You can even edit it, if necessary (just how it appears—you’re
not actually changing your phone number).
Announce Calls. Cool—the iPhone can speak the name or number of
whoever is calling you. Here you can turn that feature on or off, or
specify that you want it to happen only when you’re using headphones
or in the car.
Call Blocking & Identification. You can block certain people’s calls,
texts, and FaceTime video calls.
This isn’t a telemarketer-blocking feature; you can block only people
who are already in your Contacts. It’s really for blocking harassing ex-
lovers, jerky siblings you’re not speaking to, and collection agencies.
Tap Block Contact to view your Contacts list, where you can tap to
choose the blockee. (You can also see and edit this list in the Messages
and FaceTime panels of Settings.)
Wi-Fi Calling. This glorious option lets you place great-sounding calls
even with a crummy cellular signal, as described in “FaceTime Audio
Calls”.
Calls on Other Devices. Here’s the on/off switch for Continuity, the
ability to make phone calls from your Mac (“Mac as Speakerphone”).
You can even specify which gadgets talk to your iPhone in this way.
Respond with Text. This feature is described in “Respond with a Text
Message”; here’s where you can edit the canned “Can’t talk right now”
text messages.
Call Forwarding, Call Waiting (AT&T and T-Mobile only). Here are
the on/off switches for Call Forwarding and Call Waiting, which are
described in Chapter 4.
Show My Caller ID (AT&T and T-Mobile only). If you don’t want
your number to show up on the screen of the person you’re calling, then
turn this off.

Change Voicemail Password. Yep, pretty much just what it says.
Dial Assist. When this option is turned on, and when you’re calling
from another country, the iPhone automatically adds the proper country
codes when dialing numbers in your contacts. Pretty handy, actually.
SIM PIN. Your SIM card stores all your account information. SIM
cards are especially desirable abroad, because in most countries, you
can pop yours into any old phone and have working service. If you’re
worried about yours getting stolen or lost, turn this option on. You’ll be
asked to enter a passcode.
Then, if some bad guy ever tries to put your SIM card into another
phone, he’ll be asked for the passcode. Without the passcode, the card
(and the phone) won’t make calls.
TIP
And if the evildoer guesses wrong three times—or if you do—then the words “PIN
LOCKED” appear on the screen, and the SIM card is locked forever. You’ll have to get
another one from your carrier. So don’t forget the password.
[Your carrier] Services. A duplicate of the options described in ???.
TIP
The button at the bottom of the screen opens your account page on the web, for further
details on your cellphone billing and features.
Messages
These options govern text messages (SMS) and iMessages, both of which are
described in Chapter 6:
iMessage. This is the on/off switch for iMessages. If it’s off, then your
phone never sends or receives these handy, free messages—only regular
text messages.

Show Contact Photos. Do you want to see the tiny headshots of your
conversation partners in the chat window?
Text Message Forwarding is the text-message element of Continuity;
it’s described in “Texting from the Mac”. You get an on/off switch for
each gadget that you might want to display your phone’s text messages.
Send Read Receipts. If this is on, then people who send you iMessages
will know when you’ve seen them. They’ll see a tiny gray text
notification beneath the iMessage bubble that contains their message. If
you’re creeped out by them being able to know when you’re ignoring
them, then turn this item off.
Send as SMS. If you try to send an iMessage to somebody when there’s
no Internet service, what happens? If this item is on, then the message
goes to that person as a regular text message, using your cell carrier’s
network. If it’s off, then the message won’t go out at all.
Send & Receive. Here you can enter additional email addresses that
people can use to send your phone iMessages.
This screen also offers a Start new conversations from item that lets
you indicate what you want to appear on the other guy’s phone when
you send a text: your phone number or email address.
MMS Messaging. This is the on/off switch for picture and video
messages (as opposed to text-only ones).
Group Messaging, Show Subject Field, Character Count. These
options are described starting in ???.
Blocked. Here’s another way to build up a list of people you don’t want
to hear from, as described in ???.
Keep Messages. You can specify how long you want Messages to retain
a record of your exchanges: 30 days, a year, or forever.
Filter Unknown Senders. This feature gives you a sliver of protection
from bombardment by strangers. It prevents you from getting
notifications of iMessages from anyone who’s not in your Contacts. In

fact, you’ll also see two tabs in Messages—one that lists chats for
people you know (and regular non-Apple text messages), and the other
labeled Unknown Senders.
Audio Messages. You can now shoot audio utterances to other people
just as easily as you can type them. And, under Expire, you can set
them to auto-delete after two minutes. Why? First, because audio files
take up space on your phone. Second, because you may consider them
spoken text messages—not recordings to preserve for future
generations. This is also where you turn on Raise to Listen.
The audio-texting feature lets you send and receive audio messages
without looking at the screen or touching it; see “Audio Texting
(iMessages Only)”.
Low Quality Image Mode. This option can save a huge amount of
cellular data when you send photos. See “Bonus Settings in a Place You
Didn’t Expect”.
FaceTime
These options pertain to FaceTime, the video-calling feature described in “Get
Your Ringtones Back”. Here, for example, is the on/off switch for the entire
feature; a place to enter your Apple ID, so people can make FaceTime calls to
you; and a place to enter email addresses and a phone number, which can also be
used to reach you.
The Caller ID section lets you specify how you want to be identified when you
place a call to somebody else: either as a phone number or an email address.
FaceTime Live Photos, new in iOS 11, lets you take a Live Photo during a
FaceTime call—a three-second video slice of your conversation.
Finally, here yet again is the Blocked option—a third way to edit the list of
people you don’t want to hear from.
Maps
The expanded Maps app has an expanded set of settings. At the top, three

controls that also appear elsewhere in Settings, but are here again because
they’re so important: Siri & Search (see “Siri Settings”); Notifications (do you
want turn-by-turn instructions to pop up when you’re driving?); and Cellular
Data (do you want Maps to be able to eat up your cellular Internet allotment?).
Then there’s:
Preferred Transportation Type. Do you mainly drive, walk, or take
public transport? By specifying here, you save yourself a tap every time
you plot directions.
Driving & Navigation. Here’s where you tell Maps that you want your
plotted courses to avoid Tolls or Highways; turn a Compass display on
or off on the map; specify the Navigation Voice Volume; and direct
playback of any spoken entertainment (like podcasts or audiobooks) to
Pause whenever the Maps voice is giving you an instruction.
Transit. Which modes of public rides do you want Maps to show you
when proposing routes? Bus, Subway, Commuter Rail, Ferry?
Distances. Measured in miles or kilometers, sir/madam?
Map Labels. Would you like place names to appear in English—or in
their native spellings?
Extensions. Now that Maps can incorporate other apps (see “Flyover
Tours”), which ones should it show you? Lyft and Uber are the obvious
ones here, so that Maps can incorporate those ride-sharing services into
its proposals for your travel.
Show Rides From New Apps. Lyft and Uber aren’t the only ride-
sharing apps in town. But when you install new ones, you might want
Maps to include their options automatically, so you don’t have to
remember to burrow in here and turn on their Extensions switches.
Table Booking Extensions. If you turn on OpenTable and/or Yelp here,
then whenever you search for a restaurant in Maps, you’ll see whether it
has tables available, courtesy of these apps.
Show Parked Location. You wouldn’t turn off this cool Maps feature,

would you (“Where You Parked”)?
Follow up by Email. When you report a problem with Maps’ still-
buggy database of the world, may Apple technicians get back to you by
email?
Compass
You wouldn’t think that something as simple as the Compass app would need a
Settings page, but here it is: an on/off switch called Use True North. (True
north is the “top” point of the Earth’s rotational axis. If you turn it off, then
Compass uses magnetic north, the spot traditional compasses point to; it’s about
11 degrees away from true north).
Safari
Here’s everything you ever wanted to adjust in the web browser but didn’t know
how to ask. (At the top: The usual Siri & Search options, as described in “Siri
Settings”.)
Search
Search Engine. Your choice here determines who does your searching
from the search bar: Google, Bing, Yahoo, or others. (Baidu is big in
China.)
Search Engine Suggestions. As you type into Safari’s search box, it
tries to save you time in two ways. First, it sprouts a list of common
search requests, based on what millions of other people have sought.
This list changes with each letter you type. Second, Safari may
autocomplete the address based on what you’ve typed so far, using
suggestions from your History and bookmarks list. This switch shuts off
those suggestions. (It’s here primarily for the benefit of privacy hounds,
who object to the fact that their search queries are processed by Apple
in order to show the suggestions.)

Safari Suggestions. Safari searches (Chapter 3) can find matches from
the iTunes, iBooks, and App stores; from databases of local businesses,
restaurants, and theaters; and from the web. Unless you turn this off.
Quick Website Search. You can search within a site (like Amazon or
Reddit or Wikipedia) using only Safari’s regular search bar, as described
in “Quick Website Search”. If, that is, this switch is on.
Preload Top Hit. As you type into the search box, Safari lists websites
that match. The first one is the Top Hit—and if this switch is on, Safari
secretly downloads that page while you’re still finishing your search.
That way, if the Top Hit is the page you wanted, it appears almost
instantly when you tap.
But here’s the thing: Safari downloads the Top Hit with every search—
which uses up data. Which could cost you money.

General
AutoFill. Safari’s AutoFill feature saves you tedious typing by filling in
your passwords, name, address, and phone numbers on web forms
automatically (just for the sites you want). It can even store your credit
card information, which makes buying things online much easier and
quicker.
The AutoFill screen lists on/off switches for the different kinds of data
that Safari can autofill for you: your contact info, website account

names, and passwords. (If you actually want to see and edit the
memorized passwords, then open Settings → Accounts & Passwords.)
You can also see your credit cards. Tap Saved Credit Cards to see or
delete the memorized cards.
Frequently Visited Sites. When you have nothing open in Safari, it
likes to offer a page full of icons representing sites you visit often. Turn
off this switch if your privacy concerns outweigh the convenience of
this feature.
Favorites. As described on “The Favorites Icons”, your favorites in
Safari are just ordinary bookmarks in an extraordinary folder. Here you
can choose a different folder as the home of your favorites.
Open Links. When you tap a link with your finger, should the new
page open in front of the current page—or behind it? Answer here.
Show Tab Bar. In the Plus models, this makes a row of tab buttons
appear when the phone is in landscape orientation.
Block Pop-ups. In general, you want this turned on. You really don’t
want pop-up ad windows ruining your surfing session. Now and again,
though, pop-up windows are actually useful. When you’re buying
concert tickets, for example, a pop-up window might show the location
of the seats. In that situation, you can turn this option off.
Privacy & Security
Prevent Cross-Site Tracking. New in iOS 11: An option to prevent
web operators from recording where you go after you leave their sites.
As a result, advertisers have a harder time gathering data about you and
what you like.
Block All Cookies. You can learn all about cookies—and these options
to tame them—on “Cookies”.
Ask Websites Not To Track Me. If you turn this on, then websites
agree not to secretly track your activity on the web. The problem is, of
course, that this program is voluntary—and the sleazy operators just

ignore it.
Fraudulent Website Warning. This option makes Safari warn you
when you try to visit what it knows to be a phishing site. (Phishing is a
common Internet scam. The bad guy builds a fake version of Amazon,
PayPal, or a bank’s website—and tries to trick you into “logging in.”
You therefore unwittingly give up your name and password.)
Camera & Microphone Access. There aren’t many websites that need
access to these potentially spyworthy components. But just in case
evildoers try to access them, here’s how you shut them down.
Check for Apple Pay. Some websites let you buy stuff with a quick
touch of your fingerprint (Apple Pay)—but only if you let them offer
you those controls by leaving this on.
Clear History and Website Data. Like any web browser, Safari keeps
a list of websites you’ve visited recently to make it easier for you to
visit them again: the History list. And, like any browser, Safari therefore
exposes your activities to any crackpot colleague who picks up your
phone. If you’re nervous about that prospect, then tap Clear History to
erase your tracks. This feature deletes all the cookies that websites have
deposited on your “hard drive.”
Automatically Save Offline. The Reading List feature (“The Reading
List (
)”) is wonderful. But because it downloads
entire web pages to your phone—and then syncs them to all your other
Apple gadgets—it uses a lot of data. If you fear going over your
cellphone plan’s monthly data allotment, then turn this off. You’ll be
allowed to save sites to your Reading List only when you’re online.
Advanced. Safari recognizes HTML5, a technology that lets websites
store data on your phone, for accessing even when you’re not online
(like your Gmail). In Website Data, you can see which web apps have
created these databases on your phone and delete them if necessary.
JavaScript is a programming language whose bits of code frequently

liven up web pages. If you suspect some bit of code is choking Safari,
though, you can turn off its ability to decode JavaScript here.
The Web Inspector is for website programmers. You connect your
phone to a Mac with a USB cable; then, in Safari on the computer, you
choose Debug → iPhone → [the name of the website currently on
the iPhone’s screen]. You’ll be able to examine errors, warnings, tips,
and logs for HTML, Java​Script, and CSS—great when you’re designing
and debugging web pages or web apps for the iPhone. (Experimental
Features is also decidedly for programmers.)
News
“News” describes the News app. Here’s where you indicate whether it’s allowed
to tailor your news to your Location, whether it’s allowed to provide Siri &
Search results, if it can bug you with Notifications about news stories, whether
it’s allowed to fetch news in the Background (at some cost to battery life), and
whether it can fetch new news over the Cellular Data network (at some cost to
your data allowance).
You can turn off the “Next Up” link at the bottom of each story, as well as the
Story Previews (where the first couple of lines of each news story appear right
in the app). Restrict Stories in For You means you’ll see only stories from news
sources you’ve selected; you don’t give News leeway to propose articles from
other sources on topics you like.
Music
What you see here depends on whether you’ve subscribed to the $10-a-month
Apple Music service (Chapter 8).
Show Apple Music. When this is off, the new tabs (For You and New)
disappear from the Music app. Which makes sense if you’re not a
subscriber, since they’re doing you no good.
Add Playlist Songs. Songs you add to a playlist get automatically
added to your library, too.

Show Star Ratings. Turn this on if you’d like to rate the songs in your
music collection from one to five stars. Note that this option doesn’t
affect how Music suggests new music to you, as you might expect.
iCloud Music Library (which appears only if you use Apple Music) is
described on “The Library Tab”.
Cellular Data lets you guard against having your streaming music eat
up your monthly cellular data allowance. If it’s off, then you can
download and play back music only over Wi-Fi. You can also permit or
prevent using cellular for Streaming songs (or just High Quality
Streaming) and Downloads of songs.
Downloaded Music lets you see how much of your storage space is
devoted to songs you’ve acquired.
Optimize Storage. This option appears only if you use iCloud Music
Library. It offers to auto-delete everything but 8, 16, 32, or 64 gigs of
songs. They’re still yours—they’re just online instead of on your phone.
Automatic Downloads is another iCloud Music Library special. It
means that any song you’ve added to your online song library also gets
auto-copied to your phone for offline playback.
EQ, Volume Limit, Sound Check. See “Switching Among Speakers”.
Use Listening History. Each song you play on your phone helps to
shape the Music app’s “For You” recommendation. Also, people who
follow you on Apple Music get to see what you’ve been playing.
Home Sharing. Conveniently enough, you can access your iTunes
music collection, upstairs on your computer, right from your iPhone,
over your home Wi-Fi network. Or at least you can if both machines are
signed into the same Apple ID. Here’s where you enter the Apple ID
that matches your iTunes setup.
TV
This is what you can adjust for the TV app:

Notifications. Here are the app’s notifications controls.
iTunes Videos. Use Cellular Data for Playback is a safeguard against
eating up your cellular data with videos; leave it off to stream videos
only over Wi-Fi. Playback Quality asks: When you’re watching over
Wi-Fi, do you want the best picture, even if that uses up more data?
(Yes, some people have to worry about how much Wi-Fi data they use
every month.) You get the same choices for Cellular data.
Download HDR Videos is for iPhone X owners, whose screen can
show high dynamic range (HDR) video, with darker darks and brighter
brights. Purchases and Rentals: When you buy or rent a video from
Apple, do you want it in High Definition or Standard? (High
Definition looks better but takes forever to download.)
Home Sharing means you can access your video collection in iTunes
on your computer, as described already. Same deal here.
Up Next. All your Apple machines will remember where and what you
left off watching.
Connect to TV. These are the apps for your various cable and pay-TV
channels. The ones you turn on here sync, with your other iOS devices,
what you’ve been watching and where you stopped.
That’s a slick convenience—but it does mean Apple’s computers will
know what you’ve been watching. So here, for the sake of your privacy
and self-esteem, you can turn off that data sharing on a per-channel
basis.
Clear Play History. Again, Apple’s worried about your worries about
privacy. This function deletes your viewing data from the TV app.
Photos
In iOS 11, the old Photos & Camera settings have been split into two,
ingeniously titled Photos and Camera.
Siri & Search. Duplicates of what’s described in “Siri Settings”.

iCloud Photo Library. See “iCloud Photo Library”.
Optimize iPhone Storage, Download and Keep Originals. See
“Geotagging”.
Upload to My Photo Stream. Every picture you take will be sent to all
your Apple gadgets (see “Hide”).
Upload Burst Photos. Recent iPhones can snap 10 photos a second
when you hold your finger down on the shutter button. That’s a lot of
photos, which can fill up your iCloud storage fast. So Apple gives you
the option to exclude them from the uploads.
iCloud Photo Sharing and Cellular Data are covered in “iCloud Photo
Sharing”.
Summarize Photos. In the Photos app, the Years and Collections
screens generally display one tiny thumbnail for every single photo.
This feature makes those more manageable by displaying fewer, but
representative, thumbnails. (You won’t see any difference unless you
have a pretty huge collection of photos.)
View Full HDR (iPhone X only). You lucky dog—your OLED screen
can display the full range of colors and brights and darks in your photos.
Don’t turn this off.
Show Holiday Events. You know the Memories feature (“The
Memories Tab”)? It can create auto-slideshows based on the holidays in
your country, if you want. If you’d just as soon not be reminded of these
stressful times, then turn this off.
Transfer to Mac or PC. iOS 11 takes photos in a new format called
HEIF (high efficiency image format). These photos take up half the
space without losing any quality, which is awesome—but not all
desktop photo programs can open HEIF files. Mac OS High Sierra can
open them, but older Mac OS versions can’t; the current Photoshop
version can, but older ones can’t.
If you’re having trouble, turn on Automatic. That way, photos get sent
as JPEGs, which every desktop program on earth can recognize.

Camera
Behold: the controls for the iPhone’s amazing camera.
Preserve Settings. The Camera app can remember the mode you had
selected when you last used it—Video, Photo, Panorama, or whatever—
instead of always starting with Photo.
Depending on your phone model, it can also remember the last photo
filter you used (“Filters”), what lighting effect (“Studio Lighting”), and
whether or not you had Live Photo turned on (“Live Photos”).
Grid turns the “Rule of Thirds” grid (the tic-tac-toe lines) on or off on
the camera’s viewfinder screen.
Scan QR Codes. So cool! If you point the camera at a QR bar code (of
the type you often see on movie posters and ads), the corresponding
web link appears as a notification, ready to tap. You don’t need a
dedicated QR-reading app anymore.
Record Video. This option, exclusive to the iPhone 6 and later, controls
the frame rate and quality of the video you shoot. The first number in
each option (like 720p, 1080p, or 4K) controls the resolution of the
video (how many pixels make up each frame—and how
correspondingly huge the video files are). The second, fps, controls the
frames per second. Normal TV video is about 30 fps, so choosing 60
fps creates bigger files but smoother playback.
A weird additional option appears here if you have a Plus or X model:
Lock Camera. These phones, of course, have two lenses (“Editing Live
Photos”). Under certain lighting conditions, if you zoom while
recording video, a little hiccup results as the phone switches from one
lens to the other. But if you turn on this option you’ll get no such glitch,
because the phone will use only one lens the whole time. (You can still
zoom—but it’s a digital, fake zoom, and the image will slightly degrade
as you do so.)
Record Slo-mo. Recent iPhone models give you a choice of slow-
motion modes (and tell you how much space each takes up). 240 frames

per second plays back at half the speed of 120.
Formats (iPhone 7 and later). As noted, your photos and videos now
occupy only half the space they used to—and look exactly the same.
That’s because Apple has adopted a new format called HEIF (high
efficiency image format) for photos, and HEVC (high efficiency video
coding) format for video.
Which is great—except what happens when you try to share one of your
pictures or videos with someone whose phone or computer doesn’t
know that format? No sweat: iOS automatically checks before sending
to see if the receiving device can handle HEIF or HEVC. If not, it
converts the outgoing photo to JPEG, or the outgoing video to H.264—
the old standards.
If you’re having any trouble with this system, you can turn it all off
here. If you choose Most Compatible, the iPhone captures photos and
videos in the older formats (JPEG and H.264). As the note here points
out, though, super-deluxe capture styles like 4K and 60 frames a
second, and slow-mo at 240, must use HEVC, no matter what your
selection here.
Auto HDR. If this is on, Camera switches to HDR (“High Dynamic
Range (HDR)”) whenever it thinks that lighting conditions merit it. If
you turn this off, then the HDR button returns in the Camera app, so
that the choice is yours.
Keep Normal Photo. When you take a photo in HDR mode, iOS saves
two photos, one normal and one HDR. If you turn this off, you get only
the HDR shot.
iBooks
These iBooks ebook settings are described starting in “iBooks Settings”.
Podcasts
These settings affect the Podcasts app described on “Podcasts”. They govern

how often the app auto-downloads new episodes, and how many; whether it can
do so using cellular data (or only Wi-Fi); and whether you want the app to auto-
delete podcasts you’ve already heard.
Game Center
For millions of people, the iPhone is a mobile game console. Once you’ve
logged into Game Center with your Apple ID, you can allow Nearby Players to
invite you to multiplayer games wirelessly, and you can create or edit your
Game Center Profile (your player name). And when you get fed up, you can
Remove All Game Center Friends—the nuclear option.
TV Provider
As noted in “The TV App”, the TV app is designed to let you watch all the
shows you’re paying your cable or satellite company for—on your phone. At the
outset, alas, very few major cable companies are playing ball with Apple. You
can sign in here if you have an account from DirecTV, Dish, or a few obscure
cable companies. But if you have, say, Comcast, Time Warner, or another big
one, you’re probably out of luck.
App Preferences
At the bottom of the Settings screen, you see a list of apps that have installed
settings screens of their own. For example, here’s where you can decide whether
you want Feedly to use cellular data, change how many days’ worth of news you
want the NY Times Reader to display, and so on. Each one offers an assortment
of preference options.
It can get to be a very long list.

Appendix A. A Signup & Setup
You gotta admit it: Opening up a new iPhone brings a certain excitement.
There’s a prospect of possibility, of new beginnings. Even if you intend to
protect your iPhone with a case, there are those first few minutes when it’s shiny,
spotless, free of fingerprints or nicks—a gorgeous thing.
This chapter is all about getting started, whether that means buying and setting
up a new iPhone, or upgrading an older model to the new iOS 11 software that’s
described in this book.
Buying a New iPhone
Each year’s new iPhone model is faster, has a better camera and screen, and
comes packed with more features than the previous one. Still, “new iPhone”
doesn’t have to mean the iPhone X ($1,000 or $1,150, either up front or spread
out over two years) or even the iPhone 8 ($700). You can still get an iPhone 7 for
$550, an iPhone 6s for $450, or an SE for $350. (Thank heaven, the U.S. carriers
no longer obscure the true price of the phone in two-year contracts.) And, of
course, you can get even older models dirt cheap, used.
In any case, once you’ve chosen the model you want, you also have to choose
which cellphone company you want to provide its service: AT&T, Verizon, T-
Mobile, or Sprint.
Research the coverage where you live and work. Each company’s website shows
a map of its coverage.
You can buy your iPhone from a phone store (Verizon, Sprint, T-Mobile, AT&T),
from an Apple Store, from a retail store, or from the Apple website. You can buy
the phone outright, or you can opt to have the price spread out in monthly
payments. Or you can lease it.
All right then: Here you are in the store, or sitting down to do some ordering
online. Here are the decisions you’ll have to make:

Transferring your old number. You can bring your old cellphone or
home number to your new iPhone. Your friends can keep dialing your
old number—but your iPhone will ring instead.
It usually takes under an hour for a cellphone-number transfer to take
place. During that time, you can make calls on the iPhone, but you can’t
receive them.
NOTE
Transferring a landline number to your iPhone can take several days.
Select your monthly calling plans. Signing up for cellphone service
involves more red tape than a government contract. In essence, you
have to choose three plans: one for voice calls, one for Internet service,
and one for text messages. The variations are complicated, but a quick
web search (“iPhone X plans compared”) can help you make sense of
them.
The carriers are all pushing unlimited-data plans these days, which
come with a certain comfort.
But the traditional “4 gigabytes per month” plans are still around, too.
Of course, the problem with fixed data allotments is this: Who has any
idea what 2 gigabytes of data means? How much of that do you eat up
with email alone? How much is one YouTube video?
As you approach your monthly limit, you’ll get warnings by text
message, but you can also see your data usage on your phone (???). Yes,
it’s a pain to have to worry about data limits, but at least monitoring
them is fairly easy. If you use more than your allotted amount, some
carriers automatically bill a surcharge—for example, $15 for each
additional gigabyte.
All four cell companies offer unlimited free calls to other phones from
the same company. All but the cheapest plans offer unlimited calls on
nights and weekends.

And all iPhone plans require an “activation fee” (ha!).
NOTE
The choice you make here isn’t etched in stone. You can change your plan at any time on your carrier’s
website.
As you budget for your plan, keep in mind that, as with any cellphone, you’ll
also be paying taxes as high as 22 percent, depending on your state. Ouch.
Upgrading to iOS 11
If you’ve recently bought a new iPhone, great! iOS 11 (or one of its successors,
like iOS 11.2) comes on it preinstalled.
But you can also upgrade an older or used iPhone to this new software in any of
three ways:
Upgrade it wirelessly. Upgrading means installing iOS 11 on top of
whatever is already on your iPhone. You don’t lose any data or settings.
This is the easiest way to upgrade. You’ve probably already seen the
little red number on your Settings app icon (see “Customizing
Notifications”), and on the word “General” inside it; the phone is trying
to tell you that iOS 11 is ready to download. Tap Settings → General
→ Software Update to see the iOS 11 info; tap Download and Install.
(You have to be on a Wi-Fi network, and it’s wise to have your iPhone
plugged into power.)
Upgrade it from iTunes. If you wish, you can also perform the upgrade
using the iTunes program on your computer. This method takes less
time but, of course, requires being at your computer.
To begin, connect your iPhone and click its icon at top left (see
“Connecting the iPhone”). On the Summary tab, click Check for
Update, and then click Download and Update.
Restore it. This is a more dramatic step, which you should choose only

if you’ve been having problems with your phone or if, for some other
reason, you would like to start completely fresh. This step backs up the
phone, erases it completely, installs iOS, and then copies your stuff back
onto the phone.
Connect the phone to your computer, open iTunes, and then click
Restore iPhone.
After the Restore process, treat your phone as though it’s a brand-new
one as you read the following pages.
The Setup Assistant
Upgrading your iPhone to iOS 11 from some older iOS version doesn’t involve
much more effort than sitting and waiting. When the upgrade is over, you get a
Welcome screen, and boom: You’re at your Home screen, ready to roll.
Things aren’t so straightforward, though, if any of these situations apply to you:
You’ve bought a new iPhone to replace an older model.
You’ve bought your first iPhone.
You’ve upgraded your existing iPhone to iOS 11 by restoring it (erasing
it, starting from scratch).
All three of these situations subject you to the iOS 11 setup assistant—a series of
screens that interview you to get all the settings right.
If you’re used to previous versions of iOS, you’re in for a treat—or at least less
of a punishment; in iOS 11, Apple has tried to simplify the setup process.
TIP
If you’re upgrading from an older phone, you’d be very, very wise to take these three preparatory steps.
First, back up the old phone (see “Backing Up the iPhone”). Second, transfer your old phone’s SIM card
to the new one (“Sensors”).
Finally, remember that iOS 11 cannot open so-called 32-bit apps (meaning “ancient”). You may own a
few old favorites that you’ll have to give up; see “The Abandoned Apps”.

The screens you encounter, and their sequence, vary wildly depending on what
phone model you have, whether you choose Quick Start and Express Settings,
what backup you’re restoring from, and other factors. But in general, this is what
you’ll find when you turn on the phone for the first time after buying or
upgrading it:
1. Hello. Your new phone’s life begins with the screen that flashes “Hello”
in various languages. (At this point, you can turn on VoiceOver
[“VoiceOver”] or Zoom [“Zooming”] if you have trouble seeing it.) Tap
Continue.
2. [Choice of Language]. You won’t get very far setting up your phone if
you can’t understand the instructions. So the goal here is to tell it what
language you speak.
3. Select Your Language and Country. Now tell the phone where in the
world you live. (It proposes the country where you bought the phone.
Clever, eh?)
4. Quick Start. If you’re upgrading from an older phone, you’re in luck:
The new Quick Start feature is about to save you the tedium of entering
passwords and setting up initial preferences. It works only, however, if
your old phone is running iOS 11.
If you don’t have another iOS 11 device, you can’t use Quick Start; tap
Set Up Manually and skip to step 5.
If you do have another iOS 11 gadget, though, this is a blast. The Set
Up Your iPhone screen (on the new phone) directs you to bring the old
phone close to the new iPhone. The old one shows a Set Up New Phone
screen, bearing your iCloud address; tap Continue.

Suddenly, the new phone displays an animation that looks like a
swirling cloud of glitter. Hold the old phone a few inches over the new
phone’s screen, so that the animation fits in the brackets on the old one’s
screen. Boom! They’re paired. The old phone begins to send encrypted
data to the new one.
You’re now directed to enter the old phone’s passcode on the new
phone; it’s going to become your new phone’s passcode, too.
Truth is, Quick Start doesn’t actually transfer very much from the old
phone: only your Wi-Fi password, your iCloud password, a few
settings, and, of course, your iPhone passcode. You still have to copy
over all of your apps, photos, music, and so on. Still, it was fun, wasn’t
it?
And in the following sequence, you can skip steps 5, 7, and 9.
5. Choose a Wi-Fi Network. Tap the name of the Wi-Fi network you
want, enter the password if required, and tap Join.

Or, if there’s no Wi-Fi you can (or want to) hop onto right now, then tap
Use Mobile Connection.
NOTE
At this point, your phone becomes activated, which means that it marries your cell carrier. If
there’s a SIM card from your carrier in your phone (“Sensors”), this step takes only a second
or two. If there isn’t a SIM card in the phone, though, you can’t activate it; you can’t proceed
to the Home screen. (The workarounds: Borrow a SIM card from your carrier, even from a
deactivated account—or use Quick Start to inherit the settings from another iOS 11 phone, as
described in step 4.)
6. Touch ID or Face ID. You’re now invited to teach the phone your
fingerprint or “face print” for the purposes of unlocking it without
having to type a password. Start in “Fingerprint Security (Touch ID)”
for more on Touch ID and Face ID.
You can also tap Set Up Later. When the time comes, you can revisit
this process in Settings → Touch ID & Passcode (or Face ID &
Passcode).
7. Create a Passcode. Whether you opted to store a fingerprint/face print
or not, you’re now asked to make up a six-digit passcode (password) for
unlocking your phone. You’ll need it whenever the phone won’t accept
Touch ID or Face ID—for example, after you’ve restarted the phone.
TIP
You don’t have to accept iOS’s proposal of a six-digit passcode. Tap Passcode Options to
reveal more choices, like Custom Alphanumeric Code (any password you like, any length,
any characters), Custom Numeric Code (any number of digits), or 4-Digit Numeric Code
(like in the old days).
8. Apps & Data. This screen offers to reload all your stuff from your most
recent backup. (See Chapter 15 and Chapter 16 for details on iPhone
backups.)
The new phone may guess about what recent backup you want to use. If

so, and it’s correct, tap Continue.
If not, tap Choose Other Backup or Don’t Restore. Now you’re
offered a choice: Restore from iCloud Backup (if your backup was on
iCloud) Restore from iTunes Backup (if your backup was on your
computer); Set Up as New iPhone (if you’ve never owned an iPhone
before or want to start fresh); or Move Data from Android.
NOTE
The Move Data from Android option prompts you to download a companion app on your old
Android phone called Move to iOS. When you open it, the app (on Android) asks you to
enter a number code that’s offered by your iPhone at this stage. Then the Android phone asks
what kinds of data you’d like copied to your iPhone: your Google account (email, calendar,
and so on), web bookmarks, text messages, contacts, and photos. When you hit Next, the
transfer begins, wirelessly and automatically.
9. Apple ID. A million features require an Apple ID—just about any
transaction you make with Apple online. Buying anything from Apple,
from a song to a laptop. Using iCloud (Chapter 16). Playing games
against other people online. Making an appointment at an Apple Store.
If you already have an Apple ID, enter your email address and iCloud
password here. If not, tap Don’t have an Apple ID or forgot it? You’ll
be asked to provide your name, birthday, email address (or you can
create a new iCloud email address), a password of your choice, and
answers to a few security questions (you’ll have to get them right if you
ever forget your password). You also get to decide if you’d like the
honor of receiving junk email from Apple.
You’ll be sent, by the way, an Apple ID Verification Code—that is, a
two-factor authentication code as described in “Privacy”.
10. Terms and Conditions. Tap Agree, and then Agree.
11. Express Settings. Do you want to set up Apple Pay (“Apple Pay”)?
How about Siri (Chapter 5)? Are navigation and other apps allowed to
monitor your location using Location Services (“Privacy”)? Will you
agree to let Apple collect (anonymous) Analytics data about how you

use the phone?
In iOS 11, Apple gives you the chance to say “Yeah, sure, fine” (tap
Continue) for all of these items at once, thereby skipping over a few
steps in the setup assistant.
Otherwise, you can tap Customize Settings and walk through those
screens individually (Location Services, Apple Pay, Siri,
Analytics)before proceeding.
Some of these screens involve some setup. For example, Apple Pay
requires registering your credit cards, and if you want to be able to use
the “Hey Siri” hands-free mode (“How to Use “Hey Siri””), then you’re
supposed to speak a few sample sentences so that Siri learns your voice.
NOTE
If your new phone is slurping up the backup from an older phone (if you used Quick Start,
for example), you don’t get Express Settings. Instead, you get Settings from Your Backup. It
serves much the same purpose—letting you skip the Siri, Location, and Analytics questions
—except that it grabs the settings from your backup rather than using Apple’s suggested
defaults.
12. Apple Pay. Next up: If you have an iPhone 5s or later, you’re now
invited to store your credit cards, for the purpose of turning on Apple
Pay. The process is described in “Apple Pay”.
If you don’t want to use Apple Pay, or don’t want to set it up now, hit
Next anyway, and then hit Set Up Later in Wallet.
13. App Analytics. Behind the scenes, your iPhone sends records back to
Apple, including your location and what you’re doing on your iPhone.
By analyzing this data en masse, Apple can figure out where the dead
spots in the cellular network are, how to fix bugs, and so on. The
information is anonymous—it’s not associated with you. But if the very
idea seems invasive, here’s your chance to prevent this data from being
sent.
14. True Tone Display. This option appears only on the iPhone 8 and X

models. It adjusts the screen colors in an attempt to keep them
consistent under different lighting conditions (see “Focus
Lock/Exposure Lock”).
15. Meet the New Home Button. On the iPhone 7 and 8 models, this
screen introduces you to the clickless home button (“Home Button”)—
and invites you to choose how hard its click feels (???).
16. Display Zoom. On bigger-screened phones like the iPhone 6 and later,
you get this choice. It asks how you want to exploit the larger screen. If
you choose Standard, you’ll see more stuff (icons, menus, lines of text)
per screenful than on smaller iPhones. If you choose Zoomed, then
you’ll see the same amount of stuff, but bigger. You can always change
your mind in Settings → Display & Brightness.
17. Go Home, Switch Between Recent Apps, Quickly Access Controls.
These informational screens appear only on the iPhone X. They’re
designed to teach you some of the new gestures you’ll need as you
adapt to life without a home button.
18. Welcome to iPhone. Your phone is set up. Tap Get Started to jump to
the Home screen.
If you’ve restored your phone from a backup, you’re not quite finished; now
your phone should sit in a Wi-Fi hotspot for 30 or 60 minutes as it downloads all
your existing apps, music, photos, and videos from Apple’s servers.
See, in iOS 11, an iPhone backup no longer includes any of that stuff. Instead,
iOS simply remembers which apps, songs, photos, and videos you had. After
your backup is restored, your phone proceeds to re-download all of them from
the Internet; you’ll see your dimmed app icons gradually filling up as they
arrive.
The benefit of this arrangement, of course, is that your backups don’t take up
much time or much disk space. The downside: If you’re trying to restore several
phones from a single backup, you’re going to eat up a lot of data and time.
In any case, all of this is an excellent argument for beginning the restore process
when (a) you’re in a Wi-Fi hotspot, and (b) you’ve got some time to kill.

Software Updates to Come
As you’re probably aware, phone software like the iPhone’s is a perpetual work
in progress. Apple constantly fixes bugs, adds features, and makes tweaks to
extend battery life and improve other services.
Updating Directly on the Phone
One day you’ll be minding your own business, and you’ll see a red number
badge appear on the Settings app’s icon on the phone. Open Settings → General
→ Software Update to read about the new update and install it. Note, though,
that unless it’s plugged into a power source, your phone won’t install an iOS
update unless its battery is at least half full.
Install Updates from Your Computer
Maybe you’re not that adventurous and you’d prefer to install your software
update the old-fashioned way.
No problem: Connect the iPhone to iTunes, wirelessly or not (“Connecting the
iPhone”). Then click the iPhone’s icon in iTunes; on the Summary pane, tap
Check for Update.
Restrictions and Parental Controls
If you’re issuing an iPhone to a child, or someone who acts like one, you’ll be
gratified to discover that iOS offers a good deal of protection. That’s protection
of your offspring’s delicate sensibilities (it can block pornography and dirty
words) and protection of your bank account (it can block purchases of music,
movies, and apps without your permission).
To set this up, visit Settings → General → Restrictions. When you tap Enable
Restrictions, you’re asked to make up a passcode that permits only you, the all-
knowing parent, to make changes to these settings. (Or you, the corporate IT
administrator who’s doling out iPhones to the white-collar drones.)

Once you’ve changed the settings described on these pages, the only way to
change them again (when your kid turns 18, for example) is to return to the
Restrictions page and correctly enter the passcode. That’s also the only way to
turn off the entire Restrictions feature (tap Disable Restrictions and enter the
passcode). To turn it back on, you have to make up a passcode all over again.
Once Restrictions is turned on, you can put up data blockades in a number of
different categories.
Allow

For starters, you can turn off access to iPhone features that locked-down
corporations might not want their employees—or parents might not want their
children—to use, because they’re considered either security holes, time drains,
or places to spend your money: Safari (can’t use the web at all), Camera, Siri
& Dictation, FaceTime, AirDrop, or CarPlay (Apple’s specialized connection
for certain car models, in which your iPhone’s relevant icons appear on the car’s
dashboard screen).
A second list of options lets you block access to iTunes Store, Music Profiles &
Posts (the news and discussion within Apple’s music service), iBooks Store, and
News—and turn off the option to download Podcasts. You can stop your kid
from Installing Apps or Deleting Apps, too. And you can turn off In-App
Purchases so that your offspring won’t be able to buy new material (game
levels, book chapters, and so on) from within an app that you’ve already bought.
Many of these restrictions work by removing icons altogether from the iPhone’s
Home screen: Safari, iTunes, and Camera, for example. When the switch says
Off, the corresponding icon has been taken off the Home screen and can’t be
found even by searches.
Allowed Content
Here you can spare your children’s sensitive eyes and ears by blocking
inappropriate material.
Ratings are a big deal; they determine the effectiveness of the parental controls
described in this section. Since every country has its own rating schemes (for
movies, TV shows, games, song lyrics, and so on), you use the Ratings For
control to tell the iPhone which country’s rating system you want to use.
Once that‘s done, you can use the Music, Podcasts, News & iTunes U, controls,
plus Movies, TV Shows, Books, and Apps, to specify what your kid is allowed
to watch, play, read, and listen to. For example, you can tap Movies and then tap
PG-13; any movies rated “higher,” like R or NC-17, won’t play on the iPhone
now. (And if your sneaky offspring try to buy these naughty songs, movies, or
TV shows wirelessly from the iTunes Store, they’ll discover that the Buy button
is dimmed and unavailable.)
For some categories, like Music, Podcasts, News & iTunes U, and Siri, you can

turn off Explicit to prevent the iPhone from playing iTunes Store songs that
contain naughty language, or speaking them.
Websites lets you shield impressionable young eyes from pornography online. It
offers these settings:
All Websites. No protection at all.
Limit Adult Content. Apple will apply its own judgment in blocking
dirty websites, using a blocked-site list it has compiled.
That doesn’t mean you can’t override Apple’s wisdom, however. The
Always Allow and Never Allow controls let you add the addresses of
websites that you think should be OK (or should not be OK).
Specific Websites Only. This is a “whitelist” feature. It means that the
entire web is blocked except for the few sites listed here: safe bets like
Disney, PBS Kids, Smithsonian Institution, and so on. You can add your
own sites to this list, but the point is clear: This is the web with training
wheels.
Finally, Password Settings lets you loosen the requirement to enter your Apple
password every time you download something from the App Store, iTunes Store,
or iBooks Store. You can choose Require After 15 Minutes, so you won’t be
repeatedly bugged for your password if you’re on a shopping spree, and you can
turn off the requirement for free downloads.
Privacy
These switches can prohibit the unauthorized user from making changes to the
phone’s privacy settings, which are described in “Privacy”.
Allow Changes
These items (Accounts, Cellular Data Use, Background App Refresh,
Volume Limit) are safeguards against your offspring fiddling with limits you’ve
set. TV Provider makes sure that the rapscallion won’t attempt to change your
cable-TV company (“TV Provider”).
And Do Not Disturb While Driving ensures that your underling can’t simply

turn off that important safety feature (“One More Safety Measure”), thereby
defeating the entire purpose.
Game Center
These controls let you stop your kid from playing multiplayer games (against
strangers online), screen recording in games, or adding game-playing friends to
the center.
Two-Factor Authentication
By now, it’s probably clear that passwords aren’t enough to protect us from the
bad guys. Even if your password is é$*@çg45e+7r6ü, someone can still steal it.
There are all kinds of ways: An inside job. Poor security on a company’s servers.
Social engineering, where someone calls up pretending to be you and saying, “I
forgot my password.”
Fortunately, security experts have come up with a way to keep baddies out of
your account even if they’ve got your password. It’s a system called two-factor
authentication—and in iOS 11, it’s no longer optional. (Let’s call it 2FA to save
paper.)
Here’s how it works: Suppose you’re setting up a new Apple device, or you’re
trying to log into iCloud.com with a new web browser. You log in with your
iCloud password.
Almost immediately, Apple sends a message to the screens of all of your other
Apple machines—devices that it knows you own: “Your Apple ID is being used
to sign in to an iPad [or whatever] in Hinsdale, IL” (and there’s a little map).
TIP
And what if you don’t have another Apple device? Then you can get the code via automated phone call
or text; tap Didn’t get a verification code.
And what if you’re not online? No problem. You can make the older, trusted device cough up a code on
demand, in Settings → [your name] → Password & Security → Get Verification Code.

If that’s not where you are right now, it means someone is pretending to be you!
Tap Don’t Allow and shut them down!
If it is you, though, hit Allow. Now your older device displays a six-digit code;
on the new machine or browser, there’s a box to enter it. You’re in.
NOTE
Sometimes, the code and “enter code” box appear on the same device! What sense does that make?
Easy: You’re using a new browser for the first time. The operating system treats that browser as a new
“device,” even though it’s running on an already-accepted machine.
If some Russian hacker does get your password, he still can’t get into your account, because he doesn’t
have the code. Sneaky, eh? And incredibly effective; 2FA almost completely eliminates the chance of
someone else accessing your account. They’d have to have your iCloud password and your phone or
laptop and your password for that device.
Each time, you’re adding to your list of trusted devices. At any time, you can
look over a list of them at appleid.apple.com/account/manage. (You’ll get a 2FA
code just to get into your account.)
NOTE

All of this works smoothly on Apple products. But what about programs (like calendar and email
programs) that also need access to your iCloud account? They’re locked out just as though they were
hackers.
Fortunately, you can go to appleid.apple.com/account/manage to generate an app-specific password. If
you enter this 16-character password as your iCloud password in your third-party calendar or email
program, it will now be able to access your iCloud account as it did before.

Appendix B. B Troubleshooting &
Maintenance
The iPhone is a computer, and you know what that means: Things can go wrong.
This particular computer, though, is not quite like a Mac or a PC. It runs a spin-
off of the macOS operating system, but that doesn’t mean you can apply the
same troubleshooting techniques.
Therefore, when things go wrong, let this appendix be your guide.
First Rule: Install the Updates
There’s an old saying: “Never buy version 1.0 of anything.” In the iPhone’s case,
the saying could be: “Never buy version 11.0 of anything.”
The very first version (or major revision) always has bugs, glitches, and things
the programmers didn’t have time to finish the way they would have liked. The
iPhone is no exception.
The beauty of this phone, though, is that Apple can send it fixes, patches, and
even new features through software updates. One day you’ll glance at your
Home screen’s Settings icon, and—bam!—there’ll be a badge indicating that
new iPhone software is available.
So the first rule of trouble-free iPhoning is to accept these updates when they’re
offered. With each new software blob, Apple removes another few dozen tiny
glitches.
And sure enough: Within the first few weeks of iOS 11’s existence, software
updates 11.1 and 11.2 came down the pike. And more will come.
Six Ways to Reset the Phone
The iPhone runs actual programs, and as actual programs do, they actually crash.
Sometimes, the program you’re working in simply vanishes and you find

yourself back at the Home screen. Just reopen the program and get on with your
life.
If the program you’re in just doesn’t seem to be working right—it’s frozen or
acting weird, for example—then one of these resetting techniques usually clears
things right up.
NOTE
Proceed down this list in order! Start with the easy ones.
Exit the app. On an iPhone, you’re never aware that you’re launching
and exiting programs. They’re always just there, like TV channels,
when you switch to them. There’s no Quit command. But if a program
starts acting glitchy, you can make it quit.
To do that, double-press the home button to bring up the app switcher.
Find the “card” that represents your balky app, and then flick it upward
to quit it. Try reopening it to see if the problem has gone away.
iPHONE X
Swipe up from the bottom of the screen; with your finger still down, pause until the app
switcher appears. Hold your finger down on any “card” until the 
 appears. Tap it, or
swipe the card upward, to exit the app.
Turn the phone off and on again. If it seems that something more
serious has gone wrong, then hold in the side button for a few seconds.
iPHONE X
Hold the side button and either volume button simultaneously.
When the screen says slide to power off, confirm by swiping. The
iPhone shuts off completely.

Turn it back on by pressing the side button for a second or two.
Force-restart the phone. If you haven’t been able to force-quit the
program, and you can’t shut the phone off either, you might have to
force a restart. Thanks to Apple’s fickle relationship with the home-
button concept, the method varies by phone model.
iPhone 8 or X: Click the volume-up key, and then the volume-down
key; now hold in the side button until the Apple logo appears.
iPhone 7: Hold in the side button and the volume-down key
simultaneously until the Apple logo appears.
Earlier models: Hold down the home button and the side button until
the Apple logo appears.
In each case, keep holding, even if the screen goes black or you see the
“power off” slider. Don’t release until you see the Apple logo appear,
meaning that the phone is restarting.
Reset the settings. This procedure doesn’t erase any of your data—only
the phone’s settings. From the Home screen, tap Settings → General
→ Reset → Reset All Settings.

Erase the whole phone. From the Home screen, tap Settings →
General → Reset → Erase All Content and Settings. Now, this
option zaps your stuff—all of it. Music, videos, email, settings, apps, all

gone, and all overwritten with random 1’s and 0’s to make sure it’s
completely unrecoverable. Clearly, you’re getting into last resorts here.
Of course, you can then sync with your backup (iTunes or iCloud) to
copy all that stuff back onto your iPhone.
Restore the phone. If none of these steps solve the phone’s glitchiness,
it might be time for the nuclear option: erasing it completely, resetting
both hardware and software back to a factory-fresh condition.
TIP
If you’re able to sync the phone with iCloud or iTunes first, do it! That way, you’ll have a
backup of all those intangible iPhone data bits: text messages, call logs, Recents list, and so
on. It will all go back onto the phone the first time you sync after the restore.
If you backed up to iTunes: Connect the phone to your computer, as
described in Chapter 15. In iTunes, click the iPhone icon and then, on
the Summary tab, click Restore.
The first order of business: iTunes offers to make a backup of your
iPhone (all of its phone settings, text messages, and so on) before
proceeding. Accepting this invitation is an excellent idea. Click Back
Up.
If you backed up to iCloud: You can restore your phone this way only
if your iPhone is completely wiped empty. If it’s not, then manually
erase it using iTunes first.
During the setup screens described in “Upgrading to iOS 11”, tap
Restore from iCloud Backup. You’re shown the three most recent
backups; tap the one you want. The phone goes right to work
downloading your settings and account information. Then it restarts and
begins to download your apps; if you’re in a hurry for a particular app,
tap its icon to make iCloud prioritize it.
When that’s all over, you can get to work downloading your music (if
you’re an Apple Music subscriber).

iPhone Doesn’t Turn On
Usually, the problem is that the battery’s dead. Just plugging it into the USB
charger or your computer doesn’t bring it to life immediately, either; a
completely dead iPhone doesn’t wake up until it’s been charging for about 10
minutes. It pops on automatically when it has enough juice to do so.
Recovery Mode
Phones, like the best of us, sometimes get confused.
In a few weird situations, the iPhone gets so baffled that you can’t even start it
up. For example:
The startup process gets stuck forever at the Apple logo.
The “Connect to iTunes” screen appears, even when the phone is
connected.
You’ve connected to iTunes on your computer, but the phone doesn’t
show up, or it says it’s in “recovery mode.”
The solution is the drastic, but effective, force-restore process (known to techies
as the Default Firmware Update mode).
Open iTunes on your computer. Connect the iPhone with its white USB cable.
Now force-restart the phone as described earlier:
iPhone 8 or X: Click the volume-up key, then the volume-down key; now hold
in the side button.
iPhone 7: Hold in the side button and the volume-down key simultaneously.
Earlier models: Hold down the home button and the side button.
In each case, keep the key(s) pressed until iTunes tells you that an iPhone in
Recovery mode has been detected; click OK. (If you see anything but blackness
on your iPhone’s screen—an Apple logo, for example—then the process didn’t
work. If the problem has not, in fact, gone away, then you should start again.)
iTunes tells you that “There is a problem with the iPhone that requires it to be

updated or restored.”
By far your favorite choice should be Update, because that means you won’t
lose any of your phone’s data. iTunes will simply download and install a fresh
copy of iOS 11. (If the download takes longer than 15 minutes, the iPhone exits
recovery mode. Just wait until the download is finished, and then start this
process again.)
If the Update process doesn’t work, you have no choice but the bad one: Restore.
That’s where you wipe out the iPhone’s contents and restore everything on it
from a backup. (Of course you have a backup, right?)
Battery Life Is Terrible
If your battery seems to drain faster after you’ve installed iOS 11, it might be
because the Photos app is busy scanning and categorizing all your photos so that
it can use its object and facial recognition.
Or maybe it’s just you using the phone more, checking out the cool new
features.
If neither of those is the problem, then consult the battery-saving tips in “Battery
Life Tips”.
Out of Space
It happens all the time. You couldn’t imagine filling up 64, 128, or 256 gigabytes
of storage, so you saved some money by buying an iPhone with less. And now
you can’t even take a video or a photo, because your phone reports that it’s full.
You’re frozen out until you have the time and expertise to delete some less
important stuff.
Fortunately, iOS 11 is teeming with features designed to ease up the storage
crunches so many people face. Some are automatic: The new HEIF and HEVC
formats, for example, mean new photos and videos occupy only half as much
space as the old ones (see ???).
The iPhone Storage Screen

But really, the Grand Central of storage management is in Settings → General
→ Phone Storage.
Here’s a master graph that clearly shows what’s eating up your space. This
screen also lists every kind of file by category (apps, photos, mail, and so on)
and how much space it’s eating up. That should make it easy to delete the fattest
ones to make the most room with the least effort.
The biggest space hogs on your phone are video files, photo files, apps, and
music files. Heck, deleting just one downloaded movie or TV show could solve
your storage crunch instantly.
Better yet, this screen actually suggests ways to free up space, like deleting
messages that are older than a year; looking over and maybe deleting big email
attachments; or storing your messages on iCloud.

Offload Unused Apps
One of those suggestions is to Offload Unused Apps. It makes the iPhone delete
the apps you haven’t used in a while, but preserve their icons (dimmed) on your
Home screens; just tap an app if you ever want to download it again.
This option has its own master switch in Settings → iTunes and App Stores →
Offload Unused Apps. You can also hit the Offload App button for individual
apps in the master list at Settings → General → Phone Storage.
Offload Full-Resolution Photos
Also, for goodness’ sake, don’t miss Optimize iPhone Storage (“Geotagging”).
It transfers your full-resolution original photos to iCloud—but leaves much
smaller versions on your phone that are just right for viewing on its little screen.
Offload Music
Deep in Settings → Music, another Optimize Storage switch appears. Turn it on
to automatically remove music from your iPhone that you haven’t played in a
while, freeing up precious gigabytes.
Warranty and Repair
The iPhone comes with a one-year warranty and 90 days of phone tech support.
If you buy an AppleCare+ contract ($200 for the iPhone X, $130 for other
models), then you’re covered for a second year.
TIP
AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, or Verizon tech support is free for both years of your contract. They handle
questions about your iPhone’s phone features.
If, during the coverage period, anything goes wrong that’s not your fault, Apple
will fix it for free. In fact, AppleCare+ covers damage even if it is your fault—if
you drop the phone or something—at a rate of $29 for screen damage and $100
for other damage, plus tax. Maximum: twice.

If you don’t have AppleCare+, the repair fee depends on the type of phone you
have but will probably set you back around $300.
You can either take the phone to an Apple Store, usually the fastest route, or call
800-APL-CARE (800-275-2273) to arrange shipping back to Apple. In general,
you’ll get the fixed phone back in three business days.
NOTE
Back up the phone before it goes in for repair. Apple very often just hands you a new (or refurbished)
iPhone instead of your original.
Also, don’t forget to remove your SIM card (“Sensors”) before you send in your broken iPhone—and to
put it back in when you get the phone. Don’t leave it in the loaner phone. The carrier can get you a new
card if you lose your original, but it’s a hassle.
Out-of-Warranty Repairs
Once the year or two has gone by, or if you damage your iPhone in a way that’s
not covered by the warranty (backing your car over it comes to mind), Apple
charges from $270 to $550 to repair an iPhone, depending on the model. (Apple
usually just replaces it.)
The Battery Replacement Program
Why did Apple seal the battery inside the iPhone, anyway? Everyone knows
lithium-ion batteries don’t last forever. After 300 or 400 charges, the iPhone’s
battery begins to hold less charge (perhaps 80 percent of the original). After a
certain point, the phone will need a new battery. How come you can’t change it
yourself?
Apple’s answer: A user-replaceable battery takes up a lot more space inside the
phone. It requires a plastic compartment that shields the guts of the phone from
you and your fingers; it requires a removable door; and it needs springs or clips
to hold the battery in place.
In any case, you can’t change the battery yourself. If you have AppleCare+,
though, a battery replacement is free. If the phone is out of warranty, you must
send it to Apple (or take it to an Apple Store) for an $80 battery-replacement job.

(As an eco-bonus, Apple properly disposes of the old batteries, which consumers
might not do on their own.)
What to Do About a Cracked Screen
Keeping your iPhone in a case may lower the chances of your dropping it or
scratching it—but it can’t prevent bad luck. An incredible number of iPhone
screens meet an untimely end, even with cases on.
Apple will happily replace your phone’s screen for $130 to $280, depending on
the model. It’ll do it the same day if you take the phone into an Apple Store, or
you can mail it in and get a replacement in three to five days. (If you’ve bought
AppleCare+, then a replacement screen is a flat $29.)
There are plenty of other companies that can repair a cracked screen, though.
The reps from iCracked.com, for example, send a technician to you and perform
the fix on the spot.
And then there’s the do-it-yourself technique. You can buy a screen-replacement
kit for about $60 online, complete with the special tools you need to open the
iPhone and do the job yourself. It requires care, patience, and some dexterity
(Google can help you find the step-by-steps), but it’s a good option if you’re
technically savvy.
Where to Go from Here
At this point, the iPhone is such a phenomenon that there’s no shortage of
resources for getting more help, news, and tips. Here are a few examples:
Apple’s official iPhone User Guide. Yes, there is an actual
downloadable PDF user’s manual for iOS 11. help.apple.com/iphone/11
Apple’s official iPhone help website. Online tips, tricks, and tutorials;
troubleshooting topics; downloadable PDF help documents; and, above
all, an enormous, seething treasure trove of discussion boards.
www.apple.com/support/iphone
Apple’s service site. All the dates, prices, and expectations for getting

your iPhone repaired. Includes details on getting a temporary
replacement unit. www.apple.com/support/iphone/service/faq
iMore blog. News, tips, tricks, all in a blog format. www.imore.com
iLounge. Another great blog-format site. Available in an iPhone format
so you can read it right on the device. www.iLounge.com
MacRumors/iPhone. Blog-format news, accessory blurbs, help
discussions; iPhone wallpaper. www.macrumors.com/iphone

Index
1xRTT networks 451
3D city tours 415
3D Touch 37–40
Force Touch keyboard 97–98
peek and pop features 39–40
quick actions 37–38
3G networks 25, 452
4G networks 25, 452
4K video 297
30-pin connector 33
32-bit apps 357
A
abbreviation expanders 90–91
AC adapter 34
accented characters 89–90
accessibility 215–243
adding shortcuts to Control Center 54
and Face ID 230
AssistiveTouch 231–233
audio typing feedback 227
dictation 98–104

double-tap timing 220
filters for color blindness 225–226
grayscale screen 226
Guided Access (kiosk mode) 239–240
hearing assistance 236–238
increasing screen contrast 229
increasing text size 228
inverting colors 225
Irlen syndrome 226
LED flash for alerts 237
Magnifier 223–224
monaural mode 237
Reduce Motion feature 230
Rotor 218–219
routing calls to speakerphone 236
Screen Curtain 217
shortcut to features 242–243
Sticky Keys 235–236
subtitles 238
switch control 230–231
touch accommodations 233–234
TTY 237
typing in Braille 217–218
typing options 219
using phone with hearing aids 236
video descriptions for the blind 238

VoiceOver 216–220
word highlights for dyslexia 227
zooming the screen 220–223
accessories
AC adapter 34
Bluetooth 153–155
car systems 155
charging pads 41–42
earpieces 154–155
EarPods 34
fitness bands 155
headphones 31–32
Lightning connector 33
smartwatches 155
Activation Lock 538–539
Add Call. See conference calling
address book. See Contacts app
address/search bar 461–462, 465–470
Quick Website Search 470
typing web addresses 465–466
advertising 587
cookies 484
location privacy 586
pop-up blocker 483
removing from web articles 482–483

turning off in-app review requests 588
Airbnb 206
AirDrop 364–366
between a phone and a Mac 561–562
defined 364
restricting senders 365–366
step by step 365
turning off 366
airplane mode 45, 456–457
controlling by voice 162
controlling from Control Center 456
vs. Do Not Disturb 138
with Wi-Fi and Bluetooth on 567
AirPlay 273–274
peer-to-peer AirPlay 273–274
switching among speakers 263
AirPods 32
AirPrint 362–363
Printopia app 362
alarm clock 380–382
adding alarms to Control Center 55
alarm labels 381
choosing a song 382
controlling by voice 163
deleting or editing alarms 382
status bar icon 25

turning off the alarm 382
alphabetizing
app icons on the Home screen 350
contacts 592
notes 594–595
Amazon
buying with a fingerprint 63
Kindle app 394
Kindle book reader 355
searching within 470
use of cookies 484
Android phones
texting animations to 201
transferring data from 617
animations
Animoji 207–208
dynamic wallpapers 580
in Messages 200–201, 210
in Weather app 446
Live Photo effects 309–310
parallax motion 230
Animoji 207–208
creating videos 208
turning into photos 207
using as stickers 207

answering calls. See Phone app antennas 33–34
AOL
mail accounts 487–488
syncing with Notes app 430
App Analytics 618
Apple ID 345
creating for a child under 13 550–551
forgotten 588
in the App Store 347
setting up 617
signing out 588
viewing account information 588
Apple Music 247–249
Beats 1 radio 248
Connect service 248
controlling by voice 171–172
free trial 248
iCloud Music Library 249
Apple Pay 542–549
Apple Pay Cash 546–549
fingerprint access 63–64
participating retailers 542–543
security of 545–546
settings 589
setting up 543–544
shopping with 544–546

using online 546
with an iPhone X 544–545
Apple TV
4K video 297
adding remote to Control Center 55
and AirPlay 273–274
Apple Watch
app 446
Create Watch Face command 328
apps 343–366. See also App Store Airbnb 206
App Analytics 618
App Store settings 588–589
augmented reality 356–357
automatic updates 353–354, 588–589
available in Messages 204–210
Back button 360–362
Background App Refresh 575
bypassing the app switcher (X only) 361–362
Calculator 367–369
Calendar 369–379
Camera 275–300
Circle Pay 206
Clock 379–385
Compass 385–387
defined 343

deleting 350
Doodle 206
downloading 346–347
ebook readers 394
Fandango 206
Files 387–391
finding and downloading 345–347
finding settings 353
Find My Friends 448
Find My iPhone 536–539
Flight Update Pro 355
folders 350–353
folder-syncing services 388–389
force quitting 359
free Apple apps 354, 448
free re-downloading 540–541
Google Maps 354
Hair Color by ModiFace 356
Health 391–393
Home 393
iBooks 394–404
Ikea Place 356
iMovie 448
in-app purchases 621
Instagram 355
iTranslate 206

iTunes Store 265–268
iTunes U 448
Kayak 206
keyboards 92–93
location-tracking controls 585–586
Mail 487–514
MailShot 167
manual updates 353
Messages 185–214
Music 247–264
News 417–418
no longer working in iOS 357
Nook 394
Notes 419–430
Numbers 448
offloading 589, 631
opening with Siri 161–162
OpenTable 206
organizing 348–350
Pandora 260
parental controls 621
photo editors 310–311
Photos 301–342
Podcasts 431–433
Porsche AR 356

preferences settings 608
Printopia 362
QuickTime Player 274
re-downloading 357, 517
Reflector 274
Reminders 433–438
ringtone customizers 148
running in the background 359–360
Safari 461–486
Settings 565–608
stargazing tools 356
Stocks 438–441
switching among 20
texting 206–210
third-party calendars 378
Tips 441
troubleshooting 626
turning off automatic updates 45
turning off requests for reviews 588
updates 353–354
using Siri to find and buy 162
Venmo 206
virtual tape measures 356
Voice Memos 441–444
Wallet 444–446
Watch 446

Waze 355
Weather 446–448
Yelp 206
App Store 343–348. See also apps and Apple ID 345
App Details page 345–347
Apple starter apps 354
auto backups 348
defined 343
finding good apps 354–357
in-app purchases 621
in Messages app 206–210
re-downloading apps 357
searching 345
settings 588–589
Today tab 344
Updates tab 345
app switcher 20, 358–359
accessing without the home button 233
Back button 360–362
background apps 359–360
bypassing (iPhone X) 361–362
finding (iPhone X) 358
force-quitting an app 359, 626
Handoff icon 561
peeking at 359

arrow notation 4
aspect ratio 306
AssistiveTouch 231–233
AT&T
4G network 452
data network speeds 451
EDGE network 451
GSM network 29
LTE network 452
using the iPhone overseas 30
attachments
folder 491
opening in Mail 503–504
photos or videos 511
removing from phone 574
saving graphics and pictures 504
searching in Mail 507
viewing in Messages 194
.zip files 504
audiobooks. See also iBooks app in CarPlay 573
managing in iCloud 540–541
managing in iTunes 525
audio texting 197–198
deleting messages 198
augmented reality 356–357
apps 386–387

ARKit 356
sampling of AR apps 356–357
Auto-Brightness 43, 226
auto-capitalization 575
autocorrect
abbreviation expanders 90–91
make it stop replacing certain words 91
resetting suggestions 577
turning off 575
AutoFill
passwords and credit card numbers 476–479
settings 601
automatic app updates 354
autoplay
in App Store 588
B
Back button
gesture 36, 256
in apps 360–362
in Safari 462–463
background apps 359–360
Backspace key 82–83
backups 529–530
automatic app backups 348

deleting 530
Encrypted iPhone Backup 529
iCloud Drive 387–388
preventing a backup 520
restoring data 529–530
via iCloud 539
Baidu 600
banners
temporary vs. persistent 73–74
battery
background activity 47
battery usage screen 46–47
brightness settings 578–580
charging 40–42
charging pads 41–42
extending life 42–47
Low Power mode 42–43
Low Signal warning 46
replacement program 632
settings 584–585
status bar icon 26
turning off automatic app updates 45
using airplane mode 45
using Bluetooth LE 155
Bcc
Always Bcc Myself option 592

defined 509
Beats 1 radio 248
bedtime controls 382–384
Bing
searching by voice 173
setting as default search engine 600
black-and-white photos 303–304
blindness
and Face ID 584
audio movie descriptions 238
Braille keyboard 217–218
VoiceOver 216–220
blocking calls and texts 596
Bluetooth 153–155
4.0 and 5.0 155
accessories 153–155
address 572
AirDrop 364–366
Bluetooth LE 155
car systems 155
connecting a physical keyboard 96
Control Center icon 50
controlling by voice 162
earpieces 154–155
headphones 262–263

icon 26
keyboards 96
pairing 262–263
settings 568–569
setting up a Personal Hotspot with 459
speakers 154–155, 261–263
status bar icon 26
turning off to save power 45
using with Do Not Disturb While Driving 141
watches and bands 155
boarding passes 445–446
bookmarks 470–473
creating 471–472
defined 470
editing 472–473
favorites icons 466–467
folders 472
iCloud syncing 535
in iBooks 400
in Maps 410
syncing via iTunes 527–528
Box 388–389
Braille keyboard 217–218
brightness controls 578–580
adjusting by voice 162
in Control Center 52–53

in iBooks 399
in Maps 413
burst mode 287–288
buttons. See also icons home button 19–22
side button 15–18
silencer switch 23
volume keys 23
C
Calculator app 367–369
memory function 368
scientific calculator 368
Calendar app 369–379
alerts 374–375
alert time defaults 594
alternatives to 378
color-coded categories 376–378
controlling by voice 167–168
Day view 369
editing and deleting events 375–376
Facebook integration 377
iCloud syncing 535
invitations 374, 378–379
landscape view 370–371
limiting past events 594

location suggestions 594
making an appointment 371–376
Month view 369
notes 375
quick actions 38
repeating events 373
searching appointments 378
setting default category 594
settings 593–594
sharing calendars in Family Sharing 554
showing week numbers 593
special views in the Plus iPhones 371
starting a week on any day 594
subscribing to online calendars 371
time zones 593
travel time settings 373–374
Up Next widget 76
Year view 370
caller ID 148
ability to make a guess 135
FaceTime settings 598
hiding yours 596
calling. See also Phone app announcing names of callers 596
Blocked list 212
calling plans 612
dumping calls to voicemail 16

from a Mac 556–557
Internet calls via FaceTime 152–153
noise cancellation 237–238
overseas call settings 596
routing calls to speakerphone 236
switching from email to a call 513–514
call waiting 146–147
in FaceTime 153
turning off before an important call 147
camcorder. See video camera camera 28. See also Camera app, video camera
features overview 275
iPhone 8 and 8 Plus 5
LED flash 28, 280–281
optical zoom 283–284
screen flash 281–282
TrueDepth 7–8, 64–65
Camera app 275–300. See also camera, Photos app, video camera burst mode
287–288
exposure 279–280
exposure lock 280
face detection 278
flash 280–281
focus lock 280
front camera 288, 298
geotagging photos 338–339
high dynamic range feature 285–286

Live Photos 290–292
locking the video lens 607
macro mode 279
Memories feature on/off 606
opening 276
optical zoom 283–284
overview 275–277
overview of modes 276–277
panoramas 294–296
portrait mode 292–294
quick access to 53
quick actions 37
reviewing a photo 286–287
Rule of Thirds grid 284–285
screen captures 340–342
self-timer 288–289
settings 606–607
sharing and using photos 322–329
Slo-Mo mode 298–299
Square mode 294
still photos 277–290
taking the shot 286–287
Time-Lapse mode 299–300
True Tone flash 281
using with Siri 162
Video mode 296–298

volume-key shutter 286
white balance 278–279
yellow box 277–279
zooming 282–283
Camera Roll. See also Photos app saving to 331
vs. All Photos 337
capitalization
Caps Lock 82, 575
keyboard shortcuts 89
when dictating 103–104
carpenter’s level 387
in Rule of Thirds grid 285
carriers
calling plans compared 612
cars
car-based reminders 437
CarPlay technology 573
parked car finder 414–415
traffic reports 415
Cc
defined 509
viewing names 506
CDMA networks
antennas 34
calling features on 144–146

defined 29
SIM cards 29–30
switching to GSM while roaming 569
cellular data
cellular data icon 50
cellular triangulation 406
networks 25
signal status bar icon 24
turning off to save power 45
cellular networks 451–453
1xRTT network 451
3G 452
4G LTE 452
CDMA vs. GSM 29–30
EDGE network 451
HSPA+ 452
managing data 569–571
settings 569–571
Wi-Fi Assist 571
character preview 576
charging 40–42. See also battery charging pads 41–42
Qi pad 41–42
with AC adapter 40
with iPad adapter 41
with Lightning connector 33
with USB cable 40

checklists 422
children
Family Sharing 549–554
Guided Access mode 239–240
making Do Not Disturb While Driving mandatory 142–143
parental controls 619–622
word highlights for beginning readers 227
Circle Pay 206
Cisco Spark 114
Clipboard
copy between Mac and phone 563–564
Cut, Copy, and Paste 106
Clock app 379–385
alarm clock 380–382
auto-time zone on/off 586
Bedtime feature 382–384
controlling by voice 164
opening the timer 54
quick actions 37
settings 575
stopwatch 384–385
timer 385
world clock 379–380
colors
choosing a text markup color 208–209

color blindness accommodations 225–226
grayscale screen 226
inverting 225
legibility filters in Magnifier 224
of iBooks highlights 400
photo editing 303–305
photo filters 289–290
photo markup 307
Reduce White Point 226
screen washes for Irlen syndrome 226
Smart Invert feature 225
Compass app 385–387
level 387
orienting a map 407
settings 600
true north vs. magnetic north 386
conference calling 144–146
GSM vs. CDMA phones 144
merging calls 145–146
swapping calls 145
Contacts app 119–129
adding contacts from email 503
adding custom fields 126–127
adding photos 123–124
adding photos from Facebook 124–125
adding someone quickly 128

assigning relationships 123
blocking calls and texts 212, 596
controlling by voice 164–165
custom field labels 122
defined 119
deleting someone 128
designating VIPs 495–497
editing contacts 121–129, 128
Facebook groups 121
favorites 114–117
groups 120–121
iCloud syncing 535
import contacts from SIM card 593
importing from Twitter 125
linking names 127–128
My Info 592
navigating list of contacts 119–120
settings 592–600
sharing contacts 128–129
sort order 592
using to address email 508–509
vibration patterns 125–126
Continuity 555–564
AirDrop 561–562
calling from a Mac 556–557

Instant Hotspot feature 559–560
setting up 555–556
texting from a Mac 557–559
universal Clipboard 563–564
contrast 229
adjusting in photos 303
Invert Colors 225
Reduce White Point 226
Control Center 49–58
accessibility shortcuts 54
airplane mode 50, 456–457
alarm clock 55
Apple TV remote 55
Bluetooth 50
calculator 54
camera 53
cellular data 50
closing 58
customizing 54–57
disabling 58
doesn’t open on first try 58
Do Not Disturb 52
Do Not Disturb While Driving 55
gestures to open 36
Guided Access 55
LED flashlight 53

Low Power Mode 56
magnifier 56
music information 51
notes 56–57
rotation lock 52
screen brightness 52
screen recording 57
stopwatch 54
text size 57
timer 54
voice memos 57
volume 53
Wallet 57
Wi-Fi 50, 456
cookies 484
copying 104–107
from one email to another 510–511
photos 327
text messages 194–195
universal Clipboard 563–564
without formatting 106
Creative Cloud 388–389
credit cards
and Apple Pay 542–549
filling in info automatically 476–479

sharing in Family Sharing 549–554
storing in Keychain 535–536
using the camera to enter 478–479
cropping photos 305–307
D
dark theme 225
data speeds 25
date 575
deafness. See hearing assistance deleting
all content and settings 577
apps 350
audio messages 598
AutoFill information in Safari 601
calendar events 375–376
cities in Weather app 447
contacts 128
email 502
family member from Family Sharing 552
favorites from Contacts 117
files in Files app 389
Home screen folders 353
mailboxes 489
phone backup file 530
photo albums 318

photos and videos 317, 321
photos from iCloud Photo Stream 336
photos from Photo Stream 331
recent calls 119
reminders 436
Safari bookmarks 472
Safari favorites icons 466
Safari history 475
saved attachments 574
saved Safari passwords 478
stocks from portfolio 440
text messages 191–192
tickets from Wallet 445
TV app data 605
VIPs 496
voicemail messages 132
voice memos 443
diacritical marks 89–90
dialing 113–114
by voice 163
keypad 129–130
touchtones 143–144
dictation 98–104
capitalization 103–104
limitations of 98
punctuation 100–103

dictionary
definitions 107
iBooks 400
Internet searches 107–108
languages 576
resetting 88
resetting autocorrect suggestions 577
spelling 87–88
using Google as 470
Digital Touch 208–210
doodling 209–210
drawing on a photo or video 209–210
sending lips, hearts… 210
dimming the screen 43, 578–580
shortcut 241–242
directions 411–412
voice control 168–169
disabilities. See accessibility Dock 48
documents. See also Files app scanning in Notes app 422–424
syncing with iCloud Drive 387–388
Do Not Disturb 138–140
allowing special callers through 139–140
controlling by voice 162
defined 138
driving version 140–143

Emergency Bypass option 125
repeated calls 140
Silence option 139
status bar icon 25
turning on or off 138–139
Do Not Disturb While Driving 140–143
adding to Control Center 55
automatic setting 141
making it mandatory 142–143
text auto-replies 142
turning on 141–142
Doodle 206
double-tapping 35
downloads
automatic app updates 588
blocking 621
downloading apps 346–347
email attachments 503–504
hard-pressing to pause download 347
in iCloud 540–541
in iTunes 266–267
in the TV app 268–274
iOS 11 613
iOS user’s manual 633
music 249–250
over cellular network 266

turning off automatic 45
dragging
gesture 36
Home screen icons 348–350
multiple icons at once 349
drawing. See also emoji Chinese or Japanese characters 94–95
Digital Touch tools in Messages 208–210
in Mail app 512
on notes 425–426
on PDFs 486
on photos 307–308
on screenshots 340
whiteboard in Messages 199–200
Dropbox 388–389
DuckDuckGo 470
Dynamic Type 228
dynamic wallpaper 580
dyslexia 227
E
earbuds
answering calls with 135
balance slider 238
dumping calls to voicemail 137
EarPods 34

limiting volume 264
playback controls 251, 254
triggering Siri 159
turning on mono audio 237
using volume clicker as camera shutter 286
ebooks. See also iBooks app managing in iTunes 525
EDGE network 25, 451
editing
app and website passwords 589
calendar events 375–376
Contacts 121–129
Home screen 348–350
iTunes Store icons 268
Live Photos 308–310
Memories 314–315
Music app Up Next list 258
photos 301–311
playlists 256–257
ringtones 148–149
Safari bookmarks 472
Safari Favorites page 466–467
Safari passwords 478
screenshots 340
Slo-Mo video 299
typed text 83–84
video 300

voice recordings 443–444
email. See also Mail app free account with iCloud 539–540
syncing with Notes app 430
turning off push data 44
emoji
Animoji 207–208
Emoji Suffix feature 217
in QuickType suggestions 86
jumbo 199
keyboard 95–96
Encrypted iPhone Backup 529–530
ePub files 395–396
EQ (equalization) 263
erasing the phone 577
Express Settings 617–618
F
Facebook
alert sounds 582
calendar integration 377
Contacts groups 121
importing names and photos from 124–125
posting photos to 325–326
Face ID 6–7, 64–66
for app purchases 347

preventing screen dimming 584
reliability 64
settings 230
training 65–66
TrueDepth sensors 7–8, 64–65
using 66
FaceTime 149–153
audio-only FaceTime calls 152–153
call waiting 153
capturing a screenshot 152
ending a call 152
muting audio or video 152
on/off switch 598
rotating the screen 152
settings 598
switching to 146
switching to back camera 151–152
taking photos from 598
video calls 149–152
facial recognition
Face ID 6–7, 64–66
in Photos app 315–316
Family Sharing 549–554
appointments, photos, and reminders 554
approving purchases 552–553
defined 549–550

hiding your purchases 553
locating family members 553–554
removing someone 552
setting up 550–552
using 552–554
Fandango 206
favorites
deleting in Contacts 117
Favorites folders in Files app 390–392
in Contacts 114–117
in Maps app 408
in Messages app drawer 205
in Photos app 315
on Today screen 77
rearranging in Contacts 116
web bookmarks 466–467
Files app 387–391
Favorites folders 390–392
iCloud Drive 387–388
tagging files 390
working with files 389–390
working with third-party apps 389–390
file sharing
via iTunes 527–528
filters

for color blindness 225–226
in Camera 289–290
in Magnifier 224
in Mail 494
in Messages 213
in Photos 304
Find My Friends 354, 448
controlling by voice 173
using with Family Sharing 553–554
Find My iPhone 536–539
Activation Lock 538–539
defined 536
displaying a message 537–538
Lost Mode 537–538
remote wipe 538
Send Last Location 538
tracking the phone 538
fingerprint security. See Touch ID
flagged email messages 497–498
flash 28, 280–281
as video light 298
for rings and notifications 237
LED flash 281
screen flash 281–282
flashlight 28
and the Magnifier 223

turning on quickly 53
Flash plug-in 461
flicking 36
Flickr
and geotagging 339
posting photos to 325–326
Flight Update Pro 355
folders
Attachments 491
creating and editing 350–353
deleting 353
in Files app 390–391
moving 352
renaming 352
fonts
bigger or bolder text 228–229
formatting in Notes app 421–422
increasing type size 579
in iBooks 399
in Reader view 483
subtitles 238
force-quitting apps 359
force-restarting the phone 626
forwarding
calls 147–148

emails 501
text messages 192
front camera 288
flash for 281–282
taking video 298
G
Game Center
parental controls 622
settings 608
geotagging 338–339
defined 338
Places folder 316
gestures
backspace in Calculator 368
basics 34–37
bypassing the app switcher (iPhone X) 361–362
customizing in Mail 499
double-tapping 35
dragging 36
flicking 36
force-pressing 37–40
hard-pressing 97–98
in AssistiveTouch mode 233
in Mail app 499–500

in Maps 405, 415
in VoiceOver 216–217
iPhone X 6–7, 17
magnify sections of a web page 463
peek and pop 39–40
pinching and spreading 35–36
punctuation with one gesture 88–89
quick actions 37–38
rightward swipe 491
scroll up or down in Safari 464
selecting text in Safari 105
split tap 216
swipe to go back 567
swiping 35
swiping from left edge 256
swiping in from the edge 36–37
tapping 34
triggering app switcher (iPhone X) 358
working with photos 312–313, 318–319
zooming 221
getting online. See Internet GIFs 210
in Messages 210
turning Live Photos into 291
Gmail
setting up account 487–488
Syncing with Notes app 430

Google
Google Maps 404
Google Voice 147
search 468
searching by voice 173
Google Drive 388–389
Google Maps 354
GPS 406
alternatives to 406–407
geotagging 338–339
location-based reminders 437
Maps app navigation 412–413
status bar icon 26
turning off to save power 44
graphics
fetched images in email 591
opening in Mail 503–504
saving in Safari 476
sharing via Mail 504
groups
in Contacts 120–121
in Do Not Disturb 140
in Mail 509
in Messages 212
MailShot app 167

GSM networks
calling features 144–146
defined 29
importing contacts on 593
SIM cards 29–30
switching to while roaming 569
Guided Access (kiosk mode) 239–240
adding to Control Center 55
H
Hair Color app 356
Handoff 560–561
compatible programs 560
settings 573
setting up 561
haptics
defined 583
settings 583
hard-pressing. See also 3D Touch for playlist options 253
in Calendar app 369
notifications 70
pausing app downloads 347
renaming folders 352
Safari links 475
Settings icon 567

to answer texts 189
to play Live Photos on Lock screen 580
to preview email messages 498
to select text 97–98
to send text animations 200
to view icon options 37–38
to view text drawing colors 209
vs. long-pressing 38
HDR 285–286
Auto HDR 286
headphones 261–263
headphone jack 31–32
limiting volume 264
Health app 391–393
and Fitbit 391
fitness device compatibility 391
medical ID information 393
setting up 392
hearing assistance 236–238
adjusting stereo mix 238
hearing aid compatibility 238
LED flash for alerts 237
mono audio 237
noise cancellation 237–238
subtitles 238
TTY 237

using phone with hearing aids 236
“Hey Siri” feature 160
and battery life 42
hiding
Apple Music tabs 247
Caller ID on outgoing calls 596
dialing keypad 144
email header details 506
Facebook friends from Contacts 125
mailbox folders 492
microphone button 576
notes 426–428
photos from collections 318
purchased apps in App Store 357
purchases from Family Sharing 553
Quick Type typing suggestions 87
sharing options 363
texts from Lock screen 214
unwanted Apple apps 350
highlighting. See also selecting in iBooks 400–401
History list 475
clearing 475, 602–603
Home app 393
home button 19–22
accessibility 22, 242–243

activating Siri 20
adjusting click feel 573
app switcher 20
defined 19
double-click speed 234
on iPhone X 6–7
Reachability feature 21–22
triple-press 223–224, 241–242, 242–243
waking the phone 19–20
HomeKit 393
Home screens 47–49
adding widgets 78
alphabetizing app icons 350
background 49
badges 47
Dock 48
folders 350–353
icons 47
navigating 47–48
organizing your downloads 348–350
quick actions 37–38
Reduce Motion feature 230
resetting layout 577
restoring 350
Home Sharing
playing music from your computer 264

settings 604
hotspots. See Wi-Fi HTML5 603
hyperlapse video 299–300
I
iBackup Viewer 195
iBooks app 394–404
adding bookmarks 400
adjusting screen brightness 399
alternatives to 394
changing page appearance 399
creating collections 397
creating photo “ebooks” 326
defined 394
dictionary 400
downloading books 394–395
downloading cover art 396
ePub files 395–396
finding free books 396
free re-downloading 540–541
highlighting 400
making notes 401
Online Content 404
organizing your library 397
PDF files 395–396

reading books 398–400
saving web articles to 486
searching in the app 399
searching with Siri 175
settings 403–404
syncing bookmarks and collections 404
type size 399
using as audiobook reader 402–403
using scrolling view 399
viewing table of contents 399
iCloud 531–542. See also iCloud Drive, iCloud Keychain, iCloud Photo Library,
iCloud Photo Sharing automatic app updates 588
automatic backups 539
defined 531–533
email account 539–540
Find My iPhone 536–539
free music, video, apps storage 540–542
iCloud Music Library 249
restoring from a backup 628
sharing calendars 378
signing up 531
storage prices 541–542
syncing 534–536
syncing web tabs 481–482
syncing with Notes app 430
VIPs 497

iCloud Drive 387–388
and Files app 389–390
keeping document synced 387–388
rivals 388–389
iCloud Keychain 535–536
iCloud Photo Library 337–338
accessing your photos 338
iCloud Photo Sharing 332–336
creating an album 332–333
editing an album 336
receiving an album 335–336
settings 334
sharing albums publicly 334
subscriber posting 334
technical requirements 332
icons 47
adding outlines 229
Dock 48–49
dragging multiple icons at once 349
for Internet connections 453
hard-pressing for options 37–38
top strip of Home screen 24–28
Idle Visibility control 222
Ikea Place 356
IMAP email accounts 488–489
iMazing 195

iMessages. See also Messages app advantages 186–188
animations 200–201
audio texting 197–198
Blocked list 212
defined 186–188
ellipsis rules 187
finding chat transcripts on the Mac 195
on/off switch 211, 597
read receipts 211
settings 211–214
sharing contacts 128–129
tapbacks 195–196
vs. text messages 185–188
iMovie for iPhone 300
in-app purchases 621
Instagram 355
Square mode 294
Instant Hotspot 559–560
international calling 30
Internet
connection icons 453
EDGE network 451
iCloud 531–542
Instant Hotspot 559–560
parental controls 619–622

Safari settings 600–603
Safari web browser 461–486
searching by voice 173–174
speed 25
tethering 457–459
VoLTE 452–453
Wi-Fi 453–460
invisible ink 200
invitations
in Calendar 374
in Calendar app 378–379
to Family Sharing 552
to shared calendars 378
to shared photo albums 335–336
iOS 11. See also what’s new in iOS 11
battery issues 629–630
design 228–230
features overview 8–12
troubleshooting 625–633
updates 619
upgrading to 613
iPhone
accessories 34
antenna band 33–34
as phone 113–155
basic gestures 34–37

buying 611–612
calling plans 612
camera and flash 28
charging 40–42
complexity of 12
defined 1–2
erasing 577
Face ID 64–66
finding basic stats 522
finding your phone number 119
headphone jack 31–32
home button 19–22
information about 572
intro to 1–2
Lightning connector 33
Lock screen 17–18
microphone and speaker 32–33
passcodes 58–61
powering off 626
pricing 611
renaming 572
resetting 625–628
sales statistics 1
screen 24–28
sensors 29

serial number 572
settings 565–608
setup 613–619
SIM card slot 29–30
sleep mode 17
sources for news, tips, and tricks 633–634
status bar icons 24–28
troubleshooting 625–633
turning on and off 16
updates 619
upgrading to iOS 11 613
using overseas 30
volume controls 23
waking 19–20
warranty and repair 631–632
iPhone 5s
finding the side button 16
screen resolution 24
iPhone 6 and 6 Plus
display zoom options 579
price 611
screen resolution 24
special calendar views (Plus) 371
VoLTE 452–453
zoom style 618
iPhone 6s and 6s Plus

3D Touch 37–40, 97–98, 235
display zoom options 579
price 611
screen resolution 24
special calendar views (Plus) 371
iPhone 7 and 7 Plus
3D Touch 37–40, 97–98, 235
display zoom options 579
headphone jack 31–32
home button settings 573
Live Photos as wallpaper 580
Lock Camera option on the 7 Plus 607
optical zoom on the 7 Plus 283–284
Portrait mode on the 7 Plus 292–294
price 611
screen resolution 24
special calendar views (Plus) 371
VoLTE 452–453
zoom style 618
iPhone 8 and 8 Plus
3D Touch 37–40, 97–98, 235
camera 5
charging pads 41–42
display zoom options 579
Flyover and Flyover Tours 415–416

headphone jack 31–32
Lock Camera option on the 8 Plus 607
optical zoom on the 8 Plus 283–284
Portrait mode on the 8 Plus 292–294
price 611
screen resolution 24
special calendar views (Plus) 371
studio lighting effects on the 8 Plus 293
VoLTE 452–453
what’s new 4–5
zoom style 618
iPhone SE
finding the side button 16
price 611
screen resolution 24
iPhone X
3D Touch 37–40, 97–98, 235
accessibility shortcuts 22
button reassignments 17
bypassing the app switcher 361–362
charging pads 41–42
coping without a home button 6–7
Face ID 64–66
Face ID settings 230
Flyover and Flyover Tours 415–416
gestures 6–7

headphone jack 31–32
Lock Camera option 607
new gestures 19
opening the app switcher 20
opening the Control Center 36
opening the Notification Center 36
optical zoom 283–284
Portrait mode 292–294
Reachability feature not available 21
screen resolution 24
status bar and Notch 27–28
studio lighting effects 293–294
summoning Siri 20
tap to wake 235
TrueDepth sensors 7–8, 64–65
using Apple Pay 544–545
what’s new 5–8
zoom style 618
iPod features. See Music app, Videos app Irlen syndrome 226
iTranslate 206–207
iTunes. See also iTunes Match, iTunes Radio, iTunes Store, iTunes U, Music
app, syncing connecting to 518–521
creating smart playlists 524
Encrypted iPhone Backup 529
erasing the phone 627–628
file sharing 527–528

manual syncing 520–521
On My Device options 528
phone backups 529–530
playlists 254–258
re-downloading apps and ringtones 517
restoring from a backup 628
syncing bookmarks and settings 527–528
syncing the phone 517–530
tabs 521–528
turning off autosyncing 520
upgrading the iOS 613
iTunes Match 249
iTunes Radio 259–261
controlling with Siri 171
custom stations 260–261
defined 259
free stations 260
Siri voice commands 261
subscriber stations 260
iTunes Store 265–268
defined 265
editing icons 268
free re-downloading 540–541
More tab 267–268
Not on This iPhone 266–267

Purchased Items list 266–267
Redeem button 265
ringtones 267–268
searching 266
settings 588–589
syncing to Mac or PC 268
J
Java 461
JavaScript 603
K
Kayak 206
keyboard 81–96. See also typing alternatives to Apple’s 92–93
auto-capitalization 575
autocorrect 575
Backspace 82–83
Caps Lock 82, 575
connecting a physical keyboard 96
extra keys no longer available 93
Force Touch keyboard 97–98
installing the emoji keyboard 95–96
international 94–95
numbers layout 83
QuickType suggestions 85–87, 575

repeating keys 235
resetting dictionary 577
Return key 83
settings 575–576
Shift key 82
Slow Keys 235
smart punctuation 575
spelling checker on/off 575
Sticky Keys 235–236
switching among keyboards 93
typing shortcuts 576
Typing Style options 219
Keychain. See iCloud Keychain keypad 129–130
inputting touchtones 143–144
kiosk mode. See Guided Access (kiosk mode)
L
landscape view
in Calendar app 370–371
in slideshows 328
in Stocks app 440
removal of widescreen keyboard 93
language
dictation 98–104
for video subtitles 271

international keyboards 94–95
settings 576
Siri’s languages 158, 183
LED flash for alerts 237
letterbox bars 272
level 387
in Rule of Thirds grid 285
Lightning connector 33
light sensor 29, 43–44, 226
linked contacts 127–128
LinkedIn
posting with Siri 177
links
in email 500
link-tapping tricks 475
settings 602
useful options 466
Live Photos 290–292
defined 290
editing features 308–310
reviewing 291
sharing 291–292
taking 290
using as wallpaper 580
location 585–586
how the phone knows where it is 406–407

location-based reminders 437
resetting warnings 577
Share My Location feature 585
sharing in Messages 193–194
locking
auto-lock settings 579
iPhone 17
notes 426–428
Lock screen 17–18, 67–68
enabling features on 583–584
missed calls and texts 67
music playback 254
opening camera from 67
pull-down duplicate 69–70
security 74
showing notifications on 73–74
sleep settings 579
swiping up, down, left, or right 67–68
Lost Mode 537–538
loupe 83–84
Low Power mode 42–43
adding to Control Center 56
LTE networks 25, 452
disabling 569
Lyft 412

calling with Siri 177
M
macro mode 279
Macs
AirDrop 561–562
finding chat transcripts on 195
Handoff 560–561
Instant Hotspot 559–560
making calls from 556–557
projecting iPhone screen to 274
texting from 557–559
universal Clipboard 563–564
magic wand button 301
Magnifier 223–224
adding to Control Center 56
adding to photos 307
controls 223–224
legibility filters 224
opening 223
Mail app 487–514
adding a sketch 512
adding senders to Contacts 503
addressing email from Contacts 508–509
addressing groups 509

Always Bcc Myself 592
ask before deleting 591
attaching photos or videos 511–512
Cc and Bcc 509
collapsing messages 510–511
composing and sending messages 508–514
controlling by voice 166–167
deleting single messages 502
downloading messages 490–494
email filters 494
filing messages 499–500, 502–503
flagging messages 497–498
flag style 591
formatting text 512–513
forwarding messages 501
free accounts 487–488
gestures 499–500
hiding mailbox folders 492
Load Remote Images 591
mailbox folders 491–492
managing accounts 514
marking email as unread 506
message preview 514
moving between messages 506
number of lines to show in preview 590
opening attachments 503–504

POP 3 and IMAP accounts 488–489
push email settings 589–590
quick actions 38
quote level (indentation) 512–513
reading messages 500
replying to messages 500–501
reply notifications 501–502
saving graphics and pictures 504
searching messages 507–508
selecting batches of messages 502–503
selecting the sending account 510
setting default account 514, 592
settings 590–592
sharing attachments 504
showing the To/Cc label 514
signatures 513–514
subject line 510
swipe gesture options 591
switching to a phone call 513–514
threading 493–494, 591
To/Cc badges 590
unified inbox 491–492
unsubscribing to spam 505
using live links 500
viewing header details 506

VIP list 495–497
Maps app
3D city tours 415
cellular triangulation 406
checkered past 404
controlling by voice 168–169
defined 404–405
extensions 416
finding your parked car 414–415
getting directions 411–414
GPS 406
location cards 409–410
Maps Destinations widget 77
Navigation mode 412–413
Night mode 413
orienting yourself 407
pinning locations 409
quick actions 38
recent and favorite searches 408
searching maps 407–409
settings 599
traffic reports 415
transit features 411–412
Uber and Lyft 412
view options 406
Wi-Fi positioning 406

MeasureKit AR 356
medical ID 393
Memories 313–315
editing 314–315
merging calls 145–146
Messages app. See also iMessages, texting accessing the App Store 206–207
addressing and sending texts 196–201
animations 200–201, 210
Animoji 207–208
apps drawer 204–210
autodeleting audio texts 598
Blocked list 212
blue and green text bubbles 188
character count 212
deleting texts 191–192
Digital Touch feature 208–210
forwarding texts 192
GIFs 210
group messaging 212
hiding texts from Lock screen 214
highlighted words 199
iCloud syncing 535
iMessages on/off 597
invisible ink 200
list of conversations 191–192

marking texts as read 192
MMS on/off 597
muting a person 194
notification settings 213–214
photos and videos 202–204
preserving texts 195
quick actions 38
QuickType 85–87
read receipts on/off 597
receiving texts 188–191
recents 210
repeat alerts 214
respond to voicemails by text 137
saving incoming photos or videos 194–195
searching texts 191
sending low-quality photos 213
settings 211–214, 597–598
sharing photos and videos 324
sharing your location 193–194
showing subject line 212
SMS messages 186
switching to a phone call 192–193
tapbacks 195–196
texting from a Mac 557–559
texting music updates 207
text messages vs. iMessages 185–188

tips and tricks 190–191
tones for each person 126
viewing attachments 194
voice control 165–166
whiteboard 199–200
MFi hearing aids 236
microphones 32–33
hiding the keyboard microphone button 576
noise cancellation 237–238
second mike for noise canceling 31
Minuum keyboard 92
mirroring 273
missed calls 118
Missing Manuals 3–4
MMS messaging 212. See also Messages app mono audio 237
Move Data from Android 617
movies. See also videos Fandango 206
free re-downloading 540–541
from the iTunes Store 265–268
in the TV app 268–274
letterbox bars 272
projection with AirPlay 273–274
subtitles and captioning 238
trivia and showtimes from Siri 175
viewing library 524–525

multitasking
app switcher 20
Background App Refresh 575
getting online while on a call 136
music. See also Apple Music, Music app, ringtones creating smart playlists 524
fitting it on your phone 524
headphone jack 31–32
identifying songs 172
managing in iTunes 523–524
monaural mode 237
sending song updates by text 207
Music app 247–264. See also earbuds, headphones, iTunes Store, music,
speakers adding album art 251
Apple Music service 247–249
Beats 1 248
Browse tab 259
controlling by voice 171
controlling from earbuds 251
equalization 263
finding Shuffle, Repeat, and What’s Next 252
iTunes Match 249
iTunes Radio 259–261
Library tab 249–250
lyrics 253
options panel 252–253
playback control 250–254

playback while locked 254
playing music from your computer 264
playlists 254–258
scrubber 251
settings 603–604
song ratings 253
Sound Check 264
Up Next list 257–258
volume limit 264
muting
calls 143
in FaceTime 152
in Phone app 146
people in Messages 194
sound effects 218
VoiceOver 223
My Photo Stream 329–331
deleting photos from 331
iCloud syncing 534–535
on/off switch 534, 605
saving photos from deletion 331
turning on 330–331
N
navigation 412–413

networks
cellular 451–453
resetting settings 577
speeds 25
status bar icons 24–25
News app 417–418
For You tab 417
searching 417
settings 603
setting up 417
Spotlight 417
using offline 417–418
Night Shift 578–579
Night Sky 5 356
noise cancellation 31, 237–238
Nook app 394
Notes app 419–430
adding a sketch 425–426
adding notes to Control Center 56–57
adding photos and videos 424–425
adding tables 420–421
checklists 422
collaborating on notes 426
compatibility with email programs 430
compatibility with old version 419
controlling by voice 170

defined 419–420
document scanning 422–424
formatting text 421–422
iCloud syncing 535
locking notes 426–428
Lock screen security 56–57
organizing notes 428–430
quick actions 37
saving links to 486
searching notes 429
settings 594–595
syncing notes 430
viewing attachments 429–430
Notification Center. See also notifications gestures to open 36
settings 572
notifications 68–74
app icons 73
banner options 73–74
customizing 72–74
dismissing 71
hard-pressing 70
History list 73
opening 70–71
repeat alerts in Messages 214
responding to 70–71

Show Preview option 74
spoken 219
numbers layout 83
O
oleophobic screen 24
OneDrive 388–389
on/off switch 16
OpenTable 206, 410
optimizing iPhone storage 338
Outlook
setting up email account 487–488
P
pairing
Bluetooth settings 568–569
car systems 155
earpiece or speaker 154–155
fitness device 155
headphones or speakers 262–263
Mac 558–559
physical keyboard 96
panoramas 294–296
parental controls 619–622
blocking inappropriate material 621–622

blocking websites 621–622
Do Not Disturb While Driving 142–143
Game Center 622
Guided Access (kiosk mode) 239–240
in-app purchases 621
restricting apps 621
Safari 485
parked car finder 414–415
passcodes and passwords 58–61
Encrypted iPhone Backup 529
Erase Data option 60
Face ID 64–66
Face ID settings 583–584
forgotten Apple ID 588
for parental controls 620
Keychain 535–536
letting Safari create 483–484
passcode alternatives 616
saving in Safari 476–479
settings 583–584
setting up 59–63
Touch ID 61–64
Touch ID settings 583–584
TrueDepth sensors 64–65
two-factor authentication 622–624
payments. See Apple Pay PDFs

converting photos to 326
document scan to PDF 422–424
opening email attachments to iBooks 504
printing from the phone 362–363
reading in iBooks 395–396
zooming 400
peek and pop 39–40
link-tapping tricks 475
peer-to-peer AirPlay 273–274
Personal Hotspot 457–459
defined 457
fee for 457
turning on 457–458
using 459
via Bluetooth 459
via USB cable 459
via Wi-Fi 458–459
phishing 602
Phone app 113–119. See also Contacts app, phone features answering calls 134–
136
Blocked list 212
caller ID 148
call forwarding 147–148
call info screen 118–119
calling from Contacts list 119–120
calling from Recents list 117–119

calling while using Wi-Fi 136
call waiting 146–147
dialing with Siri 113
dumping calls to voicemail 136–137
FaceTime audio calls 152–153
FaceTime video calls 149–152
favorites 114–117
keypad 129–130
merging calls 145–146
putting someone on hold 146
quick actions 38
Remind Me Later option 137–138
Respond with Text option 137
silencing the ring 136
TTY calls 237
using earbuds 135
phone features
accessibility 215–243
caller ID 148
call forwarding 147–148
call waiting 146–147
conference calling 144–146
hiding your number on outgoing calls 596
merging calls 145–146
muting 143

noise cancellation 237–238
speakerphone 144
tracking call time and data usage 571
Visual Voicemail 130–134
phone number
transferring 612
where to find 119
photos. See also Photos app adding to notes 424–425
assigning to contacts 123–124
attaching in Mail 511–512
HEIF format 607
iCloud Photo Sharing 332–336
in FaceTime 598
in Messages app 202–204
sending low-quality in Messages 213
syncing to a computer 526–527
syncing to the phone 525–526
viewing full HDR (iPhone X) 606
Photos app 301–342. See also Camera app, My Photo Stream, photos adding
favorites 321–322
adding photos to Watch 328
adding received images to app 327
Albums tab 315–317
assigning photos to Contacts 327
auto-enhance button 301
black-and-white photos 303–304

color and light controls 301–304
controlling by voice 177
cropping and straightening 305–307
deleting photos 321
editing Live Photos 308–310
editing photos 301–311
excluding bursts from iCloud 605
facial recognition feature 315–316
favorites 315
filters 289–290, 304
Finger Browse gesture 313
flicking, rotating, zooming, panning 318–319
geotagging 338–339
hiding a photo 318
iCloud Photo Library 337–338
markup feature 307–308
Memories tab 313–315
moments, collections, years 311–313
My Photo Stream 329–331
organizing albums 317–318
organizing photos 311–322
Recently Deleted folder 317
red-eye removal 304–305
saving photos to iBooks 326
saving your edits 310–311
searching 319–321

searching with artificial intelligence 319
selecting photos 322
settings 605–606
sharing and using photos 322–329
sharing photos in Family Sharing 554
sizing photos for prints 306
slideshows 328
Studio Lighting effect 293
texting photos and videos 324
using third-party editing apps 310
wallpaper 329
pinching and spreading 35–36
in Maps 405
in Safari 463
PDFs 400
photos 318–319
to zoom video 297–298
Weather app 447
Pinterest
searching with Siri 177
playback controls 250–254
mini-player 250
Now Playing screen 251–252
previous/next 251
scrubber 251

switching among speakers 263
video 270–271
volume keys and silencer 23
playlists 254–258
creating on the phone 255–256
defined 254
editing or deleting 256–257
Up Next list 257–258
using 256–257
Podcasts app 431–433
controlling with Siri 175
in CarPlay 573
managing podcasts in iTunes 525
playing a podcast 432–433
podcasts defined 431–432
settings 432
streaming vs. downloading 432
subscribing to series 432
POP3 email accounts 488–489
Popular Near Me 586
pop-up blocker 483, 602
Porsche AR 356
portrait orientation
in Facetime 152
rotation lock 52
printing. See AirPrint Printopia 362

privacy
advertising settings 587
blocking calls and texts 596
by app 586–587
camera and microphone access 602
clearing History list 602
cross-site tracking tools 602
deleting TV app data 605
DuckDuckGo 470
hiding Frequently Visited Sites 601
hiding texts on Lock screen 214
listening history 604
Location Services settings 585–586
locking notes 426–428
private browsing 484–485
sending App Analytics 618
settings 585–587
turning off search engine suggestions 600
turning off TV syncing 605
projecting 274
to a TV 273
pronunciation
correcting 227
teaching Siri names 182–183
proximity sensor 29

punctuation
dictating 100–103
typing shortcuts 88–89
push email 589–590
defined 490
turning off to save power 44
Q
Qi charging pads 41–42
QR codes 606
quick actions 37–38
QuickType keyboard 85–87
emoji suggestions 86, 198
hiding 87
information suggestions 199
quick capitalization 87
settings 575
smart suggestions 87
Quick Website Search 470
R
radio
Beats 1 248
iTunes Radio 259–261
radio signals 33–34

Raise to Wake 17–18
settings 579
Reachability feature 21–22
Reader view 482–483
reading. See iBooks app Reading List 473–475
settings 603
read receipts 597
turn on and off for individual contacts 194
Recents list 117–119
defined 117
deleting calls from 119
recovery mode 628–629
Reddit
searching 470
Redeem button 265
red-eye removal 304–305
region
non-English keyboards 94–95
settings 576
relationships
recording in Contacts 123
teaching to Siri 182
Reminders app 433–438
adding a new task 435–436
car-based reminders 437
controlling by voice 169–170

creating new lists 434
creating reminders with Siri 433
Details screen 436–438
iCloud syncing 535
location-based reminders 437
organizing lists 433–434
quick actions 38
reminders defined 433
Remind Me About This feature 438
Remind Me Later feature 137–138
Scheduled list 435
setting default list 595
settings 595
sharing reminders in Family Sharing 554
syncing reminders 595
timed reminders 436–437
Remind Me About This 438
Remind Me Later 137–138
renaming your iPhone 572
repair 631–632
resetting
all settings 577, 627
erasing the phone 577, 627–628
force-restarting 626
location warnings 577

restoring the iPhone 627
troubleshooting steps 625–628
Wi-Fi networks 577
resolution 297
Respond with Text 137
restaurants
finding in Maps 409–410
information from Siri 170
OpenTable 206
reservations 410
Yelp 206
Rest Finger to Open 18
restrictions. See parental controls Retina display 24
Return key 83
ringtones
creating your own 148–149
different for each person 125
for text messages 126
from iTunes Store 267–268
re-downloading 517
restoring missing ones 149
settings 581–583
silencing 23, 136
Vibrate on Ring, Vibrate on Silent 581–582
vibrate, then ring 149
vibration patterns 125–126

volume 582
rotating
photos 319
Plus model phones 22
rotation lock 52
rotation lock icon 26
Rotor 218–219
Rule of Thirds grid 284–285
level for document scanning 285
S
Safari 461–486
address/search bar 461–462, 465–467
Back and Forward buttons 462–463
bookmarks 470–473
clearing History list 602–603
cookies 484
cross-site tracking tools 602
favorites icons 466–467
full-screen mode 464–465
History list 475
iCloud syncing 535
link-tapping tricks 475
memorizing contact information 477–478
navigating to websites 465–467

overview 461–463
parental controls 485
password suggestions 483–484
phishing warning 602
pop-up blocker 483, 602
private browsing 484–485
Quick Website Search 470
Reader view 482–483
Reading List 473–475
Reload button 462
saved passwords and credit cards 476–479
saving images 476
saving links to Notes 486
search engine choice 600
searching the web 467–470
security 483–485
selecting text 105
settings 600–603
Stop button 462
Suggested Sites 468
switching to desktop sites 467
tab bar 602
tabbed browsing 479–480
Top Hits 467–468, 600
using the loupe 83–84
web clips 486

Web Inspector 603
zooming and scrolling 463–464
saving
audio texts 198
camera settings 606
email attachments 504
Files app 387–391
graphics 476
passwords and credit card info 476–479
photos 327
texted images to Photos 194
texts 195, 213
to iCloud Drive 387–388
scanning 422–424
screen 24–28
Auto-Brightness feature 43–44, 226
brightness settings 578–580
dimming to save power 43
increasing contrast 229
invert colors and grayscale 225–226
preventing dimming with Face ID 584
projecting to a Mac 274
protecting 24
recording 57
Reduce Transparency 229

repairing 633
time to auto-lock 579
trick to dim instantly 241–242
turning off 46
turning off while using VoiceOver 217
zoom style for larger phones 618
Screen Curtain 217
screen recording 57
screenshots 340–342
editing window 340
recording screen video 341–342
scrolling
Contacts list 119–120
drag gesture 36
flicking gesture 36
in Safari 463–464
old texts 190
scrubber
music 251
videos 270
searching 108–112
App Store 345
calendars 378
email messages 507–508
how to search 109–111
iBooks 399

Internet 467–470
limiting the search 112
Maps app 407–409
News app 417
notes 429
photos 319–321
Quick Website Search 470
settings 566
text messages 191
text of a website 469
turning off Safari suggestions 600
security
Activation Lock 538–539
cookies 484
Erase Data setting 584
Face ID 64–66
fingerprint access to apps 63
Lock screen 74, 583–584
of Apple Pay 545–546
of notes on Lock screen 56–57
parental controls 619–622
passcodes and fingerprints 58–66
password suggestions 483–484
phishing warning 602
pop-up blocker 483, 602

private browsing 484–485
Safari 483–485
saved passwords and credit cards 476–479
Send Last Location feature 538
setting a SIM card PIN 596–597
Siri 178
Touch ID 61–64
True Depth sensors 64–65
two-factor authentication 622–624
selecting
email messages 502
iBooks books 397
photos 322
text 105–106
text messages 191–192
with Force Touch 97–98
selfies. See front camera Send Last Location 538
sensors 29
serial number 522
settings 565–608
advertising 587
AirDrop 365–366
airplane mode 567
Analytics 587
battery 584–585
Bluetooth 568–569

camera 606–607
cellular 569–571
compass 600
Control Center 49–58, 572
controlling with Siri 162
Date & Time 575
Display & Brightness 578–580
downloaded apps 353
Face ID 583–584
FaceTime 598
Game Center 608
General 572–578
haptics 583
home button 573
iBooks 403–404
iTunes & App Store 588–589
keyboard 575–576
limiting background apps 360
Location Services 585–586
Mail 590–592
managing storage space 630–631
Maps 599
Messages 211–214, 597–598
Music 603–604
News 603

Night Shift 578–579
Notes 594–595
Notifications 72–74, 572
on/off labels 230
passcode 583–584
Personal Hotspot 572
Phone 595–597
Photos 605–606
Podcasts 432, 608
privacy 585–587
Raise to Wake 579
Reminders 595
Reset screen 577–578
resetting all settings 627
Restrictions (parental controls) 575
Safari 600–603
save Camera’s last setting 606
searching 566
Siri 183–184
Sounds (& Haptics) 581–583
Touch ID 583
TV 604–605, 608
virtual private networks 576
Wallet & Apple Pay 589
wallpaper 580–581
Wi-Fi 568

your name 567
Setup Assistant 613–619
Express Settings 617–618
shake to undo 106–107, 236
shared photo streams. See iCloud Photo Sharing Share My Location 585
sharing
AirDrop 364–366
bonus buttons in the Share sheet 485–486
contacts 128–129
email attachments 504
hiding options 363
iBooks highlighting and notes 402
iCloud calendars 378
Live Photos 291–292
More button 327
music 252–253
notes 426
photos to Notes 325
photos via Mail 324
photos via Messages 324
Share sheet 363–364
voicemail messages 131
voice memos 443
Wi-Fi password 460
Shift key 82

shopping. See Apple Pay, App Store, iTunes Store shortcuts. See also Force
Touch, hard-pressing, peek and pop abbreviation expanders 90–91
dragging multiple icons at once 349
finding old texts quickly 190
in Settings 566–567
opening the camera quickly 276
opening things from the Control Center 49–58
quick actions 37–38
secret Safari tab search 481
triple-press home to dim the screen 241–242
turning on/off keyboard tricks 575–576
typing “.com” 462
typing punctuation 88–89
typing two spaces 84
side button 15–18
signatures 513–514
adding to photos 307
silencer switch 23
Vibrate on Silent setting 581–582
SIM card 29–30
protecting with a PIN 596–597
Siri 157–184
Apple Music 171–172
booking restaurants 170
business lookups 170–171
Calendar app 167–168

Camera app 162
changing settings with 566
changing voice gender 183
Contacts lookup 164–165
controlling iTunes Radio 261
defined 157
dialing by voice 163
dictation 98–104
driving directions 168–169
email 166–167
Facebook and Twitter commands 177
finding and buying apps 162
finding facts 175–176
Find My Friends 173
fixing name comprehension 182–183
funny things Siri says 178–181
gender of 159
hands-free 160
“Hey Siri” feature 160
history of 158
how to trigger 159
iBooks app 175
identifying songs 172
iTunes movies 175
language and accent 158, 183
LinkedIn 177

making to-do lists 434
movie info 175
music playback 171–172
notes 170
opening apps 161–162
opening Settings panels 162
photos and videos 177
Pinterest 177
podcasts 175
relationships 182
reminders 169
security 178
setting alarm clock 163
settings 183–184
Siri App Suggestions 76–77
sports scores 174–175
Square Cash 177
stock lookups 173
texting apps 177–178
text messages 165–166
time and date 164
timer 163–164
translations 164
troubleshooting 178
typing your request 181–182

Uber and Lyft 177
using 159–160
voicemail 163
weather 172–173
web searches 173–174
what to say 161–177
Wolfram Alpha 175–176
Skype
controlling by voice 177–178
one-tap calling 114
sleeping aids
bedtime controls 382–384
sleep timer 385
sleep switch. See side button slideshows 328
Slo-Mo mode 298–299
editing 299
frame rate 299
Slow Keys 235
smart playlists 524
smileys. See emoji SMS messages. See Messages app sounds. See also
notifications alarms and alerts 582
settings 581–583
spam
unsubscribing 505
speakerphone 32–33, 144
routing calls to 236

speakers 261–263
AirPlay 263
switching among 263
trouble hearing 144
volume keys 23
speech. See also dictation, Siri, VoiceOver changing VoiceOver voice 217
choice of voice 227
correcting pronunciations 227
dictation 98–104
iBooks reads to you 402–403
settings 227
speaking rate 227
Speak Screen command 227
Speak Selection command 108, 227
typing feedback 227
spelling
dictionary 87–88
spelling checker 88
sports trivia 174–175
Spotlight
in News app 417
spreading. See pinching and spreading Sprint
CDMA network 29
data network speeds 451
LTE network 452
using the iPhone overseas 30

Square Cash
controlling by voice 177
Messages add-on 206
square photos 294
status bar 24–28
airplane mode 25
battery meter 26
call forwarding 26
cell signal 24
clock 25
GPS 26
network speeds 25
network type 24–25
padlock 26
syncing 26
Teletype mode 26
VPN 26
Wi-Fi signal 25
step counter 391
Sticky Keys 235–236
Stocks app 438–441
controlling by voice 173
customizing portfolio 440–441
landscape view 440
stopwatch 384–385

adding to Control Center 54
storage
Files app 387–391
folder syncing services 388–389
freeing up space 630–631
iCloud Drive 387–388
settings 573–574
straightening photos 305–307
subject line
in Mail 510
in text messages 212
smart suggestions 509
subtitles 238
setting language 271
swapping calls 145
SwiftKey 92–93
swiping 35, 36–37
Switch Control 230–231
switches 230–231
Swype 92–93
syncing 517–530
adapters for MacBook Pro 518
bookmarks and settings via iTunes 527–528
Continuity 555–564
defined 519
drag and drop 521

ebooks and audiobooks 525
Handoff feature 560–561
iBooks bookmarks 404
manually 520–521
movies and TV shows 524–525
multiple computers 528
multiple iPhones 528
music 523–524
notes 430
only checked songs and videos 521
overview 519–520
podcasts 525
reminders 595
turning off autosyncing in iTunes 520
using iTunes tabs 521
via cable 518
via iCloud 534–536
via Wi-Fi 518–519
T
tabbed browsing 479–482
opening a new window 480
switching among windows 480–481
syncing with iCloud 481–482
tables

in Notes app 420–421
tapbacks 195–196
teletype calling 26, 237
tethering. See Personal Hotspot text
adding to photos 307
formatting in Notes app 421–422
hard-pressing to select 97–98
making screen fonts bigger or bolder 228–229
selecting 105–106
size control in Control Center 57
size in iBooks 399
zoom style for larger phones 618
texting. See also Messages app automatic replies while driving 142
using non-Apple apps with Siri 177
text to speech. See speech third-party keyboards 92–93
installing 93
limitations 93
threaded email 493–494
settings 591
tickets 445–446
time. See Clock app time-lapse video 299–300
timer 385–387
controlling by voice 163
opening quickly 54
sleep timer 385
time zones 593. See also Clock app auto-set on/off 586

Tips app 441
T-Mobile
free international texting and Wi-Fi 30
GSM network 29
using the iPhone overseas 30
Today screen 75–78
adding favorites to 114
editing 76
sections of 76–78
Siri App Suggestions 76–77
widgets available 76–78
to-do lists 433–438
Touch ID 61–64
access to apps and websites 63
adding a fingerprint 61–62
for app downloads 347
renaming or deleting fingerprints 63
troubleshooting 63
where fingerprints are stored 62
touchtones 143–144
traffic reports 415
transcripts
in voicemail 132
transferring your phone number 612
transit navigation 411–412

translation
in Siri 164
transparency 229
troubleshooting 625–633
Analytics settings 587
battery life 629–630
battery replacement 632
Continuity 555–556
cracked screen 633
erasing and restoring the phone 627–628
force-quitting apps 626
force-restarting 626
installing updates 625
phone won’t turn on 628
recovery mode 628–629
resetting settings 627
resetting the phone 625–628
restoring the phone 613
Siri 178
storage 630–631
Touch ID 63
warranty and repair 631–632
Web Inspector 603
TrueDepth sensors 7–8, 64–65
preventing screen dimming 584
True Tone flash 281

TV app 268–274. See also movies AirPlay 273–274
aspect ratios 272
deleting viewing history 605
descriptions for the blind 238
earbuds clicker 271
letterbox bars 272
navigating 269–270
playback controls 270–271
playing videos 270–271
projecting iPhone screen to Mac 274
scrubber 270
settings 604–605, 608
subtitles 238
TV output 273
viewing episode library 524–525
zooming 272
Twitter
alert sounds 582
importing contacts 125
posting photos to 325–326
searching with Siri 177
two-factor authentication 622–624
typing. See also keyboard abbreviation expanders 90–91
accented characters 89–90
audio feedback 219, 227

“.com” shortcut 462
Copy, Cut, and Paste 104–107
correcting spelling 87–88
emoji 95–96
keyboard repeat 235
loupe (magnifying glass) 83–84
period shortcut 84
punctuation 88–89
QuickType suggestions 85–87
Reachability feature 21–22
resetting dictionary 88
selecting text 105–106
tips and tricks 83–93
to Siri 181–182
turning shortcuts on and off 575–576
Undo 106–107
web addresses 465–466
U
Uber 412
calling with Siri 177
UDID 522
Undo 106–107
unified inbox 491–492
universal Clipboard 563–564

Update All Contacts button 124
updates 573, 619
to apps 353–354
turning off automatic app updates 45
why they matter 625
upgrading
before you upgrade 614
via a restore 613
via iTunes 613
wirelessly 613
Up Next list 76
Music app 257–258
USB cable 34
V
Venmo 206
Verbosity 217
Verizon
CDMA network 29
data network speeds 451
LTE network 452
using the iPhone overseas 30
vibrations
for text messages 126
haptics settings 583

individualized patterns 125–126
settings 581–582
turning off 236
vibrate, then ring 149
video calling. See FaceTime video camera 296–298
changing focus 297
resolution 297
taking a still photo while filming 298
Time-Lapse mode 299–300
using front camera 298
zooming while recording 297–298
videos. See also Camera app, movies, TV app adding to notes 424–425
attaching in Mail 511–512
autoplaying in App Store 588
editing 300
free re-downloading 540–541
geotagging 338–339
HEVC format 607
in Messages app 202–204
Memories 313–315
of iPhone screen 341–342
posting to YouTube and Vimeo 326
screen recording feature 57
Slo-Mo mode 298–299
subtitles 271
syncing to a computer 526–527

syncing to the phone 525–526
texting 324
time-lapse 299–300
Vimeo
playing videos in Messages 190
posting videos to 326
VIPs 495–497
virtual private networks 576
status bar icon 26
vision assitance. See blindness voice control. See Siri voicemail 130–134
call details 133
changing password 596
controlling with Siri 163
default message 130
defined 130
deleting messages 132
dialing in for messages 134
listening to deleted messages 132
recording your greeting 133
sending calls to 136–137
sending calls to voicemail 16
setting up 130–131
sharing messages 131
transcriptions 132
using 131–133

Voice Memos app 441–444
adding to Control Center 57
defined 441
deleting recordings 443
editing recordings 443–444
making recordings 442–443
sharing recordings 443
syncing to iTunes 441
VoiceOver 216–220
choosing a voice 217
gestures 216–217
Navigate Images options 219
on/off with home button triple-click 242–243
Phonetic Feedback 219
Rotor 218–219
speaking rate 217
Typing Feedback 219
typing in Braille 217–218
Typing Style 219
voice recognition. See dictation voices. See speech VoLTE 452–453
volume
adjusting from Control Center 53
limit 264
of Maps’ spoken instructions 599
of ringer 582
Sound Check 264

turning off volume keys 582
volume keys 23
using as camera shutter keys 286
W
waking the phone 16
Tap to Wake feature (iPhone X) 235
walkie-talkie. See audio texting Wallet app 444–446
adding to Control Center 57
iCloud syncing 535
settings 589
wallpaper 329
animated 580
turning off motion 230
with Live Photos 580
warranty 631–632
battery replacement 632
Watch app 446
Waze 355
Weather app 446–448
adding new cities 447–448
controlling by voice 172–173
web browser. See Safari web clips 486
websites. See also Internet, links, Safari about the iPhone 633
creating web clips 486

favorites 466–467
MissingManuals.com 4
requesting desktop version 467
sending photo albums to 334
to find good apps 354
WeChat
Siri control 177–178
week numbers 593
WhatsApp
one-tap messaging 114
Siri control 177–178
what’s new in iOS 11 8–12
Accounts & Passwords settings 589
adding a sketch to an email message 512
Animoji (iPhone X) 207–208
Apple Pay Cash 546–549
apps available in Messages 204–210
App Store video autoplay controls 588
augmented reality apps 356–357
Auto HDR 286
camera and microphone access controls 602
cellular data icon 50
changes in dictation 100
changes to iTunes 517
changes to Mail settings 590
changes to search bar 109

cleaned-up Messages app 185
color inversion intensity slider 226
cross-site tracking tools 602
customizing the Control Center 54–57
document scanning 422–424
Do Not Disturb While Driving 140–143
dragging multiple icons at once 349
expanded lookups 107–108
expanded QuickType suggestions 87
Face ID 64–66
Face ID (iPhone X) 6–7
FaceTime Live Photos 598
Files app 387–391
Health app iCloud syncing 535
HEIF photo format 607
HEVC video format 607
hiding purchased apps in App Store 357
improvements to Notes app 419
in-app ratings controls 588
level feature on Rule of Thirds Grid 285
Live Photo editing features 308–310
Mail settings vary by account 514
Messages app iCloud syncing 535
new photo filters 289
new voice for Siri 157

new way to share a Wi-Fi password 460
no support for 32-bit apps 357
Offload Unused Apps control 589
one-handed keyboard 91–92
opening camera from Lock screen (iPhone X) 276
phone storage management 573–574
private Notes accounts 594
QR code scanning 606
recording screen video 341–342
removal of expanded keyboard 93
requirement for two-factor authentication 622–624
restoring missing ringtones 149
Return Missed Calls feature 60
screenshot-editing window 340
seconds control in timer 385
Shut Down button in Settings 577–578
Siri answers follow-up questions 160
Siri translations 164
smarter texting suggestions 199
Smart Invert feature 225
smart punctuation 575
Spotlight tab in News 417
Studio Lighting effect (iPhone X) 293
switching between apps directly (iPhone X) 361–362
Tap to Wake feature 235
typing to Siri 181–182

viewing full HDR (iPhone X) 606
whiteboard 199–200
white cable 34
widgets. See also Today screen adding to home screen 78
expanding 78
Wi-Fi 453–460
address 572
airplane mode 456–457
commercial hotspots 455–456
controlling by voice 162
controlling from Control Center 456
defined 453
easily share a password 460
finding hotspots 453
hotspot connection data 455
hotspot invitations 454
initial setup 616
Instant Hotspot feature 559–560
list of hotspots 455
printing with AirPrint 362–363
sequence of connections 453–454
settings 568
turning off 45, 456–457
using while on a call 136
Wi-Fi Assist 571

Wi-Fi Positioning System 406
wireless syncing with iTunes 518–519
Wikipedia
in Spotlight results 111
searching 470
searching from iBooks 399
searching with Siri 174
wireless speakers and headphones 261–263
Wolfram Alpha 175–176
world clock 379–380
Y
Yahoo
searching by voice 173
setting up email account 487–488
syncing with Notes app 430
Yelp 206
YouTube
playing videos in Messages 190
posting videos to 326
Z
.zip files 504
zooming 220–223
camera digital and optical zoom 282–284

Display Zoom 618
Follow Focus command 222
gestures 221
in Safari 463–464
menu 221–222
on larger-screened phones 579
on/off with home button triple-click 242–243
photos 318–319
Show Controller command 222
type size in iBooks 399
video 272
while recording video 298


