
About the Author
Marty Matthews “played” with some of the first mainframe computers, the ones that
took up half a football field and still used vacuum tubes, and from those to the latest iPad
and iPhone, he has never lost his fascination with computers. He has been everything from
a programmer to a software company president and many steps in between. Throughout he
has worked to bring others along with him and help them make the best use of all that
computers can do. Toward that end, he has written over 80 books on software and
computing subjects, with many becoming bestsellers and receiving a number of accolades.
His recent books include iPad for Seniors QuickSteps®, Windows 8.1 for Seniors
QuickSteps®, and Windows 8 QuickSteps®.
Marty and his wife Carole, also a writer, are the co-creators of the QuickSteps® books and
live on an island northwest of Seattle, Washington.
About the Technical Editor
Anne Dotson’s passions are technology and education. She was an early PC adopter and
is constantly exploring new software. She is a Google Certified Teacher, a Google Apps
Certified Trainer, and a Microsoft Innovative Educator. Long before most people were
aware of computers, Anne took computer science courses, and a very early course on the
Internet and HTML put on by NASA. Most of Anne’s professional career has been as a
teacher, from elementary education, to home economics, to high school English and
special programs. She pioneered two separate high school programs: one in character
education, where she wrote three books on the subject, and the other in critical thinking,
where she established a new program to teach and test the subject. Most recently, Anne
has married her two passions by working as the Technology Integration Specialist in her
local school district, where she introduced the iPod and iPad into the school program and
brought the district teachers and staff up to speed on the subject. She is never very far
from her iPad and iPhone, and when she is on the move, which is most of the time, her
iPad is under her arm and her iPhone is in her hand.


Copyright © 2015 by Matthews Technology. All rights reserved. Except as permitted
under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this publication may be
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval
system, without the prior written permission of the publisher, with the exception that the
program listings may be entered, stored, and executed in a computer system, but they may
not be reproduced for publication.
ISBN: 978-0-07-184400-0
MHID:       0-07-184400-7
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-
184399-7, MHID: 0-07-184399-X.
eBook conversion by codeMantra
Version 1.0
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark
symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we use names in an editorial
fashion only, and to the benefit of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement
of the trademark. Where such designations appear in this book, they have been printed
with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill Education eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as
premiums and sales promotions or for use in corporate training programs. To contact a
representative, please visit the Contact Us page at www.mhprofessional.com.
McGraw-Hill Education, the McGraw-Hill Education Publishing logo, QuickSteps®, and
related trade dress are trademarks or registered trademarks of McGraw-Hill Education
and/or its affiliates in the United States and other countries and may not be used without
written permission. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners.
McGraw-Hill Education is not associated with any product or vendor mentioned in this
book.
Information has been obtained by McGraw-Hill Education from sources believed to be
reliable. However, because of the possibility of human or mechanical error by our sources,
McGraw-Hill Education, or others, McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the
accuracy, adequacy, or completeness of any information and is not responsible for any
errors or omis
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and McGraw-Hill Education and its licensors reserve all rights
in and to the work. Use of this work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under
the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you
may not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative
works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or sublicense the work or
any part of it without McGraw-Hill Education’s prior consent. You may use the work for
your own noncommercial and personal use; any other use of the work is strictly
prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these
terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL EDUCATION AND ITS

LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE
OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY INFORMATION THAT
CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE,
AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED,
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill
Education and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the
work will meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free.
Neither McGraw-Hill Education nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone else for
any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages
resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill Education has no responsibility for the content of any
information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill
Education and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, incidental, special, punitive,
consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work,
even if any of them has been advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of
liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises
in contract, tort or otherwise.

Carole and Michael, my mainstays

Contents at a Glance
Chapter 1 Getting Acquainted with Your iPhone
Review the iPhone’s physical features; plug in, charge, turn on, and set
up your iPhone; sync to your computer; consider accessories.
Chapter 2 Using Your iPhone
Explore the iPhone screen, use your fingers, review initial apps, use Siri,
make and receive calls, and use Contacts.
Chapter 3 Exploring the Internet
Set up Wi-Fi, use Safari to browse and search the Internet, save and
organize bookmarks, play audio and video files, and shop.
Chapter 4 Using Email and Messages
Set up Mail and configure settings; send, receive, store, and reply to
email; use web mail and contacts; set up and use Messages.
Chapter 5 Managing Time and Events
Get familiar with, use, and share Calendar; set up and use Reminders, the
Clock, and Alarms; use Notifications and the Control Center.
Chapter 6 Taking Photos and Videos
Take photos and use the app and its options; make, edit, share, and
download videos; use FaceTime.
Chapter 7 Listening to and Reading on the iPhone
Get music from iTunes and other sources, create playlists and listen to
music, read books and other media, and explore maps.
Chapter 8 Exploring Apple Pay and Other Apps
Set up and use Passbook and Apple Pay, set up and use the Health app,
and set up and use Notes.
Chapter 9 Socializing and Playing Games
Enable, explore, use, and manage Twitter and Facebook; download and
play games; explore the Game Center.
Index

Contents
Acknowledgments
Introduction
Chapter 1 Getting Acquainted with Your iPhone
Explore Your iPhone
Look at the Physical Features of the iPhone
 Reviewing What You Need
Plug In and Start the iPhone
Plug In and Charge Your iPhone
Turn On and Set Up Your iPhone
 Using the Onscreen Keyboard
Attach Your iPhone to a Computer
Turn Your iPhone On or Off and Put It to Sleep or Wake It
Get Accessories for Your iPhone
Chapter 2 Using Your iPhone
Explore the iPhone Screen
Let Your Fingers Do the Work
Review the Initial Home Screen Apps
Understand the Status Bar
Navigate Within and Among Apps
 Searching with Spotlight
Enter Information into Your iPhone
Expand Your Use of the Onscreen Keyboard
Set Up Siri and Use Dictation
Use the Phone
Make Calls
Receive Calls
Work with Contacts
Add New Contacts
Use Contacts
Review Contacts Settings

Chapter 3 Exploring the Internet
Connect to the Internet
Establish an iPhone Wi-Fi Connection
Use the World Wide Web
Get Familiar with Safari
Browse the Internet
Search the Internet
Save a Bookmark
Organize Bookmarks
Use Internet Information
Work with a Web Page
Read Web Pages
Play Internet Audio and Video Files
Control Internet Security
Gather Information and Shop on the Internet
Search for Information
Shop on the Internet
Use Siri to Browse the Internet
Chapter 4 Using Email and Messages
Use Mail
Set Up Mail
Change Mail Settings
Send, Receive, and Respond to Email
Apply Formatting
Handle Attachments
Manage Email
 Delete, Move, and Mark Several Messages at Once
Use Messages
Start and Use Messages
Review Messages Settings
Chapter 5 Managing Time and Events
Set Up and Use Calendar

Get Familiar with Calendar
Use Calendar
Work with Multiple Calendars
Handle Invitations
Share a Calendar
Work with Reminders
Set Up Reminders
Get Time and Event Information
Use the Clock and Alarms
Handle Notifications and Alerts
Set Up and Use Notifications
 Using Do Not Disturb
Use the Control Center
Use AirDrop
Chapter 6 Taking Photos and Videos
Use the iPhone as a Camera
Take Photos
Use Photo Options
 Moving iPhone Photos to Your Computer
Work with Photos
Use the Photos App
 Using Photo Stream
Work with Videos
Download Videos
Make Videos
Edit and Share Videos
Use FaceTime
Chapter 7 Listening to and Reading on the iPhone
Listen to Music
Get Music from iTunes
Transfer Music from a Computer
Create Playlists

Listen to Music
Listen to iTunes Radio
Read on the iPhone
Read Using Safari
Read Using the Newsstand
Read Using iBooks
Use Maps
Explore Maps
Get Directions
Chapter 8 Exploring Apple Pay and Other Apps
Pay with Passbook
Set Up Passbook and Apple Pay
Use Apple Pay
Use Passbook
Track Your Health
Set Up the Health App
Use the Health App
Take Notes
Use Notes
Set Up Notes
Chapter 9 Socializing and Playing Games
Follow Twitter
Enable and Explore Twitter
Post Tweets and Build a Following
Explore Facebook
Start Using Facebook
Manage Your Facebook Account
 Protecting Your Online Identity
Play Games
Download and Play Games
Explore the Game Center
Index


Acknowledgments
The author of a book is just the beginning of what it takes to produce one. The team for
this book is especially accomplished and added greatly to making the book all that it is. I
am most appreciative for all that they did. I particularly want to acknowledge the
following people:
Anne Dotson, technical editor, who corrected many errors, added many notes and points,
and did so with much enthusiasm and many kind and supportive words. Thanks, Anne!
Janet Walden, editorial supervisor, who often rolled up her sleeves and did much of the
editorial heavy lifting throughout the project. Thanks, Janet!
Howie Severson, project manager, who made sure that all the pieces came together to
produce the book. Thanks, Howie!
Bart Reed, copyeditor, who is so very good at making my words readable without
changing my voice. Thanks, Bart!
Karin Arrigoni, indexer, who adds so much to the usability of book. Thanks, Karin!
Lisa McCoy, proofreader, who made sure that the words and illustrations actually work to
tell a story that makes sense. Thanks, Lisa!
Amanda Russell, editorial coordinator, Wonder Woman, and Queen of Apple permissions
who kept us on schedule with all the chapters and illustrations accounted for, an almost
herculean task. Thanks, Amanda!
Roger Stewart, editorial director, who is responsible for making this book a reality for us.
He has worked with us for over 25 years and never lost faith, although I’m sure he
questioned it more than once. In the process, he has become a valued friend. Thanks,
Roger!
I am also fortunate to live in a very supportive community that includes our local
telephone, Internet, and broadband supplier Whidbey Telecom and its co-president
George Henny, who provided assistance in a number of ways, not the least of which was
to cheer me on. Thanks, George!

Introduction
The iPhone is the ultimate computing device for seniors. It is small, light, very portable,
and very capable, allowing seniors to have with them at all times the means for making
and receiving phone calls, doing email, messaging, scheduling, getting news and
information, working with photos and videos, socializing, reading, listening to music, and
watching movies. I believe that every senior should have an iPhone, and it is my objective
to make that assimilation as easy as possible with the end result being the fullest possible
use of the iPhone.
Most of my friends and acquaintances are seniors, as I am, and I have spent a fair amount
of time helping them get comfortable with computers in general and the iPhone in
particular. This book is written for them in a voice without jargon using relevant examples
in clear, step-by-step instructions. This book zeroes in on only the most important topics,
and it uses brief instructions in plain language, with many color visuals to clearly lead the
reader through the steps necessary to perform a task.
QuickSteps® books are recipe books for computer users. They answer the question “How
do I…” by providing a quick set of steps to accomplish the most common tasks with, in
this case, an iPhone and iOS 8.
QuickSteps® are the central focus of the book, showing you how to quickly perform
tasks. QuickFacts sidebars provide information that, although outside the primary
discussion, is important to understand for the overall use of the iPhone. Notes, Tips, and
Cautions augment the steps with concepts and thoughts that the reader needs to be aware
of. The introductions are minimal, and other narrative is kept brief. Numerous full-color
illustrations and figures, some with callouts, support the steps.
You can easily find the tasks you want to perform through
•   The table of contents, which lists the functional areas (chapters) and tasks in
the order they are presented
•   A QuickSteps® To list of tasks on the opening page of each chapter
•   The index, which provides an alphabetical list of the terms that are used to
describe the functions and tasks
•   Color-coded tabs for each chapter or functional area, with an index to the tabs
in the Contents at a Glance (just before the table of contents)

Conventions Used in This Book
iPhone for Seniors QuickSteps® uses several conventions designed to make the book
easier for you to follow:
•   A 
 in the table of contents references a QuickFacts sidebar in a chapter.
•   Bold type is used for words on the screen that you are to do something with,
such as “…tap Settings, and tap Calendar.”
•   Italic type is used for a word or phrase that is being defined or otherwise
deserves special emphasis.
•   SMALL CAPITAL LETTERS are used for keys on the keyboard, such as ENTER and
SHIFT.
•   When there are several commands in a row with the same verb (for example,
tap Settings, tap General, tap Siri, tap On/Off), the instruction becomes long and
hard to follow. To simplify that, I have replaced the comma and repeated verb with
the | character (called the vertical line or pipe character). Thus, the example
becomes tap Settings | General | Siri | On/Off.

Chapter 1

Getting Acquainted with Your iPhone
QuickSteps to…
 Look at the Physical Features of the iPhone
 Plug In and Charge Your iPhone
 Turn On and Set Up Your iPhone
 Attach Your iPhone to a Computer
 Turn Your iPhone On or Off and Put It to Sleep or Wake It
 Get Accessories for Your iPhone
Welcome to your iPhone! It is one of the foremost communication and information
devices ever created. It allows you to communicate through voice, video, and text, as well
as seek information in the form of text, sound, images, and video. You can make and
receive any of the three forms of communication, as well as create, access, and exchange
information on the Internet—through email, notes, or documents you write; through
photos or video you take; and through appointment calendars, maps, and games you use.
Your iPhone even provides a built-in voice-activated assistant to help you use it and its
information. In addition to what you see on the screen when you first start your iPhone,
there are over 1.2 million “apps” (applications) you can download from the App Store and
run on your device.
The iPhone 6, shown in Figure 1-1 in the next section, is first and foremost a phone with
which you can call any other phone in the world that’s on a public exchange. It is also a
fully capable handheld computer, not much different from a desktop or laptop computer
except in size and shape. Although there are some limitations due to its size, such as a
smaller screen and less memory, this is more than made up for by its cameras, its global
positioning system (GPS), its ability to use cellular as well as a Wi-Fi Internet connection,
and its considerable portability.

Figure 1-1: Front, back, and side of the iPhone 6 (courtesy of Apple Inc.)
NOTE This book is written with the iPhone 6 or 6 Plus and iOS 8. There are many similarities with
iPhone 5s, 5c, 5, and 4s and iOS 7, so this book can easily be used with earlier devices. However, I strongly
recommend upgrading to iOS 8.
In this chapter you’ll explore the external features of the iPhone, see how to plug it in,

charge its battery, turn it on and off, put it to sleep, and wake it up. You’ll then go through
the iPhone setup to get an Apple ID and activate your iPhone and set up its basic services.
TIP Sign up for the AppleCare+ two-year extended warranty in the first 30 days and get two instances of
accidental damage coverage, plus two years of telephone support, versus no accidental damage coverage and 90
days phone support in the free basic one-year warranty. The extended warranty currently costs $99 plus tax.
EXPLORE YOUR IPHONE
Take a moment to explore the physical iPhone and what you got when you purchased it.
 Look at the Physical Features of the iPhone
Your iPhone has several controls, sockets, and features that allow it to perform its
functions. These are located on the front, back, and sides of the device. Figure 1-1 shows
the front, back, and left side of an iPhone 6, which contains these components:
•   FaceTime camera This camera has 1.2MP (megapixels, or million pixels)
resolution, provides face detection, and takes 720p (progressive-scan) high-definition
(HD) video. It is used with FaceTime, the video-conferencing app that comes with the
iPhone, but can also be used with other apps. See Chapter 6 for how to use FaceTime.
•   Phone earpiece Used to hear a phone conversation.
•   On/off–sleep/wake button The primary power controller for the iPhone.
Pushing it quickly puts the iPhone in power-saving sleep mode. Pushing it quickly
again or pushing the Home button wakes the iPhone from sleep. Pushing and holding
this button for about three seconds begins the process of shutting the power fully off.
Pushing and holding this button for a little over a second when the iPhone is powered
off begins the process of powering up the iPhone.
•   iSight camera This camera has 8MP resolution with autofocus, optical image
stabilization (iPhone 6 Plus only), a five-element lens, face detection, exposure
control, backside illumination, and panorama mode. It can be used for either still
pictures or videos with video stabilization, continuous autofocus, 3× zoom, and 1080p
HD. See Chapter 6 for more information on using the camera.
•   True Tone flash Provides a bright light for the camera when the light sensor
between the camera and the flash says it is needed. The flash can also be used as a
flashlight that is turned on from the Control Center.
•   Ring/silent switch Turns off the ringer so that the phone only vibrates if it rings.
You can use Settings | Sounds to set the ringtone used and to set when the phone
vibrates.
•   Volume up/down buttons Used to change the loudness of the phone ringer and
in both the speaker and whatever is plugged into the headphone jack. Press the top

button to increase the volume and press the bottom button to reduce it.
•   SIM card tray and release hole You can poke a paperclip into the release hole
to open the tray. The tray holds the SIM card, which identifies your phone, your
network, and type of service. It normally comes already installed.
•   Home button and Touch ID Used to display your Home screen when pressed.
From the Home screen you can open or reopen any app on the phone and access the
settings that control how the iPhone behaves. In the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus, as well as the
iPhone 5S, the Home button incorporates a fingerprint identity sensor that you can use
to identify yourself in place of entering a passcode.
•   Speaker Lets you hear Siri, music that is being played, and other sounds that are
produced by your iPhone.
•   Lightning connector Used to plug in the iPhone to both charge the battery and
directly communicate with another computer.
•   Microphone Used to talk on the phone and to Siri (the voice assistant), and used
with Voice Memos, FaceTime, and other apps.
•   Headphone jack Used to plug in headphones, such as Apple’s EarPods, to talk
on the phone, listen to music, and hear any other audio, including Siri, produced by
your iPhone. When a listening device is plugged in, the iPhone’s speaker and mic are
turned off.
•   Dock Located at the bottom of the screen, the dock provides a separate area to
park your most heavily used apps so you can more easily reach them independent of
what other apps are displayed. You can move apps on and off the dock, but it is
limited to four apps.
•   App icons Represent the applications available on the iPhone. You start out with
apps that come standard with the iPhone and in a standard layout. You can add icons
and rearrange their layout on the screen, but you cannot delete the standard apps.
(However, you can hide the standard apps by enabling Restrictions in Settings |
General and turning off the apps you want hidden.)
•   App icon page The dots shows which of the several app icon pages is being
displayed. Two dots with the first one brighter than the other one means that there are
two app icon pages and the first one is being displayed.
•   Touch screen Also called a “multitouch screen” or just “the screen,” the touch
screen comprises the majority of the front face of the iPhone. It allows you to view,
select, and manipulate the contents displayed there.
•   Status bar Located at the top of the iPhone screen, the status bar provides
information about the connectivity with both Wi-Fi and your cellular carrier, the
current time of day, and the degree to which your battery is charged (described in
Chapter 2).
Use of iPhone Memory
Inside your iPhone is memory that is used to store pictures, movies, videos, TV shows,

music, books and magazines, mail, contacts, documents, and apps. Apps can also
temporarily use some memory when they execute. No two people will have the same mix
of these items, and there is no easy way to determine what your mix will be. Also, no one
item takes the same amount of storage in every device. You have at least 16GB (gigabytes,
or billion bytes) of memory and maybe more, depending on the model you have. Here are
some rough rules of thumb for the amount of memory used by various items:
•   Full-length commercial movies and TV shows are 1GB to 3GB.
•   Videos, depending on their length and their format, take from 500MB (.5GB) to
1.5GB.
•   Music takes about 1MB per minute, or about 50MB for a CD.
•   Magazines depend on length and the number of photographs, but generally range
from 150MB to 500MB.
•   Pictures, depending on their size and quality, take from 50KB to 3MB.
•   Apps vary greatly, from 50KB to over 1GB for some games.
•   Documents, mail, and contacts take relatively little space.
NOTE A kilobyte (KB) is 1,000 bytes, 1,000KB is a megabyte (MB), and 1,000MB is a gigabyte
(GB). A byte is roughly a character.
As you store information on your iPhone, consider your mix of movies, TV shows, music,
and games. If you are around a computer where you can store these items, it is very easy
to transfer items back and forth from your iPhone. You can also use iCloud for this
purpose. Both of these processes are discussed later in this book.
TIP Store the bulk of your movies, videos, pictures, and music on your computer or on iCloud and only
keep on your iPhone what you know you will be using in the near term.
Understand Wi-Fi vs. Cellular
Your iPhone has both cellular and Wi-Fi service capability, which allow the iPhone to
connect to the Internet to communicate with the hundreds of millions of people,
businesses, organizations, and institutions connected to it. This communication capability
is foundational to the use of both the iPhone and its operation. The iPhone could not do
what it does without this capability, which is therefore critical to its success.
If you don’t already have Wi-Fi service in your home and/or office, it is easy to get from
your local telephone company, TV cable company, or an independent Internet service
provider. Also, it is available for free in many public locations such as libraries, coffee
shops, hotels, and airports. Depending on your cellular contract, Wi-Fi might be able to
save you money.

 QuickFacts
Reviewing What You Need
To use your iPhone, you will need (if you don’t already have) the following:
•   A cellular phone account with one of the major providers. In the United
States, these include Verizon, AT&T, Sprint, and T-Mobile.
•   Wi-Fi wireless Internet connection in your home and office.
•   An Apple ID to register your iPhone and download apps from Apple or to
get iCloud or iTunes accounts. You will see how to get an Apple ID later in this
chapter.
•   Access to another computer (either a Mac or a PC and either a desktop or
laptop) that you can connect the iPhone to using a USB connection on the
computer and the Apple Lightning–USB cable. If the computer is a Mac, it must
be running OS X version 10.6.8 or later. If the computer is a PC, it must be
running Windows XP (with Service Pack 3 or later) or either 32-bit or 64-bit
Windows Vista, Windows 7, or Windows 8. On this computer, you’ll need to
have (or download for free) iTunes 11.4 or later.
•   Access to a printer with wireless printing capability, such as Apple’s
AirPrint. (A printer is not essential, but may be nice to have.)
PLUG IN AND START THE IPHONE
When you first get your iPhone, the temptation is to immediately turn it on and start using
it. The iPhones are shipped from the factory with enough charge in their battery to do this,
but unless you had your iPhone set up at the store where you bought it, you must go
through the activation and setup process. To make sure you have enough power to do all
you want when you first turn it on, I recommend that you start by plugging in and
charging your iPhone; it should not take more than a couple of hours. After that, you can
turn it on and begin the activation and setup process.
 Plug In and Charge Your iPhone
Plugging in your iPhone is not exactly rocket science, but there are two ways to do it:
•   The simplest and surest way to plug in and charge your iPhone is by using the
USB-to-AC adapter, plugging it into a wall socket, and plugging the Apple Lightning-
to-USB cable into both the AC adapter and your iPhone.
•   You can also use the Apple-to-USB cable to connect your iPhone to a computer
through a USB socket on the computer. This allows you to both charge your iPhone
and to transfer information between your computer and your iPhone, as discussed later
in this chapter and in several other places in this book. To charge your phone, your

computer may need to be turned on.
When you have successfully charged your iPhone and have turned it on, you will see an
icon in the upper-right corner of the iPhone screen that looks like a green battery with a
lightning bolt to its right.
 Turn On and Set Up Your iPhone
When your iPhone battery is reasonably charged, turn the iPhone on and begin the
activation process by activating your cellular service, and then go through the setup and
activation process of the iPhone itself with Apple.
Activate Your Cellular Service
In the United States, four cellular companies offer iPhone service, and there are slight
differences among the services concerning what you have to do to activate your cellular
service. Your phone should come with instructions on how to do this, but the easiest and
least troublesome way is to call customer service or go into an Apple store or a store for
your cellular company and have them walk you through the process.
CAUTION! If you are replacing an old phone with your iPhone 6, be sure to back up your old
phone to your computer before you activate your new phone. This requires that you have iTunes on your
computer, or that you use a service provided by your cellular company. Often, you can take your old and new
phones into a store for your cellular company and they will back up and transfer the data from your old phone to
your new one. You will need to turn off your old phone before you activate the new one.
Activate Your iPhone
When you are ready, use these steps to start and activate your iPhone:
1. Hold your iPhone in portrait fashion, where it is taller than it is wide, with the
Home button at the bottom, as shown in Figure 1-1. This will orientate the iPhone for
the following steps.
2. Press the Home button at the bottom of the phone. The screen should come on
and display the word “Hello” in a number of languages.
If the screen does not come on, press and hold the On/Off–Sleep/Wake button on
the right side of the iPhone for several seconds. The screen should display the Apple
logo for several seconds as the iPhone starts up (“boots up”). Finally, you should see
the initial screen with the word “Hello.”

3. At the bottom of the screen, use your finger to slide the words Slide To Set Up to
the right.
4. If you are asked to choose your language, touch (or tap) the language you want to
use and your country (for example, “English” and “United States”).
5. If there are several Wi-Fi networks around you, you will see them listed. Tap the
network you want to use. If you don’t see a network, none is available where you are.
Tap Use Cellular Connection and skip to step 7. If you think you have Wi-Fi, contact
your Internet provider or ask the business or organization you think is providing the
Wi-Fi.
6. If you are connecting to a Wi-Fi network, you are asked to enter the password for

that network. Use the onscreen keyboard that pops up to do this (see the “Using the
Onscreen Keyboard” QuickFacts later in this chapter) and tap Join.
7. When a check mark appears next to the network you want, tap Next.
8. Determine whether you want to enable Location Services. This uses the iPhone’s
GPS and/or your cellular network to determine your current location, and is valuable
when you are asking Siri about the location of restaurants or using maps. It is
especially valuable when you are getting driving directions. Also, Location Services
must be enabled to use Find My iPhone. On the other hand, apps can see where you
are and use that information, which you may or may not want. (Keep in mind that you
can turn off Location Services for specific apps in Settings | Privacy | Location
Services.) I think that the benefits of Location Services outweigh the perceived loss of
privacy. Based on your decision, tap either Enable Location Services or Disable
Location Services and then tap Next.
Set Up Your iPhone
With your iPhone started and connected to the Internet, you next need to connect to Apple
to set up an Apple ID and register your iPhone. Apple uses a common ID and password
for Apple itself, the iTunes Store, the App Store, iCloud, the iBook Store, and the Mac
App Store. This allows you to get accounts to download apps from Apple’s App Store, or
music and videos from the iTunes Store, and accessories from the Apple Store. You’ll
need to have and use an Apple ID even for free apps and other free items. Apple doesn’t
charge for the ID itself, and there is no other way to work with Apple. Continue with these
steps to set up your iPhone:
1. If you have used an iPhone in the past, you probably have a backup you can use
to quickly set up a new iPhone. In that case, your first question is, do you want to set
up as a new iPhone or do you want to restore from an iCloud or iTunes backup? If you
don’t have a backup, you won’t see this question. We’ll assume you want to set up as a
new iPhone (we’ll talk about restoring in Chapter 10). Tap Set Up As New iPhone
unless you have the choice of restoring and want to do that.

2. You are then asked to either sign in with an Apple ID or create a new one. Again,
we’ll assume you need to create a new one (if you have an Apple ID, enter it and your
password and skip to step 11). Tap Create A Free Apple ID.
3. Select your birthday by using your finger to move the three calendar elements up
or down. When you are done, tap Next.
4. Tap in the First Name field and tap or type your first name using the keyboard at
the bottom of the screen. See “Using the Onscreen Keyboard” QuickFacts later in this
chapter to understand how to do that.
5. Tap Return to go to the next line. Type your last name and then tap Next.
6. If you have an existing email address, accept that default, tap Next, enter your
address, tap Next again, and skip to step 8. If you do not have an email address that
you want to use, tap Get A Free iCloud Email Address, tap Next, and follow on to
step 7.
7. Type the first part of your new email address (for example, type funnyclown for
an email address of funnyclown@icloud.com). Tap Next. You are asked if you are sure
you want to use that email address. If so, tap Create.
8. Enter and verify a password that’s at least eight characters long and contains a
number and both uppercase and lowercase letters. Tap Next when you are done.
9. Choose three security questions, enter their answers, and tap Next. If you wish,
and if you have one, enter another email address that can be used in case all else
doesn’t work. In any case, tap Next.

CAUTION! Write down your password and the answers to your questions so there is no way you
would not know them. Make and keep a password list for yourself and give someone you trust a copy. If you are
locked out of your iPhone, no one, not even Apple, can get you in without losing all the information on your
phone.
10. If you want email updates from Apple, leave the default ON and tap Next. If you do
not want these updates, swipe (move your finger across) the ON button from right to
left to turn it off. Tap Next.
11. You are asked if you agree to Apple’s terms and conditions. You can read them on
your iPhone or have them sent to you by email. If you don’t agree, you will not be able
to use your iPhone. However, if it is shortly after you purchased it (within 30 days),
Apple will allow you to return the iPhone with a full refund. When you are ready and
do agree, tap Agree and then tap Agree again.
12. Next you are asked if you want to use iCloud, which is Apple’s free Internet storage
service for backing up the information on your iPhone. If something happens to your
iPhone, you can recover your information from iCloud. Also, if you store your iPhone
information on iCloud, you can access that information on your iPad, iPod touch, or
Mac. I think it is a good idea, and the first 5GB are free. If you want this, tap Use
iCloud; if not, tap its alternative, and then, in either case, tap Next.
13. You are told that Find My iPhone is automatically enabled with iCloud, although you
can turn it off later in Settings | iCloud, which is discussed later in this book. Find My
iPhone is invaluable if you lose your phone or if it is stolen. Find My iPhone is good
insurance, and I recommend that you keep this. Tap Next.
14. Next you are asked if you want to upgrade to iCloud Drive, which is similar to
GoogleDrive and Microsoft’s OneDrive. Tap Not Now. We’ll come back to this topic
later in the book. Tap Continue to confirm that you do not want to upgrade to iCloud
Drive.
15. If you have used an iPhone before, you will be asked if you want to let people contact
you via iMessage and FaceTime, and your phone number and email address will be
displayed and selected (with a check mark). If you don’t want to use either of those
contacts, tap them to deselect them. In any case, tap Next.
16. Next you are asked if you want to use your fingerprint in place of your passcode. If
you don’t want to do that, tap Set Up Touch ID Later and skip to step 17. Otherwise,
place your finger or thumb on the Home button. Repeatedly lift and replace your
finger on the button. When you are asked, lift, move your finger a bit, and replace it to
capture the edges of your finger. Finally, you are told that the process has been
completed. Tap Continue.

17. You are then asked to create a passcode. Even with Touch ID, a passcode is
occasionally necessary for verification. Without Touch ID, a passcode is used
whenever you start or wake up your iPhone to protect it from unauthorized use, and I
recommend that you set one up. The standard passcode is four numbers, like the PIN
you might have elsewhere. Enter your passcode and then re-enter it for confirmation.
18. Next you are asked to set up an iCloud Keychain that is used to store your passwords
and credit card information with encryption. You can choose to do this or set it up
later. I recommend that you go ahead and do this. Tap Set Up iCloud Keychain.
Choose to use your existing passcode, or create a different one. You can change this
later, so for now tap Use Passcode.
19. Enter either your phone number or the phone number of someone you trust and tap
Next.
20. Tap Use Siri and tap Next. Siri is a voice-activated assistant to which you can ask
questions, such as “What are the Greek restaurants in Bellevue?” or “Do I have an

appointment next Tuesday?” You can also tell Siri to call someone or get directions. I
can’t imagine someone not wanting to use Siri.
21. You can choose to help Apple by anonymously sending them information about how
you are using your iPhone, including your location. I believe that doing this helps all
users, so I recommend it. If you agree, tap Automatically Send; if not, tap Don’t
Send. In either case, tap Next.
22. Similarly, you are asked if you want to help app developers by having Apple share
crash information and data about how you use apps with them. Again, I think this is
worthwhile and recommend that you do it. If you agree, tap Share With App
Developers; if not, tap Don’t Share.
23. If you want larger images and text on the screen, tap Zoomed; otherwise, tap
Standard. You are shown the image you have chosen. If you want to change it, tap the
opposite at the top of the screen. When you are ready, tap Next.

24. Finally, you see “Welcome to iPhone.” Tap Get Started. The familiar iPhone Home
page is displayed.

 QuickFacts
Using the Onscreen Keyboard
When you need to enter text on your iPhone, an onscreen keyboard is
automatically displayed. Simply tap the keys you want to use. Here is how to
use the other features of the onscreen keyboard:
•   If you don’t see a keyboard when a form or text entry box is displayed,
simply tap in the text box in which you want to place text.

•   To make a letter uppercase, press the upward-pointing arrow or the SHIFT
key so the arrow itself darkens, and then tap the letter. Uppercase will
automatically be turned off after you tap the letter.
•   To make a series of letters uppercase, double-tap (tap twice in rapid
succession) the SHIFT key so a line appears beneath the arrow. Then tap the keys
you want in uppercase. When you are done, tap the upward-pointing arrow again
to turn it off.
•   To correct an error, tap the BACKSPACE key once for each letter you want to
replace. Then tap the replacement key(s).
•   To complete one line of type and go to the next line, tap the RETURN key.
You may also tap the new line on the screen.
•   To enter numbers and some of the special characters, tap the 123 key. If
you don’t see the special characters you want, tap the #+= key for additional
characters. When you are done entering numbers and/or special characters, tap
the ABC key to return to the original keyboard.
•   With the ! and ? keys, press and hold the key for a moment to see two
options and then press the desired key to get the character you want. There are
also a number of additional choices by tapping and holding any of these keys: - /
$ &”. and’.
•   When you finish entering text or complete a form, the onscreen keyboard
automatically disappears.
 Attach Your iPhone to a Computer
If you have a recent (in the last five years) computer available to you, either a Mac or a
PC, you can attach your iPhone to it and transfer information between the two devices. To

do that, you need to install Apple’s iTunes on that computer if you haven’t already. This is
a particularly good approach if you have a lot of music or videos on the computer that you
want on the iPhone. See the “Reviewing What You Need” QuickFacts earlier in this
chapter for the specifications of the computer you need to use.
If you have iTunes already on the computer, make sure it is up to date. On a Mac, press
the Apple key and click Software Update. On a PC with Windows 7 or earlier, click
Start, click All Programs, and click Apple Software Update. On a Windows 8 PC, on
the Start screen, start typing Apple and click Apple Software Update. You will be told if
iTunes is not up to date. If so, follow the instructions to update it.
Download and Install iTunes
If you do not already have iTunes, you can download it for free from Apple and install it
on your computer.
TIP You do not have to use a credit card to set up an iTunes account. Simply select None or skip the
entry when you are asked for a payment type. You, of course, will not be able to buy anything that’s not free
(there are many free items on both the App Store and iTunes Store). Also, you can get a very limited credit card
and use that for your Apple ID and other purchases on the Internet.
1. On your computer, open a browser, type itunes.com in the address box and press
ENTER. The Apple iTunes download page will open.
2. Click Download iTunes. On the next page, click Download Now (you don’t
have to enter your email address, and I’d uncheck the two email offers) and click Run
at the bottom of the screen in Windows 7 and earlier versions or click
itunes64Setup.exe at the bottom of the window in Windows 8.
3. In the Welcome To iTunes dialog box that opens, click Next. Uncheck any of the
options you don’t want, and then click Install and click Yes to allow iTunes to make
changes to your computer.
4. Finally, when you are told that iTunes has been installed, click Finish. iTunes
will open on your desktop.
Connect Your iPhone to iTunes
Once you have iTunes installed and your iPhone set up, it is time to connect the two. Here
are the steps to follow:
1. Plug the Apple Lightning connector into your iPhone and the USB connector into
your computer. The iPhone’s screen will come on. Touch the Touch ID or swipe the
Slide To Unlock arrow left to right and enter your passcode, if you have enabled either
of these, and then tap Trust in the Trust This Computer? dialog box that opens.
2. If it isn’t already running on your computer, start iTunes. You should see your
iPhone appear in the left column. If you don’t have a left column (or sidebar), click the
View menu and click Show Sidebar. If you don’t see a menu bar across the top, click

the Select menu (the black and white rectangle) in the far upper-left corner, and then
click Show Menu Bar.
3. Click your iPhone in the left column to open a pane on the right about your
iPhone, as you see in Figure 1-2.
Figure 1-2: iTunes not only allows you to transfer information, but also to control some aspects of your iPhone.
4. If you had a previous iPhone that you backed up, you can restore it now by
selecting that option and jumping to step 6. Alternatively, you can set up as a new
iPhone (if you didn’t previously have an iPhone or back it up, that is the automatic
selection). Click Continue.

5. You are told you can sync the music on your computer through iTunes to your
iPhone. Click Get Started.
6. If, when you set up your iPhone as described earlier in the chapter, you selected
to automatically back up on iCloud, it will be selected in iTunes, as you see in Figure
1-3.
Figure 1-3: iTunes allows you to perform several operations on your iPhone remotely.
7. You may additionally, or in lieu of iCloud, back up on the computer you are
connected to. If so, click that option, if desired, click Encrypt Local Backup, enter
and verify a password, and click Back Up Now.

You will see a lot more about syncing music, videos, and other media between iTunes and
your iPhone in later chapters of this book.
NOTE Although you can back up your iPhone to a computer, I recommend additionally, or in lieu of
the computer, backing up to iCloud. The computer can be destroyed by fire or be stolen; the iCloud cannot be. If
you choose to back up both to your computer and to iCloud, I recommend that you leave iCloud selected for
automatic backup and manually back up to your computer.
 Turn Your iPhone On or Off and Put It to Sleep or Wake It
In going through the setup of your iPhone, you have probably experienced the screen
shutting itself off automatically after the iPhone had been inactive for a period of time.
This is the iPhone’s sleep mode, a low-power condition that prolongs the battery life, but
makes it immediately available to perform some task for you. This is one of three power
modes:
•   Fully powered on with the screen lit and the iPhone is available at a single touch.
•   In sleep mode with the screen dark, but the iPhone is available by waking it.
•   Fully powered off and not using any power. It must be turned on to be used.
Turn the iPhone On or Off
When the iPhone is fully powered off, you must start it up. You know it is off if you press
the Home key and nothing happens (given that your battery has a charge).
•   To turn off your iPhone, press and hold the On/Off–Sleep/Wake button until the
Power Off command appears, and then swipe that command from left to right.
•   To turn on your iPhone, press and hold the On/Off–Sleep/Wake button until the
Apple icon appears. Then, when the Slide To Unlock command appears, swipe it from
left to right. Enter your passcode. Even if you are using Touch ID, you must enter a
passcode when starting up.
Put Your iPhone to Sleep or Wake It
By providing the sleep mode, Apple has made your battery last a lot longer. Remember
that when you get tired of your iPhone often being asleep. You can adjust the period of
time before your iPhone goes to sleep, as you will see in Chapter 2.
You can wake your iPhone in two ways:
•   Press the Home button and either swipe the Slide To Unlock command from left
to right, and enter your passcode, or touch the Home button to use Touch ID.
•   Press the On/Off–Sleep/Wake button and either swipe the Slide To Unlock
command from left to right and enter your passcode, or touch your Home button to
use Touch ID.

To put your iPhone to sleep, momentarily press the On/Off–Sleep/Wake button.
(Normally, your iPhone will go to sleep automatically, but if you want, you can put it to
sleep manually.)
 Get Accessories for Your iPhone
A large number of accessories are available for your iPhone from both Apple
(apple.com/us/iPhone/iphone-accessories) and retailers such as Amazon (go to
Amazon.com and search for “iPhone accessories”). Some of the accessories you can
consider include cases and covers, screen protectors, cables, and headphones.

Chapter 2

Using Your iPhone
QuickSteps to…
 Let Your Fingers Do the Work
 Review the Initial Home Screen Apps
 Understand the Status Bar
 Navigate Within and Among Apps
 Expand Your Use of the Onscreen Keyboard
 Set Up Siri and Use Dictation
 Make Calls
 Receive Calls
 Add New Contacts
 Use Contacts
 Review Contacts Settings
In this chapter you’ll explore how the iPhone is used, beginning with its screen, how to
use it and manipulate the apps on it, what those apps do, and how to, in general, use them.
We’ll talk some more about typing on the screen and then how to use Siri, the voice
assistant, and dictation to get around having to type. Finally, we’ll go in depth on using the
most important app, Phone, and its related app, Contacts, to make and receive calls,
manage calls, handle special situations, and keep track of and use contacts.
EXPLORE THE IPHONE SCREEN
The screen is the central focus of the iPhone. The screen is used to both control the iPhone
and display an initial set of apps that the iPhone has available. Besides the few buttons
along the edges or at the bottom front, the iPhone is controlled on the screen. You do it
with your fingers, often with just a touch, but there are other moves of your fingers that
you need to know. This section describes how to start, pause, and leave apps as well as
how to navigate among them.
 Let Your Fingers Do the Work
The principal control device for your iPhone is your fingers. You don’t have to remember
to bring them along or learn how to use them, unlike a mouse, and their use is intuitive
and simple.

Use One or Two Fingers
The principal commands used in this book can be performed with one or two fingers:
•   Tap Lightly touch and withdraw your hand once from an object on the screen to
select it.
•   Tap an app on the Home screen to open or start the app.
•   Tap an item in a list, such as an option in a menu or a photo in an album, to
select or display it.
•   Tap an action in an app, such as a previous or next arrow, to follow that action
(for example, to return to the previous page in Safari).
•   Tap a text box, as in the address bar in Safari or text line in Notes, to identify
the line into which the text you type will go.
•   Tap a key on the onscreen keyboard to place its character on a selected text
box or text line.
•   Tap the status bar at the top of the screen when a web page, an email message,
or a list is displayed to quickly move to the top of the page, message, or list.
NOTE It is not always easy to see and tap on the status bar, which may be above the search bar.
•   Double-tap Tap a display on the screen twice, such as a page in Safari or a map
in Maps, to generally enlarge the content being displayed.
•   Flick or Swipe Quickly move one finger up or down, left or right, to perform the
following actions:
•   Scroll or move a web page, an email message, or a list up or down or left or
right
•   Turn the pages in a newspaper, magazine, or book
•   Open the Notification Center by flicking down from the top of the screen
•   Open the Control Center by swiping up from the bottom of the screen
•   Drag Press and hold a finger on an object until it is selected, or, in the case of the
apps on the Home screen, until all apps wiggle and then drag the object to where you
want to move it.
•   Pinch Bring together two fingers, often your thumb and forefinger, to zoom out
and display more area in a web page, email message, reading page, or a map, showing
more area but at a smaller text size.
•   Spread Spread apart two fingers to zoom in, enlarge, and display less area in a
web page, email message, reading page, or a map, but with a larger text size.
•   Press Press the Home button when in an app to leave the app and return to the

Home screen.
•   Double-press Double-press the Home button to open the App Switcher, showing
the apps you have used that are still active. Tap any of the apps to switch to that app.
At the top of the App Switcher are your favorite and recent contacts. Tap any one of
them to place a call to that person.
NOTE In the App Switcher, you can switch from one app to another with a single finger swipe from
the right or left.
 Review the Initial Home Screen Apps
On a new iPhone there are 23 apps on the Home screen, plus another seven on a second

screen. The icons and their order can be different, depending on when you got your
iPhone, but here are the Home screen apps in the order they appear in iOS 8 in the fall of
2014 (see the inside of the front cover for the images, or look at your iPhone):
•   Messages Allows you to send and receive text messages with any other device
able to do the same, as discussed in Chapter 4.
•   Calendar Allows you to enter and keep track of calendar events and sync with
other calendars, as discussed in Chapter 5.
•   Photos Stores, organizes, and displays photos that you have taken, as discussed
in Chapter 6.
•   Camera Allows you to take both still and video images from either the front or
rear camera, as discussed in Chapter 6.
•   Weather Provides the current temperature and 10-day forecast for one or more
cities worldwide, with hourly forecasts for the next 12 hours.
•   Clock Displays the time of day, temperature, and weather conditions in up to 12
locations around the world.
•   Maps Displays maps and satellite views, gives driving directions, and shows
your current position, as discussed in Chapter 7.
•   Videos Provides the means to store, organize, and play movies, TV shows, and
other videos, as discussed in Chapter 6.
•   Notes Allows you to jot down and organize thoughts you have and then save,
email, print, and delete them, as discussed in Chapter 8.
•   Reminders Allows you to create and keep track of calendar-oriented to-do lists,
as discussed in Chapter 5.
•   Stocks Provides information from major exchanges as well as business news and
allows you to track your stock portfolio.
•   Game Center Provides a social networking site where you can find people to
play with and get recognized for your ability to play a game.
•   Newsstand Provides a place to get, store, organize, and read magazines and
newspapers that you have subscribed to, as discussed in Chapter 7.
•   iTunes Store Allows you to purchase music, movies, TV shows, and university
courses, as discussed in Chapter 7.
•   App Store Provides a place to search for, learn about, purchase, and download
additional apps, as discussed further in Chapter 8 and elsewhere.
•   iBooks Allows you to get, read, and organize books and PDFs from the iBook
store and other sources, as discussed in Chapter 7.
•   Health Allows to you track and store many health and fitness measurements
from other health and fitness apps or values you enter, as discussed in Chapter 8.
•   Passbook Provides access to Apple Pay and is a place to store and use boarding

passes, movie tickets, and more, as discussed further in Chapter 8.
•   Settings Allows you to change the settings for the iPhone itself, as well as many
of the apps. Settings is discussed further in this chapter and in many other chapters.
•   Phone Allows you to make and receive phone calls as well as to maintain a
detailed Contacts list, as well as handle voicemail, as discussed later in this chapter.
•   Mail Provides an email program that allows you to send, receive, reply to, and
forward email messages from one or more email accounts, as discussed in Chapter 4.
•   Safari Provides a web browser that allows you to search and surf the Internet, as
discussed in Chapter 3.
•   Music Provides the means to store, organize, and play music that you have
collected, as discussed in Chapter 7.
•   FaceTime Allows you to video-chat (conference) with anyone who has an
iPhone, iPad, iPod touch, or a Mac computer for free if you are using Wi-Fi, as
discussed in Chapter 6.
•   Calculator Allows you to perform standard calculator operations in portrait
orientation or scientific functions in landscape orientation.
•   Podcasts Allows you to search for, select, download, and listen to or watch
podcasts, as well as organize and automatically update those you choose.
•   Compass Provides a direction, your latitude, and your longitude, as well as
allows you to find level, match a slope, and stay on course by locking in a current
heading.
•   Voice Memos Allows you to record, play back, store, and organize voice
recordings using the iPhone’s microphone, the EarPods’ mic, or another external
microphone.
•   Contacts Allows you to store names, addresses, email addresses, phone
numbers, and notes about people and organizations, as discussed later in this chapter.
•   Tips Provides tips on using your iPhone.
 Understand the Status Bar
Along the top of the iPhone’s screen is the status bar, which can contain a number of icons
that appear at various times depending on what the iPhone or its apps are doing. Many of
these icons are discussed further in this and other chapters. See the inside of the back
cover for images of these icons in the following order:
•   Airplane Mode has been turned on and all cellular, Wi-Fi, and Bluetooth
transmissions by the iPhone have been turned off.
•   Connected to the cellular carrier shown and has the signal strength indicated
by the number of dots—the more, the better.
•   Connected using 4G LTE (Long Term Evolution) service.

•   Connected using 3G (third generation) or 4G (fourth generation) service.
•   Connected using EDGE (Enhanced Data for GSM Evolution) service.
•   Connected using GPRS (General Packet Radio Service) service.
•   Making a Wi-Fi phone call.
•   Using a Wi-Fi network to connect to the Internet. The number of quarter-circles
indicates the strength of the connection.
•   Do Not Disturb is currently turned on, silencing all notifications and alerts,
including FaceTime calls, but letting alarms still sound (see Chapter 5).
•   Personal hotspot or Wi-Fi connection using the cellular connection to allow
other devices to connect to the Internet.
•   Synced with iTunes on your Mac or PC computer.
•   Internet activity, such as downloading or uploading documents.
•   Call forwarding has been turned on.
•   Connected using VPN (virtual private networking).
•   TTY in use to send and receive text for hearing impaired.
•   Screen rotation locked in portrait orientation.
•   Alarm set (see Chapter 7).
•   Location Services in use by an app to determine your current location.
•   Bluetooth is paired with a device, if blue. If white, it is used to communicate. If
gray, the paired device is off, asleep, or out of range.
•   Battery level of a paired Bluetooth device.
•   Battery level and charging status of your iPhone.
 Navigate Within and Among Apps
The iPhone has techniques for handling all of the many different situations that can occur
when you’re using apps, including using your finger alone, the Home button, and the App
Switcher.
TIP When you start an app, especially one of the 30 basic apps, and then start another app, put the iPhone
to sleep, or even turn the iPhone off, and then come back to the first app, it is still where you left it. In other
words, when you leave an app by simply starting another app or by switching away from it, the original app
remains “active” (the definition of active depends on the app). This is what is considered “multitasking,” and you
can see the app in the App Switcher. In almost all cases, when you come back to the app, you will return to
where you were and what you were doing when you left the app.
Navigate Within an App

There are differences in the ways that various apps work; one or more of the following
techniques are used to navigate within the majority of apps:
•   Drag your finger up or down or left or right to slowly scroll, or move, to other
areas of the app.
•   Flick or swipe your finger up or down or left or right to quickly scroll (move)
to other areas of the app.
•   Tap a link, such as a title, an item in a list, a picture, or a highlighted phrase, to
display the page associated with that link.
•   Tap a control, such as a left- or right-pointing arrow or a Next or Prev button, to
go to the previous or next page in an app, or tap a button labeled “Buy Now,” “Add To
Cart,” or “Sign Up” to go to the page indicated.
Leave an App
When you are done using an app, you can leave it in three ways:
•   Press the Home button to redisplay the Home screen.
•   Quickly press the Sleep/Wake – On/Off button to turn off the screen, lock the
iPhone, and put it in sleep mode.
•   Press and hold the Sleep/Wake – On/Off button to fully power down the iPhone.
TIP You can think of the Home button as a “return,” “go back,” or “escape” key or command.
Shut Down an App
Once you start an app, it stays running—whether you are looking at it or you leave it—
and is hidden in the background behind other running apps, even after you shut down your
iPhone. When you turn your iPhone back on and just want to see what apps are still
running, double-press the Home button to display the App Switcher. While in the App
Switcher you can shut down an app by simply swiping up on it. The app will disappear
from the App Switcher, and if you restart the app, it will start at its home page, not the
page you last looked at.
Switch to Other Apps
When you are in one app and want to switch to another, you can use one of the following
techniques:
•   Press the Home button to redisplay the Home screen and then tap the app you
want to switch to.
•   Press the Home button twice in rapid succession to open the App Switcher and
then tap the app you want to switch to.

TIP If you don’t see the recently used app you want on the App Switcher, scroll the apps by dragging
them with your finger from right to left.
Go Beyond the Initial Home Screen
You have already seen that there are more built-in apps than what can fit on the initial
Home screen and that there is a second screen—a second Home screen if you will. You
can rearrange the app icons so they appear on whatever screen you want. In any case, the
iPhone has multiple screens on which you can have apps. Just above the set of apps on the
dock at the bottom of the screen are two or more white or gray dots, as you saw in the
previous chapter. These dots represent alternative pages you have for the Home screen.
The white dot signifies the page you are on. The gray dots are the alternatives. You can
navigate among these screens by swiping to the left or right.
•   Drag or swipe the screen from right to left to move to screens on the right, or
from left to right to move to screens on the left.
•   From any of the alternate Home screens, pressing the Home button will return
you to the initial Home screen.
•   From any app not on the Home screen, pressing the Home button will return you
to the initial Home screen.
 QuickFacts
Searching with Spotlight
Spotlight is the iPhone’s general-purpose search engine. With it, you can
search the information you have stored on the iPhone, such as contacts, music,
and notes, and the apps you have downloaded. It will search for apps, names,
authors, artists, titles, and words, as well as email messages, appointments, and
websites.

Open Spotlight
Open Spotlight to perform a search.
•   From any of the Home screens, swipe down beginning at or below the first
row of apps (if you swipe down from the top of the screen, you will get the
Notification area).
•   From any app, press the Home button and then do the “midway” swipe
down.
Use Search
In the Spotlight Search box at the top of the screen, begin to type what you
want to search for. As you type, items matching what you typed appear in a list
below.
•   If it is an app you want, tap the app name to open the app.
•   If it is a contact, tap the name to open Contacts.
•   If it is a song, a movie, or other media, tap the item to begin playing it.

ENTER INFORMATION INTO YOUR IPHONE
You need to enter information into your iPhone to tell it where to go, as in typing an
address in Safari, or what to do, such as typing a piece of music to play. You also will
probably want to add text into Mail, Messages, Notes, Reminders, Contacts, and Calendar.
To do this, you can use the onscreen keyboard, as briefly described in Chapter 1, or voice
dictation, which the iPhone has available.
 Expand Your Use of the Onscreen Keyboard
Chapter 1 has a brief QuickFacts to get you started using the onscreen keyboard and
facilitate setting up your iPhone. Here, we will look at a number of additional features
used in entering text.
Benefit from Typing Shortcuts and Aids
In addition to the primary keyboard techniques shown in Chapter 1, the iPhone has a
number of shortcuts and aids to help you quickly type and correct text. Many of these,
which are on by default, can be turned off in Settings, as you will see in Chapter 5. The
iPhone is watching what you type and automatically helps with these features:
•   Capitalization of the first character after a period.
•   Words above the keyboard to correct misspellings as well as suggest logical next
words. Tap SPACE to accept a highlighted corrected word or tap a suggested word to
insert it.
•   Periods and a space are added at the end of a sentence when you tap SPACE
twice.
•   Phrases are keyboard shortcuts that you type such as “btw” and “syl” to get “By
the way” or “See you later.” You can add shortcuts from the Home screen by tapping
Settings | General | Keyboard | Shortcuts | +. In the Phrase text box, type the
expanded phrase you want (for example, By the way), tap RETURN, type the shortcut
(for example, btw), and tap RETURN again. The next time you type btw, you will get
“By the way.”

•   Apostrophes are added to many contractions, such as “don’t,” “won’t,” and
“shouldn’t,” when you type the word without one. Press SPACE to accept the
apostrophe or touch the suggestion to reject it.
NOTE In this book, the pipe (| ) character is used to replace repetitions of the leading verb. For
example, instead of saying “tap Settings, tap General, tap Keyboard…,” I’ll use “tap Settings | General |
Keyboard,” making it less verbose and easier to read and follow.
•   Alternative letters add accent marks to a character, such as è, é, and ë, when
your hold your finger on the letter. Vowels are the most common characters with
alternatives, but s and c have alternatives, too. Some special characters, such as the
dollar sign, which shows other currency symbols, also have alternatives.
Use the Landscape Keyboard
When you turn your iPhone onto landscape orientation, where it is wider than it is tall,
you’ll see six additional keys that can be very useful. These include an undo key, a
comma, a close key that removes the keyboard, a period, and forward and back insertion-
point movement keys. If you are doing a lot of text editing, it can be worthwhile turning
the iPhone to landscape orientation.

Edit Text
The iPhone gives you a number of ways to assist in editing text, including using a
magnifying glass to place an insertion point; selecting the text you want to change; and
cutting, copying, and pasting text as needed:
•   A magnifying glass is displayed when you hold your finger on a piece of text.
You can then move your finger to exactly place the insertion point.
•   Slide to the correct letter when you see you are pointing at a wrong letter.
Don’t lift your finger off the keyboard, but slide it to the letter you want. The letter
isn’t selected until you lift your finger.
•   Select text. After placing the insertion point and lifting your finger, you get the
options to select the current word, select all text, or, if you have recently cut or copied
something, to paste it. Tap the option you want, or you can type a character to insert it
at the insertion point, or use BACKSPACE.

•   Change the selection by dragging the blue icons at the ends of the selection.
•   Cut, copy, and paste text options are available if you have chosen Select or
Select All. Like all such computer options, Cut removes the selected text and makes it
available to be pasted elsewhere. Copy leaves the selected text and makes it available
to be pasted elsewhere, and Paste places the text that was most recently cut or copied
at a new insertion point. There may be additional options such as Replace, which
suggests alternatives to a word, and Define, which provides a definition of a word.
•   Shake to undo cuts, pastes, and typing. Shake your iPhone (not too vigorously)
and get a menu of undo and/or redo options pertinent to what you have just done. Tap
the option you want.
 Set Up Siri and Use Dictation
Siri is the iPhone’s voice assistant. It allows you to speak to the iPhone and have it
respond. It can use information in your phone, as well as what it can find on the Internet.
You can say, for example, “What time is my appointment with John?” and Siri will look it
up in the Calendar and give you the answer. You can also say, “Where is the movie 100
Foot Journey playing?” and Siri will search the Internet for the answer and tell you what it
found.

Turn On and Use Siri
Siri is turned on by a choice you had when you set up your iPhone. You should see a
microphone key on the onscreen keyboard, as shown earlier in this chapter. You must also
be connected to the Internet by either Wi-Fi or a cellular service. If you use Siri, some
information about you will be sent to Apple to facilitate this use—for example, your
contacts, which might allow you to say to Siri “call Home,” and Siri will look at your
contacts for “Home” to carry out your request. If you don’t want to do that, you should not
use Siri. If you don’t see the microphone icon in the keyboard, you can turn it on and, in
any case, begin using Siri with these steps:
1. From the Home screen, tap Settings | General | Siri | On.
2. To use Siri, press and hold the Home button until a microphone appears. When
that happens, Siri will ask what it can help you with.
3. Speak in a normal voice to respond to and ask Siri any question. Siri will respond
as best it can, sometimes humorously.

TIP As you might have seen in Settings | General | Siri, you can turn on “Hey Siri” so you can directly
start talking to Siri instead of pressing and holding the Home button.
Use Dictation
The iPhone’s dictation allows you to verbally add text anywhere the onscreen keyboard
would normally appear. You can tell if Siri is turned on by whether a microphone key
appears on your keyboard.
To use dictation, tap the microphone key (the first time tap Enable Dictation) and begin
talking. You should see the modulated voice wave while you are talking. When you have
finished, tap Done. After a bit, the text you dictated will appear. It is not fast. Pause often
to let it catch up. You can verbally indicate punctuation by saying the words such as
“period,” “comma,” and “new paragraph.”

NOTE The reason that you must be connected to the Internet to use Siri and do dictation is that your
voice is sent over the Internet to servers at Apple where it is converted to text and then sent back to you. To
facilitate the conversion, Apple also collects a lot of information about you, such as your name, address, the
names in your Contacts list, your current location, and so on. If you are not comfortable with this, turn off
dictation by reversing the previous steps to set up Siri.
USE THE PHONE
As I said in Chapter 1, the iPhone is first and foremost a telephone with which you can
easily make and receive calls using the Phone app. To facilitate that, the Phone app
includes the following items:
•   A numeric keypad for dialing
•   A contacts list where you can store phone numbers, email addresses, and much
more information
•   A favorites list for frequently called numbers
•   A list of recent calls both made and received
•   A voicemail recorder for people to leave messages and for you to record an
outgoing message
 Make Calls

Your iPhone allows you to make calls in a number of different ways, not all in the Phone
app. For example, you can tap a phone number in an email or text message or on a web
page to call that number. Within Phone, though, you can use the keypad, call a number in
any of the three lists, and return a call from a message left in voicemail.
Make Calls from the Keypad
If you have ever made a call from a phone with a keypad, then making a call from the
iPhone’s keypad will be very familiar. Here are the steps to follow:
1. From the Home screen, tap Phone. If you don’t see the keypad, tap Keypad on
the bottom right of the screen.
2. Enter the phone number you want to call using the keypad and press Send (the
green classic handset button).
You will hear the other phone ringing and the call screen will appear with several call
options:
•   Mute Tap to mute all microphones either in the iPhone or in the EarPods. Touch
and hold to put the call on hold.
•   Keypad Display the keypad to enter keystrokes during a call.
•   Speaker Have the iPhone behave like a speakerphone or use a Bluetooth device
with the phone.
•   Add Call Dial another call while you are on an existing call for conference
calling.
•   FaceTime Turn a call into a FaceTime call. (FaceTime is discussed further in

Chapter 6.)
•   Contacts Open Contacts to get information.
When you are finished with the call, tap the red handset button at the bottom of the screen
or press the On/Off-Sleep/Wake button, which will also put the iPhone to sleep.
Make a Call with Siri
Making a call with Siri is most intuitive: just push and hold the Home button until the
microphone appears and the double-beep sounds or say “Hey Siri” and then say “Call,”
followed by anyone in your Contacts list or a phone number. The call will go through as if
you had tapped the person in your Contacts list.
Make Calls from Lists
You can make a call from any of the three lists—Favorites, Recents, or Contacts—by
scrolling the list until you see the entry and then tapping it in both Favorites and Recents.
In Contacts, after scrolling to find the entry, tap it and then tap the desired phone number.
Manage the Favorites and Recents Lists
The Favorites and Recents lists can be valuable, and you’ll want to maintain them and
transfer entries from one list to another. The Contacts list is discussed in detail a little later
in this book. The Recents list in particular needs to be culled; otherwise, it will get big
fast. There are two operations that you can perform on entries in the Favorites and Recents
lists:
•   Delete the entry Tap Edit in the upper right of Recents or upper left of
Favorites, tap the entry, and tap Delete (the red circle with a white bar on the left of
the entry).
•   Work with the entry Tap the information icon (the “i” in a circle) to open a
worksheet where you can add the entry to either Favorites or Contacts (or both), make
regular or FaceTime calls, send a text message, or block incoming calls.

Use Another App During a Call
If, during a call, you want to start and use another app, you can do so with iOS 8. Here’s
how:
1. Tap the Home button to open the Home screen.
2. Locate and tap the app you want to use.
3. Do whatever you want to do with the app while still talking on the phone.
4. When you are done with the app and want to return to the phone call screen, tap
the green bar at the top of the screen.

 Receive Calls
When you receive a call, your iPhone will ring, vibrate, or both, and a screen will pop up
with the name of the caller (if they are in your Contacts list) or the phone number (if they
are not). You can then perform the following actions:

•   Tap Accept, drag the slider if the iPhone is locked, or press the center button on
your headset to talk to the caller.
•   Tap Decline, press the On/Off-Sleep/Wake button quickly twice, or press and
hold the center button on your headset to decline the call and send it to voicemail.
•   Tap Remind Me to set up a reminder for the call.
•   Tap Message to send a text message in place of the call.
•   Silence the call by pressing the On/Off-Sleep/Wake button or either volume
control button. The call can then be accepted or declined and sent to voicemail.
Handle Voicemail
Voicemail allows callers to leave voice messages to you on your iPhone, as well as allows
you to record an outgoing message that callers hear when you can’t answer your phone.
Callers are sent to voicemail when you do not or cannot answer your phone as well as

when you decline a call. When a caller leaves a voicemail message, you know about it in
three ways:
•   On the lock screen, you’ll see a note that you missed a call and that the caller left
voicemail.
•   On the Home screen, the Phone app will have a number in a red circle indicating
the number of voicemail messages.
•   At the bottom of the Phone app screens, you’ll see a number in a red circle over
the Voicemail icon indicating the number of voicemail messages.
To listen to a voicemail message, open the Phone app, tap the Voicemail icon, tap the
message you want to hear, and tap Play (the right-pointing arrow). Tap Speaker to hear
the voicemail there. Also, you can drag the slider opposite Play to position where in the
message you want to listen. Tapping the information icon (the “i” in a circle) displays the
information you have on the caller in Contacts. When you are done listening to a message,
tap outside the message box to close it.
To record a greeting (the outgoing message that a caller hears when they go to voicemail),
open voicemail as described previously and tap Greeting in the upper left. You have two
choices: the default your cellular service has set up, and a custom greeting you set up on
your iPhone. To create a custom greeting, tap Custom | Record, speak the message, and
tap Stop. You can then tap Play to listen to your message, and, if desired, re-record it.
When you are happy with your message, tap Save.

Call Waiting
Call waiting occurs when you are engaged in a phone conversation and another call comes
in. If the caller is someone in your contacts list, you will see their name and possibly their
picture. Otherwise, you will just see the phone number. In any case, you will get three
options about what you want to do:
•   End Current Call Hang up the original call and connect the second call.
•   Send To Voicemail Decline the second call and keep the first call connected.
•   Hold & Accept Put the first call on hold and connect to the second call. When

you hang up the second call, you will be reconnected to the first call.
Call Forwarding
Call forwarding provides the means for you to forward calls received by your iPhone to
another phone number. This can be very handy, but may not be available with all cellular
services—and there may be some small differences between services that do offer it. The
best solution is to call your cellular service to see how to use call forwarding. With
Verizon, to activate call forwarding dial *71, the number to which you want calls
forwarded, and touch Send (the green circle with a handset); to end call forwarding, dial
*73 and touch Send.
WORK WITH CONTACTS
Contacts allows you to collect phone numbers, email addresses, and other information
about the people and organizations with whom you correspond or otherwise interact.
Contacts is a handy address book in your iPhone.

 Add New Contacts
You can add contacts directly by typing them in (see “Add Contacts Directly,” later in this
chapter), or you can have contacts automatically added to iPhone’s Contacts in several
other ways, including from the following:
•   iCloud Contacts are transferred from other iOS devices (iPhone, iPod, and iPad)
automatically using Wi-Fi if they are synched with iCloud and you have chosen to use
iCloud as described in Chapter 1. On your iPhone, tap Settings | iCloud | Contacts |
On.

•   iTunes Contacts are transferred from a Windows or Mac computer if iTunes is
installed on the computer and synced with the iPhone, as described in Chapter 1. In
iTunes on the computer, with the iPhone connected to it, select your iPhone in the left
pane and select Info in the top command bar. You will be told your contacts are being
synced, as you see in Figure 2-1.

Figure 2-1: iTunes is a good conduit between email apps on your computer and iPhone, most of which are not in
iCloud.
NOTE It is possible to get duplicate contacts when using both iTunes and iCloud. However, you can
use both, with iTunes getting contacts from your computer and iCloud getting them from other iOS devices.
•   Facebook Contacts are transferred from Facebook, creating a Contacts group of
your Facebook friends. On your iPhone, tap Settings | Facebook | Contacts | On.

•   Exchange Contacts are transferred from a Microsoft Exchange Global Address
List. On your iPhone, tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars | Exchange (account)
| Contacts | On.
•   Mail and Safari Contacts are picked up from incoming email or from a website,
as described in the next section.
Pick Up Contacts from Mail and Web Pages
When you get a piece of email with a phone number, email address, or snail-mail address,
all you need to do is touch and hold for a moment on the number or address and a menu
will pop up, allowing you to add it to Contacts, among other options.
Similarly, when you are browsing through websites and find an email address, phone
number, or mailing address, touch and hold on it for a moment to get a pop-up menu you
can use to add it to Contacts.

Add Contacts Directly
You can, of course, directly add individuals to Contacts, one at a time:
1. Open Contacts and tap the Add icon (the plus sign) at the top right of the All
Contacts screen. The New Contact page opens.
2. Enter as much of the information as you have or want. To call, you need a name
and a phone number; for email, you need at least an email address and a name. If you
have additional information, such as another phone number and/or email address, or a
home address for the contact, tap the text boxes for those items and fill in the desired
information.
3. When you are done, tap Done in the upper-right corner to close the New Contact
page.
TIP When you have several phone numbers or email addresses in a single contact’s record, they are all
displayed when you go to call the person or enter the contact in an email message so you can select the one you
want.

 Use Contacts
Contacts is an electronic address book you can easily carry with you and reference often.
It is very intuitive and easy to use.
Call a Contact
To call a contact:
1. On the Home screen, tap Phone | Contacts (you can also just tap Contacts on
the Home screen). The All Contacts list will pop up.
2. Tap the letter of the alphabet that begins the contact’s last name and then tap the
contact you want to call. To get more information about the contact, drag the contact’s
page up.
3. Tap the phone number you want to use. The call will start, and the normal calling
screen will appear.
Change Contacts
To change contacts:
1. Open Contacts, locate the contact you want to change, as described in the
previous section, and tap Edit in the upper-right corner of the contact page. A page
similar to the one for a new contact will open that’s filled in with the contact’s existing
information.
2. Make changes to any of the fields or add information to fields not already used.
3. When you are done with editing and linking, tap Done in the upper-right area.
Delete Contacts
To delete an entire contact entry, edit the contact to open it in editing mode, as just
discussed, and then scroll to the bottom of the page and tap Delete Contact.
Set a Ringtone
For your special contacts (wife, husband, mother, daughter, and so on), you can set a
special ringtone and/or vibration so when that person calls, you immediately know who
the call is from. Follow these steps to set a ringtone:
1. Open Contacts and select the person whose ringtone you want to change.
2. In the individual’s contact page, tap Edit | Ringtone to open a screen of
alternative ringtones.
3. Touch each of the ringtones to listen to them and choose the one you want to use.
With similar steps you can change the vibration that is used for the contact as well as the
text tone and vibration used when text messages are received from the person. You can set
the default ringtone, vibration, text tone, and so on by tapping Settings | Sounds.

 Review Contacts Settings
To review Contacts settings, tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars and scroll down to
Contacts. You have these settings available:
•   Sort Order Specifies the order in which the entries in your contacts list are
displayed
•   Display Order Specifies how entries are shown in the list
•   Show In App Switcher Shows favorites and recent contacts along the top of the
App Switcher
•   Short Name Specifies whether a short name is used and how it is constructed
•   My Info Specifies the owner of or the one responsible for the list
•   Default Account Specifies the mail account that will be associated with contacts
that aren’t associated with any other mail account

Chapter 3

Exploring the Internet
QuickSteps to…
 Establish an iPhone Wi-Fi Connection
 Get Familiar with Safari
 Browse the Internet
 Search the Internet
 Save a Bookmark
 Organize Bookmarks
 Work with a Web Page
 Read Web Pages
 Play Internet Audio and Video Files
 Control Internet Security
 Search for Information
 Shop on the Internet
 Use Siri to Browse the Internet
The Internet provides both worldwide communication and a major means for locating and
sharing information. The Internet is at the foundation of the iPhone; the iPhone wouldn’t
exist without it because most of what you do with the iPhone is done with the Internet. To
use the Internet, you must have a connection to it using either cellular or Wi-Fi. With this
connection you can send and receive email; access the World Wide Web; shop; use social
networking sites such as Facebook; listen to music; watch movies and TV; and participate
in blogs, forums, and newsgroups, among many other things.
In this chapter, we’ll review how to get connected to the Internet, take a good look at
Safari and its settings, and then see how you can use Safari to explore the Internet via both
navigation and searching. Next, we’ll go over how to use tabs, bookmarks, and history,
and then we’ll review how to get and use information on the Internet, including audio and
video files. Finally, we’ll cover how to control Internet security.
CONNECT TO THE INTERNET
With a cellular service, you sign up with AT&T, Sprint, T-Mobile, or Verizon (in the
United States), start your iPhone, tap the Safari icon, and you are on the Internet. With Wi-
Fi, you can use someone else’s connection, such as in a coffee shop, library, hotel, or
airport, often for free (we’ll talk about how to connect there in a moment). If you want Wi-

Fi in your home or office and don’t already have a connection, you can get one from a
local telephone company, a cable TV company, a satellite link, or an independent Internet
service provider (ISP). If you already have Wi-Fi available in your home or office and just
need to connect your iPhone to it, skip to “Use the World Wide Web” a little later in this
chapter.
 Establish an iPhone Wi-Fi Connection
To use your iPhone in a Wi-Fi area, called a “hotspot,” you must tell the iPhone about it
and probably give the iPhone the password for the hotspot. When you first enter a Wi-Fi
hotspot that you want to use with your iPhone, after turning on your iPhone, follow these
steps:
1. Tap Settings | Wi-Fi and turn Wi-Fi on if it isn’t already. Review the list of Wi-Fi
networks that are available at your location.
2. Tap the wireless network you want to use. If there is a lock symbol for this
network, indicating that a password is required, a Password dialog box will appear.
3. If needed, enter the network password and tap Join. You will be connected to the
Wi-Fi network and, in most cases, to the Internet.
USE THE WORLD WIDE WEB
The World Wide Web (or just the Web) is the sum of all the websites in the world—
examples of which are CNN (shown next), Amazon, and the BBC. The World Wide Web

is what you can access with a web browser such as Safari.
 Get Familiar with Safari
Safari comes standard with the iPhone and provides an excellent means to access the
Internet and do anything it is possible to do with a web browser. Several other browsers,
including Google Chrome, are available as apps you can download from the App Store,
but this book assumes you are using Safari to access the Internet.
Review Safari’s Controls
Start Safari and review its controls (from the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Safari). At the
top and bottom of the Safari screen are a series of icons and features that let you control it.
From left to right, these are as follows:

•   The address and search bar allows you to type in a web address, or URL, to
open the website in Safari. For example, if you wanted to open CNN, you would type
cnn.com in the address bar. This same bar also allows you to enter keywords to use in
searching the Internet, as you might do directly in Google. As you will see in the next
section, you can select the search engine that is used to do the searching for this field.
Google is the default, but Yahoo! and Bing are also options in Settings | Safari.
•   Reload lets you re-download the selected web page from its server to see any
changes in the page, such as late-breaking news or the latest prices on an auction site.
If a web page is not behaving the way it should, reloading it can often fix the problem.
While a webpage is being loaded, the Reload icon is replaced with a Stop icon (an X)
that, if you click it, will stop the loading of the web page.

•   Previous and Next let you return to the pages you have visited previous to or
following the present page.
•   The Share menu allows you to tap various actions you can take to share the
current website address, including AirDrop to a nearby iPhone, iPad, or iPod; text
messaging or emailing it to a friend; putting it on Twitter or Facebook; adding it to
your Home screen; printing or copying it; and adding it to either your Bookmarks or
Reading List.
•   Bookmarks, Reading List, and Shared Links opens a set of three lists: one for
the bookmarks (website pages) that you tap to keep, one for web pages with articles
you want to come back and read, and one for web pages that have been shared with
you.
•   Tabs identify separate website pages you have opened; simply tap a tab to see its
page.

TIP When you see a web address such as http://www.amazon.com, all you have to type is amazon.com
(the “http://www.” is assumed). If you have been to the site recently, you only have to type enough of the name
for it to be unique; as you see in the illustration, typing amaz got me Amazon.com.

Look at Safari’s Settings
In iPhone’s Settings, there is a full set of settings for Safari. From the Home screen, tap
Settings | Safari.

Safari’s settings include the following:
•   Search Engine allows you to choose the search engine used: Google (the
default), Yahoo!, or Bing.
•   Search Engine Suggestions allows you to turn off search engine suggestions
and only display the most likely result of the search.
•   Spotlight Suggestions allows Safari to use your Spotlight search history,
including the suggestions you selected to determine the top suggestions in the current
search.
•   Quick Website Search allows you to search within a website by including the
website address in the search. For example, entering Amazon Quicksteps displays
suggestions of QuickSteps books on Amazon.
•   Preload Top Hit allows Safari to immediately start loading what it determines is
the most likely search result page based on your bookmarks and browsing history.
•   Passwords & AutoFill allows you to turn on or off the automatic filling out of
web forms with your contact information, including names, passwords, and other
information that you have previously given to a website. This is turned off by default,

and it is a good idea to leave it that way. Although it is a handy feature, it can lead to
giving out information when you don’t want to do so.
•   Favorites allows you to establish the defaults that are suggested when you enter
an address or search term.
•   Open Links allows you to control whether clicking a link or opening a new page
replaces the current page in the current tab or opens a new tab displaying the new
page.
•   Block Pop-ups allows you to prevent a website from opening a second little
window for whatever purpose. Here again, history has colored the prevailing view of
pop-ups. They can be a pain if they are giving you information you don’t want, but if
they open a web form you need to fill out, they can be useful. The default is On,
blocking pop-ups. Depending on what you are doing, you might want to turn this off.
•   Do Not Track allows you to turn on or off the prevention (if it is on) of
collecting information, such as websites you visit and your name, address, and other
information you have entered into web forms. With Do Not Track on, AutoFill does
not collect information and it doesn’t fill in forms. Also, the history of the websites
you have visited is not maintained.
•   Block Cookies allows you to choose whether you want to accept cookies that are
stored on your iPhone: either always, never, or only from sites you visit. (Cookies are
small snippets of information that identify you to the website based on information
you gave them.)
•   Fraudulent Website Warning tells the iPhone to warn you when you are
visiting a website that is not what it seems to be and is suspected of phishing. Phishing
sites masquerade as a real site, such as your bank, and fraudulently ask you to enter
your personal information, such as username and password. If you get such a warning,
you want to immediately leave the site and not enter any information.
•   Clear History and Website Data allow you to remove the information on your
iPhone from or about the websites you have visited.
•   Use Cellular Data tells the iPhone that it can use your cellular network to save
Reading List information to iCloud for offline reading.
•   Advanced provides three more options:
•   Website Data show you which websites are storing how much information on
your iPhone.
•   JavaScript allows you to turn off accepting programs or apps that use
JavaScript, a programming language. Generally, you want to leave JavaScript
turned on. Many apps legitimately use it, and if you want to use the app, you have
to accept the use of JavaScript. Historically, bad things were done with JavaScript,
and, of course, they still can be. However, if you are running apps from the App
Store, they are reasonably safe. Apple has vetted these apps.
•   Web Inspector allows you to open Safari on your computer, connect the
computer to your iPhone with a cable, and look at what a website is doing on the

iPhone using Safari’s Advanced Preferences option on your computer. The Web
Inspector option is for use by app developers to debug (remove problems from)
their apps.
 Browse the Internet
Browsing the Internet refers to using a browser, such as Safari, to go from one website to
another. You can browse to a site by directly entering a site address, navigating to a site
from another site, or using the browser controls. First, of course, you have to open the
browser.
Enter a Site Directly
To go directly to a site, follow these steps:
1. Open Safari, tap in the address bar, and tap the X on the right of the bar to erase
the current contents.
2. Begin typing the address of the site you want to open. The iPhone will give you
suggestions and fill in the address bar. I got these after typing gopro and needed to
only tap the first suggestion to go to the site. I could also have typed gopro.com and
tapped Go to open that web page.
TIP The onscreen keyboards that appear when the address bar is tapped change the label of the
RETURN key to GO.

Use Site Navigation
Site navigation uses a combination of links and menus on one web page to locate and open
another web page, either in the same site or in another site.
•   Links are words, phrases, sentences, or graphics that, when tapped, take you to
another location. They are often a different color, banded (as “Learn More”; see the
following left image), or underlined.
•   Menus contain one or a few words in a horizontal list (as in “Standard Surf
Music”; see the following right image) or vertical list (or both) that, when tapped, take
you to another location.
If you hold your finger on a link or a menu option, which is really a link within a menu, a
pop-up menu will be displayed, allowing you to open the link in the same tab, open it in a
new tab, add it to your Reading List, or copy it, allowing you to paste it in an email, text
message, or elsewhere.

Use Browser Navigation
Browser navigation uses the controls on your browser at the top and bottom of Safari, as
described in “Review Safari’s Controls,” earlier in this chapter, to go to another location.
 Search the Internet
You can search the Internet in two ways: by using the search facility built into Safari and
by using an independent search facility on the Web.
Search from Safari
Tap in the address/search box at the top of the Safari screen, tap one of the popular sites or
a site you have visited, or begin to type a site name to search for sites you have recently
visited or search for sites that contain keywords. For example, type veal. The search
engine—Google is the default—will display several suggested web pages while you are
typing, as well as whether there are any matches on the current web page. You can tap any
of the suggestions to open those pages.

Search from an Internet Site
There are several directly accessed Internet search sites. Among these are Google, Bing,
and Yahoo! Because Google is the default, you can open Google by simply tapping Go on
the keyboard to display its search results. For example, with the word “veal” as entered in
the previous section, you would get these results:

TIP When you enter search criteria, place quotation marks around certain keywords or phrases to get only
results that match those words exactly.
 Save a Bookmark
Sometimes, you visit a site that you would like to return to quickly or often. Safari has the
ability to save sites as bookmarks for easy retrieval.
Add a Bookmark
To save a site to the Bookmarks list, follow these steps:
1. Open the web page you want to add to your Bookmarks list, and make sure its

correct address (URL) is in the address bar.
2. Tap the Share menu icon in the bottom center and then tap Add Bookmark. The
Add Bookmark dialog box will open (see the following left image).
3. Adjust the name as needed in the text box (you may want to type a new name you
will readily associate with the site).
4. Initially, the Location option is “Favorites,” meaning that the link will be saved to
the Favorites bar. If you tap that option, though, you can choose to save the link to the
Bookmarks list or to a subfolder you have within Bookmarks (see the following right
image).
5. Choose where you want to save the link and tap Save.
Save to the Home Screen
You can choose to have a link to a website added to the Home screen as you would an app.
Here’s how:
1. Open the web page you want to add to your Home screen, and make sure its
correct address (URL) is in the address bar.
2. Tap the Share menu icon and tap Add To Home Screen. The Add To Home
dialog box will open.
3. Adjust the name as needed in the text box and tap Add. You’ll see the icon for
the page appear on the Home screen.

 Organize Bookmarks
Safari provides two places to store your bookmarks: a Bookmarks list and a Favorites list.
TIP The web pages you have pinned to the Home screen from Safari can also be organized in any way
you want.
Rearrange, Edit, and Delete Bookmarks
The items on your Bookmarks list are displayed in the order you added them, with the
name you left them with, but you can move them to a new location, edit their names, and
delete them. Follow these steps:
1. In Safari, tap the Bookmarks Reading List Shared Links icon and then, if
needed, tap the Bookmarks segment on the left. Tap Edit on the bottom right. The
Bookmarks editing features are displayed.

2. Locate the site you want to reposition. Touch and hold the three bars (grip strip)
on the right of the bookmark, and drag it up or down to where you want it.
3. To edit a bookmark’s name, tap the right arrow on the mid-right of the bookmark
to open the Edit Bookmark dialog box.
4. In the top text box, edit the name as you would edit other text on the iPhone (see
Chapter 2).
5. In the bottom text box opposite Location, tap the greater-than sign and tap where
you want to store the bookmark (see the following section).
6. To delete a bookmark, tap the delete icon on the left of it and then tap Delete.
When you are done editing bookmarks, tap Done.

Create New Folders
You can add your own folders within Bookmarks:
1. In Safari, tap the Bookmarks Reading List Shared Links icon and then, if
needed, tap the Bookmarks icon and tap Edit on the bottom right. The Bookmarks
editing features are displayed, as you saw earlier.
2. Tap New Folder in the lower left, type the name for the folder, tap where you
want to store the folder, and tap DONE on the keyboard.
3. Use the steps in the “Rearrange, Edit, and Delete Bookmarks” section earlier to
move the desired bookmarks to the new folder.
Put Bookmarks in Folders
You can put a site in either your own folders (see “Create New Folders”) or the default
Bookmarks list and Favorites bar, which operate like folders. Here’s how:
1. Open the web page you want in your Bookmarks list, and make sure its correct
address, or URL, is in the address bar.
2. Tap the Share menu icon, tap Add Bookmark, adjust the name as needed in the
text box, tap Location, tap the folder to use, and tap Save.
USE INTERNET INFORMATION

Of course, the reason for accessing the Internet is to use the information you find there—
to read it, save it, play its media, or send it to a friend.
 Work with a Web Page
An iPhone screen displaying a web page in Safari works just like any other iPhone screen
and gives you the same tools you’ve used elsewhere on the iPhone. In Safari, you can
perform the following tasks:
•   Select pages, links, items, and options by tapping them.
•   Move a page being displayed up or down, left or right, by dragging it with your
finger.
•   Change a page by swiping from right to left or bottom to top.
•   Enlarge a page by spreading two fingers apart.
•   Reduce a page by pinching two fingers together.
•   Enlarge just an article if it is in a separate frame by double-tapping the article.
•   Scroll just an article if it is in a separate frame by dragging with two fingers.
•   See a link’s destination by touching and holding the link, which also allows you
to open the link in a new tab and add it to the Reading List.

•   Fill out a form by tapping the first field, typing what is requested, and then
tapping Next or Previous.
•   Return to a web page you have viewed by tapping the Tab icon in the lower
right and tapping the page you want to return to. On the Tab list screen you can go to a
new page by tapping the plus sign in the bottom center (see earlier illustration).
 Read Web Pages
Safari has a reader with which you can separate out an article from advertisements and
make reading an excellent experience.
1. Navigate in Safari to an article you want to read and then tap it. On the left end of
the address bar you should see the Reader icon (a stack of lines).
2. Tap the Reader icon. The article will appear, filling the screen.

3. Scroll by swiping up (from bottom to top) as you would any other page.
4. To close the Reader, tap the Reader icon again in the address bar.
NOTE The Reader provides a good way to forward an article because it removes the ads and transfers
just the article. Use the Share menu to do this, which works with the Reader as well.
 Play Internet Audio and Video Files
You can play audio and some video files on the Internet with Safari directly from a link on
a web page. The exception is that the iPhone cannot play video files that use the Adobe
Flash technology (several apps are available in the App Store, such as the Rover browser,
that will allow you to play Flash content). Many web pages have links to audio and video
files, such as the one shown next. To play these files, simply tap the play button in the
center. The player will open to play the requested piece.

TIP To search for information within an open web page in Safari, type the keywords you want to search
for in the Search field in the upper-right area, and then tap the entry or entries under On This Page.

 Control Internet Security
As you read earlier in this chapter, Safari Settings allow you to control several aspects of
Internet security. You can determine how you want to handle cookies placed on your
computer by websites and use Do Not Track to prevent the website from bothering you in
the future, among several other settings. These controls are found in Settings.
Handle Cookies
Cookies are small pieces of data that websites store on your computer so that they can
remind themselves of who you are. These can save you from having to constantly enter
your name and ID. Cookies can also be dangerous, however, letting people into your
iPhone where they can potentially do damage. Safari lets you determine when you will
block cookies:
1. In the Home screen, tap Settings | Safari.

2. In Safari Settings, tap Block Cookies.
3. Consider the four choices you have:
•   Always Block means that every time you visit a site, you must sign in, and
there is no memory of your last visit that might take you back to what you were
doing the last time you were on the site.
•   Allow From Current Website Only is a onetime exception for the current
website.
•   Allow From Websites I Visit means that you will allow cookies from the
specific website you visit but block cookies from third parties and advertisers.
•   Always Allow means that any site you come across can add whatever
information they want.
The default, and my recommendation, is Allow From Websites I Visit. In my mind,
cookies can be more of a benefit than a problem. You can see who has stored information
on your iPhone by tapping Advanced at the bottom of Safari Settings and then tapping
Website Data, as discussed earlier in this chapter.
Use Do Not Track
Safari’s Do Not Track option in Safari Settings gives you a way to visit a website and not
leave any information on both your iPhone and the visited website that you had visited it.
This allows you to take a peek at a website and not leave any trace so as to more safely
browse and view websites. While you have Do Not Track turned on, your browsing
history, temporary Internet files, and cookies are not stored on your iPhone, preventing
anyone looking at your phone from seeing where you have browsed. In addition, a request
is passed on to the Internet content provider (the site you visit) not to track your visit. It is
up to the site to honor that request or not!

NOTE If you are using your iPhone in a school or business that has security controls, they may be able
to see where you have browsed, even with Do Not Track, and it is not perfect at preventing a website from
knowing who you are.
Turn On Private Browsing
Private Browsing, which is turned on at the bottom of the Tabs screen, is another aspect of
Do Not Track. If you tap Private on the Tabs screen, your screen will darken, Safari will
not remember the sites you visit, they will not be stored on the Tabs screen, and cookies
and other information will not be stored on your phone. Also, the sites will be requested
not to track you.
Enable Fraudulent Website Warning
Fraudulent sites are websites that present themselves as legitimate ones—including banks,
brokerages, email services, and others—when in fact they are not and only want to get
information from you, such as your user ID, password, Social Security number, and other
information. This is called phishing. If Fraudulent Website Warning is enabled, Safari will
warn you when it thinks a site you are visiting is suspected of phishing. This is enabled by
default, and I strongly recommend that you leave it that way. Safari’s ability to do this is
less than perfect, so you need to be aware of this practice and watch out for it.
GATHER INFORMATION AND SHOP ON THE
INTERNET
The World Wide Web is a phenomenal source of information and place to shop. It is the
world’s largest library, museum, and shopping mall rolled into one—you only need to use
it, which you can do with your iPhone and Safari.
 Search for Information
We have discussed using Safari to browse and search the Internet, but not where that takes
you and what to do when you get there. There are, of course, millions of subjects you
could search on, but let’s look at two examples: researching a historical figure (Theodore
Roosevelt) and gathering demographic information (the population growth in the 10
largest U.S. cities).
Research Theodore Roosevelt
In Safari, simply typing theod provides several places to start. The first, Wikipedia, is a
huge online encyclopedia maintained by everybody who wants to contribute to it. The
second is the official White House presidential bio. The third is a general search on the
name. Tapping the Wikipedia entry provides a wealth of information that you can read and
use as needed. Tapping the general search provides numerous other sites and resources.

Gather Demographic Information
Here, to get what we want I had to fully type growth of ten largest us cities, but I got
numerous sites to explore and many related searches. You have to look at several to get the
information you want.

 Shop on the Internet
As with sources of information, there are innumerable places to buy goods and services on
the Internet; you only need to search for them. Two examples are a small black leather
purse and French restaurants in Seattle.
Look for a Black Purse
My wife wanted a classic small black leather purse and hadn’t seen one lately in stores, so
she turned to the Internet. Typing small black leather purse produced a number of firms
offering that product. Selecting any one or more of those sites offered many items to select
from.

Find a French Restaurant
If you live in or near a large city, you know that restaurants come and go fairly quickly, so
if you like a particular type of food, Internet searching can be helpful. Here is a search for
French restaurants in Seattle.

Tapping on most of them opens a map and reviews, and further tapping opens a website
for the restaurant with menus, photos, and reservations.
 Use Siri to Browse the Internet
Many times you can use Siri to do the searching for you. For example, you can say, “Hey
Siri, get information on Theodore Roosevelt” or “find French restaurants in Seattle.” Siri
does an excellent job getting information on “T.R.” and providing a list of French
restaurants. In the latter case, Siri goes on automatically to display the first restaurant
listed and offers to make reservations for you.




Chapter 4

Using Email and Messages
QuickSteps to…
 Set Up Mail
 Change Mail Settings
 Send, Receive, and Respond to Email
 Apply Formatting
 Handle Attachments
 Manage Email
 Start and Use Messages
 Review Messages Settings
For many people, email and messaging have become primary means of communicating
and are another reason for them to have an iPhone. The iPhone comes with the Mail,
Messages, and Contacts apps already installed. In addition, the App Store has many
alternatives for emailing and messaging. To use any apps for emailing and messaging,
however, you must have a connection to the Internet and an email account. If you do not
yet have an Internet connection, go back to Chapter 3 and set one up now.
This chapter will discuss getting an email account; setting up the Mail and Messages apps;
sending, receiving, and managing email; and sending and receiving text messages.
USE MAIL
The iPhone’s Mail app allows you to send, receive, and manage email over the Internet.
This book primarily focuses on the use of the Mail app because it is a modern email
program that works well and comes with and is designed for Apple’s iOS. You can also
send and receive email through other email apps, as well as web mail accounts using
Safari, but this chapter will be devoted to using Mail.
 Set Up Mailx
To begin the use of Mail, you must establish an email account with an email provider
recognized by Mail and then convey that information to Mail. You may have already
automatically set up Mail during your iPhone installation using the email account you
used for your Apple account. If so, you can skip to “Change Mail Settings.”
Establish an Email Account
For an email account, you need the following:

•   An email address (for example, mike@anisp.com).
•   The password for your mail account.
•   You may also need to know the type of mail server you are using—either IMAP
or POP (if you have a choice, choose IMAP; it is newer and provides more flexibility).
Internet Message Access Protocol (IMAP) keeps a copy of your mail on the server and
does not delete it until you do or until some set time, such as three months. This
allows you to read your mail on several devices until you delete it on one of them.
Post Office Protocol (POP) allows you to download your messages once and then
deletes it on the server, unless you choose otherwise, making it hard to use it with both
an iPhone and a computer.
At the time this was written, Mail recognizes accounts with iCloud, Microsoft Exchange,
Gmail, Yahoo!, AOL, Microsoft Hotmail, Microsoft Outlook, and a number of smaller
email services. Because you had to have an email account to get an Apple ID to use
iPhone, you can generally use that for your Mail account. It is also likely that when you
set up an Internet connection, you were given an email account that you can use. Finally,
you can open Safari and go to Google.com, Yahoo.com, Outlook.com (not the Office
product, but the replacement for Hotmail), and others to create a new account. Here are
the steps with Google:
1. On the Home screen, tap Safari. Tap the address bar, tap the delete icon, and type
the site from which you want an email account—in this case, type google.com.
2. Tap More (the three bars on the left) | Gmail | Create An Account. Enter your
name, choose a username, create and confirm a password, and complete filling out the
registration form.

3. When you are done, tap Next Step. To confirm your entries, tap Create Profile.
4. At the Welcome message, tap Continue To Gmail.
5. You are asked if you want the Gmail app. Because you already have the native
iPhone Mail app, for the moment, I suggest you ignore the Gmail app and tap Go To
The Mobile Site. This shows you your Google mail in Safari. For now, close Safari.
The Gmail account in Safari is called “web mail” and is one of three ways to look at
Gmail. The other two are a Gmail app you can download and the iPhone’s Mail app,
which is the way we’ll use. After creating an email account, put aside looking at your mail
and return to the Home screen to set up Mail.
Set Up Gmail in Mail
With a Gmail account, you not only can view your mail in a web mail account on Safari,
but also set it up in Mail. Here’s how:
1. In the Home screen, tap Mail. If you have not previously set up an account in
Mail, it will display a number of mail servers. Tap Google. If you have previously set
up an account in Mail, follow the instructions in “Set Up Outlook.com in Mail,”
substituting “gmail.com” for “outlook.com.”

2. Enter your name, email address, password, and a description of the account and
then tap Next. If you want, choose to link Contacts, Calendars, and Notes to Gmail
and then tap Save. Your Gmail account will open in Mail.
TIP A blue dot next to a message in your Inbox indicates that a message has not been read.
Set Up Outlook.com in Mail
Outlook.com (which used to be Hotmail, the Microsoft mail service, and may in some
cases have been moved to live.com) is set up in Mail in a similar way to Gmail, but once
you have any account configured in Mail, you start in a different way. If Outlook.com is
your first account, start with step 1; otherwise, start with step 2.
1. In the Home screen, tap Mail. Mail will display a number of mail servers. Tap
Outlook.com and skip to step 3.
2. If you have other Mail accounts, from the Home screen, tap Settings | Mail,
Contacts, Calendars | Add Account | Outlook.com.

3. Enter your email address, password, a description of the account, and tap Next.
Choose if you want to link Mail, Contacts, Calendars, and Reminders to Outlook and
tap Save. You are returned to Settings.
TIP Besides the major six email servers, there are a great number of other mail servers you can access on
your iPhone, including smaller email servers and email on a personal website.
 Change Mail Settings
Mail settings include settings for each account, as well as for Mail itself.
Change Account Settings
The account’s settings vary by account and can go into a fair amount of technical depth,
most of which, if you have been able to complete the setup, you don’t need. The general
Mail settings are discussed under “Change General Mail Settings,” later in this chapter.
Here’s how to view the settings for a particular account:
TIP If you are having trouble setting up a mail account, the quickest solution is to contact the mail
provider (or Internet service provider, called the ISP) or IT help desk, either online or by phone, and have them
lead you through the setup. They will help you with the detail settings for your account.
1. Tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars | account name (for example,
“Gmail”).
2. The account’s top-level settings will open. Here, you can turn on or off portions
of the mail service, delete the account, and, by tapping Account, go into the account’s
detail settings.
3. In the detail settings, you can change your basic logon information and open the
advanced settings for your mail provider. For the latter, I’d recommend that you make
any changes with the help of the mail provider.

NOTE Some mail providers, Gmail in particular, provide the ability to archive messages that you
might want, but might not want them to take up room on your iPhone. See the discussion under “Archive,
Delete, and Recover Messages,” later in this chapter.
Change General Mail Settings
The general settings that apply to all mail accounts are below the account-specific settings
discussed earlier. As mentioned there, tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars and scroll
down a bit. The general settings include the following:
•   Fetch New Data allows you to choose how you receive your email from your
mail provider. You essentially have three choices, with some subchoices. From the
Mail, Contacts, Calendars settings, tap Fetch New Data. On the screen that opens,
you have these choices that affect all services:

•   Push Your mail is automatically pushed to you by the server whenever the
mail is available, causing the iPhone to be more active and, therefore, using more
of the battery. Only some mail services provide the Push option (in the examples
here, it is only iCloud), and you can turn that off by tapping the On/Off button.
•   Fetch The iPhone’s Mail app requests the server to send you your mail. This
can be done automatically every 15 minutes, 30 minutes, hourly, or manually
(meaning you determine when to download your mail). Manually puts the least
drain on the battery. Tap the option you would like.
Individual mail services’ settings can be changed by tapping the service you want to
change and then tapping the selection you want from the following options:
NOTE With Push email, the email is received whenever it is available, provided the iPhone is not
powered off, even when it is sleeping and regardless of whether the Mail app is active. With Fetch set to a time
interval (15 minutes to hourly), mail is received only when Mail is first opened and then periodically on the time
interval, so long as Mail remains open. With Fetch set to manual, email is only received when you manually drag
down the top of the Inbox with your finger.
•   Preview allows you to determine the number of message lines you want

displayed in the Inbox.
•   Show To/Cc Label adds a label to received emails telling you if you are an
addressee or a Cc. If no label appears, the email probably came from a mass mailing
and may be spam.
•   Flag Style allows you to select the style and color of the flags attached to mail
messages.
•   Ask Before Deleting gives you a warning and a second chance when you delete
a message.
•   Load Remote Images allows photos to be received with email when they are
attached.
•   Organize By Thread organizes your email by subject instead of time and date.
•   Always Bcc Myself sends a copy of an email to you so you can get it on another
computer, such as your desktop or laptop computer, if you share an email account with
that computer.
•   Mark Addresses highlights addresses in your mail not ending in a certain
domain, such as anisp.com.
•   Increase Quote Level increases the indentation of replies and replies to replies
in the list of messages in your Inbox. This works particularly well when you organize
your messages by their thread (subject).
•   Signature allows you to enter a block of text that is added at the end of your
email messages. If you want to have different signatures for each of your email
accounts, tap Signature, tap Per Account, and add to or replace the default “Sent
from my iPhone” text with the signature block you want to use.
•   Default Account allows you to specify the email account to use when you send
email from an app other than Mail (such as Notes or Photos) and you tap the Share
icon and tap Mail.

 Send, Receive, and Respond to Email
The purpose of email, of course, is to send messages to others, receive messages from
them, and respond to the messages you receive. Mail does this with a simple elegance.
Create and Send Email
To create and send an email message, follow these steps:
1. Tap Mail on the Home screen and in the page that opens, tap the New icon in the
upper-right corner. The New Message screen will open.
2. Start to enter a name in the To text box. If the name is in your Contacts (see “Use
Contacts” in Chapter 2), it will be suggested in a list and you can tap to accept that
name. If the name is not automatically completed, finish typing a full email address
(such as tim@apple.com) and then tap RETURN.
3. If you want more than one addressee, after accepting a suggested name or tapping
RETURN after typing one, as directed in step 2, you can simply begin typing a second
address after the space that has been added.

TIP To look up a name in Contacts, tap the plus sign icon on the right of the To address box to open the
All Contacts list, where you can scroll down to find a name and then tap it.
4. If you want to differentiate the addressees to whom the message is principally
being sent from those for whom it is just information, tap Cc/Bcc to open text boxes
for those items and then enter the desired addressees there as you did in the To text
box. If you want to send the message to a recipient and not have other recipients see to
whom it is sent, tap the Bcc text box and then type the address(es) to be hidden. (Bcc
stands for “blind carbon copy.”)
5. Tap in the Subject text box and type a subject for the message.
6. Tap the area beneath the line under Subject and type your message.
7. When you have completed your message, tap Send in the upper-right corner of
the message. If you are done, close Mail.
NOTE If you want to delete or move an email addressee, touch and hold on the name. While you are
holding it, it will pop away from the text box and you can drag it where you want, such as from To to Cc. If you
just tap it to select it, you can then tap the backspace key to delete it.
Receive Email
Mail can be received automatically if the account is pushing messages to the iPhone or if
you have the account set on automatic fetch. Otherwise, you need to manually download
your mail by dragging down the Inbox on the screen. You can tell whether you have
received email on the Home page by a number in the upper-right corner of the Mail icon.
Once you have unread mail in your Inbox, you can follow these steps:
1. Open Mail (the number opposite the mail account is the number of unviewed
messages) and tap one of the accounts that contains newly received messages.

TIP Have a friend send you an email message so you know whether you are receiving messages. Then
send the friend a message back and ask them to let you know when they get it so you know you are sending
messages.
2. You can tell which messages in the Inbox are newly received by the blue dot
beside them. Tap a message to have it displayed so you can read it.

3. If you wish, you can delete a message while it is selected by tapping the Delete
icon at the bottom-center of the screen.
NOTE You can also delete an email message in the Inbox by swiping across it and tapping Trash.
Alternatively, you can archive it by taping Archive (if available). On the same fly-out menu with Trash are Flag,
which adds a colored dot to the message in the Inbox, and More, which gives you a number of options you can
perform with the message.
Respond to Email
You can also respond to messages you receive. Simply tap the message in the message list
and then tap the Reply icon on the right of the screen. Alternatively, you can swipe across
the message in the Inbox and tap More | Reply.
From the menu that appears, you can tap one of the following options:
•   Reply To return a message to just the person who sent the original message.
•   Reply All To return a message to all the people who were addressees (both To
and Cc) in the original message.
•   Forward To relay a message to people not shown as addressees on the original

message.
•   Save Image To save on your iPhone an attached image or an embedded image
that you received in the original message. (This is only present when there is an
attachment.)
•   Print To print the original message.
In the first three cases, a window similar to the New Message window opens and allows
you to add or change addressees and the subject as well as to add a new message.
 Apply Formatting
In iPhone Mail, you can add bold, italic, and underline formatting to the words, phrases,
and paragraphs in an email message. You can also indent paragraphs. Follow these steps:
1. Create a new email message or one that is in response to a message you have
received, as described in the previous sections of this chapter.
2. Type the text you want in the message and then tap the text you want specially
formatted. The Select bar will appear; tap Select.
3. When the text is selected, drag the ends of the selection box as needed to select
the words you want to format.
4. If it isn’t already displayed, tap the selected text to open the Cut, Copy, Paste …
bar.
5. Tap the right-pointing arrow to display the BIU, Define, … bar.

6. Tap BIU to open the Bold, Italics, Underline bar.
7. Tap the style(s) you want to use (you can use more than one). When you are
done, tap outside of the selection.
8. To indent a paragraph, select it and open the Select bar, as done previously in step
2.
9. Tap Quote Level, and then tap either Decrease or Increase to outdent (move to
the left) or indent (move to the right), respectively. You can do this several times if you
choose. When you are done, tap outside the selection.
 Handle Attachments
When you send email, you may want to include a photo, a video, a note, an iWorks
(Pages, Numbers, and Keynote) document, a Safari web page, or one of many other items
on your iPhone. You can do that either while you are working on a message or while you
are looking at the item.
TIP A number of apps have a Share icon that allows you to email the items produced by that app, among

other actions. If you don’t see a Share icon or other command that allows you to email an item, you can always
take a screenshot of it (press and hold the Sleep/Wake button while pressing the Home button) and then email
the resulting image from Photos.
Add a Photo to a Message
From within an email message, you can attach a number of documents, including photos
and videos, without leaving the message. Let’s look at attaching a photo as an example:
1. Create a new email message or one that is in response to a message you received,
as described in the previous sections of this chapter.
2. Type the message you want to start with. When you are at the spot where you
want to insert the photo, tap RETURN twice to leave a blank line.
3. Press and hold for a moment on the blank line to open the Select bar, tap the right
arrow, and then tap Insert Photo Or Video.
4. A list of your photo folders will appear. Tap the folder, tap the photo, and then tap
Choose. The picture will appear in your message.
Here’s an alternative method:
1. When you are at the point described at the end of step 2 in the preceding list, you
can also press Home and tap Photos to open the Photos app.
2. Open the album needed to locate the photo you want. Then press and hold for a
moment on that photo to have the Copy, Hide bar pop up.

3. Tap Copy. Press the Home button and tap Mail. The email message that you
have been working on will appear.
4. Press and hold for a moment on the blank line to open the Select bar and then tap
Paste. The photo will appear in your message.
5. When you are ready, send the message as you would normally.
Email Items Directly
In the preceding section, you saw how to insert as well as cut and paste items into an open
email message. You can also send photos and other items directly from their respective
apps.
1. Open the app with the item you want to email. In that app, navigate to where you
can see the item.
2. Select the item, tap the Share icon, and tap Mail. A new email message pops up
containing the item you selected.
3. Add the addressees, a subject, and any message you want to include. When you
are ready, tap Send.

NOTE Email that is sent directly from an app other than Mail is sent using your default mail provider,
as described earlier in “Change General Mail Settings.”
Handle Received Attachments
You also may need to handle attachments you receive in email on your iPhone. You can
tell if a message has an attachment by the paperclip icon in the message header. The
attachment can be a photo, video, or other document, including Microsoft Word, Excel,
and PowerPoint files, as well as Adobe PDF files and web pages. To process an
attachment, follow these steps:
1. Open a message with an attachment as you would any other message. The body

of the message will open, and at the bottom you will see the attachment.
2. Tap the attachment to open it. If the attachment is a document that the iPhone can
open, it will do so and you can read or view it. If you want to save it, tap the Share
icon and then tap the app that you want to save it in. In the case of the Word document,
choose Open In Pages or Open In Office Mobile, where it is automatically saved.
3. If the attachment is a photo, it will automatically open in Mail and you can save it
by pressing and holding on the photo to open the Share menu. Tap Save Image to
place it in your Camera Roll.
4. If the attachment is not a common file type, you can normally re-send it in
another email, or store it in a note or cloud app. Tap the attachment to see what options
are available. Here, you can see that a file created with a program called Xara (a
graphics program I use with my website) can be re-sent in email or stored in Evernote,
OneNote, DropBox, or OneDrive.

 Manage Email
Mail allows you to organize your mail in both existing and new folders; to archive, delete,
and recover messages; and to flag, mark, and search your messages.
Understand Email Folders
Email that you receive and send is stored in folders, both in the Mail app on the iPhone
and the mail server you are using, as shown earlier. The folders you have available depend
to some degree on the mail service and, if you have previously used it on another
computer, how you set it up there. In the latter case, the iPhone will mimic the folder
structure on your computer.
Here’s how to work with folders:
1. From an Inbox, the most common working area of Mail, tap the mail provider’s
name in the upper-left corner. This may take you to the set of folders for that particular
mail provider or to Mailboxes, depending on where you originally started. If you are
showing Mailboxes, tap an account in the lower part of the screen to see the folders for
that account.
2. If you are displaying the folders for a provider, tap Mailboxes in the upper-left
corner. This shows you your mail accounts, both in terms of their Inboxes at the top,

where tapping any of the accounts takes you to their Inbox, and the accounts
themselves in the lower part of the screen, where tapping takes you to the set of folders
for that account.
3. Tap an account under All Inboxes to open and observe the respective Inbox. Then
return to Mailboxes by tapping the provider’s name in the upper-left corner.
4. Tap an account under Accounts to open and observe the set of folders for this
account. Tap Inbox to open and observe the Inbox arrived at in this manner. You can
see there is no difference in the Inboxes.
5. Return to Mailboxes by tapping first the provider’s name in the upper-left corner
and then tapping Mailboxes in the same location.
Understanding this navigation from Mailboxes to account folders to Inboxes and back is
important to easily getting around Mail.

Add and Delete Folders
If you find that you would really like to have additional folders to better organize your
mail, you can do that easily. Here’s how:
1. From the Mailboxes screen, shown in the previous section, tap in the Accounts
area the mail provider where you want the extra folder. The list of existing folders for
that provider will appear.
2. Tap Edit at the top-right corner of the screen and then tap New Mailbox in the
bottom-right corner.
NOTE Some folders in Mail can be moved, have their name changed (which might satisfy the need for
a new folder), and deleted, whereas other can’t. You can tell which can be edited after you tap Edit because they
are darker.
3. Type the name for the new folder and then tap the account field beneath Mailbox
Location to choose where in the current folder hierarchy you want the new folder.
4. Tap where you want the new folder and then tap Save in the upper-right corner.
5. If you want to change the position or name of the new folder, or any other folder,
tap Edit in the upper-right area and then tap the folder you want to change.
6. In the Edit Mailbox screen, make any desired changes to the name, tap Mailbox
Location, tap the new parent folder, and tap Save.
7. If you want to delete a folder, perform step 5 and then in Edit Mailbox, tap
Delete Mailbox. Confirm that by tapping Delete again and then tapping Done.

Organize Messages with Folders
Use the various folders that you have by moving your mail among them:
1. From Mailboxes, tap an account in the upper part of the screen to open the Inbox
for that account. Alternatively, tap an account in the lower part of the screen to open
another folder for a given mail provider to display the message(s) you want to move to
other folders.
2. Tap the message you want to move so it is displayed on the right of the screen.
3. Tap the folder icon at the top of the screen. The mail account’s folders will be
displayed.
4. Tap the folder in which you want to store the message. The message will
disappear from its current folder and appear in its new one.
TIP There are two special mailboxes that display only messages from very important people (VIP) and
those that have been flagged. You can select from your contacts those people who are VIPs.
Archive, Delete, and Recover Messages
You may have noticed that when you open a message in Gmail in the icons in the bottom
area there is, by default, an archive box, whereas in other mail providers there is a trash
can. This is because Gmail allows you to “archive” a message as well as to delete it.
Archiving is an intermediate step between placing an item in a normal folder and deleting
it.
•   To delete or archive a message, open the message and tap either the delete or
archive icon.
•   If you choose Archive, you are given the choices of Trash Message or Archive
Message.
•   To recover a message, move it to a new folder using the technique described in
“Organize Messages with Folders,” earlier in this chapter. (Go to Mailboxes and tap
the account in the lower part of the screen to display that account’s folders.) Deleted
messages are in either the Trash or Deleted Messages folder; archived messages are in
the All Mail folder.
•   Determine whether or not to use archiving, if it is available, from the Home
screen. Tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendar | account name | Account |
Advanced | Archive Mailbox or Deleted Mailbox.

 QuickFacts
Delete, Move, and Mark Several Messages at Once
Mail has the means to delete, move, and mark a number of messages at one
time:
1. Open the folder containing the messages you want to delete, move, or mark.
2. Tap Edit in the upper-right corner of the screen.
3. Tap the messages you want to work on. A white check mark will appear in a
blue dot on the messages that are selected. (You unfortunately can’t use Mark
All, which only allows you to “Flag” or “Mark As Read,” if some messages are
unread, or “Mark As Unread” if all are read.)
4. Tap the command button at the bottom of the screen for the action you want
to carry out:
•   If you tap Trash, the selected items go into the Trash folder for that
account.
•   If you tap Move, the list of folders for that Mail account will open and
you can tap where you want the messages to move to.

•   If you tap Mark, a menu pops up giving you the choice to flag the
message, mark it as unread, or move it to the Junk folder, if such a folder
exists.
Search Messages
As the number of messages you have in various mailboxes begins to stack up, it may
become difficult to find a message that you want to look at. You can use Mail’s Search
feature for that purpose. Search, though, searches all folders of all accounts; you can’t just
search a single folder.
1. Open a Mail account and folder.
2. Swipe down the list of messages. The search text box will appear at the top of the
messages.

3. Type the keywords to search on. As you type, Mail will begin to select messages
that match what you’re typing and display their headers in the screen.
USE MESSAGES
Messages allows you to send and receive text messages using an email address or cellular
phone number with any device, phone, or tablet that will receive them. It will also send
and receive media messages that include photos and videos using Apple’s iMessage,
instant messaging (IM or chat) with other iPhone, iPod, iPad, and Mac (Mountain Lion
and later) users who are online at the same time as you.
 Start and Use Messages
Messages, by default, is in the upper-left corner of the Home screen. The use of iMessage
requires your Apple ID, which you must have to use your iPhone. As a result of that, you
will automatically be signed in when you open Messages.
1. From the Home screen, tap Messages. Messages will open.
2. If you see a To text box, tap in it and begin to type a name. If you don’t see the
To box, tap the New Message icon in the upper-right area of the screen. If you want to
search for a name, tap the Add A Contact icon on the far right to open the list of your
contacts. Scroll down and tap the contact you want to chat with.

3. Tap the text tray at the bottom of the screen, type your message, and tap Send.
4. If you have a photo that you want in the message, you can attach it by tapping the
Photo icon and tapping either Photo Library or Take Photo Or Video. In the former
case, select the photo, tap Choose, and tap Send. In the latter case, select the front or
back camera, tap the shutter release, and then, if you are happy with the photo or
video, tap Use Photo.
5. If your correspondent has an iPhone or other recent Apple device, you can send
voice messages using Messages. Tap and hold the microphone icon while speaking
your message. A set of three controls will appear on the right, an arrowhead in the
center to play back what you have recorded, an “X” to delete what you recorded, and
an up arrow to send the voice message.
6. Continue the conversation as your correspondent replies. Touch the arrowhead to
play an audio or video message.
 Review Messages Settings

The Messages settings, opened by tapping Settings | Messages, provide these options:
•   iMessage Allows you to turn iMessage on and off.
•   Send Read Receipts Provides a notice to the sender when you have read their
message.
•   Send As SMS Uses Short Message Service (SMS), which is text only, when
iMessage is not available if turned on; otherwise, Multimedia Messaging Service
(MMS) is used.
•   Send & Receive Lets you set the addresses and phone number where you can be
sent messages and from which you can send messages.
•   MMS Messaging Turns on Multimedia Messaging Service, which allows audio,
video, and photographic images to be sent with or as text messages.
•   Group Messaging Allows multiple people to share a text message conversation.

•   Show Subject Field Allows you to display the Subject field or not.
•   Character Count Provides a count of the number of characters when SMS or
MMS is being used, if turned on.
•   Blocked Opens your Contacts and allows you to select those from whom you do
not want to receive messages or FaceTime calls.
•   Keep Messages Allows you to choose the length of time to keep text messages
—from 30 days, 1 year, or Forever.
•   Audio Messages Expire Provides two choices: After 2 Minutes and Never.
•   Raise To Listen If this option is selected, raising the phone to your ear
automatically starts playing an audio message.
•   Video Messages Expire Provides two choices: After 2 Minutes and Never.



Chapter 5

Managing Time and Events
QuickSteps to…
 Get Familiar with Calendar
 Use Calendar
 Work with Multiple Calendars
 Handle Invitations
 Share a Calendar
 Set Up Reminders
 Use the Clock and Alarms
 Handle Notifications and Alerts
 Set Up and Use Notifications
 Use the Control Center
 Use AirDrop
The iPhone provides several apps or areas—including Calendar, Reminders, Clock,
Notifications, and Control Center—to help you control the events of your life. This
chapter provides a review of all of these, showing you how to set them up, handle their
settings, and use them in several circumstances.
SET UP AND USE CALENDAR
The primary purpose of a calendar, of course, is to keep track of upcoming events, such as
meetings, appointments, birthdays, and anniversaries. You can also note date-related
objectives, such as projects to be completed (book deadlines, in my case) and goals to be
accomplished (such as weight loss by a certain date). Whatever the purpose, Calendar has
tools to work with it and several views to look at it.
 Get Familiar with Calendar
The iPhone Calendar has implemented on the screen four views of calendar entries and
given you easy ways to navigate among them. Open Calendar by tapping its icon on the
Home screen. One of Calendar’s four views will appear.
Explore Calendar Views
When the iPhone is held upright, in portrait orientation, the four Calendar views are as
follows:

•   Day view Displays the events in one day and provides a time-of-day display on
the left and the detail for events in that day on the right. The day view is similar to the
day books that were popular before computers. You can swipe the dates at the top of
the screen to display different days as well as swipe the screen up and down to see
other times.
•   List view Provides a summary list of events for as many days and months as
there is room on the screen. You can swipe up or down to see additional events. I like
to use this view as my primary one because I can keep track of a number of events.
•   Month view Provides a high-level view of the month with the current day shown
within a red dot. Each day with an event has a gray dot beneath the date. Swipe up and
down to see additional months.
•   Year view Displays 12 months on one screen with the current day marked with a
red dot. Year view primarily allows you to select the month in which you want to
work. Swipe up and down to see additional years.

When you hold the iPhone horizontally, in landscape orientation, all the views change to a
week view with times down the left side. You can swipe the dates at the top to display
other dates and swipe the screen up or down to see other times.
Review Calendar Controls
When the iPhone is in portrait orientation, the calendar has three permanent controls at the
bottom as well as two to four controls at the top, which are detailed here from left to right:

•   Month or Year Selector Allows you to go from the current day to the current
month, and from the current month to the current year. This control disappears in year
view.
•   List Selector Opens the full events view if the screen was displaying a day, or a
partial events list if the screen was displaying a month. If you are displaying the
month view and want the full list of events, display a day first and then events.
•   Search Opens a search text box where you can enter keywords on which to
search Calendar.
•   Add Event This is the plus icon at the top right, which opens the Add Event
screen with which you enter events into the calendar.
Across the bottom from left to right are the following items:
•   Today Identifies the current day in the current view.
•   Calendars Opens a list of the various calendars you have available. From this
list, you can choose which you want to display, if not all of them. Also, by tapping the
“i” in a circle for one of the calendars, you can choose which color you want to
represent that calendar.

•   Inbox Displays the calendar invitations you have received and lets you reply to
them.
Change Calendar Settings
The calendar settings, opened by tapping Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars and
scrolling down to the bottom of the screen, include the following:

•   Time Zone Override Changes the default from showing events in the local time
zone the iPhone is in to a selected time zone.
•   Alternate Calendars Allows the display of Chinese, Hebrew, and Islamic dates.
•   Week Numbers Displays the number of the week within the year in day, week,
and month view.
•   Show Invitee Declines Shows if an invitee has declined an invitation.
•   Sync Lets you automatically sync historical as well as future events. Tapping this
option allows you to select among several time periods.
•   Default Alert Times Determines when alerts are created for birthdays, events,
and all-day events. For each, you have a choice of when the alert is posted, from the
time of the event to one week before the event.
•   Start Week On Lets you specify which day of the week is on the left of a
weekly calendar.
•   Default Calendar Lets you specify which calendar to use with events that are
created outside of Calendar.
 Use Calendar

The iPhone’s Calendar app is made for active use as you are on the go. It will sync the
entries you have from your desktop or laptop computer or such online calendar resources
as Facebook and Google Calendar. It is also a good resource for directly entering and
managing events as you go along.
Choose Your Calendar
Depending on your email accounts and what you have on computers and tablets, you may
have a number of calendars. To start, I’d recommend that you work with only one. Later in
this chapter we’ll come back and look at how to handle multiple calendars.
If you have multiple calendars, begin by turning off all but one. You can then use it for the
next several sections until we get to the discussion of multiple calendars.
1. From the Home screen, tap Calendar and then tap Calendars in the bottom-
middle area. You will see the list of your calendars.
2. If you have other calendars turned on (they have a check mark beside them), tap
all but one calendar to turn them off.
3. Tap Done at the top-right of the screen to close the list of calendars.
Select a Date
Calendar events, of course, are on a certain date or series of dates; therefore, the first task
in using Calendar is to select a date. You have several options, depending on where you
are looking:
•   If you are in year view, tap the month with the event and then tap the day.
•   If you are month view, tap the day.
•   If you are in day or week view, drag the dates at the top of the screen to display
the correct week and then tap the day if you’re in day view.
Add Calendar Events
With a day selected in day view, here’s how to add an event and its specifics:
1. Tap the icon for Add Event in the top-right corner of the screen to open the New
Event screen.

TIP You can also open the New Event screen by pressing and holding for a moment on a day and time in
day or week view. A colored box will appear under your finger with the words “New Event.”
2. Type the title of the event, tap in the Location text box, and type the location.
3. If it is an all-day event (or close enough to call it that), tap the On/Off button for
that.
4. Tap Starts to open the date and time rotator. Move your finger up and down on
the date to select it and then do the same thing with the hour, minutes, and AM/PM to
select the start time.

5. If you want a different time zone than your current location, tap the Time Zone
selection, if needed, and tap Done.
6. Tap the Ends time and select the appropriate time.
7. If you want a time zone other than your default, tap Time Zone, begin typing a
different time zone, and tap the time zone that appears in the list.
8. If the event will happen periodically, tap Repeat and then tap the period of
repetition.
9. If it is a factor, tap Travel Time, turn it on, and enter a starting location (if
relevant), and/or select a time and tap New Event in the upper-left corner.

10. Tap Calendar if you want this event listed on a calendar other than the default (see
“Work with Multiple Calendars,” later in this chapter), and tap New Event to return
there, if necessary.
11. If you want to invite people to the event, tap Invitees.
a. Begin typing a name in your Contacts list. When the name that you want is
displayed, tap that name.
b. To add more invitees, tap the Add icon (the plus sign) to open your All
Contacts list and then tap the person you want to invite. Repeat this for as many
people as you want to invite.
c. When you are finished adding invitees, tap Done.
12. Tap Alert and then tap when you want the alert. Repeat this for the second alert if
desired.
13. The default is to show your time as being “Busy” when you have an event. This is for
shared calendars so others will not schedule events for you during that time. If you
want to change from “Busy” to “Free,” tap Show As and tap Free.
14. If desired, you may type in a uniform resource locator, or URL (that is, a web address),
and enter notes for the event. When you are ready, tap Add to complete the event.

15. Tap the event to see its information.
TIP For the URL and notes sections of a new event, you can copy and paste information from a website
that might be of interest to the people you are inviting to an event.
Change Calendar Events
Changing an event is very easy:
1. With Calendar open on the screen, select the date of the event, as described
earlier in this chapter.
2. In day, week, or month view, tap the event and tap Edit to open the Edit Event
screen.

3. In the Edit Event screen, tap the field you want to change and make the desired
changes. See “Add Calendar Events,” earlier in this chapter, for field-by-field
considerations.
4. When you have made the changes that you want, tap Done.
Delete Calendar Events
Deleting events is even easier:
1. Follow steps 1 and 2 in “Change Calendar Events” immediately preceding this
section.
2. In the Edit Event screen, scroll to the bottom and tap Delete Event. Tap Delete
Event a second time to confirm it. If the event is repeated, you will have a choice of
deleting the current event only or this and all future repetitions of the event.
 Work with Multiple Calendars
As you begin to use Calendar, you may find that you are getting events from several
sources that you would like to keep on different calendars so you can manage them as a
group. Also, you probably want to look at all your calendar events together periodically on

one calendar display. The iPhone provides ways to do both of those.
When you start up your iPhone for the first time after setting it up and syncing to iCloud,
you will see that, by default, Calendar with iCloud starts out with three independent
calendars, labeled “Home,” “Work,” and “Birthdays.” You can, therefore, immediately
place events on more than one calendar.
Add Events to a Different Calendar
To add events to one of several calendars, you can use one of three techniques:
•   While entering a new event in the Add Event screen, tap Calendars and then tap
the calendar you want to use.
•   To add a number of events to a single calendar (for example, your Work
calendar), turn off all other calendars so that when you open the Add Event screen, the
default is your Work calendar.
•   If you are going to be working primarily with one calendar, but don’t want to
turn off other calendars, you can change the default calendar in Settings. From the
Home screen, tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars | Default Calendar and then
tap the calendar you want to be the default.
Show Several Calendars Together
With just one calendar, there is no problem finding an event you want to look at, but as
soon as you add another calendar, you have to ask the question, “Which calendar do I look
at?” The answer, of course, is to superimpose one calendar on the other so you can see
them both at the same time. Calendar allows you to do this by simply turning on the
calendars you want to display.
1. With Calendar open on your iPhone, tap Calendars.
2. Tap the calendars in the Calendars screen that you want to be displayed, as you
have seen earlier.
Add Another Calendar
The Calendar app has two types of calendars: those tied to mail accounts (such as Gmail,
Outlook, and iCloud) and those created within Calendar. You can, therefore, add calendars
from either source. Here’s how to add a calendar within Calendar that’s not connected
with a mail account:
1. From within Calendar, tap Calendars to open the Show Calendars screen.
2. Tap Edit in the upper-right corner and then tap Add Calendar in the
approximate middle of the screen.

3. In the Add Calendar screen that opens, type the name of the new calendar and tap
the color you want to associate with that calendar.
4. When you are ready, tap Done.
To add a calendar from a mail account, follow these steps:
1. Press Home to return to the Home screen.
2. Tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars and tap the mail account whose
calendar you want to add. The mail account’s settings will open. Tap the On/Off
button to the right of Calendars to turn it on (not all mail servers have calendar
services).
3. Press Home and tap Calendar to return there and eventually see your mail
calendar(s).
NOTE It takes a while before Calendar will see a new mail calendar.
Delete a Calendar
As in adding calendars, you can delete them either from mail accounts or from Calendar
itself. You can delete a mail account–related calendar by, in essence, turning it off. Here
are the steps to follow:
1. From the Home screen, tap Settings | Mail, Contacts, Calendars.
2. Under Accounts, tap the account with an associated calendar that you want to
turn off (those with a calendar will say “Calendars”).

3. In the mail account details, tap the On/Off button to turn it off.
4. Tap Delete to confirm that is what you want to do and then tap Done.
To delete a calendar created within Calendar, follow these steps:
1. From the Home screen, tap Calendar | Calendars in the bottom middle.
2. Tap the right end (the “i” in a circle) of the calendar that you want to delete to
open the Edit Calendar screen. You can alternatively tap Edit and tap the calendar you
want to delete.
3. Scroll to the bottom of the screen, tap Delete Calendar, and then tap Delete
Calendar again to confirm the deletion.
TIP Facebook’s calendar is deleted like a mail account’s calendar. Tap Settings | Facebook | Calendar to
turn a Facebook calendar off if it is on, and then tap Contacts off to remove Facebook Birthdays.
 Handle Invitations
Earlier in this chapter you saw how you can add invitations to a new calendar event. When
you do that, an invitation is sent to the invitee. If the recipient has a recent iOS device
(iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch) and it is set up normally, they will get a notification at the
top of their current screen, and the invitation will go directly to the Calendar’s inbox. If
any of those constraints are not true, the recipient will get an email message with the
invitation. Both the Calendar and email invitations provide three links the recipient can
click or tap to accept, decline, or maybe accept the invitation.
In an email message there is also an attachment, which you can tap in the Inbox, to open a
Calendar event. Tap Add to Calendar, select the calendar to use, and tap Done. Press
Home to close Mail and then tap Calendar to open it and display the event.

In a Calendar invitation, tapping Accept or Maybe creates a calendar event that you can
view like any other. With either a calendar or email invitation, accepting, declining, or
saying maybe generates information back to the originator in the form of a notification
and a Calendar Inbox message.
 Share a Calendar
If several people are working together, sharing a project, have a family in common, or are

in an organization together, it can be worthwhile sharing a calendar to better coordinate
what they are doing. iPhone’s Calendar provides two tools to facilitate this: fully sharing
with one or more people a calendar that all can change, and publishing a public calendar
that others can subscribe to but only you can change.
Share a Common Calendar
To create a common calendar that two or more people can share with equal ability to add
and change events, follow these steps:
1. From the Home screen, tap Calendar. Tap Calendars and tap the information
icon (“i” in a circle) on the calendar you want to share. This opens the Edit Calendar
screen.
2. Under Shared With, tap Add Person and begin typing the name of the person in
your Contacts with whom you want to share this calendar. The person and their email
address should pop up. Tap the person to select them.
3. If you want to share with another person, either begin typing a name or tap the
plus sign on the right and repeat step 2.
4. When you have added all the people you want, tap Add to be shown the Edit
Calendar screen, where you can tap View & Edit to disallow the other person from
editing the calendar or making and changing events.
5. Tap Done when you are ready. Upon returning to the Calendars screen, you will
see that the calendar you chose to share will now have “Shared With…” under the
name of the calendar.

The recipient gets a Calendar notification that you want to share a calendar with them. In
their Calendar Inbox they need to tap Join Calendar and Done. You are then told that
they have joined the offered Calendar.
If the recipient taps Calendar from the Home screen and then taps Calendars, they
should see the newly shared calendar in the list of calendars.
The originator will get a notice that the recipient has accepted the invitation.
On a PC, the recipient gets an invitation that looks like other invitations and is able to
access the calendar through a link in the invitation to an iCloud PC web app. On a Mac,
the recipient gets an invitation and then can look at the calendar in iCal.

Publish a Public Calendar
If you are responsible for a larger public group, such as a Boy or Girl Scout troop, a Little
League team, or a book club, and you want to make available a calendar for that
organization, you can make a calendar a public calendar that allows anyone to subscribe to
it and peruse it. However, they will not be able to change or write to that calendar. To
publically share a calendar, follow these steps:
1. In Calendar, tap Calendars and tap on the right (the “i” in a circle) of the
calendar that you want to make public.
2. In Edit Calendar, tap the On/Off button opposite Public Calendar at the bottom to
turn it on. This will allow anyone to subscribe to a read-only version of the calendar.
3. After turning on the public calendar, a new option appears: Share Link. Tap this.
4. You are allowed to send the Internet link (URL) for your public calendar to
anyone you want using AirDrop, text messaging, email, Twitter, Facebook, or by
copying it to a document, website, or blog. Tap the option you want to use. For
example, tap Mail, fill in the addressees, and then tap Send.
5. When you are done, tap Cancel, if needed, and then tap Done.
The recipient gets an email, text message, or other invitation, which, when they open it,
gives them a very long Internet link. When they tap or click that link, they are asked if
they want to subscribe to the public calendar. If they tap or click Subscribe, they are told
that the calendar has been added, and they can tap or click View Events to see it. If you
open Calendars, you can also see it.


WORK WITH REMINDERS
Reminders is for making lists, to-do lists, shopping lists, and list of steps to complete a
project. Reminders may be date and time sensitive and can be marked as completed. They
can also remind you that an item has not been completed and can be assigned a priority.
Lists can be by date or by list, several of which have been created for you, but you can
create as many more as you like. You can sync lists with iCloud and several other
products, such as Hotmail’s Calendar. If you add a date and time to an item on a list, the
item will appear on both the Scheduled and Reminders lists as well as the original list on
which you added it.
 Set Up Reminders
Reminders is very simple. The only setup necessary is the adding, deleting, renaming, and
rearranging of lists, and there is only one setting to consider. Here’s how set up
Reminders:
1. From the Home screen, tap Reminders, which will open the app.
2. For general reminders, tap under Reminders twice to open the keyboard and type
a reminder. After you have completed the reminder, tap the information icon on the
right to open the Details screen for the reminder.

3. If you want to be reminded on a particular day, tap Remind Me On A Day and
select the date and time. If desired, tap Repeat and select the period.
4. If you want to be reminded when you are leaving or arriving at a particular
location, tap Remind Me At A Location and enter or select the location and then tap
Details.
5. Tap a priority, enter any desired notes, and when you are ready, tap Done.
6. To change a reminder that you have entered, tap the reminder, make any desired
text changes, tap the information icon, and make any necessary changes to the details
of the reminder. When you are ready, tap Done.
7. To delete the reminder or make changes to the list, tap Edit, tap the Do Not
Enter icon, and tap Delete. Tap Done when you’re ready.
8. To add a new list, tap the word Reminders at the top of the list, tap New List,
type a name for the list, pick a color, and tap Done.
9. Enter the items on the new list and then tap Done.
10. To make changes to a list, tap Edit in the top-right area. Tap Color and tap a new color
to make a change. Tap Sharing, tap Add Person, begin typing the person’s name,
select the person’s name when it appears, tap Add, and tap Done.
11. While in Edit mode (see step 10), press and hold on the right end lines (“grip strips”)
of the list you want to move up or down and then drag it as desired.
12. If you want to delete a list, while in Edit mode, scroll to the bottom of the list and tap
Delete List and then tap Delete to confirm it.
13. Tap Done in the top-right area when you have made the changes you want.

14. Review Reminders’ settings by pressing the Home button and tapping Settings |
Reminders. Tap Default List, tap the list you want other apps outside of Reminders to
automatically add to, and tap Reminders.
GET TIME AND EVENT INFORMATION
The iPhone provides a number of methods to get information to you, including clocks,
alarms, notifications, alerts, and a control center. We’ll look at these in three groups:
clocks and alarms, notifications and alerts, and the Control Center.
 Use the Clock and Alarms
The Clock app contains four components: World Clock, Alarm, Stopwatch, and Timer.
Tapping Clock to open the app displays the last component that you used. If it is not
already displayed, tap World Clock at the bottom of the Clock screen to begin with that
component.
World Clock
World Clock displays a number of clocks for cities around the world. Tap the plus sign in
the upper-right corner to add a clock and select the city for it. Tap Edit, use the Do Not
Enter icon on the left to delete a world clock, and use the grip strips on the right to change
the order of the clocks. Tap Done to complete the editing.
Alarm
The Alarm component allows you to set multiple alarms and turn them on and off as
needed. Tap the plus sign in the upper-left corner to add a new alarm. Use the time spinner

to select the time the alarm will go off, tap Repeat to select the days of the week the alarm
will sound, tap Label to type a label for the alarm, tap Sound to select a sound or a song
from your music, and tap Snooze to turn that ability on and off. When you have set an
alarm, tap Save. Once you have an alarm, you can turn it on and off.
Stopwatch
Stopwatch allows you to tap Start, tap Lap for each lap, and then tap Stop to collect a set
of times. You can then tap Reset to start over.

TIP To save individual times before resetting the stopwatch, take a picture of the iPhone’s screen (a
“screenshot”) by pressing and holding the On-Off/Sleep-Wake button while pressing Home.
Timer
Timer allows you to set a time in hours and minutes and then tap Start to begin a timer for
the time you set. You can tap Pause to hold the timer until you tap Resume. When the
timer is finished, you will hear a sound that you can select, and a message will appear on
the screen.

 Handle Notifications and Alerts
If you have used your iPhone for any time, you have probably seen alerts pop up and
notify you about something. They can come from your mail, from your calendar, or from
apps you have installed, especially news, sports, and investment publications, as you have
seen earlier in this and previous chapters. Alerts generally have self-explanatory buttons—
such as OK, View, Close, and Options—that you can tap to carry out that command.
Notifications are another form of alert that repeat their message. Not all notifications have
a related alert, but all alerts have a notification. Notifications are in the form of a banner
that can be pulled down from the top of the screen by swiping down, usually with a
number of other notifications. Tap a banner notification to open the related app and
display the item in the notification.
 Set Up and Use Notifications

The most important aspect of notifications and alerts is the need to control what you get so
you get what is important for you and don’t get so much it overwhelms you. Notifications
and alerts are controlled in Settings.
1. From the Home screen, tap Settings | Notifications to open the list of apps in
Notifications and other settings.
NOTE Depending on the apps you have downloaded, you may have more or fewer apps than shown
here.
2. Many (if not most) apps, when they are downloaded and set up, put themselves in
Notifications and you get a haphazard list of your apps. The default is the sorting of
apps manually, but that means you must do it. Here’s how:
a. Tap Edit in the upper-right corner.
b. Press and hold on the grip strip (lines) to the right of an app you want to move.
c. Drag the app where you want it in the list.
d. Repeat steps b and c for all the apps you want to move.

e. Tap Done when you are ready.
3. Each app has several settings within Notifications. As an example, tap
Reminders (while still under Notifications in Settings).
a. The first option turns on Reminders in Allow Notifications, the second option
lets you determine the number of reminders in Notifications, and the third options
lets you select the sound, if any, to be played when the notification appears.
b. You can determine if the app’s badge icon (the icon on the Home page) reflects
the notification in the form of a number in a red circle and whether the notification
appears on the lock screen (the screen you have to swipe from left to right or use
your fingerprint to open the iPhone).

c. You have a choice of three styles of alerts:
•   None
•   A banner in Notifications pulled down from the top of the screen
•   Alerts that pop up in the middle of the screen in addition to the banner
4. Repeat step 3 for all the apps whose notification settings you want to change.
Some apps have one or more special settings, such as whether to repeat the alert and
whom to allow alerts from.
5. When you are ready, return to the Home screen.
NOTE At the bottom of the list of apps in Notifications is an equally important list of apps not in
Notifications. For each of these, ask yourself if they are properly categorized.
 QuickFacts
Using Do Not Disturb
Do Not Disturb, which you can turn on or off from Settings | Do Not Disturb
and from the Control Center (the crescent moon icon; see the next section),
allows you to silence alerts and incoming FaceTime calls by tapping the On/Off
button opposite Manual in settings or by tapping the crescent moon icon in the
Control Center. If you tap Do Not Disturb in Settings, you can do the
following:

•   Override the prohibition of alerts for scheduled events by tapping the
On/Off button opposite Scheduled.
•   Allow calls and FaceTime calls from certain individuals by tapping
Favorites opposite Allow Calls From and tapping whom to allow.
•   Allow calls and FaceTime calls when the call is repeated from the same
person within three minutes.
•   Choose whether you want calls, FaceTime calls, and notifications silenced
when Do Not Disturb is turned on always or only while the iPhone is locked.
When Do Not Disturb is turned on, a crescent moon icon appears to the left
of the group of icons on the right at the top of the screen.
 Use the Control Center
The Control Center takes the most heavily used settings and gives you immediate access

to them from any screen. You can open the Control Center by swiping up from the bottom
of the screen.
Here are the controls that appear on the Control Center:
•   Airplane mode on/off Allows you to turn on or off Wi-Fi and Bluetooth, which
you might be required to do on an airplane.
•   Wi-Fi on/off Allows you to turn on or off Wi-Fi.
•   Bluetooth on/off Allows you to turn on or off Bluetooth, which is used to
communicate with accessories such as headphones and keyboards.
•   Do Not Disturb on/off Allows you to turn on or off the silencing of alerts and
incoming FaceTime calls.
•   Lock rotation Allows you to prevent the screen from rotating when the iPhone
is in portrait orientation and you turn it sideways, or if locked when in landscape
orientation and you turn it upright.
•   Brightness control Allows you to set the screen’s brightness.
•   Media player controls Allow you to start and pause playing the currently
selected playlist, to go to the beginning of a song (single tap) and the previous song
(double-tap), to the next song, and to any point within a song on the bar at the top.

•   Volume control Allows you to adjust the current volume.
•   AirDrop Allows you to turn on AirDrop and select whom you receive
information from. See “Use AirDrop” later in this chapter.
•   Turn on the flashlight Allows you to turn on the bright light on the back of the
iPhone that is normally used to take pictures.
•   Open Timer app Allows you to open the Timer app, which includes the clock,
alarm, and stopwatch.
•   Calculator Allows you to open and use the Calculator app as you would any
calculator.
•   Open Camera app Allows you to open the Camera app and take still and video
images, as described in Chapter 8.
 Use AirDrop
With AirDrop you can directly share files between two nearby (within 33 feet, or 10
meters) compatible devices (a Mac with OS X Lion or later and an iPhone, iPod, or iPad
with iOS 7 or later) without the need for Wi-Fi or cellular. Here’s how to use AirDrop:
1. Have two compatible devices within 33 feet of one another.
2. Turn on AirDrop on both devices by opening the Control Center and selecting
either Contacts Only (if the other device is owned by a contact) or Everyone. This
makes the devices discoverable by one another.
3. In one of the devices, display and select something you want to send to the other
device, such as a photo, a document, or a web page. (The selected photos shown next

are courtesy of Hank Nelson, Cloudstone Sculpture.)
4. Tap the Share icon to open the Share menu. The discoverable devices near you
should appear.
5. Tap the device to which you want to send the file or link.
6. On the receiving device, you should see a notice that the other device would like
to share a file. If you want to accept it, tap Accept.



Chapter 6

Taking Photos and Videos
QuickSteps to…
 Take Photos
 Use Photo Options
 Use the Photos App
 Download Videos
 Make Videos
 Edit and Share Videos
The iPhone is truly a multimedia device. In the next chapter you will see how well it
handles literature and music. In this chapter you’ll see how it does an equally good job
with photos and videos. In addition, you can use it to take and edit photos and videos.
We’ll look at how to take, edit, and view them on the iPhone as well as how to use
FaceTime.
USE THE IPHONE AS A CAMERA
The iPhone has two cameras: the iSight camera on the back and the FaceTime camera on
the front. The iSight camera on the iPhone 6 and 6 Plus provides an 8MP (megapixel)
stabilized (optical stabilization on the 6 Plus) image with automatic face detection and
exposure control, both burst and timer modes, and geotagging to add your current location
to a photo. The FaceTime camera provides a 1.2MP stabilized image with many of the
same other features. The iPhone provides an excellent alternative to small point-and-shoot
cameras.
 Take Photos
I bet you have already figured out how to take a picture with your iPhone. Regardless,
here are the steps:
1. From the Home screen, tap Camera. An image of what the camera is looking at
will be displayed.
2. Press the shutter button in the middle of the bottom of the screen. That is all there
is to it. Your picture will appear at the end of the Camera Roll album.
TIP If you are in a hurry to take a picture, you don’t have to unlock your iPhone first; simply swipe up on

the camera icon in the lower-right corner of the lock screen to open the Camera app and immediately take a
picture.
After taking a couple of pictures with just these two steps, you are going to want to change
the focus, zoom in or out, and jump to Photos and jump back to Camera.
Change Focus and Exposure
The iPhone’s cameras have automatic focus and exposure capability. By default, they aim
that capability at the center of the image on the screen. They also provide face detection
and balance the exposure across up to ten faces. In Camera, when you hold the iPhone still
while preparing to take a picture, a yellow square briefly appears on the image showing
where the focus is aimed and using a normal or “medium” exposure. As you move the
iPhone and change the image, Camera will refocus and the yellow square will briefly
reappear to show you what it is focusing on. At any time you can touch the screen to tell
the iPhone to focus and set the exposure on that spot. You’ll see a smaller yellow square
with a sunburst or brightness setting appear where you touched the screen, and face
detection will be turned off. You can drag the sunburst up for longer exposure, or down for
shorter exposure.

Zoom In or Out
Camera has the standard iPhone zoom capability, where you can zoom in (enlarge the
image) by spreading two fingers apart on the screen and zoom out (reduce the image) by
bringing two fingers together (pinching) on the screen. When you start to use your fingers
to zoom in or out, a slider control appears at the bottom of the screen. You can drag the
slider in either direction to accomplish the zooming.
Jump to Photos
As you are taking pictures, you will probably want to quickly look at your latest picture to
see if you got what you wanted. You can do that by tapping the thumbnail image of your
last snapshot in the lower-left corner. That takes you to the full-screen image of your last
photo. Use your finger to scroll from left to right to see previous photos. You can also use

any of the Camera Roll controls you learned about earlier in this chapter. If the controls
disappear, tap the screen to redisplay them. When you are ready to return to the Camera
app, tap Done in the upper-right corner.
 Use Photo Options
The iPhone provides a number of options for you to use while taking a picture. These
include the use of a grid for alignment, a flash in low-light situations, a self-timer to allow
you to jump into the photo, and the ability to switch between the front and back cameras.
Use a Grid
As you try to compose a picture, it is sometimes hard to align the object you are
photographing within the frame of the picture. To help with that, Camera allows you to
turn on a grid that you can use for aligning objects on the screen, as you saw earlier. Turn
on or off the grid by tapping Settings | Photos & Camera | Grid, as described earlier in
the chapter. The grid appears on the screen but will not show up in the photo.
Use the Flash
The iSight camera on the back of the iPhone has a True Tone flash next to it that can be
used to add light to your pictures and provide very close to real-life color balance. Control

when the flash is used by tapping the lightning bolt icon in the upper-left corner of the
screen. This gives you the options of turning the flash on or off, or putting it into
automatic mode where the camera senses the need for the flash.
TIP You can use the camera flash as a flashlight when it is dark by turning it on in the Control Center,
which you can open by swiping up from the bottom of the iPhone next to the Home button. See the discussion of
the Control Center in Chapter 5.
Use the Self-Timer
The self-timer allows you to set up the iPhone camera and then jump into the picture for a
“selfie.” Set the self-timer by tapping the timer icon in the upper-center-right of the screen
and selecting 3S (for three seconds) or 10S (for 10 seconds). Then, when everything is set,
tap the shutter button. The iPhone will count down the appropriate number of seconds and
then trip the shutter.
Switch from Back to Front
The iPhone has two cameras: one on the back with a higher resolution that is meant for
taking the majority of pictures and videos, and one on the front that is primarily for
FaceTime conversations or selfies. You can switch between the two by tapping the camera
and circular arrows icon in the upper-right corner.
TIP You can find tripods, tripod heads, Bluetooth remote shutter activators, and lens accessories that fit
or work with your iPhone at most camera and photography outlets, including Amazon.com.
Take Alternative Types of Photos
In addition to normal photographs, the iPhone can take square, panoramic, HDR (High
Dynamic Range), and burst mode photos, as well as apply filters to a photo as you take it.
Take a Square Photo
The normal photo taken by the iPhone is rectangular. iOS gives you the option to make the
photo square. In the command bar on the bottom, tap Square or drag it to the yellow dot.
You will see the elongated sides shorten to form a square. Tap the shutter to take a square
photo.

Take a Panoramic Photo
The iPhone with iOS 8 lets you automatically take a series of pictures and stitch them
together to create a panoramic picture. In the command bar on the bottom, tap Pano or
drag it to the yellow dot. You will see an arrow appear, showing the direction to move the
camera to capture a panoramic image. Tap the shutter button and move the iPhone in the
direction of the arrow. Tap the shutter button again to complete the capture.

Take an HDR Photo Series
HDR, when it is active, takes three shots, one each at long, short, and normal exposure,
and then blends the best parts into a single picture. HDR is particularly useful in situations
with extreme contrast and wide variations in lighting. In the top of the screen, tap HDR
and select On, Off, or Auto. In Settings, you can choose to keep a normal photo in
addition to an HDR one. See “Review Photos & Camera Settings,” later in the chapter.
Apply Filters
You can apply various color and monochromatic filters to a photo. Tap the Filter icon in
the lower-right corner and tap one of the eight filters displayed. Tap the Filter icon again
to remove the filter choices. Alternatively, you can tap None in the center to not have a
filter apply. If you want a filter on a picture already taken, you can edit it and apply a filter
then. See “Edit Photos,” later in this chapter.

Use Burst Mode
Burst mode allows you to take a quick series of photos and then choose the best one.
Touch and hold the shutter button to take a burst of photos. You’ll see the counter quickly
telling you how many you have taken. To select the photo you want to keep in the burst
you have taken, tap the thumbnail in the lower-left corner and tap Select in the bottom-
middle area. The burst photo set will be shown at the bottom of the screen with one of the
sets displayed on the screen. In the set at the bottom, the ones that the iPhone believes to
be the best will have a gray dot beneath them and the current one displayed will have a
triangle above it. Select a photo you want to keep by tapping the circle in the lower-right
corner of the photo displayed on the screen. When you have selected the burst photos you
want to keep, tap Done. Then you can delete the remainder of the burst set by displaying it
and tapping the delete (trash can) icon.

 QuickFacts
Moving iPhone Photos to Your Computer
As you take pictures or otherwise collect them on your iPhone, you likely
will want them also on your computer. You may be able to do this via iCloud,
depending on your use of it, but you can also do this by simply plugging your
iPhone into your computer.
Move to a PC
When you plug your iPhone into a PC computer, an AutoPlay message pops
up, giving you several options about what to do with your iPhone information.
All are good options, but I like to control where information is put on my
computer, so I choose Open Device To View Files because the other options
don’t give you the same degree of control. From there, follow these steps:
1. On a PC, in the AutoPlay dialog box, click Open Device To View Files.
This opens the Windows Explorer (File Explorer on Windows 8) displaying the
internal storage of your iPhone.

2. To drill down to your photos, double-click Internal Storage to open it.
Double-click the DCIM file folder to open it, and then double-click the final file
folder. This opens the Camera Roll album on your iPhone, displaying the photos
it contains, as you see in Figure 6-1.

Figure 6-1: Getting photos from your iPhone is just like getting pictures from another folder on your computer.
3. Use the File (Windows) Explorer as you normally would to move the
iPhone’s photos on the right to folders on your computer on the left.
Move to a Mac
On a Mac, when you plug your iPhone into the computer, iTunes may open it
if that is your default setting. Close iTunes, open iPhoto, click your iPhone,
click the photos you want to import onto your Mac, and click Import Selected,
as shown in Figure 6-2. Click either Delete Originals or Keep Originals. Use
the Finder as you normally would to move the iPhone’s photos to where you
want them.

Figure 6-2: On a Mac, you need to use iPhoto to initially get photos off the iPhone.
WORK WITH PHOTOS
There are many reasons why you would want photos on your iPhone: from the simple fact
that you like them or want them for the wallpaper on the Home screen, to using them to
illustrate points in a document, to display them in a photo essay, or to send to a friend.
Whatever the reason, the iPhone makes it easy to acquire, take, edit, store, and use photos.
All of these actions are discussed in this section.
 Use the Photos App
On the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Photos. A screen of photos should open, as you see on
my iPhone next.

Organize Your Photos
The Photos app provides three primary ways of looking at (or views of) your photos, each
of which has further categorization:
•   Photos Takes all your photos and automatically organizes them into Moments
(by date and time), Collections (by location for more recent photos with geocoding),
and Years.
•   Shared If you have set up an iCloud account, Shared displays Shared Streams
that contain photos you share with the other devices that are on your iCloud account or
are shared with specific people. We’ll talk about this later in this chapter in the
QuickFacts “Using Photo Stream.”
•   Albums Organizes your photos into groupings called “albums” that you create.
For the photos you brought across from your computer, each album is a folder that you
had on your computer, as you saw earlier in Figure 6-2. The album named Camera

Roll appears when you take pictures with your iPhone’s camera or take screen
captures. See discussions later in this chapter on taking pictures and capturing screens.
TIP Screen captures, or screenshots, are images of what is currently on the iPhone’s screen. All of the
iPhone screen images in this book are screenshots from my iPhone. You take a screenshot by pressing and
holding the On/Off-Sleep/Wake button while pressing the Home button. The screen will go blank for a fraction
of a second, and you will hear a “click” sound. The images will go into the Camera Roll album and, if enabled,
into your Photo Stream.
Access Your Photos
You can access with your photographs in either the Albums or Photos view. The objective,
though, is to get to an individual picture. Here, we’ll start with Albums.
1. In the Photos app, if it isn’t already selected, tap Albums at the bottom-right area
of the Photos screen.
2. Tap an album to open it and see and select the photos.

3. Tap a photo to enlarge it. (The photos of sculptures on this page are courtesy of
Hank Nelson, Cloudstone Sculpture.)
4. Drag the photo to the left or right to view other photos.
5. Tap a photo to redisplay the controls at the top and bottom.
6. Tap the Share icon, select any additional photos in the album by tapping the
circle at the bottom of a photo, and tap one of the actions to take with the selected
photo(s).

7. When you are ready, tap Cancel in the upper-left corner, if you are still in the
Share screen, then tap the left arrow in the upper-left corner to close the photo and
return to the display of the album’s photos. There, you can select another photo or tap
Albums to return to the album screen. If you actually share a photo in this process,
you are returned to the album you were working with.
Work with Albums
As you read earlier, folders on a PC or albums on a Mac that you downloaded from your
computer become albums on the iPhone. After you have taken pictures or captured
screens, the iPhone creates an album for these items called “Camera Roll.” In addition,
you can create as many albums as you like. Here’s how:
1. To add another album from the album screen, tap the plus sign in the upper-left
corner, type an album name, and tap Save. In the Photos screen that opens, tap the
photos you want to add to the new album. Tap Done when you are ready.

2. Tap Edit on the far upper-right of the Albums screen. Here you can perform the
following actions:
•   Move an album by dragging the grip strip on the right to where you want the
album.
•   Delete an album that you have created on the iPhone (you can’t delete an
album that you brought over from your computer) by tapping the Do Not Enter
icon (a red circle with a white dash in the middle) on the left and then tapping
Delete.
•   Rename an album that you have created on the iPhone by tapping the name
and using the onscreen keyboard to make the changes you want.
NOTE You can only rename and delete albums that you create on the iPhone.
3. Tap Done when you have completed editing albums.
4. Tap Photos to open a screen of your photos and, if needed, go to the Moments
display. Tap Select and then tap the photos you want to share, delete, or add to other
albums.

•   Tap the Share icon to open the Share menu, where you can attach a photo to a
message or email; send it to iCloud, Twitter, Facebook, Pinterest, or Flickr; and
copy, print, or perform other actions on it.
•   Tap Add To to add selected photos to albums that were created on the iPhone.
You can’t add to albums that you brought over from folders on your computer.
•   Tap Delete (the trash can) to delete selected images you have taken or copied
on your iPhone that don’t also exist on your computer or another device. Tap Delete
Photo to complete the process.
•   Tap Cancel to stop any operation you have started.
5. Copy a photo by pressing and holding it until the Copy, Hide menu appears. Tap
Copy and open an album you created on the iPhone. Then either press and hold an
existing photo and then tap Paste to paste the copy to the left of the existing photo, or
press and hold a blank area of the album and tap Paste to paste the copy to right of the
last existing photo. (The photos of sculptures in the next several examples are courtesy
of Hank Nelson, Cloudstone Sculpture.)

Edit Photos
With a single photo displayed, tap Edit on the upper-right corner to perform a number of
operations:

•   Tap Red-Eye and tap each eye for which you want to remove red-eye.
•   Tap Enhance to apply an automatic enhancement, generally brightening.
•   Tap Crop to open the crop, rotate, and aspect ratio screen. Drag the corners in
toward the center to crop the photo on two sides. Tap the rotate icon on the left to
rotate the image by 45 degrees, or drag the protractor to any degree of rotation desired.
Tap the aspect ratio icon on the right and select a different ratio. Tap Reset to return to
the original image and tap Done when you are finished.

•   Tap Filters to apply one of eight filters, which you can choose from the option
displayed across the bottom of the screen.
•   Tap Color Dial at the bottom right, and select various degrees of light, color, and
black and white.

•   Tap Cancel to stop whatever editing function is currently underway.
Set Up a Slideshow
A slideshow displays the photos in the current album, one after the other. From the Album
view, select a photo, tap the Share icon, and tap Slideshow to create one. The Slideshow
Options menu will open. See “Review Photos & Camera Settings,” later in this chapter.
•   Tap Transitions and review the various transitions available. Try several to see
which one you like and then use it.

•   If desired, tap the Play Music on/off switch, tap Music, and then select the piece
you want to play in the background.
•   Tap Start Slideshow to start your new slideshow.
 QuickFacts
Using Photo Stream
Photo Stream is a component of iCloud that allows you to share recent
photos that you have taken on your iPhone with other devices that share your
iCloud account. Of course, you must have set up and enabled an iCloud
account, as described in Chapter 1. Also, Photo Stream must be enabled in
Settings, as described in “Review Photos & Camera Settings,” later in this
chapter.
Photos you take with Camera or screenshots (see the Tip earlier in this
chapter near the “Access Your Photos” section) you capture on your iPhone go
into the Camera Roll album. They are automatically uploaded to your Photo
Stream on iCloud, if it is enabled, after you leave Camera. The photos can then
be viewed on all the devices that share your iCloud account, including PC and
Mac computers. On your iPhone you will also see photos taken or captured on
your other iCloud-enabled devices. You can keep up to 1,000 photos on your
Photo Stream, and they won’t count against your total iCloud storage.
It’s easy to manage your Photo Stream:

1. From the Home screen, tap Photos (if necessary), return to Albums, tap My
Photo Stream, and tap Select on the top right.
2. Tap the photo(s) you want to share, delete, or save to your iPhone.
3. Tap the Share icon in the bottom-left corner to open the Share menu and
add the photo(s) to a message, an email, iCloud Photo Sharing (see the next
section), or Facebook (or that you want to copy, print, or perform other actions
on), as you have seen earlier in this chapter.
4. Tap Add To to save the selected photo(s) to an existing album that you have
created or to a new album.
5. Tap Delete (the trash can) to remove the selected photo(s) from your Photo
Stream on your iPhone. This does not delete the original photo(s).
iCloud Photo Sharing
iCloud Photo Sharing is a separate album you share with other people not on
your iCloud account but who have iOS 6 or later or OS X Mountain Lion or
later devices (recent iPhone, iPad, and iPod touch devices as well as Macs).
Here’s how to create an iCloud Photo Sharing album:

1. In Settings | Photos & Cameras, turn on iCloud Photo Sharing, if it isn’t
already on (see “Review Photos & Camera Settings,” later in this chapter).
2. From most Photos screens, tap Shared at the bottom of the screen to open
iCloud Photo Sharing.
3. Tap the plus sign in the upper-left corner to open and name a new stream
you are creating.
4. Tap Next and enter the email address of someone you want to share your
new stream with. Tap the plus sign in a circle to enter additional email addresses
to share your stream with more people.
5. When you are ready, tap Create.
6. Tap the new stream and tap the plus sign to open Photos. Tap the photos you
want to include in your new photo stream, tap Done, and tap Post. The new
folder will open and display the selected photos.
7. Tap People at the bottom of the screen to invite additional people and
decide how you want to manage the photo stream.


The people you have invited will receive an email message asking if they
want to subscribe to your photo stream.
Review Photos & Camera Settings
The following settings are available for Photos; from the Home screen, tap Settings |
Photos & Camera:

•   iCloud Photo Library allows you to turn on or off the automatic uploading of
your entire photo library to iCloud so you can access this library on any iOS device
using your iCloud ID and password.
•   My Photo Stream allows you to turn on or off the basic Photo Stream
capability. See the “Using Photo Stream” QuickFacts.
•   Upload Burst Photos allows you to turn on or off a fast sequence of photos that
can be up to 10 frames per second.
•   iCloud Photo Sharing allows you to turn on or off the Shared Photo Stream
capability. See the “Using Photo Stream” QuickFacts.
•   Summarize Photos allows you to choose a compact summarized view for
Collections and Years.
•   Play Each Slide For allows you to set the number of seconds (from 2 to 20) for
which each slide plays in a slideshow.

•   Repeat allows you to turn on or off the playing of a slideshow.
•   Shuffle allows you to turn on or off the random mixing of slides in a slideshow.
•   Grid allows you to turn on or off a grid for better aligning a photo. This does not
show in the final picture.
•   Record Video At 60 FPS allows you to turn on or off the ability to take high-
speed video at 60 fps (frames per second).
•   Keep Normal Photo saves a normal photo when an HDR (High Dynamic
Range) series of photos is taken that blends the best parts of three separate exposures.
WORK WITH VIDEOS
Your iPhone provides an excellent way to record, edit, and even watch videos. The
iPhones 6 and 6 Plus allow you to record 1,080-pixel high-definition (HD) video at either
30 fps or 60 fps. You can also record slow-motion video at either 120 fps or 240 fps, as
well as time-lapse video. This makes the iPhone a good video-recording device. With the
iPhone’s cameras, you can record videos in much the same way as you take a photo, do
some limited editing with the default apps, and download apps for more comprehensive
video editing. You can also download movies and TV shows and watch them on the
iPhone. Although the iPhone has a small screen, if you are the only one watching it and
you use the EarPods to listen, it is not a bad experience, especially on an airplane.
 Download Videos
There is an almost unlimited number of videos you can view on your iPhone. This
includes movies, TV shows, music and personal videos, and video podcasts. You can
download videos from iTunes and many additional sources on the Internet. When you
download a video, you may have it permanently, although in the cases of rentals and
library loans, what you downloaded will disappear after a set time. You can also stream a
video, which means that it is sent to you in small bites as you view it. Streaming, though,
requires that you have a faster, stable Internet connection. Look at what is available and
how to use videos from the iTunes Store and then look at what else is available.

CAUTION! Full-length movies are large files in the range of 3GB to 4GB. They take a good
amount of time to download; require stable, fast Internet and Wi-Fi connections; and if you use cellular, they will
take a fair bite out of your data plan. They can also use up the iPhone’s memory pretty fast.
Download from iTunes
Using iTunes on your iPhone to get videos is similar to using it to get books and music,
although it takes a lot longer.
1. From the Home screen, tap the iTunes Store icon and on the bottom menu bar
toward the left, tap Movies to see a number of movies displayed.
2. See additional videos within an individual category, generally listed in a row, by
swiping it to the left. See additional categories by swiping up.
3. Tap a video to see additional information and view trailers of it. Tap a trailer to
view it.
TIP For many movies on iTunes, you can choose to rent or buy them. If you buy a movie, you can
permanently keep it and watch it as many times as you wish. If you rent a movie, you have 30 days to begin
watching it and then 24 hours to finish watching it (in the USA; 48 hours elsewhere) from the time you click
Play.

4. Tap either the Buy price or the Rent price (if it is available) and then select HD
(high definition and a large file size) or SD (standard definition and a much smaller
file size). Tap Buy Movie (or Buy Video) or Rent Movie, enter your Apple ID
password, possibly verify your credit card, and then tap OK to complete the process.
You will see the downloading icon where the amount was. If you tap Downloads in
the lower-right corner, you will see the progress of the downloading.
5. Tap outside of the information box to close the added information.
6. When the downloading has finished, press Home, tap Videos, and tap your video
to play it. If you rented a video, you will be told the number of days you have left.
 Make Videos
The iPhone’s cameras make videos as well as photos, and you make a video very much
like you do a photo. Normal video is taken at 30 fps, but in Settings | Photo & Camera,
you can change this to 60 fps (see “Review Photos & Camera Settings,” earlier in this
chapter).
1. On the Home screen, tap Camera and then tap or drag the Video option over to
the yellow mark on the screen.

2. Aim the camera where you want to begin the video capture, press the red button
at the bottom center, and then pan the iPhone (move it from left to right or from right
to left) to capture what you want in the video. A timer at the top of the screen shows
you how long you have been shooting.
TIP While you are shooting a video, you can take a still photograph by pressing the shutter button in the
bottom-left corner.
3. When you are done capturing, press the red square button that has replaced the
red round button in the bottom center. You can then view what you just shot by
tapping the thumbnail of your video at the bottom right.
4. Tap the triangle in the middle of the screen to play the video. Videos you produce
are kept in Photos, not in Videos, but in the Videos album.
5. You can start playing a video at any place during its duration by tapping in the
sequence of frames at the top of the screen, or you can drag a finger across the frames

to quickly or slowly view the video.
TIP You can take a screenshot of a particular frame in the video and in this way you can identify the best
photo in the sequence of action.
 Edit and Share Videos
As you take videos, you may notice that you have frames at either the beginning or end of
the video that you want to remove. The iPhone provides a simple video editor that lets you
trim frames from either end of a video clip, but not remove frames from the middle of it.
You can also delete a video or share it with others in various ways.
1. From the Home screen, tap Photos, tap Albums (if needed), tap Videos or the
album you are using for your videos, and tap the video you want to work with. It will
open and have the features you saw at the end of the last section. If you don’t see the
series of frames at the top of the screen, tap the video.
2. To trim an end off the selected video, tap either end of the series of frames so it
becomes enclosed in a yellow border. Drag toward the middle from either end until the
frames you want to trim have become dim. Tap Trim in the upper-right corner and

then tap either Trim Original, so you only have a clip without the frames you
trimmed, or Save As New Clip, to create a new clip without the trimmed frames and
still have the original clip with the frames.
3. To delete the entire video, tap the recycle bin in the lower-right corner and then
tap Delete Video.
4. To share a video with other people, tap the Share icon in the lower-left corner of
the screen and then tap the method (Message or Mail) or service (YouTube, Facebook,
or Vimeo) you want to use. Note that YouTube and Vimeo are unique to videos. In
both cases, you must have an existing account to upload videos.
TIP Apple offers for free a very capable video-editing app called iMovie, which you can download and
use from the App Store.
Take Time-Lapse and Slow-Motion Video
The iPhone 6 and 6 Plus offer both time-lapse and slow-motion video. In Camera, tap
Time-Lapse and then tap the shutter button. The iPhone will take a still photo about every

seven seconds, until you tap the shutter again. It will then put the still photos together into
a video that you can edit as such. For slow-motion, in Camera tap Slo-Mo at the bottom of
the screen and then tap the speed, either 120 fps or 240 fps. Tap the shutter to start the
video and then tap it again when you are done. If you select the slow-motion video in
Photos, you will see a time bar beneath the video frames. You can drag the two black
vertical bars, representing the start and end of the slow-motion segment, anywhere within
the time bar to indicate the part you want in slow motion.
USE FACETIME
FaceTime makes the iPhone (or an iPad or iPod touch) into a video phone, where you can
contact someone and have a face-to-face conversation with them—in other words, a video
chat. To use FaceTime, you need to have an Apple ID and either a Wi-Fi or cellular
connection to the Internet. Note, however, that in using a cellular service for FaceTime
you may incur data charges.
Here’s how to make a FaceTime call:
1. Tap the FaceTime icon on the Home screen. The FaceTime screen will appear
with some of your contacts.
2. Tap the person in your contact list that you want to call. An intermediate screen

will appear showing who you are calling and giving you controls to switch the front
and back camera, disconnect the call (hang up), and mute the call.
3. When the other person answers, they will appear on your screen with your picture
inset in a corner. You can begin talking as you normally would. The iPhone’s
microphone is pretty good, and you shouldn’t have to lean in.
4. Drag the small image of you to any of the four corners.
5. When you are done with the call, tap the screen and then tap Disconnect (the red
dot with a handset).
6. You can show the person you are talking to what you are looking at by tapping
the switch camera icon, on the left, to activate the other camera in the iPhone and
then aiming the iPhone at what you want to show.
7. You can also mute the iPhone’s microphone—if, for example, you want to take a
call on another phone—by tapping the mute icon.
8. If you want to resume a FaceTime call, tap Recents and then tap the call you
want to resume.



Chapter 7

Listening to and Reading on the iPhone
QuickSteps to…
 Get Music from iTunes
 Transfer Music from a Computer
 Create Playlists
 Listen to Music
 Listen to iTunes Radio
 Read Using Safari
 Read Using the Newsstand
 Read Using iBooks
 Explore Maps
 Get Directions
In the first six chapters, I’ve primarily covered how to get the most productive use out of
your iPhone. In this chapter, you’ll see how to relax and enjoy your iPhone by locating,
getting, organizing, and listening to music and then how to locate, organize, and read
electronic books (ebooks) and other documents.
LISTEN TO MUSIC
Music has always been a powerful part of human history, and it remains so in this mobile
digital age. People may not agree on the type of music they like, but the majority of people
like to listen to some form of it—and the iPhone supports that in spades. Here, we’ll look
at getting music from two sources (iTunes and your computer), organizing it into playlists,
and then listening to it.
 Get Music from iTunes
iTunes makes available for purchase and download over 37 million songs. iTunes is easy
to use to search, open, preview, and buy music that you want to listen to.
TIP In addition to music, at the iTunes Store you can buy movies, TV shows, and other media. The
general discussion here on how to use iTunes applies equally to all the types of media available through it. I
talked briefly about getting videos and movies in Chapter 6.

Set Up iTunes
iTunes comes already installed on the iPhone, and using it requires little more than
opening it. You must, of course, have an Apple ID, but you most likely have that, as
described in Chapter 1. Take a brief look at the iTunes settings by tapping Settings |
iTunes & App Stores from the Home screen:
•   Show All allows you to determine whether you want to show all of the music
and videos you have purchased from iTunes and in iTunes Matches (see next item) as
well as whether you have downloaded them to your iPhone. The default is to show
them.
•   iTunes Match allows you to subscribe (for $24.99 a year) to an iCloud service
that stores all of your music, regardless of whether you bought it on iTunes or not.
•   The four Automatic Downloads options allow purchases on other devices, such
as an iPad, to be automatically downloaded to your iPhone. These are on by default,
and under most circumstances, you want to leave them that way.
•   If you have a limited data plan, you probably do not want to use cellular for the
automatic downloads between Apple devices and for iTunes Match. This is the
default, which you probably want to leave.
•   Suggested Apps allows you to turn on or off the suggestions on the lock screen
and App Switcher of apps that you have installed or are available from the App Store
related to your current location. The default is that they are both turned on.

Become Familiar with iTunes
Take a quick look around iTunes and get familiar with the interface. Open it by tapping
iTunes Store on the Home screen. The iTunes screen that opens has two sets of selectors.
At the bottom of the screen are the primary categories of Music, Movies, TV Shows,
Search, and More. For each of the first three categories at the bottom there is a set of
genres, or subcategories, available by tapping Genres at the top-left area of the screen.
The last two items on the bottom allow you to search iTunes or open five additional
sources of music. At the top of the screen, in addition to selecting a list of genres, you can
choose between Featured, pieces selected by iTunes (the default), and Charts, pieces
selected based on their popularity. Within Charts you can see the most popular singles at
the top, followed by albums and music videos. On both the Featured and Charts screens,
you can scroll most rows from right to left.

NOTE As seniors, we may not recognize much of the music that is displayed, but iTunes has our music
also.
Search iTunes
The key hurdle in using iTunes, of course, is finding the music you want to buy. iTunes
gives you several ways of reviewing what is available.
1. When you first open iTunes, All Genres is selected on the Genres screen. This
provides a smattering of recent popular albums and songs of different types.
2. To hone in on a particular genre, tap Genres at the top-left corner to review what
is available.
3. Tap several genres that appeal to you, such as Blues, Classical, Jazz, Pop, and
Rock, and look at what is available.
4. Tap Search in the bottom-right area to open the Search box at the top of the
screen, where you can enter album, artist, and composer names, as well as categories
of music. For example, to search for the music of my youth and young adulthood, I

entered Music of the 50s and 60s and was amazed at all I got.
TIP Don’t limit your searches to albums or artists. Try any unique categories you might think of.
Preview and Buy Music
Once you have found the music you may want, the next step is to preview it and make
sure it is what you really want—and, if so, to buy it. To preview and potentially buy an
album or song that you have found, follow these steps:
1. From the iTunes page you found earlier—for example, the result of my “Music of
the 50s and 60s” search—tap an album or song you are interested in. I tapped Cruisin’
to the Hits of the ‘50s and ‘60s.
2. You get an overview, review summary, price, and list of the songs on the album
or just the individual song. Tap any of the songs to have a 90-second preview of it
played on your iPhone.

3. When you find a song or album that you want to buy, tap the price, tap Buy
Song,
 use your Touch ID or enter your Apple ID password, and tap OK. You will see
your song downloading, and when it is done, the word “Play” replaces the price.
 The first time you buy something from the iTunes or App Store, you will be asked to
agree to Apple’s terms of sale (a 34-page document you can have emailed to you). You are
asked this even if the app or song you are getting is free.
 Transfer Music from a Computer
If you have had a computer for any length of time, you probably have put some music on
it, either by downloading the music or by copying CDs you have to your computer (called
“ripping” CDs). The major way to get music from other iTunes sources to your iPhone is
through your computer, and to do that you need to have iTunes installed on your computer.
You may already have iTunes on your computer, but if not return to Chapter 1 and install
it now; then look at collecting the music you have on your computer, ripping CDs to
iTunes, and finally transferring and syncing your music between your computer and your
iPhone.
Collect the Music on Your Computer
To get the music from your computer onto your iPhone, it must first reside in iTunes on

your computer. In many instances iTunes will automatically find and list the music from
your computer if it is in the standard folders, and you will not need to do anything more
(see Figure 7-1).


Figure 7-1: iTunes is more than a conduit for communicating between your iPhone and your computer; it is also a
great organizer and player of music on your computer.
If iTunes did not automatically locate and list your music, assist it by opening the file
system on your computer (Windows or File Explorer on Windows, or Finder on a Mac)
and locating your music. On recent Windows computers (7 and 8), it is probably located
within Libraries/Music/. On Macs (recent OS X versions), it is probably located within
Music. With that knowledge, follow these steps:
1. In iTunes on your computer, the first time you use it, click Scan For Media. This
will pick up the easily recognized music. On my computer it picked up most of the 27
albums I have.
2. Still in iTunes on your computer, click File | Add Folder To Library. Navigate
to the folder that contains any music not automatically picked up.
3. Click the top album, press and hold SHIFT, click the bottom album to select them
all, and click Select Folder.
4. You may be told that one or more of the songs you are adding to iTunes needs to
be converted to a different format. Click Convert. The process of converting and
adding your music to iTunes may take several minutes, depending on how big your
library is.
Rip CDs to iTunes
Here’s how to rip or add music from a CD to iTunes:
1. If it isn’t already, start iTunes on your computer.
2. Place the CD in your computer’s CD drive. iTunes will open, displaying the CD
you inserted and its songs.
3. iTunes will ask if you want to import the CD. Click Yes.

TIP If you don’t want to import the entire CD, you can uncheck the songs you do not want to import.
4. If you are asked about import settings, unless you have a special need, accept the
default and click OK.
5. As the CD is being imported, you’ll see the status at the top and a green check
mark in a green circle.
6. If you are told that the cover artwork cannot be found, click OK. You can live
without it or come back later and try to find it (do an Internet search on the title).
7. When you are done importing, remove the CD from the computer.
Transfer and Sync to iPhone
You can transfer all or selected parts of the music on your computer to your iPhone
automatically by syncing it, in essence making the music on your iPhone the same as the
music on your computer.
1. Plug your iPhone into a Universal Serial Bus (USB) port on your computer and
unlock the iPhone, if necessary.
2. On your computer, start iTunes, click your iPhone in the objects bar (it should be
the object on the left but closest to the center), and click Music under Settings, as you
can see in Figure 7-2.

Figure 7-2: iTunes on your computer allows you to have consistent music on both your computer and your iPhone.
3. Click Sync Music and click either Entire Music Library or Selected Playlists. I
recommend Selected Playlists to conserve space on the iPhone.
4. Review the playlists, artists, genres, and albums and select (check) the ones you

want on your iPhone. Note that the lists duplicate each other. Probably the least
confusing is to select albums and not any other category.
5. When you have selected the music you want to transfer, click Apply in the lower-
right corner.
Syncing transfers the music that is not currently on your iPhone from your computer to the
iPhone, but the opposite is not true—music that’s on the iPhone but not on the computer
will not be transferred to the computer.
 Create Playlists
A playlist is a list of songs from various albums that you want to play together in
sequence. Selecting the playlist plays all the songs on it. The process of creating a playlist
entails simply selecting the songs you want on the list and giving it a name. Here is how
you do it in the iPhone’s Music app:
1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Music | Playlists on the bottom left. If you
see Playlists, tap More on the right and then tap Playlists. If you have purchased
several individual songs on an album, they will be shown as a playlist under the
album’s name.
NOTE The icons at the bottom of the Music screen can be rearranged according to what you use most
often by tapping More | Edit and dragging the icons to where you want them.
2. To create a new playlist, tap New Playlist (the plus sign), type a name, and tap
Save.
3. Tap Songs at the bottom of the screen. This will open a list of all the songs on all
the albums you have either imported from your computer or purchased on iTunes.
4. Either swipe up or use the alphabetic index on the far right to scroll through the
list so you can find the songs you want.
5. Tap the songs you want on the playlist. When you have selected all the songs you
want, tap Done. The list of songs on your playlist will appear.

6. Tap Edit in the upper left to go into edit mode.
NOTE Only playlists that you create on the iPhone can be edited. Playlists that you bring over from
your computer cannot be.
7. To delete a song on the list, tap the white bar in the red circle and then tap
Remove. Drag the grip strip on the far right to reposition songs within the list.
8. To add a song to the list, tap the plus sign in the upper right and repeat steps 3
through 5. When the list is the way you want it, tap Playlists on the left. Your new
playlist will appear on Music’s Playlists page.
 Listen to Music
You can listen to music on your iPhone using iPhone’s Music app, which has a number of
features to fulfill that function. Unless it has been moved, the Music icon is on the right
end of the dock at the bottom of the Home screen.

TIP The Music app allows you to play not only music, but also podcasts and audiobooks, as well as listen
to “radio” (streaming audio).
To play music on your iPhone from the Home screen, tap Music, tap one of the categories
at the bottom, tap Radio, Playlists, Songs, Artists, or More where you find Albums,
Genres, Compilations, and Composers, and finally tap an individual song you want to
play. The iPhone’s player will open with these controls:
•   Return to library (the arrow in the upper-left corner) leaves the current song
and returns to the Playlist, Album, or Artist library, but leaves the song playing unless
you pause it.
•   The song list (the three lines in the upper-right corner) displays the list of songs
in the album.

•   The current position shows where you are currently in the song that is playing.
You can drag the red position marker (also called a “Playhead”) in either direction to
move what is currently playing.
•   The progress bar provides the span for marking the current position in a song
that is playing. The number of minutes already played and remaining are at either end
of the progress bar.
•   Player controls with Previous and Next allow you to step through an album one
track at a time in either direction, and Play and Pause allow you to start and stop
playing the current song.
•   The volume slider can be dragged left or right to lower or raise the volume of
the music being played.
•   Repeat repeats the current song.
•   Create allows you to create a new playlist or radio station based on the currently
selected artist or song.
•   Shuffle rearranges the list of songs in an album and plays them in a random
order.

TIP To delete an album from your iPhone, tap More | Albums (unless you have rearranged the icons),
swipe the album from right to left, and tap Delete. You cannot delete albums that are on iCloud (for example, the
free U2 album Apple gave everyone). To remove it from your iPhone, in Safari go to itunes.com/soi-remove, tap
Remove Album, sign in with your ID and password, and you will be told the album is removed.
Control Music
Actually controlling the music you are playing is, at this point, anticlimactic, and you
probably have, with the touch controls so obvious, figured it out. This, of course, varies a
bit, depending on the view you have on the screen.
1. After tapping the song you want to play, the player will open with the progress
bar, player controls, and volume slider, as described previously, and the song will
begin. The entire playlist, album, or artist collection will play if you don’t interrupt it.
2. Tap Pause in the player controls to temporarily stop playing the music. Tap Play
to start playing again where you left off.
3. Tap Previous or Next to go to the previous or next song or track in the album.
4. Drag the volume slider to increase or decrease the volume.
TIP Some headphones, such as Apple’s EarPods, which can be plugged in on the left of the Lightning
USB cable, allow you to adjust the volume remotely on the wire to the headphones.
Set Up Music
Open Music’s settings from the Home screen by tapping Settings | Music. Options
include the following:

•   Shake To Shuffle lets you shake your iPhone to change the order in which songs
are played.
•   Sound Check, when turned on, levels out volume highs and lows.
•   EQ allows you to select preset equalizer settings for various types of music.
•   Volume Limit lets you set a maximum volume limit, which you might want to
use with headphones.
•   Lyrics & Podcast Info provides added information when it is available.
•   Group By Album Artist groups albums by one artist together.
•   Show All Music provides for the display of all music that has been downloaded
to the iPhone or stored on your iCloud account.
•   Genius allows Apple to anonymously gather information about your music
library so they can suggest similar music to you.
•   iTunes Match sets up the storing of all of your music on iCloud, including
music you have ripped from CDs and downloaded from other sources. See “Set Up
iTunes” earlier in this chapter.
•   Home Sharing displays the Apple ID used with Home Sharing.

TIP Turning the iPhone to Landscape orientation (lengthwise) displays a full screen of your album
covers.
Use the Control Center Controls
If you are playing music while also using another app, such as an app for reading a book
or magazine, you can quickly get to a set of player controls in the Control Center without
having to open the Music app and possibly losing your place in what you are reading.
You can display the audio controls from any open screen on your iPhone by swiping up
from the bottom of the screen and using the same player controls described earlier.

 Listen to iTunes Radio
iTunes Radio is a competitor of Pandora and other streaming Internet “radio” stations
(where the music is sent to you as you are listening to it). iTunes Radio provides a number
of stations either dedicated to particular types or genres of music or groupings of music
such as the current top 50 songs or The Beatles Radio. You can also create your own
station, which is stored on iCloud, so you can listen to it and any of the other stations
anywhere you have iTunes, including your iPhone, iPad, iPod, and your PC or Mac
computer.
NOTE iTunes Radio is itself free, but there will be occasional ads to listen to, and you are reminded
that you can buy the current song for your own library by clicking the price associated with it. If you sign up for
iTunes Match (explained earlier in this chapter), you will be spared the advertising.
If you have never used iTunes Radio, you may not see the icon at the bottom of the Music
screen and you will need to download the app from the App Store. Tap App Store and tap
Search on the bottom right of the screen. Tap in the Search box at the top of the screen,
type itunes radio, and tap Search. When iTunes Radio appears, tap Listen Now.
If you do see the iTunes Radio icon at the bottom left of the Music screen, tap it. In either
case, iTunes Radio will open. Across the top are featured stations, and on the bottom is
space for your own selected ones. To use iTunes Radio on your iPhone, follow these steps:
1. Scroll Featured Stations by swiping from right to left.
2. Select a station to listen to by tapping it. The Now Playing screen will open and
display the album cover for the current song, as well as the familiar player controls.

3. Tap the info icon for more information about the current song and to create a new
station based on the current artist or current song. You can also tune the current station
to play only the top hits or a variety of related music, or you can explore some
variations of the theme of the current station. Finally, you can choose to allow explicit
tracks as well as if and how you want to share this station with others.
4. There are several ways to start a station of your own. As you read in step 3, you
can start a new station based on an artist or a song you are currently playing. You can
also tap New Station (the red plus sign) on the iTunes Radio page and select a genre
and possibly a subcategory. Finally, you can use the search box at the top of the screen
and enter an artist, song, or genre.
TIP If you only have one of your own radio stations, you can see the New Station plus sign on the initial
iTunes Radio screen. If you have two or more of your own stations, you will need to scroll up from bottom to top
to see New Station.
5. To change or delete a radio station you have created, tap Edit on the left of the
My Stations heading. Tap the station you want to work with. You can add artists,
songs, and/or genres that you want more of or don’t want to hear. Alternatively, you

can tap Delete Station and then tap Delete to remove the station.
READ ON THE IPHONE
Reading on the iPhone is easy, and the iPhone offers a lot to read. Many newspapers are
available both in Safari and in their own apps. Also, a large number of magazines, again
both online and in their own apps, are available. Then there is the iBook app that comes
with iPhone with which you can buy books and read them. Finally, several third-party
ebook readers are available in the App Store, along with thousands of free books that you
can read, and a great number more that you can buy.
 Read Using Safari
A great deal of material to read on the Internet is available directly in Safari without
another app, as you have seen in Chapter 3. This includes web pages themselves, blogs
(web logs, or ongoing writing about a particular subject), newspapers, and magazines. To
read on Safari (for example, The New York Times website), follow these steps:
1. From the Home screen, tap Safari.
2. Tap in the address box at the top center of the screen and then tap the X on the
right end of the box to remove its contents.
3. Type nytimes.com and tap Go. The New York Times home page will open.
4. When you see an article you want to read, tap it to open a page with that story.
5. Tap Reader (the stack of lines) at the left end of the address bar. The article will
appear in a well-formatted, easy-to-read page.

 Read Using the Newsstand
The Newsstand is a holder for certain newspapers and magazines whose app has been
customized so that the publication goes into the Newsstand (the Newsstand itself is not an
app). One such magazine is National Geographic. Here’s how to get and use it:
1. From the Home screen, tap the Newsstand icon to open the Newsstand.
2. Tap Store on the bottom-right corner of the Newsstand. The App Store will open
and display several magazines.
3. To locate a magazine you don’t immediately see, tap and clear the search box in
the upper-right corner, type the magazine name, and tap Search. A set of magazine
apps will appear.
4. Tap National Geographic in either the original set of magazines, if it appeared in
step 2, or as a result of the search in step 3.
5. Tap Free, tap Install, and then tap Open. A page opens showing recent copies of
the magazine, where you can buy individual issues or subscribe for a year.

6. Tap your choice, tap Buy, type your Apple ID password, and tap OK. Tap
Download. The magazine will download and then be displayed.
TIP Some magazines automatically download new issues and sometimes automatically charge you for
that new issue, depending on your subscription arrangement with them. By tapping Settings | iTunes & App
Store, you can turn off the Automatic Downloads Updates.
 Read Using iBooks
With iBooks, you can carry a small library around with you; add to that the iBookstore
and the iCloud, and you have an endless supply of reading material. The iBooks app is not
only a container and organizer for your books, as is Newsstand for magazines, but it is
also a reader, a portal to the iBookstore, and a means to fully annotate your books with
bookmarks, highlighting, and notes.
Set Up iBooks
Start your iBook experience by setting it up the way you want:

1. Press Home and tap Settings | iBooks to open the iBooks settings.
2. Review the settings and consider if you want to change any of them:
•   Full Justification, when enabled, aligns the text to the margins on both the
left and right edges by spreading out the characters and words. The alternative is to
have a ragged right edge with consistent character and word spacing.
•   Auto-hyphenation, when enabled, allows splitting words on the right margin
to facilitate justification without drastic changes to the character and word spacing.
•   Both Margins Advance, when enabled, allows you to advance to the next
page on the right by tapping the left margin as well as the right margin. Otherwise,
tapping the left margin will take you back one page.
•   Sync Bookmarks And Notes and Sync Collections, when enabled, sync your
bookmarks, notes, and current page information, as well as the way you have
organized your books into collections across your iOS devices such as iPads and
iPods.
•   Online Content, when enabled, allows the book you are reading to go online
and access content from the book’s publisher.
•   Acknowledgements is simply Apple acknowledging the people who
contributed to iBooks.
3. Press Home to leave Settings.
Search and Buy from the iBookstore

The iBookstore is like the iTunes Store, except that it is for books. Here is how to buy or
acquire (some are free) one or more books:
1. From the Home screen, tap iBooks and tap Featured in the bottom-left area. The
iBookstore will open.
2. Swipe from right to left the various lines of books. Swipe up to review various
categories of books. You might want to explore Categories at the top left or Top Charts
at the bottom center. You can also tap Search and enter to search for specific books,
authors, or categories.
3. When you find a book you are interested in, tap it to open detailed information
about it.
4. If you want to read a sample of the book, tap Sample. The book will appear on
your bookshelf with the word “Sample” on the cover. Some samples are quite
extensive.
5. When you are ready to buy a book, tap the book’s price and then Buy Book,
enter your Apple ID password, and tap Return. The book will appear in iBooks.

Use iBooks
Although the principal purpose of iBooks is to facilitate the reading of books, it also
provides for the acquiring, organization, display, and disposal of books. The functions that
can be performed in iBooks include the following:
•   View books either in the standard bookshelf view, shown next at left, or in a list
view, shown next at right by tapping the stack of lines icon in the upper-left corner.
•   Sort list view by tapping one of the four sort methods at the top of the list view
screen.
•   Arrange books on the bookshelf by touching and holding on a book while
dragging it to another location.

•   Search for a book by scrolling to the top (swiping from top to bottom) of the
bookshelf or book list; tapping in the search box; entering the keywords such as
author, title, or subject; and tapping Search.
•   Delete a book in either view by tapping Select in the far-upper-right corner and
tapping the book (or books) you want to delete to place a white check mark in a blue
circle on the book(s). When you are ready, tap Delete. You then can tap either Delete
This Copy to delete the copy on your iPhone or Delete From All Devices to delete
copies from your iPhone as well as any copies on your other iOS devices. Tap Done.
The book will remain available to you in iCloud (see the icon in the upper-right corner
of the book). Tap the book to bring a copy back onto the iPhone.
•   Organize books by putting your library into collections or categories that you
set up similar to the categories in list view, but with your own categories (or
“collections”) that appear in both Bookshelf and list view. Do this by tapping Select,
selecting the books, tapping Move, and selecting the collection or creating a new one.

Read a Book
Using iBook to read a book is quite easy, but iBook also provides the means to do much
more than just read—in terms of enlarging the page, changing the font size, jumping to a
particular page, jumping to the table of contents, looking up the definition of a word, and
adding a bookmark. Not all books that you read in iBooks have exactly the same features,
but many have the ones described here:
•   From iBook, swipe the bookshelf (if needed) to open the collection and then tap
the book that you want to read. The book will open. If you have never read any of the
book on the iPhone before, it will open to page 1. If you have previously read some of
the book on the iPhone or other iOS device with which you are sharing the book, the
book will open to where you were last reading.

•   Turn a page by tapping in the left margin or swiping from the left edge to go
back a page, or by tapping in the right margin or swiping from the right edge to go
forward a page.
•   Display the controls by tapping virtually anywhere on the page (although Apple
recommends toward the center of the page).
•   Return to the library by tapping the Library button in the upper-left corner.
•   Display the table of contents or a list of bookmarks or your notes by tapping
the Contents icon and then tapping either Bookmarks or Notes (the Contents page is
displayed by default).

•   Change the font and size by tapping the Fonts icon to open the Fonts menu,
where you can change the brightness using the slider at the top, decrease or increase
the font size by repeatedly tapping the smaller or larger “A,” change the font by
tapping Fonts and selecting a font.

•   Search the text by tapping the Search icon to open the Search box. Type a word
or page number to search for and tap Search.
•   Add a bookmark by tapping the Bookmark icon on the far right. Tap the icon
again to delete it. Because iBook keeps track of where you are currently reading,
bookmarks are for other purposes you might have. See a list of bookmarks by tapping
the Contents icon and then Bookmarks.
•   Go to another page by dragging the slider at the bottom of the page in either
direction.
Annotate a Book
For those who like to annotate the books they read, reading in iBook has to be a real asset.
Besides leaving bookmarks, as discussed earlier, you can also perform the following tasks:
•   Select text, any amount of it, by double-tapping some of what you want to select
and then dragging the endpoints to enclose all of the text you want to select. When
you do that, a menu appears that allows you to copy, get a definition, highlight, make a
note, search, or share the selection.

•   Highlight text by dragging across it or by selecting it and tapping Highlight. In
the latter case, in the Highlight menu that opens, tap the color discs on the left and
then tap one of the five colors or the underline. Close the highlight menu by tapping
anywhere outside of the highlight.
•   Add a note by selecting the text to be noted and tapping Note in the selection
menu. A blank note will appear, where you can type the note you want. When you are
finished, tap outside the note or highlight. The note will disappear, and a little yellow
icon will appear in the margin.
•   Remove highlight and a note by tapping the highlighted text, tapping
Highlight, and tapping the recycle bin. If you have a note, you will be told that the
note will also be deleted, and you can tap Cancel or Delete; otherwise, just the
highlight will be removed from the text and you are returned to the normal page.

•   Search by selecting a word and tapping Search. A search panel opens displaying
the locations in the book where the word appears and allowing you to search the Web
and Wikipedia.
TIP Many public libraries, even smaller ones, have programs for lending ebooks on the Internet. You
need a library card and a library app such as 3M (used with smaller libraries), OverDrive (which is able to handle
multiple library cards), and others. You may be able to choose to get books in different formats. If you choose
the Kindle version, it goes through the Amazon store and your device must be registered to your Amazon
account. There are differences among libraries on how the ebook lending works, so you’ll need to explore your
own local library.
Use Maps
iPhone’s Maps is one of its most useful and practical apps, as well as being fascinating and
even fun. You can quickly find where an address is located as well as get directions to it.
You can also see where you are currently and get information about that area, as well as
find out about points of interest and local establishments. You can see this in a standard
map view, in a 3-D view, in a satellite view, or in a hybrid view, where the street names,
points of interest, and establishments are overlaid on the satellite view. If that isn’t
enough, you can view the satellite and hybrid views straight up and down (so you can
better see the streets) or at an angle (so you can better see the buildings). Maps has two
primary purposes: to find out where something is located and to get directions to a
location.

NOTE Maps requires an Internet connection, either Wi-Fi or cellular, and voice-driving directions
require a cellular connection that will incur data usage. To get your current location you must give permission for
that. Although maps are relatively accurate and quite useful, they are not perfect and you must allow for some
error.
 Explore Maps
Maps can be fun to explore, but is also very useful to find out where something is located.
1. From the Home screen, tap Maps. Maps will open and show you where you are
currently located with a blue dot in a white circle.
2. You can change what you are seeing:
•   Move around a map by dragging it with a single finger.
•   Change the orientation of the map by rotating it with two fingers.
•   Return to the North at the top by tapping the compass in the upper-right
corner, which only appears when you have rotated the map.

•   Zoom in by double-tapping with a single finger or by spreading two fingers
apart.
•   Zoom out by tapping with two fingers or by bringing together two fingers.
3. Search for a location by tapping in the search box at the top of the screen and
typing an address; the name or type of an establishment; or a landmark, area, town,
city, ZIP code, or region. Maps may suggest a destination as you are typing. If you
want the suggestion, tap it.
4. Touch and hold on a location on the map to drop a pin there, identify it, and mark
it for future reference. Tap the info icon in the lower-right corner to change the map
view, drop a pin in the center of the map, show a 3-D map, report a problem with the
map, or show traffic on local streets using increasingly thicker red dashed lines for
increasing traffic congestion and yellow dotted lines for construction.
5. Tap one of the many icons on the map to get information about that location or
establishment.
6. Tap the arrowhead in the lower-left corner to see your current location.
7. Select Satellite and Show 3D Map on the Info menu to see an awesome view of
buildings in that area.

8. Tap the Share menu icon in the upper-right corner to send map information of
either your current location or a selected location to others using AirDrop, Message,
Mail, or other means.
9. Press the Home button and tap Settings | Maps. Here, you can control the
volume of voice navigation, choose whether distance is in miles or kilometers, and
whether labels are in English.

 Get Directions
It is one thing to locate a place or an establishment, but it might still be difficult to get
there. Maps can show you how to get to a destination with alternative routes on a map,
with a set of written instructions, and can give you turn-by-turn voice instructions.
1. From the Maps screen, tap the Directions icon in the upper-left corner to open
the Directions menu.
Alternatively, you can open Directions by tapping the automobile symbol on a pin
you dropped or that appears when you touch and hold on a map feature or the map
itself. You can also tap Directions To/From Here in information drop-downs.
2. At the top of the Directions menu, select whether you want directions for driving
or walking, or to use third-party apps for directions.

3. Enter or select the starting and ending locations and then tap Route to display the
route on the map. The recommended route will be shown in dark blue, while
alternative routes will be shown in lighter blue with the approximate driving times
shown with each route.
4. Start getting voice directions by tapping Start at the bottom center. The voice
directions will begin and then pause until Maps detects you have completed that step.
You can stop the voice directions by tapping End in the upper-left corner, change the
volume by tapping the loudspeaker in the lower-right corner, or display written
directions by tapping List Steps in the bottom middle of the screen.
5. Tap Overview in the upper-right corner of the voice direction map page to
expand the map and see the full route.

Chapter 8

Exploring Apple Pay and Other Apps
QuickSteps to…
 Set Up Passbook and Apple Pay
 Use Apple Pay
 Use Passbook
 Set Up the Health App
 Use the Health App
 Use Notes
 Set Up Notes
We have covered many of the iPhone’s apps in other chapters of this book, but there are
still three others that deserve exploring: Passbook with Apple Pay, Health, and Notes. In
this chapter we’ll look at each and see how they are set up and used.
PAY WITH PASSBOOK
Passbook allows you to store airline boarding passes, movie and concert tickets, coupons,
and loyalty cards. It is also where you set up Apple Pay.
 Set Up Passbook and Apple Pay
Setting up Passbook with an iPhone 6 or 6 Plus is primarily about adding and managing
credit cards. Your credit card information is encrypted and kept very securely on your
phone—so secure, in fact, that the U.S. government complains they can’t get into it! You
can set up Passbook and Apple Pay either in the initial Passbook app or in Settings.
Set Up Apple Pay from Passbook
Start by setting up Apple Pay from Passbook.

1. From the iPhone’s Home page, tap Passbook and in the upper half of the screen
tap Set Up Apple Pay.
2. Tap Allow to allow Passbook and Apple Pay to use your current location for
relevant passes, card setup, and store locations.
3. Enter your Apple ID password and tap OK. If you have a credit or debit card on
file with iTunes and want to use it with Apple Pay, tap that option and go to step 4.
Otherwise, tap Use A Different Credit Or Debit Card and go to step 5.

4. For your card on file with iTunes, tap in the Security Code field and enter the
number; then tap Next | Agree | Agree. Your card will be activated. When the
activation process is complete, you will be told it is ready for Apple Pay. Go to step 6.
5. For a new card, tap in the Name field and then correct or enter the name on the
card, as needed. Tap in the Card Number field and enter the card number
(alternatively, tap the camera icon and position the card in the frame; the name, card
number, and expiration date will automatically be captured). Finally, tap in the
Security Code field, enter the number, and then tap Next | Agree | Agree. Your card
will be activated. When the activation process is complete, you will be told it is ready
for Apple Pay.
6. To add more cards (you can store up to eight cards), tap the plus sign in the top-
right corner of your list of cards or tap Add Another Card on the initial Passbook
screen and return to step 5.

Set Up Passbook and Apple Pay from Settings
Settings provides a similar setup for credit and debit cards, plus allows you to make
several other settings.

1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Settings | Passbook & Apple Pay | Add
Credit Or Debit Card.
2. In the Card Details screen that appears, enter your information or use the camera,
as described in step 5 under “Set Up Apple Pay from Passbook,” earlier in this chapter.
3. Tap Default Card, tap the card you want to be your default, and tap Back.
4. Tap Billing Address | Enter New Billing Address, enter your name and address,
and tap Done. Alternatively, you can tap Add From Existing Contact and select the
address you want from your contact list (for example, yourself if you have entered
yourself). Unfortunately, the automatic entry in your contacts labeled “Home” is not
available to be selected.
5. Tap Shipping Address | Enter New Shipping Address, enter your name and
address, and tap Done.
6. Tap Email and enter the necessary information if it is not already there. Do the
same thing for Phone.
7. To remove a card from your iPhone, tap the card to be removed, scroll down, and
tap Remove Card.
8. When you are ready, return to the iPhone Home screen.
 Use Apple Pay

With an iPhone 6 or 6 Plus, Apple Pay will allow you to pay for purchases, either while
you are online or while you are in a store. This payment is very secure; your credit card
information is never seen by the vendor.
Pay at a Store
You can use the iPhone to pay for a purchase in establishments that have contactless
reader devices that work with your iPhone. Look for one of the following symbols:
Many stores already (as of fall 2014) support Apple Pay—and the list is growing. A few
examples of current stores include Aéropostale, Bloomingdales, Chevron, Macy’s,
McDonalds, Office Depot, Panera, RadioShack, Staples, Subway, Texaco, and Whole
Foods. To use Apple Pay while in one of these establishments, follow these steps:
1. When you are ready to pay, hold your iPhone about an inch away from a
contactless reader; there is no need to wake your phone or start an app, and your
default credit or debit card will be displayed with “Pay with Touch ID” on the screen).
2. If you want to pay with a different card, tap the default card; your credit and debit
cards should appear on the screen.

3. Tap the card you want to use, place your Touch ID finger on the Home button,
and continue to hold the iPhone about an inch away from the reader until the iPhone
vibrates. If you don’t have your finger correctly on the Home button, you will see a
message asking you to authenticate with your Touch ID or your passcode. Keep the
iPhone in front of the reader until the transaction has been completed, and you will see
a check mark and the word “Done.” After a moment, the details of the transaction will
appear.
Pay Online
Using Apple Pay online simply involves getting the store’s Apple Pay app and choosing to
use it to pay for a purchase.
1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap App Store | Search, type Apple Pay, and
tap Browse Now. Scroll down to review the list of establishments with apps that allow
you to buy online with Apple Pay.
2. Tap Get | Get | Install | Open for the establishment where you want to shop.
Browse and use the search features to locate what you want to buy. Select it and then
tap the Apple Pay logo.

3. In the bill that appears, tap the credit card to select a different one and tap the
shipping address and/or contact information to change either one.
4. When you are ready, press the Home button with your Touch ID finger to
conclude the sale. If you don’t want to go ahead, tap Cancel.
If you open Passbook, you will see your last transaction and the card it was made with.

 Use Passbook
To use Passbook, you need to download or scan in boarding passes, movie and concert
tickets, coupons, and gift and reward cards. You can get these in many places, but a good
place to start is to download apps that support Passbook. You can open Passbook and tap
Find Apps For Passbook on the Welcome screen, or you can open
itunes.com/passbookapps in Safari or in a browser on your computer.
1. From the iPhone Home screen, tap Passbook. If you don’t still have the
Passbook Welcome screen displayed, tap the plus sign in the upper-right corner to
display it.
2. Tap Find Apps For Passbook and tap Get for several apps that might be useful
to you.

3. Use the app to locate coupons and discount and reward cards. For example, tap
Get | Install | Open With Starbucks. Tap Sign Up and enter your name, email, a
password, the month and day of your birthday (for a free coffee), and your postal code.
Tap Continue, tap Add Starbucks Card | Get A New Digital Card, and then tap
Continue to add the card to Passbook. Identify several Starbucks locations near you,
and tap Add as the final step to place it in your Passbook. Open Passbook to see the
card.
4. You can also scan several types of documents, including retail loyalty and reward
cards. Place the document on a flat, nondistracting surface. From the Passbook
Welcome screen, tap Scan Code, aim the iPhone at the code, and the camera will lock
onto it. Unfortunately, not all codes produce a pass.

TRACK YOUR HEALTH
The iPhone’s Health app helps you keep track of your fitness and health information so
you can track how you are doing in both areas. You can directly enter information, and
you can have external devices that use Bluetooth to manually or automatically transfer
information to Health.
 Set Up the Health App
There are three ways to use Health: by directly entering and viewing data (see “Use the
Health App,” later in this chapter), with separate external devices (follow the instructions
for the device), and by using apps that interface with Health, which we’ll look at next.
Set Up Health Apps
There are a large number of health- and fitness-related apps, only some of which interface
with the iPhone’s Health app. Here is how to find and set up the ones that do:
1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap App Store | Search, type health apps, and
tap Search.
2. Under Apps For Health, tap Browse Now. In the screen that opens are three
categories of apps: Fitness & Wellness, Food & Nutrition, and Healthcare. Drag each
category from right to left to see additional apps.
3. Select several apps that are correct for you. Here, I’ll get and set up Health Mate,
Calorie Counter (by MyFitnessPal), MyChart, and AskMD as examples, not as

recommendations (only AskMD interfaces with the Health app).
4. Tap Health Mate | Get | Install, sign in to the App Store if necessary, and tap
Open. If you wish, review their data-gathering devices and then tap No Devices Yet.
5. Enter the requested information, tap Next as needed, and then tap Create. Tap
the Welcome tour and read how to use the app (and get invited to buy their devices).
Without their devices, you can still measure your heart rate using your camera, track
the number of steps you take if you keep your iPhone in your pocket, and enter your
weight and blood pressure that you get from some other devices.

6. From the App Store Apps for Health, tap Calorie Counter | Get | Install, sign in
to the App Store if necessary, and tap Open | Sign Up. Choose to sign up with your
email address or your Facebook account and select your weight goal and related
information, tapping the right arrow in the upper-right corner as needed.
7. When you have entered all the information, you will be told what your daily
calorie goal is. Tap Start Tracking Now. Pick a meal, enter a type of food to search
for, select a match, and tap Add (1). Repeat for all the items you eat and for the meals
in a day. Tap the day complete icon in the upper-right corner and tap Complete Entry.
Explore the many aspects of Calorie Counter.


8. From the App Store Apps for Health, tap MyChart | Get | Install, sign in to the
App Store if necessary, and tap Open | Accept. Choose your state and medical
provider, sign in, and accept the terms and conditions. This provides some access to
the medical records of your medical provider. If your provider is not listed, this app
will not work for you.
9. From the App Store Apps for Health, tap AskMD | Get | Install, sign in to the
App Store if necessary, and tap Open | Sign Up. Enter the requested information, tap
Yes to share information to the Health app, and select the elements you want to share.
Browse through the app and use the features that interest you.
Set Up Emergency Information
The iPhone’s Health app provides for the entering of emergency medical information that
can be viewed on the lock screen. Here is how to set it up:
1. From the iPhone Home page, tap Health | Medical ID in the bottom-right corner
and then tap Create Medical ID.
2. Choose whether to show this information when the iPhone is locked; then go
down through the categories of information and enter what you think is pertinent. Tap

Done when you are finished. You can always come back and tap Edit to make any
changes you want.
3. To access this information when the phone is locked, press the Home button,
swipe the screen from left to right, and tap Emergency | Medical ID. The information
appears.

 Use the Health App
As stated earlier, the primary use of the Health app is the entering and tracking of fitness
and health information. Some of the information can be entered by devices and other apps,
and some is generated by the iPhone itself, but much of the information must be entered
by you. Once this is entered, Health provides a number of ways to track the information.

Get Information into Health
Here are some examples of what the iPhone can collect and what you need to enter:
1. From the iPhone Home screen, tap Health | Health Data in the bottom left. Here
there are seven categories of health and fitness information, plus one that combines all
the others.
2. Tap Body Measurements | Height | Add Data Point. Enter your height in
inches and tap Add | Back in the upper-left corner.

3. Tap Weight | Add Data Point. Enter your weight in pounds and tap Add | Back |
Health Data in the upper-left corner.
4. Tap Fitness | Flights Climbed. This information is automatically collected by the
iPhone, as is Steps and Walking + Running Distance. You can add more data points if
you wish. Return to Health Data when you are ready.
5. Tap Nutrition. Tap a nutritional element you want to track, tap Add Data Point,
and enter the amount of that element. Return to Nutrition and repeat this step for other
elements. When you are done, return to Health Data.
6. Tap Sleep | Sleep Analysis | Add Data Point, enter the start and end dates and
times, and tap Add. Return to Health Data.

7. Tap Vitals | Blood Pressure | Add Data Point, enter the systolic and diastolic
figures, and tap Add. Return to Vitals.
8. Tap Heart Rate | Add Data Point, enter the beats per minute, and tap Add.
Return to Health Data.
Track Health Information
Once you enter information, you want to see the results and your progress in achieving
goals. This is accomplished in two ways: the dashboard, where you can see a selected set
of charts, and in the charts for each element. When you enter a particular element, you can
see and analyze the chart for that element. Also, you can choose whether you want to
show the element on the dashboard by tapping that option.

TAKE NOTES
Notes is very handy, allowing you to record brief ideas, reminders, and lists and to
organize those in limited ways. Notes can be shared through iCloud with other Apple
devices and through the mail accounts you have. You can also share notes with others and
print them.
 Use Notes
Using Notes is simplicity itself:
1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Notes | New and begin typing the note. The
first line you type will be used as the title of the note.
2. When you are finished, tap Done | Back to return to the list of your notes. That’s
all there is to it. Here are two examples of notes:

3. As you create notes, a list is built on the opening page that allows you to quickly
select and return to any note.

TIP You can dictate a note by tapping the microphone key in the onscreen keyboard, dictating the text
you want, including punctuation (for example, by saying “period,” “colon,” or “new paragraph”), and tapping
Done when you are finished. You may need to do some editing, but dictating should still be faster. Here are
screenshots of before and after editing a to do list:
Edit Notes

Notes can be edited like any other text that has been entered into the iPhone.
1. From your list of notes, tap the one you want to edit and then tap anywhere in the
note to place the insertion point. You are then asked if you want to select the word or
select all of the text.
2. If you tap Select, you can drag the selection handles on either end of the selection
to select the text you want to work on.
3. When you have the desired selection, you will be asked if you want to cut, copy,
replace, or format it. Based on the choice you make, complete the process.
4. Repeat steps 1 through 3, as needed, to complete editing the text. When you are
finished, tap Done | Back.
5. To delete a note, tap it in the list of notes, tap Delete (the trash can) in the lower-
left corner, and tap Delete Note. Alternatively, in the list of notes, you can swipe a
note from right to left and tap Delete.
6. To create a new note while you are in a note, tap the New Note icon in the lower-
right corner.
7. To search notes from the list of notes, drag the top down, tap in the Search box
that appears, type what you want to search for, tap Search in the keyboard, and then
tap the appropriate note. The word or phrase you are searching for will be highlighted.
NOTE You cannot sort notes alphabetically, though that would be a great addition. Instead, they show
according to the last one opened.
Share and Print Notes

You can share notes with others and print them on a wireless printer.
1. From the list of notes, tap the one you want to share and then tap the Share icon
in the bottom middle of the screen.
2. In the Share menu that opens, tap the means of sharing you want to use, fill out
the sending document, and tap Send.
3. To print, tap Print in the Share menu, select the number of copies, select the
appropriate printer, and tap Print.
 Set Up Notes
You can attach notes to iCloud or to any of your mail accounts that accept notes, such as
Gmail and Yahoo! To do that, you must turn on Notes in iCloud and mail accounts and
then select the primary account in Notes with these steps:
NOTE You do not need to enable Notes in iCloud and your mail accounts if you do not foresee a need
for their use. If you just want to use Notes on your iPhone and don’t have other devices or needs for notes, you
can ignore the Notes settings discussed here.
1. From the iPhone’s Home page, tap Settings | iCloud | Notes to allow iCloud to
receive and pass on to other Apple devices the notes you create. Tap Settings to return
there.
2. From Settings, tap Mail Contacts Calendar and tap the mail account you want

to reflect Notes. For example, tap Gmail and tap Notes to turn it on if it is currently
off. Tap Mail in the upper-left corner when you are ready.
3. Repeat step 2 for as many mail accounts as you want to reflect Notes. Tap
Settings in the upper-left corner when you are ready.
4. From Settings, tap Notes | Default Account and tap the account that you want to
reflect your notes. If you want them only on your iPhone, tap that choice. Tap Notes |
Settings in the upper-left corner when you are ready.

Chapter 9

Socializing and Playing Games
QuickSteps to…
 Enable and Explore Twitter
 Post Tweets and Build a Following
 Start Using Facebook
 Manage Your Facebook Account
 Download and Play Games
 Explore the Game Center
You have seen the iPhone’s practical and entertaining sides; in this chapter you’ll see its
socializing and fun sides: interacting with your family and friends, and playing games.
This chapter shows you how to get connected and use Twitter and Facebook, as well as
find, download, and use a few of the many games available on the iPhone, some of which
are multiplayer games where you can interact with your friends.
FOLLOW TWITTER
Twitter is a social networking service on the Internet that allows you to post very small
messages, called “Tweets,” of no more than 140 characters. You can choose to follow this
stream of messages, or Tweets, on any topic and from any individual. You can also choose
to add your own Tweets, which anyone can read. You can read the public postings of
anyone else and sign up to follow anyone.
 Enable and Explore Twitter
You must register with Twitter before you can use it. You can access Twitter from Safari at
Twitter.com, or you can download for free the Twitter app from the App Store. The app is
tailored to your iPhone, so begin by downloading the app and then registering with
Twitter. Next, locate some information and contributors you want to follow. Finally, you
can post Tweets of your own and build a following.
Download and Register with Twitter
Use the following steps to download and register with Twitter:
1. From the Home screen, tap the App Store | Search. Clear the Search box if
needed. Type twitter and then tap Twitter in the search results.
2. Tap Free | Install, use Touch ID or enter your Apple ID password, and tap OK.
The Twitter app will be downloaded. Tap Open to display Twitter. If you want, tap

Allow to allow Twitter to use your current location.
3. If you don’t have an existing Twitter account, tap Sign Up and enter the
requested information. Otherwise, enter the email address and password for your
existing Twitter account. Tap Don’t Allow or OK to allow notifications.
4. You are asked if you want to follow your friends. Tap OK, if you wish, to allow
access to your contacts. A list of people, including some of your contacts who are on
Twitter, will be displayed. Tap the check box on the right for each person you want to
follow, or tap Select All to do that.
5. Tap Next or, if you selected some people, tap Follow to display a list of your
contacts who are not on Twitter and whom you can invite to join Twitter and follow
you. Tap Invite to display a list of people who your friends are following and are
suggested as people you might want to follow. Tap the check box for each one you
want to follow, or tap Select All to do that and then tap Follow.
6. You are asked if you want to add your photo to your Twitter account, and you are
given the option of taking a photo with the iPhone or choosing an existing photo. If
you choose the latter, you are asked if you want to allow Twitter access to your photos.
Tap OK or Don’t Allow (if you choose Don’t Allow, you will need to take a photo and
insert it, unless you choose not to have a photo on Twitter). Select the photo you want,

move and scale it, and tap Use | Finish.
Search for Tweets
In setting up Twitter, you’ve added the people in your contacts list who you want to
follow, but it is likely that you want to follow others in areas that you are interested in. I’m
interested in the Apple Watch and what people are saying about it. Also, I like to cook, so
I am interested in new and unique recipes. I can search on both of these topics to see who
is Tweeting about them.
1. Tap the Search icon, type what you want to search for, and then tap the result you
want to explore. In my case, I type and then tap Apple Watch to get this screen:
2. Scroll down the Tweets until you see one you might want to follow and then tap
it. The selected Tweet will expand.
3. Tap the Follow icon if you want to follow this Tweeter or subject.
4. Repeat the first three steps for as many subjects as you want to follow.

TIP Some subjects, such as my interest in cooking, can provide a great many Tweeters to follow, many of
whom do a lot of Tweeting.
Explore What Else Is Happening
After you have selected several people and organizations that you want to follow, tap the
left arrow in the upper-left corner. This opens the Home page, which displays the Tweets
of those you are following.
In addition to the Home page, there are two more pages titled “Discover” and “Activity.”
The Discover page shows you what is trending, both in general and with those you are
following. The Activity page displays the Tweets of people and organizations being
followed by those you are following.

1. With the iPhone in portrait orientation and Twitter’s Home page displayed, swipe
the page from right to left to display the Discover page and swipe again to display the
Activity page.
2. On either page, scroll down to see additional Tweets. Tap one of the Tweets to
explore it further. It may lead you to a website, and that may lead you to other sites.
3. When you have explored a path as far as you want, return to Twitter by tapping
the X in the upper-left corner.
4. Beneath each of the Tweets on the Home, Discover, and Activity pages is a set of
four icons (three on the Home page and one for Tweets from those you are already
following), as shown here:
•   Reply Used to send a Tweet to the person or organization that posted the
Tweet you are replying to.
•   Retweet Used to repost the Tweet under your name; tap Retweet a second
time to undo it.

•   Favorite Used to state that the Tweet is one of your favorites.
•   Follow Used to add the Tweeter to those you follow.
 Post Tweets and Build a Following
Although reading the Tweets of others can be interesting and worthwhile, there is an
equally compelling use of Twitter: to state your thoughts and comments by posting your
own Tweets, with and without photos, by replying to the Tweets of others, and by
retweeting what others have posted.
Post a Tweet
Posting Tweets is no harder than posting a text message, except that you are limited to 140
characters, and, of course, you must figure out what to say in that number of characters.
Here are the steps to follow:
1. On any Twitter page, tap the Tweet icon in the upper-right corner to open the new
Tweet message area.
2. Type whatever you want to say in the message area. Notice the number in the
upper right, which starts at 140 and decreases as you type, telling you the number of
characters you have left.
3. When you are ready, tap Tweet in the upper-right corner to post on Twitter.
4. If you are not already there, tap the Twitter Home screen (“Timelines” in the
bottom-left corner) and you will see what you posted.

Tweet with Photos and Add Your Location
You may have noticed two icons in the lower-left corner of the New Tweet dialog box.
These allow you to add a photo to your Tweet and to add your location. Here’s how:
1. Create and enter a new Tweet, as described previously.
2. Tap the Photo icon in the lower-right corner.
3. Tap the Location icon to be asked if you want to add your current location to
your Tweets. Tap Enable to do that, or tap Cancel to not add your location.
4. When the Tweet is ready, tap Tweet to send it.
Tailor Twitter Settings
You can change Twitter settings in both the iPhone’s settings and in Twitter.
1. From the iPhone’s Home screen, tap Settings | Twitter. Tap your account to
change your password and/or description. Tap Find Me By Email to allow people to

search Twitter and find you using your email address.
2. Also in iPhone Settings you can add another Twitter account, either existing or
new. You can also update your possible Twitter followings based on changes to your
contacts as well as allow Twitter to use your Apple account so that you sign in to
Twitter when you sign in to your iPhone.
3. While in iPhone Settings, tap Notifications | Twitter and choose the notification
settings for Tweets that are correct for you. Return to the iPhone Home screen when
you are finished.
4. Tap Twitter | Me and tap Edit Profile in the upper right to change your photo,
header image, name, location, website, and bio. Tap Save when you are ready.
5. Tap the gear icon and then Settings to change your account, image upload
quality, sound effects, image previews, notifications timeline, text size, and
accessibility. Tap Done when you are ready.

EXPLORE FACEBOOK
Facebook allows people 13 and older to connect with their friends and share comments,
pictures, and videos. To do that, each user, after registering, creates their own web page
and identifies the friends they want to share with. You can limit sharing to just your
friends, or have a public page that anyone can view. You can send invitations to people to
be your Facebook friends, and you will likely receive invitations from others to be their
friends. Making full use of Facebook is a book-length subject, and my wife, Carole
Matthews, has written one—Facebook for Seniors QuickSteps—published by McGraw-
Hill Education.
 Start Using Facebook
As with Twitter, you can use Facebook either through Safari or with the app, which you
can download for free from the App Store. Also, as with Twitter, I recommend using the
app. Once you get Facebook open, even if it is for the first time, you can immediately start
using it by posting comments, photos, and videos. You will want to add friends who can
see and respond to what you have posted.
Download and Register with Facebook
Use the following steps to download and register with Facebook:

1. From the Home screen, tap the App Store. Clear the Search box, type facebook,
and then tap Facebook in the search results.
2. Tap Free | Install, enter your Apple ID password, and tap OK. The Facebook
app will be downloaded. Tap Open to display Facebook.
3. If you don’t have an existing Facebook account, tap Sign Up For Facebook and
enter the requested information, choose a picture of you to use (you have to give
Facebook permission to use your photos), and tap Get Started. Choose to find friends
by allowing Facebook to use your contacts list. Finally, confirm your email address to
Facebook. Otherwise, enter the email address and password for your existing
Facebook account. Facebook will open.
Use Facebook
If you have an existing Facebook account, your current Facebook page will open;
otherwise, you are asked where you want to start.
1. Tap Status in the upper-left corner. Select whether you want your status to go to
just your friends, everybody (“public”), or just selected friends, and then enter what’s
on your mind or comment that you would like to share with others. When you have

completed entering the comment, tap Post. Your status or comment will appear on
your page.
2. Tap the Photo icon in the lower-left corner to add one. Tap either the Camera
icon in the upper-left corner and take a photo as you normally would, or choose from
the Camera Roll a photo you want, and then tap Post.
3. Tap Check In in the upper-right corner. Facebook will ask if it can turn on
Location Services. If that is acceptable to you, from the iPhone’s Home screen, tap
Settings | Facebook | Settings | Location | While Using The App. If you allow the
use of your current location, Facebook will display a list of Facebook pages that are
close to you.
4. Tap the Message icon (the silhouette and three bars) in the upper-left corner to
open the list of your friends to whom you can send individual messages. To send a
message, tap the friend’s name, tap in the text box at the bottom of the screen, type a
message, and tap Send.

Add and Contact Friends
At the bottom of the Facebook screen are five icons for five areas of Facebook. The
Facebook discussion so far has dealt with the default News Feed area. This is where posts
that you receive are displayed. The second area is Requests, which shows you the friend
requests you have received, people you may know (generally friends of friends) and
whom you may request to be your Facebook friend, and allows you to expand the people
you may know and search for others.
You need to start out with a few friends on Facebook. With that start, the number of your
friends will quickly grow as you get suggestions to add friends of friends. Also, others will
request that you be their friend as they learn you are on Facebook.
1. Tap Requests at the bottom of the Facebook screen and review the friend
requests at the top of the screen. Tap Confirm for those you want to be your friend,
and tap Delete for others.
2. For all the people on the Friend Requests page, tap the person’s photograph to
open the person’s Facebook page. From an individual’s page you may tap pictures to
enlarge them, tap View Profile at the bottom center to see more about the person, and
swipe from right to left to see other friend requests.

3. From the summary Friends Request page, tap the plus sign in the upper-right
corner to open the Find Friends page. Here, you can see several ways to add friends. If
you are just starting out, you will probably not see any people under Suggestions or
Requests.

4. Tap Search | Name Or Email and type a friend’s name or email address (an
email address is preferred because if you enter a name, you must search through all the
people on Facebook with the same name—which is probably a lot). Finally, tap
Search.
5. When you see a friend you would like to add, tap that friend’s name to open their
page and then tap Add Friend. You will see the label “Add Friend” change to “Undo.”
Under the name you will see “Request Sent.”
6. If needed, tap the return arrow in the upper-left corner to return to the Find
Friends page and then tap Contacts to see who on your contacts page is on Facebook.
Tap Get Started and then OK to proceed. A list of people from your address book and
on Facebook will appear. Tap Add Friend opposite the people you want to be your
friends. They will receive a notice like this:

7. You can then tap Skip and look at everybody else in your address book. Tap
Invite to invite them to create a Facebook page and be your friend. Tap Done when
you are ready.
8. Tap Browse to search for people from organizations and institutions you are
affiliated with.
9. After adding several requests for friends, tap Suggestions. You will see that you
now have a number of suggestions based on the requests you have made and who their
friends are. Tap the Add Friend icon on the right of the people you want to be your
friends.
10. After your friends have had a chance to see their email and respond, you will see them
in the right column on your News Feed page. If you tap the Notification icon in the
bottom of the page, you will see the friends who accepted your requests.
NOTE When you start using Facebook, be prepared to receive a lot of suggestions and requests for
friends.

 Manage Your Facebook Account
Facebook can disseminate a lot of information about you, and it is important that you use
the controls that Facebook provides to place the limitations you want on who can see
what. There are two lists of settings you can work with to have Facebook behave the way
you want: the iPhone’s settings and Facebook’s settings.
Review iPhone’s Facebook Settings
The iPhone’s Facebook settings have to do with whether apps can use your Facebook
account and whether Facebook can use other iPhone apps.
1. On the iPhone Home page, tap Settings | Facebook | Settings. Review the apps
that Facebook can access. The default is all those listed. Tap any you don’t want
accessed.

2. Tap Facebook in the top-left corner and tap your name. Here, you can enter your
password and delete your Facebook account from your iPhone (it does not delete your
Facebook account).
3. In the list of apps that can use your Facebook account, which are all selected by
default, select the ones you do not want to use it.
4. If you want Facebook to have temporary access to the email addresses and phone
numbers of your contacts, tap Update All Contacts.
Adjust Facebook’s Own Settings
Facebook has several different places where there are settings, and they duplicate each
other in some cases. Here, I’ll try to point out some of the more important ones, but it is
worthwhile for you to review them. There are far more than can be listed here.
1. In Facebook, tap More (the three bars in the lower-right corner).

2. Drag or scroll the list of options up until you see the primary heading Settings
and tap Privacy Shortcuts to open what is probably the most important of Facebook
Settings.
3. Tap Who Can See My Stuff | Who Can See My Future Posts, choose the
category of friends to do this, and tap the return arrow in the upper-left corner.
4. Tap Where Do I Review…, review your Activity Log and see who saw the items
you posted and liked, and tap the return arrow in the upper-left corner.
5. Tap Who Can Contact Me and then under Whose Messages Do I Want
Filtered, choose the level of filtering you want.
6. Tap Who Can Send Me Friend Requests, choose the option you want, and tap
the return arrow in the upper-left corner.
7. Tap How Do I Stop Someone…, enter the name of the person to be stopped, and
tap the return arrow in the upper-left corner to return to the overall Facebook settings
page.
8. Scroll down and tap Settings under the Settings heading. Tap each of the 13
categories, review the options, make the changes that are correct for you, and tap the
return arrow in the upper-left corner.

CAUTION! Consider carefully the information you put on Facebook and the degree to which you
allow others to view your information. Even though you put limits on who can see your information, a good
assumption is that anything you put on Facebook is public information. In your exploring Facebook, use
common sense to protect yourself, as discussed in the “Protecting Your Online Identity” QuickFacts.
 QuickFacts
Protecting Your Online Identity
It is a wonderful thing to be able to find and exchange information with
people 
with 
similar 
interests. 
Social 
networking 
facilitates 
these
communications so that we connect with broader webs of people, as well as
with people we simply do not know. In today’s world, though, it is wise to be
“street smart” when it comes to the streets of the Internet. Here are a few hard-
and-fast rules for keeping your identity to yourself and your information
private:

•   Make sure your password is reasonably difficult to figure out and protect
your passwords by not sharing them and by changing them often.
•   Be wise about the information you put on the Internet and by not putting on
highly personal information.
•   Don’t click links from unknown persons or organizations. These can be
programmed to gather information from you or your computer. Check the actual
URL of people soliciting your information and make sure they are who you think
they are.
Social networking can be fun and a great way to meet people and interact
with them. Just keep in mind that you want to be “street smart” while you are
having that great time.
By looking at only Twitter and Facebook, I have only touched on social networking apps
—although they are far and away the most popular ones, especially for seniors. If you are
interested in business and job networking, I recommend looking at LinkedIn, and if you
want to share a common interest, I recommend Pinterest as an iPhone app. Talk to your
friends and associates about what they are using and possibly try out other social
networking apps.
PLAY GAMES
Almost everybody likes to play games. The iPhone App Store offers a large number of
them you can directly play, and the iPhone’s Game Center allows you to compete with
others in multiplayer games and to keep track of how you are doing. The Game Center is
separate from individual games themselves, so we’ll discuss them first.
 Download and Play Games
Many iPhone games are free, or at least start out free, and many more cost something
(from 99 cents on up). Just to find a game you want is a major undertaking, and to make
sure it is well thought of and fun to play takes research. There are many different types of
games, such as action games, board games, card games, and many others. You can limit
yourself to free games, knowing that many “free” games get you hooked during free play
and then have various ways to get you to pay something. Although we’ll discuss several
games here, I suggest that you do some initial research by typing best iPhone games or
best free iPhone games into Google or Bing and reading through the reviews. If you are
looking for a particular type of game, enter best card games on iPhone, for example.
Back on your iPhone, open the App Store and perform searches on games in general, free
games, and then on particular types of games. In what follows I’ll describe two games I
think are fun to play and well crafted as examples of the many types available.
Solitaire
The card game Solitaire has been on the iPhone since the beginning. If you perform an
iPhone App Store search on Solitaire, you will see a number of games. One that I like is

the free version by Finger Arts. It does have ads, but they appear at the bottom of the
screen.
You can choose the look of the cards by tapping that option at the lower left and make
other settings by tapping Options on the right. You can also jump right in and begin
playing by clicking Play and then choosing a difficulty and the number of cards to draw.
At that point, you can tap the card deck on the upper right to begin play.
Mahjong
Mahjong is an ancient Chinese game where you try to use up all the tiles by matching
them. You tap first one tile and then a matching tile and the two disappear, allowing you to
see and work with other tiles. The 1001 Ultimate Mahjong version of this game is free, but
has some in-app purchases you can make. The free version of the game without additions
plays well.

When the game first opens, you are asked to choose from many different initial layouts of
the tiles. You also can tap Options and choose from a number of tile sets, backgrounds,
and themes, as well as set the volume. Upon choosing a layout, the game is created. Work
from the top down and the edges in. It is truly addictive.
 Explore the Game Center
The Game Center is not where you go to play games. You play games by starting them
from the Home screen. Game Center is where you keep track of how well you are doing
and, most importantly, where you connect with others who play the same games as you
and challenge them to play against you. The Game Center helps you connect with other
players, keeps track of the accomplishments of you and your opponents, and tells you
about other multiplayer games.




Index
Please note that index links point to page beginnings from the print edition. Locations are
approximate in e-readers, and you may need to page down one or more times after
clicking a link to get to the indexed material.
| (pipe) character, 25
! key, 12
? key, 12
#+= key, 12
3G networks, 21
3M app, 133
4G LTE service, 21
4G networks, 21
123 key, 12
A
ABC key, 12
accent marks, 25
accessories, 2, 3, 16, 96
activating iPhone, 6–8
Add Call button, 28
address and search bar, 39
Adobe Flash technology, 48
AirDrop, 39, 83, 90, 91
Airplane Mode, 21, 90
alarm clock, 21, 86, 91
alerts, 87–90. See also notifications; Reminders
default alert times, 76
Do Not Disturb, 21, 89–90
for events, 78
modifying, 89
styles, 89
types of, 89

using, 87–88
Amazon, 16, 133
AOL email accounts, 56
app icon page, 3, 4
app icons, 3, 4
App Store
Apple ID and, 8
buying magazines/newspapers, 128, 129
buying music, 118
considerations, 12, 42
described, 20
games, 162
suggested apps, 116
using Apple Pay, 141
App Switcher, 19, 22, 36
Apple ID, 5, 8–11, 110, 118
Apple ID password, 8, 110, 118, 138
Apple Pay, 138–141. See also Passbook
adding new credit/debit cards, 138–139
paying at a store, 140
paying online, 141
removing credit/debit cards, 139
security of, 137, 140
setting up, 137–139
switching credit/debit cards, 140, 141
using existing iTunes payment info, 138
using Touch ID, 140, 141
Apple Software Update, 12
AppleCare Protection Plan, 2
Apple-to-USB cable, 6
apps. See also specific apps
accessed by Facebook, 159

active, 21
considerations, 4, 21
crash information, 10
on dock, 4
emailing directly from, 65
exiting, 22
games, 162–163
health/fitness-related, 143–144
hiding/showing, 4
Home screen, 19–20
library, 133
memory, 4
multiple screens for, 22–23
navigating, 21–23
for Passbook, 141–142
rearranging icons, 22
showing/hiding, 4
shutting down, 22
Suggested Apps, 116
switching between, 22
using during calls, 29–30
AskMD app, 143, 144
AT&T, 5, 37
attachments, 63–66
audio. See also sound settings
controls, 126
muting, 28, 113
playing on Internet, 48
streaming, 123
audio messages, 71
audiobooks, 123
autofill feature, 41, 42

automatic downloads, 116, 129
AutoPlay, 99
B
BACKSPACE key, 12
backups, 6, 8, 9, 13
badge icon, 89
battery
Bluetooth devices, 21
charging status, 21
percentage charged, 6
sleep mode and, 13–14
battery icon, 6
Bing search engine, 44
Block Cookies option, 42, 49–50
Block Pop-ups setting, 41–42
blocking messages, 71
Bluetooth, 21, 28, 90
bookmarks
adding, 45
Books, 132
deleting, 46
editing, 46
folders for, 46–47
organizing, 45–47
rearranging, 46
Safari, 45–47
saving to Home screen, 45
syncing, 129
Bookmarks list, 39, 40
books. See iBooks
brightness, 90, 132

browsers. See web browsers
burst mode, 96, 98, 108
C
cables, 5, 6, 42, 125
Calculator, 20, 91
Calendar, 73–84. See also events
adding calendar from mail account, 80
adding events, 75, 77–80
alternate data display, 76
changing events, 79
choosing calendar, 75, 76
color-coding, 75
common calendar, 82–83
controls, 75
Day view, 74
default calendar, 76
deleting calendars, 81
deleting events, 79
described, 19
Facebook calendar, 81
Inbox, 75
invitations, 76, 78, 81–82
list selector, 75
List view, 74
listing events, 74
Month view, 74
month/year selector, 75
multiple calendars, 76, 79–81
publishing public calendar, 83–84
searching for keywords, 75
selecting date, 76

settings, 76
sharing calendars, 82–84
showing as busy/free, 78
subscribing to, 84
syncing, 76
time zones, 76, 77–78
Today, 75
using, 76–79
views, 73–74
week numbers, 76
Week view, 74
Year view, 74
calling
accepting calls, 30
call forwarding, 21, 32
call waiting, 31–32
conference calling, 28
from Contacts list, 29, 35
declining calls, 30
Do Not Disturb, 21, 89–90
ending call, 28
FaceTime calls, 28
Favorites list, 29
with keypad, 28
from lists, 29
making calls, 28–30
missed calls, 31
Phone app, 20, 28
receiving calls, 30–32
Recents list, 29
reminders for calls, 30
sending text message instead, 30

silencing calls, 30
with Siri, 29
speakerphone, 28
using apps during, 29–30
vibrate function, 2, 30, 36
voicemail, 28, 30–31, 32
Wi-Fi phone calls, 21
Calorie Counter app, 143–144
camera, 93–100. See also photos
burst mode, 96, 98, 108
exposure, 94
face detection, 94
FaceTime camera, 2, 3, 93
filters, 96, 97
flash, 2, 96
focus, 94
gridlines, 95, 108
HDR mode, 96, 97
iSight camera, 2, 3, 93, 96
moving photos to computer, 98–100
panoramas, 97
photo options, 95–100
self-timer, 96
settings, 108
switching front/back, 96
taking photos, 93–95
using as flashlight, 2, 91, 96
video mode, 110–111
viewing thumbnails, 95
zooming in/out, 94–95
camera accessories, 96
Camera app, 19, 91, 94, 95

Camera Roll, 94, 95, 101, 103
CDs, 4, 118, 120, 125
cellular carriers, 4, 5, 21, 37
cellular networks, 7, 42
cellular service
activating, 6
default, 31
FaceTime and, 112
options for, 37
vs. Wi-Fi service, 5
charging iPhone, 4, 6, 21
charging status, 21
Clear History option, 42
Clock. See also time
alarm clock, 21, 86, 91
described, 19
stopwatch, 86–87, 91
timer, 87, 91
World Clock, 86
close key, 25
Compass, 20
computer
backups to, 6, 13
connecting iPhone to, 5, 12–13
finding music on, 118–120
moving photos to from iPhone, 98–100
transferring music from, 118–122
conference calling, 28
contacts
adding, 32–35
calling, 29, 35
deleting, 36

display/sort order, 36
from Exchange accounts, 33
Facebook, 33, 160
iCloud syncing, 33
iTunes syncing, 33, 34
making changes to, 35
My Info, 36
short names, 36
special ringtones/vibration for, 36
using, 35–36
Contacts, 32–36
adding email addresses to, 9, 10, 35
described, 20
looking up names, 61
opening from keypad, 28
settings, 36
using, 35–36
Contacts button, 28
Contacts list, 29, 35
Control Center, 90–91, 126
cookies, 42, 49–50
crash information, 10
credit cards, 10, 12, 137–141
currency symbols, 25
D
debit cards, 138–139, 140
dictation (Siri), 26–27
directions, getting, 134–136
Do Not Disturb option, 21, 89–90
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
dock, 3, 4

documents. See files
double-presses, 18–19
double-taps, 18
dragging, 18, 22
E
earpiece, phone, 2, 3
EarPods, 4, 28, 125. See also headphone jack
ebook readers, third-party, 127
ebooks, 133. See also iBooks
EDGE (Enhanced Data for GSM Evolution) service, 21
electronic books. See ebooks; iBooks
email, 55–70. See also Mail
account creation, 56–58
add sender to contacts, 34–35
adding addresses to Contacts, 9, 10, 35
adding calendar from mail account, 80
adding photos to, 64–65
addressees, 60–61
alternate email address, 9
archiving, 68
attachments, 63–66
cc and bcc, 59–60
default account, 60
deleting messages, 59, 62, 68, 69
emailing directly from apps, 65
Fetch New Data, 59
flags, 59
formatting, 63
forwarding, 62
frequency of checking, 59
Gmail, 56, 57, 58, 68

iCloud email address, 9
IMAP accounts, 56
Inbox, 66, 67
invitations, 81–82
load remote images, 59
looking up names in Contacts, 61
mail servers, 56, 58
Mailboxes, 66–68
managing, 66–70
marking, 69
modifying settings, 58–60
moving, 69
notes in, 150
organizing, 68
Outlook-based, 57
passwords, 9, 56, 57
POP accounts, 56
printing, 62
push data on/off, 59
quote level, 60
receiving messages, 61–62
recovering messages, 68
replying to, 62
saving images, 62
searching, 69–70
sending, 60–61
setting up, 9, 55–58
showing To/Cc label, 59
signatures, 60
threads, 59
types of accounts, 56
VIP mailbox, 68

web mail, 56–58
Yahoo!, 56
email folders, 66–68, 69
email updates, 9
emergency information, 145
Enhanced Data for GSM Evolution (EDGE) service, 21
events. See also Calendar
adding to calendars, 75, 77–80
alerts for. See alerts
deleting, 79
editing, 79
information about, 78
inviting people to, 78, 81–82
listing in Calendar, 74
time zones, 77–78
URLs for, 78, 79
Exchange accounts, 33, 56
F
face detection, 94
Facebook, 156–162
adding/contacting friends, 157–159
apps accessed by, 159
calendar, 81
Contacts groups, 33
downloading/registering, 156
managing account, 159–162
overview, 156
password, 160, 161
precautions, 161
privacy, 160–161
settings, 159–161

updating contacts, 160
using, 157
Facebook app, 156
FaceTime, 112–113
cellular service and, 112
described, 20
Do Not Disturb option, 21, 89–90
ending calls, 113
initiating calls, 112–113
muting audio, 28, 113
resolution and, 2, 96
resuming, 113
switching camera orientation, 113
turning calls into FaceTime calls, 28
turning on/off, 9
FaceTime app, 2
FaceTime button, 28
FaceTime camera, 2, 3, 93
Favorites list
calling from, 29
deleting entries, 29
managing, 29
working with entries, 29
Favorites setting, 41
files
audio/video, 48
email attachments, 63–66
memory used by, 4, 109
sharing. See sharing
size, 109
viewing, 98
filters (camera effects), 96, 97, 105

Find My iPhone, 7, 9
finger movements, 18–19, 22
fingerprint identity sensor, 3, 9–10, 140
flash, camera, 2, 95, 96
Flash technology, 48
flash, True Tone, 2, 3
flashlight, 2, 91, 96
flicking, 18, 22
folders
bookmarks, 46–47
email, 66–68, 69
music, 118
photos, 64, 102, 103
forms. See web forms
forwarding calls, 32
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
G
game apps, 162
Game Center, 20, 162, 163
games, 162–163
downloading, 162
free, 162, 163
Mahjong, 163
playing, 162–163
searching for, 162
Solitaire, 162
types of, 162
GB (gigabyte), 5
General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) service, 21
Genius playlists, 125
gigabyte (GB), 5

Gmail, 56, 57, 58, 68
Google search engine, 44
GPRS (General Packet Radio Service) service, 21
GPS, 7
group messaging, 71
H
HD (high-definition) video, 108, 110
HDR (High Dynamic Range), 96
HDR photo series, 97
HDR photos, 108
headphone jack, 2, 3, 4. See also EarPods
headphones, 4, 125
Health app, 142–147
adding medical information, 146–147
AskMD app, 143, 144
blood pressure, 147
described, 20
emergency information, 145
health/fitness-related apps, 143–144
heart rate, 147
Medical ID, 145
medical records, 144
nutrition information, 146
setting up, 142–145
sleep information, 147
tracking health information, 147
using, 145–147
vitals, 147
Health Mate app, 143
health/fitness-related apps, 143–144
“Hey Siri” option, 27

High Dynamic Range. See HDR
high-definition (HD) video, 108, 110
history, 41, 42, 50
Home button, 2, 3, 6, 22
Home screen. See also screen
adding shortcuts, 24
displaying, 6, 22
going beyond initial screen, 22–23
saving website links to, 45
using, 3, 18
Home screen apps, 19–20
Home Sharing, 125
Hotmail, 56
hotspots
establishing connection, 38
finding, 37
personal, 21
I
iBooks. See also reading
adding bookmarks, 132
adding notes, 132–133
annotating books, 132–133
arranging books, 130
buying from iBookstore, 129–130
controls, 129
deleting books, 131
described, 20
displaying controls, 132
fonts/font size, 132
highlighting text, 133
online content, 129

organizing books, 131
reading books, 131–132
searching for books, 129–130
searching text in books, 132, 133
sort methods, 130
syncing bookmarks/notes, 129
table of contents, 131
turning/viewing pages, 131, 132
viewing books, 130
iBookstore, 129–130
iCloud
attaching notes to, 150
backing up iPhone to, 13
considerations, 5
Contacts syncing, 33
iCloud Photo Library, 108
passwords, 9, 10
Photo Stream, 101, 106–107, 108
sharing photos, 101, 103, 106–107, 108
signing up for, 9
tips for, 5
transferring to/from, 5
iCloud Drive, 9
iCloud email accounts, 9, 56
iCloud Keychain, 10
iCloud Photo Library, 108
iCloud Photo Sharing, 106, 108
images. See also photos
in email, 59
loading remote, 59
memory used by, 4
saving from email, 62

screen captures, 101
IMAP accounts, 56
iMessage, 9, 70–71
iMovie, 112
Internet, 37–53. See also web/Wi-Fi entries
bookmarks, 45–47
browsing, 42–44, 53
connecting to, 5, 21, 37–38
cookies, 42, 49–50
described, 37
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
hotspot connections, 21, 37, 38
personal hotspot, 21
playing audio/video files, 48
Private Browsing option, 50
searching, 44, 51–52
security, 49–51
shopping on, 52–53
uses for, 37
using Siri, 53
World Wide Web, 38–47
Internet activity, 21
Internet radio. See iTunes Radio
Internet search sites, 44
Internet service provider (ISP), 38, 58
invitations, 76, 78, 81–82
iOS devices, 33, 108, 129
iOS versions, 2, 106
iPhone
accessories for, 16
activating, 6–8

backing up. See backups
backups, 6, 8, 9, 13
charging, 4, 6, 21
choosing language, 7
connecting to computer, 5, 12–13
connecting to Internet, 5, 21, 37–38
connecting to iTunes, 13
entering information into, 24–27
features, 1
finger movements, 18–19
introduction to, 1–16
iOS versions, 2, 106
making calls. See calling
memory, 4–5, 109
overview, 1–2
passcode. See passcode
password, 5
passwords. See passwords
physical features, 2–5
plugging in, 6
powering up, 2
ring/silent switch, 2
ringtones, 2, 36
setting up, 8–11
sleep mode, 2, 13–16
turning on/off, 2, 3, 6–7, 14–16
unlocking, 15
using, 28–32
voicemail, 28, 30–31, 32
waking from sleep, 2, 15–16
warranty, 2
iPhoto, 99, 100. See also photos; Photos app

iSight camera, 2, 3, 93, 96
ISP (Internet service provider), 38, 58
iTunes. See also music; Music app
automatic downloads, 116
basics, 116–117
buying music, 118
connecting iPhone to, 13
copying music from computer, 118–122
cover artwork, 120
downloading, 12–13
downloading videos from, 109–110
Genius playlists, 125
getting music from, 115–118
import settings, 120
installing, 13
iTunes Match, 116, 125, 126
iTunes Radio, 123, 124, 126–127
iTunes Store. See iTunes Store
movies. See movies
playlists, 122–123, 124, 125
previewing music, 118
ripping CDs to, 118, 120
searching in, 117–118
setting up, 116
showing all music/videos, 116
Synced with iTunes option, 21
syncing contacts, 33, 34
syncing music, 120–122
TV shows. See TV shows
iTunes Match, 116, 125, 126
iTunes Radio, 123, 124, 126–127
iTunes Store, 116–118

buying music, 118
categories/genres, 116–117
described, 20
previewing music, 118
searching in, 117–118
J
JavaScript, 42
JavaScript option, 42
K
KB (kilobyte), 5
keyboard, onscreen
editing text, 25–26
expanding use of, 24–26
external, 90
landscape orientation, 25
opening in Reminders, 85
special characters, 12
typing shortcuts/aids, 24–25
using, 11–12
using Siri with, 26–27
Keychain, 10
keypad, 28
Keypad button, 28
keywords
Calendar, 75
email, 70
iBooks, 130
Safari, 39, 44, 49
kilobyte (KB), 5
Kindle app, 133

L
landscape keyboard, 25
language, choosing for iPhone, 7
library apps, 133
lightning bolt, 6
Lightning connector, 3, 4
Lightning-to-USB cable, 6
LinkedIn, 162
links, 43
Location Services, 7–8, 21
lock rotation, 90
Long Term Evolution (LTE) networks, 21
LTE (Long Term Evolution) networks, 21
lyric information, 125
M
Mac computers. See also computer
connecting iPhone to, 5, 12–13
system requirements, 5
magazines, 4, 20, 128–129
magnifying glass, 25
Mahjong, 163
Mail, 55–60. See also email
described, 20, 55
modifying settings, 58–60
notes in, 150
setting up, 55–58
mail servers, 56, 58
Maps, 133–136
considerations, 134
current location, 134, 135
described, 19

dropping pins, 134
getting directions, 135–136
navigating in, 134
overview, 133–134
searching for locations, 134
sharing information, 135
views, 134, 135
voice directions, 136
MB (megabyte), 5
media player controls, 90
megabyte (MB), 5
memory, 4–5, 109
menu bar, 13
menus, 43
Messages, 19, 70–71
microphone, 3, 4
microphone key, 26
Microsoft Exchange Global Address List, 33
Microsoft Outlook, 56
misspellings, 24
MMS (Multimedia Messaging Service), 71
movies. See also video
buying/renting, 109–110, 116
considerations, 109
file size, 109
iMovie, 112
memory used by, 4, 109
watching on iPhone, 108–109
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), 71
multitouch screen. See touch screen
music, 115–127. See also iTunes; Music app
album covers, 125

buying in iTunes, 118
categories/genres, 116–117
Control Center, 126
controls for, 124–125, 126
converting to different format, 120
cover artwork, 120
displaying audio controls, 126
equalizer settings, 125
finding on your computer, 118–120
Genius playlists, 125
getting from iTunes, 115–118
grouping by artist, 125
iTunes Match, 116, 125, 126
iTunes Radio, 123, 124, 126–127
listening to on iPhone, 123–126
lyric information, 125
memory used by, 4
playlists, 122–123, 124, 125
podcasts, 20, 123, 125
previewing in iTunes, 118
searching for in iTunes Store, 116–117
settings, 125
Shake to Shuffle, 125
showing all, 125
in slideshows, 105
syncing, 120–122
transferring from computer, 118–122
transferring to iPhone, 120–122
volume, 124
Music app, 122–127. See also iTunes; music
audiobooks, 123
controls, 123–125

deleting albums from, 124
described, 20
equalizer settings, 125
Genius playlists, 125
iTunes Radio, 123, 124, 126–127
listening to music, 123–126
pausing, 124
playing music on iPhone, 123
podcasts, 123, 125
previous/next song, 124
repeating songs, 124
settings, 125
Shake to Shuffle, 125
shuffling songs, 108, 124, 125
song list, 124
streaming audio, 123
volume controls, 124, 125
Mute button, 28, 113
My Photo Stream, 101, 106–107, 108
MyChart app, 143, 144
N
networks
3G, 21
4G, 21
cellular, 7, 42
connecting to, 7, 38
listing, 7
LTE, 21
passwords, 7, 38
social. See social networking
types of, 21

VPN, 21
Wi-Fi. See Wi-Fi networks
newspapers, 20, 128–129
Newsstand, 20, 128–129
Next icon, 39
Notes, 147–150
attaching to iCloud, 150
described, 19, 87, 147
dictating, 148
editing, 149
in email, 150
printing, 149, 150
searching, 23
setting up, 150
sharing, 149
syncing, 129
using, 148–150
Notifications, 87–90. See also alerts
Do Not Disturb, 21, 89–90
number of reminders in, 89
sounds for, 89
Tweets, 152, 156
types of alerts, 89
O
On/Off–Sleep/Wake button, 2, 3, 6–7, 14–16
onscreen keyboard
editing text, 25–26
expanding use of, 24–26
landscape orientation, 25
opening in Reminders, 85
special characters, 12

typing shortcuts/aids, 24–25
using, 11–12
using Siri with, 26–27
Open Links settings, 41
optical stabilization, 93
Outlook-based email, 57
OverDrive app, 133
P
panoramic photos, 97
Passbook, 137–142. See also Apple Pay
coupons/discounts, 142
described, 20
finding apps for, 141–142
reward cards, 142
setting up, 139
setting up for Apple Pay, 137–139
using, 141–142
passcode. See also passwords
considerations, 15
creating, 10
using fingerprint as, 3, 9–10
Password & Autofill setting, 41, 42
password lists, 9
passwords. See also passcode
Apple ID, 8, 110, 118, 138
autofill feature, 41, 42
considerations, 5
email, 9, 56, 57
Facebook, 160, 161
iCloud, 9, 10
Keychain, 10

networks, 7, 38
personal hotspot, 38
tips for, 9, 161
web forms, 41
PCs. See computer
personal hotspot, 21
phishing, 42
Phone app, 20, 28. See also calling
phone calls. See calling
Photo Stream, 101, 106–107, 108
photos, 100–108. See also camera; images
adding to email messages, 64–65
adding to Twitter, 152, 155
adjusting color, 105
albums, 101, 102–104
assigning to Messages, 70
burst mode, 96, 98, 108
Collections, 101
copying/pasting, 104
cropping, 104
deleting, 104
editing, 104–105
enhancing, 104
filters, 96, 97, 105
folders, 64, 102, 103
HDR, 96, 97, 108
iCloud Photo Library, 108
iPhoto, 99, 100
memory used by, 4
Moments, 101
moving from camera to computer, 98–100
My Photo Stream, 101, 106–107, 108

options for, 95–100
organizing, 101
panoramic, 97
red-eye removal, 104
rotating, 104
settings, 108
sharing, 101, 103, 106–107, 108
slideshows, 105, 108
square, 96
taking with iPhone, 93–95
viewing, 98
working with, 101–102
Years, 101
Photos app, 101–108
described, 19
editing photos, 104–105
My Photo Stream, 106–107
organizing photos, 101
settings, 107
slideshows, 105
working with albums, 102–104
working with photos, 101–102
pictures. See images; photos
pinching, 18
Pinterest, 162
pipe (|) character, 25
playing audio/video on Internet, 48
playing music, 124
playlists, 90, 122–123, 124, 125
podcasts, 20, 109, 123, 125
Podcasts app, 20
POP accounts, 56

pop-ups, blocking, 41–42
power modes, 14
Power Off command, 14
Preload Top Hit setting, 41
presses, 18
Previous icon, 39
printers, 5
printing
email, 62
notes, 149, 150
wireless, 5
privacy. See also security
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
Facebook and, 160–161
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
Location Services and, 7
Private Browsing option, 50
Private Browsing option, 50
public library, 133
punctuation, 148
Q
questions, asking Siri, 10, 27
questions, security, 9
Quick Website Search setting, 41
R
radio. See iTunes Radio
Reader mode (Safari), 48, 128
reading, 127–136
with iBooks. See iBooks
with Newsstand, 128–129

public library ebooks, 133
with Safari, 127–128
Reading List, 39, 40, 42
Recents list, 29
red handset button, 28
redo options, 26
release hold, 3
Reload icon, 39
reloading websites, 39
Reminders, 19, 84–85. See also alerts
resolution, 2, 96
RETURN key, 12
ringer, 2, 3
ringer volume, 2, 3
ring/silent switch, 2, 3
ringtones, 2, 36
ripping CDs, 118, 120
S
Safari, 38–52. See also web browsers
autofill settings, 41, 42
blocking pop-ups, 41–42
bookmarks, 45–47
browsing Internet, 42–44, 53
clearing cache, 42
clearing history, 42
controls, 39–41
cookies, 42, 49–50
described, 20
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
introduction to, 38–42

navigation, 39, 43–44, 47, 48
Open Links settings, 41
opening websites in, 39, 42–43
passwords, 41
Private Browsing option, 50
Reader mode, 48, 128
Reading List, 39, 40, 42
reading with, 127–128
search engine choice, 41
searching, 41, 44, 51–52
settings, 41–42
Web Inspector, 42
screen, 17–23. See also Home screen
brightness, 90
described, 4
finger movements, 18–19
illustrated, 3
image/text size on, 10
lock rotation, 90
locking, 21
overview, 17
rotation, 21
screen captures, 101
Screen rotation locked, 21
screenshots, 101
scrolling, 18
Search Engine settings, 41
search engines, 39, 41, 44
searching
Calendar, 75
email messages, 69–70
Favorites, 41

iBookstore, 129–130
Internet, 44, 51–52
iTunes, 117–118
iTunes Store, 117–118
within open web page, 49
Preload Top Hit, 41
Quick Website Search, 41
from Safari, 44
with Spotlight, 23
Spotlight Suggestions, 41
for text in books, 132, 133
via search engines, 39, 41, 44
security. See also passcode; passwords
cookies, 42, 49–50
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
Internet, 49–51
Location Services and, 7–8, 21
phishing, 42
privacy. See privacy
Private Browsing option, 50
security questions, 9
selecting text, 25–26
“selfies,” 96
self-timer, camera, 96
Settings app, 20
Shake to Shuffle, 125
Share icon, 64
Share menu, 39, 48
Shared Links, 39, 40
Shared Streams, 101
sharing

AirDrop, 39, 83, 90, 91
calendars, 82–84
Home Sharing, 125
notes, 149
photos, 101, 103, 106–107, 108
video, 112
website address, 39–40
SHIFT key, 12
shopping on Internet, 52–53
Short Message Service (SMS), 71
sidebar, 13
silent/ring switch, 2
SIM card, 3
SIM card release hold, 3
SIM card tray, 3
Siri
asking questions, 10, 27
browsing Internet on, 53
described, 10
dictation, 26–27
getting directions, 10
“Hey Siri” option, 27
turning on, 26, 27
using, 26–27
sleep mode, 2, 13–16
Sleep/Wake button, 2, 3, 6–7, 14–16
Slide To Unlock command, 15
slideshows, 105, 108
SMS (Short Message Service), 71
social networking
Facebook. See Facebook
LinkedIn, 162

Pinterest, 162
Twitter. See Twitter
Software Update, 12
Solitaire, 162
songs. See music
sound settings, 2, 4, 36. See also audio
speaker, 3, 4, 28
Speaker button, 28
special characters, 10, 25
Spotlight, 23, 41
Spotlight Suggestions, 41
spreading fingers, 18
Sprint, 5
status bar, 3, 4, 21
Stocks, 20
stopwatch, 86–87, 91
streaming audio, 123
streaming photos, 101, 106–107, 108
streaming video, 109
Suggested Apps, 116
Summarize Photos option, 108
support, 2
swiping, 18, 22
switch camera icon, 113
sync collections, 129
Synced with iTunes option, 21
syncing
bookmarks, 129
Calendar, 76
contacts, 33, 34
iTunes, 21, 120–122
music, 120–122

notes, 129
sync collections, 129
T
Tab icon, 39, 40, 48
tapping, 18, 22
text
cutting/copying/pasting, 26
editing, 25–26
entering into iPhone, 24–27
magnifying, 25
selecting, 25–26
sliding to correct letter, 25
using dictation (Siri), 26–27
text messages, 19, 30, 70–71
time. See also Clock
displaying, 19
setting for alarms, 86
setting for alerts, 76
setting for events, 76–78
setting for reminders, 84–85
setting for stopwatch, 86–87
setting for timer, 86–87
time zones, 76, 77–78
timer, 87, 91
timer, self (camera), 96
Tips, 20
T-Mobile, 5, 37
Touch ID
Apple Pay, 140, 141
described, 3
using fingerprint as passcode, 3, 9–10

touch screen. See screen
Trash, 62
True Tone flash, 2, 3, 96
TTY in use, 21
TV shows
buying/renting, 109–110, 116
memory used by, 4
purchasing on iTunes, 116
watching on iPhone, 108–109
Tweets. See Twitter
Twitter, 151–156
Activity page, 154
adding photos, 152, 155
adding your location, 155
building a following, 154–156
Discover page, 153–154
downloading/registering, 151–152
following people/groups, 152–154
modifying settings, 155–156
posting Tweets, 154–155
searching for Tweets, 152–153
setting up, 151–152
Tweet notifications, 156
viewing Tweets, 153–154
typing shortcuts/aids, 24–25
U
undo key, 25
undo options, 26
unlocking iPhone, 15
updates
contacts, 160

email, 9
podcasts, 20
Software Update, 12
Upload Burst Photos option, 108
URLs, 39, 78, 79
USB adapters, 6
USB cables, 5, 6, 125
USB-to-AC adapter, 6
Use Cellular Connection option, 7
Use Cellular Data option, 42
V
Verizon, 5, 32, 37
vibrate function, 2, 30, 36
video, 108–112. See also movies
considerations, 108–109
creating, 110–111
deleting, 112
downloading, 109–110
editing, 111–112
FaceTime calls, 112–113
file size, 109
HD, 108
high-speed, 108
iMovie, 112
memory used by, 4, 109
playing, 111
playing on Internet, 48
recording, 110–111
sharing, 112
slow-motion, 108, 112
streaming, 109

time-lapse, 108, 112
trimming, 111
TV shows. See TV shows
types of, 109
Vimeo, 112
watching on iPhone, 108–109
YouTube, 112
video messages, 71
Video option, 110
Videos app, 19
Vimeo, 112
VIP mailbox, 68
virtual private networking (VPN), 21
voice directions, 136
Voice Memos, 20
voice messages, 70–71
voicemail, 28, 30–31, 32
voicemail indicator, 31
volume control, 90
volume up/down buttons, 2, 3
VPN (virtual private networking), 21
W
waking iPhone, 2, 15–16
warranties, 2
Weather, 19
Web, 38–47. See also Internet
web browsers. See also Safari
considerations, 39
history, 41, 42, 50
navigation, 39, 43–44, 47, 48
Safari. See Safari

web forms, 41, 42, 47
Web Inspector option, 42
web mail, 56–58
web pages
adding contacts from, 34–35
bookmarking. See bookmarks
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
enlarging/reducing, 47
forms, 41, 42, 47
links, 43
menus, 43
moving, 47
navigating, 39, 43–44, 47, 48
playing audio/video files, 48
Reader mode (Safari), 48, 128
reading, 48
reloading, 39
returning to, 48
scrolling, 47, 48
searching on, 49
selecting, 47
tabs, 40
viewing link destination, 47
Website Data option, 42
websites
cookies, 42, 49–50
Do Not Track option, 42, 50
Fraudulent Website Warning, 42, 50–51
Open Links settings, 41
opening in Safari, 39, 42–43
phishing, 42
saving links to Home page, 45

sharing address, 39–40
Wi-Fi
vs. cellular, 5
hotspot connections, 21, 37, 38
personal hotspot, 21
turning on/off, 90
voice calls using, 21
Wi-Fi networks
vs. cellular networks, 5
establishing in home, 37–38
joining, 7, 38
passwords, 7, 38
settings, 21
Wi-Fi service, 5
Wikipedia, 51
Windows computers. See also computer
connecting iPhone to, 5, 12–13
system requirements, 5
wireless networks. See Wi-Fi networks
word definitions, 26
World Clock, 86
World Wide Web, 38–47. See also Internet
Y
Yahoo! email accounts, 56
Yahoo! search engine, 44
YouTube, 112

