www.allitebooks.com

iPhone User Interface 
Cookbook
A concise dissection of Apple's iOS user interface design 
principles
Cameron Banga
   BIRMINGHAM - MUMBAI
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

iPhone User Interface Cookbook
Copyright © 2011 Packt Publishing
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted in any form or by any means, without the prior written permission of the publisher, 
except in the case of brief quotations embedded in critical articles or reviews.
Every effort has been made in the preparation of this book to ensure the accuracy of the 
information presented. However, the information contained in this book is sold without 
warranty, either express or implied. Neither the author, nor Packt Publishing, and its dealers 
and distributors will be held liable for any damages caused or alleged to be caused directly or 
indirectly by this book.
Packt Publishing has endeavored to provide trademark information about all of the companies 
and products mentioned in this book by the appropriate use of capitals. However, Packt 
Publishing cannot guarantee the accuracy of this information.
First published: November 2011
Production Reference: 1171111
Published by Packt Publishing Ltd.
Livery Place
35 Livery Street
Birmingham B3 2PB, UK.
ISBN 978-1-84969-114-7
www.packtpub.com
Cover Image by Asher Wishkerman (a.wishkerman@mpic.de)
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Credits
Author
Cameron Banga
Reviewers
Daria Bernabei
Robb Lewis
Chris Zaplatosch
Acquisition Editor
Steven Wilding
Development Editor
Maitreya Bhakal
Technical Editor
Aaron Rosario
Project Coordinator
Vishal Bodwani
Proofreader
Aaron Nash
Indexer
Monica Ajmera Mehta
Graphics
Valentina D'silva
Production Coordinator 
Alwin Roy
Cover Work
Alwin Roy
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

About the Author
Cameron Banga is an iOS application interface designer and entrepreneur, having played 
a role in the development of over 35 applications for the iPhone and iPad since beginning 
work on the platform in May 2009. Cameron can be found on Twitter at @cameronbanga, or 
at her personal website, http://cameronbanga.com. He can be e-mailed at Cameron@
CameronBanga.com.
Currently Cameron is lead designer at 9magnets LLC, which is an iPhone and iPad application 
design, development, and marketing studio he co-founded in May of 2010.
The team has seen strong success in the App Store and has had their work featured and 
reviewed positively by the New York Times, Chicago Sun-Times, Fox Business News, Macworld, 
PC Magazine, and more.
I'd like to thank Nathan, Mom, and Dad, thanks for putting up with my hectic 
schedule while remaining to be the best family a guy could ever ask for, as I 
can't even begin to describe my appreciation. 

Kathryn, thanks for the patience and believing in me throughout this entire 
process, I owe you an omelet. 

Adam, Aviral, Bud, Harry, Hayson, Mike, and Tom, I apologize for being 
the non-existent friend over the past year. To Lank 5 South, this one is for 
Cardboard Mike Lucien. 

I'd like to give a special thanks to Maitreya, Vishal, Aaron, Steven, and the 
rest of the Packt Pub team, for helping direct and lead the production of 
this book. Thanks as well to Chris, Daria, and Robb for their unbelievably 
valuable feedback during the technical review stage. 
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

About the Reviewers
Ever since the early days at the Graphic Design school in Italy, Daria Bernabei knew her 
real passion was the web. After working for several small studios, Daria moved to Barcelona 
and soon started to work for lastminute.com, where user experience and the marketing 
departments worked hand in hand to deliver campaigns where eye-catching creativity was 
balanced with high technical skill to provide adequate support on the platform side.
At the moment she leads the User Experience department in Gsicommerce International, 
coordinating the creation of user interfaces for online stores. Her goal is to optimize design as 
well as technical implementation according to the web standards and the main focus is about 
improving the user's shopping experience.
She is fascinated by the new challenges and opportunities that mobile devices are bringing to 
the web developers and a total fanatic of Apple gadgets.
Robb Lewis is a web developer and student studying web technologies at Portsmouth 
University. Robb has a great interest in technology, specifically mobile technology, and is an 
Apple advocate. Robb also blogs about software, technology, and the Internet at http://
therobb.co.uk.
Chris Zaplatosch works in the technical support industry, specializing in customer support 
and management. He has more than five years of experience in the IT support field.
Since March 2011 he has been working for Blackboard Inc. as a Technical Support Manager, 
providing support for system administrators.
Prior to working at Blackboard, Chris spent three years working at a university help desk as a 
Help Desk Manager, supporting students, faculty, and staff in day to day technical operations.
Chris has a bachelor's degree in Business Management from Valparaiso University.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

www.PacktPub.com 
This book is published by Packt Publishing. You might want to visit Packt's website at 
www.PacktPub.com and take advantage of the following features and offers:
Discounts
Have you bought the print copy or Kindle version of this book? If so, you can get a massive 
85% off the price of the eBook version, available in PDF, ePub, and MOBI. 
Simply go to http://www.packtpub.com/iphone-user-interface-cookbook/book, 
add it to your cart, and enter the following discount code:
ipuicebk
Free eBooks
If you sign up to an account on www.PacktPub.com, you will have access to nine 
free eBooks. 
Newsletters
Sign up for Packt's newsletters, which will keep you up to date with offers, discounts, books, 
and downloads.
You can set up your subscription at www.PacktPub.com/newsletters 
Code Downloads, Errata and Support
Packt supports all of its books with errata. While we work hard to eradicate errors from our 
books, some do creep in. Many Packt books also have accompanying snippets of code to 
download.
You can find errata and code downloads at www.PacktPub.com/support
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

PacktLib.PacktPub.com 
PacktLib offers instant solutions to your IT questions. It is Packt's fully searchable online 
digital book library, accessible from any device with a web browser.
f
f
Contains every Packt book ever published. That's over 100,000 pages of content.
f
f
Fully searchable. Find an immediate solution to your problem.
f
f
Copy, paste, print, and bookmark content.
f
f
Available on demand via your web browser.
If you have a Packt account, you might want to have a look at the nine free books which you 
can access now on PacktLib. Head to PacktLib.PacktPub.com and log in or register.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Table of Contents
Preface	
1
What this book covers	
1
Who this book is for	
3
Getting to know the features of iOS	
3
The tools of the trade	
4
Working with a finger as a pointing device	
7
Placing visual elements for touch	
12
What you need for this book	
17
Chapter 1: Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and 
Testing our Design	
21
Introduction	
21
Starting with the sketch	
22
Developing a rapid prototype	
25
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina display	
28
Getting our work onto a device	
32
Taking a screenshot of an application on our device	
39
Working within Apple's guidelines	
40
Chapter 2: Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar	
43
Introduction	
43
Designing an application icon and preparing it for the user home screen	
44
Creating the rounded edges effect on our icon	
48
Removing the app icon's gloss effect	
54
Optimizing our newspaper or magazine app's icon for Newsstand in iOS 5	
56
Creating a custom Tab Bar for our iPhone application	
58
Chapter 3: Different Ways to "View" our Application	
63
Introduction	
63
Properly utilizing modal views	
64
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

ii
Table of Contents
Getting quick updates with Alert Views	
68
Improving our application through Table Views	
71
Integrating Web View into our app	
75
Including Twitter in iOS 5	
78
Determining which view is better for our app	
82
Chapter 4: Utilizing Common UI Elements	
87
Introduction	
87
Implementing application functionality using a Navigation Bar	
88
Providing variety through a Tab Bar	
92
Speeding up data entry through pickers and custom keyboards	
95
Simplicity in the Slider control	
99
Offering complex control through an Action Sheet	
103
Using UI to keep our user inside our application	
105
Making text fade in or out of view	
108
Chapter 5: All About Games	
113
Introduction	
113
Planning your game around touch	
114
Using control techniques that are optimized for touch	
118
Designing HUDs with limited real estate	
123
Accounting for the lost Status Bar	
128
Chapter 6: Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking	
133
Introduction	
133
Starting the application with a proper Default.png	
134
Planning our application UI for a first impression	
138
Dealing with phone calls or text messages	
142
Working with multitasking in iOS 4	
145
Periodical downloads and Newsstand in iOS 5	
149
Making accommodations for other apps that are multitasking	
151
Chapter 7: Notifications, Locations, and Sounds	
157
Introduction	
157
Integrating push or local notifications into our app	
158
Using badges to draw attention to new content	
161
Managing audio properties and keeping silent	
165
Locating the sweet spot when handling location services	
168
Making an app usable without location data	
171
Making cents with proper ad placement	
175
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

iii
Table of Contents
Chapter 8: Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to 
Help our User	
179
Introduction	
179
Using the 80 percent rule when developing optimal settings	
180
Properly supporting copy and paste	
183
Supporting undo and redo	
186
Configurations in, settings out	
189
Cutting features when in doubt	
193
Supporting VoiceOver and other accessibility features	
196
Chapter 9: Migrating to the iPad	
201
Introduction	
201
Migrating our app to the iPad	
202
Experiences that are possible on the iPad, but not on the iPhone	
204
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes	
208
Managing our app for use with two hands	
212
Designing our app with all orientations in mind	
215
Including Popovers and new UI elements for the iPad	
219
Designing an app using skeuomorphic designs	
224
Appendix A: The Importance of Direct Manipulation	
229
Appendix B: If you need a stylus, you blew it 	
235
Index	
241
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
The incredible growth rates for the iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad have pushed consumers to 
a new "App" economy, with developers racing to the platform. Mobile touch-centric interfaces 
vary greatly from traditional computing platforms, and programmers as well as designers must 
learn to adapt to the new form-factor.
The iPhone User Interface Cookbook offers a complete breakdown of standard interface 
design on the iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad. You will learn the tools behind the trade, how 
to properly utilize standard interface elements, and custom UI tricks that will help your work 
stand out on the App Store.
The book is designed to be a complete overview of interface design on all iOS platforms, 
offering insight and an inside look into app design. A variety of topics are covered, starting 
with an overview of tools for the app interface designer, touching upon popular interface 
components such as the Tab Bar, and offering suggestions for complex game interfaces. 
Whether you're new to the platform or a seasoned developer with numerous applications 
in the App Store, this book strives to teach everyone simple and easy to implement tips for 
iOS interface design. Regardless of skill level, the iPhone User Interface Cookbook offers a 
detailed breakdown of all things interface design.
What this book covers
In the Preface, we'll touch upon the basic features of iOS and the common tools that we'll 
use as interface designers. If you're uncomfortable with the thought of being considered a 
designer, start your reading here.
For Chapter 1, Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design, we'll touch 
upon the first steps of interface development. We'll start out with early design sketches, then 
progress on to the point where we put our app onto a device or offer a test build for beta 
users.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
2
In Chapter 2, Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar, we'll tackle the first 
thing the user sees when using our app: the icon. This 512 pixel square will be an essential 
piece of the puzzle if we want to see success, and we'll discuss some ways in which our work 
can stand out from the crowd.
Chapter 3, Different Ways To "View" our Application, is all about the different content 
presentation views that are available for our application. We'll discuss web views, Twitter 
views, modal views, and much more.
What's the difference between a Tab Bar and a Navigation View? In Chapter 4, Utilizing 
Common UI Elements, we'll tackle the various navigational interface elements that exist for 
our use in iOS.
Chapter 5, All About Games is action packed, as we tackle interface challenges that exist for 
games on iOS. Unsure about how to best go about game play mechanics or a heads up display 
when working with a touch platform? These recipes will help you gain a high score in interface 
design.
First impressions and final goodbyes are the topics that we'll take on in Chapter 6, Starting, 
Stopping, and Multitasking. From the Default.PNG to multitasking in iOS 4 and 5, we'll learn 
about the best ways to design our application for the stop and go nature of iOS.
Chapter 7, Notifications, Locations, and Sounds helps teach interface principles requirements 
that come into play when we design to include push notifications, badges, iCloud, location 
services, or iAds into our app. These are all common app features, and our app will be more 
successful if we use each correctly in our interface.
We'll discuss app configurations, copy and paste, and accessibility in Chapter 8, Accessibility, 
Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User. While often overlooked, the features 
discussed in these recipes are often responsible for the extra polish that pushes an app into 
the top sales charts.
Finally, for Chapter 9, Migrating to the iPad, we'll grow up a bit and talk about the iPad. 
Interface design for the larger screen and wider aspect ratio can be a bit different than the 
work we produce for the iPhone, and we'll discuss those differences here.
Looking for a bit more help? We'll tackle the problem of direct manipulation and the 
importance of application responsiveness in Appendix A, The Importance of Direct 
Manipulation.
As a final encore, we'll discuss the interface challenges that arise when designing a touch 
based operating system in Appendix B, If you need a stylus, you blew it. Software designed 
around use with a finger instead of a mouse can be a bit tricky, but we'll help you master the 
subject.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
3
Who this book is for
The iPhone Interface Cookbook is written from the ground up for people who are new to iOS 
or application interface design in general. Each chapter discusses the reasoning and design 
strategy behind critical interface components, as well as how to best integrate each into any 
iPhone or iPad application. Detailed and straight-forward recipes help give guidance and build 
understanding far beyond what is offered through Apple's Human Interface Guidelines.
Getting to know the features of iOS
If we want to develop an attractive yet functional user interface, we need to start by taking the 
time to fully understand the uniqueness of the iOS operating system and how it is designed 
to provide an exceptional touch-centric experience. Let's take a look at the key hardware 
features that the user will use to interact with and experience our application.
Looking at the features…
Take note of the hardware features present on the iPhone or iPad. All iOS devices have a circle 
home button located below the touch-sensitive screen, volume controls found on the side of 
the device, a headphone jack, and a sleep button on the top of the device. On the iPhone and 
iPad, a switch can be found that toggles silent mode on and off.
Several other features can be found on each device, depending on the model. A rear-facing 
camera has been prevalent on the iPhone since the first model in 2007. A front-facing 
camera has become a common addition since the introduction of the iPhone 4 and Facetime 
in 2010. Recent iPod touch and iPad devices have also received front and rear cameras. All 
devices besides the first generation iPod touch contain a microphone for recording audio. 
With the addition of the iPhone 4S, Apple included its system-wide Siri voice dictation 
software, which is available to all applications through inclusion of the standard keyboard.
An ambient light sensor and accelerometer can be found on every iOS device. Bluetooth has 
been a staple of every iPhone and iPad, with iPod touches receiving the feature in 2008 
models and beyond. A gyroscope is a new addition to iOS devices, being introduced with the 
iPhone 4 in the summer of 2010.
Music, photos, and applications are all held on the device in flash ROM storage. The 
amount of storage on each device can fluctuate anywhere between 8 GB to 64 GB and is not 
expandable after a user has purchased the device.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
4
Unlike other touch capable phones or tablets, iOS devices contain no programmable hardware 
buttons for developers or designers to work into an application. Instead, every interaction 
between the user and the application must be implemented through either a software 
interaction with the touch screen or by utilizing the accelerometer or gyroscope for user 
interaction.
We've just begun to scratch the surface on the functionality available to iOS designers. Here 
are a few more tips that we can use to best understand the basic principles of iOS user 
interface development.
Understanding our audience
Fully understanding the hardware specifications and limitations for the device we're looking 
to target is absolutely essential. The more we know about who will be using our application 
and what device features they have, the better we can fine tune our user interface in order to 
provide a great experience for the end user.
Before we ever begin to map out any interface design, we should take the time to sit and 
consider where and when people will be using our application.
Imagine we are looking to build an application to help bus riders in Chicago keep track of 
stop locations. In this app, it wouldn't make sense to use the accelerometer and have the 
app update the user's location when the device is shaken, because the constant stop and go 
nature of a bus ride could accidentally trigger an update and frustrate the user.
Dealing with download caps
Even though Apple's cap of a 2 GB file size per application is usually more than enough 
space for any app, it's also important to remember that many wireless carriers across the 
world place a limit on the size of applications that can be downloaded over the wireless data 
network.
When determining a target audience and use case for an application, it's important to see 
what app size limitations are in place for the target market.
Using our example of an application to help bus riders find detailed stop information, it would 
be detrimental to have our app size be above the wireless download cap placed by the carrier, 
because users would be unable to download the application while walking around the city 
looking for a bus stop.
The tools of the trade
In designing the user interface for an iOS application, we're lucky that very few tools are 
required during the production process. That being said, this does mean that the tools we do 
need are that much more important when it comes to producing a quality application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
5
Let's look at what hardware and software we're going to need in order to develop the best 
interface possible for our application.
What we'll be using…
The first thing we need to do is pick up a capable computer for design work. Since we're 
developing for iOS, a Macintosh is definitely preferable if not required. If we're not going to be 
doing any programming, it could be possible to get away with a PC that runs Adobe Photoshop, 
but this is not recommended. Without a Macintosh, we will not have access to the iOS 
Simulator and other tools that Apple provides for design.
All other things being equal, a quality monitor of significant size may be the most important 
attribute when picking up a computer for design work. The iMac or a Mac Pro with Cinema 
Display may be the best option, but a Macbook or Macbook Pro is certainly sufficient. Given 
the Retina display of the iPhone or large display of the iPad, we'll want to have as much room 
for high-resolution art on our monitor as possible. 
Currently, the Mac Pro is the only Apple computer that is easily upgradable after initial 
purchase. With a slight bit of tinkering, it's easy to add more RAM or install a new hard drive 
on the professional grade machine, so it should be our first choice if we're looking for a device 
to build upon in the future.
In comparison, it is relatively difficult to upgrade an iMac, Mac Mini, Macbook Pro, Macbook, 
or Macbook Air. Any Apple computer should be more than capable of producing exceptional UI 
design, but this lack of expandability should be something to keep in mind in case we plan on 
upgrading our machine down the road.
Pick up a copy of Adobe Photoshop and if possible, Adobe Illustrator. Adobe offers a variety 
of packages on software, which can all vary greatly in price depending on our needs and 
circumstances. When it comes to design and graphic production, Adobe is the gold standard 
and we can never go wrong by having their design suite on hand. Ultimately, Photoshop is 
really the only application we will need, but it never hurts to have Adobe's entire design suite 
just in case.
Many designers like working in Illustrator because it makes it easy to do vector drawings, 
which are resolution independent and work well if we ever need art for a magazine ad or 
promotional banner. We also never know when Apple will increase the resolution on iOS 
devices, as they did in 2010 with the Retina Display, and it is much easier to upscale artwork 
for higher resolution screens when resource files are easily available in vector format.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
6
If Photoshop is out of our price range, fear not, as there are several other raster graphic 
programs that can help in the design process. Acorn by Flying Meat Software, found online 
at http://flyingmeat.com/acorn/, is an extremely capable image editor that can be 
purchased for only $50. Acorn is fundamentally similar to Photoshop, so moving between the 
two is quite easy.
We'll also want to make sure that we've downloaded the latest version of Apple's iOS SDK 
tools as well. The iOS SDK can be downloaded for free from Apple's Developer Center, 
regardless of whether we are registered in the iOS developer program or not. When we're 
ready to download the SDK, we can visit http://developer.apple.com/devcenter/
ios/index.action.
If we're not performing any of the programming for our application, we could get away without 
using or learning how to use the iOS SDK, but this is not preferable. The iOS SDK, along with 
XCode, allows us to change art resource files quickly and then launch the iOS Simulator to see 
how resources look when running in our application.
While this seems like a fairly limited tool set, we should be able to compete with nearly any 
user interface in the App Store once we have these items. Anything we can't build in code can 
be produced in Photoshop, which gives us the flexibility of only needing one application for the 
majority of our work. The negative side to this is that we're going to be spending a lot of time 
in one application, so we need to be comfortable in the image manipulation program. 
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
7
We won't dive too deep into Photoshop in this book, so you may find yourself struggling a bit 
at first if you've never used the application. Luckily, there are many resources available to help 
teach Photoshop, written by individuals who are extremely talented with the application. A 
simple web search of the Photoshop technique you're looking to learn or a stop by a bookstore 
should provide more than enough information on improving our Photoshop skills.
Resources for designing iOS apps
Many websites and blogs focus primarily on the design of iOS applications. Here are a few 
handy resources that can help inspire and educate.
Sizing up interface elements
iDev101 offers a great breakdown of the exact sizing requirements of different iOS UI 
elements, which can be found at http://www.idev101.com/code/User_Interface/
sizes.html.
The complete package
The iPhone GUI PSD http://www.teehanlax.com/blog/2010/08/12/iphone-4-
gui-psd-retina-display/ is an extremely handy Photoshop file compiled by Teehan+Lax. 
The file typically sees an update whenever Apple makes changes to UI elements, making this 
an extremely valuable resource for any designer.
Great examples from the pros
365PSD is an extremely useful site by Dutch designer Jonno Riekwel, which releases a new 
Photoshop file per day as a free resource. A good deal of the posts focus on iOS and the files 
can be a great way to learn first hand how a specific UI effect was performed in Photoshop. To 
download files from 365PSD, we should visit http://365psd.com/.
Working with a finger as a pointing device
In developing an operating system without a keyboard or physical buttons, Apple had to decide 
on whether or not to facilitate interaction with a stylus. Ultimately, it was decided that a stylus 
would create an unsatisfactory experience and the device was built from the ground up to only 
support human finger interaction.
There are many benefits in developing a touch only operating system. Users have no stylus 
to lose, the barrier between person and device is essentially torn down through direct 
interaction, and the device can easily be managed with only a thumb when held in the palm of 
a hand.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
8
While often considered to be an afterthought, it's important to understand how our users will 
hold the device with using our application. Difference in aspect ratio, hand placement, and 
grip are rather serious attributes that can greatly change the development of our interface.
Let's take a look at how hands are both a blessing and a curse.
Working with our hands...
While nearly everyone who first uses an iOS device has had an experience with a traditional 
button based cell phone, the large screen touch based devices offer a significant difference by 
allowing a truly orientation independent device.
In many respects, the decision to create a device which functions as properly right side up as 
it does upside down was intentional on Apple's part. All iOS devices contain a single, circular, 
and orientation neutral button that sends the user back to the home screen upon impression. 
All other menus and buttons to control an application are produced on screen and as such, 
defined by the developer. 
This establishes an incredible sense of free reign for creative design in application 
perspective. Games such as Doodle Jump by Lima Sky can offer entertaining and fast paced 
play mechanics while various Twitter applications can offer landscape views for reading or 
typing away at tweets. Applications such as Ocarina by Smule can flip an iPhone or iPod touch 
completely on its head and require a user to rotate the device completely around so that the 
microphone can be used to mimic an actual ocarina.
In deciding which orientation best fits our iPhone or iPod touch application, the general 
purpose of our app will help guide our way. In nearly every situation, the user expects the 
application to function properly within the portrait orientation. Unless our app is a game that 
requires a simulated control pad and buttons or landscape orientation, we should always 
assume that users will expect portrait orientation in some respect or another. Landscape can 
offer an intriguing and greatly appreciated bonus for many users, especially in applications 
that depend heavily on typing or data entry, as many users prefer typing on the larger 
landscape keyboard.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
9
While the above flexibility applies to smaller iOS devices, Apple demands orientation 
independence when working with the iPad. Unless there is a specific reason as to why an 
iPad app could not support both landscape and portrait view, we're expected to design our 
application to fit both perspectives.
Designing visually appealing work for both portrait and landscape perspectives on the iPad 
can be a challenging experience. The device features a 4:3 aspect ratio which creates a 
screen size that's not quite a square, but not wide enough to be a true widescreen perspective 
either. This provides an interesting problem where it is difficult to create two unique 
orientation interfaces that work well in their own way.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
10
To help account for both orientations, Apple has developed a fair amount of new interface 
elements for our use in an application. Popovers and Dual pane views are just two new 
tools that are at our disposal to help produce quality interfaces. Tab Bar and Navigation Bar 
views have also been redeveloped to help better fit the larger screen as well. In designing 
our application, we should provide some sort of dual interface perspective that best works to 
provide clear navigation regardless of orientation.

Instapaper - © 2008-2011 Marco Arment
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
11
Instapaper by Marco Arment implements a prime example of an iPad application that provides 
a dual pane interface when in landscape view and a single pane presentation aided by a 
Popover sheet when in portrait view.
When holding an iPhone in portrait view, the thumb of the hand holding device is easily 
available for use on screen. This portrait view also allows for the opposite hand to also be 
used as a way to interact with the device with ease. When holding an iPhone in landscape 
view, the device is typically held in a fashion that allows for only the thumb of each hand to be 
used to interact with the screen. As such, the landscape perspective is best used for typing or 
game applications.
Due to the large size of the iPad, the device offers a different experience with regards to 
holding and interacting with the screen. Typically, the iPad is held with two hands much like a 
book, with one hand lifting up to touch on screen with the pointer finger when input is needed. 
A large bezel surrounding the device prevents a finger from accidentally coming in contact 
with screen and makes it difficult for a thumb to move from a relaxed position to the screen. 
This distance makes applications or games with persistent interaction, such as a game with 
a software simulated control stick, difficult to play for extended periods of time because the 
hand will naturally fatigue while being held up to touch the screen.
With this information in mind, we should be able to develop applications that behave 
predictably for the user. When the user knows what to expect with our app, time spent 
learning the application will diminish and users will have more time to enjoy our work.
Screen sizes and the touch surface can vary based on the device, which means we shouldn't 
assume a great iPhone app will automatically make a successful iPad app.
It all depends on how you hold it
While the iPad and iPhone both run iOS, the size difference between the two devices can 
cause us to hold each considerably different. The iPhone and iPod touch are primarily one-
hand devices while the iPad is more commonly held with two hands like a book.
Just because an interface works well on an iPhone doesn't mean it will necessarily translate 
to the bigger device and vice versa. Likewise, actions that work well with in one way on iPhone 
may need a different gesture or a button on iPad.
These size differences help demonstrate why we should have multiple test devices on hand 
during development. Just because one mechanic works well on a specific device doesn't mean 
we should assume that it would work well on another.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
12
Placing visual elements for touch
Being devoid of physical buttons, there are a few assumptions that we can make about our 
user base and how they'll interact with our app. Because nearly any interface imaginable is 
possible on the touch screen, it's important that we abide by documents like Apple's Human 
Interface Guidelines, which are written with perspective from designers who had a hand in 
the creation of the platform's interface elements.
Apple's Human Interface Guidelines are exhaustive documents published 
on the iOS and Mac Dev Centers, located at http://developer.
apple.com, for developers to learn how Apple intends interface items to 
be used inside applications.
Determining placement of standard components...
In designing placement of components of our app interface, we should first understand 
what is required of us and should be placed in a specific location without compromise in all 
situations. Apple has established their Human Interface Guidelines, which detail procedures 
and specifications that must be followed by all applications and our work could get rejected by 
their review team if we decide to disobey these recommendations.
The most important thing to keep in mind with touch is that we should follow Apple's 
recommendations on placement of common UI elements. Essential elements such as the 
Navigation Bar and Tab Bar are placed on the top and bottom of the screen respectively for 
a reason. The high placement of the Navigation Bar serves the purpose of giving title and 
context to the information that is directly below, allowing us to move throughout an expansive 
table of information easily, much like thumbing through a stack of papers on a desk would be 
much simpler if the top of each page had an accurate title.
The Navigation Bar's placement anchored to the bottom of the screen allows for easy 
movement throughout multiple modal views without ever obstructing important information 
on screen with our finger. With just a quick touch, we can quickly swap between two or three 
important pages of data.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
13
Not to be confused with a misplacement of the Navigation Bar in the Tab Bar location, many 
apps such as Maps or Calendar place a Toolbar anchored to the bottom of the screen that 
looks nearly identical to the Navigation Bar. As shown in the next screenshot, the two look 
similar but serve different purposes:

Calendar - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
The Navigation Bar allows the user to navigate through vast tables of information either 
forward or backwards quickly. Anchoring a similar Toolbar to the bottom of the screen for 
various settings, as we find in Safari, allows for users to quickly manipulate data on screen 
with clear buttons. We should be sure to follow these established conventions with regards to 
navigation.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
14
Action sheets can often be implemented in an app upon pressing an item in the Toolbar. 
Action sheets offer quick and temporary choice between several different options. For an 
example of an action sheet, open Safari and tap the plus icon located in the center of the 
bottom Toolbar. As shown in the next screenshot, this option brings up three temporary 
choices that can be quickly chosen by the user:
Keyboard placement anchored to the bottom of the screen is also a necessity for interface 
development. Whereas the software keys are not physically responsive to the press like 
the keyboard on our Mac or PC, the placement of each button becomes a trained response 
much like a tactile device. Custom keyboards in general can be a detrimental decision for our 
application in nearly every situation. Their sizing will confuse our users and be unnatural in 
comparison to every other keyboard on the device, leading to an unnecessary learning curve 
that causes frustration.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
15
Picker views for date or different selection options are sized to fit into the same size of 
the Keyboard and should mimic placement conventions of the Keyboard as well. Whenever 
we implement this option, it should be anchored to the bottom of the screen and only be 
displayed when necessary.

Clock - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
As demonstrated about with the Clock application's alarm feature, Picker Views are expected 
to be anchored to the bottom of the screen and we should follow this guideline when 
implementing the control in our applications.
With regards to placing significant text and data on screen for our user, we should create 
conventional typography that preferably aligns flush left, at a size that is easily legible to the 
user. In creating labels or bodies of text, we'll often be using code similar to this:
cell.textLabel.font = [UIFontfontWithName:@"HelveticaNeue-Bold" 
size:17];
Correct text size is a subjective metric depending upon our audience and typeface, so it 
may often be helpful to provide multiple sizing options to our users when possible. If using 
a common font like Helvetica, we should try to make our text size 16 or larger if we want our 
work to be easily legible.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
16
For an example of well-placed text, we should follow the 
example of Notes and Mail with placement of either user 
entered or pre-defined text.
If we feel unsure about proper placement of a specific user interface element on screen, it is 
best to follow Apple's lead on whatever we're doing. Using Apple developed applications that 
come pre-installed on our iOS device is the best way to experience quality examples of how 
interface elements should be properly placed.
There's more...
If we're looking to create a mobile webpage for our business or personal website, there are 
several basic web principles that we should be cautious of during our development. Here are 
a few tips for producing exceptional mobile HTML.
Comments on columns
Multicolumn blocks of text are a web staple, with significant prevalence on many blogs and 
news sites. However, columns work poorly on the iPhone or iPod touch, as constant scrolling 
both vertically and horizontally can become confusing. We should refrain from using such a 
scheme and instead create a single column, even if it must be rather lengthy.
It all depends on how you hold it
When designing for a desktop computer application or website, it's natural to place important 
navigation or action items near the top, bottom, or corners of the screen.
Placement of interface elements near sides of the screen is an extremely effective design 
principle on the desktop because of an interaction model called Fitts's Law.
In the simplest explanation, we place interface elements near the corner of the screen when 
working with a mouse because when the user moves the cursor from the center of the screen 
to a button near an edge, it's more difficult to miss the target because the cursor stops when 
it hits the screen boundary and as such, buttons placed there effectively have infinite widths.
While Fitts's Law works wonderfully with a mouse, it's less important and can create cramped 
interfaces when practiced on iOS. Since our user will be using their fingers, which are typically 
slower pointing devices which give the brain more time to adjust for distance in movement 
and in turn provides for greater accuracy, it's alright to utilize space in the center of the screen 
and space buttons further apart.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
17
What you need for this book
To tackle the recipes inside of this book, you'll be best served to have the following equipment 
on hand: a Macintosh computer running Snow Leopard or Lion operating systems, an iPhone, 
iPod touch, or iPad device, a copy of Adobe's Photoshop software, and sketching tools such 
as a notepad and pencil. Throughout the book, we will refer to additional software and tools 
that can help make interface creation easier; however these side notes will never be required 
during the design process.
Conventions
In this book, you will find a number of styles of text that distinguish between different kinds of 
information. Here are some examples of these styles, and an explanation of their meaning.
Code words in text are shown as follows: "We can include other contexts through the use of 
the include directive."
A block of code is set as follows:
<rdf:Description rdf:about=""
            xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/">
         <dc:format>application/vnd.adobe.photoshop</dc:format>
</rdf:Description>
When we wish to draw your attention to a particular part of a code block, the relevant lines or 
items are set in bold:
<rdf:Description rdf:about=""
            xmlns:dc="http://purl.org/dc/elements/1.1/">
         <dc:format>application/vnd.adobe.photoshop</dc:format>
</rdf:Description>
Any command-line input or output is written as follows:
# cp /usr/src/asterisk-addons/configs/cdr_mysql.conf.sample
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Preface
18
New terms and important words are shown in bold. Words that you see on the screen, in 
menus or dialog boxes for example, appear in the text like this: "clicking the Next button 
moves you to the next screen".
Warnings or important notes appear in a box like this.
Tips and tricks appear like this.
Reader feedback
Feedback from our readers is always welcome. Let us know what you think about this book—
what you liked or may have disliked. Reader feedback is important for us to develop titles that 
you really get the most out of.
To send us general feedback, simply send an e-mail to feedback@packtpub.com, and 
mention the book title via the subject of your message.
If there is a book that you need and would like to see us publish, please send us a note in the 
SUGGEST A TITLE form on www.packtpub.com or e-mail suggest@packtpub.com.
If there is a topic that you have expertise in and you are interested in either writing or 
contributing to a book, see our author guide on www.packtpub.com/authors.
Customer support
Now that you are the proud owner of a Packt book, we have a number of things to help you to 
get the most from your purchase.
Downloading the example code
You can download the example code files for all Packt books you have purchased from your 
account at http://www.PacktPub.com. If you purchased this book elsewhere, you can visit 
http://www.PacktPub.com/support and register to have the files e-mailed 
directly to you.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Preface
19
Errata
Although we have taken every care to ensure the accuracy of our content, mistakes do happen. 
If you find a mistake in one of our books—maybe a mistake in the text or the code—we would be 
grateful if you would report this to us. By doing so, you can save other readers from frustration 
and help us improve subsequent versions of this book. If you find any errata, please report them 
by visiting http://www.packtpub.com/support, selecting your book, clicking on the errata 
submission form link, and entering the details of your errata. Once your errata are verified, your 
submission will be accepted and the errata will be uploaded on our website, or added to any 
list of existing errata, under the Errata section of that title. Any existing errata can be viewed by 
selecting your title from http://www.packtpub.com/support.
Piracy
Piracy of copyright material on the Internet is an ongoing problem across all media. At Packt, 
we take the protection of our copyright and licenses very seriously. If you come across any 
illegal copies of our works, in any form, on the Internet, please provide us with the location 
address or website name immediately so that we can pursue a remedy.
Please contact us at copyright@packtpub.com with a link to the suspected pirated 
material.
We appreciate your help in protecting our authors, and our ability to bring you valuable 
content.
Questions
You can contact us at questions@packtpub.com if you are having a problem with any 
aspect of the book, and we will do our best to address it.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

1
Getting Started: 
Prototyping, Proper 
Tools, and Testing 
our Design
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Starting with the sketch
f
f
Developing a rapid prototype
f
f
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina display
f
f
Getting our app onto a device
f
f
When to use the simulator or a real device
f
f
User testing and getting a way for people to test out our app
f
f
Taking a screenshot of an application on our device
f
f
Working within Apple's guidelines
Introduction
As an introduction to interface design and development on the iPhone, it's important to learn 
about the basic skills that we'll need to be comfortable with in order to tackle our first 
design project.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
22
We'll dive into more technical topics later on, but first we'll start by discussing the different 
tools of the trade, hardware features that we'll need to focus our design around, and placing 
our design work on an actual device.
In this chapter, we'll tackle these introductory lessons and gain a foundation for what it will 
take to jump into the world of iPhone and iPad application user interface design.
Starting with the sketch
Before we take time to design our user interface in Photoshop, it is important to sit down with 
a piece of paper and a pencil to sketch out the basics for how users will interact with our app. 
Once we set a programmer out to begin work on an application with a given interface, it can 
be very costly to go back and make changes later when we realize that our design has a few 
small problems that need to be fixed.
Luckily, a notebook and pencil are cheap tools, and we can draw out many example interfaces 
without ever wasting a dollar of programming time.
Getting ready
For best results, we should find a desk, a good pencil, an eraser, and a couple of pieces of 
paper. If available, large notepads are preferable, as the extra space will allow room for notes.
How to do it...
Before we step into Adobe Photoshop or XCode with our application design, we should begin 
by sketching out the idea onto paper. 
Photoshop is Adobe's high-profile raster image editing software. XCode 
is Apple's development environment for iOS and Mac applications. Both 
apps are essential parts of our development toolbox.
Let's take a look at some basic iOS drawing principles so that we can best prepare our 
sketches for the transition to pixels on an iPhone screen:
1.	 We should start by sketching several rough boxes that are scaled roughly to the size 
of an iPhone or iPad. The iPhone screen is a rectangle measuring approximately 4.5 
inches by 2.5 inches. The iPad screen measures approximately 9 inches by 7 inches.
Next, we should go about designing a wire frame mock up of how we anticipate 
interacting with our application, so that we know exactly what we are looking for in 
our prototype. The following screenshot shows how a wire frame should give a visual 
representation of how the user will flow through the final application. In the quick wire 
frame of a dictionary application below, we gain a good idea as to how the user will 
interact with our work.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
23
Home
Dictionary
Entries
Word of
the Day
Definition
Quiz
Guess the
Definition
Time
Attack
10,000
Definitions
2.	 The paper is literally our blank canvas right now, so we should experiment with ideas 
and get an idea of what we want our app to look like.
Often, it's useful if large sketch paper is used when designing an interface. This 
allows space for notes and multiple screens to be sketched.
We'll be designing an application in either landscape or portrait view, and may want 
to place out multiple possible screens on our page of sketch paper to help lay out an 
intended application flow.
From here, we can begin to sketch out our interface on screen. Buttons, text, and 
other interface elements can be placed in the approximate size and position that we 
desire our future app to look like.
3.	 With our application screens laid out on paper, you begin to literally place the paper 
in your hand and touch it as if it were a real iOS device.
Take a quick note of the visual changes that occur when a finger is placed upon the 
interface. Does touching a button cause the user to place their hand over important 
data? Do buttons seem to be spaced far enough apart that a user could easily tap on 
one without errantly tapping upon another?
4.	 Take notes on the process of interacting with your sketched mock up application and 
proceed to make changes to the sketch, and then repeat the process.
Ideally, we will go through three or four revisions until we design something that we 
could see ourselves enjoying on our iOS device.
5.	 At this point, our drawings may be slightly sporadic and our notes may be messy. 
Since the reasoning behind our design is still fresh in our minds, now would be the 
best time to go back and redraw views or notes that are unclear. Once we're happy 
with our work, we are done sketching up our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
24
How it works...
Because iOS devices require a user to physically interact with a variety of interface elements 
in a small amount of space, sketching up ideas can be a powerful way to test user interface 
design ideas. If drawn close to scale, we can simulate touch interactions and get a good idea 
of how our interface will look before we ever paint a pixel in Photoshop.
There's more...
Several companies provide special graph paper, stencils, and iOS applications that help 
make it easier to sketch application ideas. Typically these products are inexpensive and make 
high quality mock ups simple. Many stencil sets also come with many standard UI elements 
accurately sized, which will allow us to sketch with confidence and precision.
Picking up the best stencil set
Design Commission produces arguably the best interface design stencils, which can be found 
at http://www.uistencils.com/products/iphone-stencil-kit. For a low cost, 
iPhone and iPad stencils can be purchased along with appropriate device sketchpads. Design 
Commission also has great stencil sets for Android and Web developers, in case we're looking 
to design for those platforms as well.
As we can see in the following screenshot, the interface stencil contains many common pieces 
and can help in properly laying out elements on paper:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
25
There's an app for that
There are even several iOS applications focused around making the sketching process easier 
as well. Interface by Less Code LTD, iMockups for iPad by Endloop Systems, and Dapp by 
Kerofrog are all great applications that can make the mock up process easier. Each offers the 
ability to drag and drop standard interface elements around on a real iPhone or iPod touch 
screen, allowing us to quickly grasp the scale and feel of our desired interface on a 
real device.
See also
f
f
Developing a rapid prototype in this chapter
f
f
Getting our work onto a device in this chapter
Developing a rapid prototype
Sketching up an application design is a critical step in designing an exceptional user 
experience, but it doesn't quite compare to actually using our fingers to interact with our 
interface on a real iOS device.
No matter how well we sketch up our interface, we may come upon a problem wherein a 
certain aspect of our design doesn't really work well once it's implemented on an iOS device. 
Sometimes, these design problems are minor and altering our interface to fix the problem isn't 
a big deal. But there is also the real possibility that a design mistake can be a showstopper, 
requiring hours of new design work and programming for something that could have been 
easily solved before development began.
Getting ready
When preparing to put together a rapid prototype, we should first consult with our 
programmer. There are several different ways to go about developing a rapid prototype, with 
each having different pros and cons.
Arguably the best way to create a rapid prototype is to literally develop the shell of the 
application using Apple's suite of development tools for Macintosh and iPhone applications, 
XCode. This will allow the app to run natively on our test device and also create code that can 
be used in the final application.
However, there may be situations where developing a rapid prototype in XCode would actually 
be extremely time intensive and not worth the effort. In these scenarios, there are several 
other ways to build a simple rapid prototype, which we will discuss in this recipe.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
26
How to do it...
Rapid prototypes can be an exceptional asset to the standard development cycle, allowing us 
to gain an idea of how our application will work before we spend a good deal of costly time on 
development. Here are the steps that will help us prepare a rapid prototype:
1.	 Much like we did in the previous recipe, we should begin by constructing a wireframe 
of our application.
This will help us to get an idea as to how our application will flow and what screens 
will be required for our work.
2.	 Next, we should go about sketching out each of our intended screens so that we have 
an expected design for our rapid prototype.
We don't need to add an exceptional amount of polish or have our design be 100 
percent completed, but it will be useful to have an idea as to what we're planning for 
the application to look like.
3.	 After we have a wire frame to visualize application flow, we should go about 
determining how to build the prototype application with the least amount of content 
possible.
For example, if we're building a dictionary application, what would be the fewest 
number of entries we need in order to make sure that our design and concept works? 
As a rule of thumb, we should have enough substance in our prototype to not have 
doubts about the success of any feature in the application.
4.	 With our prototype planned, we should go forward with programming our basic 
application in whatever format that works the best.
If we have the time, it's often best to produce an actual app in XCode for our rapid 
prototype, as this will give us a significant code base to start with when we begin work 
on the final application. However, this method is often time consuming and costly, so 
we may decide to go by another route.
Several iOS applications have been produced to aid in the development of 
rapid prototypes. The best example of an iOS native prototyping tool is the 
simple Prototypes app for Mac by Duncan Wilcox, which can be found on the 
Mac App Store. Prototypes relies upon its own basic programming language 
in order to connect different pages of our prototype together, but is a powerful 
tool for the development of quick prototypes that will run on a real iOS device 
without requiring XCode.
As seen below, With Prototypes, mock screenshots are given simple properties that 
are used to contain different attributes of our rapid prototype:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
27

Prototypes - © iridescent.co
5.	 If we are looking to avoid XCode and Prototypes, we can design our prototype in basic 
HTML instead.
Several open source HTML and JavaScript frameworks exist for web developers 
looking to build a mobile friendly website and these tools can be used for prototyping 
an application as well.
jQTouch, found online at http://jqtouch.com/, is a great jQuery plugin 
that allows for rapid prototyping of web apps that can be used to test the flow 
of our application before we go about building our native app.
With a prototype built, we can go about testing our interface ideas for usability and 
simplicity. It's much easier to alter spacing and button layout on a prototype than it is in a 
final application and now is the time to verify that our design ideas will make sense when 
translated onto a physical iOS device.
How it works...
iOS designers are at a bit of a disadvantage with prototyping when compared to traditional 
web developers or even desktop application developers.
Interface interaction with a mouse and keyboard has been commonplace for 30 years and 
most designers have grown to understand basic interface concepts that either work well or fail 
miserably. In contrast, touch-based interface development is still in its infancy and has really 
only been prevalent since the launch of the iPhone in 2007.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
28
It's still possible for iOS designers to overcome this competitive disadvantage and develop a 
great touch-centric interface; it just requires a bit more work. If we start each project with a 
quick, rapid prototype, we'll help guarantee that we're not sent back to the drawing board late 
in development because of failed design work.
See also
f
f
Getting your application onto a real device in this chapter
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina 
display
With the announcement of the iPhone 4, Apple introduced the Retina display. This new 
technology produces a 3.5 screen with a resolution of 960x640 pixels, which is considered 
to be the highest resolution screen ever placed inside of a mobile phone. The screen's 
pixel density is a welcome addition to consumers, but can cause a significant heartache for 
designers who are unprepared for the change. In this recipe, we'll take a look at how to best 
prepare resources for future changes in iOS screen resolution.
Getting ready
Updating our art resources for the new screen requires us to double the resolution of our 
original artwork. To help make this process easier, we'll need the original art resources for our 
application. Otherwise we'll be producing new high-resolution artwork from scratch, which can 
be a significant obstacle to overcome.
How to do it...
Now and in the future, it's to be expected that all iPhone and iPod touch devices will feature 
the high resolution Retina display. If we want success for our application, we should prepare 
our artwork for the 326 pixel per inch screen.
Let's take a look at a few steps that will help us migrate to the larger screen:
1.	 We should start by going through our old applications and prepare to update 
outdated resources for the higher resolution display.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
29
Luckily, Apple has built iOS to properly upscale all standard UI elements that 
are drawn natively in code or through Interface Builder. Text will also be 
scaled properly depending upon the device, so we don't need to worry about 
changing any UITextViews either. The only real concern will come into 
play with art resources, typically stored as .PNG files. Isolate these files so 
that we have an idea as to what needs to be updated for the Retina display.
2.	 Next, we hope that our original art files were created either as vectors, or as raster 
pieces greater in resolution than 640 pixels by 960 pixels, that were scaled down for 
the iPhone. If either of the previous two statements is true, we're fairly well off. If not, 
we've got a bit of a rough road ahead of us.
Vector and raster images
Vector graphic files are a type of image format where visual data is stored as 
a geometrical set of points, lines, curves, or polygons. Vector graphics scale 
up well because images are displayed as shapes with a specific mathematical 
relationship, meaning that magnifying the image is no problem because the 
relationship between the shapes stays the same regardless of size. Vector 
graphics can be built with an application like Adobe Illustrator but can be 
somewhat more difficult to use than Photoshop. If our art resources are 
still available in a vector format, we only need to create new copies of each 
resource at double the resolution of the old file. Once we do this, we're ready 
to move forward and prepare these new files for inclusion into our application.
Raster images are built as a grid of square pixels, with each point in the grid 
having a set color. It is difficult to increase the size of raster graphics because 
a multiplication in size just means that there will be a multiplication in the 
amount of pixels that build the image. As such, raster images tend to look 
pixilated or blurry when increased in size. Doubling the size of a raster graphic 
will look unprofessional and isn't likely to be of high enough quality for our 
application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
30
More likely however, we'll find that our resource files have been saved and only 
remain in a raster format like PNG:
If, at this point, we're left with only raster images and have no access to either higher 
resolution artwork or vector images, we have a bit of a predicament on our hands. 
The tough reality of this situation is that we'll have to go about creating each piece of 
art again by hand at double its original resolution in order to fit the Retina display.
3.	 After we've gone about updating our resource art for the Retina display, it's time to 
update the file names of each piece for inclusion into our app project.
Due to exceptional engineering by Apple's iOS team, it's extremely simple to name our 
high-resolution art so that our app knows how to handle these new files. To properly 
name our high-resolution files, we only need to append @2x onto the file name of the 
low-resolution resource file name.
For example, if we have a resource called Button.PNG, we need to name our new 
double resolution resource file as Button@2x.PNG.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
31
4.	 Once we've renamed all new high-resolution resource files to include the @2x suffix, 
we're ready to hand the new files off to our programmer or include them into the 
XCode project ourselves.
5.	 We should take the new files and include them into the XCode project as we would 
do to any other art file and that's it. There's no need to play around with any code or 
project settings; just leave the new art in the same resource folder as the original 
resource file.
At this point, our application should be well prepared for the Retina display. No matter 
if our user has the high-resolution screen or not, our application will continue to look 
great.
How it works...
Apple has developed iOS and XCode so that inclusion of artwork for the Retina display is 
extremely simple. The operating system is designed to recognize if an iOS device is utilizing 
the Retina display, and then display the correct resource file size for the specific device. If a 
Retina display is detected, then the @2x art is used. If not, then the original piece of art is 
displayed instead.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
32
There's more...
The introduction of the Retina display with the iPhone 4 was a wonderful example of why 
designers should create artwork in either a vector format or in a size much larger than they 
ever intend on using. While it is easy to take something big and make it smaller, it's extremely 
difficult to take something small and make it bigger.
Don't get too comfortable
Even though the Retina unbelievably displays high pixel density of 326 pixels per inch, it 
seems to be at an upper limit which Apple will likely not increase. Hence, we should prepare 
for the future by creating artwork at much higher resolutions that we should ever need, just 
in case.
Hiring someone to help fix our art problem
Since the emergence of the Retina display, several web companies have begun to specialize 
in the up scaling of mobile phone art for higher resolution displays. We should be wary of 
hiring such a company, as there are no magical techniques that can automatically increase 
the size of our low-resolution artwork.
If we do decide to work with a company that specializes in up scaling, we should ask for the 
contact information of previous clients to insure that the company completely redraws artwork 
for the higher resolution. We don't want to get stuck paying for artwork that was just magnified 
in Photoshop.
See also
f
f
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes in Chapter 9
Getting our work onto a device
Once we've planned out our interface and started working on development, we'll need to set 
up an iOS device for testing. By using XCode and Apple's iOS Dev Center, we'll be able to send 
pre-release application builds to our iOS device using a standard 30-pin connection cable.
Getting ready
Before we start, we'll want to gather up the iOS device we plan on using for testing, the latest 
update to the iOS SDK from the iOS Dev Center, and the computer we plan on doing our 
design work on.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
33
Apple typically keeps a collection of PDFs and videos on the iOS 
Provisioning Portal, which are much more thorough and up-to-date than 
this recipe. It would be beneficial to download and read or watch these 
resources before we begin.
We should also complete this recipe using the Team Agent credentials for our iOS developer 
account. Apple has two different accounts that we can choose from depending upon our 
needs as developers. All accounts currently cost $100 per year and allow us to release an 
unlimited number of apps into the App Store. Little is needed to sign up besides the bank 
account information and any legal business filings that we may have if we are registering as a 
company instead of an individual.
Individual accounts are fairly self-explanatory, working best for people looking to release apps 
under their personal name. If we sign up as an individual, our account log-in serves as the 
Team Agent.
Company accounts are for development studios that may have two or more developers or 
designers who all need access to the iOS Development Center forums or operating system 
pre-release builds. For a company account, the log-in credentials used to create the account is 
the Team Agent account and this will be needed to create the necessary files for this recipe.
How to do it...
Setting up our computer to process pre-release builds is one of the most difficult tasks that 
we'll accomplish early on as iOS developers. It's a fairly complex job and can be very confusing 
at first. Here are some simple steps to help get our test application running on an iPhone, iPod 
touch, or iPad:
1.	 In preparing our application and device for testing, we're going to build what is called 
a Provisioning Profile. This file is required for applications that we want to test on a 
device and will include information from our Development Certificate, Device UDID, 
and App ID. The Provisioning Profile works with XCode, iTunes, and our device to 
make sure that we're running an authentic copy of our app.
First, acquire the iOS Development Certificate by generating a Certificate Signing 
Request with Keychain Access. This process will give your applications the 
appropriate private key required for an iOS device to run our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
34
Launch Keychain Access from our Applications folder in OS X. Next, visit the 
Preferences window, which can be found in the Keychain Access menu bar or by 
using the Command + comma keyboard shortcut. Navigate over to the Certificates 
tab, and then turn Online Certificate Status Protocol and Certificate Revocation 
List modes off before closing the Preferences window.
2.	 Next, go back to the menu bar and select Request a Certificate from a Certificate 
Authority under the Certificate Assistant menu item.
3.	 When filling out the Certificate Assistant form, be sure to use the email address that 
is associated with our iOS Team Agent Apple account.
4.	 Fill out the Common Name field, leave CA Email Address blank, click on the Saved 
to Disk radio button, select Let Me Specify Key Pair, and then click on Continue to 
proceed.
5.	 Select 2048 bits key size and RSA algorithm options when prompted on the next 
screen. After clicking on Continue, a CSR file will be created on our computer's 
desktop.
6.	 Now log into the iOS Provisioning Portal using our Team Agent account. Click upon 
the Certificates navigation option, then click on Request Certificate under the 
Development tab.
7.	
Scroll down the page, click on Choose File, then select the CSR file from our desktop.
8.	 After successfully submitting the file, an email should be sent to the Team Admin and 
the status of our uploaded certificate will change to Pending Approval. The Team 
Agent account user can then approve the certificate request and a new certificate will 
be available for download in the Certificates menu in the iOS Provisioning Portal.
9.	 Once downloaded, double click the new .cer file and install the certificate using 
Keychain Access. This new certificate will last for a year before it expires, after which 
we'll have to go through this whole process again.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
35
10.	 With our new certificate loaded onto our computer through Keychain Access, we're 
now ready to configure our test device through XCode. We should now tether our iOS 
device to our computer through the standard 30-pin connecter and launch iTunes.
Once the device finishes the sync process, select the device under the Devices menu 
and click on the Summary tab. Now we'll want to use our mouse to click on the device 
serial number that is located near the top of the window. This will reveal our device's 
UDID, which we can select by using the Command+C copy shortcut.

iTunes - © 2001-2011 Apple Inc.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
36
Then we head back to our web browser and the iOS Provisioning Portal, where we can 
select the Devices menu option. Click the Add Devices button, enter a device name, 
and then paste in the device UDID using the Command+V paste shortcut. Click on 
Submit and our device has now been configured as a test device.
11.	 We now need to create an App ID, which is a unique identifier that Apple uses as 
part of the Provisioning Profile. App IDs help make special iOS features like in App 
Purchase, Push Notification, or Game Center work.
Using our Team Agent account, log into the iOS Provisioning Portal and navigate to 
the App ID menu section. Click the New App ID button and give a short description 
for our App ID. For the Bundle Seed ID drop down option, either generate a new 
Bundle Seed ID or use a previous ID. We would use a previously generated ID if we 
wanted our application to share data with an existing application.
Now we should enter a Bundle Identifier into the text field. This identifier should 
match the CF Bundle Identifier that has been set for the app under the Application 
Settings in XCode. If we ever plan on using features like in App Purchase or Push 
Notifications in our app, we should use a unique Bundle Identifier. Apple suggests 
the com.companyname.appname format, to guarantee that our Bundle Identifier 
is unique across all IDs. For example, a company called ABC Software with an 
application called Our Great App would create a Bundle Identifier called com.
abcsoftware.ourgreatapp.
Once we click on the Submit button, our Bundle Seed ID will be created and 
connected to our new Bundle identifier and this new string is our App ID.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
37
12.	Since we've now created our development certificate, registered our test device, and 
created an App ID, we can move forward and create the actual Provisioning Profile for 
our application. Using this new profile, we can successfully send a test application to 
a device and finally try out our application.
Using our Team Agent account, visit the Provisioning menu section of the iOS 
Provisiong Portal. Click on the Add button and give a name to our new Provisioning 
Profile. We should then click the check buttons for each device that we want to test 
our application on. Finally, we should select the Developer Certificate and unique App 
ID that we want to use for our application.
After entering in all of this information, click on the Submit button and a new 
Provisioning Profile will be created which we can use to test our application. While still 
in the Provisioning section of the iOS Provisioning Portal, we can download our new 
profile and save it to our computer.
13.	Once the Provisioning File has finished downloading, drag the file from Finder to 
XCode or iTunes to install the profile. We should now launch XCode and open the 
Organizer under the Window menu bar option. As long as our iOS device is still 
connected, we should see it here in the side menu. Under the provisioning option in 
the window, click the plus button and locate the Provisioning Profile if it isn't already 
selected.
14.	 At this point, we've successfully created a provisioning profile for our test application. 
Now head to our project file in XCode, select the project from the Target option in the 
side bar, then hit the blue Info button up on the toolbar. Scroll down and set the Code 
Signing Identity field to developer certificate associated with our new Provisioning 
Profile. We can now close the Info window.
We can now run our application in XCode. We can now use any iOS device to test with, 
however it is often wise not to use a device that you depend on daily for testing. While there 
are few repercussions with regards to using a device for testing, it's better to be safe than 
sorry with a device that you need as a phone or for other work related items.
To test out our app, we can click on the Build and Go menu bar option 
in order to build the app on our tethered iOS device.
How it works...
Installing an application on a test device can be a bit lengthy the first time we go through the 
process but will become much easier for sequential applications, as we no longer will need to 
create a developer certificate or register our test device.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
38
Apple's designed the system to make sure that we can securely install pre-release software on 
devices without fear of our work being pirated or reverse engineered by those looking to take 
our ideas. The profile system also helps protect users from nefarious developers who may 
otherwise look to deliver malware applications by circumventing the App Store.
The certificates, profiles, and application IDs that we create will be specific to our developer 
account, our applications, and our test devices. So unless we specifically intend to run a test 
application on a specific device, no unintended eyes will be able to see our pre-release work.
Once we've set up our application's Provisioning Profile, we'll be able to run our application as 
much as we would like on our test device. The benefits of testing our app on a real iOS device 
will become immediately apparent and we'll forget all about the heartache we went through to 
get our application up and running in the first place.
There's more...
Two iOS devices are better than one, and we may find ourselves in a situation where we would 
like to add multiple iOS devices to our developer account through the Provisioning Portal at 
one time. Luckily, Apple has developed a method for simplifying this process:
Setting up multiple devices at once
If we're looking to set up multiple iOS test devices at the same time, we can bulk upload the 
device names and UDIDs using the iPhone Configuration Utility or by creating a tab delimited 
.txt file. Once we've created a file containing all of our device information, we can upload it 
through the iOS Developer Portal by clicking on the Upload Devices button under the Devices 
menu option.
How many devices should we use?
We've discussed setting up test devices, but how many different devices should we use? 
Should we test on both the iPhone and the iPad?
Ideally, we'll test on as many devices as we can afford. However, we should test on a minimum 
of three devices. The first should be an iPhone or iPod touch running the latest operating 
system version available. The second should be an older iPhone or iPod touch running the 
oldest operating system that we plan on supporting. Finally, we should also test on an iPad, 
even if we haven't optimized for the tablet interface.
See also
f
f
Tools of the trade in the Preface
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
39
Taking a screenshot of an application on 
our device
In designing our interface for an application, we're going to be working with pre-release builds 
where our interface and app features will be changing quite often. We'll find ourselves working 
on an interface, throwing images or new text into an app to test, and then we'll probably make 
a few more changes and repeat this process.
It will be useful to take screenshots of our work in progress to email over for viewing on a 
larger monitor or to send to a friend or project teammate.
In this recipe, we'll learn how to quickly take and email screenshots of an application.
Getting ready
For this application, we'll only need our iOS device. We may also want the charging and 
syncing connection cable that game with our device to sync images with a computer if this 
is desirable.
How to do it...
It doesn't matter if we're using an iPhone, iPod touch, or iPad, as the process for taking a 
screenshot is the same on all devices. Let's take a look at the simple process:
1.	 We should start by loading the application and specific view that we desire to take a 
screenshot of on our iOS device.
Start by heading to the application that we want to take a screenshot of, and keep it 
open on our iOS device.
2.	 Next, we should hold down on the sleep button sitting on the top right or left of the 
device and then quickly press down the home button.
Both buttons must be pressed at the same time for the screenshot to be taken. It 
may take a bit of practice to not put the device to sleep while taking a screenshot.
3.	 We should see a white flash, indicating that a screenshot was successfully taken. 
Next, we need to go into the Photos application.
Once we see the white flash of light on screen, we'll know that the screenshot 
had been taken successfully and we can move on to the Photos app to send the 
screenshot to our email inbox.
4.	 Our screenshot will show up as the last taken photo, so we can now email, print, 
MMS, or upload the photo to a computer using iPhoto.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
40
In Photos, we can send or upload the image however we see fit and then use this screenshot 
to help improve our interface further.
How it works...
Apple has designed a simple, intuitive way to take a screenshot of any screen in iOS. The 
problem is, there is little obvious instruction on how to actually perform this function and most 
users are unaware that the feature even exists.
But once we're able to take screenshots, we'll find ourselves often taking quick screens as a 
way to quickly get our work in progress from the iPhone onto a traditional computer for 
further inspection.
See also
f
f
Getting our work onto a device in this chapter
Working within Apple's guidelines
The guidelines placed upon developers by Apple have been a hot topic of debate since the 
App Store first opened in 2007. For over two years, applications were rejected from the store 
with a vague explanation as to what was or was not acceptable for sale within Apple's 
walled garden.
Luckily, Apple has been much more open in recent history with regards to what is allowed 
in the App Store. Many common reasons for rejection involve problems with an app's user 
interface, so it is important for designers to understand why rules are in place so that a costly 
app rejection can be avoided.
Getting ready
Apple provides two important documents to help designers keep applications from being 
rejected. We should take the time to download and study these documents before sending off 
our application to Apple. The first document is called the iPhone User Interface Guidelines, 
and this file can be found in its most up to date version on the iOS Dev Center. This detailed 
document offers a bit of detail and reasoning as to why it is important that iOS interface 
elements should behave correctly in every application.
Next, we should become familiar with the App Store Review Guidelines document that 
can also be found in the iOS Dev Center portal. These guidelines were first published in 
September 2010 as a way to offer explanation of the rules and regulations for approval into 
the App Store reviewers.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 1
41
Once we've read both of these documents, we're ready to start glancing over our application 
user interface to make sure that we abide by all App Store regulations.
How to do it...
Keeping within Apple's requirements isn't difficult so long as we keep focused on the 
requirements and prepare accordingly. Here are a few steps to help keep our app away 
from rejection:
1.	 The iPhone Human Interface Guidelines offer a great example of how essential UI 
elements should interact and behave.
We should start by verifying that our Tab Bar, Navigation Bar, and Alert Views work as 
emphasized by Apple. Many app rejections occur because fundamental UI elements 
do not work as suggested in the Human Interface Guidelines.
2.	 Next, we want to make sure that our interface does not mimic form and function of an 
Apple application that comes pre-installed on iOS, such as Music, the iTunes Music 
Store, or the App Store.
Apple tends to pick and choose when to implement this rule, with many web browsers 
and compasses seeing approval into the store.
3.	 We'll want to be sure that we're not using trademarks, logos, or a brand identity which 
we have not been given rights to use.
Developing an unofficial sequel to our favorite video game may seem like a great 
idea, but Apple will reject our application if we do not have the rights to use a 
character or specific image.
This rule also applies to using icons or artwork that looks similar to iOS system 
artwork. So for example, if we decided to build an eBook reader, we should refrain 
from using an icon that could be confused with the iBooks icon.
4.	 We should also guarantee that we do not include excessive swear words, gratuitous 
sex, or drug use in our application. 
Apple is very adamant about the fact that the App Store should be a family friendly 
place to purchase software, and inappropriate language or crude content could lead 
to rejection of our application.
We must also assure that we do not reprogram hardware buttons on the iOS device to 
serve a function other than their dedicated system wide function. This means that we 
can't set up the volume up or down button to serve as a shutter button in our camera 
app, nor could we program the home button to work as a way to fire a weapon in our 
video game. All device hardware buttons must work as intended throughout 
our application.
With these tips in mind, we'll be less likely to cross the line and violate Apple's terms of 
service. Rejection can be costly, so we'll want to guarantee that we don't keep our app from 
approval because of poor interface decisions.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Getting Started: Prototyping, Proper Tools, and Testing our Design
42
How it works...
Apple's strict polices may annoy pundits who wish the App Store was more open, but the 
current plans in place are set to help developers achieve greater success. By making every 
developer comply with specific UI and functional standards, Apple is ensuring a certain level of 
quality that builds consumer confidence with applications in the App Store. Once users trust 
that an app will work as advertised, they will be more willing to buy apps in the future, which 
will increase the revenue stream for all developers.
There's more...
When reading Apple guidelines or blog posts about rejection, it can often appear as if Apple 
discourages innovation and unique interface design. In practice, this is untrue, with Apple 
offering yearly awards for exceptional app designs that are anything but ordinary.
The Apple design awards
For an example of exceptional design, check out Apple's web page for their yearly WWDC 
Design Awards http://developer.apple.com/wwdc/ada/. Design Award winners 
typically offer a great example of how we can transform standard interface elements into an 
exceptional user experience, all while remaining within App Store rules and regulations.
Rejection is a dish best served cold
To help developers better understand application rejection, Apple has created the Resolution 
Center within iTunes Connect.
iTunes Connect is the online web portal where we'll submit and 
make changes to app binaries. If we want to change the price 
or availability of our app, we'll head here.
The Resolution Center offers explanations as to why the app was rejected, along with 
suggestions as to how the application can be modified to comply with Apple policies.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

2
Customizing our Icon, 
the Navigation Bar, 
and the Tab Bar
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Designing an application icon and preparing it for the user home screen
f
f
Creating the rounded edges effect on our icon
f
f
Removing the app icon's gloss effect
f
f
Optimizing our newspaper or magazine app's icon for Newsstand in iOS 5
f
f
Creating a custom Tab Bar for our iPhone application
Introduction
The application icon and essential interaction elements such as the Navigation Bar and 
Tab Bar are crucial for the success of our work. The user will be tapping the icon every time 
they go to use our app, and interact with our navigation elements throughout their entire 
experience in our application.
If we want success, we must focus on making these components attractive and functional. 
Attention to detail and the presentation of these pieces will be key, and we'll need to produce 
our best work if we want to stand out in a sea of apps.
In this chapter, we'll discuss the all-important application icon, along with a couple of other 
ways in which we can make our work shine on the iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
44
Designing an application icon and preparing 
it for the user home screen
It's often said that a book shouldn't be judged by its cover, but the harsh reality of mobile 
development is that an app is often judged by its icon. This rounded rectangle will appear on 
the home screen of every user, and it's important that we create something that is attractive 
and also a good indication as to what the user should expect after downloading 
our application.
In this recipe, we'll create a strategy for successful app icon design.
Getting ready
Adobe Photoshop will be our primary tool in the design of our app icon. It may also be helpful 
to grab some paper and a pencil so that we can sketch out any concepts we may have before 
we begin working on our computer.
How to do it...
The application icon is a primary component of any work. Appearing in the App Store, on a 
user's home screen, in Spotlight searches, and more, it's an important part of our job.
Let's take a look at several steps that will be useful in the creation of our app icon:
1.	 We should start by with either a rough sketch or Photoshop mockup of our intended 
design. We should create this mock up at several sizes to help represent the different 
resolutions at which our icon will be viewed.
2.	 After we've developed an idea that we believe is going to scale well, its time to sit 
down in Photoshop or Illustrator and begin work on our icon.
At this point, we need to determine what size canvas we want to design our icon on. 
Apple requires that our icon be available at a variety of sizes, with a 512 by 512 pixel 
square currently being the largest required format, but we should be prepared in case this 
requirement changes in the future and design our icon accordingly. There are two different 
ways we can go about making our icon "future proof".
We can go about designing the icon in a vector format using an application like Adobe 
Illustrator. Vector drawings will always be the best way to ensure that our icon will scale to any 
size, but they can be a bit more difficult to create.
If we're more comfortable using a raster image manipulation program like Photoshop, it's best 
to create our icon at a resolution well above what we'll ever need for the App Store, starting 
with a canvas of 4096 by 4096 pixels square or greater.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
45
Such a large raster size will give us a piece of art that will print comfortably on sizes as large 
as 13 inches when printed at 300 DPI, while also easily scaling down to whatever size we 
need for the App Store.
1.	 Once we've decided which format we're most comfortable with, its time to go about 
creating our icon.
2.	 Once we've completed our icon, it is time to prepare it for inclusion into our 
application.
3.	 This icon should then be named apple-touch-icon.png and placed inside of our 
application bundle. iOS will then automatically add the glare effect to the top half of 
the icon, as seen throughout the interface.
The Info.plist is a file that allows us to customize a bunch of different 
application attributes. We'll learn how to use it to remove the icon gloss effect 
in an upcoming recipe titled Removing the app icon's gloss effect.
4.	 After finishing our icon, we may also want to run a small focus group, much like we 
would in order to gain feedback on our user interface design.
We can quickly set up a simple website with a form asking for opinions on our 
design or even email an image of the icon to friends and family in order to 
facilitate feedback.
When looking to gather opinion on our icon, we want to better understand a user's first 
impression of our icon. For a good portion of purchase decisions, the icon may be the only bit 
of insight into our app that the user has before tapping the buy button. We want to make sure 
that on first impression, the typical user associates our icon with quality, simplicity, and value. 
If our icon looks amateur, users probably won't consider our application for purchase.
How it works...
Icon design is tough, primarily because we're required to design a small square that 
represents our application's purpose, quality, and value. It's truly a challenge to design 
something that works well at 512 pixels and 27 pixels. Let's take a look at how the steps 
above work together to create a good icon.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
46
Resolution flexibility is arguably the difficult part of icon design, as our work needs to look 
great at 512 pixels by 512 pixels and at 27 by 27 pixels. Small details that look great at a high 
resolution can really make an icon indecipherable when scaled down to the lowest 
resolution required:
In the above screenshot, we can quickly see how an icon becomes less legible as it decreases 
in size. It's necessary to provide the icon to Apple in several different sizes, which can vary 
depending upon the iOS device we're developing our application for and the current operating 
system requirements from Apple. These file sizes have varied significantly throughout the life 
of iOS, so we should verify the current requirements in the iOS Development Center before 
their creation.
Sebastiaan De With keeps an excellent Photoshop file for iOS icon design, complete with 
resolution requirements, which he updates every time Apple changes the icon requirements. 
We can find the file here at http://blog.cocoia.com/2010/iphone-4-icon-psd-
file/and it should reference it while designing a new icon.
When building our icon, we should really take time to think about what our icon should look 
like and what users will think when they first set eyes on it in the App Store. This set process 
works because it systematically creates a piece of work that will be optimized for the various 
needs of iOS.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
47
There's more...
It may take a bit of practice to get a firm grasp on what makes a great or poor icon. Here are a 
few helpful ideas, just in case we're struggling to develop an icon that we're happy with.
Dropping the text
We should always refrain from including a great deal of text in our app icon. Text tends to 
become illegible when scaled down to small resolutions such as 27 x 27, so it is often best to 
keep text out of our icon. If we absolutely must include text in our icon, we should use short 
words that are large in size and in a bold typeface.
Great gradients
From an art design perspective, we'll probably be including an artistic gradient in our icon to 
offer the illusion of brushed metal or progressive lighting. But choosing a strong color palate 
for a gradient can be difficult.
Dezigner Folio has created a large library of fresh, modern gradients that they've offered up 
for free use in any project. For the entire library, feel free to visit their website at http://
www.dezinerfolio.com/2007/05/03/ultimate-web-20-gradients-v30-release.
If all else fails....
If we're having a rough time with icon design and all else fails, we can always hire a freelance 
artist or design firm to help out with the production of our application icon. A quick search of 
Google can help us find a multitude of artists who have become specialists in the field of 
icon design.
Finding a talented designer can actually be quite affordable, with many freelance artists 
charging a hundred dollars or less for a high quality icon. As icons can be produced in 
Photoshop, local graphic designers or students can help out at affordable rates as well.
See also
f
f
Starting with the sketch in Chapter 1
f
f
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina display in Chapter 1
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
48
Creating the rounded edges effect on 
our icon
The raised, rounded rectangle bezel is a common trait on many application icons. Made 
popular by developers such as Electronic Arts, Lima Sky, Gameloft, and others, such icons 
often look as if they almost have a wooden or metal frame.
Let's take a look at how we can go about creating our own rounded edge effect so that our 
icons stick out on the App Store.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we'll need a copy of Adobe Photoshop or another similar raster image editing 
application. It will also be useful to have the source file, titled IconBezel.PSD, to be 
downloaded from the Packt website.
How to do it...
Creating a rounded bezel effect on our icon is relatively simple; we'll just have to work in 
some rounded rectangles and proper sizing requirements. Let's take a look at the simple 
steps that we must take to create such an icon:
1.	 Create a new Photoshop file for the icon, square in shape, measuring at least 512 
pixels by 512 pixels. Then, give a color to the background of the file, ideally close in 
color to our bezel.
The outer bezel is often styled to look like metal when used in an 
icon, but we could try to make it look like wood, plastic, or some 
other material. Be creative and design something unique!
2.	 Use the Rounded Rectangle tool with a radius of 25 pixels to create a rounded square 
that fills the entire screen. When we're done, the rounded rectangle should fill the 
entire square from edge to edge.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
49
3.	 Create another second rounded rectangle with a radius of about 15 pixels inside the 
first rectangle to create desired width bezel.
4.	 Use a bevel and outer glow to create the illusion of a bezel.
5.	 Include the desired art in the center of the icon frame.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
50
6.	 From here, we can save the icon as a PNG in whatever size we need for the app or 
marketing purposes.
How it works...
On an iOS device's home screen or in the App Store, Apple has designed icons to be 
presented with a rounded edge look. So while we'll create a square piece of art, our icon will 
look better if we design a bezel or other piece designed around the understanding that our 
icon will stand apart from the crowd.
Creating the ideal bezel effect isn't easy. For example, in step three, we need to create a 
second rounded rectangle inside the first. This rectangle should be in a different color from 
the first, offering a background for art that we'll place in later. It will also contrast with the first 
rectangle and give the illusion of a bezel.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
51
As shown in the previous screenshot, this second smaller rectangle should have a radius 
between 10 to 15 pixels. If we use a radius equal to the larger rounded rectangle, our bezel 
will look somewhat misshapen.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
52
Diving further into the design, by using the Bezel and Emboss blending effect in Step 4, we'll 
create a sense of depth that gives the illusion of a bezel, thanks to the Outer Glow blending 
effect on the inner rectangle.
A 6-pixel large inner bevel with a softness of 5 pixels should be fine, but we can play around 
with these values to create a desirable look. If we're looking to create a metallic look, we may 
want a greater bevel. If we're creating a wood look, we may want less of a bevel.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
53
For this example, a glow with a size of 6 pixels offers just the shadow necessary to create our 
desired effect. Like the bevel though, we may want to play with this depending on our 
desired effect.
The rounded bezel is an easy way to make our icon pop; it just requires that we have an 
understanding of how our icon will be displayed on a device. With a bit of practice and 
experimentation, we can design an exceptional application icon.
There's more...
We'll probably be creating a PNG image of our icon to place inside our app and submit to the 
store, but we shouldn't be including transparencies.
Not being caught cutting corners
A somewhat troubling problem is found in many app icons, where there is noticeable clipping 
in the corner of icons in the App Store and when placed on the device. To an icon with this 
problem, it looks as if the corners have been cut off a bit and replaced with white 
pixel artifacts.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
54
This usually occurs when the icon designer creates a bezel like we've built in this recipe, 
but they don't place a background color in the image under the bezel and instead leave the 
corners transparent.
This is a great example as to why we should always test our designs on actual 
devices before we ship our app. This is a common mistake that could easily 
be corrected if we tested our icon file on an actual iPhone or iPad.
What happens is, corners aren't accurately sized and the corners aren't filling the entire file 
properly. The App Store and iOS can't properly display transparencies, so these missing pixels 
appear white and are often in contrast with our designed bezel.
Always include a full square image and use a color background in the corners, even though 
the user will never see these pixels. This will help to prevent this problem.
See also
f
f
Designing an application icon and preparing it for the user home screen in 
this chapter
f
f
Removing the app icon's gloss effect in this chapter
Removing the app icon's gloss effect
Apple created iOS to offer a standard icon, originally equal to 57 pixels by 57 pixels. On top of 
these icons, a standard glass reflection effect was placed on top of all icons.
But there will be times at which we feel that our icon will look better without the gloss effect. 
In this recipe, we'll discuss how we can remove this effect and create a crisp and bright icon.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we'll need XCode installed on a Macintosh computer. We'll also need the 
project file for our application in order to edit its Info.plist.
How to do it...
With a few simple steps, we'll easily remove the ship from our iOS icon on the user's home 
screen. Let's take a look at what is needed in order to remove the effect:
1.	 Open our application project in XCode. We should begin by opening our project in 
XCode. If we need to check the code out of a repository or just open it from our 
computer, we should do so now.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
55
2.	 In XCode, open the project's Info.plist file. The location of this file may vary based 
on our application, but it will be present somewhere in the project folder.
3.	 Add a new row to the Plist and set the key to Icon already includes gloss effect.
4.	 Next, we'll need to create a new row in the Plist and then set the key of that row to the 
Icon already includes gloss value.
5.	 Set the Boolean value to YES, save, and compile our application.
The next time we compile our application, the shine will no longer be present and our app icon 
will look crisp on the home screen.
There is no rule with regards to when we should or should not include the 
gloss effect. Try out both styles to see which suits our icon best.
How it works...
Our application's Info.plist file holds a variety of application properties, including the 
ability to remove the gloss effect from an icon when displayed on the iOS device home screen.
As learned in steps 4 and 5, this Boolean value determines if the gloss effect is placed upon 
our icon or not. By hovering over an existing row, we'll see a small plus icon that we can click 
with our mouse in order to create a new row:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
56
iOS parses the plist when installing the application, and such settings are then applied to the 
icon in code by the operating system. It doesn't require much work on our part, and can help 
make our icon stand out as exceptional.
See also
f
f
Designing an application icon and preparing it for the user home screen in this 
chapter
f
f
Creating the rounded edges effect on our icon in this chapter
Optimizing our newspaper or magazine app's 
icon for Newsstand in iOS 5
With iOS 5, Apple has developed a new set of application icon attributes to help make our 
periodical stand out in the new Newsstand feature. Our icon can now look different than the 
standard glossy rounded rectangle, allowing for our work to gain greater attention from 
our users.
In this recipe, we'll look at different ways in which we can customize our periodical icon in 
Newsstand.
Getting ready
In this recipe, we'll need a nearly completed periodical application for which we can complete 
the necessary icon files. It's important that we have an idea about what sort of art direction 
will be required for the icon as we complete this work.
How to do it...
Creating icon files for periodicals in iOS 5 and beyond is a bit more complex than the standard 
application, as we have the ability to have customizable covers that change as content 
changes with new issues in the app. We can also dress up our app icon to look like a real 
magazine or newspaper, which can offer neat artistic flare as well. Let's take a look at the 
steps required to create a periodical icon in iOS 5:
1.	 Create a standard iOS icon square for the app, measuring 57 and 114 pixels for the 
iPhone and 72 pixels for the iPad.
2.	 Design a periodical specific default cover image to appear in Newsstand. Select a 
binding edge and binding type for the Newsstand cover.
3.	 Include cover images in future updates to the periodical for inclusion in Newsstand.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
57
When these four steps have been accomplished, our icon will be ready to go for the 
Newsstand feature in iOS 5.
How it works...
Throughout the history of iOS, designers have only needed to put together a single icon, 
consisting of a 512-pixel square that is then scaled down to other sizes as required. This 
made icon design simple and easy, although it was quite difficult to make an icon stand out 
from the crowd. With iOS 5 and Newsstand, periodicals can now add a bit of customization to 
help an app's content stand out.
In step one, we'll be designing a standard square icon that will turn into a rounded rectangle 
and look like any other app icon in iOS. This will be required for our periodical, even though we 
have new and improved cover icons in Newsstand. The standard icon will be used in the App 
Store, when searching for an app in Spotlight, in the Settings application, and in notifications 
throughout the operating system, so it is required that we still include it in our app binary.
With step two, we'll be designing a more periodical specific icon to serve the purpose of a 
cover page for our magazine or newspaper when in the Newsstand feature. As new issues 
come out, we'll be able to update the icon to represent the day or week's cover story, but we'll 
still need a general periodical cover to display in case we have no updated periodical cover to 
display. This should be in the art style of our periodical and look much like a standard issue 
would appear on a physical paper or magazine.
For step three, we'll need to apply binding properties to the cover in the application's 
Info.plist. For the UINewsstandBindingType key, we'll provide a string of either 
UINewsstandBindingTypeNewspaper or UINewsstandBindingTypeMagazine. This 
choice is fairly self-explanatory and based on our selection, our periodical cover will look more 
like either a glossy magazine or a newspaper.
Next, we'll set the UINewsstandBindingEdge key to eitherUINewsstandBindingLeft, 
UINewsstandBindingEdgeRight, or UINewsstandBindingEdgeBottom. With our 
selection, the periodical cover will be edited to look as if the binding fold is on the left, right, or 
bottom of the issue.
Finally, we'll need to include updated periodical cover art images whenever we update our 
application so that iOS can adjust the cover accordingly in Newsstand. This will allow our 
periodical to appear up to date and grab the user's attention with an updated cover based on 
our most up-to-date app content.
By following these four steps, our icon will be ready for display in iOS 5's Newsstand feature.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014
www.allitebooks.com

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
58
See also
f
f
Designing an application icon and preparing it for the user home screen in this 
chapter
f
f
Creating the rounded edges effect on our icon in this chapter
f
f
Removing the app icon's gloss effect in this chapter
Creating a custom Tab Bar for our 
iPhone application
While we'll often want to implement a standard Tab Bar, there may be an occasional situation 
for which we will want to create a customized Tab Bar that offers up a bit of a different look.
This will require that we create the new bar entirely in Photoshop, and then use these buttons 
to transition through different views. As we're creating something custom, we don't have many 
rules to follow. However, we should still create a Tab Bar that is somewhat recognizable to 
the user.
In this recipe, we'll discuss a technique for creating a custom Tab Bar for our iPhone 
application.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we'll need a copy of Adobe Photoshop or another similar raster image editing 
application. It will also be useful to have the source file, titled TabBar.PSD, downloaded from 
the Packt website.
How to do it...
We will need to go about creating a very structured and organized set of image files in order to 
have an effective custom Tab Bar. Let's take a look at the steps that we'll need to follow:
1.	 Create a new file in Photoshop for the Tab Bar, that is equal to 98 pixels in height and 
640 pixels in width. Give a background color to the Tab Bar to what we desire non-
active tabs to be in color.
2.	 Now, we should create a background color in our file that will serve as an inactive tab 
color background.
3.	 Next, we should use the guide tool in Photoshop to create verticial guidelines to guide 
where we will place each tab. Guides can be found by selecting View in the Menu Bar 
and then choosing New Guide.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
59
We'll find the width of each tab by taking the width of the screen and 
dividing it by the number of tabs that we intend to include. As seen 
below, if we want to include four tabs here, each tab should be 160 
pixels in width on the Retina display.
4.	 For each section of Tab Bar, create active and inactive states for each tab.
5.	 Now we need to go about exporting each button for both states. It is typically easiest 
to go about selecting a single tab using the Marquee tool, and then copy the content 
from all layers using the Merge Copy tool with the Shift+Command+C shortcut. We 
can then create a new file, paste, and save it in both Retina and standard resolutions.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Customizing our Icon, the Navigation Bar, and the Tab Bar
60
6.	 As we save an image for each state, we should be sure to use clear file names for 
each tab, such as TabOneActive.png and TabOneInactive.png, to help us 
easily label and make changes to the tabs as need be through development.
7.	
Place the images as buttons inside of our application. When an inactive tab is 
tapped, transition to the view that is represented by this tab and change the previous 
view's tab to the inactive image.
With this method, we'll quickly and easily create a unique Tab Bar that still behaves similar to 
how the user anticipates the behavior of the standard interface element to be.
How it works...
While a bit more rare, custom Tab Bars can help make our application stand out. The design 
principles behind the bar are quite simple, so it isn't difficult to re-create through some 
creative interface work.
In Step 1, we created a file with a resolution of 98 pixels by 640 pixels, because this is Apple's 
recommended height for the bar, but we really have the creative freedom to do whatever we 
want with regards to height.
As we move forward in the process, we will create the art for each tab. As we're creating a 
custom bar, color, texture, button requirement, and other attributes aren't really required to 
have any specific look. We should keep a general look that remains somewhat familiar to the 
user, but we should still feel free to use a little creativity.
Once we export our new images, the new Tab Bar is ready to be placed as individual buttons 
anchored to the bottom of our application interface. We'll create as many buttons across the 
bottom of the screen as tabs we want, and then create a system through which each view 
is presented by tapping an inactive button on the bottom of the screen. When this inactive 
button is tapped, the view will change and the previously active tab button will change to its 
inactive counterpart.
Remember that if we do decide to go this route, we should still keep the standard Tab 
Bar behavior intact. We'll be creating something that users won't be expecting and in 
most situations, that's OK. But since the custom bar will look a bit foreign, we don't want 
to completely scare away users from something that both looks and behaves completely 
unexpected.
But through creating something as shown, we can greater customize our interface and make 
our application our own.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 2
61
There's more...
In this recipe, we've recommended a height of 49 pixels for a Tab Bar, but is this a 
requirement? Let's take a look at to why we should follow this rule.
Losing the freshman 15
Our initial desire may be to make our Tab Bar a bit bulkier than the Apple native bar, giving 
users a bit larger of a tap zone to switch between tabs. This is a bit undesirable, as it can 
often be confusing to the user and could lead to possible interface problems down the road.
Through day-to-day use of the iPhone, iPad, or iPod touch, the user is going to become trained 
with regards to what the standard size of a Tab Bar should be. If our bar is much larger or 
smaller, we'll break the cognitive expectation for the user and they'll not know how to perceive 
the item at first.
We also need to be aware that Apple could very well change the screen size of the iPhone or 
iPad, create a new Tab Bar style with different function expectations, or design some other 
fundamental operating system change. By making our custom Tab Bar similar in size to the 
original bar, we'll be able to quickly adapt our app if something changes in the future.
See also
f
f
Providing variety through a Tab Bar in Chapter 4
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

3
Different Ways 
to "View" our 
Application
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Properly utilizing modal views
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views
f
f
Improving our application through table views
f
f
Integrating the web view into our app
f
f
Including Twitter in iOS 5
f
f
Determining which view is better for our app
Introduction
Views controllers are an essential part of iOS development, providing a gateway for users to 
observe and manage essential data stored inside of an application. These controllers come in 
many shapes and sizes, and all go about helping users see and control data on screen.
As interface designers, it will be our job to select the appropriate interface element or screen 
view to properly portray our app interface. To create a top app, we're going to need to stock 
our interface arsenal with a variety of tricks including Alert Views, Table Views, and 
Web Views.
Views are a portion of the iOS screen that are dedicated to organizing 
photos, text, or other content on screen.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
64
In this chapter, we'll define the different views that make up our user interface and ways to 
optimize our design through proper implementation of each available option.
Properly utilizing modal views
iOS is a highly modal operating system, forcing one application at a time upon the user. Not 
only are we limited to one application, but we're also limited in space and possible views at 
any given time when inside our application.
In this recipe, we'll define modal views and the role they play in our application.
Getting ready
Modal views are more prevalent and easy to distinguish on the iPhone and iPod touch, so we 
should look to have one of these two devices on hand. Modal views do occur on the iPad as 
well, so it would be helpful to also have this device if possible.
How to do it...
Apple has devised several different modal views for our disposal. One modal view only works 
on the iPhone, only three work on the iPad, and one can be used on either platform. Let's take 
a look at the different modal view types available to us:
1.	 We're given a full-page modal view similar to modal views on the iPhone or 
iPod touch, where the only option on screen is to complete or cancel the modal 
presentation.
2.	 A blue Alert View that appears in-app, or out of app as a Push or Local Notification, 
is also a way to present modal information. Alert Views can appear on either the 
iPhone or iPad.
3.	 A second popular modal view on iPad is the Form Sheet, where the modal view 
is placed on top of the current window at a fixed size of 540 pixels by 620 pixels. 
When in the Form Sheet, viewable window space below the modal view is dimmed 
to visually indicate to prevent the user from interacting with anything other than the 
modal view. Composing a new email on the iPad is an example of a Form Sheet.
4.	 A Page Sheet is similar to the Form Sheet and also only available on the iPad. While 
the Form Sheet has a fixed size, the Page Sheet has a fixed width of 768 pixels and a 
height that spans the entire length of the iPad.
5.	 A final modal view, also limited to only the iPad is the Current Context modal view. In 
this view, modal content is presented in a split pane or Popover view, filling the entire 
interface element.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
65
By using any of these modal presentations, we'll be able to offer a linear presentation of data 
and direct the user towards the most important aspects of our application. The variety of view 
types offers flexibility, so that we can fine tune our app and create the best experience possible.
How it works...
Modal views allow our application design to present a single functionality to the user at 
a given time, focusing the user on the specific task at hand. In a traditional computing 
environment, this sense of modality is less important as we're given a great deal of space on 
screen to work with and can space application interface functions and interactive well enough 
in a clear way without forcing the user to attend to a single function at any given time.
Proper understanding of modal views in iOS is essential due to limited device real estate. On a 
desktop application, large monitors make it easy to refrain from using modal views. However, 
most information entry scenarios on iPhone or iPod touch devices require modal interfaces in 
order to make data entry simple and clear.
For a simple definition, a modal view is any view that requires action 
before the user can move onto another window or view.
When presented with a modal view, the user typically has the choice between entering a piece 
of data or canceling the action. Sending a text message in the Google Voice application is an 
example of a modal view, as shown below:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
66
As shown in the following screenshot, picking a local city in Weather, composing a new 
message in Mail, and various options in the Settings application are all modal interfaces that 
would not commonly require a modal presentation in a traditional computer setting:

Weather - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
Despite the larger screen size, modal views are prevalent on the iPad as well, though not quite 
as necessary as on the smaller predecessor. On the large device, we're somewhat limited in 
how we can present our modal view.
Apple has also designed several standard animations to help best integrate modal views. 
The most common and default modal presentation animation is a vertical slide from the 
bottom of the screen, where the view rises up to take over the viewable area. This standard 
implementation works well in nearly every scenario and we should implement it if we're 
uncertain.
The second modal transition style is the flip, which makes the view appear as if the 
transitioned screen exists on the back of the previous screen. When we cancel or close this 
modal view, the screen flips back around and we're presented with our first screen. Apple's 
Weather application is a great example of this technique, utilizing the flip when transitioning 
to the location selection page of the application.
The third and final animation is the page curl transition, where the corner of the screen flips 
up to present the user with several application options. When the user has completed or 
canceled the modal task, the corner curls back down and the original view is presented again. 
The Maps application includes a great example of the curl animation.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
67

Maps - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
Modal views will often be a key component in our application, allowing us to focus our user's 
attention in order to create an easy to understand interface. By integrating standard modal 
view animations and expected use cases into our application, users will feel familiar and be at 
home inside of our work.
There's more...
What if we wanted to present a modal view inside of a modal view? Would this be possible 
in iOS?
Dual modalities
It is possible to offer a modal view that is a child of another modal view inside iOS. For 
example, when inside a modal view for the composition of a new email, we could tap on the 
plus icon to pull up a modal view that allows the selection of a contact from the device's 
address book.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
68
Such a technique is not extremely common and should be used with caution, as this can often 
create a more complex interface. The most useful scenario for such use is when our initial 
modal view requires a good deal of data entry and we can help speed the user through this 
process by automatically adding data in some way.
One important interface note to remember is that if we're looking to build a modal view into 
another modal view, we can't use the page curl animation. The slide up and flip animation 
allow for a modal view inside of a modal view, but the page curl does not.
Getting quick updates with Alert Views
System wide notifications are an essential component of any modern mobile operating 
system, allowing for a quick way to present short text prompts to the end user.
Apple has built Alert Views into the iOS SDK, giving developers the same notification system 
used by Apple for system alerts such as text messages. We can use these several ways, either 
in application or outside of the application through Push Notifications or Local Notifications.
In this recipe, we'll break down different ways that we can present the notifications to our user 
through Alert Views.
Getting ready
Alert Views can be found in many applications on both iPhone and iPad devices. It's useful to 
have an application on hand like Alarm Clock, so that we can test out this view type.
It would also be useful to have Urban Airship's website on hand, which can be found 
at http://urbanairship.com. Urban Airship is a tool that allows for the easy 
implementation of notifications into our app. By using their API, we can quickly integrate 
Push Notifications.
It will also be useful to have a copy of the iOS Human Interface Guidelines on hand and 
available as well. These guidelines give the most up-to-date information on how Alert Views 
should be integrated into our app, and can be found online at http://developer.apple.
com/library/ios/#documentation/userexperience/conceptual/mobilehig/
Introduction/Introduction.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40006556-CH1-
SW1. In iOS 5, Apple made a variety of changes to the notification system and also to the 
implementation of Alert Views. We should famaliarize ourselves with these changes and their 
impact on Apple's expectations for our interface, as dictated in the official guidelines.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
69
How to do it...
As these notifications are available to every application, even important system notifications 
such as low battery life warnings, it's important that the user does not tire from excessive 
alerts. We can also use Alert Views as a way to provide a modal prompt to the user, however, 
notifications will be the most common use of the view.
In iOS 5, Apple worked extensively to make notifications less intrusive and more 
mainstreamed into the operating system. By default, notifications now appear in a 40 pixel tall 
banner that spans across the top of the device screen. 
Even with this new and clean presentation, we will still want to refrain from notification 
overload. In order to assure that our notifications are prompt and appropriate, Apple offers the 
following suggestions:
f
f
Alert Views are unnecessary if used to provide an alert for a standard feature of the 
application. We should reserve these views for the ordinary user notification and for 
information updates that are essential parts of the application; we should instead try 
to integrate this data into our standard application interface.
f
f
Alert Views should never be used to note to the user that the application is 
functioning or progressing as normal, such as if the application is downloading 
updated information in the background.
f
f
We should do our best to avoid Alert Views as a way to confirm an action that the user 
is looking to perform, even if that action is destructive. If the user is looking to delete 
an important piece of information and we think it's important to secure confirmation 
before performing the action, we should use an Action Sheet instead.
f
f
We should not use Alert Views to inform the user about an action over which they 
have no control of, such as the inability to connect to a web service or data server. 
Instead, we should integrate this information into our standard interface.
How we word the text that comprises our title and body of an Alert View is also significant. 
We're given only a sentence or two as a way to clearly indicate the action that the Alert View 
represents, along with the consequences of the action. If we're looking to optimize text copy in 
our alert, we should observe the following:
f
f
Our Alert View title and body text should be sufficient enough to indicate to the user 
as to what action is taking place inside the application and what outcomes will occur 
if a button is pressed.
f
f
Title text should never exceed a line in length if possible, and should never be single 
word entries consisting of Error, Warning, or another vague and unhelpful phrase.
f
f
Text included inside the Alert View should never directly refer to or call out a user. We 
should refrain from using words such as you, your, or me.
f
f
Users of iOS do not have a mouse as an interface device; so we should instruct the 
user to tap the application, not click.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
70
f
f
Our text should be succinct enough to fit properly on screen in both portrait and 
landscape device orientations.
These tips will help us use the Alert View to provide valuable information to our user in a quick 
and simple way, regardless as to whether we use the alert within our application, through 
Push Notifications, or in a Local Notification.
How it works...
Alert Views have been designed by Apple to be an unobtrusive, quick way for the operating 
system to provide feedback to the user about important information that affects an 
application on the device. Through a quick pop-up banner anchored to the top of the screen 
in iOS 5 or centered large window in iOS 4 and below, users can receive a text message or be 
informed about low battery power on the device.
From an interface development point of view, Alert Views are presentable using a narrow and 
long banner that is anchored to the top of the screen, allowing the user to quickly keep up 
with system tasks while remaining focused on the task at hand. A short additional message 
body can also be included inside the Alert View, however it is not a requirement.
Alert Views have a unique property in that they can be displayed 
when the user is inside and outside of our application.
In iOS 3.0, Apple gave developers the ability to send out user notifications when in other 
applications through a server connection called Push Notifications. Push Notifications are 
relatively difficult to integrate into our application, requires a somewhat costly server solution, 
and we're limited in the fact that the user must be connected to the Web through WiFi for 
cellular network to receive the alert.
With iOS 4.0, Apple introduced Local Notifications, which allow us to present a similar Alert 
View to the user without an Internet connection. However, we're limited in the sense that we 
can't pull from the Web to offer dynamic alert information such as sports scores or friend 
messages from a social network.
Neither Push Notifications nor Local Notifications provide a perfect solution, but both are 
manageable and allow us to keep our application salient to the user. If we're looking to 
inform our user of an upcoming event or news update, these Alert View styles can be greatly 
beneficial to our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
71
When implementing Alert Views in our application, or when outside our application through 
Push Notifications or Local Notifications, it's important that we do not overload our user with a 
flood of alerts. Apple suggests that we limit the amount of notifications that we present to our 
user, to ensure that such alerts attract the user's attention and do not become a nuisance.
The notification consistency is a strong way to help simplify the entire operating system's 
interface for the user, while also offering the ability to provide a vast amount of information in 
a readily available way.
There's more...
Push Notifications can be somewhat difficult to implement into our application, due to 
complicated server requirements. Luckily, one service looks to simplify the process of adding 
notifications into our app.
Pushing it back
Urban Airship, found online at http://urbanairship.com/, is a great way to go about 
adding Push Notifications or In-App Purchases into our iOS application.
Urban Airship is a mobile service that offers an API to help integrate necessary frameworks 
into the application so that we can go about sending a quick Alert View to our user over 
a network connection. Their web app handles all of the required server backend for 
notifications, along with accompanying code to help easily integrate Push Notifications into 
our app.
With modest pricing plans and a fully managed server backend, we'll be hard stretched to find 
an easier way to integrate the functionality into our work.
See also
f
f
Improving our application through Table Views in this chapter
Improving our application through 
Table Views
Table Views are an essential component of iOS and an extraordinarily simple way to separate 
data on screen and give the user an easy way to sort through piles of information.
There are a couple of ways that we can present Table Views on screen, with each offering 
benefits in specific scenarios. In this recipe, we'll discuss several ways in which we can 
improve our application through Table Views.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
72
A Table View is a single column of information presented on an iOS 
device as a list of a set of two or more rows.
Getting ready
Table Views are one of the most common ways to go about designing an application on iOS, 
with prominent applications such as Music and Contacts being built on the view type. For this 
recipe, it will be useful to have an iOS device to hand along with some scratch paper to quickly 
sketch out table flow charts as well.
How to do it...
In their iOS Human Interface Guidelines, Apple offers suggestions on which types of Table 
Views are best for specific use cases. As per their suggestions, here is how we should handle 
specific functions:
f
f
If we're using a Table View to provide a list of possible options that the user can 
choose from, we can use either a plain or grouped view
f
f
If we're looking to provide several groups of highly distinguishable data on screen, the 
Grouped Table View is the best option
f
f
If users will be sorting through a great deal of data where an alphabetical index can 
help facilitate information lookup, the Plain Table View is the best option because we 
can include an index to the right of the table
f
f
If we're presenting hierarchical information to the user, a Plain Table View offers 
arguably the best way to present a single successive list
Apple also offers other general suggestions for our use of Table Views. These guidelines apply to 
both grouped and plain views, and can help make our information more accessible to a user:
f
f
Animations should be used when making edits or when deleting data. This provides a 
strong sense of visual feedback to the user and makes it more evident that the data 
is being manipulated on screen
f
f
If we're presenting a good deal of data on our table, we should avoid waiting until all 
data has been loaded to display our table. If possible in our app, this will decrease 
the perceived time that it will take for our application to load
f
f
When using a Plain Table View, we should never vary the height of our cell. When 
used, it will often make data feel improperly placed and difficult to manage
f
f
When possible, we should ensure that our text inside of a cell is brief in order to avoid 
truncation of important context words
If we adhere to Apple's suggestions for Table Views, we'll find it easy to present a great deal of 
data to our users in a small amount of space.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
73
How it works...
Table Views are an extremely popular application view because they offer such data flexibility. 
If we only have a few entries to present to our users, a Grouped Table View will offer an 
attractive way to present several options. If we have hundreds of data points, a Plain Table 
View offers a fast and smooth option as well.
If we imagine that Table Views work much like a spreadsheet with rows and columns, it's easy 
to see how the view offers quick and legible movement up throughout many columns of data. 
We can move back and forth, offering our users great flexibility.
Luckily for us, Apple has built this powerful framework for us from the ground up, which we 
can easily integrate into our application design.
There are a variety of native examples in Apple developed applications that we can pull from 
to learn more about Table Views. In the Music application, a Table View is used to list artists or 
albums. In Contacts, a Table View is used to sort through the list of stored contact information. 
When we're viewing the top 25 listings in the App Store, Table Views are used to sort that 
information as well.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
74
Plain Table Views are the simplest of Table Views, with rows that span from one side of the 
iOS device screen to the other. As shown in the previous screenshot, songs in Music are a 
great example of a Plain Table View, offering one song per row that spans the entire screen 
in width.
We can make slight modifications to these views as well, offering the ability to customize 
the cell to include multiple lines of data and even images. Plain Table Views are perfect for a 
large number of rows, where we want to give users the ability to flip through data quickly. Data 
inside Plain Table Views can also be given header information or sorted quickly, offering more 
flexibility in presentation.

Settings - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
Grouped Table Views are another valuable type of view for use in our application. Using this 
interface element, a slight padding is given between the edge of the screen and the table 
row. As shown in the previous screenshot from the Settings application, Grouped Table Views 
are often useful when dealing with fewer objects that work well being grouped into specific 
categories. These groups are laid out on top of a blue and white grid pattern by default, but 
this background is customizable and can be changed if we think a different pattern would 
work better with our design.
There's more...
While we didn't discuss it in depth in this recipe, Plain Table Views often go hand in hand with 
Navigation Bars. If we're looking to include this view inside our app, we may want to consider 
the Navigation Bar as well.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
75
Two peas in a pod
Navigation Bars and Plain Table Views work well together because the Navigation Bar allows 
for quick navigation back and forth through different tables. If we'd like to offer further detail 
on a table object, we only need to allow the user to tap on an entry then jump forward into a 
further view.
The two work perfectly together if we consider the Navigation Bar to be header columns in a 
spreadsheet, with data inside the table cells taking the role of rows.
If the user taps upon a table cell, it's much like moving to the next column. Hitting back on the 
Navigation Bar is like moving back a column.
Using this metaphor, it's easy to understand how users can quickly move through a great deal 
of data.
See also
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views in this chapter
Integrating Web View into our app
Being connected to the Internet at any given moment with a full web browser is really a factor 
that helped propel the iPhone's massive popularity. While browsing on a mobile device wasn't 
exactly a new concept when the phone first released, no manufacturer had ever put together 
such a smooth experience.
This power web browser was built on Apple's Web Kit rendering engine, which provided an 
experience similar to what was possible on Safari for OS X. Rich web content was already 
available out of the box and with a bit of code modification, any website could be optimized for 
the small screen.
In compiling the first public version of the iOS SDK, Apple gave the developers access to Web 
Kit through a Web View. In this recipe, we'll discuss different ways to go about including Web 
Views inside our application.
Getting ready
For this application, we should have access to mobile Safari on our iPhone or iPad device.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
76
How to do it...
The mobile Safari browser built with Web Kit may have been one of the most significant 
aspects of the first iPhone release. With mobile Safari, Apple built the most complete and 
feature packed web browser ever to exist on a phone. Without modification, millions of 
websites were available as they were intended to be viewed and not in a stripped down 
mobile shell.
In developing the iOS SDK, Apple wisely included easy access in the same Web Kit rendering 
engine for use inside our applications. Using code to include a Web View in our app, gives a 
completely contained web engine that allows us to render HTML or load an external web page 
inside our application.
Web Views can be used in one of two ways inside our application. Let's take a look at the 
different ways in which we can use this view:
1.	 To display local HTML code: First, we could use the view to display local HTML 
information stored inside of our application. This can be useful for rich text 
information, such as an acknowledgements page.
When propagating our application with data and text inside of a Web View, we can 
use common HTML page formatting to structure our work. Using common tags, we 
can make our text bold or italic and modify font color. Web Views can be a great tool 
for designers new to iOS, as HTML formatting is more common and could be more 
familiar to those migrating from web design.
2.	 To display an external web page within our application: The second use of a Web 
View would be to use the view as a way to let our user navigate to a web page without 
leaving our application. For example, we may create an application that allows a user 
to quickly find local restaurants. By integrating a Web View, we can give our user the 
opportunity to view a restaurant web site quickly without ever leaving the application.
This ability may be the most beneficial use of a Web View from a design 
perspective that allows us to give our user the ability to quickly surf the 
web while remaining inside of our application.
By integrating a Web View in our application, we're able to capitalize on Apple's powerful Web 
Kit rendering engine to provide a dynamic app experience.
How it works...
Being built on top of the Web Kit rendering engine, Web Views allow us to include an extensive 
range of web technologies natively into our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
77
When we implement a Web View into our application, we should be aware that our app will 
perform much like we're writing code for the Web. HTML will render accordingly, text will 
format like in a browser, and our application will work much like having Safari embedded into 
our work. It's also important to note that the Web View will also automatically turn information 
such as a phone number into a link that will dial the number in the phone application as well.
The view also gives us the great ability to offer access to websites without pushing the user of 
our app. Twitter for iPhone uses a Web View for a similar purpose, allowing users to view links 
included within tweets without ever being kicked out to the actual Safari application. As shown 
below, this keeps the user from the frustrating experience of frequently switching applications 
while still offering a full web experience.
For developers looking to bring their existing web application to iOS, or for designers looking 
to pull from their previous knowledge of HTML, the Web View is a simple way for developers to 
expedite development and create quality applications.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
78
There's more...
Even though we're often integrating a Web View into our application and users will often be 
unaware that they're actually browsing a website, it's important to make the user feel natural 
while browsing.
Back, forward, and home
If we integrate a standard Web View into the application, we also need to plan a way for the 
user to navigate through various web pages or web content. If we link to an outside website 
and the user is navigating, we'll need to design standard web controls into our Web View 
interface.
At the bare minimum, we need to integrate a way to move back and forward through web 
pages along with a button to go back into our application if we're pushing the user onto a page 
on the Internet. These functions should work identically to back and forward buttons found on 
a standard web browser.
If we have space and capability, adding email functionality for a web address may be another 
worthwhile feature to include into our Web View as well. If the user finds an interesting page 
while inside the view, they'll need a way to share it with friends. Because there is no built-in 
address bar in a Web View, an email function is an easy way for the user to get the link to the 
page they're viewing while inside of our application.
See also
f
f
Getting quick updates with an Alert View in this chapter
Including Twitter in iOS 5
In iOS 5, Apple has given application developers the ability to allow the user to send messages 
over Twitter in a uniform, easily manageable way inside of every application. Much like the 
ability to draft an e-mail or send a text message natively within an app, users can now tweet 
much in the same manner.
Twitter is an extremely popular social network, where users post 140 character messages that 
can be read by anyone across the world. It’s currently used by millions of people worldwide.
For this recipe, we’ll take a look at the interface requirements that will be required of us if we 
decide to include Twitter directly into our application in iOS 5.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
79
Getting ready
For this recipe, we’ll need the latest version of Apple’s developer SDK for iOS 5. This can be 
downloaded in the iOS Dev Center located at http://developer.apple.com.
How to do it...
The ability to integrate native e-mail and SMS controllers inside of our application has always 
been a strength of iOS, making it easy for developers to integrate such communication features 
while also providing a consistent and familiar interface for users. With the growing popularity of 
Twitter, Apple has created away for developers to easily integrate the social network into apps 
with iOS 5. Let’s take a look at how we’ll need to account for this in our interface:
1.	 Determine the type of content that should be eligible for tweets, or when it’s 
appropriate for the user to tweet.
2.	 Create an interface that allows for the user to initiate the 
TWTweetComposeViewController, making it clear as to what is being included in 
the tweet.
3.	 Use the TWTweetComposeViewControllerResult property to verify if the tweet 
was posted correctly, and then display an appropriate message to the user as to the 
status of their tweet.
Once we complete these steps, we’ll have included Twitter functionality into our app and users 
will be able to jump in and tweet from our application.
How it works...
Twitter has become a nearly universal messaging tool, with adaptation rates high among 
tech savvy iPhone users. The network is a great place to share content, so being able to allow 
users to inform their friends about our app with ease is an extremely noteworthy feature.
In step one, we need to first decide as to what content inside of our application is suitable for 
tweeting. This will be a mutual decision between the team members in charge of programming 
and design, as we’ll need to design what parts of our app, be it text, photos, high scores, and 
the like are even possible to tweet.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
80
Step two is the most difficult in implementing the tweet feature, as we need to design a way in 
which to invoke the view controller that allows for the user to compose and send a message 
to Twitter. This will need to be a button or some other prompt for the user to begin the tweet 
process. In the Photos application, a share button in the Toolbar provides an Action Sheet with 
multiple sharing options, including Twitter.
Imagine this step to be much like including an e-mail view or SMS view in an application for 
iOS 3 or iOS 4 which we may have built in the past. Twitter is a form of communication much 
like these other mediums, so the interface design through which we begin the process of 
tweeting should be similar.
A choice on an Action Sheet like Photos or specific button for tweeting will be sufficient here. 
As shown below, iOS will take control and allow the user compose a tweet once we’ve handed 
over control to the TWTweetComposeViewController.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
81
Finally, we’ll need to provide some sort of interface option that makes it apparent to the 
user that the tweet has been sent off successfully. A quick overlay displaying “Tweet sent 
successfully” or text placed in line with the content on our interface will be sufficient. We’ll just 
need something that allows the user to look back and realize that they performed all of the 
steps required to share their work with the world.
Once we’re finished with these interface steps, our application will be ready for users to share 
content using Twitter.
There’s more...
If Twitter is our first foray into content sharing in our app, we may want to expand a bit further 
and continue to make it easy for users to tell their friends and family about our app.
Keep on giving
In iOS 3 and iOS 4, Apple allowed for us to use email and SMS view controllers in an almost 
identical manner to that which we walked through in this recipe. If Twitter is the first time 
we’ve considered including social networking or easy communication tools into our app, we 
may want to also go ahead and allow users to email or SMS message their friends about our 
app in a similar manner to Twitter.
By making it easy for users to share information with their friends, they’ll be more likely to tell 
their friends about our work. Recommendations from a peer are one of the leading reasons 
why people purchase or download an app, so we should make it easy for people to tip off their 
friends to our work.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
82
Determining which view is better for our app
Between Web Views and Table Views, it can often be difficult to determine which route is best 
for our application design. While some applications types lend themselves to an obvious view 
choice, other apps can often work out well with multiple view types.
In this recipe, we'll discuss several Apple developed applications, their view types, and why 
this choice was best for the application.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should have an iOS device in order to follow each example application and 
take note of the view used.
How to do it...
In looking for inspiration as to how to apply the most appropriate view to our work, it's often 
beneficial to pull from applications developed by Apple. Apple designs are created around 
proper management of specific view types, and offer exemplary insight into what different 
views were designed to accomplish.
In the Settings application, we're given a strong example of Grouped Table Views. Settings 
offers a variety of different functions to the user, and it must present these options in a quick 
and easily accessible menu.
Apple's grouped WiFi options together, Apple built application settings together, and then 
all App Store apps together in another group. Tapping on any category pushes forward into 
deeper device options, with more Grouped Table Views and further options. If we're handling 
an application where we want to offer the user quick access to a variety of information 
categories, Grouped Table Views work well.
Grouped Table Views work well when handling data points or options that are of a different 
category, but what about when we're handling a great deal of information that all falls in the 
same category? 
Music and Contacts handle this type of data management with ease by using a Plain Table 
View. By using the Plain Table View, we can offer a lengthy table full of data in a singular 
scrolling view. These tables can offer hundreds of entries, listed alphabetically or in another 
preferable order. By tapping on an entry in the table, we can push the user forward into 
another view and use a Navigation Bar to allow for quickly moving back to the primary table.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
83
Web Views are used to display rich web content inside the Mail application. The Web View 
works well with email content, because it allows for easy integration of multiple font types or 
colors as well as clean inclusion of photos. If we intend to pull web content or would prefer 
to use HTML as a way to format content on screen, the Web View is the best route for our 
application. As shown below, an image is shown inside the Mail application using HTML as a 
way to display the image data:
Alert Views are another option that we've covered and could implement into our application 
as well. As a reminder, Alert Views can be displayed inside our application or outside of the 
application through use of Push Notifications and Local Notifications.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Different Ways to "View" our Application
84
Apple uses Alert Views heavily through the Messages and Clock application. Alert Views offer 
a quick way to give the user notice about a change in our application, but we should use them 
sparingly as a way to notify the user. It's also important to remember that applications cannot 
be built using only Alert Views and that these notifications can only be used as a way to build 
upon our current work. However, if we're looking to occasionally update our user outside of our 
application, Alert Views are the only option available and they provide a great service to our 
users. As an example below, the Alarm application uses an Alert View to notify the user that 
an alarm has gone off:
In iOS 5, Apple drastically altered the way in which Alert Views are presented to the user. In 
the screen shot above, we can see the iOS 4 and earlier style of notifications. Below, we can 
see the new iOS 5 default style.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 3
85
The new Alert View style is obviously much less intrusive and makes it easy for users to keep 
up with their apps when busy elsewhere. However, we must also keep in mind that at least 
for the near future, many users will be running iOS 4 and notifications from our app should 
behave well and in either style.
By using Apple's built-in applications, we can gain a deep understanding as to how Web Views, 
Table Views, and Alert Views inside of our own work. Whether we're sorting through pages of 
data, presenting dynamic web content, or alerting our user about an incoming text message, 
Apple has provided a variety of possibilities inside of their native SDK for our use.
How it works...
Apple's designed each different view type to help provide a platform for a specific type of use 
case, as a way for us to design detailed applications quickly. Each view may seem limited 
initially; however by focusing on a specific function, we're given powerful tools for the most 
common functions we'll need inside of our application.
Working with numerous different view types may seem difficult up front, but once we begin 
designing and preparing for the limitations of each view type, we'll be well prepared to tie 
these different capabilities together to create the ultimate iOS application.
We'll find ourselves having some difficulties at first, especially when it comes to understanding 
exactly which view is capable of specific functionalities. When we're lost, it's best to pull 
from Apple's bundled applications as an example in order to piece together the methodology 
they've used to design their work, then use this inspiration as a foundation for our 
interface design.
See also
f
f
Improving our application through Table Views in this chapter
f
f
Integrating Web View into our app in this chapter
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

4
Utilizing Common 
UI Elements
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Implementing application functionality using a Navigation Bar
f
f
Providing variety through a Tab Bar
f
f
Speeding up data entry through pickers
f
f
Simplicity in the Slider control
f
f
Offering complex control through an Action Sheet
f
f
Using UI to keep users inside our application
f
f
Making text fade in or out of a view
Introduction
We've discussed, in a fair amount of detail, the significance and importance of Apple's native 
interface elements like the Navigation Bar and Tab Bar. They're essential components for 
the development of simple and intuitive applications, and we should make a good effort to go 
about including them in our application.
Navigation Bars and Tab Bars are the most commonly implemented standard application 
elements, but tools such as the Picker and Action Sheet are also helpful when developing an 
easy to use application. If we're going to implement these tools into our work, we should learn 
the proper way to go about including such functions in our work. Because these elements 
come bundled into the SDK, it's important that we understand their fundamental tendencies 
so that we fall in line with consumer expectations.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
88
In this chapter, we'll discuss the heavily popular elements along with lighter used elements 
such as the on/off slider. After we work our way through each element, we'll be adding the 
appropriate feature to our interface with ease.
Implementing application functionality 
using a Navigation Bar
With the development of iOS, it became necessary for Apple to design a clean and functional 
way for device users to quickly navigate between huge piles of data.
It's difficult, if not impossible, to offer the same amount of choices and data detail given a 
3.5 inch screen. Design concessions from the size constraint have made standard interface 
elements from a desktop computing environment almost impossible to implement.
The Navigation Bar was an outstanding interface convention to include in the native SDK, 
allowing developers to easily offer multiple pages of tabled data in an easy to access format. 
Anchored to the top of the application screen, the bar allows the user to tap onto an on screen 
item and then quickly move backwards to the previous screen.
In this recipe, we'll take a look at several ways by which we can go about implementing 
application functionality using a Navigation Bar.
Getting ready
For this recipe, it will be useful to have access to an iOS device with loaded music, so that we 
can take note of the Navigation Bar inside the Music application.
How to do it...
The Navigation Bar is an iOS staple, with prominent interface placement on popular Apple 
developed applications such as Music, the App Store, iTunes, Photos, Game Center, YouTube, 
Calendar, Mail, Videos, and more.
Navigation Bars are a fairly flexible native interface element, offering many 
opportunities inside of our application. It can be customized to fit nearly any 
color, attribute, and navigation requirement we may.
The single most important rule that we must follow when including a Navigation Bar into 
our application, is that the bar must be anchored to the top of the application screen. In no 
situation can we have the bar floating in the middle of the screen, or anchored to the bottom 
of the interface.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
89
According to Apple's requirements in the Human Interface Guidelines, the bar also has a fixed 
height of 44 pixels, which doubles to 88 pixels on a retina display, and always spans across 
the entire screen regardless as to if the device is in portrait or landscape mode.
Commonly, Navigation Bars are used in tandem with Table Views, because it allows for quick 
movement forward and back between table screens. This is because Apple has developed 
simple integration of forward and back buttons between data tables. The buttons fit in and 
animate onto the bar quite easily, offering quick progression. If the user taps upon a table 
item to learn more, they can quickly tap the Back button and be presented with the previous 
screen. The following screenshot shows how a Back button is utilized in the App Store:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
90
The Navigation Bar is also used to offer quick access to application essential features, as 
we're not limited to pushing the user forward or backwards a screen view. Ideally our bar 
will comfortably fit a maximum of two different buttons, with one on the left flank of the bar 
and the other on the right, and a logo or contextual information about the current view often 
presented in the middle. As shown in the Facebook application below, quick links to the app's 
home screen and Live Feed are presented in the Navigation Bar:

Facebook - © 2011 Facebook Inc.
The Navigation Bar will be a unifying way to connect our user through the collection of views 
and tools that make up our iPhone or iPad application. We should become familiar with them 
as soon as possible, as they're one of the few staples that we'll rely upon in a majority of the 
projects we work on.
How it works...
Applications that make use of the Navigation Bar work well because the 44-pixel bar remains 
constant while speedy back and forward arrows allow the user to move quickly throughout our 
application.
The bar serves the same purpose as the front page for different sections to a newspaper, 
offering an iconic and consistent brand no matter what page we're in, while offering view by 
view customization to help make each page do its own work.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
91
Visually, the Navigation Bar works because it remains anchored to the top of the screen view 
and spans the length of the entire screen width. When pushing forward or heading backwards 
from view to view, standard animations and behavior make it appear as if the content on 
screen is sliding so that our content lays in wait, ready to fall into position once we make a 
navigation decision.
The Navigation Bar can be used to contain a search bar as well, as seen 
inside of the Maps application. The Navigation Bar lives up to its name in this 
app, giving the users the ability to navigate wherever they would like by typing 
in their destination in order to be presented with a map.
The Navigation Bar, commonplace inside many applications, makes the bar familiar and 
our application easy to use, increasing user satisfaction. While it may seem redundant, it's 
important that we keep navigation in mind when using the Navigation Bar. If we implement 
it into our application, it should be used to move throughout different views of the interface. 
When users see the bar anchored to the top of the screen, they'll expect that the bar will 
be used to help move throughout the application. If we don't use it to provide essential 
navigation, our interface will be confusing and difficult to manage.
There's more...
We may feel inclined to add a bit of style to our Navigation Bar. Here's a tip to make our work 
stand out from the crowd.
Adding some style
Simple gradient color Navigation Bars are the default styling, and are commonly found in 
applications using the element.
However, we can design a pattern or texture to lay upon the Navigation Bar, offering a bit of 
depth or differentiation while also keeping our application native. For more information about 
customizing our Navigation Bar, we should check out the Creating a texture overlay for our 
Navigation Bar recipe.
Instagram provides a subtle texture to the Navigation Bar that stands out, while keeping a 
native appearance as well.
See also
f
f
Improving our application through Table Views in Chapter 3
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
92
Providing variety through a Tab Bar
The Tab Bar is an extraordinary way to allow quick access to several different modes inside of 
our application. Each tab can provide a distinct function within the application, which works 
well when attempting to integrate several distinguishable features into our work.
In this recipe, we'll discuss the key characteristics of Tab Bar navigation based applications. 
We'll also discuss appropriate uses of the interface element as well.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should attempt to have access to both an iPhone and iPad, as Tab Bars can 
vary slightly between devices.
How to do it...
We use the Tab Bar inside of our application due to its ease of integration and structural 
simplicity for users. Because it's an extremely common element, users will immediately 
recognize how to use it throughout our app.
The Tab Bar works well between different application functions because it's always salient. 
No matter what the user does inside of the application, the Tab Bar stays anchored to the 
bottom of the screen and the user can quickly cycle between functions. This allows for rapid 
navigation and user freedom between modes.
When using a Tab Bar in its standard form, our design work is fairly simple. However, there are 
several significant pitfalls that we may fall into if we're not careful, and these problems could 
ruin our application interface. Let's take a look at important mistakes that we should avoid 
with our Tab Bar:
f
f
First, the tabs should each cause the user to be presented with a new view.
f
f
We should be careful to never include too many tabs on our Tab Bar.
f
f
While the default color scheme for a Tab Bar is a black gradient with gray or blue 
icons, there is a precedence to use a different design style if desired. If we're 
comfortable in making our interface stand out from the crowd, we could follow suit 
and use a unique Tab Bar color.
If we do decide that quick access to several important application views is necessary for our 
application, the Tab Bar will be our go to navigation element. We'll find ourselves integrating 
the bar quite commonly and with a bit of practice, it will be a strong component in our 
interface design toolbox.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
93
How it works...
Along with the Navigation Bar, the Tab Bar is easily the most commonly used interface 
element in iOS. Always anchored to the bottom of the screen and available on both the iPhone 
and iPad, it's a consistent and easy to integrate component.
The Tab Bar is 49 pixels in height, 98 pixels on a Retina display, and can be broken up into 
two to five tabs. The Tab Bar runs across the length of the device width and is a black gradient 
in color, with text and icons to distinguish between different pages. The selected and active 
tab is noted with a lighter gradient rounded rectangle and blue hue to the tab icon:

Music Store - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
Above, we can see the Tab Bar in the iTunes application. The purpose of a Tab Bar is to offer 
the user quick navigation between several differentiating application functions. Whereas the 
Navigation Bar is designed to quickly move the user back and forth between pages designed 
to flow in succession, the Tab Bar is designed around non-linear items.
A wonderful example of Tab Bar functionality can also be found in Apple's 
App Store, Game Center, and YouTube applications. In an application 
such as iTunes, tabs offer quick access to the music store, movies store, 
Ping network, store search, and more.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
94
When it comes to things that we shouldn't do with the Tab Bar, we need to remember the 
following keys. So long as we avoid these pitfalls, users should remain comfortable in our app:
f
f
We should never use a tab as a button to control functions on a current screen view. 
The bar should always move users between views if it is going to be implemented. In 
this way, it's important to not confuse a Tab Bar with a Toolbar, which sits in a similar 
position but contains buttons to control the active view.
f
f
Second, it's generally accepted that five tabs is the maximum number of tabs that the 
iPhone can display properly. For the iPad, there is less of a strict numerical restriction; 
however Apple advises that we use a reasonable number of tabs. While "reasonable" 
isn't exactly a quantifiable figure, we should think twice about our interface if we feel 
that more than six tabs are necessary on an iPad design.
f
f
If we have a need for more tabs, we can follow the lead of other applications and use 
a "more" tab to aggregate multiple application functions when there are not enough 
tabs to suffice for important application features. As we can see below, iTunes is 
again a great example of this, offering a Table View linking to Podcasts, Audiobooks, 
iTunes University, and Downloads. If we feel as if we need tabs for more than five 
items, an aggregate tab can help offer this possibility.

Music - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
95
Finally, Apple offers some standard icons for our inclusion in a Tab Bar, but their selection 
is hardly exhaustive and we will likely need to create our own icons for our tabs. If we're 
designing a Tab Bar icon, we should design it using solid black as the icon color, with a 
resolution of 30 x 30 or 60 x 60 for a retina device. We can create our own custom Tab Bar if 
we do so desire as well, although we should be careful not to diverge to the extent where we 
confuse our user due to unfamiliarity.
The default style works well because it offers an elegant and easy to manipulate, persistent 
presence that serves an important purpose while not over distracting the user.
The Tab Bar's simplicity and subtle placement allow quick access to important screens while 
not being over bearing. The consistency between applications allows users to gain confidence 
in our work before they ever even step foot inside of our app.
There's more...
Interface conventions are a valuable tool, and an important guideline to follow when 
developing our application. However, once we're a bit more comfortable with the standards of 
iOS interface design, we can begin to diverge a bit within our application interface. 
Making our app stand out from the crowd
While Tab Bars are typically black with blue or gray icons, there has been a precedence to add 
a bit more flair to the presentation.
In Game Center, Apple uses a fake wood styling to offer the look of an old game board. If we 
have a specific niche for our app that we think would benefit from a unique Tab Bar, we can 
consider going the Game Center route with our work.
See also
f
f
Creating a custom Tab Bar for our application in Chapter 2
f
f
Implementing application functionality using a Navigation Bar in Chapter 4
Speeding up data entry through pickers 
and custom keyboards
Data entry is arguably the most mundane and uninteresting aspect of interface design. 
Regardless as to how you frame it, there is nothing sexy about users entering significant 
amounts of data.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
96
That being said, exceptional implementation of data entry can be one of the most influential 
components in successful application design. While mobile computing has grown leaps and 
bounds in several short years, we still haven't overcome the difficulty that comes along with 
typing on a 3.5 inch screen.
While we can't increase the size of the keyboard, we can go about implementing pickers and 
alternative keyboards in order to help make data entry easier on our users. For this recipe, 
we'll go about discussing several data entry opportunities for our application.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should prepare by taking note of the various types of data entry we plan 
to require from the user. We should also have the latest version documentation on custom 
keyboards from the iOS Developer Center, as this document changes frequently with iOS 
version upgrades.
How to do it...
There are two important data entry aides that we should include inside of our application 
whenever applicable: custom keyboards and Picker Views.
Custom keyboards
We should incorporate iOS's custom keyboard views in appropriate data entry scenarios where 
such views can help expedite the time it takes for users to quickly key in digits or characters.
For example, Apple offers multiple text keyboard types to help optimize input depending on 
the text entered. Normally, the iOS keyboard contains a long space bar and characters such 
as a period or at-sign. However, we can implement the custom Email keyboard when we're 
composing a message.
Likewise, we can give our web browsing users the custom Web URL keyboard with easy access 
to a "forward slash" and ".com" button. If our user is entering numerical data, the small digits 
of the standard keyboard can be difficult to press, so we can increase user productivity and 
implement the Phone keyboard to help the process.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
97
Apple offers a variety of custom keyboards, and consistently adds new types of keyboard views 
as they release new versions of iOS. As shown above, Apple provides a variety of keyboards 
that each serve a unique purpose depending upon our application type. No matter what type 
of data we're looking to have the user type, there should be an appropriate keyboard to help. If 
need be, we could also go about creating our own application keyboard type as well if 
we're adventurous.
Picker Views
Pickers can be set up to help perform a variety of tasks. Apple has created a standard Date 
and Time Picker that helps with entries in applications such as Calendar or Alarm Clock. If we 
need a specific day or hour from our user, this is probably the preferable method of entry for 
the user.
A generic Picker allows for any variety of data entry, and can be customized to help out any 
data entry scenario where we can limit the user to a set number of choices.
In applications like Lose It, a Picker View is used to help the user quickly track food intake. 
In this Picker View screenshot, the user can select a whole number or a fraction, as well as 
a unit for the food item. It's a quick and painless process, and the user can quickly continue 
about their business.
How it works...
Custom keyboards are an ideal solution on a touch screen device, because we can create 
our keyboard in software and give it essentially any functionality we'd like. The same piece of 
screen real estate reserved for a traditional QWERTY keyboard can quickly be modified to a 
number pad or special character keyboard.
They're fairly self-explanatory in the sense that they're specially developed keyboards that 
help the user at entering data for a specific task. While QWERTY keyboards have long been 
standard these focus on a different task such as number entry or with foreign text characters.
Such specialized views are one significant advantage of a completely touch based mobile 
interface. Devices with physical keyboards provide tactile feedback, but can't adapt quickly to 
application needs like a custom view.
Keyboard will always work well with text; it will just depend upon which one we use based on 
what type of data we expect the user to most commonly enter. If we expect to web surf, it may 
be best to include a ".com" button. If we plan on entering in a variety of numbers, a keypad 
may be best. Feel free to experiment with Apple's latest keyboard options to determine what is 
best given any app interface.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
98
Much like custom keyboards, a Picker View can also greatly benefit our app. A little less 
obvious but equally valuable, these views help greatly expedite the amount of time it takes 
to enter in dates, times, or one of the several different choices. The Picker focuses on one 
specific entry, which is the selected value. Other values are then selectable by swiping a finger 
up or down on the picker, helping to display previously hidden values.
In the previous screenshot, we don't want to force the user to type in 11:00 P.M. on their 
keyboard every time they try to schedule an event, so we help speed up this process through 
the Picker. A quick flick and the user can set the time they desire to place a calendar event.
Likewise, the Picker View is an ingenious solution whose simplicity highlights the revolutionary 
iOS interface. Through graphical appearance, we can simulate a flickable wheel that contains 
all necessary choices for a particular data problem.
Picker Views are great when we can minimize the number of inputs that the user will be 
inserting into any given field, as we can only allow for specific entries to be placed. If we want 
to know what day of the week is best for a reminder, it doesn't make sense to make the user 
type out each letter to Friday when we can just have them quickly select it from a Picker list.
Data entry on a mobile phone has always been a difficult design problem. It's difficult, if not 
nearly impossible, to make entry easy on such a small screen. We're never going to completely 
solve the problem, but we can definitely use methods such as a Picker View or custom 
keyboard to help alleviate our user's pain.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
99
Apple's inclusion of these custom components inside of iOS helps create the "magical" 
interface that draws users to the platform. It's easy for developers to include such elements 
into our own applications. Because the elements are easy to implement, designers can spend 
less time focusing on data entry, and more on eye candy and the important attributes of our 
application's design.
There's more...
Keyboards are a key component to any interface, as they're the mechanism for transferring 
user text-based commands to the application. Here are a few ways that we can go about 
making our application more applicable for international users or web users.
Foreign languages can work too
Apple's not just included native keyboard support for English, but for a variety of languages as 
well. Specifically, they've included strong keyboard support for Chinese and Japanese inside of 
the operating system.
If we're planning an application with strong international appeal, we may want to guarantee 
that our application works optimally with multiple device languages as well, as we don't want 
international users to have a disappointing experience.
Keyboards on the Web
In this recipe, we discuss customizing keyboards for native applications, but what about if we 
want to customize the displayed keyboard inside of a web app?
The HTML and requirements for doing so require a good bit of web programming, but it's 
definitely possible with a bit of work. Apple's offered up a guide on how to do so, along with 
the links to other relevant HTML coding guides, available in the Safari Developer Center 
at http://developer.apple.com/library/safari/#codinghowtos/Mobile/
UserExperience/_index.html.
Simplicity in the Slider control
Audio volume, screen brightness, and font size—these three attributes are all important 
features of a mobile operating system like the iPhone.
We often discuss ways to quickly let our user pick between two different choices. A or B, up 
or down, left or right, black or white, a mobile interface often relies heavily on limiting the 
choices in order to optimize usability. But what about scenarios that are a bit more gray?
For example, we don't want to give our user the option between either loud music or no 
music. Likewise, an extremely bright screen or very dim screen may not be preferable for user 
readability. There will be situations when the user wants a moderate music volume or medium 
level of brightness.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
100
When we want to give the user a range of choices between two opposite poles, the Slider 
control may be the most convenient UI element for our application design.
Let's take a look at the Slider element and learn more about how to best integrate it into 
our work.
Getting ready
For preparation to use a Slider, we should research the implementation of the Slider inside 
the Music application and Brightness page of the Settings application.
How to do it...
On a traditional phone with hardware buttons, we would typically use a dial or plus and minus 
buttons to increase and decrease levels. On iOS, this becomes a problem because there is 
no physical dial and repetitive button presses are uncomfortable on a glass screen that lacks 
tactile feedback.
For application control requirements where we would prefer to let the user choose a maximum 
value, a minimum value, or every value in between, a Slider control is essential.
The controller is simple in nature and requires essentially no explanation to the user. By 
default, it exists in a straight bar that alights either vertically or horizontally. A small brushed 
aluminum circle denotes the current position of the Slider and a fill color, typically blue, is 
found to the left of the selection circle to give a visual cue as a rough idea of how far the one 
side or the other the Slider is placed. As shown in the following screenshot, standard use for a 
Slider would be when determining a value like music track volume:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
101
Erratic movement of the Slider or scale changes that do not feel smooth will make our 
application feel choppy and poorly programmed, as users will compare the experience 
to Apple's native use of the element. Because of this, it's essential that we have an ideal 
experience. If our application can't smoothly institute a Slider, we may be best suited to find a 
different interface element for the application function.
How it works...
Sliders work well on iOS because they're a wonderful skeuomorphic tool that offers an infinite 
range of possibilities in a seemingly one-to-one ratio, mimicking a real life dial or lever. The 
further I go in one direction or another, the closer I am to the limit value that presides at the 
end of the switch.
For the Slider to work, there should be a smooth progression of scale when moving the 
circular dial up, down, left, or right. This means that when sliding a dial to control volume in 
the Music application, the audio level should move on what feels like a one-to-one scale with 
the interface element. A small movement in the Slider should cause a nominal change in 
audio volume, while a drastic shift should cause a large change in audio intensity.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
102
Much like other iOS native interface elements, the Slider works so well and feels so real, that 
we lose focus of the fact that we're touching a piece of glass and not a real sliding switch. 
Once the user can pull their attention away from the touch screen and immerse completely 
on the application at hand, they'll be pulled into the experience and enjoy an application. The 
Slider element is a simple way to focus not on the interface, but instead on the task at hand.
There's more...
Much like the Tab Bar, the Slider opens itself up to being customized to match our interface. 
Here's how we can go about graphically improving our Slider.
Customize our slider
We discussed the possibility of changing the Slider bar selection color from blue to another 
hue that better fits our application interface, but what about the slider ball?
We can customize that using a different art image as well if we prefer, tying in a better graphic 
for our app. In an application I worked to design, Battery Go! Plus, we created a custom slider 
ball for a doodle theme:
See also
f
f
Speeding up data entry through pickers and custom keyboards in Chapter 4
f
f
Placing visual elements for touch in the Preface
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
103
Offering complex control through an 
Action Sheet
What do we do when we need to temporarily allow the user to quickly select between one of 
three or four options, but it seems out of place to send the user to another page in order to 
make the choice?
Action Sheets are designed to be a quick and unobtrusive way to present the user with 
multiple action items in relation to the initiated task. For example, pressing the plus button 
near the address bar in Safari initiates an Action Sheet presenting the user with the option to 
bookmark the current web page, add the page to the home screen, or email a link of the page 
to a friend:
Apple has designed the Action Sheet element to help provide a flexible way to quickly offer 
the user choice when initiating a task, which will be influential in many of our applications.
Action Sheets vary a bit between the iPhone and iPad, so we'll need to take note of the 
differences and properly abide by the human interface guidelines when implementing the 
element. For this recipe, we'll discuss our options and decide if our work could benefit from an 
Action Sheet.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
104
Getting ready
Action Sheets are somewhat different elements on the iPad when compared to iPhone or iPod 
touch devices, so we have both on hand as an example for this recipe.
How to do it...
Action Sheets are an extremely simple interface element to include in our application. When 
we find ourselves needing a bit of flexibility in a cramped interface, the Action Sheet will 
usually come to save the day.
Action Sheets are great because they essentially allow one interface element to serve multiple 
functions. If we find ourselves running low on space, we can attempt to group like functions 
together in an Action Sheet. On the iPhone and iPod touch, Action Sheets always rise up 
from the bottom of the screen, with the space above the sheet darkening to indicate that it is 
inactive and the sheet is the foremost interface object.
Under general practices and in addition to combining similar application functions together, 
we should also use an Action Sheet to receive user confirmation when looking to perform a 
destructive task. For example, if we give the user the option to delete all personal data inside 
of an application, we should present an Action Sheet to confirm their decision.
When initiating an Action Sheet on the iPhone, we must always include a Cancel button to 
allow the user to dismiss the view. This button should be the choice closest to the bottom of the 
screen, below all other Action Sheet items.
On the iPad, Action Sheets work a bit differently in the sense that they do not rise from the 
bottom of the screen. Instead, these sheets are placed inside of a Popover view that lies 
above the rest of the screen. A Cancel button isn't required or recommended on the iPad, as 
tapping outside of the Action Sheet will close the view for the user.
As noted by Apple in the Human Interface Guidelines, our Action Sheet buttons will be default 
silver gradient color with black text, with two important exceptions. The Cancel button should 
be the standard dark gradient with white text, making it clear to the user that this button 
serves a different purpose on the preceding options. A button that performs a destructive 
action should be red in color with white text, with this button also being the first and highest 
up action on the sheet. The distinctive color and placement far away from the Cancel button 
will help minimize the risk of accidental data deletion.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
105
How it works...
Action Sheets are a fairly common interface inclusion, mostly because they're a quick way to 
focus the users, attention on a specific action. The user can quickly invoke a task that requires 
clarification or confirmation through an Action Sheet, make their choice, then dismiss the 
sheet, and be back in the application interface.
Action Sheets work by focusing the user's locus of attention on an important task, which the 
user cannot get past without making a decision or cancelling the action. This helps to ensure 
that while a mobile application is often used passively on the go, an important application will 
receive significant attention from the user. By requiring the user to focus momentarily on the 
task at hand, we can eliminate frustration caused by haphazardly using our application.
See also
f
f
Properly utilizing modal views in Chapter 3
Using UI to keep our user inside our 
application
With nearly half a million apps in the App Store, users have a good deal of choice, often 
downloading many applications and only using them for a brief period of time.
As developers, it is our goal to keep users inside our application for as long as possible. This 
is increasingly important if we rely upon advertising as a revenue model, as sponsors typically 
pay per impression and applications with longer impressions draw greater ad revenue.
Time spent inside our application is a key metric, and a number for which designers and 
developers wrestle with constantly, trying to keep users engaged for a few seconds longer with 
each visit. In many applications, this number is absolutely vital, with advertising money tied to 
the number of impressions displayed along with the length of each view.
But keeping the user inside our application is tough, especially with various marketing studies 
asserting that uses rarely open an application more than two or three times and when they do 
open an app, they don't remain inside very long.
While these statistics seem disheartening, we must also remember that the name of the 
iOS game is volume, and a small percentage of our users will make up a majority of our app 
visits. An extra minute inside the app and additional function viewed could be the difference 
between winning over a long-term user, or being tossed aside as an app for deletion.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
106
Regardless as to if our app is free or paid, keeping a user inside our application will provide a 
less frictional experience that improves satisfaction while equating into more advertisement 
money or application appreciation.
In this recipe, we'll look at a few methods that will help keep users inside our application for a 
longer period of time.
Getting ready
To prepare for this recipe, we should have a preliminary version of our application on hand, as 
we will be looking for ways to modify it to increase the time spent using our work.
How to do it...
To keep the user inside of the application as long as possible, here are some tips we can go 
about including inside our work:
1.	 Use a Web View to keep the user inside the app when possible.
2.	 Alert the user if a function will send them outside of the application.
3.	 If possible don't hide the status bar.
4.	 If we must hide the status bar, then we should provide battery information to 
the user.
How it works...
At the end of the day, users who enjoy our application never want to leave our application; 
they're just forced to because we don't offer an interface that allows them to stay inside 
our work.
f
f
With point one, we may offer the opportunity to quickly allow the user to take some 
time to visit a web link for more information. As an example, we may be building a 
Twitter client and it's quite common for tweets to contain web links that may be of 
interest to the user.
Likewise, we may be building an RSS reader to offer users quick, mobile formatted 
pages of their favorite websites. For one reason or another, a user may want to 
have quick access to the original webpage for the RSS feed, maybe to find contact 
information about a particular blogger.
Thanks to the Web View, we can easily integrate a simulated Safari web browser 
inside of our application. This quick view can allow the user to visit the web page they 
need or visit a link, without ever leaving the application for Safari or another browser.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
107
If we don't integrate a Web View interface into our application, the user will need 
to copy the link over to Safari or a similar program in order to get to the link they're 
interested in. This causes friction for the user, and they'll be frustrated with the 
process as well as less likely to use our application.
The same technique can be used for maps, as Apple has integrated a rich 
API for presenting maps inside of our application. This will keep our user from 
needing to move out to a different application when looking for directions or 
to better understand a geographical area.
f
f
With regards to the second point in the previous section, while we should do our 
best to keep users inside of our app and away from other tools like Safari or Maps, 
there will be situations where we will be unable to retain users. If our application 
offers business contact information and our user wants to make a call, there is no 
alternative other than using the Phone application.
When users must be pushed outside of our app, we should use an Alert View or 
Action Sheet to receive confirmation from to user with regards to their choice.
For example, if we offer contact information for a restaurant, a novice user may tap 
the location's phone number unaware that this will engage a call and send the user 
away from the current screen. A quick alert can give the user a second to rethink their 
decision, as they may wish to see restaurant hours or recommended dishes before 
calling to make a reservation.
f
f
As we learn in the third point, the device status bar is an important strip of 
information for the user, offering information on wireless signal as well as the time 
and approximate remaining battery life.
Unless we're designing a game application where the status bar would be out of 
place and distracting, we should really do our best to keep the bar visible to the user 
at all times.
While we may not see the time or cell signal as important, our users may find this 
data significant if they are waiting for a call or a meeting.
If we remove this information, it becomes more likely that the user will simply close 
our application and leave if they need this data, sending them away from our work.
f
f
Finally, if we are developing a game, an augmented reality application, or another full 
screen application, we should design a menu option to display the time and battery 
statistics.
Using official Apple iOS API, it's possible to ask the device about the current battery 
percentage and time, giving us the option to display this data somewhere other than 
the status bar.
This way, if we have to prevent our users from seeing this information, they'll still have 
the option to see it if need be without leaving our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
108
Integrating tools such as a Web View for browsing websites, an email controller to make a 
quick contact, and offering access to battery information allows the user to justify remaining 
inside our application for as long as possible. If we make it easy for the user to work their way 
our app without being kicked out, they'll be more willing to explore features and see what else 
our product offers.
See also
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views in Chapter 3
Making text fade in or out of view
Scrolling bodies of text are common inside of any application; however it often looks awkward 
when text disappears abruptly at the end of scroll view. For a bit of graphical flare, it often can 
be appealing to have it appear as if the text is disappearing or fading away at the end of 
the screen.
In this recipe, we'll create a simple art file that will make our scrolling text appear as if it's 
fading away into the background.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we'll need Photoshop or another raster image editing program. It will also be 
useful to have a near final interface screenshot or knowledge of the background color we 
desire to use for the fade effect.
How to do it...
The text fade will require a simple semi-transparent PNG file that we'll lay above our text 
view. The art piece itself is fairly simple to create, but most developers are unaware of the 
technique. Let's take a look at how to get started:
1.	 Take a screenshot of our interface without the fade, or find the application's 
background art file, and open this in Photoshop. We'll use this as a guide for our fade 
image.
2.	 Create a new layer on top of this background, where we'll place the fade.
This is where we'll place the fade while we prepare it for inclusion into our app. Here's 
an example of a scroll view in an application about flu prevention, and we'll be looking 
to make the last sentence or so disappear into the background.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
109
3.	 Use the Marquee Tool to select a small area where we'll want to place our fade, then 
select the background color using the Eyedropper Tool and fill the entire selection 
with the Paint Bucket Tool.
4.	 Next, we'll create a selection so that we can create a solid color area for the transition 
to occur. This can vary in size depending upon our background and how drastic of a 
fade we desire to create.
5.	 Now, we should add a layer mask to the layer and use the Gradient Tool to fade the 
overlay from opaque to transparent.
6.	 This will create our fade effect. We now need to copy this layer over to its own file, 
save, and place the image in position above the text view in our application.
How it works...
This technique works because we're using the fade art to make it appear as if the text is 
slowly disappearing when in reality, it's just being covered up by a semi-transparent piece 
of art.
Learning layer styles and creating this piece will help us build a simple interface trick that 
is almost magic to the user. The text doesn't end abruptly and looks as if we've designed an 
advanced text management system, but all we've done is laid a simple PNG image on top of 
where our scroll view ends.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Utilizing Common UI Elements
110
As we learned in steps 3 and 4, layer masks edit the transparency of our layer, so using a 
gradient on a layer mask will slowly transition the colored rectangle we just created from 
transparent to opaque. This will give the appearance that our text is fading away. Once the 
transparency gradient is placed upon our overlaying image, the effect will stand out as shown 
in the following screenshot:
Most users probably won't even notice this effect, but they'll 
subconsciously appreciate our work. The fade offers a great visual clue 
that more text awaits upon scrolling.
As we can see, this simple, several step technique will make our text look as if it's fading, 
which will offer a strong visual clue to the user that scrolling will provide more text than which 
is hidden away.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 4
111
At this point, we only need to copy this new layer and paste it with its layer effect into a new 
file. From there, we can save the PNG and place it in position over the text in our application.
This is the sort of subtle and simple addition that helps make our application exceptional on 
the App Store.
There's more...
We've shown how to create a simple fade here, but what other possibilities exist for fading 
away text or images that scroll on screen.
Full screen? No problem
In this example, we've created a fade that does not span the entire width of the iPhone 
screen. However, we're not constricted by width or height in any respect with regards to 
creating this fade.
If we'd rather the fade out be twice as tall and the full width of the screen, that's no problem. 
We just need to create a piece of art that best works in our app.
High and low
It could also be likely that we would want text to fade out on the top and bottom of the scroll 
view. This is no problem and we can go about doing this as well. Just mirror the image, place it 
on the upper limit of the view, and we're good to go.
See also
f
f
Improving our application through Table Views in Chapter 3
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

5
All About Games
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Planning your game around touch
f
f
Control techniques that are optimized for touch
f
f
Heads-up displays and designing with limited real estate
f
f
Accounting for the lost Status Bar
Introduction
Games make up an exceptionally large proportion of all iOS applications, with 15 to 
20 percent of all apps falling into the category. The top ten grossing applications list is 
consistently flooded with games, as users look for entertainment on their iPhone or iPad.
Whereas users have few expectations as to what a typical mobile application should feel like, 
there is often an expectation with regards to what a game should play like. Mobile gaming 
platforms have been popular since the Game Boy's rise to popularity in the early 90s, and 
users have an idea as to what games work well when on the go, and iOS games are expected 
to match or exceed these preconceived notions of what is possible.
However, it isn't necessarily easy to produce a game on iOS, as the device presents one of the 
first touch screen mobile gaming experiences. There isn't much precedent as to what game 
genres and control styles work well. This can be beneficial for innovation, but can also lead to 
a great deal of heartache for any designer.
In this chapter, we'll dive into designing a game on the iPhone or iPad, along with tips for how 
we can ensure a quality experience for all users on these touch screen devices. We'll discuss 
control techniques optimized for touch, heads up displays, and a variety of techniques to best 
make our game enjoyable on the iPhone or iPad.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
114
Planning your game around touch
Unlike traditional mobile gaming platforms, we won't have physical buttons and a set interface 
blueprint to serve as a guide for our game.
Mobile platforms such as the Game Boy or PlayStation Portable have a physical control pad 
and buttons that lend the user to an inherent understanding of the game on screen. The user 
can quickly pick up and play a game, because they know that there is a finite set of buttons 
that can control game mechanics.
We're in a bit of a more difficult-to-manage scenario with iOS, as there is no control pad 
or face button to commonly dictate interaction on screen when in a game. Since we're on 
a touch screen device, we can create any interaction mechanic that we'd like, no matter 
how unorthodox the interface may be. This offers up an extraordinary opportunity for new 
gameplay experiences; however it does make our design work a bit more difficult to construct.
In this recipe, we'll discuss how touch screens drastically alter the design and playability of 
our game. Designing a game around touch is never an easy task. Controls are difficult to 
implement, screen size is often limited, and we'll need to innovate on top of standard game 
play mechanics to provide a fun experience.
While the operating system is only a few years old, there has been a significant evolution in 
gaming on the platform. Early games, such as Super Monkey Ball by Sega, were often ports 
of previous console games by big name publishers. Apple's affordable developer program 
allowed independent developers to step in and experiment on the platform, pushing forward 
intuitive new experiences like Doodle Jump, Mr. AahH!!, and Zen Bound. In recent years, the 
market has matured so that both traditional franchises and independent creative ventures 
can succeed.
Getting ready
To work on this recipe, it would be useful to have an iOS device along with a traditional gaming 
console in order to contrast the difference in mechanics between the two machines.
How to do it...
Depending on the type of game we plan on developing, there are a variety of strategies for 
success on the iPhone or iPad. However there are a few key attributes that will make any iOS 
game enjoyable:
1.	 Remember that users will be using the iPhone or iPad as both a screen and a 
controller.
2.	 Don't punish users for accidental interactions with the screen.
3.	 Keep in mind that these are mobile devices.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
115
While a good portion of our interface will vary greatly depending upon the type of game we're 
looking to create, these three rules are universal and will benefit any iPhone or iPad game. 
With these guidelines in mind, we can move on and begin to draft up our controls and heads 
up display.
How it works...
The low level of entry and unique touch controls have helped iOS evolve into a platform where 
designers can reach outside of their comfort zone in an effort to release an innovative game 
on the platform.
In step one, it's important to understand that traditionally, users and designers are trained 
toward expecting games to have an external controller that is used for manipulation of the 
game world. The screen is a separate device; either a television or portable LCD screen serves 
as a way to project the game.
However on iOS, the screen and controller are one. Regardless as to whether users interact 
with our game through buttons on screen or by using a device hardware feature such as the 
accelerometer, it is a guarantee that the iPhone or iPad will be held in a hand while our game 
is being played.
We should always keep this in mind when designing both our game and interface, as the user 
will need to comfortably hold the device while playing. If we use traditional controls through 
a software joystick or buttons, we should place these elements on screen in a manner that 
allows for the iPhone or iPad to be held comfortably while playing. Depending upon our game 
and orientation, we may find that specific parts of the play area are perfect for the placement 
of such controls while in other scenarios, we may want to give the user the ability to customize 
the placement of buttons to their preference. If we expect the user to tilt or shake the 
controller to interact with our game, we should take this into consideration as well.
While it may sound somewhat clichéd, the game and its controls are one and the same. There 
is no separation and any design that assumes that we can quickly implement controls without 
taking this fact into consideration is destined to fail. 
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
116
Not being given a set control pad or buttons gives us the flexibility to be creative, but poor 
design can quickly confuse or frustrate users. In the next screenshot, we can see that Flight 
Control developer Firemint has used small exclamation point markers to offer up a hint as to 
where inbound aircraft will soon appear. This offers a quick heads up to the user who may 
have had their hands in a poor position.

Flight Control - © 2009 Firemint Pty Inc.
We expand upon this new type of game control with these new devices in step two in the 
previous section. Because the game controller and device screen are so intertwined, it's very 
likely that the user will come into accidental contact with the screen at some point. It's just too 
difficult to eliminate unintended taps, as the finger is an imprecise pointing device.
We can assume that the user will make unintentional contact with the screen, and so we 
should do our best to design a play mechanic and interface that will not punish users for their 
mistake. For example, if we're building a racing game, it would be silly to place the pause 
button near the button used for acceleration, as misplaced fingers could often pause the 
game and frustrate users.
How we go about verifying this in our application can vary based on the type of game we're 
looking to design, but we should be mindful to keep this philosophy salient in our work. The 
limited ability to include a help menu in our application will encourage users to pick up app 
controls through point and tap experimentation. If the user experiences frustration in their first 
few minutes of using the app, they'll be likely to give up on using our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
117
Finally in step three, we should focus on creating an interface that is mobile. While we're 
designing with a device that is nearly as powerful as home gaming consoles, we must keep in 
mind that our users will be using their iPhone or iPad when on the run. They may be playing our 
game on a train, or in the car, or when walking between classes, so it's important to remember 
that this is a slightly different game platform than what we've ever developed for before.
Because users will be playing our app when on the go and users will be less likely to sit 
down and play our game for extended periods of time, we should prepare our gameplay and 
interface around this probability.
Big buttons and forgiving controls are the best way to go about designing for a mobile 
interface. Larger targets on screen will make it easier for the user to perform an intended 
action, even when walking or riding around.
If we'd like to take mobile usability a bit further, we could also implement modifiable controls 
into our app as well. Giving the user the ability to calibrate settings will enable our game to 
play well, regardless as to the situation they're currently in. In the next screenshot, we can see 
how Doodle Jump allows users to adjust the game's controls:

Doodle Jump - © 2011 Lima Sky, LLC
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
118
It's also important to note that we should design our interface for the rapid entry and exit that 
is common of iPhone users. People will be playing our game on buses, while waiting in line at 
a store, and in other scenarios where their time spent inside of the app may be no longer than 
one to two minutes. This will affect game play drastically, so it's important to test such game 
scenarios while we build our app.
Because our first iOS game may be our first touch screen based game, or our first game in 
general, we should be cautious and conservative with our interface and game play mechanics.
That's not to say that the creation of any game is easy; however these are significant pitfalls 
that could plague our work if we're not careful. 
There's more...
While rare, there is the possibility that our iPhone can be used as a controller for a device 
other than itself.
Using the iPhone as a controller…for the iPad
Thanks to the Bluetooth integration that Apple has included in new iPhone, iPod touch, and 
iPad devices, it is possible to use our iPhone as a controller for iPad games, so long as the 
developer has produced games for both platforms and supports the feature.
It isn't necessarily easy to design and develop a game that includes such a feature, but it is by 
no means impossible. If we're working on an expansive game, it is definitely possible to create 
an immersive experience where the iPhone is used to control action on the iPad.
See also
f
f
Working with a finger as a pointing device in the Preface
Using control techniques that are 
optimized for touch
Video games have evolved over the past 30 years to include several distinguishable and 
expected traits, especially with regards to controls. A joystick or control pad, and two or more 
physical buttons has become the standard that has seen universal success on multiple game 
platforms. From the original NES to the Dreamcast or Game Boy Advance, gamers worldwide 
have grown accustomed to such a scheme.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
119
But game design drastically changes with a touch screen, as we need to properly account for 
how the user will hold our device, and what sort of control options will be comfortable to the 
user.
The fun factor of our game will be completely dependant upon the control scheme we 
implement into our work, so this isn't an attribute that we should take lightly. Whether we use 
a software control stick, software buttons, or any other interface mechanic, we should take 
ease of use into consideration.
For this recipe, we'll dive into different gameplay mechanics that have been proven to be 
successful on iOS.
Getting ready
To experience different popular control types on the iPhone and iPad, it would be useful to 
purchase games such as FIFA 10 by EA Sports, Doodle Jump by Lima Sky, and Ocarina by 
Smule.
Both a new and old iOS device would also be useful for this exercise, so that we can 
experience the differences in capabilities over hardware revisions, to see how the gyroscope 
or retina display can alter game design.
How to do it...
Before we determine which control type is most appropriate for our game, we should first look 
at a few common techniques for inspiration. Here's a look at several of the options that are 
available for our game:
1.	 A traditional style using a software simulated control stick and action buttons.
2.	 Pulling, pushing, and tossing game play objects using the flick gesture.
3.	 Precise control utilizing the accelerometer and gyroscope.
4.	 Use of a unique hardware tool such as the microphone as a controller for 
unconventional gameplay.
In understanding the gameplay requirements for our app, we'll be better able to judge if the 
style of each is suitable for our work.
How it works...
The powerful processors in the iPhone, iPod touch, and iPad encourage developers to produce 
expansive, attractive game worlds that are equal in size and scope to traditional video games. 
This is great for consumers, as their new phone or MP3 player is also a first rate gaming 
device. However, it can create a good deal of heartache for designers.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
120
Because such traditional gaming environments are possible, users will expect familiar 
controls, which is why software simulated control joysticks and action buttons are so popular 
in many iOS games. We can craft an experience not unlike that of a console video game, and 
users have rewarded those apps with strong sales in the App Store.
However, the lack of tactile feedback and requirement for accuracy can make such a 
development strategy difficult. Pair this with the intuitive hardware features of the iPhone, 
and many developers have gone the alternative route and created unique experiences that 
innovate greatly on the new platform. If original and enjoyable, these games have performed 
wonderfully in the store as well.
Using the simulated control stick and control button technique, we will place interface 
elements on screen to stand in for physical buttons. A control stick allows the user to move 
in any direction along an axis and buttons perform actions. We can't provide tactile feedback, 
but we can fake the experience enough to make it feel familiar to the user. Using this method, 
we can replicate any fashion of traditional controller that fits best with our game. Below, we 
can see how FIFA 10 uses a traditional control style:

FIFA 2010 by EA SportsÔ - © 2009 Electronic Arts Inc.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
121
Perhaps the best, and most successful example of the flick gesture gameplay mechanic is 
Angry Birds. In the game, players use a slingshot to flick tiny birds at pigs that are hiding 
behind a variety of barricades. The game has seen strong commercial success worldwide, 
mostly due to its unique controls that are only possible on a touch screen device such as the 
iPhone or iPad.
By requiring the users to pick up and drag birds on screen in order to determine the direction 
and velocity of the birds, we guarantee that the player's finger will be positioned in a place 
where important on screen visual cues are not obscured. Likewise, dragging a finger on 
screen gives a surprising amount of direct control to the user, which when coupled with a 
strong physics engine, provides an exceptional sense of control, as seen here:

Angry Birds - © 2011 Rovio Mobile
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
122
Doodle Jump by Lima Sky is an exceptional example of tilt controls that are powered by the 
accelerometer and gyroscope. As shown in the next screenshot, the user holds the iPhone 
or iPod touch in their hand, and then tilts left to right to help the Doodler find platforms and 
avoid monsters. The controls are intuitive and it feels as if the user is directly controlling a 
world that lives inside the iPhone, which creates an enjoyable game play mechanic.

Doodle Jump - © 2011 Lima Sky, LLC
Our games can also utilize other device hardware features as well. Ocarina by Smule is an 
original experience and digital music instrument, where the user blows into the phone to play 
the instrument, just like a real ocarina. This is another great example of using the unique 
device features of iOS to create an interesting and fun entertainment option.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
123
Picking a control type and accompanying interface is never a simple decision, and our choices 
will ultimately determine the success of our app in the market. The applications in this recipe 
should help provide inspiration and put us on the right track for application interface success.
There's more...
Users and peripheral designers have been wishing for an actual controller attachment for iOS 
since the App Store's creation, but have they found success?
Using an actual control pad
Because the iPhone and iPod touch are such powerful devices with easily accessible API 
for app creation, consumers have demanded an accessory that gives the devices a physical 
control pad for several years.
It seems as If the development of a controller shell would be easy, but such hardware 
attachments would need Apple's blessing in order to interact with the standard 30 pin port 
used on all iPhone, iPod, and iPad devices.
Thus far, Apple has never approved such an accessory, and they don't seem interested in 
changing their minds here in the near future. Several homebrew, small-run test controllers 
have been produced which would work either through Bluetooth or through jailbreaking a 
device, but none of these options have seen commercial success. For now, it appears as if a 
controller attachment will remain on iOS developer wish lists.
See also
f
f
Working with a finger as a pointing device in the Preface
Designing HUDs with limited real estate
The Heads Up Display (HUD) is an integral aspect of any game, offering graphical overlay 
information on the user's score, the number of lives remaining, information on current user 
attributes or power ups, progress through a level, and more.
If we're designing a game, we're probably going to need a HUD. However, since our touch 
capacitive screen also contains our control mechanism, we need to be a bit creative with how 
we lay out our HUD.
In this recipe, we'll give examples of several applications that offer exceptional HUDs that we 
can use for inspiration in our games.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
124
Getting ready
We don't really need any concrete hardware or software for this recipe, but we should have a 
good grasp of what overlay elements we'll require in our application before we begin.
We don't need to have their final shape or size set, but we should have an idea of what we'll 
need screen real estate for.
How to do it...
The HUD plays an important role in a game, offering up updated statistics, scoring, and 
important information about the user's progress in our game. As such, the HUD should 
flow well so that the user can quickly find this information when necessary without causing 
frustration. On the iPad and iPhone, this is a bit more difficult than a traditional gaming 
console, as we may also have game control buttons placed upon the screen as well. Here are 
a few tips for HUD creation:
f
f
In designing our HUD, the first thing we should determine is what important elements 
are required for the user to successfully play the game.
f
f
If we find ourselves adding seemingly too much to our HUD, we should keep in mind 
that it is possible to keep less essential game information on a pause screen if need 
be.
f
f
Arguably the most important attribute to keep in mind when developing a HUD, is 
the assurance that control elements are clearly separable from non-interactive HUD 
content, and that our HUD never be covered by our hands while playing the game.
While we design our HUD, we will see success so long as we keep in mind the fact that the 
user will need to interact with the screen to play the game as well. So long as it's clear as to 
what on screen elements are interactive, and we place other informative on screen items in a 
location where it will be consistently visible and unobtrusive, users will find great utility in 
our HUD.
How it works...
When people think of the most important attributes of a game, they often first have controls 
or graphics come to mind. The HUD is often never even considered as an important attribute, 
even though it may be the most significant aspect of the entire design.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
125
In reality, people don't cite the HUD as important because it's the unappreciated aspect of 
the system that no one really ever sees. If the HUD is good, it blends in so well and is nearly 
invisible so that the user can always focus on the game at hand and is never distracted by it. 
If the HUD is bad, users will focus their frustration on the game in general, overlooking HUD 
design flaws and assuming that the game itself is bad.
For the first point, we'll want to provide a HUD that offers up all the information that the user 
will need, while not crowding the play area. On iPhone and iPod touch devices, we're already 
working with a small screen area as it is, and we shouldn't over clutter our interface.
Shown in the next screenshot, The Incident succeeds with a minimal HUD, where important 
elements somewhat outline the screen. This helps to guarantee that the user can always keep 
attention on the game's fast paced action.

The Incident - © 2011 Big Bucket Software
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
126
With regards to the second point, we should consider moving cluttered on screen items off to 
a pause menu if need be. Through the pause screen or deep menu items, we can keep our 
game screen orderly, while offering relatively easy access to such game options. Game Dev 
Story is one such game that works well with a deep menu system.

Game Dev Story - © 2011 Kairosoft Co.,LTD
Hand placement should be the primary focus with the third point. We should make sure that 
buttons are clearly buttons so that users can properly hold and manage the device during 
gameplay. When designing an artistic vision for our buttons and background items, we should 
be sure to make our interface elements distinguishable and clear to the user. Seen in the next 
screenshot, Chu Chu Rocket implements a clean HUD with clearly labeled interface buttons, 
making the game easy to pick up and understand:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
127

Chu Chu Rocket - © 2010 SEGA
On the surface, this makes the HUD seem like a somewhat thankless addition to our work, 
with no user noticing enough to appreciate the work. However, once we begin to understand 
the subtle traits of good HUD and their impact on a game's success, we'll realize that the 
entire experience is dependent on good work. By working to optimize our HUD as best we can, 
we'll be making the right steps toward designing a successful game.
There's more...
While developing our HUD, we may find it difficult to limit the amount of information we need 
on screen. We may also find it difficult to best present such options on screen. What do we do 
in these situations?
Customizations
If we find ourselves having difficulty, we should remember that iOS is a completely flexible 
design canvas. If we're unsure of what is best, we can always integrate a settings page into 
our application where users can make a decision on what best works for them.
This flexibility can give users a variety of options, allowing alternate interfaces for left handed 
users or even the ability to drag and selectively place elements if we want to work such a 
feature into our app.
There is no requirement that we offer such customization, however it can be a simple way to 
increase user satisfaction for our game.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
128
See also
f
f
Placing visual elements for touch in this chapter
f
f
Planning your game around touch in this chapter
Accounting for the lost Status Bar
Because a game is typically full screen, in order to provide an immersive experience in our 
game, we'll lose the important 20 pixel Status Bar located on the top of our iPhone or 
iPad screen.
The Status Bar contains important user information on connectivity signal, the time, and 
battery life; we may not want to completely remove this functionality if we can avoid it. Users 
often enjoy such features and may want to know how much battery life they have or what time 
it is when playing our game. However, we don't want them to close our app in order to find this 
information.
In this recipe, we'll discuss ways in which we can best go about keeping these features inside 
of our application, so the user is never forced to leave midway through a game level.
Getting ready
Either the iPhone or iPad will work well in this recipe, as both will give an idea as to the 
significance of losing the status bar.
It also may be useful to read up on the iOS Date and Time programming guide, located 
at https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentation/Cocoa/
Conceptual/DatesAndTimes/DatesAndTimes.html.
You may also find interest in the Battery Status sample code project, located at 
https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#samplecode/BatteryStatus/
Introduction/Intro.html.
How to do it...
The Status Bar is an integral aspect of iOS, offering up essential information on every device. 
iPhone and 3G iPad devices place important signal strength information in the upper status 
bar, and all devices show the current time and battery level in the top bar as well.
This data is key for the user, especially information like battery life, as the user may be 
unwilling to continue using their iPhone to play games if the battery level is low and they need 
the phone to be usable and are unable to charge the device immediately.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
129
However, problems arise as we design a full screen and immersive game application. Either 
we'll need every available pixel for our game, or the Status Bar will appear out of place, and 
we'll need to remove it from our work. But once we remove it, it will become quite clear to the 
user that they're unable to access this important information.
Luckily for us, Apple has offered wonderfully simple API to tie into, which will help us include 
the time and battery information into our game. The only problem that we must seriously deal 
with is the question of where we place this information.
The simple placement position is on a pause menu, however it's astonishing as to how many 
games and full screen applications either forget or refuse to attempt to include such data, 
even though it's extremely easy to implement. Two different possible inclusions of this 
data are:
f
f
Integration of time and battery information into a pause menu so that the time and 
battery information fits into our game's art style
f
f
Inclusion of the standard status bar into our game's pause menu
It's a minor addition, but will increase the likelihood that a user remains inside our application 
and creates a better experience for everyone. It's a win-win situation that helps to create an 
app that will ultimately receive better reviews on the App Store.
How it works...
The Status Bar is an iOS fixture, and the interface element that is most prevalent throughout 
the operating system, appearing in all but a handful of situations. It's also the least 
customizable interface element, as we're only able to alter a few aspects of its color.
With the bar also containing important data on device power and cell signal, users are going 
to need this data at some point. It's best to make sure that the user has a way to always 
access the information.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
130
For the first suggested method of inclusion, we can easily create a stylized clock and battery 
icon to provide such information to the user:

The Incident - © 2011 Big Bucket Software
The Incident is an application that provides exceptional inclusion of time and battery data. In 
the previous screenshot, we can see a clock and battery indicator in the same enjoyable pixel 
art style that is found throughout the game. This method of inclusion is a wonderful way to 
retain the fun, playful styling of the game while also offering a feature that is extremely useful 
to the user.
If we'd rather go with the second suggestion and provide a more traditional display of 
information to our users, there is also nothing stopping us from throwing the standard 
Status Bar back into our application when action is paused as well. Zen Bound 2 goes about 
replacing the Status Bar when paused, and as shown in the next screenshot, this works quite 
well for the user by providing a recognizable and clean presentation. This also allows for us to 
give the user access to the cellular signal, as we're unable to tap into signal strength using the 
approved API.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 5
131

Zen Bound 2 Universal - © 2008 Secret Exit Ltd.
Regardless as to how we decide to include the Status Bar information, either through a playful 
and styled display as is seen in The Incident or through an implementation as seen in Zen 
Bound 2, this ability is extremely important to the user and we should work to include it in our 
interface.
Luckily, Apple has offered APIs such as the iOS Date and Time programming guide and Battery 
Status sample code project to help make programming this data into our application easy; we 
only need to go about designing ways to include it into our interface. This isn't an easy task 
necessarily, but with a bit of work, we can find a way to replace the Status Bar within 
our game.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

All About Games
132
Once users aren't forced to leave our app to see how much battery life is remaining or for the 
time, they'll be more comfortable playing our game for an extended period of time. This will 
lead to greater enjoyment, and our application will be more loved and receive higher rankings 
in the store.
See also
f
f
Planning your game around touch in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

6
Starting, Stopping, 
and Multitasking
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Starting the application with a proper Default.png
f
f
Planning our application UI for a first impression
f
f
Dealing with phone calls or text messages
f
f
Preparing for a quit application in iOS 3
f
f
Working with multitasking in iOS 4
f
f
Periodical downloads and Newsstand in iOS 5
f
f
Making accommodations for other apps that are multitasking
Introduction
We work our way through life with constant reminders of the importance of first impressions 
and final goodbyes. From an early age, these two circumstances are of extreme importance in 
our everyday lives.
Hellos and goodbyes are important in our iPhone apps as well. Providing a first impression 
is absolutely essential, as it will set the pace and initial user opinion about our entire 
application. Likewise, the user will retain a lasting impression based upon the experience 
we provide when they leave our app for a phone call or text message, and then return back 
looking to use our app again.
In this chapter, we'll discuss the finer points of application launching, closing, and 
multitasking. We'll discuss a few techniques that will help ensure that users enjoy their first 
experience, their transition back to other iOS apps, and their return to our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
134
Starting the application with a proper 
Default.png
When an application loads for the first time, the user is presented with a variable duration 
of loading time. This period can change depending on the device processor or RAM, memory 
requirements of the application, current free memory available on the device, and any number 
of other variables.
Ideally, the user will only be required to sit through this period for a brief moment. However, 
this duration can last up to several seconds in length if we're loading an image intensive app 
on an older device.
Apple has designed a loading screen method that is required by each app, through the 
inclusion of a PNG file in our app bundle. In this recipe, we'll discuss two interface strategies 
for this loading period.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should have a computer with Photoshop or another image creation tool. 
We should also have knowledge of the devices and orientation types that our application 
will support.
How to do it...
Loading times are an inherent problem with all types of software, regardless of platform. As 
hardware has increased in speed, these times have diminished, but they haven't become 
non-existent. 
Apple created a simple design fix for this problem, offering up a quick and easy way to load an 
image during the loading period. Here are quick, simple steps in order to create an image that 
will display during the loading period:
1.	 We should start by designing up an art image measuring either 320 x 480 pixels or 
320 x 460 pixels (or the equivalent Retina display double resolution size), containing 
the art piece which we would like the user to see during the loading screen.
2.	 Next, we should then save and name that file Default.png.
3.	 Finally, we should include that image in the resource bundle of our application project 
in XCode.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
135
4.	 If we're creating a web application, we can also include the image in our HTML code 
so that the image is displayed when the user launches the web app. To do this, 
we should name our file startup.png and place the following code in our HTML 
header:
<link rel="apple-touch-startup-image" href="/startup.png">
iOS is designed to search the bundle for a PNG with this name, and then display it on load if 
it's available. Once we finish these steps, we have accomplished everything we need to do to 
have the image load on startup.
When it comes to design styles and technique on what we should include on the image, there 
are two different strategies that we can take:
The right way
Apple's documentation on the Default.png is fairly clear. According to their design 
documents, this image should serve as a clean visual of what the application would look like 
with no pre-populated data.
In essence, this provides the perception that the application has already loaded, but the user 
is just waiting for the data to populate. It's a subtle way to trick the user into thinking our app 
loads quicker than it actually does.
This trick works because it typically takes the brain about 2-4 seconds to see an image on 
screen, process the layout of what is before them, and then make a decision. Because the 
loading process for an application is relatively short, typically under three seconds, presenting 
an overlay of the interface as the Default.png loading image allows the brain to use this 
time to process what is about to be presented on screen.

Phone - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
136
As shown above, Phone, Messages, and Photos all load preview images with their Default.
png displays, which offer the perception that the application loads very quickly. By preparing 
the user for the app during the Default.png load image period, the user will subconsciously 
perceive that our application loads faster than it actually does.
The wrong, but possibly preferable way
While we're supposed to use the loading image to prepare the user for our app, we may 
want this time to serve another purpose, such as a way to advertise our development team 
or Twitter account. It's an important and powerful moment for application branding, so we 
should feel free to use this moment as a way to build brand equity through use of a logo and 
appropriate styling.
There is no set rule that says we can't use the Default.png as an advertisement of sorts, 
and many applications succeed using this strategy.
We'll need to include a Default.png in the application package, to give our app something 
to display before loading has concluded. Depending on our application type and loading 
period, we should be able to include a screen that fits into one of these two methods 
with ease.
How it works...
Apple has designed iOS so that it is easy to present a loading screen to the user—we only 
need to create a PNG image, name it Default, and include it inside of our application bundle. 
The operating system will do the rest for us.
Because this predetermined method works so well, we can instead focus on optimizing the 
image to best fit into our application. It's important to remember that the Default image is the 
first thing that the user will ever see in our app, and we should take considerable care in the 
creation of the art. Attention to detail with such seemingly minute application attributes is 
what sets outstanding applications apart.
For some situations, creating an image that looks like similar to the first screen after launch 
will be ideal; as it will offer the perception that our application loads quicker than it actually 
does. This will increase user appreciation and enjoyment of our app.
In other situations, it may be desirable to go with this splash screen approach instead of 
the prescribed approach of faking application load. For applications where loading takes a 
considerable period of time, usually anything over four seconds, it is difficult to use the load to 
ease users into our app like Apple does with Mail, Messages, or Phone. The pause becomes 
so long that the user instead believes that the application has broken.
So in such situations, these banner loading Default.png images may provide a better 
alternative, offering up a way for the user to know that they have indeed loaded the correct 
application, but that it will still be several seconds before they're able to interact with the 
initial view.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
137
Regardless of what method we choose, it will be necessary to include a Default.png in with 
the project. With a bit of work and consideration, we can create something that will win the 
hearts of our user base.
There's more...
Now that we've learned more about different styles of Default images, we can put a bit of 
extra effort into going the extra mile with the image as well. Here are a few tips on how to 
produce a great Default.png.
We can retina optimize our Default.png too
Like any other art piece, we can include a Retina display specific graphic inside our 
application. By adding the standard @2x modifier to the end of the image, iOS will know to 
pull this image instead when running a higher resolution device.
As the Default.png is the first image presented to the user, we should take extra effort to 
show that we're dedicated to a full retina optimized experience.
Prepare for multiple orientations
On the iPhone, we're limited to only one Default.png orientation requirement, as 
applications tend to be optimized for one orientation and we can create the Default image to 
account for the prominent orientation.
However, on the iPad, each application should be designed for optimal use in either 
orientation. This requires us to create two Default images, one for the app launching in 
portrait and another for if the app launches in landscape.
Apple has created an easy system for the simple creation of such different images. We only 
need to create the images and add a simple –Portrait or –Landscape modifier (for example, 
Default-Portrait.png) in order to launch the appropriate view.
See also
f
f
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina display in Chapter 1
f
f
Planning our application UI for a first impression in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
138
Planning our application UI for a first 
impression
In the real world, we spend a good deal of time preparing for first impressions. We tuck our 
shirts in, spend time making sure our hair looks perfect, and iron our shirts so that they're 
wrinkle free. We do this because it's a common understanding that others will greatly have 
their feelings toward us determined on the basis of how we look or talk during our first 
meeting. If we don't impress them off the bat, they'll never be willing to warm up to us.
Mobile application development falls under the same sense of unspoken understanding. If 
our application isn't easy to manage or understand in the first 30 seconds, users will have no 
qualms over closing our work and deleting it off their device.
Are the colors attractive? Is information easy to access? Do they seem to know what the 
correct next step is? These are all important questions that the user will subconsciously 
answer during their first several minutes inside our work.
In this recipe, we'll discuss a couple of design decisions that we can make, in order to impress 
our users early.
Getting ready
Little is needed for this recipe. Ideally, the implementation of this recipe will take place 
throughout the course of development, as we fine tune along the way.
How to do it...
The Default.png image is the first visual that every user will see when they check out our 
app, but it isn't necessarily the first visual that their brain will take a good deal of 
time processing.
That honor will fall on our actual application, once loaded in full glory for all eyes to behold. It's 
a somewhat magical moment, as our work is first presented to the audience. Like the opening 
line of a play, first chapter of a book, the front door to a house, the first few minutes of a 
game, this is an important moment in the user's determination of what they think 
about our app. 
So how do we present our application with its best foot forward? Here are a couple of simple 
tips, to help users quickly feel at home inside of our application:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
139
f
f
Use simple, clean In-App icons to help signify key features: When selecting icons to 
fall inside of Tab Bar cells or Navigation buttons, it's important to ensure that our icon 
use falls in line with expectations found in other applications. The magnifying glass 
represents search, a star presumes favorites or top performers, three dots represent 
that the tab contains multiple options, and a square with a pencil infers that the 
button composes a new email.
f
f
Start by giving users a push in the right direction: Feel free to offer up a friendly 
push to the user from the get go. If we make the first step clear, the subsequent steps 
may become a bit more obvious, as shown in the following screenshot from Grades 
by Tapity:

Grades - © Tapity
f
f
Hold back sound, flashy animation, or bright colors until the user has had the chance 
to settle in.
f
f
Offer content early, if only a little taste of what is to come.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
140
How it works...
Creating an intuitive application interface from the first second a user opens our app is an art, 
which requires that we shape our app carefully overtime. As we add new features, create new 
art, or conceive new ways to present data on screen, we should always be thinking about what 
a new user will think upon first presentation of our app.
For Step 1, Apple routinely updates the Mobile Human Interface Guidelines, https://
developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentation/UserExperience/
Conceptual/MobileHIG/Introduction/Introduction.html, with suggestions on 
how to use icons that come built into the iOS SDK.
These guidelines account for a limited quantity of icons and uses, which makes it a bit difficult 
to gain a good grasp of how we should truly utilize such pieces in our app. While it would be 
impossible to create an exhaustive list of general shapes and their associated meaning on 
iOS, the best we can do is make ourselves familiar with as many apps as we possibly can in 
order to best understand how others have paved the road of user expectations.
In Step 2, we took a look at Grades by Jeremy Olsen. The application allows users to manage 
test scores and class grades, with an exceptional level of open-ended opportunity. No matter 
how complex or simple a class's grade scale may be, the application handles the data with 
ease.
The application makes such scalability easy for the user by using a simple contextual clue 
on initial launch. By offering direction on how to start tracking information for a class, the 
user is essentially given a tutorial without even realizing that they're being taught. There is no 
confusion as to what the first step is, and the user can jump right in and start keeping track of 
their grades.
For Step three, if we are in the mood, or feel as if it's necessary to make our application stand 
out through a good deal of noise, eccentric color, or excessive animation, that's perfectly fine. 
Each application has a different art strategy and depending on our target audience, these 
elements may very much make sense in our work.
However, we should be hesitant to use such vivid visuals or loud sounds during the user's 
introduction to our app. While the user may be in our target audience and enjoy our app 
otherwise, such sudden extreme sense stimulation may be off-putting.
Instead, we should slowly walk our users into the application and give them a chance to 
prepare for any noise or bright lights that we may throw their way. This way, the user is 
expecting whatever we decide to present. For example, if we offer loud noises right after 
the initial launch and our user is sitting in a quiet auditorium, the successive embarrassing 
situation may turn the user away from our application, just because we presented them with 
an unexpected bout of displeasure.
By working the user into our loud, colorful, flashy application, we'll be less likely to scare away 
potential long-term users in the first five minute of using our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
141
With regards to Step 3, if our application is a content heavy application, such as a social 
network or application that features extensive listings of local sport scores, we may be 
inclined to encourage users to sign up for our service before we offer the meat and potatoes 
of our app. Most designers are confident that their content is so valuable, users will jump 
through whatever hoops necessary in order to gain access.
However, the typical user is an impatient soul, unlikely to fill out forms in order to gain access 
to an app's walled garden. Instead they'll download our app, see the frictional barrier in front 
of the content, and decide that they're not that interested.
By offering a quick glimpse, we hold some hope in convincing the user that our content is 
worth going through the sign up process. Service applications such as Instagram and Twitter 
do a great job at this, offering a handful of images or text entries before asking the user to 
sign up.
These quick entries give an example of the wealth of content laying behind the apparent 
barrier of a sign up form. Through these quick previews, the user can gain an idea as to 
whether they'll enjoy the service or not. By using a preview method such as this, users are 
able to gauge interest before the sign up, saving everyone's valuable time.
Finally, we know that every iOS device user is familiar with Apple's bundled applications, as 
they are the only applications that come pre-installed and as such, are the only applications 
that every user is likely to have used. We should look here for inspiration, as Apple offers a 
good deal of guidance with their work. When placing an icon on our Tab Bar, ask yourself if 
every user will instantly know the tabs function based on the imagery. If we have doubts, there 
is probably a better alternative icon.
In many respects, this recipe isn't so much a one-time action like many others found 
throughout this book. Instead, it's a design philosophy which we will fine tune as we create 
more applications for the iPhone or iPad.
There's more...
Tutorials and help menus were a somewhat taboo topic during the early days of the App Store, 
with Apple holding a hard stance that apps requiring such a menu were too complex for the 
mobile platform.
Times are changing a bit, with Apple themselves offering help menus in complex apps like 
Garageband or iMovie. Here's a tip on how to best offer support inside of our app.
Lend a helping hand
While most early apps were capable of success without a help menu, many new apps have 
become much more complex and require such a way to teach the user about app features.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
142
If we want to provide help for our users, we have two choices. One thing we could do is create 
a specific help view; we could do something like provide a table of topics that the user can tap 
upon in order to learn more about. This allows us to dive in-depth into a variety of topics, with 
as much detail as we feel is required.
We could also provide a tutorial through on screen overlays, where tapping a help button 
presents short tips on screen with insight into different app features. This method works well 
because we can directly point at an interface element and tell the user what its purpose is. 
However, because we're overlaying such information on top of the interface, we must be brief 
when using this choice.
Our app may be simple and self-explanatory enough, that we won't need one of these two 
methods in order to provide a help menu. However, if we think that we need to lend a hand, 
either of these two routes would work well.
See also
f
f
Placing visual elements for touch in the Preface
f
f
Starting an application with a proper Default.png in this chapter
Dealing with phone calls or text messages
iOS may be capable of multitasking on newer devices, but the foundation of the operating 
system is still very much focused on presenting one application at a time. Even though 
applications can run in the background, there is still only one app visible on screen.
So what happens if the user gets a text message or phone call while in the process of using 
our application? It's extremely likely that a call from mom or dad is much more important than 
our app, even if we'd like to believe otherwise. We have to assume that at any given moment, 
the user could leave unexpectedly.
So how we design our interface to transition the user in and out of the application is key. If 
the user has spent minutes configuring our app a specific way, and that work is lost when 
they leave to answer a text message, they may find themselves extremely frustrated with this 
experience.
For this recipe, we'll discuss ways in which we can prepare for text messages, phone calls, or 
anything else that may pull the user away from our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
143
Getting ready
For this application, you may think that we need an iPhone with an active service plan on 
hand in order to test entering back into an app after having left for a text or call, but we really 
don't. To test this behavior, we can simply press the Home button and return to the home 
screen, then re-launch our app.
When a user leaves for a text message or phone call, no special processes are going on 
behind the scenes, and the operating system handles the event much like any other instance 
in which the user quits and leaves our app. So we only need to press the Home button and 
leave in order to test this scenario.
How to do it...
So what's the best way to go about preparing our application for persistent back and forth 
switching? Here are a few tips:
f
f
If the user is in the middle of an action when the call or text message comes, then 
find a way to bring the user back to that action
f
f
However, if the action is time sensitive, like an action in a game, find a way to ease 
the user back in
f
f
In complex situations, try to offer help or a reminder about what is going on
How it works...
Phone calls or text messages are a somewhat unique with regards to the user's experience on 
leaving an application, as such scenarios are always sudden and unexpected.
For the first point, regardless as to if our application is optimized for multitasking in iOS 4 or 
not, we should be sure to save data inside of the application as often as possible. This will 
allow the user to ease back into the app quickly.
For example, imagine that we're writing an application that lets a user send digital postcards 
to friends. In our app, the user needs to select their friend's email address, select an artistic 
background, and compose a message. Imagine this application if no data is saved and 
when the user leaves to check a quick text message, their entire postcard is deleted. This 
experience would become rather frustrating, as the user would need to remember this 
problem when using the app and hold off on answering calls or messages when composing 
a message.
We should help the user out with this problem by saving their content in order to offer them 
the opportunity to continue the card they were previously working on before they left. Save 
intervals will vary based on what we're building, but in general, it would be optimal to save 
whenever new content is created.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
144
On the second point, we don't always want to rush and place the user back in the same 
position they were at before they left. If we're building a game, or some other application in 
which timing is important, this could be disorienting and also cause frustration.
For example, a game that requires users to avoid enemy spaceships requires a strong sense 
of timing as pace picks up in the game. If the user receives a phone call and must leave the 
app, then returns after the call, we need to ease them back into the game as their sense of 
timing is completely off.
Working users back into our game doesn't require an advanced interface, as we may need to 
only create a quick several second countdown timer before restarting game play. A simple "3, 
2, 1, GO!" can help get the user ready to avoid alien invasion.
In the most advanced application, we should remember that under the circumstance of a 
user being pulled away from the application for a call or text message, there will be little time 
to prepare for being pulled from the app. The user may not have time to finish an important 
impending complex task, which may be difficult to jump back into.
Finally, if this scenario seems likely for our application, we need to take a step back and 
evaluate how our interface can be designed in order to toss the user back in without fear.
A great way to go about easing the user back in, is to save their data but start the user back 
a step or two behind where they were when they left. We don't want to take them far back 
or require them to start a complex process from scratch, but walking someone back through 
their last step can be an easy way to refresh the memory.
We could also go about offering a quick visual overlay reminder to give a clue as to what step 
is required next. If we point the user toward the next step, they'll also have a sense of direction 
to help lead them through our app.
In the case of a phone call, the user must make what is essentially an instantaneous choice 
as to if they want to leave the app and answer the call. If they choose to leave, there is no time 
to sit and assure that all data has been saved. As such, it's our job to ensure that when they 
come back, it will be as if they never even left.
If our application doesn't stand up against such a test, and it takes considerable time to jump 
back into our app after leaving, users will find such scenarios frustrating and find another app 
to use instead.
There's more...
For this recipe, we focused on text messages and phone calls, so we may be lead to believe 
that the iPhone is the only device where we need to worry about having the user pulled away 
from us. But if we're working on an iPad or iPod touch compatible app, we still have a bit to 
worry about.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
145
They're not text messages, but they're close enough
As of iOS 4, Apple has decided to use an alert-based notification system. This method works 
extremely well given the small iPhone or iPod touch screen, with a simple blue alert view 
popping up on screen and allowing the user to take action. Text messages arrive in this way, 
so the view is extremely familiar to any iPhone user.
The same alert method is also used for local notifications and push notifications as well, 
which means that the entirety of this recipe is also applicable to any application that uses 
either notification type. While such distracts are less likely on devices that can't receive calls 
or texts, it is still a problem we should keep in mind.
See also
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views in Chapter 3
f
f
Integrating push or local notifications into our app in Chapter 7
Working with multitasking in iOS 4
With the advent of iOS 4, iPhone applications could finally multitask, allowing users to quickly 
jump back and forth between applications. In reality, the devices aren't actually multitasking; 
they're instead saving the state of our application temporarily until the user returns.
However, this save state allows users to jump right back where they left off. This change has 
brought new user expectations, and our interfaces should respond accordingly.
In this recipe, we'll break down what users expect, and how we can deliver an exceptional 
multitasking experience in our app.
Getting ready
To understand multitasking, we could get by using the iOS Simulator built into XCode. We 
would be best off with a capable device on hand, so that we could test the features on an 
iPhone or iPad, but it isn't a requirement. 
iPhone models 3GS and beyond, third generation iPod touch devices and beyond, and all iPad 
models are capable of multitasking functionality.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
146
How to do it...
In iOS 4, Apple provided new ways for our application to multitask, which has greatly benefited 
the overall operating system user experience. With this new technique, users can quickly 
switch between applications, with no need to restart their task from the beginning just 
because they opened a text message.
While multitasking is helpful, it isn't multitasking in the sense that we may be familiar with. 
Instead of letting any app run at all times, applications can perform one of six different 
multitasking services to enhance their app. Here is a rundown of each service, and how they'll 
affect the interface of our app:
f
f
Fast app switching
f
f
Background audio
f
f
Voice over IP
f
f
Background location
f
f
Push or local notifications
f
f
Task finishing
Multitasking has provided a variety of new features and interface complexities in iOS, which 
is both good and bad for our application. If used well, we can create an exceptional new 
experience beyond what was previously possible. However, if we become careless, we can 
quickly create an interface nightmare for the user. If we work to include these tips into our 
app, then we'll be well on the road to multitasking success.
How it works...
The most important development change of iOS 4 was the implementation of fast app 
switching, as all applications could now load much more quickly for the user. This change 
allowed users to move from task to task with ease, which in turn created a more powerful 
computing experience where applications could become more in-depth and feature filled.
This ability for rapid movement was the most influential change from a design standpoint, and 
the most important consideration change when it comes to interface design. Pre-multitasking 
apps were much like movies; a dedicated start and end with the expectation that the viewer 
will see out the entire experience. Multitasking changed the experience to be much more like 
a book, specifically a dictionary or encyclopedia, where the user will instead have a dedicated 
beginning with the assumption that they can come back whenever necessary with little 
friction.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
147
Fast app switching is the one type of multitasking that we should always include in our 
application, as it allows for the user to quickly jump out of the app and then return back to 
where they had been before leaving. While the user is gone, the app isn't actually running in 
the background. Instead, the app is essentially frozen in memory until the user returns, when 
state is restored.
For most applications, little interface work will need to be done for fast app switching, as the 
user will be able to jump back in right where they left off. It's a great solution for users, and for 
designers as well.
In applications such as games, it may be best to provide the user a countdown restart to the 
game after returning from a fast app switch. Games typically require quick reflexes and for the 
user to be prepared for action on screen, and throwing them back into the game immediately 
may cause frustration.
Otherwise, little work is required from an interface aspect when it comes to fast app switching.
For audio applications, such as Music or Pandora, background audio allows for music to play 
in the background while the user browses other applications.
From an interface standpoint, this has always been a point of consideration as the user has 
always been able to play the Music application while using other apps, iOS 4 just allows third 
party App Store applications to do the same.
The biggest problem for our interface will revolve around if we use audio cues to help aid 
our interface, with actions on screen leading to sound effects to verify that the action has 
occurred successfully. The audible swoop heard when sending a message in Mail is a great 
example of this type of sound. If we include these in our app, we should verify that our 
application does not interfere with background audio, or force background audio to quit 
playing while the user is inside of our app.
If the user is playing music from Pandora in the background when they load up our app, it's 
probably because they're rather listening to their music. We shouldn't take this as an insult. 
Instead, we should ensure that the user will have an exceptional experience regardless as to 
what audio is playing.
Voice over IP (VOIP) allows applications to use Internet calling services such as Skype as an 
alternative method for calling friends or family. Such applications were previously allowed on 
iOS, but the user was required to remain inside the VOIP app while on the call. Now, the user 
can stay on the call regardless as to which application is currently open.
If we're looking to build a VOIP application, essentially no work is required for us to handle 
users when outside of our app. If the user is to leave, the device status bar will double in to 
denote the VOIP connection, much like it occurs when the user is on a regular call.
The only interface situation that we may want to consider is the scenario that occurs when 
the user ends a VOIP call outside of our app, as we should design the interface to be easy to 
understand and manage the next time they return.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
148
The new background location multitasking capabilities allows us to keep note of the user's 
coordinates when they are using another app. This can be useful if we are developing a GPS 
or location-based social networking app.
From an interface standpoint, we should design our app views so that they can quickly change 
in order to accommodate for the user's new location, once they hop back into our application.
For example, if we're designing a social network that allows a traveling user to identify local 
restaurants, a slow and clunky interface may cause background location to make our app 
look inaccurate and useless, especially as if it appears our location is incorrect because the 
app interface hasn't provided obvious enough clues to inform the user that the content on the 
screen is adjusting to account for the new location.
Push notifications have been a fixture since iOS 3, and Local notifications were introduced 
in iOS 4 to help provide similar functionality without need of an Internet connection.
Notifications themselves don't really affect our interface, as they're more of an intrusion on 
another application's interface when we implement them into our app. However, we should 
prepare our own interface with regards to how we'll ease users back into our app if we decide 
to do so with the notification.
For example, an application designed to promote animal care may send a local notification to 
remind users that it is time to walk their dog, thanks to a timer we've set. Our two notification 
options for the user may be, Walk the Dog or Cancel. If the user taps Walk the Dog, we may 
prefer to send the user back into our application, where they will make note that the dog had 
been walked.
We should concentrate on optimizing the view that the user arrives in on, as it will quite 
possibly be the only view that they see while making the note and we'll want to make the 
experience quick and simple for the user by making it easy to enter whatever data is required 
so that they can get back to what they were doing.
Task finishing in iOS 4 allows our app to finalize any process that may need to finish, 
without requiring the user to sit and wait for the process to end. For example, if we create a 
photo editing application, this service could be offered to allow the photo to be uploaded to 
Facebook or Flickr without requiring the user to wait to finalize the upload.
The one subtle change in our interface for this feature could be a simple note or reminder to 
the user that our application includes this service, as it may not be directly known to the user 
that the feature is supported. A user may instead assume that their upload progress would be 
deleted if their app was closed, driving them to stay inside our application and wait when they 
really don't have to.
While the metaphor may be somewhat of a stretch, we should take note of the drastic 
fundamental changes between the two experiences and work to optimize our work 
accordingly.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
149
There's more...
Multitasking brings a multitude of great features to iOS, but it does have its disadvantages as 
well. Here's a look at how our multitasking app may actually upset users.
Multitasking can be frustrating
While there are many advantages to multitasking, the solution can be frustrating to 
certain users.
The required application close on exit of iOS 3 and earlier was often seen as a significant 
advantage to novice users or young children. When such users became frustrated or confused 
with an app, they only needed to hit the big Home button, and then reopen the app in order to 
start again from the beginning. It was a crude method, but effective at solving a problem.
iOS 4 ruined this solution, which caused a bit of frustration for those who relied upon this 
strategy when stuck. Upon closing and reopening, the user is brought right back to the point of 
difficulty, unable to escape.
If we have a hunch that our target audience could be classified as "new to the operating 
system", we should probably provide easy access to the home view whenever possible, to offer 
an escape button of sorts. This way, users can still get back to square one if something does 
go wrong and don't know how to navigate themselves out of the jam.
See also
f
f
Making accommodations for other apps that are multitasking in this chapter
Periodical downloads and Newsstand in 
iOS 5
Apple finally included a highly desired feature in iOS 5, allowing for magazines and newspaper 
applications to download new issues while running in the background. This simple feature 
allows for users to have fresh content waiting upon launch of our app.
If we're designing a magazine, newspaper, or any other type of periodical, this will be a 
desirable feature and we'll need to make some small interface changes to accommodate. In 
this recipe, we'll take a look at what we'll need to do to help our application handle this new 
type of multitasking in iOS 5.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
150
Getting ready
For this application, an iPad or iPhone device running our application will be desirable to help 
test the multitasking features of our app.
How to do it...
Designing an application to support background issue downloading and the interface change 
requirements associated with the new Newsstand feature are quite simple. In a few easy 
steps, our interface will be ready for Newsstand:
1.	 Include the UINewsstandApp key in the application's Info.plist file
2.	 Create the server programming backend to send the new periodical background push 
notification to the application
3.	 Integrate icon art files that will allow for the periodical cover to change as content is 
updated periodically
4.	 Design an application interface that properly notifies users of new content
After instituting these quick changes, our application will be ready to shine using Newsstand 
on the iPhone or iPad.
How it works...
Newsstand is an easy to integrate way to help the user enjoy the daily, weekly, or monthly 
content that may come along with our magazine or newspaper application for iPhone or iPad. 
Using the simple steps above, we'll quickly be up to speed with the new form of multitasking.
In step one, we'll make a quick Boolean addition to the Info.plist to help indicate that 
our application utilizes background downloads for periodical data. Likewise in step two, 
our programming team will need to follow Apple's Newsstand Kit Framework Reference 
located on the iOS Development Center at http://developer.apple.com/library/
prerelease/ios/#documentation/StoreKit/Reference/NewsstandKit_
Framework/_index.html#//apple_ref/doc/uid/TP40010838.
With step three, we'll need to provide an updated icon file to represent the updated content of 
our periodical. Much like a magazine cover, attractive and relevant art provides an easy way to 
win over reader's attention and Apple has allowed for us to quickly update our icon to reflect 
content updates in iOS 5. We'll include these new cover art assets to the bundle of each issue 
and then the updated cover will display in Newsstand.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
151
For step four, we'll need to take a look at our application individually and determine what 
would be the best way to provide information inside the application on updated content. We 
have a lot of old tools available as well, as we can use badges on the app icon in order to also 
indicate to the user that a new issue is available. Inside of our app, we may want to provide 
an Alert View or another context sensitive feature to notify the user that content has been 
updated inside of our periodical.
Once we've followed these simple steps, our application will be ready for Newsstand and 
periodical background downloading on iOS.
There's more...
Periodical background downloads are new to iOS 5, but they're not the only way to provide 
background task services in iOS.
Let's multitask.
Periodicals are quite an exclusive application genre and it won't be common to work on such 
projects for the iPhone or iPad unless we work for a big newspaper or magazine publisher.
But we can still use multitasking inside of other applications. In iOS 4, Apple allowed 
developers to tie their app to specific multitasking types so that music could be played in the 
background, VOIP calls could be made, and more.
For a complete breakdown of different multitasking options and how they can influence our 
application interface design, see the previous recipe titled Working with Multitasking in iOS 4.
See also
f
f
Making accommodations for other apps that are multitasking in this chapter
f
f
Working with multitasking in iOS 4 in this chapter
Making accommodations for other apps 
that are multitasking
In a preceding recipe, we discussed a multitude of multitasking services that were introduced 
to developers in iOS 4, along with several suggestions as to how we could alter our interface in 
order to take advantage of such features.
Nevertheless, how do we optimize our interface in order to be mindful of other applications 
that are currently multitasking? In this recipe, we'll discuss strategies for creating a super app 
experience, even when other developers are attempting to steal the glory.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
152
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should have a multitasking device on hand if possible in order to test how 
our app performs while other applications are running.
It is possible to simulate the tall status bar inside of the iOS Simulator built into XCode, but it 
would be ideal to experience the change in usable resolution on an actual device.
How to do it...
Any app can take advantage of multitasking, so we should prepare for the design benefits that 
are possible through implementing it into our own app, along with the potential compromises 
required when other apps include the services as well. Here's a look at a couple of potential 
design problems that we should be aware of when other apps are multitasking:
f
f
Fast app switching
f
f
Background audio
f
f
Voice over IP
Now that we've discussed both ways to benefit from multitasking, as well as ways to ensure 
that other applications multitasking doesn't ruin our experience, we'll be more than capable of 
creating an application that is flexible under any circumstance.
How it works...
Being a good multitasking steward for other apps is often an important interface 
consideration, as it is one of those traits that is implemented in a manner that the user will 
never notice such subtle differences unless we've messed it up completely. And when we do 
mess it up, it will be painfully obvious and ruin the app experience.
Often, the problem can be solved with a little extra spacing or other minor adjustments, so the 
actual implementation isn't tough. It's remembering to test for such a scenario that is the hard 
part; as developers often overlook such use cases when on a deadline.
Optimization for fast app switching isn't the exception as much as it is the reality with iOS 
development in a post iOS 4 world. Because users aren't required to finish a task in one app 
before finishing a task in another, we'll find that it isn't uncommon to see users swapping back 
and forth between two or three apps in repetition and quick succession. A power user could 
easily slip between an RSS reader, instant messaging client, and email in a 30 second period.
To conquer this problem, our application should be continuously saving user data in 
preparation for an exodus. The fast app switching service offers many services to aid this 
inside of our application; it's just our job to assure that our application flows properly.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
153
There really isn't a magic formula to answer the question as to what "feels right" when it 
comes to application entrance and exit. It's a skill that takes time, but we'll quickly recognize 
the flow when we see or feel it. The goal is to eliminate interface components that cause 
friction or increase the amount of time that it takes to open our app and accomplish a 
task. When a user can quickly move back and forth with ease, we'll have mastered fast app 
switching.
As we discussed in the previous recipe on implementing multitasking for our own gain, the 
biggest difficulty for our interface will occur when we depend upon the audio inside of our 
application but the user is currently listening to an audio track from another application.
Ideally, we should abide by the user's clear intention to listen to the previously playing track, and 
never interrupt this audio when possible. We should feel free to quickly interrupt if necessary 
for short sound effects, but we should keep the primary audio track in control of the application 
that had possession of the user's headphones when they entered our app initially.
Apps that are the biggest criminals of this behavior are game applications, which look to use 
their own audio instead of the musical track being supplied by an app like Music or Pandora.
It's important to remember that users were listening to this song before opening our 
application for a reason, likely because they prefer the song to a game soundtrack. This is a 
personal user preference that we're never going to change, so we shouldn't attempt to force 
our music, even if we think it's a better choice. Instead, we should allow the user to listen to 
their preferred track when inside our app.
While this tip applies to Voice over IP with regards to specific device multitasking services, we 
will also run into this same interface problem when the user is currently on a phone call or 
using WiFi tethering while concurrently using our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Starting, Stopping, and Multitasking
154
When such services are used, iOS doubles the size of the status bar as a way to notify the 
user that a phone call or tethering service is currently taking place on the device. In the 
following screenshot, we can see how Calculator solves this problem:

Calculator - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
The resulting shift gives our application essentially 20 less pixels to work with. 20 pixels only 
accounts for approximately four percent of our total screen height, but this distance can 
create a drastic shift in the appearance of our application on screen.
Depending upon how our application is coded, this double status bar will either cover up or 
push down part of the interface view. Such small changes seem minute, but can easyily cause 
a drastic difference and make parts of our application unusable.
It seems as if these situations are outliers, as an individual is less likely to be off a phone call 
than on a call, but these scenarios are essential because when a user enters our application 
when on a VOIP call or regular call, it's probably because they're looking up information to 
share with the person on the other line. If they are unable to access the information because 
of our inability to plan for the tall status bar, the user will become disappointed or frustrated 
with our work.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 6
155
It is possible to cover the tall status bar, but only when our application is in a full screen 
mode where the status bar is covered throughout all use of the app. Game applications most 
commonly use such a behavior and while this helps eliminate the 40 pixel status bar problem, 
it may not be ideal for our application to always feature this trait.
The iPhone Simulator built into XCode lets us simulate these double status bar cases with 
ease, and we should test each view of our application for such a scenario, to guarantee that 
users will always be able to gather information from our app.
If we want our work to be exceptional, we should be mindful to test for the double status bar 
or audio problems when using our application.
There's more...
We talk a bit about the tall status bar in this recipe, but when exactly will it become a 
problem? Here's a look at different scenarios that can create a tall status bar.
Double status bar all the way
This 20-pixel addition to the standard status bar can cause quite a bit of design headache if 
we're unprepared. Here's a look at different ways in which the user can bring about the tall 
status bar:
f
f
When on a phone call and leaving the Phone application, which is only applicable on 
the iPhone.
f
f
When in the process of using WiFi, Bluetooth, or USB tethering, which is also only 
possible on the iPhone.
f
f
When on a VOIP call using an application such as Skype, and the user leaves the 
VOIP app. This behavior is possible on all iOS devices.
f
f
During an audio recording that continues to run even though the user exited the app, 
a double status bar will be shown. Any device with a microphone is subject to this 
possible double bar.
See also
f
f
Working with multitasking in iOS 4 in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

7
Notifications, 
Locations, 
and Sounds
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Integrating push or local notifications into our app
f
f
Using badges to draw attention to new content
f
f
Keeping silent and managing audio properties
f
f
Locating the sweet spot when handling location services
f
f
Making our app useable without location data
f
f
Making cents with proper ad placement
Introduction
Our application interface is not confined to the various views that take up real estate once the 
user is inside our application. Notifications, location management, and audio cues inside our 
application also take up an integral role both inside and outside of our work.
Furthermore, text clarity on messages, using badges to notify uses of content change, and 
location specific displays can help separate a best seller from the rest of the pack.
In this chapter, we'll discuss the inclusion of notifications, the fine sounds of background 
audio, location clarification, and much more.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
158
Integrating push or local notifications 
into our app
Push and local notifications are a common inclusion in many applications, offering a way 
to communicate to users when they're not currently using our application. Upon a content 
update in our app, we can either send out a push or local notification to help allure the user 
back inside of our work.
Push and local notifications are an extremely useful interface option that we have essentially 
no creative control over. No matter how hard we try to customize the notification, it will forever 
be a blue rounded rectangle with one or more action buttons.
At this point, we may be asking ourselves as to if there is an actual need to put effort into the 
interface design of notifications. We may even wonder if time spent on such elements is even 
interface design work, as we have no control over the piece.
However, it's important to note that push and local notifications are often the most overlooked 
aspect of application design. The purpose of the notification is to encourage the user that our 
app is more valuable and worthwhile than whatever they're at the time of presentation.
So if we want the user to be more likely to tap through and reenter our application, we should 
take time to thoughtfully craft the copy and behavior of our notifications.
There isn't much interface work to be done when working to apply notifications, as a standard 
Alert View is presented with limited customization options. We do have some control over 
the context buttons and text included though, so we should focus on optimizing the copy and 
audio options that are presented when using notifications.
In this recipe, we'll dive into tips for notifications in iOS 3.0 devices and later.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should have the knowledge regarding whether our application will use local 
or push notifications. We should also have advance knowledge as to what content will be 
presented on notifications, so that we can best prepare an optimizing text copy.
How to do it...
Here are a few helpful tips on how we can best take control of our local or push notifications:
f
f
Consider the frequency of our expected notifications
f
f
Be brief when displaying copy
f
f
Provide single word, clearly identifiable action buttons
f
f
When bringing users back into our app, create a direct route to desired content
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
159
By taking these different tips into account with our notifications, we'll create an intuitive and 
easily manageable way for the user to have constant communication with our application.
How it works...
Notifications are a great tool, regardless as to if we use the push or local variety. To be a 
success, our application requires user eyeballs, and the notification alert is a great way to 
remind users that they're missing out on the important content inside of our app.
With the first point on notifications, the entire element purpose is to provide the desired 
content to the user when outside of our application. For example, if we're creating a personal 
calendar application, we could send out a notification to remind the user about an 
upcoming event.
But we should be conservative in our decision as to how often we present such notifications, 
as they are somewhat disruptive when the user is viewing other content. In some respects, 
this disruption is appreciated, as the user has downloaded our app in order to receive 
such updates.
However too much of a good thing can sometimes be overwhelming, and frequent updates 
can become distracting and unappreciated. In determining as if we should include 
notifications, we should take display frequency into consideration. If we believe that we'll be 
presenting notifications more than once or twice per house, we may want to reconsider and 
look into badges instead.
Second, text presented in the body of the notification alert should be short. If we present a 
body copy that is longer than two to three lines in length, the alert will take considerable time 
to read and also runs the risk of requiring the user to scroll down through a lengthy view.
Because the push or local notification will arise when the user is busy doing something 
else, we should be mindful to respect their time with our interruption. Concise copy will help 
ensure that the user can quickly read our alert and get back to whatever they were previously 
occupied with.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
160
The third tip is useful when using a two-button notification, as we're required to include the 
Close option for the user. But we are given the option to customize the action button in the 
notification and should take advantage of this opportunity when possible. As shown below, 
Handoff uses the word View to direct users towards new content:
If we do decide to alter the action button, a single short word is the best way to describe the 
task if possible. If we can't constrain the action to a single word, the button should never be 
so long that the text on the button is truncated and overly complex.
We should also take international language translations into consideration as well when 
determining the text for the action button. If our application is localized to various languages, 
we should verify that the text we decide upon would be printable in a concise manner in all 
desired languages.
Finally, when pulling the user back into our application through a notification, we should 
provide direct access to the updated content. Because we're interrupting the user with our 
notification, quick access will be appreciated.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
161
If desirable, we are also able to include a special loading Default.png image to load when 
the user enters from a notification. This allows for a unique image that helps acclimate the 
user for this specific scenario. This can be done using the alertLaunchImage property of 
UILocalNotification class.
Many interface designers often believe that they're above worrying about the text placed on 
an alert, or that it's not a very influential component of the interface. This is often a significant 
oversight and should not be overlooked. Language is a critical component in creating clear 
direction, and we should persistently work to cut down on excessive or confusing copy.
Working these changes into our notifications can help drive higher tap through rates back into 
our application, while also offering increased user utility.
There's more...
Looking to add a bit more spunk to an alert? Here are a couple of other ways in which we can 
customize our notification.
Using a single button notification if we want
Throughout this recipe, we speak most specifically about two button alert notifications. 
However, it is also possible to create a single button alert notification too. This is useful 
for simple timed reminders or other content in which we're not really informing about new 
content, but are instead just using the alert to grab the user's attention.
Providing a positive sound
We can also include a custom sound to accompany our push or local notification. This is a 
great way to differentiate our alert, as the unique sound will help the user distinguish between 
our notification and other alert sounds for text messages or emails.
See also
f
f
Getting quick updates with Alert Views in Chapter 3
f
f
Using badges to draw attention to new content in this chapter
Using badges to draw attention to 
new content
As a specific form of notifications, badges allow us to give a numerical bit of context on the 
application for the user. This is a great tool when we look to inform the user on the number of 
their new emails, text messages, and so on.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
162
Badges are a relatively simple, but fundamentally important aspect of an application 
interface. For any application that uses Push or Local Notifications in order to update the user 
on new content, badges are an option to help gain user attention.
Badges are used by many applications. In the previous screenshot, badges indicate the 
number of apps available for update in the App Store, emails awaiting response in Mail, 
replies to be viewed in Twitter, and more.
By definition, badges consist of a small red circle that appears in the upper right hand 
corner of an application or folder icon on the iOS home screen. These interface elements are 
technically a component in the Push and Local Notification framework, intended to be offered 
as an alternative to an alert notification.
When displaying a badge, we're free to offer a sound to help notify the user if we so desire. We 
can also display the badge in tandem with a traditional alert as well.
Badges help to offer a simple way to inform users about the number of events, messages, 
tasks, or other quantifiable content that is currently waiting inside of the application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
163
Preferably, the badge is used to offer an indication on tasks or messages that are not time 
sensitive. The number should indicate the number of available items that can be visited at 
the user's leisure, without any sense of deadline. If we feel as though our notification is for 
a message or task that must be completed within a specific period of time, a standard push 
notification is a more preferable interface option.
It's important that we use notification alerts instead of badges for time sensitive information 
because we can't guarantee that the user will see our badge, whereas we know they will be 
presented with an alert. If the user is inside of another application, on a home screen that 
does not include our app, or if our app is stored inside of a folder, it's very likely that the user 
will never see our badge.
For this recipe, we'll discuss a few badge limitations as well as the use cases that best fit the 
interface element.
Getting ready
To prepare for the inclusion of badges, we should ensure that our application will technically 
include the proper notification API. We should also have a solid understanding as to what 
content we will want to update users about with badges.
How to do it...
In choosing if badges are best for our application, we should consider the frequency with 
which we intend to present the user with information. If we feel as though our badge will often 
offer a number greater than 10-20 items, we may want to reconsider its inclusion. With such 
a large number, users will be more likely to overlook our badge and not take it seriously when 
our application offers up a badge display.
Badges can be updated as frequently or infrequently as we like, using Apple's notification 
frameworks. We can use push or local notifications to drive our badge update as we desire.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
164
While somewhat rare, some applications use badges for other purposes. Coaching Wizard is 
an iPhone assistant for soccer coaches that provides a unique use by placing the game timer 
on the home screen through the use of badges. As shown below, a coach can see that the 
match is in the second minute when outside of the app checking e-mail or calling a player to 
see why they're not at the game yet:
Overall, badges are a somewhat simple, yet rather important inclusion in the interface of 
many feed-based applications. Graphically, they allow the user to quickly glance at an icon 
when on the home screen, and see the number of items currently awaiting attention.
While we're extremely limited in the presented presentation style that we're available to offer, 
the badge does offer a clean and simple interface opportunity for our work.
How it works...
Badges are an extremely simple interface technique that utilizes the notification framework in 
order to present a small red circle that indicates the number of events that haven't been acted 
upon. It's not highly customizable, can only be seen when the user is on a home screen and 
outside of our application, and offers little indication as to what is actually awaiting inside 
of our app.
However, the badge is an important if not overlooked way to retain user interest in our work 
well after they decide to leave for something else. By properly implementing this element as 
a way to pique curiosity, we can bring users back into our app and engage continuously. This 
allows the user to be informed about new app content that may interest them, while also 
providing our app the screen time we desire. It's win-win, and a great way to create a better 
app experience.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
165
There's more...
Badges are part of the notification framework, so we can expand on them a bit. Here's a 
helpful tip on how to make badges stand out.
Accompanying badges with notifications
Because the badge accompanies push or local notifications in the same programming family, 
we can also present these alerts at the same time in which we update our badge value.
Working hand in hand, this technique can make our badge stick out more, as the user will 
have a more obtrusive element to overcome.
See also
f
f
Integrating push or local notifications into our app in this chapter
Managing audio properties and keeping 
silent
When Steve Jobs first introduced the iPhone in 2007, he declared the device to be a phone, 
Internet browser, and an iPod all in one. The last point specifically was of great importance at 
the time, as the iPod brand was far and away the strongest line of MP3 players available on 
the market.
Immediately it became clear that the iPhone would be a pocket device designed to hold all of 
the user's music, movies, and more. When the App Store was announced, it was clear from 
day one that developers would be working on a platform that was used as a multi-feature 
device throughout the day.
As the device is most likely our user's primary audio device, we may see a situation quite often 
where the device is being used as an MP3 player while also using our application. As such, we 
should be mindful to not to hog the device's audio properties.
The most important interface function we should provide is to take note of the current audio 
state of the application on initial load. This is a relatively quick programming test using the 
Audio Session Services framework, specifically with the AudioSessionGetProperty 
function. By integrating this in code, we're able to queue the device and see if the audio is 
currently playing in the background. If there is an audio playing, it's likely that an app like iPod 
or Pandora is playing music that the user would prefer to listen to. As such, we should not 
interrupt the user's tunes and should instead find a work around.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
166
The Audio Sessions Services serves as a valuable mechanism to help give a level of 
simple control for our application's audio on the device. Because audio properties can 
be so influential with regards to the flow of our interface, it's important to have a basic 
understanding of the options available to us as a designer.
Audio cues are an important aspect of exceptional interfaces, and music may be a key 
component in our application. But we're not always given full reign when it comes to audio 
inside of an application.
When the user is expecting silence, through we should respect this wish and refrain from 
implementing audio features that could confuse or frustrate.
In this recipe, we'll discuss the importance of respecting audio settings inside of 
our application.
Getting ready
For this recipe, it would be useful to understand the audio we expect to place into the 
application and it's purpose with regards to user experience. We'll be discussing different 
audio presentation options in detail, so it will be useful to understand how we intend to use 
sound files in app.
How to do it...
Let's take a look at the different possible audio session categories and what they mean for 
our application. As a note, this isn't an exhaustive list and there are several other properties 
available, however they are all a hybrid or minor change from the following primary categories. 
For an up to date and full list, we should see Apple's Audio Session Programming Guide 
located at https://developer.apple.com/library/ios/#documentation/Audio/
Conceptual/AudioSessionProgrammingGuide/Introduction/Introduction.html:
f
f
Ambient: It is possible to make these noises interrupt the background audio 
track if we desire and if they are a flexible audio property. The ambient property is 
not designed for longer pieces though and will quit playing if the user leaves the 
application, which is important to keep in mind as well.
f
f
Playback: We can mix in ambient noises as sound effects if desired as well as keep 
the playback audio playing in the background when the user leaves the app, if we feel 
as if it would be beneficial as well. We can also play such audio while the device is 
silenced as well, but should be careful of this as it may upset the user.
f
f
Record: It is possible to record the audio while the device is in silent mode, and 
it is also possible to record the audio in the background when the user leaves our 
application. However, we won't be able to mix in other audio while the record property 
is in use.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
167
f
f
Audio Processing: When audio processing is running, we don't need to worry about 
the device and its silence settings, as no audio will be playing. As another important 
note, audio processing can also occur in the background on multitasking devices. 
So if the user leaves our app while we're still working on an audio processing job, 
the process will finish without the user being aware of what is going on behind the 
scenes.
This is a simple background into the complex world that is audio processing on the iOS 
platform; however it should be a good foundation for interface designers. If we understand the 
possibilities and expectations, we'll be able to include audio cues into our app and create a 
better user experience.
How it works...
Great interfaces aren't defined just by what is seen by the eyes. Audio cues and proper 
handling of music or sound effects are another key to strong interface design, as what 
happens on screen is often accompanied with audio.
Ambient noises are comparable to sound effects in video games, intended for short bursts of 
quick audio. These would be sounds used to help create an audio confirmation to an interface 
action, and are a great way to create a better application.
Playback audio would be the type of audio that you would hear when listening to a track on 
iPod or in Pandora. Playback is intended for long form audio such as the background music to 
the level of a video game.
The record property is the proper way to pick up user audio from the device microphone. This 
property will not work on first generation iPod touch devices, however such a device is not 
relatively popular at this point in time and it can be taken as a general assumption that most, 
if not all, of our users will have a microphone.
Audio processing is not exactly a playback possibility inside of our application, but it is an 
audio property nonetheless. While audio processing is occurring, the application will be using 
device hardware to encode audio. For example, we want to create an app that records a user's 
voice and then makes the user sound like a chipmunk. For an app like this, we could use 
background audio processing to transform the voice even if the user leaves the application. 
No actual sound will be heard during this period, but the device will be working behind the 
scenes to produce a desired file.
While we may not be designing the application's sound or programming in such code, 
it's important to understand what is going on inside of the application. By having a solid 
understanding of what opportunities are possible, as well as in knowing what makes our app's 
audio tick, we'll be able to better design our interface to work hand in hand with any audio track. 
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
168
There's more...
While it isn't a visual attribute of the application, audio also plays an important role in creating 
success. Here are a few ways in which we can optimize our audio.
Audio isn't required, but it is appreciated
It's important to note that there is no Apple mandate to include audio inside our application. 
But it is a valuable way in which we can provide feedback to the user.
As the iPhone uses a touch screen, the device lacks buttons and it's impossible to feel with 
a finger when a button is pressed, which takes away any opportunity for feedback from the 
sense of touch. Audio can help compensate, by offering subtle sound effects to help the user 
confirm that they've properly interacted with our application.
Keeping those who can't hear our audio in mind too
But while audio feedback is great, we should also take user accessibility in mind, especially 
for potential users that are either deaf or have trouble hearing.
This means that audio cues should accompany, not substitute, our visual interface changes. 
This way users who can't hear the audio, or even people who have their iPhone or iPad in 
silent mode, can still comprehend what is happening on screen.
Locating the sweet spot when handling 
location services
Arguably the most powerful driver of mobile application growth has been the nearly endless 
idea opportunity provided through the easy accessibility to geo-location data. For the first time in 
computing history, it's easy and within reach to know the location of a user on the go, and then 
provide dynamic content on demand that is specifically tailored to that user's current position.
Location services have been one of the great benefits for application developers in the rise 
of the smart phone. Thanks to on-device assisted GPS capabilities; it's possible to pinpoint a 
user within a 10-meter radius nearly anywhere on the planet.
The ability to tap the device for location information helps us quickly grab detailed location 
data for use inside of the app. Because the iPhone is constantly used on the go, applications 
that help provide restaurant information or driving directions can be of significant value. 
Entering in the address or ZIP code for an unfamiliar area can be difficult, so we can instead 
use the device to determine the location.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
169
Before iOS 4, it was often unclear as to when an application was obtaining location data. A 
simple alert prompt on initial loading of the application would ask the user to allow the use 
of location, but no indication was provided as to when such information was being used. 
Apple clarified this with the release of their new operating system, which required a special 
navigation icon remain in the status bar when location services were being utilized. The 
Settings application also kept note of applications that used location features, offering access 
to further information on the frequency of such use.
And with such further clarification, location use saw significant growth as people in general 
became more comfortable with the idea of their location being available at any given time to 
an iOS application. This is greatly beneficial for designers, as the user will typically have no 
problem with us grabbing their location for use. In general, so long as our application offers 
reward that seemingly justifies the need and we do not disobey the trust of the user, we 
should feel comfortable integrating location services into our app.
If we're looking to design a great interface for an application that is designed around user 
location, we need to take several important points into consideration. We'll be looking to 
provide a customized experience without overstepping any boundaries, which can be a 
difficult task.
In this recipe, we'll discuss location services and their impact on our application interface.
Getting ready
For this recipe, an iPod touch or iPad would be useful to have to hand. These devices do not 
have the benefit of assisted GPS and thus are more difficult to receive an accurate location 
reading on. If our application doesn't work well with the WiFi triangulation available on these 
devices, we'll be alienating a good deal of our user base while creating a sub-par app, so we 
should be sure to test on these if possible.
How to do it...
When pulling the user's location, we should always be sure to do our best to still prompt the 
user and pull location service data only after user action when possible. A great example of 
strong location use can be found in Foursquare. Although it is inherently understood that the 
app will require user location to function properly, Foursquare has required the user to take 
multiple steps when sharing their location. Here's a look at what one must do in order to 
share location:
1.	 Tap on the Friends tab.
2.	 Tap the Check In button on the Navigation Bar.
3.	 Select a location, which requires a manual refresh if the user has traveled a good 
distance.
4.	 Tap a large Check In Here button.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
170
5.	 Tap another large Check In Here button, placed intentionally on an opposite end of 
the screen to ensure that the touch isn't accidental.
With such a mechanism, there is absolutely no misunderstanding between the user and 
application backend with regards to what is public, what is being pulled, and what the 
outcome will be. This is a great way to avoid negative reviews and build good will with 
novice users.
While the location services are useful, it is also helpful to allow the users to manually 
enter in their location as well. There will be times when no matter how hard we try, the GPS 
functionality for an individual user will not be working in our favor and there will be a desire to 
manually enter the data instead. If operable within our design framework, this is a significant 
way to increase app value.
No matter if we pull the user location automatically or through manual entry, it's important 
that all location centric data on screen adapt quickly to any change in location. For example, 
if we provide driving directions to local restaurants, we need to create our application with 
rapid refreshing in mind. If the user is sitting on a bus while using our app, their location could 
change quickly by the moment and an interface that takes an extensive period of time to 
update would become frustrating.
Somewhat contradictory, but also important, we must also be mindful not to pull location 
services too often either. This behavior may seem excessive to our users, which is definitely 
a problem, but it also has other unwanted side effects as well. Grabbing location from 
the device is one of the greatest causes of battery drain in any application and we can 
unnecessarily drain precious battery life.
These tips cover a fairly wide variety of different important attributes to take into consideration 
when integrating location services into our app. But by taking note of such subtle nuisances 
when dealing with location, we'll be well on our way to providing a well-rounded location 
aware application.
How it works...
Utilizing location data within our application is an interesting interface predicament, as we're 
in an awkward design period where users and developers alike are just beginning to get 
comfortable with understanding what is and is not acceptable with regards to user data in the 
mobile world.
The best advice we can take in designing our first location-aware application is to be 
conscious and respectful of the user's personal data. Not every person who downloads our 
application will be comfortable with us knowing his or her exact location, and we need to be 
OK with that. So instead of designing an application that punishes, we should design an app 
that offers flexibility and transparency.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
171
Hopefully the tips contained in this recipe will help us build such an app. But always 
remember; when in doubt, err on the side of allowing the user to remain anonymous while 
keeping control of their personal data.
See also
f
f
Working with multitasking in iOS 4 in Chapter 6
f
f
Making an app usable without location data in this chapter
Making an app usable without 
location data
Location services provided by the GPS, cellular tower, and WiFi triangulation methods 
available in iOS are wonderful inclusions in any project, allowing us to create an app where 
users aren't required to enter such redundant information when looking for a hotel 
or restaurant.
But there will be times when we can't rely on location data in our application. If our user is 
on an iPod touch, or on an iPhone that cannot find a tower with which to gather a GPS signal, 
we'll be left without a way to gather location information.
In this recipe, we'll plan out ways to optimize our location-based application when we're 
unable to determine where our user exactly is.
Getting ready
For this recipe, an iPod touch or Wi-Fi only iPad device would be useful to have on hand. To 
simulate a lack of location service data on these devices, we can simply turn WiFi connectivity 
off and use the application. Without this, the device will be unable to grab any data.
How to do it...
When designing an application, it's quite easy to take location data for granted. Because a 
majority of our users will be iPhone users, we assume that it will be simple to ask the device 
for coordinates and display geographically specific data on screen.
In practice, we'll find that the situation is not quite so simple, as we must also take iPod touch 
and WiFi iPad devices into account as well. Such devices can use WiFi triangulation for 
location data, but this requires that the user be connected to an access point which should 
never be taken as a given. Likewise, iPhone and iPad 3G users may find themselves with poor 
service and would be unable to gather coordinates.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
172
Because accessible location data is not guaranteed, we should take this potential problem 
into account when designing our interface. Here are a few tips on how to optimize for such a 
problem:
f
f
Allow the user to access some information without the requirement of having entered 
location data
f
f
Provide clear display to the user that a device with GPS is required in order to fully 
utilize the application
f
f
Give the user the opportunity to enter their location manually
f
f
Keep track of a user's favorite location and make this information readily available
If we follow these various tips in our application, we'll be sure to provide an optimal 
experience, regardless as to if we have accurate data in hand. The user will find our app to be 
more beneficial, and we'll be rewarded with greater sales and better reviews in the App Store.
How it works...
While the iPhone and other smart phone devices are benefited by the addition of GPS 
positioning, it's a feature that can often be taken for granted. With WiFi-only iPod touch and 
iPad devices making up a good portion of our user base, it is important that we consider how 
our location-focused application will work for the user with less accurate location capabilities.
For tip 1, we see that if our application utilizes location data, we'll still want to provide some 
user utility without the requirement of a strong GPS signal.
We should do this because while we may not be able to provide the optimal app experience 
without knowing the user location, we don't want to completely turn away users from our 
application if they so happen to be unable to obtain their GPS coordinates. If the user is a 
victim of bad circumstance, they may not have the device gather an accurate location and 
then they'll have no possible chance for enjoyment with out app.
Instead, we should provide a preview as to what utility would be possible for the user, if GPS 
location was currently available. We should clearly mark such data and stress that this isn't 
the optimal experience, but at least the user will be able to play around and see what our 
application is all about. If they like what they see, they'll be willing to find a way to make GPS 
work and gain maximum enjoyment out of our app.
For tip 2, we shouldn't be subtle with the user in regards to a location requirement. iOS does 
prompt the user as to if they are willing to provide their location to our app, but we shouldn't 
rely on this message alone. If location is crucial for our app, we should make note of this to 
the user early and often.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
173
The rationale behind this philosophy is that, we don't want the user to be taken back or 
surprised if our application isn't living up to their potential because we haven't received an 
accurate location from the iPhone or iPad. If the user is inside a large building and the device 
is able to obtain accurate information, then we want the user to understand that this is a 
result of their circumstance and not poor programming on our behalf.
By reminding the user that location is required for accurate results, and by making it clear when 
the device is having a hard time obtaining such data, the user will look toward blaming their 
situation when things go wrong, as opposed to leaving us a negative review in the App Store.
As we see in tip 3, when in doubt, provide a manual option for the user to enter their location. 
Be it through providing the city, state, or ZIP code.
Through providing this possibility for the user, we don't need to worry about the type of device 
or current level of user connectivity. Instead, the user can enter whatever they please, and 
we'll provide our data accordingly.
As shown below, the native Weather application provides such an option, prompting the user 
for their desired location to receive weather information for. Regardless as to whether the user 
is currently in their desired city or not, the application is able to render the optimal data.
Finally, we should also take note of user's favorite location, especially if we're developing 
an application where location data is pulled often. By utilizing such a method, we can help 
provide the most desirable location, even if our location data isn't completely accurate.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
174
Foursquare offers such a feature as visible in the following screenshot, providing favorite 
check-in locations at the top of the establishment listings, even if the user is slightly outside of 
the typical range for that establishment. They're able to this because they know that if a user 
visits a certain restaurant or entertainment venue often, they're most likely going to attend 
again, and even if their location data is slightly inaccurate, it's likely that the user will be 
looking for the venue.

foursquare - © 2011 foursquare
Such a feature works well because it anticipates the needs of the user, and minimizes on the 
time spent searching it. By providing the most probable data, the user will notice that we've 
worked to take their personal habits into consideration, which will help grow good will for 
our application.
It doesn't take a good deal of work to optimize our application for such scenarios, but it 
does take a conscious effort. By including the tips presented in this recipe, we'll provide an 
experience that will be enjoyable by all, no matter what location data we are able to grab.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
175
There's more...
If we've built a location-focused application, it isn't fun when we can't grab solid positioning 
information. But if we're not careful, things can head downhill very quickly.
A few apps just shutting down completely
Some applications take location to be a complete given, probably testing with only their 
iPhone in a big city where interesting location content is easily obtainable. When we design for 
something like location, we should be designing with the worst-case scenario in mind instead.
If we don't test in isolated areas and places that produce poor cell reception, we'll never 
have a chance to fully understand user frustration. This is increasingly apparent in location 
applications, where poor experiences can be exceptionally terrible and ridden with confusion 
or app crashing.
See also
f
f
Locating the sweet spot when handling location services in this chapter
Making cents with proper ad placement
In the summer of 2010, Apple announced a new revenue generation tool called iAd. The new 
service was an advertisement network tailored to application developers, which partnered 
with strong brands in an effort to increase app profitability.
Many applications decide to insert advertisements as a way to monetize the work, so it is 
important that we understand the business of placing ads so that we can make informed 
interface decisions that help build revenue and create an immersive experience.
With regards to specific ad networks, there is a bit of variety and our options are open. 
This choice will be determined with the consideration of several questions, such as ease of 
implementation, typical revenue for our content type, fill rates, target user location, and more. 
The network itself will probably be chosen by our programming or marketing team, so we 
may not have much influence in its selection as interface designers. As such, we should be 
prepared to interact with anything that is thrown our way.
For the purpose of this recipe, we'll focus on iAd as it is typically the most popular and most 
strict with regards to interface requirement. Other ad networks tend to also be similar to iAd, 
so nearly all content related to the network is likely to be applicable with other networks 
as well.
Like any other Apple framework, the service helped simplify a process for developers while 
also requiring stringent standards in order to guarantee a consistent user experience. This will 
require that we understand the guidelines before we toss the ads into our app as well.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
176
For this recipe, we'll discuss the various interface requirements for the iAd network, and why 
proper placement of such ads will increase revenue.
Getting ready
An iAd, AdMob, or other advertisement service account will be required for this exercise; 
however we could go about using our own self-created ad framework as well. Regardless as 
to what service we should decide to go with, we should have documentation on expected ad 
standards on hand when working through this recipe.
For more information on how to join AdMob, MobFox, or Apple's iAd networks, feel free to visit 
the following links:
f
f
http://www.admob.com
f
f
http://www.mobfox.com
f
f
http://advertising.apple.com/developers/
How to do it...
While placing our ad, we're given the option of two different ad types. First is the standard 
banner view, which is available on all iOS devices. This ad type runs much like a traditional 
website banner ad, spanning across the width of the device screen while varying in height. 
For iAds, the standard banner is 50 pixels tall in portrait mode on iPhone or iPod touch and 
32 pixels tall when in landscape. On iPad, the standard banner is always 66 pixels in height 
regardless of orientation.
The standard banner ad should always be placed on either the very bottom of the screen view, 
or anchored above a Tab Bar or Tool Bar, also on the bottom of the screen. Never should 
an iAd be placed on the top of the screen or floating in the middle of the screen. The proper 
placement of an iAd is shown as follows:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 7
177

Battery Go! Plus - © 2011 9magnets LLC
These banners serve as an entry point to a larger ad, programmed to run full screen on top of 
our application when tapped.
The second advertisement type, called a full screen banner, is only available on the iPad. The 
ad type varies in height depending upon the presence of a Tab Bar or other interface item. 
This ad is intended to serve well as an intermittent piece between pages of a magazine or 
between levels of a game.
Such strong restrictions don't offer much flexibility in our interface, but offer the best 
opportunity to gain advertisement revenue in our app. The smaller banner ads are designed 
to be placed by high traffic interface items, which offer a high likelihood that the user will tap 
upon the ad if interest is peaked. Such banners also are designed to be as unobtrusive as 
possible, so that the user is never frustrated with an ad that overstays its welcome.
The HTML 5 content rich advertisement presented once the iAd has been tapped is another 
exceptional way to increase the revenue, as the user is able to view a full ad without leaving 
the application. This makes it much more likely that the user will tap on the ad, as they won't 
be kicked out of whatever they are viewing in order to learn more about the featured product.
Full screen banner advertisements allow for a more traditional, large-scale marketing 
approach. Here, we can offer a full-page ad presentation on the iPad in-between pages of a 
periodical or when in a game. Such ads are immersive, well received by users, and require no 
sales staff in order to sell.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Notifications, Locations, and Sounds
178
Using one of these advertising methods, we'll quickly create a strong application with the 
potential to bring in a significant amount of revenue. Just integrate the iAd framework into our 
existing work, and we'll be well on our way.
How it works...
For free applications, advertisement revenue can be a necessary means and important 
interface element. While we'd love to create amazing applications for free, income is a 
necessity if we're looking to make a career in app development.
Thankfully, Apple has created an exceptional ad framework along with simple and successful 
interface placement requirements. So as long as we sign up for the iAd program and abide by 
the rules, we'll be well on our way towards earning significant ad revenue from our application.
There's more...
In this recipe, we talk exclusively about the iAd platform. But we're not stuck on only one 
platform when it comes to placing ads inside our app.
Combining forces
Frequently, application developers integrate two or more ad platforms into an application, as 
one platform by itself may have a low fill rate or not be available internationally.
It's relatively easy to work two ad networks into an application from a technical standpoint, but 
from a design point of view, we must remember to abide by any interface standards that are 
required by each network involved.
The problem with this is that standards may not be consistent throughout each network. This 
will require us to create a fairly flexible design that works well regardless of the network.
If we do think that we're going to integrate multiple networks, it's important that we know this 
and plan for it up front before we get far into designing the application interface. If we design 
the entire app with only one network in mind, we may find it difficult to incorporate another 
network's interface standards late into the project cycle.
See also
f
f
Experiences that are possible on the iPad, but not on the iPhone in Chapter 9
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

8
Accessibility, 
Options, and Limited 
Opportunity to Help 
our User
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Using the 80 percent rule when developing optimal settings
f
f
Properly supporting copy and paste
f
f
Supporting undo and redo
f
f
Configurations in, settings out
f
f
Cutting features when in doubt
f
f
Supporting VoiceOver and other accessibility features
Introduction
When we're designing our application, it's extremely easy to fall into a bubble and forget that 
people other than our development team will use the application. It's an interesting situation, 
as we're mindfully creating a product for other people to use on their iPhone or iPad, but it's 
extremely easy to get caught up and forget that our work must be easily understandable by 
any user.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
180
The most overlooked conflict arises when designers don't attempt to make their application 
fit into operating system wide standards such as copy and paste, undo and redo, and 
accessibility features such as voiceover. Often designers feel as if their app doesn't need such 
features, or that their app is too exceptional to require the need of accessibility features or 
copy and paste.
Such an arrogant designer may make such decisions because they can't look past their own 
experience with the app and realize that such features are implemented into the operating 
system to help all users feel at home inside of every application. Including such features is 
especially important in ensuring that disabled users are able to fully use our application, as 
features such as VoiceOver are essential for users who have difficulties with sight and hearing.
In this chapter, we'll discuss different ways to determine which features inside of our app 
should receive the most interface attention as well as ways to guarantee that we can 
accommodate for various system wide text properties, while also doing our best to make sure 
that we create an application that is usable by the disabled as well.
Using the 80 percent rule when developing 
optimal settings
A popular design rule, often called the Pareto principle in honor of the Italian economist 
who popularized the concept, is a fundamental theory on an 80 percent-20 percent ratio. 
The basic concept behind the principle is that for a system with a large number of occurring 
events, often 80 percent of the results come from 20 percent of the system's cause variables.
With interface design, this rule is often embodied in the idea that for any application, 80 
percent of a user's time will be spent using only 20 percent of the app's features. Many 
applications tend to follow this trend, with some even seeing ratios as high as 90 percent or 
more of all time in app spent on 20 percent of features.
In this recipe, we'll discuss how to cut down on options or features in order to best create a 
piece of work optimized for this principle.
Getting ready
For this recipe, it will be useful to have some sort of beta testing program planned out, so that 
we can get our pre-release application into the hands of users and determine what our app's 
most popular features are.
If we're unsure of how to best set up a beta test group, a wonderful tool awaits us at http://
www.testflightapp.com. Test Flight is a simple way to distribute pre-release software to a 
group, and definitely worth looking into if we want to run a painless beta test.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
181
How to do it...
As much as we would like to believe that every user would take the time to enjoy and explore 
every feature inside of our application, the truth is that such patterns are not typical. The 80 
percent-20 percent ratio is a common standard for design guidance, with the assumption that 
80 percent of all time spent inside of our application will be dedicated to 20 percent of the 
features inside of the application.
This means that we should bear in mind two important principles when designing our apps:
1.	 We should spend a good deal of time to ensure that our most commonly used app 
functions are easy to perform and simple to understand through the use of thoughtful 
interface elements.
2.	 We should consider the removal of less commonly used application features in an 
effort to focus design on essential tasks.
We may have difficulty in determining what parts of our application are most popular to a 
majority of users. Often, we see our applications with a bias because we played a part in 
their creation, and it's important to not let this personal opinion blind us to the feelings of 
the typical user. Because of our obvious personal preferences with regards to what is most 
important inside of the app, it's very important to find a metric with which to measure the 
application use during the beta pre-release period while we're working on the app.
There are various analytic services for iOS development, which can help 
give us a peak as to what features or pages are most commonly used. 
Something like the Google Analytics SDK can be integrated quickly and 
offer detailed statistics as to how long the user stays inside of our app and 
what they do when they're visiting, which we can in turn use to determine 
what our most popular features are.
Likewise, we can also learn more about what features our users appreciate most through beta 
testing our application vigorously. This can be done by remotely offering builds via Ad Hoc 
distribution, then surveying beta testers as to what their favorite features are, or by offering 
test builds in person and observing the user interact with our app.
Once we have a tangible way to judge what parts of our application are most beloved by the 
typical user, we can go about altering our interface to better focus on the key 20 percent of 
features which are most commonly used. By identifying such critical components, we can 
make any modification necessary to help guarantee that these important features and their 
interface elements inside of the app are easily accessible and comprehendible by the user.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
182
How it works...
The most important realization we can make in our interface design is that no matter how 
great we think each and every part of our application is, the typical user will pick out a single 
appealing part and focus in on that feature first and foremost.
At first, this may seem somewhat upsetting. However, we should also realize that there is 
nothing we can do to change the average user and instead of being discouraged, we should 
use such knowledge to our advantage and build a better application.
The 80 percent-20 percent rule is a great design philosophy to keep in mind when considering 
the idea of visual appeal. If we know that a majority of all time spent inside of our app will 
be focused on a small feature set, and we recognize what that feature set will be through 
extensive beta testing, we can use this knowledge to focus our interface around these 
important features. This will drive first-time users to the most significant aspects of our 
work, which we want them to focus on. This will help ensure attention on our best features, 
increasing the chance that the user will continue to use our app.
There's more...
The 80 percent-20 percent ratio is an important way to look at our app from a design 
perspective, but it's not exactly a set in stone rule. Here's a look at different flexibility options 
we have when using it.
Ratio flexibility
If we're working with users on a beta test, we don't need to fear or think our application 
is broken if our test users only spend 70 percent of their time on 20 percent of our app's 
features. Likewise, it's not overly worrisome if the user spends 90-95 percent of time on 20 
percent of our features.
This tool is just a guide; don't take it too seriously when constructing your application feature 
set or interface.
Splitting our work into multiple apps
If we find our application full of several key features, each of which has significant value on its 
own, it may be best to break our application up into several different small apps.
In doing so, we may be able to offer a cleaner interface that is more feature-focused and easy 
to use for a specific task.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
183
See also
f
f
Cutting features when in doubt in this chapter
Properly supporting copy and paste
Copy and paste are two common text manipulation techniques on the iPhone and iPad, 
allowing users to quickly move text between fields or applications, much like on a standard 
desktop computer.
Copy and paste came late to iOS, not falling in place until the release of version 3.0 in the 
summer of 2009. Apple took their time in implementing the feature, waiting to release the 
functionality until they had perfected the feature interface.
In some applications, specifically iPad magazines or creative pieces with long prose, we may 
find it easier or more effective to take a design route that keeps the user from being able to 
copy and paste. Magazines are specifically notorious, displaying text content in an image so 
that copy and paste selection is impossible.
However, such interface behavior can be quite detrimental to the overall usefulness of our 
app, while also making our work much less accessible to those with disabilities. These are the 
outcomes that we want to prevent, so let's look at ways in which we can best utilize copy and 
paste in our work.
Getting ready
We won't need much for this recipe, besides a bit of knowledge as to where we anticipate the 
text fields being placed inside of our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
184
How to do it...
By holding down a finger on a word or by double-tapping on a text area, selection cursors 
along with the Edit Menu appear on the screen so that the user can drag and select text, then 
copy the selection to the clipboard, as shown in the following screenshot. The user can then 
tap and hold or double tap on another text field to paste the text.
This behavior only works on text fields, through the inclusion of a menu display. Apple 
designed several standard menus for easy inclusion, along with the ability to customize our 
display as well. The only thing we need to do is have our programming team code text in the 
app so that it is selectable, then include copy and paste into the app.
As adding copy and paste into our application is so simple, we really need to try hard in order 
to keep the functionality out of our app. Some developers do in fact go out of their way to keep 
copy and paste from their users. Magazine publishers are often the most common example of 
developers that withhold copy and paste from a user. They usually refrain from including the 
feature or create a design where the actual app is merely a collection of JPEG images from 
the print edition of the magazine, and because they don't want users stealing the content.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
185
This strategy often makes such applications much less usable, as it is impossible for the user 
to clip pieces and keep notes on an article or send an email to a friend with a quote from a 
piece. As a general practice, this is often poor because it only alienates users who look to use 
copy and paste, as they would expect the feature to work with any other large body of text. 
Disabled users who depend on VoiceOver will also be unable to use the feature with such text.
As a general practice we should always include copy and paste into our application on long 
bodies of text or in text fields where the user enters in their own text, and we should have a 
good reason to not include the selection tool if we decide to not allow the user to use such 
a function. Because text selection is available in so many applications, including nearly all 
large bodies of text, the typical user will take such a feature as given inside of our app. If we 
don't provide such functionality inside of our app, there will be negative feedback and it may 
considerably shrink the size of our potential user base.
How it works...
Copy and paste works well in iOS because the interaction is uniform throughout the operating 
system. If the user double taps or holds down on a text field, it's possible to select and copy or 
paste text.
It's important to remember though that while copy and paste is an invaluable tool that 
users have become accustomed to over the past two decades on the traditional desktop 
environment, there is little precedent on mobile phones with regards to how users initiate 
what they want to copy and paste, what items are selectable, and so on.
So in the design of our app, it's important to make sure we verify that the text in our work 
is capable of being copied if it's reasonable that the user would want to do so. Likewise, we 
should also be sure to let users paste text into entry fields as well.
The key to successful interface design is meeting user expectations. Copy and paste is not 
an extremely common tool in most applications, but we'll be setting up the user for potential 
frustration if we don't include the feature. That's a potential pitfall that we'd be best off 
avoiding. And since including copy and paste is so simple, there is really no reason not to offer 
this ability inside of our app.
There's more...
If we include copy and paste in our application, we'll be doing so through the Edit Menu. We 
can't customize much on the menu, but here are a few things we can do to give the menu a 
personal touch.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
186
Menu customizations
If we want to use copy and paste, we have to play by Apple's rules and use the contextual Edit 
Menu. We don't have unlimited choices with regards to what we include or don't include in the 
menu, but here is a list of things we can do to make the menu fit into our app:
f
f
We can choose which standard commands we want to include in the menu
f
f
We can customize the menu's positioning, so it doesn't obscure important interface 
buttons
f
f
We can choose what contents of a view are selected when the user double clicks on 
the screen to pull up the Edit Menu
But we can't customize everything. Here's what we don't have access to:
f
f
The shape and sizing of the menu
f
f
The color of the menu
See also
f
f
Supporting undo and redo in this chapter
f
f
Supporting VoiceOver and other accessibility features in this chapter
Supporting undo and redo
Much like copy and paste, undo and redo are also expected and necessary tools for easy text 
management on iOS. For the user looking to write a long paper on iPad or keep class notes on 
an iPod touch, these tools are essential.
If we want to make our app universally acceptable, including these features is a must. Over 
the next few pages, we'll look at the positives and negatives of including such abilities.
Getting ready
Redo and undo require little design preparation; however we should make sure that copy 
and paste have already been implemented into our app. These two features typically come 
together hand-in-hand, and if we won't be including copy and paste into our work for some 
specific reason, we probably won't be including redo and undo either.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
187
How to do it...
Undo and redo are fairly simple text commands in any operating system, allowing for the 
user to quickly correct any mistakes made on screen. The functions are not as absolutely 
necessary as they are in a traditional computing environment, mostly because user typing will 
typically be in shorter and more deliberate bursts, but the ability to undo and redo is 
still welcome.
Apple has provided two simple and standard ways to implement undo and redo text inside of 
any application; we only need to implement the feature.
The first way is through the shake gesture, and this implementation can be found in the 
Messages and Mail application. Through a simple shake of the device, an Alert View slides 
on screen prompting the user to either undo or redo text. We can also dive further into 
Apple's undo and redo framework and specify which fields are capable of undo and redo, the 
circumstances in which the action can be preformed, and the number of levels of undo and 
redo which are retained. An example of undo at work after the shake gesture is as follows:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
188
This implementation works well in applications where there is no other use throughout the 
application for the shake gesture, and the action will be a relatively rare occurrence. While 
the gesture is fairly universal system wide in typing applications as the way to undo text, we 
shouldn't take the action as guaranteed knowledge amongst our entire user base.
If we're building an application where we foresee undo and redo to be common functions, 
such as an iPad word processing application, we can always include the functions through 
standard buttons on a Navigation Bar or Toolbar. As shown below, Penultimate is a note-
taking app that keeps these buttons anchored in the Navigation Bar for easy user access:

Penultimate - © 2010-2011 Cocoa Box Design LLC
Much of the undo or redo behavior will remain exactly the same if we decide to go this route 
instead, the actions will just be performed by tapping a button instead of shaking the device. 
Distinct buttons will be more apparent to the user and won't require vigorous shaking of the 
device, which will be greatly appreciated on the iPad especially.
Undo and redo often seem like minor features; they even stayed off 
Apple's feature radar until iOS version 3.0. Yet they're still important 
functions and we should do our best to include the set inside of our 
app. In designing an application worthy of a top spot in the App Store, 
consistency in presentation is key. Users will expect our app to behave 
like other successful apps or Apple developed applications that come 
standard with their device, and these works will follow the human 
interface guidelines and properly implement undo and redo commands.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
189
Through working these tools into our app, we'll be one step closer to providing an experience 
on par with the best applications on the planet. Much like any other system feature of iOS, 
undo and redo won't make our application a success, but it could be a significant downfall if 
we happen to arrogantly overlook implementing it into our interface.
How it works...
Much like copy and paste, redo and undo are two features best included as a way to 
guarantee that we've met user expectations inside of our app. These two features are quite 
rarely used by the user, but they make our application feel more native and at home inside 
of iOS.
Attention to detail really stands out for the user when they determine their favorite application. 
With 350,000+ apps in the store, the inclusion of seemingly minor attributes such as redo 
and undo can really make the difference and send our application over the top and into the 
best sellers list.
See also
f
f
Properly supporting copy and paste in this chapter
f
f
Supporting VoiceOver and other accessibility features in this chapter
Configurations in, settings out
In designing iOS, Apple created a somewhat controversial and confusing design decision with 
regards to application settings.
iOS has been created from the ground up with the fundamental philosophy that instructional 
manuals and help menus are a design constraint of the past. This requires that our work be 
somewhat limited in feature set, in order to minimize the barrier of entry. To accommodate 
for this sense of minimalism, we must often limit the number of settings or configurations 
presentable inside of an app.
Through the developer SDK, Apple offered the ability for an app to store its configurable 
settings inside of the actual Settings application, as opposed to inside the application itself. 
So if the user needed to change a specific setting, they were required to leave the application, 
go to Settings, and make the appropriate change.
As one can imagine, this leads to a bit of user confusion. What's the best way to go about 
managing this and eliminating any potential problems? In this chapter, we'll discuss how to 
handle configurations and settings.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
190
Getting ready
In preparation for this recipe, we should have a good foundation of our interface already set 
in place. We should also have set out exactly which options or settings we plan on presenting 
to our user, so that we can take this into account when deciding where to place these settings 
for the user.
How to do it...
To help combat confusion for novice users and save space inside of the application, Apple 
provided a recommended method for the presentation of app options. Through some simple 
coding, we can include our applications, options inside of the system's Settings application. 
On paper, this is an elegant solution that allows for developers to focus on stripping down each 
unnecessary piece of clutter that could keep the user's attention away from the task at hand. 
Below, we can see several applications that include their settings within the Settings application:

Settings - © 2007-2011 Apple Inc.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
191
However, this solution has often lead to a great deal of user confusion as many developers 
keep all options inside of the application itself, leaving users unsure of where to find the 
proper location of the desired app setting. With no specific location for settings, either inside 
or outside of the application, the lost user has little direction through which to find what 
they're looking for.
So how do we decide on what configurations to include inside of our application and what 
options to place in the system Settings application? As a general rule of thumb, we should 
do our best to include commonly changed configurations inside of the application and less 
frequently altered options inside of the Settings application.

Facebook - © 2011 Facebook Inc.
A feature that is greatly dependent upon user preference, such as the frequency of sent Push 
Notifications, should be included inside of the application so that the user will definitely find 
such a setting and be able to alter it quickly. As shown above, Facebook is an application that 
follows this strategy.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
192
Application features that are rarely altered or best left manipulated by advanced users are 
often best presented inside the Settings application. An RSS reader or Twitter client may want 
to integrate Instapaper support so that users can read up on articles sometime in the future. 
Our best interface decision may be to prompt the user for their account name and password 
the first time they attempt to send an article to Instapaper. It really won't be necessary for 
the user to reenter this data ever again, but should offer the opportunity to change the login 
credentials if need be.
The Settings application is also a great place to offer language customization options, as this 
configuration will rarely change, and Angry Birds is a great example of an application that 
takes this route. Angry Birds also includes another key piece of information on its Settings 
page; the application's current version number. By keeping this information outside of the app 
itself, it's easily obtainable if needed by support staff if the app keeps crashing.
The Settings page is a great place for the proper storage of information 
as explained in the paragraphs above. By utilizing this interface option 
offered by Apple, there is no need to strain and clutter our interface in 
order to include a way to alter something like a login credential, which will 
rarely if ever be used by the user.
If used correctly and the Settings page only includes rarely changed options, we can help 
simplify our in-app interface that is perfect for the novice user, while still offering the flexibility 
that advanced users desire.
How it works...
Apple did designers few favors with the implementation of two different ways in which to 
implement application settings. While this method provides us with options through which 
we can clean up our in-app interface, there are no specific rules with regards to what settings 
should be placed in the Settings application or inside of the application itself, which can often 
lead to user confusion.
In determining what settings to offer and where to place them, the "configurations in, settings 
out" philosophy is often a good general rule that offers the best opportunity to minimize user 
misunderstanding. Anything that the user may change somewhat often is best left inside of 
the application, with the Settings application housing data or options which will rarely, if ever, 
be needed by the user.
iOS applications rarely ever need a considerable amount of configurable options, but we must 
still be careful in placing the few we will have. The easier it is for the user to find what they 
need, the more enjoyment they will get out of our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
193
There's more...
The placement of application Settings is a field of significant debate amongst application 
developers. But what if we decide we don't want to use the Settings application as a way to 
house certain options?
Do we have to?
The good news is there is nothing forcing us to include a certain amount of settings or options 
inside of the actual Settings application. If we'd prefer, we don't have to include anything there 
and can instead offer all options inside of the application itself.
The potential downfall with this is that our application may become a bit more complex. 
However, as long as we feel that this provides a better experience, there is nothing wrong with 
taking this route instead.
See also
f
f
Using the 80 percent rule when developing optimal settings in this chapter
f
f
Supporting VoiceOver and other accessibility features in this chapter
Cutting features when in doubt
If we find ourselves drowning in our own interface, unable to distinguish heads from tails, 
we may have a slight problem. Techniques that seem complex to us as the app's interface 
designer are definitely going to be too difficult to manage for the average or novice user.
Often, the cause behind clutter is the inclusion of too many features. We try too hard to make 
sure that we fit in every last need for every user and in doing so, we create something that no 
one can use properly.
Let's take a look at minimalism inside of our application design, so that we'll know when it's 
time to start making interface cuts for a better user experience.
Getting ready
For this recipe, we should have an understanding of what our application interface will look 
like. It may also be useful to have several beta testers available to offer input on user features, 
if we do decide something needs to be cut.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
194
How to do it...
Let's get this bit straight upfront—the most easily avoidable mistake made in application 
development is the inclusion of too many features. Long feature lists are an archaic remnant 
of desktop applications, where we can expect a user to easily spend 30 or 40 minutes inside 
of the app at a time. The mobile app space is different though, and users will expect to quickly 
get in and use our application.
The mobile environment almost requires that we tackle one or two tasks to 
perfection, offering concise instruction, and clear direction. A lack of space 
limits the number of interface elements that can appear on screen at any 
given time, so the inclusion of more than two or three tools often involves 
confusing menus or multiple steps.
When designing our interface, we'll often find ourselves running into a wall. In some 
situations, it will simply be impossible to cram in every single feature that we desire to include 
without creating a complicated and convoluted design. Eventually, we'll reach a point at which 
there will be no more space with which to include interface buttons, and that's when we'll 
begin to get desperate and attempt to be creative with our design work.
If we find ourselves at this junction, we should take a moment to seriously sit and contemplate 
the consequences of adding features to an already overloaded interface. As crazy as it may 
sound, when we start finding it difficult to create screen space for one feature or another, it 
may be best to look at features we could possibly cut instead.
While it may sound a bit counter-productive, running out of space on screen is often an early 
warning sign of an overdesigned interface. Navigation Bars, Tab Bars, and Toolbars offer 
more than enough space to offer simple button interactions for whatever we might need. If we 
find ourselves needing more, we're probably trying too hard.
iOS was designed from the ground up to be a simple operating system that performed well on 
the go. A need for more than a few simple tasks from any application may be asking too much, 
and we should hit the drawing board when we find ourselves with nowhere else to go. More 
likely than not, our application would be better off with fewer features if possible.
So how do we decide what should stay and what should go? The best way to go about making 
this tough decision is through application beta testing with a sample app audience. Friends 
or family work well as a test group and often offer valuable insight into what they feel is most 
valuable inside of the application.
Another route we can take is to perform a bit of market research on other available 
applications in the App Store in an effort to gauge what applications currently exist with a 
similar feature set, and where we can step in and create an application that is unique.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
195
Once we have a grip on what features may be excessive or inessential, we can consider 
finding ways to decrease their prevalence in the interface, or remove them from our 
app completely.
Stripping down inessential features isn't a skill set, so much as it is an alternative design 
philosophy that has become quite prevalent as iOS and other mobile platforms have grown in 
market share. Traditional desktop software was often a "how much" game, while new mobile 
apps have become a "how quick and elegant" game instead. Complex interfaces take time to 
learn and have become a relic of a past computing era. If we want our iPhone or iPad app to 
succeed, it must be simple, intuitive, and feature focused.
How it works...
Users will be using our apps everywhere. At train stations, on bus seats, in their office, or at 
home; there is no guaranteed use case that we can assume will be prevalent with our app.
Desktop software developers have the luxury of knowing that a high percentage of users will 
be sitting on a desk and planning to use their application for an extended period of time, 
allowing for deep feature sets with complex interfaces. But word processors or photo editing 
tools don't work well while walking down the street and typing on a phone, so traditional 
software interfaces or features won't work well on our iOS app.
If we find our application difficult to use or overly complex, new interface elements may not 
solve the problem. Sometimes, we're going to need to make the tough decision and cut 
features from inside of our application.
It's never easy to decide what's best to cut, but hopefully we've devised a few strategies that 
will help us pick out what's first to go. It may seem tough to cut something that we worked so 
hard on, but in the end, we may be left with a better application.
There's more...
Cutting features is never a fun task, but we shouldn't toss our ideas totally by the wayside. 
Here's a suggestion for when to cut something.
Cut them out for now, but don't get rid of them forever
If we do decide to cut out a feature inside of our application, we should do our best to leave 
the function commented out in code or kept in notes somewhere so that we can refer back to 
the feature and possibly use it in the future.
While somewhat in contradiction to this recipe, it's important to know that there may be a 
time in the future where it makes sense to throw the feature back into our app. Over time, 
users are becoming more comfortable in a mobile computing environment and users easily 
understand more complex applications.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
196
Spend a few minutes observing newer Apple created applications such as iMovie or 
Garageband for iPad, and compare these applications to offerings that launched with the 
iPhone in 2007 such as Photos, Stocks, or Weather. As users become more comfortable with 
an operating system, we can throw a bit more at them without fear of confusion. So while our 
features may not work inside of our application today, they may fit perfectly six months or a 
year from now. Likewise, we may also find spinning a feature that doesn't quite into an app 
into it's own separate app could be a successful venture as well.
See also
f
f
Using the 80 percent rule when developing optimal settings in this chapter
Supporting VoiceOver and other 
accessibility features
Apple's created iOS is the most accessible mobile platform for people of all disabilities. It 
seems somewhat ridiculous to think that Apple could design the most intuitive smart phone 
for the blind, using a phone with a solid glass screen, yet they've seen significant success and 
become a leading manufacturer of products for the disabled due to such technologies 
as VoiceOver.
In this recipe, we'll discuss the importance of ensuring that our work will be usable by anyone, 
regardless of his or her physical abilities. By creating an app that can be used by the blind or 
deaf, we're not just enlarging our potential user base; we're also doing the right thing. Let's 
take a look at a few ways in which we can help guarantee that accessibility features will work 
inside of our app.
Getting ready
To complete this recipe, we should take some time to set up VoiceOver on our iPhone or iPad, 
so that we can best understand how our application works with the feature.
To enable VoiceOver, head to the Settings application. Under the General tab, VoiceOver can 
be found under Accessibility options.
How to do it...
When VoiceOver is implemented, the user can drag a finger across the screen and have the 
iPhone or iPad read the contents of the screen out loud. Once the user finds the desired 
content, a double tap or flick on the screen will perform a desired action.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
197
As shown above, VoiceOver requires users to interact a bit differently with iOS. Yet it's still a 
simple and intuitive system that requires no ability to actually see the screen. However, this 
ability heavily relies on the inclusion of native interface elements inside of our application.
For example, standard tools such as the Navigation Bar or Tab Bar are built from the ground 
up with VoiceOver in mind. If the user taps one of these buttons, the device will read out the 
button type and text displayed on the button. Standard icons used on these buttons are read 
out too, so a refresh or trash can icon will be described to the user. If a standard text view is 
placed on the screen, VoiceOver will read the displayed text as well.
Problems arise if we begin to design custom interface elements, as the speech technology 
will be unable to read such assets. For example, if we create a custom Navigation Bar, with 
the title text rendered in Photoshop and not in native text, the user will be unable to gain 
context on this text. If we create a body of text on screen but create the text in Photoshop in 
order to apply styling, then render the text in our app as an art image, this sort of element will 
be inaccessible through VoiceOver as well.
If we must create a unique interface element that will not contain 
contextual text help, it is good to know that VoiceOver will read the file 
names for any custom button that does not contain native text. A button 
containing a question mark titled Help.png will be read as help. So while 
we should use native attributes as frequently as possible, this method will 
help us make our custom features a bit more accessibility friendly.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Accessibility, Options, and Limited Opportunity to Help our User
198
As additional tools for aiding disabled users, Apple has created tools to allow users to zoom 
in on any screen or invert all colors on screen to display a higher contrast environment if so 
desired. Little adjustment will be needed for our interface to support such elements, although 
the use of native elements will be greatly beneficial with regards to zoom clarity. Native 
elements will be rendered at the highest resolution that Apple can include, which will look 
best when the user zooms in for a better view. This method will also be future proof, where if 
Apple does increase the resolution of a native element in a future iOS update, our interface 
work will also see the jump in quality for users who must view in to see.
In designing any application, it's often easy to get caught up in a design bubble, where we 
forget to remember that some users will not interact with or see our work as we do with 
our own eyes. This is especially true with regards to consideration for disabled users, and 
thankfully Apple has included powerful software to help make iOS a wonderful platform for all, 
regardless of physical ability.
As long as we implement the great tools available at our disposal, our interface will be fully 
capable of interacting with VoiceOver and other accessibility tools. None of the requirements 
for an accessible application are hard to implement; in fact in many situations, it's more 
difficult to not support such accessibility tools. In doing so, we'll be making our application 
available to a wider user base, some of whom may be experiencing mobile applications for the 
very first time.
How it works...
Apple has made the inclusion of accessibility features exceptionally simple. So, as long as we 
use standard interface elements or native text, we'll have absolutely nothing to worry about 
and our application will play nice with features like VoiceOver, inverted colors, zoom, 
and more.
In designing for the iPhone, we're working with what is arguably the greatest smart phone 
device ever built for the disabled, specifically for the blind. While the touch screen seems as 
if it would a hindrance, it provides a blank canvas through an entirely different method of 
interaction.
To understand the importance of designing our app for accessibility, we must first try to 
understand how difficult it is for a person with poor vision to use a traditional cell phone or 
computer. It may first seem as if such a device would be more desirable to use than a touch 
screen, because it would be easier to find tactile buttons to press down upon than a glass 
screen with no buttons. The problem with this ideology lies in the fact that the user can't see 
any of the buttons and as such, the device is mostly useless.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 8
199
With a glass screen, there are essentially no rules by which to play by with regards to the 
interface. As non-disabled users, it's a fallacy to think that the iPhone is useless to the blind 
because we assume that they would use the device in the same manner as someone with 
perfect vision. In reality, the VoiceOver technology built into iOS for the disabled shows little 
resemblance to what the traditional user encounters and as such, it's important to handle our 
interface accordingly.
Working accessibility features into our app is essential because with little to no additional 
work, we have also created an application that is enjoyable by someone who may have never 
had the opportunity to enjoy a computer application like ours in the past. In a very real sense, 
it's our little way to make a difference and create a product that is truly special.
There's more...
We don't have to stop accommodating the disabled once we finish implementing VoiceOver. If 
we feel so inspired, here are a few tips to help make our app even better for the disabled.
Offering variable text size
It is quite easy to offer variable text sizes inside of our application, and we may want to 
consider doing so if we have a text heavy app such as an eBook reader.
While the average user may not ever have to change the size of the text inside of our app, it 
will be greatly appreciated by those who have difficulty in reading the text on the small screen.
Helping color-blindness too
If we have an application with a fair amount of color and art, we could have an interface that 
is difficult for color-blind people to read and understand.
By using colors that are high in contrast between each other, we can create something that is 
much more legible for the color-blind user. We can also help create a better interface for such 
users by not relying on colors alone to represent features or actions inside of an app.
See also
f
f
Using the 80 percent rule when developing optimal settings in this chapter
f
f
Configurations in, settings out in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

9
Migrating to the iPad
In this chapter, we will cover:
f
f
Migrating our app to the iPad
f
f
Experiences that are possible on the iPad, but not on the iPhone
f
f
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes
f
f
Managing our app for use with two hands
f
f
Designing our app with all orientations in mind
f
f
Including Popovers and new UI elements for the iPad
f
f
Designing an app with skeuomorphic designs
Introduction
With the announcement of the iPad in January 2010, Apple took an emphatic leap into a 
market where no company had seen success before—tablet computers.
Apple was determined to prove that their entry into the field, the iPad, would stand out and 
succeed where others had failed. Despite initial doubt from critics, the iPad and iPad 2 
have sold millions of units and become the most desirable tablet platforms for application 
development.
The iPad is a natural next step after working on the iPhone and iPod touch, so it's no stretch 
to think that we'll also be producing work on the new tablet. However, interface design does 
change rather drastically when moving from handheld device to tablet computer, and we 
should be aware of these changes when crafting a user experience.
In this chapter we'll discuss the migration to the iPad, as well as the pitfalls that lay in wait for 
designers creating their first work on the platform.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
202
Migrating our app to the iPad
Upon its unveiling, the iPad was written off by critics as no more than a large iPod touch. It 
wasn't until the typical users were able to use the device that people soon realized that the 
device wasn't a magnifed version of the iPhone or iPod touch. The screen resolution, form 
factor, and portability of the device lent the iPad a completely different usage experience.
Let's take a look at different ways in which a user can use our app on the iPad and how this 
affects interface design.
Getting ready
For this application, we should have an iPad device on hand with several iPhone-only 
applications loaded, along with several iPad-optimized applications as well. Several well 
designed iPad-optimized applications to consider include Pages, GarageBand, Keynote, 
GoodReader, Penultimate, iMovie, and MLB.com At Bat.
How to do it...
In designing an application that we want people to use on the iPad, we're given three different 
types of applications that we can build, depending on if we're targeting iPhone users as well. 
There are three different types of applications that we can build for an iPad:
f
f
iPad-only application—The application's features or interface require an iPad. This 
application type is impossible on the iPhone or iPod touch.
f
f
Universal application—A universal application contains specific binaries for both the 
iPhone and iPad. Our interface will be tailored to each binary, so our application will 
look great regardless of platform.
f
f
iPhone-only application—Designed purely for the iPhone, leaving us with only one 
design to create. On the iPad, our application will run through the iPhone emulator in 
either its native resolution or in a double resolution mode.
With these three different types of application designs, we have great flexibility with regards 
to the type of app we want to create. Depending upon our content or purpose, one of these 
styles will fit our needs.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
203
How it works...
Apple initially created an iPhone application emulation mode for the iPad so that the tablet 
would have a library of 200,000 applications available at launch. However after using iPhone 
apps on the large screen, it quickly became apparent that such applications would not be 
an acceptable presentation for most developers. So unless we have an application that 
absolutely does not need an iPad version or if we are lacking the financial requirements for 
such a project, we should work to create an iPad optimized interface.
It's only when we begin to use an emulated iPhone application on the larger screen that we 
begin to understand that the iPad is not just a larger iPod touch. It becomes quite apparent 
that standard design tendencies on the iPhone don't always translate well when magnified up 
to the iPad, so we'll need to make some important decisions.
The first design decision that we need to make should be as to which application type we want 
to run with. Three different application types exist, each offering up a specific way in which 
to package and distribute our application to users. There are pros and cons for each, so we'll 
need to evaluate each option with regards to how it best suits our app.
Determining our audience and best application type will also depend on our development 
purpose, as we'll need to take programming requirements and design constraints into 
consideration. So long as we don't require a tablet form factor, we'll probably be targeting 
the iPhone with nearly every application we build as the market share. The primary question 
will revolve around if we decide to create a universal application or separate iPad app for the 
tablet.
The most common situation for which we should not consider the design of an iPad specific 
or universal build will be if our application requires telephone or text messaging functionality. 
If our application places on an exceptional focus on mobile use, our application may also not 
be worth porting to the iPad. For example, a location-centric social network like Foursquare 
doesn't necessarily require an iPad application, as it serves little use on a device larger than a 
phone that won't be carried around constantly.
Outside of requiring an iPhone only feature, another limiting factor in deciding to create a 
universal app may be extra time and cost. While the programming backend of our application 
remains very much the same regardless of our application type, the interface will be 
drastically different. When creating a universal application, we'll be designing two interfaces, 
one for the iPhone or iPod touch and another for the iPad. This will quickly double the amount 
of interface work involved and can become quite expensive if we are on a budget.
Unless our application falls into one of these two special cases, we should do our best to 
target iPad users with either a universal or iPad specific app. Apple has seen strong sales for 
the tablet and the experience of using an iPhone-only application emulated on the iPad is 
simply an unacceptable experience. If it makes sense for our application and we're able to, we 
should provide optimized versions for both iPhone and iPad users.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
204
With the growing iPad market and novelty of tablet computing applications, the time spent 
on an iPad application will likely be well worth our time. It's a bit more difficult to create an 
iPad interface, especially if we've gotten in the habit of designing for the iPhone. However, the 
larger audience and optimal tablet experience will be sure to increase our app's fan base.
There's more...
If unable to produce an iPad-optimized application for one reason or another, we can still take 
an additional step to help make our work look great on the iPad.
If we can only do iPhone, we can at least increase our art quality
With the iPhone 4, Apple introduced the Retina display, for which we will likely be producing high-
resolution art. But when our iPhone application is emulated on the iPad, this high-resolution art 
for the Retina display won't be used and our application will look somewhat blurry.
Trainyard developer Matt Rix devised an elegant solution to this problem by creating a macro 
that determines the device type on launch, and then displaying the Retina display art when 
the app is being run on the iPad.
For more information on his technique, visit Matt's blog at http://struct.ca/2010/
retinafy-your-game/.
See also
f
f
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes in this chapter
f
f
Managing our app for use with two hands in this chapter
Experiences that are possible on the iPad, 
but not on the iPhone
With the realization that the iPad wasn't a big iPod touch, it also became quickly apparent that 
the iPad offered up new experiences that were not initially available on the smaller devices.
Let's take a look at such new experiences, along with how our interfaces may be influenced by 
such potential.
Getting ready
Having an iPad on hand for testing will be useful in this recipe. Having a Macintosh on hand 
with a copy of Keynote for Mac, along with a newspaper or notepad may also be helpful.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
205
How to do it...
The larger iPad screen has helped create a variety of new experiences that were difficult to 
perform or impossible on the iPhone or iPod touch. If we're unfamiliar with the iPad, it may 
take a bit to become accustomed to the opportunities of the new device.
Let's take a look at new genres of application experience types that have become extremely 
popular with the release on the iPad, and the design possibilities for these applications:
f
f
Video-focused applications
f
f
Desktop-style applications
f
f
Book, magazine, and newspaper applications
f
f
Note taking applications
These are just a few examples of application genres that have found a home on the iPad even 
though they had never really taken off on the iPhone and iPod touch. They're great examples 
of how the tablet allows for new application types, and will hopefully serve as encouragement 
as we work on our first designs for the device.
How it works...
The iPhone and iPad are drastically different devices, designed for different tasks and actions. 
Our interface design will require a bit of change as well if we plan on creating an optimized 
experience on iPad.
In the first year of the iPad, dozens of different new application types were created that 
weren't possible before on the iPhone or iPod touch. We've presented a handful here, but 
there are multiple other new applications along with a variety of ideas that haven't even been 
imagined yet.
While the iPhone has always featured a crisp widescreen display, long form video watching 
has never been a leading application genre on the small device, as it's often difficult to see 
details or focus on such a video for an extended period of time.
However, applications such as Hulu Plus, Netflix, HBO GO, ABC Player, Crackle, and more have 
created a strong video content market on the iPad. The large screen and portability makes the 
device great for video consumption.
If we're designing a video-heavy app, it's important to remember that the media is the focal 
point of our application. It should be easy to find desired content, start a video, control audio, 
send to AirPlay, and share favorite excerpts. It's important to remember that content is king 
and that the video should be the star of the show, not our interface work.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
206
Additionally, web browsers, word processors, and remote desktop VNC applications are 
all different genres that have seen relatively no success on the iPhone or iPod touch, yet 
strong prevalence on the iPad. This has to do mostly with their "desktop style" presentation 
requirement, where it is often difficult to offer up such complex interface requirements on a 
small screen. 
The iPad's large display gives greater interface flexibility and these applications have seen 
success on the device. As you can see in the next screenshot, Keynote is a technical "desktop 
style" application that would be difficult to implement on a screen as small as the iPhone.

Keynote - © 2010-2011 Apple Inc.
When working on a complex application such as these, it's important to properly integrate a 
mix of interface elements such as a streamlined Toolbar, Popovers, and Tab Bars if we want 
to see success. The increased screen size and new elements will make it possible for such 
apps to work well on the iPad.
With a 9.7-inch diagonal screen, the iPad is an exceptional device for reading long form bodies 
of text. Reading for an extended period of time on the small iPhone or iPod touch screen can 
be difficult on the eyes, but the iPad screen is much like using a traditional computer. Digital 
magazines, newspapers, and eBook readers have become increasingly popular on the iPad, 
so it is quite likely that we could work on such an application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
207
When designing an application where users will be reading heavily, it's important that we 
focus on presenting legible text, including selectable text so that the user can copy and paste, 
the ability to customize font size and typeface, the addition of AirPrint support, easy article 
sharing through email or Twitter, and other functions which would be useful to a reader.
Finally, while it is quite rare to take notes using an iPhone or iPod touch, the iPad's large 
screen makes the tablet ideal for use in an educational or business setting where note taking 
is common. Such apps have become almost a genre of iOS applications in of themselves, with 
many developers jumping to get their note-taking app into the store.

Penultimate - © 2011 Cocoa Box Design LLC
Penultimate is a successful note taking application that uses the user's finger to act as 
an input device on screen. In the previous screenshot, we can see an example of how 
handwriting looks when a finger is used to replace a pencil or pen.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
208
If we decide to take a stab at creating our own note taking application, we'll soon realize that 
interface design for the app isn't a simple task. Many note applications fail because they don't 
make it easy to navigate through different features, making it difficult to quickly create and 
update notes. Likewise, apps that let the user take notes by hand often lack input accuracy, 
making it difficult to read what had been written. If we want our note app to stand out, ease of 
use and input accuracy will be key attributes for success.
These are just some of the ways in which the tablet form factor is creating waves with regards 
to new types of application growth. With a bit of innovation and crafty design work, we'll play 
an integral role in the growth of tablet applications.
There's more...
We've discussed a few software types that have become prevalent on the iPad because of the 
increased screen size. But what other hardware features could lead to differences between 
iPad and iPhone applications?
Hardware differences
Through the two iterations of the iPad, Apple has created a pattern of the iPad leading the 
iPhone with regards to the processor being used on the device. The first iPad received the A4 
processor several months before the iPhone and the iPad 2 used the dual-core A5 processor 
well before the October 2011 release of the iPhone 4S.
As such, certain applications become only possible on the iPad for a period of time because 
they are only possible with the more powerful processor. Certain games and or intensive 
augmented reality apps are most likely to fit in this category.
See also
f
f
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes in this chapter
f
f
Designing our app with all orientations in mind in this chapter
f
f
Including Popovers and new UI elements to the iPad in this chapter
Accounting for resolution and aspect 
ratio changes
The aspect ratio of the iPad is drastically different from the iPhone. The widescreen format 
of the iPhone creates two drastically different formats, with the portrait view commanding a 
majority of application use cases and the landscape mode being relegated to mostly video 
consumption. In contrast, the iPad is well prepared for applications of all types in either 
orientation.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
209
When working on the iPhone and iPod touch, we work strictly with a 320 pixel by 480 pixel 
resolution. The iPad was introduced with a 768 pixel by 1024 pixel resolution, creating a stark 
screen contrast upon first announcement.
Couple this change in display with a new screen aspect ratio, moving from 1:1.5 on the iPhone 
to 4:3 on the iPad, and it was soon apparent to designers that such technical changes would 
require drastic design changes.
Let's take a look at resolution and the important role that it will play in our interface.
Getting ready
For this recipe, having a copy of Adobe Photoshop or another raster image manipulation tool 
would be useful.
How to do it...
In creating an application for iPad, we're going to have to take time to think about how the 
resolution change will alter our app. From a pixel pushing point of view, if we're creating a 
universal application and plan to share art components, we'll have a somewhat difficult time 
if we anticipate just throwing our Retina display art into our iPad binary. The pixel density 
difference is just too great and our Retina display art would look oversized and out of place if 
thrown into the iPad display. We'll have to go about creating new art assets that fit the 
new display.
Ideally, we'll create vector art images to use inside of our app using Adobe Illustrator, Adobe 
Photoshop, or another computer program. This will solve the problem forever, as we can scale 
our art infinitely for whatever resolution the future may toss at us. This also helps make our 
work flexible for future platforms as well, as we could use the same work if by chance Apple 
ever offers developers the opportunity to write applications for the Apple TV or another 
future device.
We'll soon learn, however, that the creation of vector art isn't easy. It requires a good eye, 
strong artistic talent, and knowledge of how to use a vector program. For many designers, 
traditional raster art is much easier to produce, so we'll be likely heading this route instead.
If we decide to create raster art in Photoshop or Pixelmator, we're going to need to make some 
assumptions as to what the resolution of a future Retina display iPad will look like, to use as a 
basis for our work:
f
f
The Retina display for iPad will happen eventually; it's a matter of when, not if.
f
f
The pixel density of a Retina display iPad will have a density greater than 286 PPI, 
which is the typically agreed upon point where the eye can no long perceive individual 
pixels when held 12 inches away.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
210
f
f
The increase in magnitude for pixels on screen for the Retina display will be a whole 
number, much like the iPhone's Retina display was twice as large as the original 
iPhone's screen. This will create an easy mathematical jump between art pieces, as 
non-optimized pieces will display at double their original resolution and still work just 
fine.
f
f
Because the density demands of a screen three times the resolution of the original 
iPad is seemingly infeasible for the time being, the increased order of magnitude will 
probably not be larger than two.
How it works...
The change in screen aspect ratio and possibility of a drastically increased screen resolution 
on the iPad requires some thoughtful planning before we begin work on our application's 
art assets. 
The 4:3 aspect ratio is a bit less optimal for video watching than the wide screen display of an 
iPhone or iPod touch. However, this new size allows for more width when holding the device in 
portrait, along with greater height when browsing applications in landscape.
With regards to resolution and the production of art assets for our application interface 
design, the iPad is large, but currently not a drastically different resolution than what is 
currently required for the iPhone. This helps during the development of universal applications, 
as art assets can often be easily adapted for both the iPad and iPhone.
The iPad has a native resolution of 1024 pixels by 768 pixels, a slight jump above the Retina 
display resolution of 960 pixels by 640 pixels. With the significant difference in pixel density 
between the two devices, we end up with the two drastically different devices sizes that we're 
presented with by Apple. In the next screenshot, we can see how the pixel scale of each 
screen changes as we transition from the original iPhone to the iPad.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
211
While we're going through the effort of creating artistic elements for the iPad, we should 
future proof our design work and plan ahead for the eventual Retina display iPad that will 
inevitably come out somewhere down the line. Resolution changes are a reality of designing In 
pixels as opposed to paper, and we'd be poor designers if we didn't plan for the future.
Given the simple assumptions, it's highly likely that the future Retina display iPad will have 
a resolution of 2048 pixels by 1536 pixels. It's an extremely large screen size, with many 
experts agreeing that it would require a much faster iPad in order to process such art.
Regardless, it's nearly inevitable that we will need to produce art at this resolution eventually, 
so we should plan accordingly. By starting our raster artwork at this resolution, we can always 
easily size down for present applications, while still having Retina graphics laying in wait for 
the day Apple announces the Retina iPad.
Resolution independence is the primary reason it is most ideal to create application art in 
vectors; however these can often be difficult to produce if we're not already familiar with 
Adobe Illustrator and creating art using shapes instead of pixels. To help with this, we can 
make some reasonable assumptions in an attempt to estimate as to what a future Retina 
iPad may look like, in an effort to prepare.
It may seem unnecessary to plan in advance for a Retina display that doesn't exist yet, but we 
can save ourselves a great deal of pain in the future. With the release of the iPhone 4 and its 
Retina display, many developers were left behind with art assets that didn't easily scale up to 
the new screen, making their applications look dated and poor in comparison to their crisp 
new counterparts. By planning ahead now, we'll be able to quickly adapt and be ahead of the 
curve when such a device is released.
There's more...
In this recipe, we spend a good deal of time making assumptions about a future Retina 
display iPad. But when should we expect such a device?
When should we expect the Retina iPad?
It can be easily assumed that two factors are limiting the production of a Retina display iPad. 
Producing such a large screen with this resolution is probably not currently possible if Apple 
plans to keep their target price of $499. The device would also have a resolution that almost 
matches the current 27-inch desktop Cinema Display that Apple sells, and the processing 
power required to display art of such resolution would be significant.
That being said, all visible signs appear to be set toward Apple working to achieve such a 
device. In a rare slip, Apple's graphic design team accidentally included @2x art in version 
1.2 of iBooks for iPad. These larger files also appear to point at a likely 2048 by 1536 pixel 
display as well. So if Apple's design teams are preparing for such a screen, we should probably 
follow suit.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
212
Analysts first projected that such a device would not be available until 2013 and likely the iPad 
4; however many hardware specialists now believe such a device could be possible for the iPad 
3 in 2012. Regardless, it's only a matter of when and we should begin planning accordingly.
See also
f
f
Migrating to the high-resolution Retina display in Chapter 1
f
f
Migrating our app to the iPad in this Chapter
Managing our app for use with two hands
Because of the size and weight of the iPad, it becomes quite apparent that the device should 
naturally be held with two hands, much like a book.
Holding the device this way does create several design challenges, which will alter the way in 
which we drive users through our application. Let's take a look at a standard iPad interface 
and how to best place objects on screen so that the app is manageable while holding the 
device with two hands.
Getting ready
Having an iPad and iPhone on hand, along with a book or notepad for a size comparison will 
be helpful for this recipe.
How to do it...
The standard hand position for the iPad is different than that for the typical iPhone user, and 
our application must be build with this fact taken into serious consideration. The way that a 
device feels in the hand may have been ignored on previous computing platforms, but with the 
touch-based iOS, it's important that the user can hold the device comfortably while using our 
app correctly.
The heavier device and requirement of two hands in order to interact with the iPad will require 
an increase in dexterity, somewhat greater concentration, and an adjusted interface. Here are 
some tips to make sure that our device works well when using two hands instead of one:
f
f
Increase text size for the larger screen and increased view distance
f
f
Slightly increase button size for all elements
f
f
Place tap buttons near the corner of the screen
f
f
Use swipe and flick often; refrain from taps
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
213
The larger size and weight of the iPad will make user interaction a bit more difficult than with 
the traditional iPhone or iPod touch sized screen. However, when we understand the physical 
and physiological differences that exist between the two device types, we can adjust our 
interface accordingly and create a great application.
How it works...
The iPad is a larger, heavier device than its more mobile predecessors, which creates a 
difference in design in how we fundamentally structure our application.
While all iOS devices run the same operating system, with identical touch manipulation, the 
way we interact with content on screen varies quite a bit due to screen size. When we get a 
chance to hold both devices, it becomes easily apparent as to how each is unique.
The iPhone is typically held with only one hand, using the thumb of the same hand to quickly 
interact with items on screen. When typing heavily, the thumbs of both fingers may be used 
while holding the device in either portrait or a landscape orientation. However the iPad is 
much larger and heavier than the iPhone or iPod touch, making it difficult to hold the device 
with one hand for an extended period of time. Instead, we'll find that users traditionally hold 
the iPad with two hands and typical iPhone interactions are no longer possible.
We need to understand these physical limitations of the iPad, as well as the potential 
inconveniences that arise when using our application. We don't want to create something that 
requires the user to hold their iPad with one hand and tap on screen for an extended period of 
time, as it will become quite strenuous and users will refrain from using our app.
With regards to the first point and font size, the increase in distance from eye to screen will 
require a larger, more legible text for easy reading. In general, we should use a font that is at 
least twice as large than we would ever consider reasonable on an iPhone screen. Characters 
that measure one-fourth to nearly one-half an inch in physical size or larger are ideal. Font 
size can vary greatly based on type-face, style, and other attributes, but this should give us a 
good guideline to get started with.
If our application cannot be easily read while sitting two feet or slightly further away from the 
user's face, it will be difficult for our application to be read for extended periods of time.
Likewise, we should also slightly increase the size of our buttons on screen in order to account 
for the greater distance between face and device. While the minimum optimum button size for 
an iPhone application is a 44 pixel square, we should make our iPad buttons a minimum of 
60 pixels in length or width if possible. 
This increase in size also helps the users, as less hand-eye coordination is needed in order to 
accurately tap the proper location on screen. While user fingers will remain an average size of 
44 pixels, the extra bit of leeway will give a bit more room for error.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
214
We should consider the placement of such buttons as well when composing our interface 
design. On traditional mouse and keyboard computer interfaces, designers are often taught 
to observe Fitts' law, which in part explains that integral interface items should be placed 
close to the corners of the screen because these regions are easier for the user to quickly 
navigate to because the pointer will catch on the end of the screen. It's a useful observance 
and commonplace in good design.
Much in the same way, we should also place our iPad interface items near the corner of the 
screen. While we won't be using a mouse and don't need the corners to catch our pointer, 
such a design is cognitively simple to the user and quick to pick up. It will also allow for the 
user to tap on screen and not have the large display covered with their hands, giving full 
visibility of whatever is being altered by an action. Finally, the user's fingers will often be near 
the side of the screen anyway while sitting on the bezel to hold the device, so it will make for a 
much more rapid movement when they finally do decide to touch elements on screen.
With regards to the last point, when we do decide to require user action on screen, it's much 
more preferable to use swipes or flicks than it is to use taps. When possible, we should try our 
best to replace taps with another gesture.
Because of hand placement on the iPad, it's easier to slide over the thumb and quickly 
flick on screen than it is to raise a hand off of the device and tap. For nearly all users, no 
readjustment of the holding hand is necessary to reach with the thumb and make a swipe in 
any direction.
iBooks is a wonderful example of this, as the thumb can quickly swipe to change pages while 
the holding hand remains in place. iBooks also lets a user navigate from page to page by 
tapping the entire right side and left side of the book view. By giving a large tap zone, the user 
doesn't need to place their hands in any position other than what feels natural, and then make 
contact through a swipe or touch of the side of the screen in order to turn to the next page.
We'll gain a better understanding as to what gestures and device holding positions are more 
desirable as we use our gain experience using an iPad. As Apple continues to refine and adjust 
the device's design, it's guaranteed that the iPad will only become lighter and easier to use. But 
for the time being, such factors must be taken into account when attempting to build success.
There's more...
We've discussed how the iPad will be held during use of our application, but with the growing 
market for iPad cases, does it make sense to design our application around the likelihood of 
the user having an iPad case?
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
215
Case considerations
In the year that the device has been on the market, an unbelievable number of iPad cases 
have been designed that attempt to help people protect their tablets.
But each case is slightly a different size, is made out of a different material, and ultimately will 
change the way in which the user holds the iPad.
We're better off not worrying about different case designs and their influence on our app, 
as we'll always find a case design that will drastically require us to change a part of our app. 
However if we do put energy into testing our iPad app with a case, we should only worry about 
Apple designed official cases. The portfolio case of the first iPad and Smart Cover for the 
iPad 2 account for an estimated 60 to 70 percent of case sales and are going to be the most 
common case for our user base.
See also
f
f
Accounting for resolution and aspect ratio changes in this chapter
f
f
Designing our app with all orientations in mind in this chapter
Designing our app with all orientations in 
mind
The iPhone and iPod touch are primarily portrait orientation devices, with no requirement for 
us to support the landscape orientation. The iPad is different and Apple states clearly stated 
in its Human Interface Guidelines that all applications should support both orientations 
unless there is explicit reason not to. But a 4:3 aspect ratio screen doesn't exactly make it 
easy to design an interface that works well in all orientations.
In this recipe, we'll discuss a few cheats that will help make it easy to design an interface that 
looks great in both portrait and landscape.
Getting ready
An iPad loaded with an email account in the Mail application and the USA Today application 
will be good to have on hand for this recipe.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
216
How to do it...
We're given a bit of creative freedom with regards to designing an interface that is functional 
in either perspective. But if we're having difficulty, there are two tried and true practices that 
help create expedite interface development:
f
f
The Split View method
f
f
The Multi-pane method
With the Split View and multi-pane layout, we have some guidance as to how we can create a 
simple yet effective iPad app that works well in both orientations. Each method provides an 
attractive application and allows for us to offer a deep experience with little headache.
How it works...
While iPhone applications typically only work in one orientation, Apple thoughtfully designed 
the iPad to be a device with no up or down. There's no wrong way to hold an iPad and as such, 
there should be no wrong way to hold our application.
Such a requirement can be a daunting realization for some developers and designers, as it 
immediately requires that our application essentially be two applications in one.
The Split View is a new interface view to the iPad, which can be flexible depending on 
orientation. This allows us to create dynamic content that works great no matter the user's 
preferred device position.
When in landscape mode, the application has two distinct views separated by a black line. 
The left view is primarily served as a navigation menu, offering up different bits of information. 
The right view is typically much larger and content focused, determined by navigating through 
options on the left view.
When in portrait view, the Split View can take one of two appearances. If we so desire, we can 
keep a split view, with each different side of the screen becoming a bit narrower. If we feel 
cramped, we can instead create one single view and use a Popover from a Navigation Bar 
button to display what previously appeared on the smaller panel. Mail is a great example of 
this, offering a split view to optimize screen in both orientations. In the landscape perspective, 
emails appear on right and different mailbox options appear on in the left panel. When in 
portrait, e-mails appear in a full screen view and a Popover allows users to navigate through 
menu options. In the next screenshot, we can see how orientation affects Mail's split pane 
view:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
217
The multi-pane method is not unlike a Split View, in that different data appears in different 
sections of the interface. While the Split View focuses primarily on two views with one 
containing very linear data through a Navigation View, a multi-pane application can feature 
any number of small view pieces.
The idea of a multi-pane view is that data or app action buttons are chunked together into 
fixed height and width pieces. The idea being that when the user rotates the application from 
portrait to landscape, these fixed size chunks simply move into a new position while retaining 
their size. Working much like a jigsaw puzzle with multiple solutions, this method allows for 
applications that look unique in both orientations.

USA TODAY for iPad - © 2011 USA TODAY
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
218
As notated above, we can see the shift in content when the USA Today application moves from 
portrait to landscape. These distinct chunks of content allow for easy movement between 
perspectives.
Complete symmetry between perspectives isn't a complete requirement. As we can see here, 
the advertisement panel and a news panel change slightly when the rotation occurs. However, 
each individual component does have a constant presence.
The flexible multi-pane technique allows for us to quickly support both portrait and landscape 
views in a way that appears consistent. While the USA Today application contains many 
panes, we can use this technique with as few as two pieces. So long as we remain consistent, 
the user will be able to easily manage our app no matter the orientation, and we'll be able to 
expedite the design process.
There's more...
Looking for another example of a multi-pane view? Here's another great app that uses a 
similar technique.
Another example
Flipboard is a socially aggregated news application, where stories linked to by friends on 
Facebook or Twitter are placed on screen for consumption. It's a novel app idea and has 
created a large following of iPad users.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
219

Flipboard - © 2010 Flipboard Inc.
Flipboard also uses this multi-pane design, with stories flowing on screen from portrait to 
landscape in set dimension boxes. If we're looking for a further example, Flipboard is a great 
place to start.
See also
f
f
Including Popovers and new UI elements for the iPad in this chapter
Including Popovers and new UI elements 
for the iPad
For the larger screen, Apple has designed a series of new interface elements for the tablet 
device. Most of these new conventions are impossible on the iPhone or iPod touch due to 
screen size, so we'll be restrained in how we can use them.
Because they're relatively rarer for us, we should take time to study up and guarantee that 
we're using the elements appropriately. In this recipe, we'll discuss these new elements and 
how to properly include them in our app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
220
Getting ready
Access to an iPad and the iOS Human Interface Guidelines will be essential for this recipe. 
We'll be learning about a few new interface elements, and it will be useful to experience such 
pieces while we read.
How to do it...
The increased screen size requires new interface elements for several interactions. Some of 
these changes occur because the larger screen size offers more screen real estate, which can 
make elements easier to use. Other changes occur because buttons on screen need to get a 
bit bigger in order to be easily tapped while holding the iPad.
Let's take a look at several interface components that were created or altered for the iPad.
f
f
Popover
f
f
A streamlined Toolbar and Navigation Bar
f
f
Larger Tab Bar
f
f
Page and form sheets
Each of these interface elements use the larger screen of the iPad to offer increased 
application capability. Through the rework of existing elements and creation of entirely new 
elements, Apple's designed quality standard interface elements that will help us create 
outstanding tablet applications.
How it works...
The larger display of the iPad required new interface elements, as it quickly became obvious 
that the new device could not simply scale up all previous iOS elements. New pieces such as 
the Popover would be necessary in order to provide the best possible experience.
The Popover is the first new design element, appearing as a variable length window for the 
placement of different action items or data cells. A Popover for the App Store app can be seen 
in the next screenshot:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
221
We can place a good variety of content inside the Popover. Like nearly every interface 
element, there are several rules that we must abide by though. The Popover must always lay 
on top of all other views, a tiny arrow is included to indicate the button that the view originated 
from, and the Popover must be dismissed when the user taps anywhere in the application 
outside of the overlay view.
We can use the Popover for almost anything and we're given the ability to include Tab Bars, 
Navigation Bars, maps, and pretty much anything else we could imagine. This allows for a 
good deal of flexibility, essentially giving the ability to create mini applications inside of 
an app.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
222
Any time we intend on creating an Action Sheet inside of our iPad app, it 
must be presented as a Popover.
Diving into the second point, when on the iPhone, any Navigation Bar or Toolbar is relatively 
limited, often only containing one or two action options for the user. This wasn't due to poor 
design, but because of a lack of space.
The increase in space allows for greater flexibility and the opportunity for all action tasks to 
occur though a Toolbar, an experience that Apple calls streamlining. We can use Popovers 
from these buttons as well, and create a full experience with all app functionality coming from 
this bar.
Much like the streamlined Toolbar, the Tab Bar also benefits from the increase in screen 
size. The bar still spans along the bottom of the device's screen, regardless of orientation, 
containing different tabs that present different views and functions when tapped.
Because of its larger size, we can now include more tabs inside of our Tab Bar. While we're 
limited to five tabs on the iPhone, we can have as many as seven on the iPad. It's also 
important to note that while the tabs resize when moving from portrait to landscape view on 
the iPhone, tabs remain the same size when switching orientation on the iPad.
Finally, when designing something modal on the iPhone, we simply have the content fill up the 
entire screen in order to take up user focus. However, this method becomes a bit less elegant 
on the iPad, where we often have no need to fill the entire screen.
Apple's created Form Sheets and Page Sheets to help solve this problem. Both views are 
designed to be momentarily present, laying over the app's other functions and forcing the 
user's attention on the modal task.
Page Sheets have a height that spans the entire device screen and a width equal to that of 
the iPad, measuring 768 pixels. When in portrait view, a Page Sheet fills the entire screen. If 
the iPad is being used in landscape view, then there is a slight area where the view below the 
Page Sheet is visible and dimmed.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
223
A proper Form Sheet can be found in this screenshot of Mail. Form Sheets have a constant 
size of 540 pixels by 620 pixels. This view remains centered on screen unless a keyboard is 
present, for which the view moves up to be flush with the status bar.
Both views are only possible on the iPad, and work best for modal information where we're 
presenting information to the user in a linear fashion.
Apple has taken much time in preparation of such special pieces and detailed interface 
guidelines for each device in order to help developers create the best possible application. 
The iPad is truly a different computing experience than the iPhone, and the different pieces of 
the interface will need to behave accordingly.
There's more...
We've just touched the tip of the iceberg with respect to how the iPhone and iPad are different 
devices. Let's take a further look at other differences between designing for the two devices.
iPad killed the radio star
On the iPhone, video is limited to full-screen display only. So if we're going to include a video 
in our iPhone app, we have no ability to do anything but make it the sole focus of the user's 
attention.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
224
For the iPad, we no longer have such a requirement and our video can only take up a small 
portion of the screen if we so desire. This allows for us to include a video in ways that we 
never would have before because we feared that it would be too intrusive on the user.
Multi-finger gestures
Apple has created multi-finger gestures that allow for the user to quickly swipe four fingers on 
screen as a way to move between applications or return to the home screen.
If your application depends upon a four-finger gesture, we may want to find a different way to 
implement its function. If the user attempts to invoke the action that this gesture links to, they 
may find themselves inside a different application if they are using iOS 5. This can cause a 
good deal of confusion, so with Apple's inclusion of this new system-wide gesture in iOS 5, we 
should work toward phasing out four-finger gestures from our application.
See also
f
f
Migrating our app to the iPad in this chapter
f
f
Experiences that are possible on the iPad, but not on the iPhone in this chapter
Designing an app using skeuomorphic 
designs
Whereas the original iPhone was a novel device unlike anything users had seen before, the 
iPad brings out a somewhat different initial impression.
In specific, the iPad isn't unlike favorite non-digital devices in many respects. It shares many 
size and shape characteristics with books, maps, television screens, day calendars, printed 
photos, and much more.
Because the iPad can mimic physical items much differently than the iPhone and iPod touch, 
we should consider this fact when designing our interface.
In this recipe we'll discuss skeuomorphic designs, which are digital interfaces that resemble 
a physical item that performs the same task as the application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
225
Getting ready
Ideally, we will have an iPad on hand with several good examples of quality skeuomorphic 
applications. Some examples include iBooks, Notes, Calendar, and Contacts.
How to do it...
The larger device size of the iPad lends itself to more opportunities for a skeuomorphic 
interface design. For many applications, the iPad application will be serving to replace an 
actual physical element such as a book, so there will be an expectation for our work to 
function like its real life counterpart.
It is quite difficult to create a successful interface that is skeuomorphic and mimics a physical 
object. It's fairly easy to create something that behaves too realistically, which ends up doing 
more damage than good to our app's usability.
Let's take a look at several keys to creating a good application interface that is instantly 
familiar and also intuitive to the first-time user:
f
f
Our app should not be skeuomorphic for the sake of visuals only
f
f
Obvious, common actions should perform true to their physical counterparts
f
f
We should never withhold functionality because it doesn't appear in the physical object
iPad users will appreciate our attempt to create applications that best resemble objects that 
they're familiar with in real life. If we go about working these tips into our app, we'll be well on 
our way toward creating a strong skeuomorphic design.
How it works...
The iPad provides a truly unique experience, in the sense that it's thinner and lighter than 
most books, with a large digital screen that can display attractive art for any application.
In many ways, it provides the power of computing that people have become accustomed to 
over the past 25 years and allows that power to better mimic traditional physical items in a 
way never before possible. While traditional computers could never truly replicate a book, 
drum set, notebook, map, or newspaper, the iPad can. This creates a drastic shift in how 
people experience the world and intake information, and we can help ease this transition by 
creating interfaces that seem familiar to the user.
Skeuomorphic designs are a replication of a physical object for the sake of making our 
design immediately familiar to the user. If we're making an eBook, it makes sense to have 
our application resemble an actual book. The user will immediately know the purpose of our 
application and how it functions.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Migrating to the iPad
226
If we're going to use a skeuomorphic design, our interface should resemble the physical 
object in both appearance and behavior. iBooks is a great example, where the application 
mimics the appearance of a physical book, and the user navigates through pages by flicking 
their finger on screen much like one would grab and turn a paper page as well.
This doesn't require us to only use true to life actions, as an app like iBooks also allows for the 
user to tap the side of the screen to flip between pages as well. But by allowing users to swipe 
to turn pages, it's simple to provide an easily understood control style with no actual buttons 
or tutorial because the application behaves exactly like paper books that all users are familiar 
with.
Continuing on to the idea of common actions acting like their physical counterparts, there are 
many small decisions that we can make that will help our app perform better. Pretend that 
we're looking to design an application that downloads and plays top podcasts from across the 
web. For our interface, we may decide to differentiate our work by creating a fun design that 
mimics a 1980s style radio. The app screen will contain standard components on a real radio 
from the era, such as a volume knob or tape deck.
If we decide to use such a skeuomorphic design, then these artistic components should behave 
much like we would expect a real radio to perform. Tapping the volume button should present 
the user with a way to raise or lower the audio level and pressing upon the tape deck should 
present the user with a Popover or form sheet that allows for selection of a new podcast.
The user will first look at these graphical locations in our app when they desire to perform a 
specific action, so they should perform accordingly. It doesn't make sense for our app to look 
like a radio if it's not going to function like an actual radio, so we should constantly be aware 
of this when creating our work.
Finally, if we're serious about creating a true-to-life application experience, it makes sense to 
limit our app to a feature set that stays true to the real life object as well.
For example, if we're creating a notebook application such as Apple's Notes, we may want to 
create an artistic design that mimics a legal pad or small pocket notebook.
The resulting aesthetic definitely provides a skeuomorphic experience, with us maybe even 
going as far as to include ruled lines and use a font that resembles handwriting. So if we want 
to give a complete experience, it would make sense to not include features such as e-mail 
note exporting or search, since these features could never be found on a physical notebook.
However, we should never withhold features for the sake of realism, even if it seems difficult 
to include the function while keeping within the theme. We should use this challenge to drive 
creativity, creating a unique way to imagine how features possible with the iPad would behave 
if plausible in real life. For example, it would never be possible to simply glance through a shelf 
of books and be able to search the contents of all available books to find a desired passage, 
yet Apple included a simple search bar in iBooks that looks as if it is engraved into the wood 
bookcase, as showcased in the next screenshot:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Chapter 9
227

iBooks - © 2011 Apple Inc.
This simple, elegant solution offers a powerful tool that isn't possible with a physical 
bookshelf, yet fits in with a desired artistic theme. Such inclusions aren't always as easy 
or obvious, but they are greatly appreciated by the user. These subtleties help make the 
transition from physical item to digital application an easy cognitive process for the user while 
also creating an attractive art design.
These are just a few tips on different skeuomorphic designs, but with a bit of creativity, we 
can pull from the user's physical expectations and create an application that is immediately 
recognizable.
See also
f
f
Migrating our app to the iPad in this chapter
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

A
The Importance of 
Direct Manipulation
Without tactile feedback for a button press, users will be looking to other cues for confirmation 
that an interaction has occurred correctly. As user interface designers, it is our job to make 
sure that it is clear to the user when they’ve properly navigated through our application.
This feedback can occur in a variety of situations, be it when pressing upon the Tab Bar, 
when manipulating a photo, or when flicking through a list. Because our applications run on a 
touch screen, it’s important that we provide proper visual feedback nearly every time the user 
makes contact with the screen.
Visual feedback is most common, but auditory response is also possible in our application as 
well. Let’s look at how to use these functions to properly provide feedback and indicate to the 
user that the application is working correctly. By creating clarity for our users, we’ll create a 
better application that will gain higher reviews and minimize confusion.
Giving the user feedback
We’ve spent time discussing different possible gestures in iOS, such as the pinch or swipe, 
which will help up determine which interaction is best suited for the activity at hand when 
developing our application. However, it is not enough to only implement the correct gesture 
type, as we should also provide adequate visual feedback to the user to help give visual 
confirmation of the action.
When working in a traditional computer environment, visual feedback is still important; 
however the user still has a tactile input device to fall back upon. If we’re using a keyboard to 
type in a word processor and the program does not respond instantaneously, we still have the 
physical press of the key to reinforce that our action was properly performed.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

The Importance of Direct Manipulation
230
A delay or pause between press of the keyboard and display of the character on screen can 
cause frustration for the user, but this action is unlikely to cause confusion. In tapping the 
keyboard, we reaffirm that we’ve hit the key correctly and a delay or failure to display the 
pressed key indicates that either the software is working improperly or there has been a 
hardware error. There is little uncertainty and with this knowledge, the user has some insight 
as to why the problem has occurred.
However, once we move to the touch screen, visual feedback becomes absolutely vital, as it 
serves as the primary method for showing the user that an interface element was touched 
correctly. Much like a word processor that doesn’t register keystrokes, a touch interface that 
doesn’t provide some sort of visual feedback can be a frustrating experience. But whereas our 
keyboard provides tactile confirmation upon pressing the key, we have no such luxury when 
working with a piece of glass on the iPhone.
If we fail to provide some sort of feedback, users will have little to fall back on and explain 
the error. Did the user miss the button with their finger? Is the application in some sort of 
processing state that doesn’t allow the button to be pressed? Is the button that the user 
is attempting to tap actually a button? These are just several questions that arise when 
improper visual feedback is given.
Providing visual response to a tap or shake isn’t enough though, as this reaction must also 
occur without any sense of delay to the user. In applications like Apple’s Photos, where images 
can be zoomed in or out on with a pinch, it is essential that apparent changes occur so that 
the users can recognize the action as well to allow for precise manipulation. Take an iPhone or 
iPad at hand and open the Photos or Safari app. While pinching in and out to pan the zoom, it 
is easy to understand the need for immediate visual reaction from our application.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Appendix A
231
If an iPhone were to take even an extra second after the pinch to properly proportion the 
newly sized image, the delay would cause frustration, as the user would need to wait for the 
photo to reappear on screen before knowing if the zoom level is acceptable. If the image is 
pinched in a bit too far, the user would then have to adjust the photo, wait for the picture to 
appear resized, and repeat this process again until the image is satisfactory.
Apple has solved a good portion of our problems for us with all standard system interface 
elements, which help to make our job easier. If we implement the standard Tab Bar, 
Navigation Bar, or Scroll View, our interface design will already perform basic and expected 
actions to visually aid a user. If we’re still uncomfortable with producing acceptable feedback 
to the user, we should reply upon Apple’s standard interface elements as much as possible. 
So long as we stay with established standards like those found in the Interface Builder, we 
should at least provide a minimal required level of visual affirmation.
Visual feedback will become much more difficult once we begin to design custom application 
elements. When creating these non-standard buttons, sliders, or navigation elements we 
should proceed with extreme caution. In many situations, we can create a great deal of 
confusion and difficulty for our user by creating a custom navigation or interaction element, 
mostly due to the fact that visual feedback will not respond as expected for the user.
If we do design to step outside Apple’s provided interface elements, we should look around 
iOS for inspiration on how our applications should respond to taps or swipes. Tapping on 
icons or a button provides a quick shaded overlay that acknowledges the press. When sliding 
the volume control in the iPod app, the representative slider quickly keeps up with our finger. 
Rotating an iPad from portrait to landscape view provides a smooth animation to help our 
brain comprehend the shift in perspective. In many applications, a loading wheel will spin 
to help signify that a task is currently processing and holding up the device temporarily. 
These responses are a mere sampling of how iOS responds to various interactions, and 
implementing a custom interface design; we should look to corresponding features in iOS 
which most closely mimic what we’re attempting to build for guidance.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

The Importance of Direct Manipulation
232
Audio clues can work to provide equal aid to the user as well and are often neglected when 
building an interface. For several examples of sound response in iOS, we can find that tapping 
the pause or play controls on the iPod application will quickly start a song or a quick chime will 
accompany a new e-mail. Likewise, game applications often make use of short sound effects 
to signal that a character has jumped or a weapon has fired.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Appendix A
233
When looking to implement sound into our applications, we should refrain from excessively 
loud or startling sounds. Our auditory clues should be soft, subtle, and provide adequate 
confirmation while not intruding upon our user.
Visual and auditory clues are greatly important for the success of our app, as there is no other 
sense of possible feedback and users will rely upon such notifications.
Many influential and inspiring books have been written on the topic of human interface design 
and how the human brain psychologically breaks down and interprets information presented 
on a computer screen. Here are a few suggested books to read up on for more information on 
the subject. 
f
f
Written by the father of the Macintosh, Jef Raskin, The Humane Interface (ISBN-
13: 978-0201379372) is a masterpiece on user experience and interface design. 
Raskin dives into great length on a variety of meaningful topics and is able to 
simplify complex areas of cognitive research into simple lessons on creating better 
applications for the end user.
f
f
How to Think Like a Great Graphic Designer by Debbie Millman (ISBN-13: 978-
1581154962) is a collection of 20 interviews with renowned designers, focusing on 
a variety of problems similar to what we’ll be fighting everyday. It’s a great book of 
insight into the lives of the best designers in the business.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

B
If you need a stylus, 
you blew it 
When questioned about input methods on the iPad, former Apple CEO Steve Jobs offered up 
one of his most quote-worthy quips in recent memory, telling journalists about competitors, "If 
you see a stylus, they blew it." Throughout the life of iOS, Apple has taken the strong stance 
that mobile computing should remain an exercise best fit for the fingertips.
Steve Jobs was a remarkable CEO and public speaker. His keynotes on iOS 
were often an interesting public display of the operating system and a must-
watch for any developer. Apple makes public all keynotes as a podcast, 
in case we haven't seen them, at http://itunes.apple.com/
podcast/id275834665.
We've already discussed the importance of understanding the difference between the portrait 
and landscape perspectives with regards to how users hold the device in their hands, but 
what about the differences between a finger and a mouse as a pointing device?
In developing an interface for the iOS, it is important to understand the fundamental 
differences between the mouse pointer and the pointer finger. In this appendix, we'll discuss 
several of the physical and philosophical differences between the two pointing devices.
While touch screen displays have become quite commonplace, the introduction of the iPhone 
in 2007 signaled the beginning of a new generation of mobile devices by ditching a keyboard 
altogether. At the time, the world had yet to see a finger focused mobile device that worked 
well and many were skeptical.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

If you need a stylus, you blew it
236
Apple differentiated from competitors and predecessors in two distinct ways when building the 
iPhone, which helped vault the device to success. First, Apple backed away from the notion 
that a stylus was required for successful touch interaction. Second, much thought was put 
into designing an attentive operating system that reacts quickly and obviously to touch inputs.
The loss of the stylus was seen as a way to break the physical barrier between human and 
computer in a mobile environment. For millions, the iPhone was the first available capacitive 
touch screen experience which was accurate enough to not require a stylus. The detachment 
from a stylus or keyboard can be a detriment in some situations, as it also takes away 
the ability for tactile user feedback. With iOS, the finger became the direct input device 
responsible for tapping the screen.
In contrasting the differences between a click and a tap, there are three distinct attributes on 
which we should focus our attention: speed of a touch or click, radius of a touch or click, and 
the speed at which the user can move from one side of the screen to the other.
Speed is inherently different between devices due to the physical act required to perform either 
a double tap or a double click. Pick up a mouse to perform a quick double click upon a file and 
consciously make an effort to notice the motion of clicking. Computer mice are designed to 
make the click as simple and comfortable as possible, so it shouldn't be a surprise to us that 
the double click has become a common action for file selection. The mouse also has the benefit 
of being detached from the computer, which allows for relative 2D motion as interpreted by a 
device sitting on a table next to the computer monitor. Our pointer finger can remain on the 
mouse at all times, which allows us to perform a double tap at moments notice.
In contrast, iOS devices are designed so that fingers do not make unintentional contact with 
the interface while being held with our hands. The iPhone and iPod touch lay flush in a palm 
while the iPad contains a bezel that measures nearly one inch in width. In order to use our 
pointer finger to tap upon the iOS screen, we must hold the device in one hand and then 
extend our other hand and make contact with the screen. This pointing dilemma is one of 
the driving reasons as to why the Tab Bar view controller works so well on the iPhone, as the 
placement of the bar on the bottom of the screen allows for easy reach with the thumb of the 
hand holding the device. 
Keeping this attribute in mind, we should focus on keeping tap 
sensitive elements to a minimum and within reach of the thumb from 
the hand holding the device when possible.
As we can see in the next screenshot, important elements on screen are placed to be within a 
quick thumb tap:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Appendix B
237
Radius is another important component of successful interface design. Unfortunately, the 
human body did not evolve with touch screens in mind and we are left carrying relatively large 
fingers with inherent computer interaction flaws.
The width of a finger is the most difficult obstacle, as radius of a tap can vary from person to 
person. As such, we must plan for large fingers with every interface we build, which can take 
up a great deal of space. Apple suggests that interface items be of a size at least equal to 44 
pixels by 44 pixels, which equates to an 88 pixel square on the Retina Display. At this size, 
the average tap is equal to nearly 14 percent of the width of the screen and 9 percent of the 
height, which is a considerable chunk of real estate.
For means of comparison, on a 320 x 480 pixels iPhone or iPod touch screen, 
the Navigation Bar measures 44 pixels tall and the Tab Bar measures 49 
pixels tall, numbers that fit accordingly with Apple's recommendation that 
interface elements measure at least 44 x 44 pixels for easy interaction.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

If you need a stylus, you blew it
238
While fingertips are taking up a considerable portion of our real estate, we haven't even begun 
to calculate lost real estate from the rest of our finger that acts as an obtrusion to the screen 
under it.
If we place our finger on the top half of an iPhone screen, we'll quickly see that the tapping 
finger covers a great portion of the screen. Again, this is lost interface space during the 
moment that a tap occurs and we should design our interfaces with this flaw in mind. If when 
interacting with an interface element on screen, it is required that a user also have access to 
information located below that element, conflict will arise and important data will be rendered 
inaccessible. In the next image, we can see an example of such data loss:
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Appendix B
239
If we compare the radius of a touch to the click of a mouse, we see the drastic differences in 
size and clarity. Mouse pointers are designed to be small in size, where a slight movement 
of our mouse on a 2D plane on our desk corresponding with an equally slight movement 
on screen. Scrolling speeds, momentum, and other speed attributes can be customized in 
software, allowing a unique experience between users. Because mouse movement occurs on 
a separate device, traditional computer interfaces also need not worry about ever having the 
mouse pointer block important information on screen.
Finally, the speed at which a user can scan across and interact with two different interface 
items is another important challenge with our interface. When using a mouse, quick shifts 
from one side of the screen to the other are simple. A sudden movement of the mouse on 
the desk can easily translate into a pointer movement across screen. However, movement 
across the iPhone or iPad can be quite different. In order to move across the screen, the user 
must physically pick up their finger, and then place it down upon another part of screen. This 
interaction is unnatural, uncomfortable, and lengthy.
Fingertips covering up important screen real estate can become problematic with speed 
as well. If our interface changes drastically after pressing upon a button, the user cannot 
visually see and react the entire screen until the finger has been lifted. Under a mouse pointer 
system, the user has the benefit of being able to react instantaneously to changes in an 
interface. This delay can be most apparent in games and applications that are fast paced, 
where important information or game characters require quick reaction time for success.
Jumping off a cliff in a platform game or losing important information because it is obscured 
under a finger can be extremely frustrating to an iOS user and our interface designs should be 
built to prevent such situations.
The surface isn't always slippery
Due to a fingerprint protective coating that Apple uses on most iOS devices, swiping a finger 
across the screen of an iPhone or iPad can sometimes be met with a frictional resistance.
There isn't a huge sense of force when pushing a finger across screen, but the coating can 
be noticeable nonetheless. When planning an interface that requires quick swiping, keep this 
slight resistance in mind as it can sometimes make swiping on screen a bit slow.
This protective coating can slightly vary between device models and can slightly wear out over 
time as well, which can also affect the level of resistance between finger and screen.
Paying attention to subtle details in each iOS device, like the resistance of the protective 
coating, can help turn a mediocre app into a spectacular interface.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Index
Symbols
80 percent-20 percent ratio
about  180
features  181
ratio flexibility  182
working  182
work, splitting into multiple apps  182
80 percent rule
using, for developing optimal settings  180-
182
365PSD
URL  7
A
A4 processor  208
ABC Player  205
accelerometer  3
acorn  6
action sheet
about  14, 103
using, steps  104
working  105
Ad Hoc distribution  181
Adobe Photoshop  44
ad placement
cents, making with  175-178
alertLaunchImage property  161
Alert Views
updates, getting with  68-71
Alert View style  85
ambient  166
ambient light sensor  3
app
designing  215-218
designing, skeuomorphic designs used  224-
227
migrating, to iPad  202
using, with two hands  212-214
Apple guidelines
Apple design awards  42
working with  40, 41
Apple’s Human Interface Guidelines   12
Apple Tv  209
application
improving, table views used  71-74
local notification  158-161
making usable, without location data  171-174
push notification  158-161
screenshots, taking  39
starting, with Default.png  134-136
view, determining  82-85
application functionality
implementing, navigation bar used  88-91
application icon
designing  44-47
glass reflection effect, removing  54, 55
gradients  47
preparing  44-46
text, dropping  47
application UI
planning  138-141
assisted GPS  169
Audio cues  166
audio processing  167
audio properties
ambient  166
ambient noises  167
Audio cues  166
audio processing  167
AudioSessionGetProperty function  165
Audio Session Services framework used  165
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

242
managing  165-167
playback  166
playback audio  167
record  166
record property  167
silent mode  165-167
AudioSessionGetProperty function  165
Audio Session Programming Guide
URL  166
Audio Session Services framework  165
B
badges
accompanying, with notifications  165
using, to draw attention to new content  161-
164
working  164
Battery Status sample code project
URL  128
Bluetooth  
about  3
integration  118
C
calendar app  13
cents
making, with ad placement  175-178
Check In button  169
Chu Chu Rocket  126
click  236
control pad  118
controls  118
copy and paste
about  183
menu customizations  186
using, ways  184, 185
working  185
Crackle  205
custom keyboards
about  96, 97
used, for speeding up data entry  95-97
custom tab bar
creating, for iPhone application  58-60
D
data entry
speeding up, custom keyboards used  95-97
speeding up, pickers used  95-97
Default.png
application, starting with  134-136
Design Commission  24
display
cinema  5, 211
retina  209-211
dual pane views  10
E
eitherUINewsstandBindingLeft  57
F
fade
text fading, in view  108-111
text fading, out of view  108-111
feedback
user feedback  229-231
visual feedback  229
Fitts’s Law  16, 214
flash ROM storage  3
flick gesture  119
Flight Control developer  116
foursquare  169, 174
front-facing camera  3
full screen banner  177
G
game
designing, on iPad  113, 114
designing, on iPhone  113, 114
iOS game developing, strategies  115
planning, around touch  113, 114
glass reflection effect
removing  54, 55
Google Analytics SDK  181
gyroscope  119
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

243
H
HBO GO  205
headphone jack  3
Home button  149
HUD
Chu Chu Rocket  126
customization  127
designing, with real estate limitation  123-127
Hulu Plus  205
human interface design
book references  233
Human Interface Guidelines  215
I
iAd  175
iBooks  214
iDev101
URL  7
Info.plist file  45
iOS
apps designing, resources  7
copy and paste  183-185
features, cutting  193-195
settings application  189-193
undo and redo  186-189
VoiceOver  196-199
iOS 4
multitasking  145-148
iOS 5  
about  84
interface requisites, for including Twitter  78-
81
magazine app icon, optimizing  56, 57
newspaper app icon, optimizing  56, 57
Newsstand  149, 151
periodical downloads  149, 151
Twitter  78
iOS apps, resources
for designing  7
iOS Date and Time programming guide
URL  128
iOS device
setting, for testing  32-38
iOS drawing principles  22, 23
iOS Human Interface Guidelines  220
iOS SDK  
about  140
URL, for downloading  6
iOS Simulator  145
iPad
80 percent-20 percent ratio  180-182
and iPad, hardware differences  208
and iPhone, differences in functionality  204-
208
app, migrating to  202
copy and paste  183-185
features, cutting  193-195
multi-finger gestures  224
new UI elements  219-223
popovers  219-223
settings application  189-193
undo and redo  186-189
universal build  203
VoiceOver  196-199
iPad-only application  202
iPhone 4S  3, 208
iPhone
80 percent-20 percent ratio  180-182
and iPad, differences in functionality  204-
208
and iPad, hardware differences  208
copy and paste  183-185
features, cutting  193-195
periodical downloads  149, 151
settings application  189-193
undo and redo  186-189
using, as controller for iPad  118
VoiceOver  196-199
iPhone application
custom tab bar, creating  58-60
features, cutting  193-196
working  194
iPhone GUI PSD
URL  7
iPhone-only application  202
iPhone User Interface Guidelines  40
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

244
J
joystick  118
jQTouch
URL  27
L
local notification
about  158-161
controlling  158
location services
about  168
using, steps  169
working  170
M
magazine app icon, Newsstand feature
optimizing, for Newsstand  56, 57
maps app  13
Matt Rix, blog
URL  204
Merge Copy tool  59
microphone  119
mobile
gaming platform  113
platforms  114
Mobile Human Interface Guidelines
URL  140
modal views
Current Context modal view  64
dual modalities  67
page curl transition  66
utilizing  64-67
mouse  236
multi-finger gestures  224
multi-pane method  216, 217
multitasking
accomodations, making  151-153
working with  145-147
N
navigation bar
style, adding  91
used, for implementing application functional­
ity  88-91
navigation bar views  10-13
Netflix  205
newspaper app icon, Newsstand feature
optimizing, for Newsstand  56, 57
Newsstand
in iOS 5  149-151
Newsstand feature
magazine app icon, optimizing  56, 57
newspaper app icon, optimizing  56, 57
P
Pareto principle  180
Penultimate  207
periodical downloads
in iOS 5  149-151
phone calls  142, 145
pickers
about  97
used, for speeding up data entry  95-97
picker views  15
pixel resolution  209
playback  166
popover  220, 222
popovers pane views  10
Provisioning Profile  33
push notification
about  158-161
controlling  158
single button notification, using  161
R
radius  237
rapid prototype
about  25
preparing, steps  26, 27
working  28
raster images  29
ratio changes  208
rear-facing camera  3
record  166
resolution  208
retina display  119
migrating to  28-31
working  31, 32
Retina iPad  211
rounded edges effect
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

245
creating, on icon  48-53
S
Sebastiaan De  46
settings application
about  189
using, ways  190-192
working  192
Shift+Command+C shortcut  59
simulated control stick and action buttons  
119
Siri voice dictation software  3
size
44 pixels by 44 pixels  237
44 x 44 pixels  237
320 x 480 pixels  237
sketch
about  22
stencil set, selecting  24
working  24
skeuomorphic designs
about  101
used, for designing app  224-227
slider control
about  99
customizing  102
using, steps  100, 101
working  101, 102
software buttons  119
software control stick  119
split view method  216
status bar
about  128
accounting, for lost status bar  128, 129
working  129-131
stylus  7, 235, 236
swiping  239
T
tab bar
about  92
using, steps  92
variety, providing  92
working  93, 95
Tab Bar view controller  236
tab bar views  10, 12
Table Views
used, for improving application  71-74
tap  236
task finishing  148
Test Flight
URL  180
text
fading, in view  108-111
fading, out of view  108-111
text messages  142-145
touch
actual control pad, using  123
control techniques, options  119
control techniques, using  118, 119
control techniques, working  119-123
Flight Control developer  116
game, planning around  114
game planning, strategies  115-118
iPhone, using as controller for iPad  118
Twitter
in iOS 5  78
working  79
U
UI
using, steps  106
working  106-108
UILocalNotification class  161
UINewsstandBindingEdgeBottom  57
UINewsstandBindingEdge key  57
UINewsstandBindingEdgeRight  57
UINewsstandBindingTypeMagazine  57
undo and redo
about  186
preparing  186
using  187-189
working  189
universal
application  202
build  203
user feedback  229, 230, 231
user home screen
application icon, designing  44-47
application icon, preparing  44-47
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

V
vector images  29
video games  118
visual feedback  229
VoiceOver
about  196
color-blindness, helping out  199
enabling  196
using, ways  196, 197
variable text size  199
working  198
Voice over IP (VOIP)  147
W
web view
integrating, into app  75-78
X
XCode  145
Z
Zen Bound 2  130
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Thank you for buying  
iPhone User Interface Cookbook
About Packt Publishing
Packt, pronounced 'packed', published its first book "Mastering phpMyAdmin for Effective MySQL 
Management" in April 2004 and subsequently continued to specialize in publishing highly focused 
books on specific technologies and solutions.
Our books and publications share the experiences of your fellow IT professionals in adapting and 
customizing today's systems, applications, and frameworks. Our solution based books give you the 
knowledge and power to customize the software and technologies you're using to get the job done. 
Packt books are more specific and less general than the IT books you have seen in the past. Our 
unique business model allows us to bring you more focused information, giving you more of what 
you need to know, and less of what you don't.
Packt is a modern, yet unique publishing company, which focuses on producing quality, 
cutting-edge books for communities of developers, administrators, and newbies alike. 
For more information, please visit our website: www.packtpub.com.
Writing for Packt
We welcome all inquiries from people who are interested in authoring. Book proposals should be 
sent to author@packtpub.com. If your book idea is still at an early stage and you would like to 
discuss it first before writing a formal book proposal, contact us; one of our commissioning editors 
will get in touch with you. 
We're not just looking for published authors; if you have strong technical skills but no writing 
experience, our experienced editors can help you develop a writing career, or simply get some 
additional reward for your expertise.
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

iPhone Applications Tune-Up
ISBN:  978-1-84969-034-8           Paperback: 256 pages
High performance tuning guide for real-world iOS 
projects
1.	
Tune up every aspect of your iOS application for 
greater levels of stability and performance
2.	
Improve the users' experience by boosting the 
performance of your app
3.	
Learn to use Xcode's powerful native features to 
increase productivity
4.	
Profile and measure every operation of your 
application for performance
iPhone JavaScript Cookbook
ISBN: 978-1-84969-108-6            Paperback: 328 pages
Clear and practical recipes for building web applications 
using JavaScript and AJAX without having to learn 
Objective-C or Cocoa
1.	
Build web applications for iPhone with a native 
look feel using only JavaScript, CSS, and XHTML
2.	
Develop applications faster using frameworks
3.	
Integrate videos, sound, and images into your 
iPhone applications
4.	
Write code to integrate your own applications with 
famous websites such as Facebook, Twitter, and 
Flickr
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

Xcode 4 iOS Development 
Beginner's Guide
ISBN: 978-1-84969-130-7            Paperback: 432 pages
Use the powerful Xcode 4 suite of tools to build 
applications for the iPhone and iPad from scratch
1.	
Learn how to use Xcode 4 to build simple, yet 
powerful applications with ease
2.	
Each chapter builds on what you have learned 
already
3.	
Learn to add audio and video playback to your 
applications
4.	
Plentiful step-by-step examples, images, and 
diagrams to get you up to speed in no time with 
helpful hints along the way
iAd Production Beginner’s 
Guide: RAW
ISBN: 978-1-84969-132-1            Paperback: 435 pages
Create motion-rich, beautiful iAd adverts for iOS devices 
and incorporate techniques to help boost revenue and 
brand awareness
1.	
Create interactive iAd mobile adverts that appear 
in applications downloaded from the App Store
2.	
Learn to use the drag and drop visual tool, iAd 
Producer, to create ads without any experience 
with the underlying technologies
3.	
Reach an audience that downloads over 200 apps 
per second and leave a lasting, memorable image 
of your brand with rich immersive ads
Please check www.PacktPub.com for information on our titles
This material is copyright and is licensed for the sole use by REKHA NADENDLA on 2nd December 2011
375 N STEPHANIE ST SUITE 1411, HENDERSON, 89014

