IS THERE A BETTER WAY TO MANAGE 
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS?
White Paper

CONTENTS
Executive Overview .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 1
Align Development Projects with the Product Portfolio .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 2
Coordinate a Development Project’s Schedule and Resources with Its Scope .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 3
Automatic Updates of Project Tasks  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Reveal Risks Based on Real-Time Product Development Status  . .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 4
Conclusion .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . 5

Is There a Better Way to Manage Product Development Projects?        1
EXECUTIVE OVERVIEW
The last three decades have seen an explosion in project management software 
tools and certifications for project management methodologies. Terms like 
agile, resource management, critical path analysis, risk mitigation, etc. are now 
commonplace throughout the corporate world. However, has all of this attention 
to the project management discipline resulted in product development executing 
as planned? For too many companies, the answer is still a resounding “No.”
A recent study by Engineering.com (“Product Development and Project 
Management Tools,” December 17, 2015) indicates that there is a significant gap 
between how manufacturing companies value specific aspects of their project 
execution and how they judge their performance. Specifically, the study looked at 
4 main aspects of managing product development projects:
•	 Executing the simultaneous launch of multiple variants of a product
•	 Understanding how requirement changes affect a project’s schedule and resources
•	 Obtaining accurate and consistent project task updates with proof  
of completion
•	 Identifying product development issues that are causing project delays
Across all industries, survey respondents judged their abilities in each of these project 
management activities to be significantly less than their importance for executing 
a project successfully. However, it was found that if a respondent combined 
their project management methodologies with a web-based Product Lifecycle 
Management (PLM) solution, they judged their performance to be significantly 
higher. In order to address these 4 challenging aspects of product development 
projects, it was concluded that a PLM solution with embedded project management 
can uniquely provide the following operational best practices:
1	 Full alignment between projects and the product portfolio in order to 
leverage common technology platforms and launch products to market faster.
2	 Coordination of a project’s schedule and resources with its scope as 
defined by requirements and development constraints in order to meet  
market expectations.
3	 Automatic updates of project tasks as development work is completed to 
have a real-time understanding of project status and progress.
4	 Mitigating project risks based upon real-time status of product development—
designs, change orders, defects, etc.—in order to stay on schedule and  
within budget.

Is There a Better Way to Manage Product Development Projects?        2
ALIGN DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS WITH THE PRODUCT PORTFOLIO
Perhaps the best way to ensure that product development projects achieve schedule and cost 
targets is for the projects to take advantage of common technologies. To illustrate this concept, 
suppose a “toy bear” company plans to launch 3 variations of its “teddy bear” line and 2 
variations of its “panda bear” line in different sizes and/or colors. One project management 
approach would be to launch all the variants serially as shown in the figure below:
DEVELOP PRODUCT LINE 1
DEVELOP PRODUCT LINE 2
2015
2016
2017
2018
Figure 1 
Serial product development
From a product development perspective, there are clearly shared technologies between 
the variants of each product line. With the serial approach to development, there may be 
unnecessary rework as this shared technology needs to be updated for each subsequent 
project. A serial development approach also gives the competition an understanding of where 
the entire product line is heading before all variants are ready to launch.
A more efficient product development approach is to plan to launch an entire product line at 
once with work also organized to develop and update a common technology platform that 
is leveraged across both product lines. Dependencies exist between the variant and common 
technology projects in order to stay aligned as shown in the figure below:
2015
2016
2017
DEVELOP PRODUCT LINE 2
DEVELOP PRODUCT LINE 1
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMON TECHNOLOGY PLATFORM
Figure 2 
Product development of entire 
product line with a common 
technology platform

Is There a Better Way to Manage Product Development Projects?        3
By developing and launching all variants of the entire product line together, the first 
variant may not be available as early as when the serial development approach was chosen. 
However, the entire product line will launch earlier and the competition will be boxed out 
from the market better.
To effectively execute product development of an entire product line with a common 
technology platform, effective product management is needed in addition to project 
management. A PLM system allows product managers to define a product line’s variants 
with the required features (or product capabilities) that must be delivered to satisfy customer 
needs or requirements. Project managers then use this detailed understanding of what must 
be delivered to market to plan project tasks for the common technology platform and each 
product line variant. While this alignment can occur with a project management system 
separate from PLM, having a PLM system with embedded project management functionality 
provides the deep traceability to provide the remaining 3 best practices.
COORDINATE A DEVELOPMENT PROJECT’S SCHEDULE AND RESOURCES 
WITH ITS SCOPE
This understanding of the product’s market goals influences the scope of the project or what 
must be delivered. Project managers must fully understand the scope in order to determine an 
appropriate schedule and resource assignments. Scope is constrained by business factors such 
as cost and the availability of resources with necessary skill levels. As such, project managers 
have two choices: (1) properly respond to scope changes with adjustments to the schedule or 
resource assignments, or (2) determine permissible changes to scope in order to meet due dates 
or address resource limitations.
All project management methodologies assign resources to tasks in a schedule. Project 
management software provides various levels of resource management, but most companies 
require basic resource leveling while some may use processes for requesting and assigning 
resources based on required project skills. Where most dedicated project management 
software fails though is trying to coordinate resources and schedule with the scope that 
must be delivered. Typically, the definition of the project scope, or the requirements of its 
corresponding product, is done separate from the project management system. As such, 
while it is straightforward to align resources and schedule to the initial scope, projects fail as 
requirements change. The best project management solutions provide complete visibility and 
access of a product’s requirements to the project team. Then, project managers can properly 
assess the impact of requirement changes. Conversely, if meeting deadlines or alleviating 
over-assigned resources requires de-scoping, then a project manager can work with a product 
manager to assess the business impact across all affected products.
Beyond just providing requirement visibility, product managers must be able to decompose 
requirements into increasing levels of detail in order to best correspond to how the requirements 
will be fulfilled during product design and engineering. With this level of granularity, it is then 
possible for a project manager to associate requirements to specific project tasks based on the 
assignee’s role and expected deliverable as depicted in the figure below:
Figure 3 
Requirements associated  
to project tasks for scope 
traceability
PROJECT MANAGER
deﬁnes project tasks to fulﬁll requirements 
PRODUCT MANAGER
deﬁnes requirements
TASK 100
TASK 101
TASK 200
TASK 300
TASK 302
TASK 201
TASK 202
TASK 102
TASK 102
TASK 301
REQ 1. A
REQ 1. A. 1
REQ 1. A. 2
REQ 1
REQ 2
REQ 1. B
REQ 2. A
REQ 2. B

Is There a Better Way to Manage Product Development Projects?        4
Traceability between the requirements and the project tasks allows the project manager to 
address proposals to requirement changes. He immediately can determine the impact to the 
project schedule and/or resource assignments with the skills necessary to fulfill the requirements.
AUTOMATIC UPDATES OF PROJECT TASKS
Project managers are often disconnected from the actual work being performed. As such, they 
are often at the mercy of the project team members to accurately communicate the status of 
their assigned tasks. However, how often do project team members have the same assessment 
of their progress or the quality of the work done? Of course, this hardly ever happens. It is 
human nature for most people to say they are further along on a job with higher levels of 
quality than is really the case. So, the project manager’s roll-up of overall project progress has 
much uncertainty in it.
An ideal solution eliminates manually communicated updates between a “doer” and a 
“manager” and the project task status is updated automatically as work is completed with full 
traceability to the work performed. This can be thought of as governing or managing a project 
“invisibly.” The best solutions base the project task status upon the actual work content being 
delivered with the necessary review and approval process to indicate completion. For instance, 
a designer’s task may be based upon the completion of a CAD model. The assigned task is not 
“done” until the CAD model is vaulted and promoted through its lifecycle with peer reviews. 
This concept is depicted in the diagram below:
Figure 4 
Automatically updating project 
task status as work is completed
PROJECT 
MANAGER
PROJECT 
TEAM MEMBERS
TASK 100
TASK 101
TASK 102
TASK 102
X
Y
Z
When project tasks are directly associated to the work performed, the overall project status 
is updated automatically. Instead of relying on weekly status meetings or email updates, the 
project manager can investigate status in real time and also assess the quality of the work 
delivered. In order to get the best results, completing a project task should not require excessive 
steps or time. Otherwise, the results may be as poor as the weekly status meeting approach. 
In order to obtain the timeliest project status, updates should be made from the software that 
team members most commonly use to perform their jobs. Examples of this would be making 
project task assignments accessible directly from a CAD tool or common workplace software 
such as Microsoft Outlook.
REVEAL RISKS BASED ON REAL-TIME PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT STATUS 
Successfully associating product development deliverables with the project schedule leads to 
the final best practice, which is the ability to reveal risks based on real-time information. When 
a project manager is able to fully investigate why a task is late by reviewing the work that has 
been performed, an opportunity exists to identify other potential problem areas in the product 
that may have not been exposed yet via the updating of project tasks.
It is well known that as a development project progresses, the cost of resolving an issue increases 
because decisions are physically locked in. When an issue is discovered during requirements or 

Is There a Better Way to Manage Product Development Projects?        5
early design, resolving it is simply a matter of reaching an agreement and updating electronic 
data files. When issues are found during testing or in operations, an issue’s resolution may 
require changing machinery that has already been built, re-designing a product, etc.
So, how can the choice of project management software impact how issues are revealed and 
resolved? Think about how the best practice of automatic task updates was described. Tasks 
were just not being marked as complete—they were completed as actual product development 
content was vaulted as a deliverable to the task. This provides the project manager with 
incredible insight in regards to the true status of his project. Suppose a project task was late 
and the project manager was able to easily investigate the design file associated with it and all 
the decisions and/or issues generated during its lifecycle? A project manager may be able to 
recognize how the same issues affect other aspects of the project and take pre-emptive steps 
to avoid the risk entirely.
By having a PLM system with embedded project management capabilities, the project 
dashboards can provide a real-time summary of what is actually occurring in product 
development. The progress of summary phases is calculated and updated as deliverables 
are completed to close out project tasks. Project managers gain insight based on the 
real development progression, rather than interpretations created and compiled during  
weekly meetings.
Once a project issue is identified, the project manager can then further assess what is 
happening in product development. For instance, the dashboard could include metrics such as 
the number of parts under development and open change requests that must be completed. 
The project manager can explore information that has been captured during design reviews 
and determine whether a problem in one area of the product’s design may impact other areas 
that have yet to start development. This is only possible because the product development and 
project management solutions are unified with a single system and methodology.
CONCLUSION
The Engineering.com survey revealed that there is a big gap between the importance 
companies place upon some project management activities and how effectively a company 
is able to perform these activities in order to successfully execute their product development 
projects. Better education in project management methodologies and standalone software 
tools will not allow a company to perform these activities at their highest level. Only a PLM 
system with embedded project management capabilities will allow a company to fully achieve 
the following best practices:
•	 Connect project deliverables with the product portfolio to execute the simultaneous 
launch of multiple variants of a product.
•	 Coordinate schedule and resources with a precise definition of scope in the form of 
requirements in order for the impact of requirement changes to be properly assessed.
•	 Manage project tasks in-context with team members’ common work environment in 
order to get real-time and consistent project task updates with proof of completion.
•	 And finally …
•	 Provide traceability to product development data in order to reveals risks and enable the 
identification of issues that may result in project delays.
There will be pressure to pursue solutions with a lengthy list of advanced project management 
capabilities. While there is a baseline that a solution must provide, there are diminishing 
returns from the most advanced capabilities. Do not place excessive priority on these seldom 
used capabilities at the expense of fully realizing the best practices discussed in this paper. 
Instead, stay focused on the unique value provided by a PLM system with embedded  
project management.

Our 3DEXPERIENCE® platform powers our brand applications, serving 12 industries, and provides 
a rich portfolio of industry solution experiences. 
Dassault Systèmes, the 3DEXPERIENCE® Company, provides business and people with virtual universes to imagine sustainable innovations. Its 
world-leading solutions transform the way products are designed, produced, and supported. Dassault Systèmes’ collaborative solutions foster social 
innovation, expanding possibilities for the virtual world to improve the real world. The group brings value to over 210,000 customers of all sizes in all 
industries in more than 140 countries. For more information, visit www.3ds.com.
Europe/Middle East/Africa
Dassault Systèmes
10, rue Marcel Dassault
CS 40501
78946 Vélizy-Villacoublay Cedex
France
Americas
Dassault Systèmes
175 Wyman Street
Waltham, Massachusetts
02451-1223
USA
Asia-Pacific
Dassault Systèmes K.K.
ThinkPark Tower
2-1-1 Osaki, Shinagawa-ku,
Tokyo 141-6020
Japan
©2016 Dassault Systèmes. All rights reserved. 3DEXPERIENCE®, the Compass icon, the 3DS logo, CATIA, SOLIDWORKS, ENOVIA, DELMIA, SIMULIA, GEOVIA, EXALEAD, 3D VIA, 3DSWYM, BIOVIA, NETVIBES, IFWE and 3DEXCITE are commercial trademarks or registered 
trademarks of Dassault Systèmes, a French “société européenne” (Versailles Commercial Register # B 322 306 440), or its subsidiaries in the United States and/or other countries. All other trademarks are owned by their respective owners. Use of any Dassault Systèmes 
or its subsidiaries trademarks is subject to their express written approval.

