ISO 9001:2015— 
A Complete Guide to 
Quality Management 
Systems

 

ISO 9001:2015— 
A Complete Guide to 
Quality Management 
Systems
Itay Abuhav
 

Taylor & Francis Group
6000 Broken Sound Parkway NW, Suite 300
Boca Raton, FL 33487-2742
© 2017 by Taylor & Francis Group, LLC
CRC Press is an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, an Informa business
No claim to original U.S. Government works
Printed on acid-free paper
Version Date: 20161130
International Standard Book Number-13: 978-1-4987-3321-2 (Hardback)
This book contains information obtained from authentic and highly regarded sources. Reasonable efforts have been made 
to publish reliable data and information, but the author and publisher cannot assume responsibility for the validity of all 
materials or the consequences of their use. The authors and publishers have attempted to trace the copyright holders of 
all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish in this form has 
not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged please write and let us know so we may rectify 
in any future reprint.
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the 
publishers.
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, please access www.copyright.com (http://
www.copyright.com/) or contact the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 
978-750-8400. CCC is a not-for-profit organization that provides licenses and registration for a variety of users. For orga-
nizations that have been granted a photocopy license by the CCC, a separate system of payment has been arranged.
Trademark Notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
[LoC Data here]
Visit the Taylor & Francis Web site at
http://www.taylorandfrancis.com
and the CRC Press Web site at
http://www.crcpress.com
 

v
Contents
Preface 
ix
Acknowledgments 
xi
Author 
xiii
 1. 
Scope 
1
 2. 
Normative References 
3
 3. 
Terms and Definitions 
5
 4. 
Context of the Organization 
7
4.1 
Understanding the Organization and Its Context 
7
4.2 
Understanding the Needs and Expectations of Interested Parties 
15
4.3 
Determining the Scope of the Quality Management System 
18
4.4 
Quality Management System and Its Processes 
22
 5. 
Leadership 
39
5.1 
Leadership and Commitment 
39
5.1.1 
General 
39
5.1.2 
Customer Focus 
47
5.2 
Policy 
50
5.2.1 
Establishing the Quality Policy 
51
5.2.2 
Communicating the Quality Policy 
51
5.3 
Organizational Roles, Responsibilities, and Authorities 
56
 6. 
Planning 
67
6.1 
Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities 
67
6.2 
Quality Objectives and Planning to Achieve Them 
81
6.3 
Planning of Changes 
94
 7. 
Support 
101
7.1 
Resources 
101
7.1.1 
General 
101
7.1.2 
People 
104
7.1.3 
Infrastructure 
104
7.1.4 
Environment for the Operation of Processes 
112
 

vi
Contents
7.1.5 
Monitoring and Measuring Resources 
120
7.1.6 
Organizational Knowledge 
130
7.2 
Competence 
140
7.3 
Awareness 
147
7.4 
Communication 
151
7.5 
Documented Information 
157
7.5.1 
General 
158
7.5.2 
Creating and Updating 
170
7.5.3 
Control of Documented Information 
175
 8. 
Operation 
189
8.1 
Operational Planning and Control 
189
8.2 
Requirements for Products and Services 
208
8.2.1 
Customer Communication 
208
8.2.2 
Determining the Requirements for Products and Services 
216
8.2.3 
Review of Requirements for Products and Services 
220
8.2.4 
Changes to Requirements for Products and Services 
225
8.3 
Design and Development of Products and Services 
227
8.3.1 
General 
228
8.3.2 
Design and Development Planning 
229
8.3.3 
Design and Development Inputs 
236
8.3.4 
Design and Development Controls 
242
8.3.5 
Design and Development Outputs 
248
8.3.6 
Design and Development Changes 
253
8.4 
Control of Externally Provided Processes, Products, and Services 
258
8.4.1 
General 
258
8.4.2 
Type and Extent of Control 
267
8.4.3 
Information for External Providers 
275
8.5 
Production and Service Provision 
282
8.5.1 
Control of Production and Service Provision 
282
8.5.2 
Identification and Traceability 
305
8.5.3 
Property Belonging to Customers or External Providers 
314
8.5.4 
Preservation 
318
8.5.5 
Post-Delivery Activities 
323
8.5.6 
Control of Changes 
331
8.6 
Release of Products and Services 
335
8.7 
Control of Nonconforming Outputs 
341
 9. 
Performance Evaluation 
353
9.1 
Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation 
353
9.1.1 
General 
353
9.1.2 
Customer Satisfaction 
362
9.1.3 
Analysis and Evaluation 
369
9.2 
Internal Audit 
375
 

vii
Contents
9.3 
Management Review 
386
9.3.1 
General 
387
9.3.2 
Management Review Inputs 
387
9.3.3 
Management Review Outputs 
387
 10. 
Improvement 
397
10.1 General 
397
10.2 Nonconformity and corrective action 
404
10.3 Continual Improvement 
415
Index 
421
 

 

ix
Preface
The quality management world is about to go through a big change represented by 
the publication of the new revision of the ISO 9001 Standard: the 2015 revision. The 
new revision of the standard introduces new challenges to the organization but also 
a revision to old challenges. This book is a complete guide to implementing all the 
requirements of the standard. In order to present the reader with a practical and use-
ful guide, I have provided a definition of my quality policy and objectives.
My Quality Policy
Presenting and reviewing the ISO 9001:2015 standard requirements through analy-
sis, interpretation, and demonstration, with explanations, insightful examples, and 
events from various industries and sectors.
My Quality Objectives
• Commitment to the highest level of consulting regarding the ISO 9001:2015 standard
• Reviewing all the topics and issues related to the realization of a product or service 
with reference to various types of processes and products
• Providing support in the implementation of an effective quality management system
• Facilitating the documentation of processes
• Providing references to the new challenges presented in the ISO 9001:2015 standard
However, a policy and related objectives are ineffective without also having in place 
designed and structured tactics and methods to achieve them:
• The book is designed and structured to mirror the standard’s table of contents in 
order to simplify navigation and use.
• Each clause and sub-clause of the standard are discussed and analyzed through 
quality perspectives, such as the implications for an organization—its processes, 
risk-based thinking, resources, infrastructures, process environment, control and 
effectiveness, and documented information.
 

x
Preface
• The ISO 9001:2015 standard acts like a complicated web of prerequisites with 
relations between them. A full and comprehensive reference to the interrelations 
between the different clauses and sub-clauses has been included.
• Putting words into actions—the book will assist in translating the requirements and 
objectives into feasible activities and tasks. It visualizes situations with everyday 
events from the different sectors, branches, and products or services.
List of Exclusions
I decided to exclude chapter 0 of the standard from this book since it mainly  provides 
explanations regarding the ISO 9001:2015 that are already covered  elsewhere in 
this book.
My biggest wish is that you, as a reader, will refer to this book as a consulting ses-
sion; that you will read and explore it, draw information and knowledge that suit you 
and your organization; and that you will introduce this information to your quality 
management system and processes.
 

xi
Acknowledgments
I wish to thank all the people—consultants, coworkers, auditors, mentors, bosses, 
and friends—that introduced me to the quality world and have aided, supported, 
taught, lectured, consulted, and provided valuable knowledge and information dur-
ing the undertaking of this book and also in my professional career. You have helped 
to give an edge to this book. The list of names is too extensive to include here, but you 
know who you are.
I wish to thank my dear family for their warm support throughout the years.
I also wish to thank my wife Angela and daughter No'omi for understanding, 
pushing, believing, and supporting me throughout this project.
Thank you.
 

 

xiii
Author
Itay Abuhav has been acting as a consultant for many organizations in  various 
areas for the past 10 years, specializing in the quality management/control 
 industry,  consulting with a number of small- to medium-sized firms dealing with 
 implementing quality management systems, with a major focus on the European 
medical device  industry. He is highly qualified to certify organizations to various 
standards: ISO 9001 and ISO 13485. The author has two active websites related to 
these topics, namely, www.9001quality.com and www.13485quality.com.
 

 

1
1 Scope
Clause 1 of the ISO 9001 Standard is used to present the purposes and concepts 
of the standard and define the scope of application of the standard to your quality 
 management system. The following aspects are covered in this clause:
• The goals and purposes of the standard
• The approach and reference to customer requirements
• The approach and reference to regulatory or statutory requirements
• Applicability of the standard requirements
Before we start to understand the requirements of clause 1—Scope, let us review 
them first:
• The ISO 9001 Standard is an international standard for the establishment, design, 
and implementation of a quality management system (QMS) in an organization.
• Applying the ISO 9001 Standard requirements enables an organization to 
 demonstrate its ability to consistently provide products or services that meet 
 customer requirements.
• Applying the ISO 9001 Standard requirements enables an organization to 
 demonstrate its ability to consistently provide products or services that meet appli-
cable statutory or regulatory requirements.
• Applying the ISO 9001 Standard requirements enables an organization to enhance 
customer satisfaction through the use of quality management instruments that 
include methods for planning and improvements of processes and ensuring 
 conformity to customer and applicable statutory and regulatory requirements.
• The requirements of this standard are generic and apply to any sector and area of 
business and may be implemented in any organization regardless of its size or the 
type of its products or services.
• Note 1—The use of the words “product” or “service” in this standard refers to a 
 product or a service as intended or required by the customer.
• Note  2—Legal requirements may be regarded as statutory and regulatory requirements.
For me, clause 1 is an important introduction to the ISO 9001 Standard and I  consider 
it crucial for
• The understanding of the expectations of the standard from an organization: What 
is the purpose of a QMS?
• Future definitions of a QMS: How may the QMS reach its purpose?

2
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The Principles of the ISO 9001 Standard
Clause 1—Scope presents us with the principles and concepts of the standard. 
The ISO 9001 Standard is aimed to satisfy customers by fulfilling its requirements 
along with applicable international and national regulations. This is expressed 
through four principles:
• The goal and objective of the standard is to initiate a QMS that acts to consistently 
meet customer requirements as well as applicable regulatory requirements.
• The requirements of this standard initiate harmonization between a QMS of an 
organization and applicable regulatory requirements.
• The requirements suggested in the ISO 9001 Standard facilitate an improvement 
of processes included in the QMS and assurance of conformity to customer or 
 regulatory requirements.
• The requirements suggested in the ISO 9001 Standard are applicable to all sorts of 
organizations regardless of their size or type, the type of their customers, and the 
type of products or services that they are providing.
Harmonization between a QMS of an organization and applicable regulatory  requirements 
means brining the applicable and relevant international, national, local, and regulatory 
requirements into consensus with QMS aspects, for  example, the  planning and imple-
mentation of processes and activities, the design of  documentation, and the training 
qualification of human resources.
The Ability to Provide Appropriate Product
What are actually the requirements here? When an organization decides to 
 implement the ISO 9001 Standard, it is required, through the use and application 
of the methods and instruments presented in this standard, to prove its ability to 
identify customer requirements and provide products and services according to 
these requirements. And while identifying customer requirements, the organization 
must consider the application of relevant applicable regulatory, statutory, or other 
requirements, for example, codes or practices. In other words, the purposes pre-
sented in this clause must be reflected through the QMS of the organization. How? 
Through applying the quality management tools and instruments that are suggested 
in the standard, such as setting defining quality policy, quality objectives, planning 
processes, and much more.
 

3
2 Normative References
The meaning and purpose of normative references is the indication that  terminology 
and nomenclature specified in this standard is not open for debate or an  interpretive 
discussion. A normative reference refers to a document that includes terms, 
 fundamental concepts, principles, and vocabulary that are essential for the applica-
tion of the ISO 9001 Standard. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements are as follows:
• When dated normative references are used, only the edition cited applies (the 
ISO 9000:2015 Standard).
• When undated normative references are used, the latest edition of this referenced 
document (including any amendments) applies.
• The document ISO 9000:2015, Quality management systems—Fundamentals and 
vocabulary are to be normatively referred to while establishing a quality manage-
ment system (QMS) according to the ISO 9001 Standard requirements.
A normative reference lists other ISO or IEC documents or standards that are 
 necessary for the application of the standard. In other words, which  documentation 
may assist you in how to comply with the requirements stated in the ISO 9001 
Standard. The objective of a normative reference is to relate to a standard that is 
 applicable to the implementation of the ISO 9001:2015 Standard and to relate to 
directives, definitions, or understanding of the ISO 9001:2015 Standard.
The ISO 9001 Standard refers us to a specific document, “ISO 9000:2015: Quality 
management systems—Fundamentals and vocabulary.” In case  questions or misun-
derstanding regarding the definitions or the requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard 
arises during the implementation and application of the standard  requirements, you 
can turn to this document. For example, when you are  discussing and  planning activi-
ties related to customer focus and you are not sure what the  definition of  customer 
focus is, you may turn to the ISO 9000 Standard and understand how the ISO 9001 
Standard  interprets the issue of customer focus.

 

5
3 Terms and Definitions
Clause 3 of the standard—Term and Definitions is necessary to clarify matters and 
disputes regarding the terms and definitions mentioned in the ISO 9001 Standard. 
The terms and  definitions mentioned and discussed in the ISO 9000 Standard—Quality 
management systems, Fundamentals and vocabulary—are applicable to this standard 
(the ISO 9001 Standard). The ISO 9001 Standard requirements are as follows:
• The terms and definitions given in ISO 9000:2015 apply for the purposes of the 
ISO 9001 Standard.
ISO 9000:2015 Standard
The ISO 9000 Standard provides the fundamental concepts, principles, and  vocabulary 
that are to be used when establishing a quality management system according to the 
requirements stated in the ISO 9001 Standard. In other words, when you  stumble 
upon a term in the ISO 9001 Standard that are unfamiliar to you, you cannot  interpret 
it correctly or you have a dispute with another on the meaning, you may turn to the 
ISO 9000 Standard and resolve the conflict. A good example may be the term “risk”; 
you may consider it as one thing but your auditor may see it as another. In order to 
avoid unnecessary disputes in advance, I advise you to review this standard and learn 
the terms and definitions that are mentioned there.

 

7
4 Context of the Organization
4.1  Understanding the Organization and Its Context
Understanding the context of an organization is now standard requirement. It is not 
a new concept but it is officially adopted by the ISO 9001:2015 Standard, and when 
developing a quality management system (QMS), it is required to identify, analyze, 
and understand the business environment in which the organization conducts its 
business and realizes its product.
Any organization is a combination of different business entities (functions or 
 systems—internal or external) that relate and interact with each other and exchange 
information and materials. The context of the organization is an outline of the inter-
action and integration of these business entities. It is the set of functions, factors, 
processes, inputs and outputs, and conditions and limitations that create the busi-
ness environment of an organization—these encompass both internal and external 
issues. These issues have an impact on the ability of the organization to provide the 
product and thus affect the goals and objectives of the organization. Thus the deduc-
tion: when determining your business strategy and setting the objectives of your 
QMS, you should understand, consider, and refer to these aspects. Understanding 
the context of the organization is key to a correct business strategy, let alone a cor-
rect quality strategy.
Before we plunge into this topic, let us review what the ISO 9001:2015 Standard 
requirements are:
• The organization must determine the organizational context in which it is active. 
The organizational context includes issues that
• Are relevant to its purpose
• Are relevant to the scope of the QMS
• Are relevant to its strategy (goals and objectives)
• Affect the organization’s ability to achieve the intended results and customer 
expectations
• Internal and external information and issues related to the context of the organiza-
tion shall be reviewed in order to evaluate changes that might affect the objectives 
of the organization.

8
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Note 1—The review may refer to positive and negative factors or conditions that may 
affect the QMS and its context of the organization.
• Note 2—Issues arising from legal, technological, competitive, market, cultural, social, 
and economic environments conditions, whether international, national, regional, or 
local, may be considered for the definition of the context of the organization.
• Note 3—Organizational values, perceptions, and cultural environment may help 
understand and form the context of the organization.
The Principle of the Context of the Organization
The ISO 9001 Standard recognizes the importance and role of the context of the 
 organization and requires its definition when establishing a QMS. The analysis 
regarding the context of the organization is a natural process that each organization 
must follow at some point in its life. The ISO 9001:2015 aspires to institutionalize the 
context as the foundation for the QMS.
Organizations usually have several strategies or concepts in various fields and areas 
that dictate the direction of the organization: financial strategy, sales and marketing 
strategy, purchase strategy, IT concept, and so on. One clear objective of determining 
the context of the organization is to harmonize these various strategies and concepts. 
By determining the context of the organization, the organization identifies the scope 
and boundaries of its activities that will be reflected in the QMS. From the context 
of the organization we derive the goals and objectives of the QMS. After attending to 
these points, you should have a clear picture of the business environment in which 
your organization is active and you would be in the right position to plan and define 
your QMS, its goals, and objectives.
External and Internal Issues Relevant to the Organization
The main goal of understanding the context of the organization is the identification 
of the external and internal issues that are relevant to the purpose of the organiza-
tion. Organizational issues are significant factors, conditions, influences, situations, 
or events that have an effect on the QMS and will affect the ability of the organization 
in achieving its objectives and desired results. The issues may be affected or directed 
by relevant parties that have an effect on the organization, such as investors, employ-
ees, competitors, suppliers, regulators, and customers.
Every area of expertise, sector, market, product family, or other business segmen-
tation has its own relevant issues that affect the organizational context. External or 
internal issues may include
• The expectations of interested parties
• The main products that provide the most value for its interested parties
• Processes and activities needed to meet specifications and expectations of its interested 
parties
 

9
Context of the Organization
• The influence of the business environment in which the organization is active
• Availability of resources needed for the realization
• Competence of the human resource
• Statutory and regulatory requirements
In practice, the standard expects awareness of these issues, and when issues are iden-
tified you must categorize them. I suggest two integrated methods for the effective 
identification of external and internal issues and their influence on the organization.
Understanding and Defining the Organizational Context
As mentioned earlier, the context of the organization consists of the environment 
in which it operates and refers to internal and external issues relevant to the activity 
of the organization. As a first step in defining the organizational context, I  suggest 
following a course that will put you in a position to better define your quality policy, 
to identify the business environment in which the organization is active, to iden-
tify which internal and external issues in this environment influence the organi-
zation, and to understand who the relevant interested parties are. The following is 
the  suggested process for an effective definition of the context of the organization 
(the different stages are elaborated throughout Section 4.1) (Figure 4.1):
• The definition of the context of the organization will begin with PEST (political, 
economic, social, and technological factors) analysis, which will provide inputs for 
the strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis.
• SWOT analysis will define inputs for the determination of the internal and external 
issues.
• The determination of the internal and the external issues will help identifying 
 relevant interested parties.
• Identifying interested parties will assist in defining the scope of the QMS.
• The scope of the QMS will provide the foundation of the QMS.
PEST Analysis
PEST stands for political, economic, social, and technological factors that may 
affect the strategy of the organization. In order to understand better the context 
of the organization, it is recommended to conduct a PEST analysis—analysis of 
different conditions that affect the organization in the business environment in 
which it is active. This analysis reviews the macro environment of an organization 
PEST
analysis
SWOT
analysis
Identify 
int. and 
ext. issues
Identify 
interested 
parties
Define 
scope of 
the QMS
Figure 4.1 Stages in understanding the organizational context.
 

10
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
and is a useful tool for understanding how a business environment behaves and 
affects the QMS. A business  environment will be analyzed by what it is address-
ing: the products, the customers’ expectations, the activities of the organization, 
and so on. And these are reviewed through four different perspectives: political, 
economic, social, and technological.
PEST analysis identifies external factors that might change and while chang-
ing will affect or influence the organization and its operations. Each of the  factors 
(political, economic, social, and technological) is used to assess the extent of influ-
ence of the business environment on the ability of the organization to deliver a 
 product according to its customers’ expectations. The organization, on the other 
hand, cannot influence these factors but must try to adapt to them. The outputs 
of PEST analysis will be used as opportunities and threats for the later SWOT 
 analysis, which will be discussed later. PEST analysis may be also extended to 
seven or even more factors: ecological (or environmental), legislative (or legal), and 
industry analysis, which uses the name PESTELI analysis. But I will concentrate on 
the four main factors.
The four parameters for analysis vary in significance and influence depending on 
the type of organization, its business environment, and activities. For example, a soft-
ware development company should give more scale to the technology while a volun-
tary association in a developing country should pay more attention to the political 
conditions.
Political Factors
Political factors consist of government regulations and legal  factors that can affect the 
business environment. Issues such as political stability, trade regulations, manufac-
turing regulations, safety regulations, and  employment laws will be assessed for their 
influence on the QMS. More example factors are
• Ecological/environmental issues
• Current legislation
• Anticipated future legislation
• International legislation (global influences)
• Regulatory bodies and processes
• Government policies, terms, and change
• Funding, grants, and initiatives
• Market lobbying groups
• Wars and conflicts
These factors may have a significant influence on defining the processes, their 
resources, and their required controls. These factors may dictate the implementa-
tion of processes and activities or may demand product specifications. Other good 
examples of a factor are work grants and permissions between different coun-
tries in different areas of the world that affect the availability or costs of human 
resources and the medical industry, when a manufacturer must implement local 
or regional regulations in each country or region where it is marketing its devices.
 

11
Context of the Organization
Economic Factors
The economic factors evaluate issues that are bound to impact on the cash flow, the 
business cycle, and any critical decisions regarding the direction of the organization. 
Here we can find factors such as economic growth, unemployment rate, inflation, and 
interest rates. Some more examples are
• National economies and trends
• General taxation issues
• Taxation to activities, products, services
• Seasonality
• Weather issues
• Market and trade cycles
• Specific sector factors
• Customer/end user drivers
• Interest and exchange rates
• International trade and monetary issues
Another good example is the big economic crisis of 2008, when many companies 
experienced a decline in their business. This led to the cancelation or delay of many 
plans and developments for new products.
Social Factors
Social factors represent the socioeconomic environment of the markets in which the 
organization is active. Social factors affect how one organization perceives its cus-
tomers and the interested parties, their needs, and expectations (clause 4.2 of the 
ISO  9001 Standard), and understanding the social factors help the organization 
ensure meeting those needs and expectations by supplying the appropriate products 
and services. Examples of social factors are
• Lifestyle trends
• Demographic trends
• Consumer attitudes and opinions
• Media views
• Changes in laws that affect social behaviors
• Image of the organization
• Consumer buying patterns
• Fashion and role models
• Major events and influences
• Buying access and trends
• Ethnic/religious factors
• Advertising and publicity
• Ethical issues
Lifestyle trends are a good example of how a change of lifestyle can change realiza-
tion processes of a product—today people shop online so that products are  delivered 
directly to their home instead of going out to the stores. As a result the delivery busi-
nesses are booming. This fact impels many organizations to change their realization 
processes and adopt new distribution channels.
 

12
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Technological Factors
Technological factors may have a significant effect on the expectations of customers, 
on the products or services offered, and thus on the processes and how products are 
realized. And in today’s world technological factors are the ones that are changing most 
rapidly. An organization that has the ability to detect and identify and react to these 
changes faster has an advantage in its market. Examples for technological  factors are
• Competing technology development
• Associated/dependent technologies
• Replacement technology/solutions
• Maturity of technology
• Information and communications
• Consumer buying mechanisms
• Technology legislation
• Innovation potential
• Technology access, licensing, patents
• Intellectual property issues
• Global communication
• Social media use
• Maturity of organizations
A good example that describes such significant technological changes is taken 
from the music recording industry in the last 20 years. In the early 2000s, the 
industry went from analog technology to digital technology leaving thousands 
of studios with irrelevant equipment. In a very short time, all studios needed to 
adapt to the new technologies and purchase new digital equipment because all 
its customers adapted it. That means adapting their substructures, their work 
environment, their purchase, the competence of the human resources, and so on. 
But guess what? After 20 years of digital sound, a social trend (social factor) has 
changed and today people are looking again for the warm analog sound! So stu-
dios that were smart and kept the old technology can satisfy today’s customers 
who will pay a bit more for the vintage  technology. How the world is changing and 
then changing back again ….
SWOT Analysis
After understanding the business environment in which the organization is active 
and the factors that influence this environment, the organization must evaluate 
itself. SWOT analysis (or SWOT model) was originally developed as a corporate 
planning tool. The analysis uses comparative data that enables the organization 
to evaluate itself and to help develop and shape a strategy—in our case, the QMS. 
SWOT evaluates the internal business environment of an organization through four 
axes: Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats. Most of us know or use 
SWOT as part of our marketing strategy. But in fact the conclusions of this analysis 
may assist organizations in identifying the relevant quality elements that affect the 
 

13
Context of the Organization
QMS: products and/or services, processes, and resources. The principle of SWOT 
analysis is easy to understand:
• What is good in the present and in the past is a strength
• What is bad in the present and in the past is a weakness
• What is good in the future is an opportunity
• What is bad in the future is a threat
The Strengths, Weaknesses, Opportunities, and Threats are axes of the analysis. Each 
of these axes will be analyzed according to the next index:
• Product (what are we realizing?)
• Process (how do we realize the product?)
• Customer (to whom are we delivering it?)
• Administration (and how do we manage these activities?)
What is the difference between PEST and SWOT analysis? PEST analysis measures 
the market and external business environment that a business unit is active in. SWOT 
analysis measures the internal factors of the business unit. The factors of PEST analy-
sis cannot be influenced; the factors of SWOT can. The most effective (and easy) way 
to perform a SWOT analysis is to begin with answering question regarding each of 
the parameters mentioned earlier.
Strengths
The strengths are the internal attributes and resources that support the realization of 
the product and the establishment, implementation, maintenance, and improvement 
of the QMS. In other words, the advantages the organization has to realize the prod-
uct or service. The appropriate questions in this case will be
• What are the reasons that on their behalf we achieve our objectives (process, 
administration)?
• Which resources in the organization are at our advantage and support the realiza-
tion of the product (product, process)?
• Which knowledge in our organization is at our advantage (product, process)?
• Which processes do we perform better than others (process)?
• Which customer expectations and requirements do we meet the best (customer)?
• What are the reasons our customers are satisfied (customer)?
Weaknesses
Weaknesses are internal attributes that may interrupt the realization of the product 
and may produce a nonconformity in the QMS. When analyzing the weaknesses it 
is highly recommended to consider it from an external (as well as internal) point of 
view. With external point of view I mean—do other parties perceive a weakness that 
you are unaware of? Another external point of view is seeing the strengths of your 
competitors as your weaknesses. The appropriate  questions in this case will be
• What are the reasons we do not achieve our objectives (process, administration)?
• Which resources in our organization we need to improve or supplement (process, 
administration)?
 

14
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• What knowledge are we lacking in order to achieve our objectives (process, product)?
• Which processes we need to improve (process)?
• Which customer expectations do we fail to understand or answer (product, 
customer)?
• What are the reasons our customers are not satisfied (product, customer)?
Opportunities
Opportunities are factors the organization can draw advantages from in the future. 
These are the chances for improvements that the ISO 9001 is so fond of. A lot is written 
on this topic in this standard—many of the standard’s clauses refer directly to the oppor-
tunities. In fact the standard requires an assessment of external as well as internal issues 
that may serve as opportunities that may assure that the QMS can achieve its objectives.
The outputs of the analysis of opportunities may serve as inputs to some of the stan-
dard’s clauses (e.g., 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities, 6.3—Planning 
of changes). In these clauses, you will need to demonstrate methods and manners for 
identifying opportunities (aside from SWOT analysis). So the advantage of perform-
ing a clear and accurate analysis of opportunities will serve you with other standard 
requirements. The appropriate questions in this case will be
• Which product features, customer expectations, or trends can we develop or 
improve (product, customer)?
• Which processes can we do better (product, customer, admin)?
• Which outputs of PEST analysis can we view as opportunities for chances improve-
ment (product, process, customer, administration)?
Threats
Threats may be considered as the risks that the organization faces while managing the 
QMS and realizing the products or services. Threats are the risks that may cause non-
conformities in the QMS or in the realization processes, which the organization must 
address and eliminate. In fact the standard requires that the organization address 
risks that may affect the ability of the organization to provide a product according 
to the expectations of the interested parties. While conducting SWOT analysis, you 
need to assess the factors that may influence this ability. The appropriate questions in 
this case will be
• Which regulatory issues or standard specifications may affect the realization 
 processes or the products (process, product)?
• Which technological issues may affect the product, its realization, or its distribution 
(process, product)?
• Which economic issues may affect the product, its realization, or its distribution 
(process, product)?
• Which processes, product characteristics, and/or customer satisfaction factors may 
be affected by upcoming changes or events (process, product, and customer)?
 

15
Context of the Organization
Determining and Documenting the Internal and External Issues 
and the Context of the Organization
After completing the analyses discussed earlier, gathering all the information and 
identifying the issues that may influence the organizational context and affect 
the QMS, you are in a position to define what internal and external issues are 
relevant to the organization and its QMS. We reviewed the business environment 
through PEST analysis. We analyzed our SWOT. Now we should have enough 
inputs and should know which issues are affecting our activities and what the 
extent of each one is.
I highly recommend documenting this analysis for the following reasons:
• In clause 4.1 (Understanding the organization and its context) there is no explicit 
requirement for documented information, but in clause 4.3 (Determining the 
scope of the quality management system) it is required to maintain as documented 
 information the scope of the organization’s QMS. The analyses and its conclusion 
are a great part of the scope.
• In clause 4.2 (Understanding the needs and expectations of interested parties), the 
organization is required to monitor and review information about the interested 
parties and their relevant requirements. This review is done through update of the 
analysis mentioned in this clause.
• Audit—During an audit you will probably be asked to explain and demonstrate how 
you reached the conclusion of your analysis. When the day comes and the question 
will pop “please enlighten me how you came to all these conclusions?” you then will 
refer to the quality manual (if you decide to maintain one) or any other document 
and will have all the answers at hand.
In case you decide to still maintain your quality manual, you may include the 
 conclusions there; just add chapters bearing the information and conclusions you 
came to during your analyses.
4.2  Understanding the Needs and Expectations of Interested Parties
Understanding the needs and expectations of the interested parties is the first step in 
developing the QMS and the foundation for determining its scope, defining relevant 
quality objectives, and developing quality activities for achieving them. After under-
standing the context of the organization, it must be determined who the interested 
parties are and what their needs and expectations are. Interested parties are individu-
als and other business entities that may affect the organization’s ability to provide a 
product according to the specifications. Understanding their needs and expectations 
will create the organizational quality management conditions for the fulfillment of 
those needs and expectations over the long term and will enable the organization to 
achieve its objectives.
 

16
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Interested parties differ from one another and thus have different needs and 
expectations. For example, investors want security for their investment and a 
good return, while customers expect to get a product that meets their needs in the 
most effective way. Identifying these expectations may be crucial for determining 
the scope of the QMS and setting the quality objectives. What does the ISO 9001 
Standard require?
• Interested parties have a potential effect on the organization’s ability to consistently 
provide products and services that meet customer and applicable statutory and reg-
ulatory requirements.
• The organization shall identify and determine the interested parties that are rel-
evant to the QMS.
• The organization shall determine the requirements of these interested parties that 
are relevant to the QMS.
• The organization shall monitor and review information about these interested par-
ties and their relevant requirements.
Identification of Interested Parties and Their Effect on the Organization
Interested parties are entities that perform and are active in the business environment, 
in which the organization is active that has an effect on the QMS. Interested parties may 
be a person or another organization that can affect, be affected by, or  perceive themselves 
to be affected by the organization or its activities. Interested parties can be investors of 
the organization; suppliers of materials, products, or service; technological providers; 
financial institutions; and governmental and nongovernmental  organizations. The first 
step in determining the needs and expectations of interested parties is identifying what 
area in the QMS they relate to. The following will help this identification process:
Interested Party
Influence
Customers
Expectations of the product, its intended use, and its characteristics. 
Changes in those expectations may influence the QMS and its activities.
Employees
Employees directly affect the QMS and its processes and, thus, the 
quality of the product.
Suppliers and external providers
The quality of materials, components, or parts that must be integrated in 
the end product and their delivery from suppliers and external providers 
may directly influence the quality and conformity of the product.
Regulators
Regulations and statutory requirements may dictate processes and 
activities of the organization and thus may affect the characteristics 
of a product.
Investors
The investors of the organization determine the availability of resources 
and thus may influence the quality and conformity of the product.
Competitors
Competitors may affect the profitability of the organization by delivering 
a product that meets customer needs and expectations better.
Other interested parties relevant 
to the area of expertise or 
activity of the organization
Other interested parties and their influence on the quality and 
conformity of the product identified through PEST analysis.
 

17
Context of the Organization
It is important to stay focused on interested parties that are relevant to the organi-
zation, its area of activities, and its QMS.
Identification of the Needs and Expectations of the Interested Parties
After listing the interested parties, we must identify their needs and expectation with 
reference to the QMS. I suggest here a very simple table that specifies the needs and 
expectations of each interested party.
Interested Party
Needs and Expectations
Customers
• Enhancement of customer satisfaction
• Delivery of quality, price, and performance of products according 
to specifications
• Appropriate communication channels with the organization
• Handling of property belonging to customers
Owners/shareholders
• Increased revenue and market share
• Sustained profitability
• Flexible and fast responses to market opportunities
• Evaluation of risks and opportunities
Employees of the 
organization
• Clear vision of the organization’s future
• Appropriate integration in the organization
• A proper job definition
• Good work environment
• Work opportunities
• Job security
• Social conditions
• Recognition and reward
• Facilities for personnel in the organization
• Developing and improving the competence of personnel (training)
Suppliers and partners
• Return on supply of goods or provision of services; appropriate 
communication channels between the organization and the 
supplier
• Provision of resources such as information, knowledge, expertise, 
technology, processes, and training
• Mutual benefits and continuity
• Sticking to payment conditions
• Handling of property belonging to external providers
Society in which the 
organization is active
• Environmental protection
• Ethical behavior
• Delivering product in accordance to the social, economic, 
ecological trends, and local cultural aspects
Regulators
• Compliance with statutory and regulatory requirements
• Anticipating and reacting to expected changes in statutory and 
regulatory requirements
• Understanding the labor market and its effect on the loyalty of 
people in the organization
 

18
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
After the identification of needs and expectations of the interested parties, you are 
in a position to develop and plan your QMS effectively. The ISO 9001 Standard refers 
through the following issues to the needs and expectations of interested parties:
• Defining the scope of the QMS according to their expectations
• Communicating the quality policy to them
• Identifying their needs and expectations related to the product
• Designing and developing products according to their needs
• Periodically reviewing their needs and expectations and changes
Monitoring and Reviewing Information Related to the Interested Parties
The organization’s business environment is ever-changing and dynamic and the 
needs and expectations of the related interested parties change with it. Thus, the 
organization is required to monitor and review changes and trends in the business 
environment and related changes in the needs and expectations of the interested par-
ties. This can be done through a constant monitoring and analysis of the organiza-
tion’s business environment and the context of the organization:
• The collection and management of data and information related to the context of the 
organization (periodical update to PEST and SWOT analyses).
• Evaluation of the new results of the analysis.
• Identifying and understanding the different changes in the different aspects: social, 
economic, ecological trends, or local cultural.
• Determining whether new needs or expectations arise from those changes.
• Updating the relevant QMS elements: new quality objectives, changing products, 
launching new products, employing new workers, and so on.
• Informing its interested parties of changes and updates relevant to the QMS through 
appropriate channels.
Updating the needs and expectations of the interested parties is related to the differ-
ent areas in an organization: human resources are responsible for identifying changes 
related to human resources, marketing is responsible for identifying changes in the 
needs and expectations of customers, and top management shall receive inputs from 
the investors. This type of update must be performed periodically; the organiza-
tion shall define the interval. In order to create a systematic review, I refer back to 
chapter 4.1 (Understanding the context of the organization), where I recommended 
a method for documentation. This type of documentation will serve as the input for 
management review (as required in clause 9.3.2, c-1).
4.3  Determining the Scope of the Quality Management System
Boundaries and applicability of the QMS must be determined in order to enable the 
definitions of the scope of the QMS. The scope of the QMS refers to the areas, locations, 
product or lines of products (or services), and processes or activities of the organization 
 

19
Context of the Organization
to which the QMS is relevant and will be influenced by them. In other words, the scope 
of the QMS defines its domain. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements are that
• The organization shall determine the boundaries and applicability of the QMS to 
establish its scope.
• The scope shall refer to products and services of the organization as well as the pro-
cesses and activities required to realize them and the various locations which the 
organization uses for the realization of the product or services.
• When determining the scope of the QMS, the organization shall relate to external as 
well as internal issues as discussed in clause 4.1.
• When determining the scope, the organization shall relate to the requirements of 
interested parties as mentioned in clause 4.2.
• The organization shall meet all the ISO 9001 Standard requirements as applicable 
to the QMS.
• While determining the scope, the organization shall justify any decision for not 
including any requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard in its QMS (i.e., exclusions).
• A justification for exclusion must prove that the exclusion of a standard requirement 
does not affect the ability or responsibility of the organization to deliver products 
or services with conformity to customer requirements and the ability to enhance 
customer satisfaction.
• Claiming conformity to the ISO 9001 Standard is only possible when the exclusions 
are proven not to affect the organization’s ability or responsibility to ensure the con-
formity of its products and services and the enhancement of customer satisfaction.
• The scope will be documented and maintained as documented information.
Determining the Scope of the Quality Management System
The scope of the QMS defines in which areas and boundaries the organization is 
active and describes the services, resources, processes, operations, and products the 
quality system applies to. In practice, it is a text that will be maintained as docu-
mented information and also appear on the certification. An accurate and correct 
definition of the scope is crucial because it determines which products and services 
are included under the QMS and that determines the processes and activities that 
need to be planned, controlled, and documented according to the ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements. The scope will relate to the following issues:
• The products or services included under the QMS and that organization delivers to 
its customers.
• All the applicable realization activities that will be under the QMS: research and 
development, production, marketing, installation, service, and support.
• Locations of the organizational units that will be under the QMS (if applicable). Bear 
in mind that each location that is included in the scope must be audited separately.
Reference to External and Internal Issues
As said before, external and internal issues are significant factors, conditions, influ-
ences, situations, opportunities, or events that have an effect on the QMS and will 
 

20
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
affect the ability of the organization in achieving its objectives and the intended 
results. Such issues and their influences were identified when we discussed the con-
text of the organization. These issues shall serve as inputs when determining the 
scope of the QMS.
For example, when the organization produces a product that is submitted to 
several regulations, this will be mentioned in the scope: Developing and manu-
facturing a product while applying the relevant local, regional, and international 
regulations.
Reference to Relevant Needs and Expectations of Interested Parties
Interested parties are persons or organizations that affect, or may be affected, or per-
ceive themselves to be affected by the organization or its activities. The interested 
parties and their relevant needs and expectations were identified and discussed in 
clause 4.2 (Understanding the needs and expectations of interested parties).
For example, if one need or expectation of your customer is distribution of your 
product with a certain technology, for example, an online shop, the scope will indi-
cate it: Marketing of products on an online or an Internet platform.
Application of All the ISO 9001 Standard Requirements in the Scope
The Standard requires complete adherence to all the requirements mentioned in the 
standard when they are applicable. In other words, you may not exclude or neglect 
any requirement of the standard unless this requirement is not applicable to your 
QMS and you have an acceptable justification. For example, if you are not purchasing 
any services or goods from an external provider, there is no sense in developing qual-
ity management tools and controls for those areas.
List of Exclusions and Nonapplications
In the case one of the standard requirements does not apply to your QMS, you are 
entitled to exclude it. Excluding means not implementing those requirements in the 
QMS. The scope of the QMS shall indicate a list of exclusions of the standard require-
ments—requirements from the ISO 9001 Standard that the organization for some 
reason decided are not applicable to the QMS and has chosen to exclude them. The 
reason for the exclusions and nonapplications is that those specific standard require-
ments do not apply to the operations, products, or services of the organization. For 
example, if your organization does not use any monitoring and measuring devices on 
its products or processes, it may exclude the requirements of clause 7.1.5—Monitoring 
and measuring resources.
Each exclusion requires a justification on behalf of the organization—a state-
ment with the explanation of an acceptable reason for excluding the requirement. 
 

21
Context of the Organization
For example, I would manage a table with the relevant clause from the standard along 
with the justification, which would look like this:
Exclusion
Reason
7.1.5—Monitoring and measuring 
resources
The organization does not use any resources, personnel, tools, or 
equipment for ensuring results of monitoring and measuring.
8.3—Design and development of 
products and services
The organization does not develop any products or services.
8.5.3—Property belonging to 
customers or external providers
The organization does not hold, store, maintain stocks, or 
inventory of property belonging to customers or external 
providers.
When you decide to exclude a requirement, make sure any activity, operation, or 
process is not included in the QMS and that the does not refer to those requirements. 
For example, if you exclude the requirements of clause 8.5.3 but do receive packages 
from a supplier, make sure that activities for handling packages or containers of the 
supplier are not included in the processes.
Including New Process Operations and Product under the QMS
When the scope of the QMS is already defined and documented, and the organiza-
tion decides to develop a brand new product with new processes, operations, and 
activities, as long as the product is not included in the scope of the QMS, it is not 
officially included in the QMS, although the development and realization were done 
under the appropriate controls and all the records are maintained, and so on.
Documenting the Scope of the QMS
The scope of the QMS and the list of exclusions must be maintained as documented infor-
mation; must be created, updated, and controlled under the requirements of clause 7.5 
(Documented information). One option is to create a designated document for the scope. 
I (along this book) recommend to document and maintain the scope of the QMS and the 
exclusions in the quality manual, if you still want to maintain this type of documentation 
(the 2015 revision of the Standard does not require maintaining a quality manual anymore).
Example Scopes for the QMS
Here are some example wordings for QMS scope from certificates I have seen:
• The design and development, manufacturing, and service for motor units and control 
equipment for pumps, fire pumps, fans, blowers, and automatic water supply systems.
• Design, manufacture, supply, service, and customer support for diesel engines from 
type XXX to type YYY.
 

22
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Developing and manufacturing semiconductors components for the XXX industry.
• Developing and provision of construction engineering services, consulting services 
including project management services. Included sites: New York branch, London 
branch, Zurich branch.
• Provision of cleaning services at the customer premises and provision of cleaning 
products and materials.
4.4  Quality Management System and Its Processes
4.4.1  
Clause 4.4.1 is a declaration of the standard’s intention regarding the QMS. In this 
clause, the requirements and main principles of a QMS are presented. This clause can 
be regarded as a foundation for self-evaluation of whether the organization’s QMS 
follows the general requirements. First let me review the basic requirements:
• The organization shall establish, implement, and maintain a QMS within the orga-
nization with conformity to the requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard.
• The organization is required to continually improve the QMS and its processes in 
accordance with the requirements of this International standard.
• The organization shall determine the processes needed for the QMS.
• The organization shall determine how these processes will be applied in the QMS.
• The processes included in the QMS shall be identified and planned, implemented, 
controlled, and improved.
• The organization shall determine the required inputs and expected outputs of every 
process.
• The organization shall determine the sequence and interaction of processes included 
in the QMS.
• The organization shall determine how these processes and their controls will be 
implemented in the organization.
• Methods, criteria, performance indicators, and measurements for ensuring effective 
monitoring and control of the processes will be defined and implemented.
• Resources needed to support these processes shall be allocated and available.
• Responsibilities and authorities for these processes shall be assigned.
• Risks and opportunities identified and determined in accordance with the require-
ments of 6.1 shall be addressed.
• Changes necessary to ensure processes achieve their intended results shall be evalu-
ated, planned, and implemented.
• The organization will implement specific measures for the improvement of these 
processes (achievement of objectives and maintenance of effectiveness).
4.4.2  
• According to its needs and requirements, the organization shall maintain docu-
mented information to support the operation of its processes.
• According to the needs and requirements, the organization shall retain documented 
information to ensure that the processes are being carried out as planned.
 

23
Context of the Organization
Establishing a QMS according to Clear Principles
The ISO 9001:2015 declares in clause 4.4 quite clearly with which principles the QMS 
shall be established:
• Establishment of a QMS according to the ISO 9001:2015 Standard Requirements
• Definition of processes and their interactions needed for the operation of this QMS
• Continually maintaining and the effectiveness of the QMS through improvement
The important message here is that in order to deliver a conformed product or ser-
vice and to meet customer requirements as well as other needs and expectations of 
other relevant interested parties in an effective way, a QMS must be established and 
maintained—a QMS
• That is based on the quality principles suggested in the ISO 9001 Standard.
• That is defined, planned, implemented, and controlled.
• That is customer focused—the QMS should use methods to understand present and 
future customer needs, and shall develop processes to meet customer requirements 
and strive to exceed customer expectations.
• Whose activities and processes address the needs and expectations of interested 
parties.
• Whose resources are planned, allocated, and controlled.
• Whose processes and activities are managed and whose interrelations are clear.
• That is constantly analyzed and controlled—analysis of data and information is 
implemented and decisions are based on facts.
• Supports improvement through collection of evidences and their analysis.
• That is fueled by the top management leadership—through leadership the purpose 
and strategic direction of the organization are established. Leadership shall create 
the environment for establishing the appropriate quality policy, in which employees 
can become fully involved and quality objectives can be achieved.
• That persons in the organization are aware of.
Employing the Process Approach
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard employs the process approach in order to enable the 
organization to effectively plan its processes and their interactions (see clause 0.1 of 
the Standard—General). How effective? The effectiveness of an organization depends 
much on its ability to perform several interconnected activities simultaneously in 
order to achieve intended results—the expectations of the interested parties.
These relations should be managed, prioritized, and controlled. The ISO 9001 
Standard requires adopting a system of processes within the organization. This sys-
tem of processes requires the application and implementation of a method for the 
identification of processes in the organization, the definition of their sequences and 
interrelations, and the application of their controls. The goal here is to develop and 
plan processes and methods for the realization of products or services. The ISO 9001 
Standard regards it as a critical element of product realization.
 

24
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Terms and Definitions
Before we start to unveil the requirements of clause 4.4 and their implementation, 
it is important to know some terms and definitions:
• Process—A set of interrelated or interacting activities that convert inputs into out-
puts and accomplish a specific organizational goal. These activities require alloca-
tion of resources such as people and materials.
• Scope of a process—Scope of the process defines precisely where a process starts and 
ends, what its related inputs and outputs are, and which activities are included and 
excluded.
• Supplier of a process—The deliverer of inputs to a process (data, information, goods, 
or services). Supplier may be an external supplier that delivers, for instance, goods 
or material or an internal supplier—an organizational unit that delivers inputs to a 
process.
• Customer of a process—The receiver of the outputs of a process (data, information, 
goods, or services). The customer defines what outputs are expected according 
to its needs. Customers may be external customers, end customers, or internal 
customers.
• Inputs—Specified requirements needed to be put into a process in order to start the 
process. The inputs will be processed by a process or activity.
• Output—Specified expected or intended result of a process.
• Risk—Combination of the probability of occurrence of not fulfilling process speci-
fications or customer requirements.
• Monitoring of processes—A continuous, sequential, and periodic examination of 
processes and its outputs.
• Measurement of processes—Determining a physical measurement of processes and 
their outputs based on data.
• Process owner—An organizational function responsible for a process or 
subprocesses.
Applying the Process Approach
Process approach or system approach refers to the act of implementing a method 
or rules that analyze, identify, manage, and measure the processes of the organiza-
tion. These processes are necessary for the operation of the QMS and the realization 
of the product. The fundamental goal is to create standardization of processes in 
the organization and to ensure that persons or different organizational units in the 
organization work in a unified way. The objectives of the process approach are as 
follows:
• Creating awareness and understanding in the organization regarding responsibility 
for managing activities
• Implementing a method for the identification and planning of activities needed for 
the operation of the QMS
• Defining the sequences between processes
• Promoting a smooth and transparent flow of operations in the workflow
 

25
Context of the Organization
• Identifying and ensuring the interactions between processes, that is, activities in the 
organization
• Ensuring accurate delivery of inputs to processes
• Monitoring and controlling activities of the QMS
• Ensuring delivery of the right process outputs
• Ensuring achievement of intended results or process objectives
• Enhancing satisfaction of process customers
• Creating basis and environment for addressing risks and preventing errors
• Creating basis and environment for the planning, implementation, and analysis of 
improvements (PDCA cycle)
Determining the Processes in the Organization
Which processes are to be included in the QMS? Applying the process approach 
requires identification and determination of all processes needed to realize the 
product or service. In other words, you are required to determine all key stages 
and substages (processes or subprocesses if you may) necessary for the delivery and 
realization of the product or service. Identifying and determining the processes 
included in the QMS is the first practical step in applying the process approach. 
Until now we
• Understood the context of the organization
• Identified needs and expectations of interested parties
• Determined the scope of the QMS
Now, we must declare which operations are required in order to fulfill the scope  (realize 
the product). The level of details and complexity of the processes depends solely on 
your organization and the nature of its products. But the thumb rule  indicates that 
only processes and activities that affect the product, its intended use, and quality 
must be included.
There are many methods and ways to identify and determine which are the 
 processes included under the QMS. For the ISO 9001 Standard it is important to 
have a clear definition of these processes because these are the activities that will be 
planned, monitored, analyzed, and controlled. It is important that the list of  processes 
you come up with answers these questions:
• Do these processes reflect your ability to deliver your product or service?
• Are all processes, key stages, subprocesses, operations, or activities critical for the 
realization of the product identified?
• Are all areas of the realization of the product covered?
• Is the scope of each process clear?
The end result of this determination of the processes and activities included in the 
QMS may be displayed with a list that specifies all processes, or a diagram (or a set 
 

26
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
of diagrams) that illustrates the processes and the interactions between them. Again, 
the book is too short to suggest a certain method. You must identify the method most 
suitable to your organization and its processes.
Relation between Processes and the ISO 9001 Requirements
It is important that the defined processes will refer to the relevant ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements. What do I mean by that? The ISO 9001 Standard presents us with 
many quality management requirements such as management review, manage-
ment of resources, but many quality requirements for the operation of the QMS. For 
example, when you design the process of offering or selling products to the customer, 
you must take into account the specification in clause 8.2—Determination of market 
needs and interactions with customers:
• Plan and implement activities to interact with customers.
• Plan and implement a method to meet requirements specified by the customer.
• Answering the requirements for the intended use, and so on.
While defining and designing the processes included in the QMS, one must include 
such operational quality requirements.
Outsourced Processes
Outsourcing a process is a situation where the organization has chosen to execute a 
certain process or activity by an external organization (external provider), that is, the 
organization delegates the responsibilities for this activity to another organization. 
Outsourced processes, that are part of the realization of the product, must be identified 
and included as part of the QMS because the organization is obliged to control them 
(see clause 8.1). In other words, handing over the task to the external provider does not 
dismiss the organization from the responsibility of conformity to all customer, statu-
tory, and regulatory requirements. For example, when a manufacturer is realizing the 
product, but the packaging activities are carried out by a supplier, the following are 
required:
• To define the scope of those packaging activities that must be planned and con-
trolled by the organization—This means to define what is being done by the organi-
zation and what will be taken care of by the external provider.
• To include these activities under the QMS—describing them in the diagram of the 
processes, for example.
• To apply the method for process approach to these processes—demand at least 
from the supplier to prove that these processes are being planned with the process 
approach.
• To monitor, measure, analyze, improve, and to control the effectiveness of the 
 process—define how you control and measure the process outputs of the supplier.
 

27
Context of the Organization
Determining the Sequence of Processes
Determining the sequence of processes means determining the sequence of dif-
ferent activities of different elements involved in the process and constructing 
the workflow in the organization. The goal is to make sure that the processes 
achieve quality objectives, deliver intended outputs, and ensure conformity of 
products or services. In practice, you define how your processes flow in your 
workflow (Figure 4.2).
The sequence should allow an overview of your workflow and reflect the way 
you are doing business and operating in your organization. A correct sequence of 
processes will allow the information to flow effectively in the workflow, deliver the 
inputs to the processes as required, and provide the right outputs. Normally, these 
processes have subprocesses. Some processes or activities may be in sequence and 
some may work in parallel. But the end result should be a process map that indicates 
or describes the workflow in the organization.
You must determine the sequence of activities within a process—what has to be 
done, in which order, when, by whom, and which resources are required. One way or 
method to describe the sequence of activities in a process is through a documented 
procedure—documented information that includes
• Reference to a process
• Goal or objective of the process
• Reference to relevant documented information
• Target group—to whom is this document designated
Design of a product 
Customer order
Manufacturing resource planning
Purchasing 
Outsourcing
Manufacturing 
Delivering
After sales activities
Assembling
Figure 4.2 Example for sequence of processes of the organization.
 

28
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Description of activities
• The expected outputs
• Relevant documented information
• The required records
Types of such documentations:
• Management-oriented process—This method is designated to support the man-
agement of different areas of responsibility and enables core processes needed to 
achieve strategic objectives, such as defining quality policy and objectives, strategic 
planning, and management review.
• Process diagram/flowchart—A graphic demonstration of the separated steps of 
a process in sequential order indicating the entities involved in the process, the 
required inputs, and expected outputs.
• Documented procedure—A structured, documented, and formatted set of activities 
needed to achieve an objective.
• Work instruction—A list of documented actions that specifies what an employee 
is required to perform and what the expected inputs and outputs are. This type of 
documentation is usually used to define specific activities.
• Standard operating procedure—A detailed written instruction to achieve the objec-
tive of the performance of a specific activity.
Another tool that reflects and demonstrates the sequence of process is an ERP sys-
tem, where processes are managed according to a defined workflow: customer offer, 
customer order, planning/scheduling (MRP), retrieving recommended purchase 
propositions, retrieving recommended production propositions, purchasing, out-
sourcing, manufacturing, delivering, invoicing, and managing after sales  activities. 
Such systems dictate the sequence of activities for the user. In some cases, docu-
mentation of such systems may serve as process diagrams or work instructions. If 
you decide to use this type of documentation, ensure to document the gaps and 
 loopholes—those activities and operations of the realization that are not covered in 
this documentation.
Interaction between Processes
Processes in the QMS must interact with each other. A process, by definition, is 
a set of interrelated or interacted activities that transform inputs into outputs. 
Interaction between processes refers to the delivery of inputs to processes, the 
acceptance of outputs from processes, and the transferring of these outputs as 
inputs to the next process. The interaction defines how inputs, outputs, or resources 
are transferred between processes and activities. Processes of a system exchange 
many types of information, data, material, goods, or services through activities. In 
order to make the system effective, the interactions between the processes in the 
system must be planned and known to the operators of the system. This interaction 
 

29
Context of the Organization
is influenced by many factors. I prepared here a table of the factors and their influ-
ence on the interaction between processes:
Factor
Influence of the Interaction between the Process
Supplier of inputs
The supplier initiates the interrelation by delivering inputs to the 
process.
The required inputs
The required inputs specify what is expected from the supplier. Here it is 
important to know that the inputs are handed or delivered to the 
process. This definition of inputs can be documented.
Required methods or 
activities for operating 
the process
Here is the reference to the methods that are used to operate the process. 
It includes the required activities, tools, technologies, facilities, or 
infrastructures for the operation of the process and the documentation 
that is needed for the support of the operation of the process.
Resources that are needed 
to operate the process
Roles or organizational units in the organization that operate the process 
should be clear—The unit the processes inputs into outputs. It need not 
necessarily be human resources, but, for example, software too. The 
knowledge and competence needed for the operation of the process 
must also be defined.
Customer of outputs
It must be understood who is the customer of the process and how the 
outputs will be delivered.
The outputs the process 
generates
The expectation of the process and the verifications, validations, and 
criteria that are required for the process must be defined. The evidence 
that a process delivered its intended results should be recorded.
If you define and plan all of these, you will be in a position to plan effectively the 
 interactions between the processes. In practice, it must be clearly defined with the 
method that you are using to document describing how the interactions are taking place.
Defining Inputs to the Processes
After defining the processes and their activities included in the QMS, you must define 
for each activity which inputs are needed. As far as the ISO 9001 Standard demands, 
you must prove that each identified process has identified inputs and that the supplier 
of the process knows exactly what they should deliver.
Inputs of a process are defined as specified requirements needed for the operation 
of a process. Inputs are the fuel that drives the process: people, resources, materials, 
data or information, technology, or knowledge. Inputs may be tangible (raw material 
for production process) or intangible (information or data, e.g., results of a customer 
satisfaction survey or knowledge). In order to effectively analyze and identify the 
inputs, one must first know which activities a process includes. Let me review the 
important aspects of inputs related to the ISO 9001 Standard:
• Defined—For each process the inputs are defined.
• Deliverable—There is an effective way to deliver the inputs to the process.
 

30
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Measureable—Inputs of a process must be measurable in order to verify their 
availability.
• Planned—It will be clear when during the workflow inputs must be delivered.
• Known—The supplier and the operator of the process must know which inputs they 
must deliver (supplier) and receive (operator) for the process.
• Assigned—Responsibilities and authorities for the inputs are assigned.
• Located—Persons who operate the process must know which inputs are required for 
their operations and where they may find them or how they should request them.
• Verifiable—Persons who are responsible for the inputs have the means, criteria, and 
knowledge to verify or validate that inputs are as expected.
Defining Outputs to the Processes
An output is a deliverable result of an operational process aimed to address the expec-
tations of the customer of the process. An output may be tangible (finished products) 
or intangible (services provided to a customer or information such as results of a cal-
culation). As far as the ISO 9001 Standard demands, you must ensure that the expec-
tations of the customer for each identified process are identified and understood by 
the people that operate the process. In practice, regardless of whatever methods you 
are using for analyzing your processes, make sure that the outputs for each process 
are as follows:
• Identified—The intended outputs of a process are identified and clear.
• Measureable—The outputs of a process must be measurable in order to verify their 
conformity.
• Assigned—Responsibilities and authorities for the outputs are known.
• Known—The persons who operate the process should know which output is 
expected from them.
• Verifiable—The persons who are responsible for the outputs have the means,  criteria, 
and knowledge to verify or validate that outputs are as expected.
Availability of Resources
Resources that are needed to support the processes and to perform activities 
must be planned and be available. Resources may affect or determine the process 
 capabilities. By providing personnel with the required resources, the organization 
ensures that processes are effective and efficient and will achieve their objectives. 
The specific requirements regarding resource management are well covered in 
c hapter 7.1—Resources. Here in clause 4.4, we are required to define which resources 
are needed for each process, operation, or activity and plan their  availability. 
Consideration of resources applies to the
• Identification of resources and technology needed for the operation of activities 
(tools, equipment, facilities, materials, energy, knowledge, and competence)
• Provision of these resources
 

31
Context of the Organization
• The evaluation of their adequacy to the processes
• The efficient use of these resources
Examples of resources include
• Human resources
• Infrastructure
• Work environment
• Information
• Natural resources
• Materials and components
• Financial resources
Responsibilities and Authorities for Processes
While defining the requirements related to the QMS for each process, it is required 
to determine the authorities and responsibilities for specific duties and obligations 
for performing the process activities for ensuring the implementation, maintenance, 
and improvement of each process and its interactions. I recommend the assignment 
of an organizational role, functional units, or authority to a process. This organi-
zational role will relate to the organizational structure. By assigning a responsible 
person for a process, we create the relation between the organizational structure and 
the  workflow. The objectives of this person are as follows:
• To decide and navigate a process (or several processes)
• To manage the resources for the process
• To solve problems related to the process
• To ensure the effectiveness of processes, that processes achieve their intended outputs
One very effective and recommended approach is defining a process owner. This 
approach supports the assignment of an organizational function regarding the 
responsibility and authority for a process or subprocess. The extent and complex-
ity of the process dictate the degree of responsibility and authority of a process 
owner. The process owner can be a person, a group, or a team, depending on the 
nature of the process and the organization. Some of the process owner responsi-
bilities may be
• Definition of the scope of the process, the interactions and interrelations with other 
processes, and process owners
• Leadership, motivation, and encouragement of employees involved in the process
• Navigating and operating the process
• Designing the process and its flow
• Measuring, monitoring, and analyzing the process
• Documenting the process
• Managing training and knowledge related to the process
• Improving the process and its effectiveness
 

32
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Knowledge competence and skills of the process owner may be
• Basic and technical knowledge and deeper understanding of the nature of the 
process
• Understanding of the process structure in the organization and the interactions 
with other processes
• Full acquaintance with process specifications, resources, and flow of information
• Understanding who is the customer of the process
• Acquaintance with process requirements such as applicable standards, regulations, 
customer requirements, inputs and outputs, and so on
• Acquaintance with situations and events related to the process
These responsibilities and authorities must be communicated in the organization. 
The definition or documentation of the process owner responsibilities and authorities 
may appear in the
• Job description
• Documented information of the process, work instruction, process diagram, and 
so on
Other suggested roles regarding a process that may share the responsibilities of the 
process owner are as follows:
• Process sponsor—This role is one level above the process owner and refers to 
the person who navigates or directs the upper-level processes and authorizes or 
approves resource for processes. The process sponsor is usually a member of the top 
management.
• Process manager—This role is one beneath the process owner and refers to the per-
son who is responsible for the operation of the process and works directly with the 
process workers, supplier, and customers. He reports to the process owner. Usually, 
the process owner assumes the process manager role as well.
• Process worker—This is the lowest level of process responsibilities. This person 
operates the process and accomplishes activities according to specifications.
Achieving Intended Results
Specifications of outputs are the intended results of the processes. Achieving intended 
results indicates whether activities were performed as expected and determines 
whether a process is effective. It is done through
• Controlling which inputs were delivered to the process
• Monitoring and evaluating what is being done in the process
• Measuring and monitoring its outputs
As we know, a process produces outputs—some desirable and some undesirable. 
This affects the interactions between processes because the output of one process is 
 

33
Context of the Organization
the input to the next process. And this fact makes this control critical. In order to 
ensure that intended results will be achieved, you must design the control that will 
demonstrate its ability to achieve intended results. The control covers the  following 
aspects:
• The appropriate inputs are delivered to the process.
• The necessary actions of the processes are carried out.
• The output is desirable and meets the specifications.
• Undesirable outputs are prevented.
In practice, for each process the following are decided:
• What are its specifications for inputs and what are the expected outputs?
• Which resources are required to control the process?
• Which methods are used to control the process?
• Which documented information is needed to provide the evidences?
• Which actions are required when undesirable outputs are accepted?
Analysis, Measurement, and Monitoring of Processes
The organization is required to define criteria and performance indicators to the 
processes. The objective is to monitor and measure the processes included in the 
QMS effectively, as follows:
• To control and ensure the effectiveness of activities and the efficiency of the process
• To verify that processes achieve their quality objectives (quality requirements, 
schedules, intended use, etc.) and their intended outputs
• To ensure that the outputs of these processes meet the expectations of the customer 
(the receiver—whether internal or external)
• Ensure improvement of these processes
Monitoring is always applicable—one may sample a process and determine 
its effectiveness. But with measurement it is more difficult and less practicable 
because  processes might not always provide objective data. The tactic of  measuring 
 processes is to
• Define a method for the measurement and the control
• Define an appropriate criteria
• Collect data
• Analyze and report data that are relevant to the process and the realization of the 
product
The analysis shall strive to allow the operators of the process to systematically detect 
trends and patterns in the processes and respond to events on time. As a result, 
the effectiveness of the QMS is maintained. Specific requirements for this issue are 
well detailed in clause 9.1—Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation. 
 

34
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Regarding the process approach you must ensure that the following principles are 
applied for the planning and analyzing processes:
• Processes are evaluated for their need to be reviewed, analyzed, measured, con-
trolled, and monitored. Where subprocesses may affect the main process, they must 
be identified and controlled as well.
• The appropriate method for measuring and controlling is defined and applied—a 
method that provides you with quantitative or qualitative information about the 
effectiveness of the process.
• The appropriate criteria are defined and established. The criteria must allow a com-
parison to accepted process results. The criteria must reflect the quality objectives.
Addressing Risks
During the analysis of its processes an organization is required to address risks related 
to products and services that may occur when processes deliver unintended outputs 
or when the interaction between the processes is ineffective. QMS in its essential is 
a preventive tool aimed to plan controls and achieve objectives. Risk refers to the 
probability of occurrence of not achieving an objective and may result in a decrease 
of customer satisfaction due to unintended outputs or ineffective interaction between 
processes. The objectives here are as follows:
• To create awareness to risks when planning processes
• To indicate the consequences of the harm of the risks, and how severe it might be
• To initiate controls of these risks while planning your processes
• To plan corrective actions when errors occur
The difference between the last revision of the standard (2008) and this one (2015) 
is the event of this analysis. The last revision promoted the discipline of the pre-
ventive action—a quality tool for protecting a product or a service from potential 
nonconformities—that is, evaluating risks and potential events that may affect the 
quality of the product. In practice, it is done after the planning and during the 
realization process. The new revision takes it one step backward—to the planning 
of the process. In other words, when planning the processes you must address asso-
ciated risks (or opportunities). This subject is widely dealt in clause 6.1—Actions 
to address risks and opportunities where the organization is required to identify 
risks that may prevent it from achieving quality objectives, delivering conformed 
goods or services, or fulfilling customer satisfaction—and this is what the ISO 9001 
Standard is trying to prevent.
Applying the process approach, determining the processes included in the QMS, 
and identifying their owners, inputs, and outputs should put you in a position to 
understand what the intended results are for each process. The next step will be to 
understand the relation between the end product or service and the intended results of 
processes. Or, more precisely—what is the relation between the conformed  products 
or services and the intended outcomes of the processes that realize them.
 

35
Context of the Organization
In practice, you need to develop or use a method that will identify all product or 
service characteristics that have an effect on the intended use of the product or ser-
vice for which verification is required. These risks may occur throughout the supply 
chain, the realization of the product, or the provision of a service. After understand-
ing which risks are potential, you must define the following actions to handle and 
control these risks:
• Identify the relevant risks.
• Define the verifications or validations.
• Define the appropriate criteria.
• Plan monitoring and measuring devices and their validations when needed.
• Plan actions for the limitations of nonconforming products.
• Determine the competence of personnel.
Let the experts and process owners decide what the risks to their processes are. You 
just need to ensure that it is done when they do the planning for the process. Take a 
look at the following analysis:
Process Owner
Process
Delivery of Unintended Results
Result/Impact
Sales manager
Acceptance of product 
specifications from 
the customer
Inadequate communication 
with the customer
Failure to deliver data and 
specification to the planning
Inadequate planning of 
product realization
Development
team
Development of the 
product according to 
the specifications
Lack of appropriate 
information for development
Failure to deliver specification 
of development to the 
production
Realization of product 
not according to the 
specification of the 
customer
Production 
team
Realization of the 
product according to 
the planning
Lack of appropriate 
competence for production
Delivery schedules not 
transferred to the production
Realization of product 
not according to the 
specification
Delivery to the customer 
not according to the 
contract
Identifying Necessary Changes
Processes must be assessed in order to ensure that they deliver the intended results 
continuously. So far, for each process we
• Defined the required inputs and expected outputs of each process
• Defined which responsibilities and resources are needed to accomplish the processes
• Defined which criteria and methods for monitoring are necessary for determining 
whether the outputs conform to the specifications
• Identified risks for unintended results
• Monitored the processes and decided whether the intended results were received or not
 

36
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In case a process fails to deliver the intended results, actions must be initiated 
in order to promote changes in the processes. The objective is to ensure that these 
intended results are achieved. Process change relates to the development of a sys-
tematical improvement of processes. This system of changes and improvement will 
be integrated into the business process. Let us now move on to the improvement of 
processes.
Ensuring Improvement of Processes
Improvement of processes enables the organization to align its business processes 
to its business strategy, leading to effective performance through the improvements 
of specific activities. Submitting specific processes for improvement is an effective 
approach to achieve quality objectives. Until now, we defined the processes, the inter-
relations between them have been determined, objectives have been set, and activities 
for monitoring, measurement, and analysis have been implemented. But something is 
missing. The loop has not yet been closed. The organization must initiate actions for 
improvement and systematically identify opportunities for improvement— situations 
and processes where planned results, quality objectives, or criteria were not met. 
These situations will be analyzed, the root causes will be identified, and actions for 
improvement will be applied.
In practice, when designing and defining the processes for the operation of the 
QMS, the organization shall implement methods and tools that will allow the iden-
tification of opportunities for improvement. Here are some methods that can be 
applied:
• PDCA cycle—Applying the plan, do, check, act discipline is an efficient way of 
implementing the improvement of processes. This method is dealt in details in 
chapter 10.3—Continual improvement.
• Statistical methods—Statistical methods are used to understand and then reduce or 
eliminate variability in processes.
• Quality control—Quality control samples process performers and indicates needs 
for improvements.
• Modeling of processes—Modeling is considered measuring the current state process 
performance and identifying gaps in the current process preventing from achieving 
the objectives.
• Redesign and reengineering—Analysis of processes and relevant activities with 
the aim to find what is preventing achieving the objectives and suggesting ways to 
improve them.
• Process selection—Selecting a small significant group of processes that have a great 
influence on achieving the quality objectives in order to improve them.
Usually, but not necessarily, the process owner is responsible for identifying the 
opportunities for improvements and initiating them.
 

37
Context of the Organization
Documentation of the Process Approach
The ISO 9001 Standard requires documentation of the process, operations, and activ-
ities that comprise the QMS. I promote it as part of standardization in organizations; 
the documentation of the process approach creates a system for designing, analyzing, 
and implementing processes. The extent and level of details of the documentations 
shall be determined by the organization according to its needs. But bear in mind that 
you will have to justify it. If you decided to maintain a low detailed documentation 
during an audit, you must show how this documentation is sufficient. Documentation 
is divided into two levels:
• The organization shall define how processes, operations, and activities shall be doc-
umented. Here the standard refers to process diagrams, procedures, work instruc-
tions, and so on.
• The organization shall define which process outputs must serve as evidence and be 
maintained in the form of records of processes, operations, and activities.
The methods and basics of defining and maintaining documented information is 
 discussed thoroughly in chapter 7.5—Documented information.
Visualization of the Process Approach
I prepared a very basic diagram that illustrates all the ideas and requirements that 
were discussed in this chapter. You may use it as a concept when developing and 
planning your processes.
The first diagram (Figure 4.3) illustrates how of the general processes are planned.
The second diagram (Figure 4.4) is a detailed demonstration of the process 
approach elements and aspects that must be considered when designing a process. 
The diagram includes references to all requirements mentioned in this chapter:
Sequence
Input from
supplier
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3
Process 4
Outputs to
customer
Figure 4.3 Definition of sequences between processes.
 

38
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Inputs
from a
supplier
to the
process
Process 1
Activity 3
Verifications/
validations: the examination of evidence
against criteria
Evaluations of
planned
results
Output
to
customer
How much? The measurement
and analysis of a process:
criteria, methods, key indicators
Necessary actions were carried out, all outputs are
accepted, results are desirable and meet
specifications, and undesirable results are
prevented
Who is responsible
to operate and
monitor the process
Management
review
Supplier’s
evaluation
Customer
satisfaction
Measurement,
analysis, and
improvement of
processes
Management of
resources, trainings, and
knowledge
QM controls—Doc.
information, planning,
etc.
Activity 1:
What and
how to
execute
Activity 2
Knowledge
The means with
which the process
will be
accomplished
Specifications
Documentation
Resources
Infrastructures
Proc. owner
Figure 4.4 Quality management controls for internal/external processes.
 

39
5 Leadership
5.1  Leadership and Commitment
5.1.1  General
As far as I can say, the success of implementing a quality management system (QMS) 
depends on the commitment of the top management. This is no secret. The  leadership 
in all organizational levels should create an environment that will initiate and  promote 
conditions in which employees feel the commitment to achieving the objectives of the 
organization. But how can one evaluate whether the management is truly devoted to 
the QMS? According to ISO 9001, the top management is required to demonstrate how 
it assures that the QMS is effectively implemented. This clause (Leadership) lays out 
the principles and expected actions from the top management regarding their com-
mitment to the QMS. This clause should be regarded as a basis for self-evaluation of 
your top management’s status and its role within the QMS  regarding its  commitment. 
In order to prove its commitment, top management will  supply evidences for its 
actions. Understanding the requirements first will allow you to understand the role of 
the top management in the QMS (the ISO 9001 requirements):
• The top management shall practice and demonstrate its ability to lead the  organization 
in implementing the QMS according to the ISO 9001 Standard requirements.
• The top management shall assume the responsibility for establishing an effective 
QMS.
• The top management shall demonstrate its commitment by engaging in managerial 
activities while implementing the QMS.
• The top management shall ensure that quality policy and quality objectives of the 
QMS are established and are compatible with the context of the organization and 
the strategic direction of the organization.
• The top management shall ensure that requirements of this standard and the derived 
quality requirements are integrated into the business activities and operations of the 
organization.
• The top management shall promote awareness of the process approach while 
 planning the QMS.
• The top management shall promote the approach of risk-based thinking while 
 planning the QMS.
• The top management shall ensure availability of resources needed for the 
 implementation of the QMS.

40
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The top management shall communicate among the organization the importance 
of an effective QMS.
• The top management shall communicate to the organization the significance of 
conforming to the QMS requirements and the requirements of their products and 
services.
• The top management shall ensure that the QMS, its processes, and related business 
activities achieve its intended results.
• The top management shall practice leadership, engagement, involvement, and sup-
port of persons in order to promote the effectiveness of the QMS.
• The top management shall promote improvement.
• The top management shall demonstrate leadership by supporting other relevant 
management roles in their areas of responsibility.
• Note: The term “business” used by the ISO 9001 Standard refers to those activities 
that operate the QMS and are central and foundational to the purposes of the orga-
nization’s existence.
Practicing and Demonstrating Leadership
Why is leadership so important to the ISO 9001 Standard? According to the ISO 
9001 Standard, leadership initiates unity of purpose, while establishing the  direction 
and strategy of the organization. This unity of purpose creates environment and 
 conditions that support the QMS and in which employees become completely 
involved in achieving the organization’s goals and aims and assists employees in 
achieving quality objectives. The obvious conclusion is reaching an effective QMS. 
Let me put it another way: When an executive leads the implementation project and 
engages directly with employees at lower levels of the organization or shows high 
 involvement, it has a strong impact because employees at those levels are getting the 
message directly from the top management, allowing them to know its perspectives 
and expectations. The ISO 9001 Standard promotes the proactive approach of the 
leadership—controlling the QMS by causing events to take place instead if reacting 
to quality or business events.
Employees that operate the QMS are a significant resource and their full 
 involvement enhances the effectiveness and improvement of the QMS. In order to 
keep employees fully involved in achieving the organization’s objectives, the top 
management should
• Promote activities for involvement in the QMS
• Promote the concept of an effective QMS
• Involve the entire organization in improving the QMS
Thus, the leadership shall support relevant management roles in their areas of respon-
sibility and promote the empowerment of people at all levels of the organiza tion to 
take relevant decisions regarding the QMS. How?
• Empowering people at all levels of the organization, authorizing them and  delegating 
responsibilities of various areas of the QMS
• Inspiring and motivating employees to take an active part in improving the QMS
 

41
Leadership
• Providing trainings needed for the development of human resources for the opera-
tion of the QMS
• Promoting the concept of an effective QMS and the awareness of improving 
the QMS
• Recognizing contribution of employees to the QMS
Here the standard lays out the principles for delegating authorities and  responsibilities. 
The practice will be discussed in chapter 5.3—Organizational roles, responsibilities 
and authorities.
Practicing Managerial Activities
Managerial activities are those actions that the top management should  consider 
for reviewing and controlling the QMS. These are the activities in which the top 
 management is expected to be directly involved. The goal of these activities is to 
enable the top management to effectively review the status of the QMS. Low  variability 
of managerial activities affects negatively the effectiveness of the QMS. Which 
 managerial activities are expected of the top management?
• Review the strategy, status of objectives, the performance of the QMS, and the 
results of audits.
• Engage in activities that promote improvement.
• Analyze processes and operations of the QMS.
• Receive feedback from lower levels of the organization regarding the status of the 
QMS: indicators for performances, status of corrective actions, and so on.
For you, as an organization, it is important to demonstrate with evidence that the 
top management does managerial activities and that these activities
• Receive the appropriate inputs
• Produce the appropriate outputs
One way to institutionalize the matter is to include it in the quality  policy or to put it 
down in a procedure although there is no requirement for any documentation.
Ensuring the Effectiveness of the QMS
The top management must ensure that QMS and its intended results are effective by 
ensuring that
• Quality objectives are defined and measured
• Processes and business activities are planned according to the ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements
• Processes and business activities are controlled and measured with the controls 
required by the ISO 9001 Standard
• Risks and opportunities are addressed
• Improvement is achieved
 

42
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
This requirement clearly emphasizes that the top management is not only responsible 
for developing the QMS but also for controlling its effectiveness. Effectiveness will be 
measured when carrying out the following fundamental activities:
• Defining a quality policy
• Establishing communication channels with the lower levels in the organization
• Implementing the quality policy throughout the organization using measurable 
quality objectives
• Fulfilling them by reviewing the QMS periodically and systematically
• Allocating the required resources
Quality Policy and Quality Objectives
The top management is required to define a quality policy with the goal of 
 demonstrating the commitment of the top management and the organization to the 
implementation of a QMS and to the maintenance of its effectiveness. In  practice, 
the top management shall initiate a written quality policy that will clearly  demonstrate 
to the interested parties of the organization
• The mission of the organization
• What the top management expects
• Its values
• How the top management shall act in order to introduce and implement its policy
The content and nature of this policy will be discussed in chapter 5.2—Quality policy. 
After defining the quality policy, the top management will establish quality  objectives 
and will ensure that these objectives are
• Appropriate to the strategy of the organization (referred by or presented in the 
 quality policy)
• Continually achieved
This will be done by defining objectives that are relevant to the quality policy and 
the nature of the organization. After defining and determining the objectives, the 
top management must review their status, collect and analyze data regarding these 
 objectives, and evaluate whether they have been achieved or not. Requirements 
regarding the quality objectives, their definition, and their planning are discussed in 
chapter 6.2—Quality objectives and planning to achieve them.
Communication Channels
The top management should consider different communication channels for  different 
purposes. But all these channels have one goal—that the interested parties are 
exposed to the quality policy and objectives. Each different interested party of the 
organization should have its own channel with which it exchanges information with 
the top management (when needed). Each communication channel will be planned 
and implemented according to its nature and purpose.
 

43
Leadership
Communication of the quality policy and its objective should reach the interested 
parties both vertically and horizontally.
• Vertically—The quality policy and the related quality objectives should be 
 communicated in a downward direction from the top management to their 
 subordinates with the purpose to distribute decisions and directives. Feedback, 
 suggestions, and opinions regarding the status of the quality objectives will flow 
from the subordinates in an upward direction to the top management.
• Horizontality—Information needed for the achievement of the quality objective (the 
operation of the QMS and its business activities) flows between roles or  persons at 
the same position. This communication is needed to coordinate activities of  various 
departments in the organization.
Communication channels will be internal as well as external. The type of  information 
that will flow in these channels is affected by interested parties’ needs and expecta-
tions (the context of the organization) and the type of relations:
• Internal communication (with employees, stakeholders)
• External communication (with customers, suppliers)
There are many ways to publish this information:
• Publishing the policy and the objective on a bulletin board or in an organizational portal
• Maintaining a procedure that requires each employee to read the quality policy at least 
once, which they must sign indicating they have read and understood the policy
• Messages or notices to the public in media
• Letters for partners
• Website
I prepared a short review of which quality elements are expected by the standard to 
be communicated:
• The importance of effective QMS
• The quality policy
• Organizational roles, responsibilities, and authorities
• Quality objectives
• Customer communication
• Performance data related to processes, products, services, and customer satisfaction
• Communication of related data to the external providers
Awareness of the Process Approach
Adapting the process approach is highly recommended by the ISO 9001:2015 
Standard. The top management from their side shall promote the awareness to the 
process approach.
• The top management shall refer to the process approach in the quality policy, define 
it as a quality goal, and if applicable, define relevant quality objectives.
• The top management can initiate benchmarking like reengineering projects or process 
mapping in order to evaluate the maturity and compatibility of the business processes.
 

44
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The top management shall allocate resources for the implementation of the process 
approach:
• Responsibilities and roles
• Plans and schedules for the implementation
• Tools that allow process analysis
• Required trainings
• Outsourced consulting
How can one assess whether a process approach is integrated in the  organization? 
I will rephrase the question: How can an auditor be convinced that the process 
approach is adapted in the organization? Would it be enough to present a pair of 
charts or diagrams? Apparently not. The organization must prove in action with 
 evidence that
• A method for analyzing processes is implemented. There is no requirement for 
 documenting the method but yet you will need to show evidence: tools and means 
with which you control your processes.
• All processes in the organization are mapped and are controlled according to this 
method.
• All processes have desired results that will allow assessment of the process.
• Responsibilities in the organization are authorized for these activities.
• Results of the process mapping exist and are reviewed.
• Process inputs and process outputs are available for review.
• Processes are regularly reviewed and improvement of processes is achieved.
In practice, I would include a capital in the quality policy that relates to the 
 implementation of the process approach in the QMS and the business activities of 
the organization.
Awareness of Risk-Based Thinking
The risk-based thinking is the new concept introduced by the ISO 9001:2015 Standard. 
It promotes a new organizational culture that leads people to look for opportunities 
and to address risks. This concept advises that alterations produce opportunities as 
well as unanticipated consequences. Thus, the organization shall analyze and act in 
advance to address changes that may impact its objectives, expectations of interested 
parties, or product requirements.
• The top management shall refer to risk-based thinking in its quality policy, define it 
as a quality goal, and if applicable, define relevant quality objectives.
• While implementing the process approach, risk-based thinking will be integrated in 
the planning of the processes.
• The top management can initiate actions like small-scale risks analysis projects in 
order to identify risks that pose threats to the QMS or to detect opportunities that 
will improve the QMS and enhance desirable effects.
• The top management shall allocate resources for the promotion of risk-based thinking.
 

45
Leadership
Ensuring Resources
No QMS can succeed without sufficient resources. The top management tends to take 
this matter not seriously because it involves costs. But still the top management must 
ensure allocation of all required resources in order to ensure the effective operation 
of the QMS. Which resources are needed and how to ensure their availability will 
be discussed in chapter 7.1—Resources. But the matter should be structured in the 
strategy of the organization and be expressed by its quality policy, for example, the 
policy shall indicate that
• The importance of allocating the right resources to the various activities of the 
 organization is understood and considered
• The need for resources in order for processes and activities to be effective and 
 efficient is acknowledged
• The top management is committed for providing the resources required to carry out 
the activities of the QMS
• Current process capabilities and the their resources are assessed
• Future resources and technology needs are identified
• Activities for the identification and provision of needed resources shall be determined
Very important is the link between the strategy and vision of the organization and 
the commitment to provide the necessary resources for achieving this strategy. In 
practice, I would include in each section, part, chapter, or capital of the quality policy 
reference to the allocation of the necessary resources. For example
• Responsibilities and roles
• The appropriate times resources
• Procedures and methods
• Tools and instruments
• External resources
• Training
Improvements
With a direct relation to the process approach and the needed resources, the top 
management must promote improvement in the organization. The requirements 
for improvement and its application will be discussed in chapter 10—Improvement. 
Here we discuss the strategic aspect. The ISO 9001 Standard views the improvement 
as vital to the effectiveness of the QMS. The expectance of the standard is a structured 
approach—by systematically improving the QMS, it would achieve its objective over 
the long term. Practicing improvement must address inputs such as data for analy-
sis, changes in the context of the organization, and assessment of current risks and 
opportunities.
This topic must be forwarded to employees at all levels. It is important for them to 
understand the direct relation between their work and the effectiveness of the QMS. 
When individuals perform their activities as expected or according to specifications 
and as a result they produce the intended results, the goals of QMS are achieved. 
When they are acting for enhancing their outputs, then the QMS is improved. 
 

46
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Understanding this concept will motivate workers in striving for improvement. 
In practice, the top management must show evidences of actions for promoting 
improvements. Publishing it on the bulletin board is not enough. It is a cyclic process 
that includes
• Promoting improvement
• Initiating actions to collect inputs
• Analyzing the inputs
• Launching actions for improvement
• Measuring the effectiveness of those improvements
So if you maintain a suggestion box for improvements in an audit it will not be enough 
to show that suggestions were filled out on a controlled form but that
• The suggestions were reviewed
• A few of them were chosen for implementation
• They were submitted to a methodic process
• Their implementation was done under control
• The top management took the time to evaluate the effectiveness of the suggestions
Ensuring Compatibility of Processes and Business Activities 
to the ISO 9001 Standard Requirements
The ISO 9001 Standard requires from the top management to ensure the compat-
ibility of QMS processes and the related business activities through integration of 
the standard requirements and the derived quality requirements, that is, how the 
top management can ensure that the ISO 9001 requirements are
• Understood
• Considered while planning the processes and business activities
• Implemented
• Controlled
The top management is required to prove with evidence its commitment to 
 implementing a QMS. This requirement of the top management has two aspects: the 
establishment of the QMS and its continual control.
• The top management must ensure that the QMS is established according to the 
 standard requirements.
• The top management must ensure that the QMS is maintained according to the 
standard requirements.
The first aspect could be covered with the quality policy mentioning that the 
QMS will be planned and designed with consideration of the ISO 9001 Standard 
 requirements and will cover all the activities of the organization that are included 
under the QMS: marketing, sales, finance, administration, production, develop-
ment, and logistics. The second aspect can be expressed with the commitment of 
the top management to evaluate the integrity and compatibility of the QMS through 
 

47
Leadership
the application of the ISO 9001 Standard requirements. The standard requires vari-
ous tools and  techniques for that kind of control:
• Internal and external audits
• Risk-based thinking approach
• Quality objectives
• Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation
• Management review
5.1.2  Customer Focus
Customer focus is one of the quality principles that the ISO 9001 Standard is based 
upon. The Standard sets requirements to ensure top management’s leadership and 
commitment to meeting customers’ as well as regulatory requirements. Clause 5.1.2 
sets the scope and the level of involvement of top management regarding its custom-
ers and their expectation of the organization. There are three main goals:
• Understanding and implementing customers’ and regulatory requirements
• Development of the strategy related and linked to the needs and expectations of 
interested parties (customers)
• Realizing a product that will meet the customers’ and regulatory requirements
What are the requirements? Top management shall demonstrate leadership and 
commitment with consideration to customer focus. This will be expressed by (the 
ISO 9001 Standard requirements)
• Ensuring and maintaining activities for the consistent provision of products and 
services that meet customer and applicable statutory or regulatory requirements
• Assessing and evaluating related risks that may affect conformity of products and 
services and the satisfaction of the customer or opportunities that may enhance 
customer satisfaction
• Ensuring activities for the determination of customer requirements
• Focusing on enhancing customer satisfaction
Clause 5.1.2 lays out the foundation for customer focus. Specific requirements and 
expected actions are motioned in the different standard requirements as follows:
• 4.2—Understanding the needs and expectations of interested parties
• 5.1.2—Customer focus
• 5.3—Organizational roles, responsibilities, and authorities
• 6.2—Quality objectives and planning to achieve them
• 8.2.1—Customer communication
• 8.2.2—Determining the requirements for products and services
In clause 5.1.2, the main requirement is to define the controls for the top manage-
ment regarding the commitment for meeting customer requirements, regulatory 
 

48
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
requirements, and reviewing process’ output (products or services). The nature of 
the organization, its business operations, will set the framework and structure—
how these controls will be applied. For example, one instrument that the ISO 9001 
Standard requires for implementation is the management review for evaluat-
ing the QMS (clause 9.3). Answering the requirements of clause 5.1.2 requires the 
 understanding of three aspects:
• Defining the customers of the organization—Customers may be external as well as 
internal.
• Understanding the expectations of the customers—Each type of customer has a 
 different set of expectations.
• Evaluating the perception of customers of the organization and how the  organization 
complies with customers’ expectations.
Meeting the Needs and Expectations of Customers
Meeting the needs and expectations of customers is crucial for the development of 
the strategy of the organization and for the implementation of an effective QMS. The 
organization may have different types of customers that have different needs and 
expectations. Very important here is to understand the expectations of the  different 
interested parties and to examine conflicts between their expectations. The dif-
ferences and the conflicts may occur because of various social, organizational, or 
cultural needs. This is why the organization must anticipate any potential conflicts 
arising from the different needs and expectations of its different customers.
Internal Customers
Internal customers include those members of the organization who operate the activi-
ties and rely on assistance from other internal entities to fulfill their duties. A good 
example is the sales cycle—the sales department (sales personnel) are the customer 
of logistics (the department that processes deliveries) and logistics must provide 
them with various services: deliver goods according to the agreement with sales. The 
requirements of the top management here are to initiate actions for understanding the 
relations between the different organizational entities, understanding who serves who 
(who is the customer and who is the provider), and whether their expectations are met. 
Examples of actions for the identification are process mapping or process engineering.
External Customers
External customers are the entities that receive the end products or services. One 
of the main goals of the ISO 9001 Standard is to enhance their satisfaction by 
meeting their requirements. Only through their purchase and the revenue they 
provide can the organization survive. By not meeting the expectations of the 
external customers, the organization risks losing them. Recollecting the sales 
cycle, the end customer that receives the goods is the external customer. The 
requirements of the top management here are to initiate actions for identifying 
 

49
Leadership
the external customers and reviewing and understanding their expectations 
through market research or surveys.
Assessing and Evaluating Related Risks and Opportunities
The top management shall plan activities to assess risks and opportunities that may 
affect products and services (directly) and customer satisfaction (indirectly). The 
top management shall demonstrate its leadership and commitment by
• Initiating plans for actions for identifying and addressing such risks or opportunities
• Demanding and controlling the integration of those actions and their  implementation 
in the processes of the organization
• Evaluating their effectiveness
Practical and precise requirements will be discussed in the designated chapter 6.1—
Actions to address risks and opportunities. The top management is required here
• To promote the proactive approach by initiating involvement of organization’s units 
at all levels in identifying and assessing the risks or in developing opportunities
• Reviewing the effectiveness of these actions with the instruments that the ISO 9001 
requires, such as internal audits or management review
Ensuring Delivery of Products and Services That Conform to Customer Requirements
Top management shall ensure the delivery of products and services that conform 
to customer requirements through implementation and integration of actions and 
activities for identifying and meeting customers’ requirements. The objective is to 
define actions that will
• Identify the requirements
• Review further necessary requirements that were not mentioned by the customer 
but are necessary for the realization of the product or service
• Publish these requirements at the appropriate stages during the realization of the 
product or service
• Review whether the requirements can be met
• Evaluate whether the realized goods or services meet their requirements
The method shall include which roles are involved, what their activities are, which 
information is to be maintained, frequencies and intervals, and data analysis actions. 
Precise requirements will be discussed in chapter 8.2—Determination of market 
needs and interactions with customers. The top management is expected to create 
the organizational conditions for the fulfillment of these customer requirements by
• Promoting and demanding the actions for meeting customer requirements
• Promoting and implementing actions for delivering conforming goods and services
• Creating involvement of employees by delegating the authority to take decisions
• Reviewing the effectiveness through the instruments that the ISO 9001 Standard 
suggests
 

50
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
How shall the top management create these organizational conditions?
• By communicating the strategy of the organization
• By publishing the values, symbols, and cultural behavior expected from the 
 employees on how work should be carried out
• By creating awareness of the significance of meeting customer requirements
• By promoting comprehension of employees to the significance of delivering prod-
ucts or services according to the requirements (customer and regulatory)
• By promoting comprehension of employees to the consequences of not delivering 
products or services according to the requirements (customer and regulatory)
• By defining appropriate quality objectives that will support the goal of delivering 
goods or services according to the requirements
• By creating awareness of customer needs and customer feedback
Enhancing Customer Satisfaction
Top management shall promote the enhancement of customer satisfaction. This is 
achieved by following two main ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• The implementation and integration of a method for monitoring customer satisfaction
• Reviewing the results of this monitoring
The first part refers to the collection of information; the top management shall pro-
mote the implementation of a method for collecting information regarding whether 
products or services meet customers’ and regulatory requirements. The method shall 
indicate types of data that will be collected and analyzed, the responsibilities, the activ-
ities, and the interval. The second part refers to the conclusion of the  information—
reviewing the results and initiating actions to enhance customer requirements based 
on this information. Precise details are discussed in chapter 9.1.2—Customer satisfac-
tion. By demonstrating leadership and commitment, the top management shall
• Define which method is needed (and most effective)
• Verify whether the method is integrated in the processes and is effectively 
implemented
• Validate that the information and data that were collected and analyzed are provid-
ing the appropriate situation report
In practice, the issue will be reviewed by the top management during the manage-
ment review (clause 9.3).
5.2  Policy
A quality policy is the general guidelines, intentions, and goals of the organization 
 referring to its quality intentions. The policy will be implementable, available, active, 
communicated, and documented in the organization. The policy will demonstrate what 
quality signifies to the organization with emphasis on the main goal of your QMS—it will 
express your intention to provide your customers with quality goods or services accord-
ing to predefined requirements using a set of systems, processes, procedures, and controls.
 

51
Leadership
5.2.1  Establishing the Quality Policy
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements regarding the quality policy are quite strict 
and clear:
• The organization will create, implement, and maintain a quality policy.
• The quality policy will be written with suitability to the purpose of the organization 
and its context and must suit the organization’s nature and type of activities.
• The quality policy will provide the basic intention, vision, or plan for setting the 
quality objectives.
• The quality policy shall demonstrate the organization’s commitment to meeting 
applicable requirements such as customer or regulatory requirements.
• The quality policy shall demonstrate the organization’s commitment for continually 
improving the QMS.
5.2.2  Communicating the Quality Policy
• The quality policy will be available as documented information.
• The quality policy will be distributed, communicated, and presented throughout 
the organization.
• The quality policy will be distributed, communicated, and presented to the  interested 
parties.
Suitability to the Purpose and the Context of the Organization
The quality policy is a document describing the organization’s strategy and policies 
clearly and serves the different interested parties of the organization. And because 
the quality policy sets the foundations for the quality objectives, it must include refer-
ences to the next issues:
• Mission and purpose of the organization—The mission of the organization describes 
the purpose of the organization: why the organization exists, who it serves, and so 
on. This was defined and discussed in chapter 4—Context of the organization.
• Vision of the organization—The vision of the organization describes the desired 
state that the organization wants to achieve: its general goals. This is important for 
the next section—relation to the quality objectives.
• Interested parties of the organization—The policy is based on the needs and expec-
tations of interested parties.
• Business objectives of the organization—The policy must clearly relate to the  business 
objectives of the organization (discussed in the next section).
One basic role of the policy is defining areas, subjects, and scopes where the organi-
zation would like to implement its quality efforts. Thus, the quality policy shall refer 
or be applicable to all activities of the organization that are included under the QMS: 
marketing, sales, finance, administration, production, development, and logistics. In 
practice, you need to be creative in formulating a policy that will convince the reader 
(or auditor) that your organization is willing to invest efforts in delivering a product 
that comply to customer requirements, to improve the QMS, and to enhance cus-
tomer satisfaction (which is not an easy task).
 

52
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Relation to Quality Objectives
The quality policy shall lay the foundations for the definition of the quality objec-
tives. This relation between the quality policy and the quality objectives will turn the 
quality policy into a useful and practical document rather than just a documented 
statement. Usually the policy includes strategic objectives that refer to more specific 
and measurable objectives. One main goal of the revision in the ISO 9001 Standard 
is to create coherence between the business objectives and the quality objectives of 
the organization. Until today, they were usually separate and were always discussed 
by two different forums or panels of people. The new standard set the framework for 
setting business objectives and quality objectives as one.
The quality policy defines areas and scopes in which the quality will be active and 
valid. The quality objectives will be derived from these areas and scopes. For exam-
ple, if the policy declares a desire to manufacture precision products to meet the most 
critical design requirements in a wide range of applications, the appropriate relevant 
objectives would be as follows:
• Promoting design and development in the organization
• Initiating communication channels with customer for a better understanding of 
their needs
Setting objectives correlated to the policy will assist in maintaining an  effective QMS. 
But whatever the objectives are, there are two main goals that must be  implemented 
regarding the quality objectives: meeting customer and regulatory requirements. The 
policy will include a clear reference to these issues.
Meeting Customer or Regulatory Requirements
One of the main goals of your QMS is consistently meeting customer requirements 
and striving to exceed customer expectations. And the quality policy should express 
that. Striving to meet customer requirements can be expressed by
• Initiating actions for understanding of needs and requirements for the satisfaction 
of customers or identifying new requirements, such as regulatory
• Initiating activities and controls that will generate products or services that will 
meet customer or regulatory requirements
In practice, the policy shall mention that such actions will be taken, resources shall be 
allocated, and the appropriate controls will be set. The requirements are  mentioned 
in the designated clauses, for example, 8.1—Operational planning and control, 
8.2.3—Review of the requirements for products and services, and 8.3—Design and 
 development of products and services.
Improvement of the Quality Management System
The policy shall demonstrate the intentions of the organization regarding the con-
tinual improvement of the QMS and maintenance of its effectiveness, that is, the top 
management must initiate defined actions in order to improve the QMS and to identify 
 

53
Leadership
opportunities for improvement. In practice, the quality policy shall include a reference 
to the intentions of how the top management shall promote the  improvement of the 
QMS. For example, the quality policy may include references to the following issues:
• Evaluation of current resources
• Evaluation of capabilities of processes
• Evaluation of abilities of technologies
Communicating and Distributing the Quality Policy
Quality policy without the awareness of the interested parties is not much use. By aware-
ness, I mean how the interested parties, in general, and employees, in  particular, relate to 
the policy. Interested parties of the organization must be informed of the quality policy 
and the quality objectives in order to understand what is expected of them and what their 
mutual goal is. As you will shortly see, publishing the quality policy is not enough. The top 
management must involve the interested parties in the QMS through exchange of infor-
mation of many kinds. This is why the top management must initiate an action that will 
ensure that the quality policy is distributed and communicated within the organization.
You might think that employees at lower levels do not have to understand the  quality 
policy of the organization but only the quality aspects of their job. For  example, an 
assembly worker does not need to know the quality policy of the  organization but only 
the impacts of his job on the quality of the product: assembling parts according to the 
specifications of the product. That is not what the ISO 9001 Standard expects of you. 
The top management must create the conditions in which employees will feel commit-
ted to achieving the objectives of the organization. An employee must  understand the 
implications of the statement on their work, how he or she helps the company in their 
job, or how his or her job relates to the company’s policy. In other words, the employee 
must understand that their work and its outputs do not end up in their work place but 
has implications on later stages. This can be achieved if the employees
• Are aware of the quality goals of the firm: what is the vision of the organization, 
what are the values upon which the organization acts
• Know what is expected of the organization (by the customers)
• Understand the importance and of quality requirements and the significance of its 
practice
• Understand the meaning of an effective QMS
• Are familiar with their direct quality objectives
• Understand the significance of the quality of products and services and the implica-
tions of delivering nonconforming products or services
I would formulate a policy statement with an easy-to-remember idiom. In that way, 
everyone can identify with it and remember it. The employee then has the message in 
order to make the relation between his job and the quality goals of the organization. 
The ISO 9001 Standard takes it one step further and requires that the top management 
ensure that interested parties (employees) will understand the importance of an effec-
tive QMS. Effectiveness means that the QMS has achieved its quality objectives and 
the goods and the services were delivered according to the intended results. And this 
 

54
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
concept must be understood by the employees. Always remember—you must provide 
the employees with conditions in which they feel committed to achieving the objectives 
of the organization. Usually, employees tend to recite the quality policy of the organiza-
tion. But do they strive for an effective system? Do they understand their position in 
the quality policy? Do they understand the significance of their quality objectives to the 
organization? Do they know all of the customer requirements? Furthermore, the top 
management must ensure that employees will understand the significance of delivering 
goods and services according to the expectation of the customers or contrariwise the 
implications of delivering nonconforming products or services. For example
• Communicating quality costs
• Publishing issues with customers
• Publishing and discussing quality problems or quality investigations
• Publishing results of audits or results of customer feedback
• Initiating quality incentives
• Initiating discussions between employees regarding quality
If we go back to the example of the assembly worker, he or she is expected to  understand 
what will happen in other process stages when a nonconformity occurs on his or 
her activity: delivering a defected product forward to later  processes,  causing quality 
assurance problems, not meeting customer schedules, and  affecting customer satis-
faction. If you think about it, the ISO 9001 Standard expects here a bit of  coaching 
for your employees—the top management must  initiate training and development in 
which the employees are taught about the QMS:
• The employees must understand who are the organization’s customers and what are 
their expectations.
• The employees must understand who are their direct customers and what are their 
expectations.
• The employees must always remember that they are expected to improve their 
 performance and the results that they deliver.
Other interested parties must be informed on the policy and thus have access as well:
• Customers
• Suppliers
• Stakeholders
• Stockholders
• Legislators
Quality Policy as Documented Information
The quality policy must be maintained as documented information, that is, a 
 documentation (of some kind) with the quality policy must be maintained and con-
trolled on a defined medium. This documentation will be submitted to the  controls 
suggested in clause 7.5—Documented information. Usually the quality  policy was 
 

55
Leadership
documented in the quality manual but the quality manual is not required anymore. 
You may though keep and maintain the quality manual and the quality policy inside it. 
I would do that. But if you decide not to keep the quality manual, just copy the part about 
the quality policy from the quality manual and generate a new controlled document.
Structure of the Quality Policy
There are no specific requirements regarding the structure of the quality policy. But the 
content must include all the topics that are mentioned in this chapter 5.2—Quality 
policy. If you still need guidance of how to formulate your quality policy, I suggest the 
following structure:
• Details of the organization
• Details of persons who wrote or approved the quality policy
• Corporate profile/purpose of the organization
• Scope of the QMS—to which departments, facilities, branches, or affiliates the QMS 
applies
• Organizational structure
Until now you provided details for readers to get acquainted with the organization 
and its nature. Now we begin to fill the ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• Short description of the purpose of the organization, its mission, and vision
• General statement regarding the quality policy of the organization—this statement 
must be aligned with the mission, vision, business, and quality objectives of the 
organization
• Reference to the needs and expectations of interested parties
• Reference or list of the quality objectives
• Statement regarding the promotion of improvement in the organization
• Statement regarding meeting customer or regulatory requirements
• Statement of how this policy will be communicated or distributed
Do not forget to submit this document to the control of documented information.
Organizational Structure
Although not required, I recommend including the organizational structure in the 
document of the quality policy. The organizational structure is the definition of hier-
archy in the organization and is the most basic definition of your QMS. The structure 
defines who is superior to whom and who reports to whom. The structure will relate 
to the working processes and scope of the QMS.
This will help in charting the QMS and is very important to the charting of the 
processes and their interactions and helps to position all the participants of the QMS 
in the organization. The organizational structure will include all the departments 
and organizational units or entities that the QMS controls. The emphasis will be on 
the organizational dependencies. I have prepared a very basic diagram as an example 
(see Figure 5.1).
 

56
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
5.3  Organizational Roles, Responsibilities, and Authorities
Implementing the ISO 9001 Standard demands the definition of authorities and 
responsibilities that will bear the obligation for implementing and operating the 
QMS,  conducting  activities related to the QMS, and product realization. The ISO 9001 
Standard requirements are as follows:
• The top management shall ensure the definition of authorities and responsibilities 
throughout the different organizational levels for operating the QMS.
• The definitions will be communicated to all the relevant levels of the organization.
• The top management shall appoint a representative or representatives on its behalf 
that has or have the authority and responsibility for the QMS in the organization 
and the following roles regarding the QMS:
• The representative will ensure the establishment, implementation, and control 
of processes and activities required by the ISO 9001 Standard for the QMS.
• The representative will ensure that the QMS continually conforms to the 
requirements of this international standard.
• The representative will ensure that processes of the QMS interact.
• The representative will ensure that the QMS delivers intended outputs.
• The representative will report to the top management on the performances, 
competence, and implementation of the QMS, opportunities, and the need for 
improvements.
• The representative will act to promote the awareness of customer focus 
 throughout the organization.
• The representative shall ensure the integrity of the QMS is maintained when 
changes to it are planned and implemented.
• The personnel (internal or external) that bear responsibility will understand their 
role in the QMS.
CEO
Finance
Production
Marketing
Research
Production 
manager
Production 
employee
Human 
resource
IT
Administration
Sales 
manager
Sales team
Lab
QA
Development
Figure 5.1 Example for organizational structure.
 

57
Leadership
Defining the authorities and responsibilities has several important objectives 
 concerning the QMS:
• Defining and communicating the hierarchy of decision-making in the organization
• Clearly allocating human resources to processes and activities
• Relating authorities with the relevant quality objectives
• Defining training and qualifications needed for each function
• Allowing the orientation within processes regarding the realization of the product, 
data, and information
• Enabling a structural sharing of information and knowledge between the different 
parties of the organization
Organizational Structure
The organizational structure is the definition of hierarchy in the organization and 
relates to the nature of the organization. The structure describes all the functions, 
roles, and relations in an organization and demonstrates who is subjected to whom 
and who reports to whom. Defining the structure is the first step in defining the 
authorities and responsibilities of the QMS: the authorities and responsibilities that 
will operate the processes and activities are to be mapped. An example of an orga-
nizational structure is given in chapter 5.2—Policy. Although there is no specific 
requirement regarding the documentation of the organizational structure, it is highly 
recommended to include an organizational chart in the quality policy.
Job Description and Understanding the Role
It is expected that every person in the organization that bears a role in the QMS will 
understand their responsibilities and authorities regarding the operation of the QMS. 
In order to fulfill this requirement, I suggest managing job descriptions. Basically for 
every role defined in the organizational structure, the responsibilities and authorities 
must be described. It is important to mention that all job descriptions must correspond 
to the list of processes included in the QMS. This will ensure effectiveness of process 
realization. The job description specifies the daily functions of a role and organizes the 
list of responsibilities and authorities of specific roles: development manager, secretary, 
production manager, or quality manager. The job description will cover the following:
• Identification of the function. The title of the role or function is important to iden-
tify every role: operational manager, lab technician, administrative secretary.
• Dependence. Which role is the person subject to or to whom must they report at the end 
of the day? This dependence will be determined based on the organizational structure.
• Responsibilities. The responsibilities are activities that combine the function’s work 
and have effect on the products or services. The responsibilities relate directly to the 
realization processes. Try to be as accurate as possible. At the end of the definition, 
each realization activity must be allocated to a function.
• Authorities. The authorities are the points and events in a process where the  function 
is authorized to make a decision that will determine the flow of the process or affect 
 

58
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
the quality of the products or services. For example, a production manager decides 
which machine will be allocated to a process. A quality manager decides whether a 
product conforms or not and therefore has control over the release of the process.
• Competence
• External qualifications: The organization will decide which external qualifica-
tions and competence are required for the role necessary for the operation of the 
processes: mechanical engineer, electrical technician, certified lab technician, 
certified account manager, licensed forklift driver.
• Internal qualification: The organization will decide which internal training and 
certifications are required for each function: working procedure training, ERP 
system training, and machine maintenance.
These types of competence may serve as introductory conditions for an employee to 
perform a job.
All employees at all levels of the organization will be aware of their responsibilities 
and authorities. All employees will be aware of their related quality objectives as well. 
The matter will be communicated to each role:
• It can be integrated into the training and certification process of each function
• It can be published through some kind of internal portal
Documenting the definitions is not required by the ISO 9001 Standard but I see no 
other way how you may maintain these definitions. The documentation will be used 
for the verification of the job description in audits or reviews. The  documentation of 
the job description may be carried out in several ways: work instructions,  procedures, 
or designated documents stated as job descriptions (I personally recommend an 
independent document).
One organization I consulted for placed a laptop in a public area in the 
 organization (e.g., the cafeteria) that was connected to just one internal web-
site—the  documentation of QMS. This way, every worker could see exactly how 
the organizational structure looks, where he or she is placed in the organiza-
tional structure, what is their job description, and download relevant documented 
information.
Reference to Regulatory Requirements
Where regulatory requirements demand the appointment of specific personnel or 
functions for specific activities or processes, it will be included in the definition of the 
responsibilities and authorities. The regulations may demand certain qualifications 
to be nominated and certain activities to be carried out. When such requirements 
exist, the top management shall ensure that
• These requirements are mentioned in the job description
• Appropriate personnel are integrated into the QMS
 

59
Leadership
Involvement of the Top Management
ISO 9001:2015 is definitely setting a new level of involvement of the top management, 
and the relations between the quality management and the top management are seen 
from a new perspective. The last revision of the ISO 9001 Standard (2008) allowed a 
bound between the top management and the management representative regarding 
the QMS—he or she should take care of the QMS and report once a year that all is well. 
If things went badly, the management representative took the responsibility. Generally, 
the ISO 9001:2015 Standard is shifting duties related to the QMS from an appointed 
member of the management to the top management, that is, the responsibility of the 
effectiveness of the quality management lies directly on the top management.
And there is a logical explanation to this change: The purpose of the organiza-
tion and its context defined by the top management is the base for the QMS. This is 
why the controls that the QMS is setting and their results must be of interest to the 
top management, and, therefore, more involvement is expected. As a logical result, 
the right information must flow to the top management and more than once a year. 
Which information should the top management expect?
• Status of implementation of the ISO 9001 Standard
• Status of processes
• Status of goods and services
• Needs for improvements
• Issues regarding customers and their satisfaction
The top management must create some kind of reporting system that will deliver this 
information on a regular basis.
The Representative(s)
The ISO 9001 Standard takes a different approach when discussing the management rep-
resentative. The last revision of the Standard (2008) demanded that a member of the orga-
nization’s management serve as a management representative. The ISO 9001:2015 takes a 
different approach. The top management on its behalf must appoint a person or a num-
ber of persons that their roles and authorities will be discussed. It is important to under-
stand that the responsibility may be delegated to several functions in the organization 
whose responsibility, duties, and area of authority are defined. However, they shall have 
the authority to decide in certain situations. This authority must be delegated from the top 
management. Please review the following  considerations when selecting the representative:
• The management representative must not be a member of the top management.
• Although it is common, the management representative must not be a quality 
 manager. In cases when the management representative is not the quality manager, 
it is necessary to define the interfaces between the representative and the qual-
ity manager—how will they interact?—because they will have to exchange a lot of 
information. A periodic meeting is one idea.
 

60
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The representative may be an external responsible body in which the top  management 
has confidence, for example, a consulting firm.
• Delegation of assignments and tasks of the representative to other roles and parties 
in the organization is possible.
• It is recommended that the representative will have the appropriate background and 
knowledge relevant to the area, technologies, and nature of the organization and the 
field of the QMS for which he is responsible.
• When appointing a role that performs or is involved in more activities in the 
 organization related to the quality of the product, it is important to ensure that no 
conflicts arise due to its obligation to the QMS.
With this approach, the standard promotes the formation of a quality circle that 
will steer the QMS, take responsibility, and report directly to the top management. 
Before this approach, quality in the organization and the QMS was the responsibil-
ity of the quality manager; he or she used to take care of everything that is related 
to quality management and there was clear separation between quality and other 
managerial areas of the organization such as sales, purchase, manufacturing, finance, 
and so on. By delegating quality authorities to other members of the organization, 
the quality becomes their obligation as well; they participate directly in defining the 
terms and they are responsible for implementation.
It is important to document these nominations. If it’s a quality manager or another 
role in the organization, then document the fact that they are the representative on 
their job description. If it’s an external party, you must produce some sort of docu-
ment that specifies its responsibilities to the top management and the organization. 
An agreement is one option.
Reference to the Process Approach
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard requirements employ the process approach, which 
enables the organization to plan its processes and their interactions. The specific 
requirements regarding planning the processes and their interactions are discussed 
in chapter 4.4—Quality management system and its processes. Here I would like to 
refer to the relation between the process approach and the roles and authorities of the 
QMS. One of the responsibilities of the management representative is to ensure the 
principles of the process approach:
• Ensuring planning of all process and activities
• Ensuring that processes interact
• Ensuring that processes are delivering their intended results
This requirement refers to skills and qualifications of nominated persons in the 
QMS—they should have some expertise in business process management or at least 
understanding of the processes that they are managing. This is why I definitely recom-
mend you to include in the job description for each job or role a list of its related pro-
cesses. One common practice is defining a process owner for each process—a person 
 

61
Leadership
who is given the responsibility and authority for managing a particular  process. This 
includes the implementation, maintenance, and improvement of the specific process 
and its interactions.
Another aspect to be considered is the interfaces between these process owners 
with the intention to ensure that processes interact. The interactions between the 
roles and the authorities define how a process detail flows between the different areas 
in the organization:
• The required information is flowing between processes.
• Each process receives the necessary inputs and releases the expected outputs.
The standard demands that these points, events, and requirements, where an interac-
tion between two functions is initiated are defined and controlled.
Examining the QMS
The management representative has two very challenging tasks that no one in the 
organization (usually) volunteers to do—to examine and evaluate the status of the 
QMS and to report it to the top management:
• The representative will ensure the establishment, implementation, and control of 
processes and activities required by the ISO 9001 Standard for the QMS, that is, the 
implementation project.
• The representative will ensure that the QMS conforms to the requirements of this 
international Standard, that is, the maintenance of the QMS.
The ISO 9001 Standard presents us with several tools and instruments for  evaluating 
the status of the QMS and its implementation, for example, performance  evaluation, 
internal audits, and management reviews. These tools evaluate the performance 
of the QMS with different applications and generate different types of results. 
The  management representative should verify that these controls are deployed and 
shall have access to their results. The main tasks of the representative are to
• Ensure whether the main objectives of the QMS are achieved
• Control the status of the implementation of the ISO 9001 Standard requirements
• Monitor the status of improvements
The examination will be done through the assessment of the processes identified as 
relevant to the QMS and that are defined in the quality manual.
Ensuring Intended Outputs
Intended outputs are required to meet the needs and expectations of the interested 
parties of the organization, to support the achievement of quality objectives, and in 
the long term fulfill the strategy and the policies of the organization. The intended 
 

62
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
outputs and the processes needed for achieving them were identified while  employing 
the process approach (see chapter 4.4—Quality management system and its  processes). 
The responsibility of the representative is to determine which  additional processes 
and controls are necessary in order to ensure that intended outputs are achieved.
Processes may be assigned to the relevant process owners. The management 
 representative can then receive the information from them. In practice, I  recommend 
a reporting system that will deliver this information to the management  representative 
on a regular basis. Once the delivered results are not satisfying, that is, the intended 
results are not being achieved, the representative will have the ability to identify 
such events and initiate actions in time (the proactive approach). Which information 
might be of interest for the management representative?
• Delays in deliveries and status of production orders
• Quality status of realized products or services
• Status of customer complaints
It is quite obvious that the management representative cannot cover all the  topics 
( particularly in big organizations). This is why we must learn to delegate these  activities 
to the appropriate parties in the organization but maintain a  communication channel 
with them. A good example is an ERP system that has functional reporting tools for 
different levels of management.
Identifying Needs for Improvements
Another important role of the management representative is identification of  opportunities 
for improvements in the QMS. There is a direct relation between achieving an effec-
tive QMS and the identification of the need for improvement. This is why the ISO 9001 
Standard lays it at the feet of the top management and the management representative.
This duty is an outcome of the responsibility for ensuring intended outputs; 
through the control of the intended outputs, the management representative should 
know whether an improvement is required, to which extent, and in which area. Once 
an opportunity for improvement is detected, it must be submitted to the require-
ments of improvement as specified in clause 10—Improvement (submitting the 
improvement to methods using measuring, monitoring, and analyzing activities). 
The  following inputs shall be considered:
• Issues of interested parties
• Data of processes
• Data of products or services
• Nonconformities
• Audits
• Self-assessments
A good example is the initiation of process mapping or process reengineering where 
the results may indicate a need for improvement. Then the management representa-
tive must take this information and forward it to the top management.
 

63
Leadership
Promotion of Awareness of Customer Focus
Another role for the management representative is to promote the awareness of the 
employees of customer focus. Customer focus is one of the quality principles that 
the ISO 9001 Standard is based upon. The specific requirements are listed and dis-
cussed in chapter 5.1.2—Customer focus. The issues of customer focus are supposed 
to be identified on each organizational level or unit which customer expectations 
are relevant. The management representative has the role of evaluating how the ISO 
Standard requirements regarding customer focus are perceived by the members of 
each organizational level or unit and how they are fulfilled in each of this organiza-
tional level or unit. The next step for the management representative will be to verify 
that measures for promoting the awareness are being taken. The ways to promote 
the issues will be planned according to the nature and activities of the organization: 
training, lectures, publications, certifications, distributing information, and so on.
Ensuring Integrity of the Quality Management System during Changes
Changes may occur in different QMS elements such as planned processes,  documented 
information, operations of the QMS, requirements or specifications for products and 
services, changes in the design and the development, and so on. When such changes 
occur they will be submitted to the controls suggested in clause 6.3—Planning 
of changes. The role of the management representative is to verify with the quality 
controls that the standard offers that
• The changes were identified on time
• The changes were submitted to the controls
• The integrity of the QMS is still maintained after the change was introduced
These information the management representative may get through the  interactions 
with other relevant parties of the organization, such as process owners, or during the 
meeting of the quality circle. Ensuring the integrity means ensuring that after the change
• Needs and expectations of interested parties are still maintained
• Quality objectives are still met
• The QMS is effective
Creating a Reporting System for the Management 
Representative and the Top Management
As you probably already noticed, the responsibility of the top management and 
the management representative includes a lot of gathering of information on vari-
ous subjects and topics of the QMS; the management representative will need to 
collect information and data regarding the QMS and its activities, assess it, and 
 

64
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
forward it to the top management. This information should flow constantly in 
order to seize the status in real time and to promote the proactive approach for 
managing the QMS. There is no exact requirement regarding the reporting meth-
ods or intervals. They may occur as management reviews, as complaints reports, 
or as internal audits reports. The reporting may vary according to different areas 
and activities. Another issue is the definition of what will act as evidence and 
findings to support the reporting. For example, as a management representative, 
aside from the management review and the internal audit I used to submit to my 
CEO weekly reports with different issues concerning the quality of the products 
or customer issues.
I support the establishment of a reporting system that will serve the management 
representative in completing his duties as required by the ISO 9001 and shall provide 
the top management with the necessary information. This kind of system can use the 
top management for the management review. The following are the data expected 
from such a system:
• Status of implementation of the ISO 9001 Standard
• Accomplishment of tasks related to the implementation
• Results of audits
• Status of actions for improvements
• Status of nonconformities
• Status of corrective actions
• Issues related to training
• Status of processes related to the realization of the product or service
• Delays in deliveries or schedules
• Status of stocks
• Status of production orders
• Issues with suppliers
• Status of products and services
• Quality status of purchased goods
• Quality status of realized goods
• Quality status of services provided to customers
• Information regarding customers and their satisfaction
• Results of surveys
• Information regarding complaints
Establishing such a system is not easy and each area and type of product or  service 
demands other properties or characteristics. You need to locate the resources in the 
organization that can provide the management representative with this  information. 
The next step will be to see how different types of information can flow to the man-
agement representative on a regular basis. The types of organizational sources of 
information are as follows:
• ERP/CRM systems can provide information related to orders, delays, production 
orders, service calls, or issues with suppliers.
• SPS inspection systems for the status of goods.
• Survey tools for customer satisfaction.
 

65
Leadership
• Customer support centers for customer complaints.
• Quality tools (like form or systems) for the status of the QMS (audit results, correc-
tive actions, and improvements).
The users of such a reporting system are the top management and the manage-
ment representative. But there is a difference between the information that the 
 management representative will use and that interests the top management; the man-
agement  representative needs a very practical information regarding processes while 
the top management needs to know only the status and the trends.
 

 

67
6 Planning
6.1  Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities
In clause 6.1, the ISO 9001:2015 Standard presents a new concept: risk-based think-
ing. Risk-based thinking directs people to look for opportunities, address risks, and 
come up with actions either to develop those opportunities or to mitigate or eliminate 
those risks. Risk-based thinking is actually a development and broadening of the well-
known “preventive action” concept. Organizations should migrate from preventive 
action to risk-based thinking. Let us start by reviewing the ISO 9001 requirements:
6.1.1
• The organization shall determine which risks and opportunities may affect its  ability 
to achieve the intended results.
• The objectives of this determination:
• To ensure that the quality management system (QMS) can achieve its intended 
results
• To enhance desirable effects
• To prevent or reduce adverse effects
• To achieve improvement
• The context of the organization and the needs and expectations of interested parties 
(as specified in clauses 4.1 and 4.2) shall be taken into account when considering the 
risks that may affect the ability of the organization to achieve the intended results.
6.1.2
• Actions to address risks and opportunities shall be planned and these actions shall 
be integrated into the processes of the QMS.
• The effectiveness of these actions shall be evaluated.
• The actions shall be planned in proportion to the potential effects on conformity of 
goods and services and customer satisfaction.
• Note—options to address risks may include actions that avoid risks, take risks in 
order to pursue an opportunity, eliminate risk sources, change the likelihood or 
consequences, share risks, or retain risks by informed decisions.

68
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Note—Opportunities can lead to planning and implementation of new practices, 
launching new products, opening new markets, addressing new customers, building 
partnerships, and using new technology and other desirable and viable possibilities 
to address the organization’s or its customers’ needs.
Throughout the standard, it is indicated where and how risk-based thinking will 
be applied in the QMS:
• Clause 4.4, QMS and its processes—You are required to address risks to conformity 
of products and customer satisfaction if process interaction is ineffective or develop 
opportunities that may enhance this conformity.
• Clause 5.5.1—The top management is requested to promote the concept of risk-
based thinking when developing and implementing the QMS.
• Clause 5.1.2, Leadership and commitment—The top management is expected 
to demonstrate leadership and commitment with respect to customer focus 
by ensuring that the risks and opportunities that may affect the conformity of 
products and services, and customer satisfaction as a result, are determined and 
addressed.
• Clause 6.3, Planning of changes—Potential consequences must be addressed while 
changes are considered.
• Clause 8.1, Operational planning process—For planning changes, their conse-
quences are considered.
• Clause 8.4.2, Type and extent of control of external provision—The organization 
considers the potential impact of externally provided processes, products, and 
services on the organization to provide products or services according to their 
specifications.
• Clause 8.5.5, Post-delivery activities—The extent of the activities is determined 
 considering the potential undesired consequences associated with the delivered 
products and services.
• Clause 9.1.3, Analysis and evaluation—The organization analyzes and evaluates 
appropriate data and information arising from monitoring and measurement 
regarding the effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and opportunities.
• Clause 9.3.2, Management review inputs—During the management review, it is required 
to discuss the effectiveness of measures taken to address risks and opportunities.
• Clause 10.2, Nonconformity and corrective action—It is required to update risks 
and opportunities determined during planning when addressing nonconformities.
Terms and Definitions
Before we start to unveil the requirements of clause 6.1 and their implementation, 
I would like to present some terms and definitions that are used in this chapter:
• Risk—The probability of arriving at an unexpected state where requirements are not 
met. This state is represented by potential events.
• Opportunity—The possibility for improvement due to a favorable combination of 
circumstances or conditions in the QMS.
• Risk evaluation—The process of comparing identified risks against given risk crite-
ria to determine whether the risks are acceptable or not.
 

69
Planning
Risk-Based Thinking
Risk-based thinking is a new concept introduced by the ISO 9001:2015 Standard regard-
ing risks and opportunities in an organization. It promotes a new organizational culture 
that leads people to look for opportunities and address risks. This concept indicates that 
changes produce opportunities and unanticipated consequences; that is, an organiza-
tion analyzes and acts in advance to address changes that may impact its objectives, 
expectations of interested parties, or product requirements. Therefore, before creating a 
change, one must identify and assess the associated risks and opportunities. An organi-
zation is required to incorporate this concept in the planning of the processes. These new 
requirements should not be considered as a burden but rather as a contribution to the 
QMS that helps the organization become more effective by eliminating adverse events.
A QMS in its basis acts as a preventive tool that initiates activities for identifying 
situations where intended outcomes, for example, objectives, would not be met or 
identifying opportunities that help an organization in achieving its objectives. This 
new concept is a development of the preventive action and requires a routine and 
more systematical analysis of risks and opportunities.
The difference between risk-based thinking and preventive action lies in the fact 
that in preventive action, a QMS relies on interested parties (most likely employees) to 
detect and report potential risks and initiate a preventive action. In other words, the 
approach is a reactive one—one reacts when a risk is already there. The ISO 9001:2015 
Standard suggests risk-based thinking as a strategic instrument for the planning of a 
QMS and adopts a proactive approach toward errors and nonconformities by antici-
pating and identifying the root causes that may emerge during realization and initi-
ating actions, which helps address the errors in advance. Risk-based thinking is more 
effective than preventive action because the identification and elimination of risks 
and opportunities are defined in planning stages and are incorporated in the process 
approach. The probability of achieving quality objectives improves because obstacles, 
interferences, and interruptions are identified and removed in advance or opportuni-
ties initiate improvements. Objectives of risk-based thinking are as follows:
• Establishing a proactive approach of identification and elimination of errors in advance
• Ensuring the QMS can achieve its intended outcomes
• Preventing or reducing undesired effects
• Ensuring long-term normality, security, and credibility of processes and business 
activities
• Achieving improvement
• Enhancing customer satisfaction
When we take a look again at the objective mentioned earlier, these are the classic 
quality objectives. Risk-based thinking enforces changes in issues such as
• Definition of specifications—According to the results of the analysis, specification 
may be changed.
• Definition of processes and activities—According to the results, activities and  processes 
may be modified.
 

70
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Quality activities—Quality controls and activities may be redesigned, according to 
the results of the analysis.
• Documented information—Documented information might be modified in order 
to support the results.
The ISO 9001 Standard specifically implies that it does not formally require a cer-
tain methodology for applying risk management and an organization can decide 
for itself whether and how to develop a more extensive risk management meth-
odology than required as long as the principles from clause 6.1 are maintained. 
I personally recommend the next process for implementing risk-based thinking 
(Figure 6.1).
When planning and applying risk-based thinking, you must refer to the entire 
lifecycle of processes or products:
• For existing processes or products, you should prove that risks are addressed in the 
frame of the ISO 9001 Standard requirements, the results (actions needed to address 
risks) are implemented, and processes, goods, and services are controlled.
• For the planning of changes in processes or new processes, you should demonstrate 
how you analyze risks and address them.
Responsibilities
An organization should identify and appoint an appropriate team of parties (may 
include external as well as internal persons) with appropriate competence, experience, 
Risk-based thinking process
Risk analysis
Risk evaluation
Risk control
Risk effectiveness
Figure 6.1 Suggestion for risk-based thinking method.
 

71
Planning
and knowledge for planning and implementing risk management activities. Such 
team is required to
• Receive different views and inputs from different areas and expertise with respect 
to identifying risks and opportunities, setting related criteria, and performing the 
evaluation
• Ensure that necessary knowledge is available
• Ensure that all risks are identified
• Ensure the effectiveness and efficiency of action controls for addressing risks
• Appoint responsible parties for the implementation
• Delegate assignments regarding risk-based thinking
I would involve in this task the process owner, because he is supposed to have needed 
knowledge and experience.
Risk Analysis
All the constituents of a QMS that affect the quality must be analyzed for their 
 probability to impact the ability of an organization to provide conformed products. 
The goal is to identify these aspects, their impact, and consequences on the QMS. The 
result will be the planning of their controls.
During the analysis, you identify and document the qualitative and quantitative char-
acteristics of those system elements. For example, when allocating an employee for a 
critical activity, you may identify the level of its competence, qualifications, and experi-
ence. The type of identification is an essential step in recognizing all the aspects of the 
QMS that may affect the quality or the ability to meet the requirements. During the 
analysis, the next issues must be clearly defined:
• The description of the QMS element that is analyzed: a process, an activity, a 
resource.
• The identification of the party that performs the analysis.
• The scope of the analysis, the characteristics, properties, or activities of which are 
analyzed.
• The objective of the element—what is its intended outcome?
While analyzing the associated risks, ensure that you review the next aspects related 
to the realization of the product. At the end of this review, you will have a compre-
hensive list of potential events that hinder achieving the objectives, which must be 
addressed:
• Product specifications—Identification of product specifications that an organiza-
tion might fail to meet. It may refer to semi-products, finished goods, services, or 
activities in a service.
• Resources—Identification of the resources that are related to the realization of the 
product and that might affect the quality of the product when not maintained or 
provided, for example, the deployment of a new technology or a new machine.
 

72
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Human resources—Identification of the qualifications of human resources that 
might affect the quality of the product when not provided, for example, the employ-
ment of new personnel.
• Process environment—Identification of the process environment conditions 
that are related to the realization of the product and that might affect the qual-
ity of a product when not maintained, for example, storing the goods in a new 
storage area.
• Handling activities—Identification of activities such as traceability, packag-
ing, transport, and storage that might harm or affect the quality of the product. 
Handling materials or components that are used in the realization of the product 
are also considered here.
• Monitoring and measuring devices—Identification of monitoring and measuring 
device requirements needed to verify intended outcomes that might affect the qual-
ity of a product when not maintained. For example, are the results of the measure-
ments done by this monitoring and measuring device interpretative? Could it be 
possible that due to a wrong interpretation of the results, product specifications 
would not be met?
Methods for risks analysis:
• FMEA—failure mode and effects analysis
• Fishbone
• FTA—fault tree analysis
• ETA—event tree analysis
• Design of experiments
• Reasons for variance
• Review for conflicting requirements
• Pareto-analysis
Risks Evaluation
After identifying risks, it is necessary to evaluate them using available information or 
data. The goal of the evaluation is to assess which objective will be impacted, what the 
significance of the risk is, and whether the risk is acceptable or not.
The first step in the evaluation is defining criteria. The criteria are used to  determine 
the acceptability of risks: which risk is acceptable and not significant to the business 
activity and which risk is unacceptable and significant:
• Acceptable risks—Risks with which an organization can live, that is, the organiza-
tion can still deliver products to customers without any nonconformity, without 
planning actions to control them.
• Unacceptable risks—Risks with which an organization cannot live, that is, when 
these risks are not addressed, there is a high probability that products delivered to 
customers do not meet the customers’ expectations.
 

73
Planning
When risks are accepted, it is important that the risks be informed to all the relevant 
parties.
This kind of evaluation assists in focusing your efforts and resources on 
addressing risks. It is possible that two risks coexist; in that case, eliminating 
the first risk is a priority whereas the second risk can be managed by the orga-
nization. The criteria should enable you to balance your objectives against the 
associated risk. The criteria provide a range with which the organization decides 
whether a risk is needed to be controlled and reduced and to what degree. The 
criteria
• Are designed to ensure the achievement of intended results
• Provide the ability to decide whether an outcome is acceptable or not
• Ensure the conformity of goods and services
• Ensure customer satisfaction
While defining the criteria, one should consider the context of the organization, the 
organizational objectives, and the expectations of interested parties. The criteria may 
be based upon a defined set of prerequisites such laws, policies, regulations, relevant 
standards, qualifications, guidelines, or other specifications. When the probabil-
ity of risks cannot be estimated, the probability of the risks cannot be quantitated; 
so  special criteria shall be applied.
According to the determination of the criteria, the tools and techniques for the 
evaluation shall be developed. The tools enable the relevant parties to obtain rele-
vant data and information needed to be compared with the criteria. The techniques 
and methods will translate the data and information into terms that could be mea-
sured against the criteria. Thus, must they be suitable to the nature of the process, 
activity, or product that they are measuring or controlling. The end result should 
enable you to decide whether the risk is acceptable or not. There are two types of 
methods:
• Estimated—This method enables the end user to choose the degree of the risk (usu-
ally predefined, for example, high, medium, or low).
• Calculated—Based on the method for calculation, the results indicate the degree of 
the risks, for example, with scale.
The evaluation examines
• The initiating event, circumstance, situation, and condition that causes the risk
• The sequence of events that could lead to the situation
• The probability of occurrence of such a situation
• The probability that such situation will cause not meeting requirements
• The characteristics, properties, or specifications (of the process or product) that 
might not be met—nonconformity
 

74
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The output of the evaluation provides the following information:
• The probability of the occurrence of the event of not meeting requirements 
• The consequences of the risks, that is, how severe it might be
Methods for risk evaluation:
• Risk evaluation matrix
• Diagram for decision process
• Formulas for calculating risk probability
• Comparing data or information against a known applicable standard
• Comparing data or information with disciplinary data
After this evaluation, all identified risks should have been assessed and their implica-
tions known. This is how you ensure that no risks are left out.
Opportunities
Though risks are considered negative, risk-based thinking suggests a positive aspect—
opportunities. Opportunities are not always directly related to risks but they always 
refer to objectives, that is, developing an opportunity improves our activities and 
assists in achieving objectives. The analysis and assessment of certain situations or 
risks show that further opportunities may arise as options for improvement. An orga-
nization must prove that such situations are analyzed and opportunities are identified.
In note 2 of clause 6.1, the standard suggests business possibilities that may arise 
when analyzing opportunities:
• Adopting new practices
• Launching new products
• Opening new markets
• Addressing new customers
• Building partnerships
• Using new technology
Common Terms or Possible Description
High
Likely to happen, often, frequent
Medium
Can happen, but not frequently
Low
Unlikely to happen, rare, remote
Examples of Qualitative Severity Level
Significant
Failure to meet requirements
Moderate
Reversible or minor nonconformities
Negligible
Will not lead to nonconformities
 

75
Planning
Reference to the Context of the Organization
The context of the organization includes the purpose of the organization, that is, the 
values to which the firm is committed; quality policy, goals, and objectives with which 
the organization fulfills its mission; and strategies with which the organization would 
like to achieve its goals and objectives. These constraints and boundaries define the 
frame in which risk-based thinking is implemented. The context of the organization 
is used to determine relevant risks and opportunities. When planning the QMS, the 
organization determines which risks may prevent it from achieving these objectives or 
which opportunities may help fulfill the context of the organization better.
As mentioned earlier, one of the main goals of risk-based thinking is handling 
changes in the business and operational environment of the organization. The busi-
ness environment is ever changing and organizations need to adapt to changes fre-
quently. These changes affect the products and business activities of organizations. 
Changes are associated with opportunities and unanticipated consequences—risks. 
Thus, organizations should
• Review which business aspects may change over time
• Evaluate what the associated the consequences will be
• Adjust criteria, evaluation methods, and controls in accordance with the changes
• Review the effectiveness of these adjustments over time
Which context of the organization’s aspects might hide risks and opportunities?
• Strengths—Strengths are the advantages of the organization when realizing the 
product or service. The organization derives opportunities from these strengths and 
tries to leverage them into improvements.
• Weaknesses—The weaknesses are attributes that may interrupt the organization in 
achieving its goals and objectives or may generate nonconformities. The organiza-
tion is to identify them and suggest ways to mitigate, avoid, or eliminate them.
• Opportunities—Environmental, technological, economic, infrastructural, or social 
conditions or circumstance that the organization can draw advantage from in the future.
• Threats—Threats are environmental, technological, economic, or social conditions 
or circumstance that may prevent the organization from achieving its quality objec-
tives. The organization is to identify them and find ways to cope with them.
Functions or responsibilities involved in the realization of the product must know the 
context of the organization and the relevant quality objectives. This is necessary to 
understand and effectively evaluate which risks or opportunities lay within realiza-
tion processes. In practice, I would include this type of analysis in the management 
review and submit its results as inputs to the management review.
Reference to the Needs and Expectations of Interested Parties
The expectations of interested parties of the organization are taken into account 
when determining relevant risks and opportunities. Identifying the concerns of 
 

76
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
interested parties and addressing the associated risks or promoting opportunities 
improve their confidence and trust. The interested parties of the organization are in 
this stage known and defined:
• Owners and investors, who represent business requirements
• Employees, who represent qualifications and training requirements
• Customers, who represent contractual, specification, and quality requirements
• End users, who represent functionality and quality requirements
• Suppliers or other external providers, who take part in the supply chain, which 
 represents contractual requirements
• Regulators, who represent legal or statutory requirements
• Auditors, who represent standard requirements
• Other interested parties, whom the organization finds relevant to the QMS
The organization must identify which risks are associated with interested parties, 
that is, when, where, and why their needs will not be met, and suggest ways and 
actions to avoid these situations or which expectations of interested parties might 
bring opportunities and whether developing these opportunities is feasible. Risks or 
opportunities associated with the expectation of interested parties are as follows:
• Owners and investors—risks associated with revenues and implementing strategies
• Employees—risks associated with errors or nonconformities related to the opera-
tion of a QMS
• End users—risks associated with the specifications or requirements from the product 
due to technological, sociological, ecological, economic, or environmental changes
• Suppliers—risks associated with the performance and ability to supply goods and 
services according to specifications
• Regulators—change of applicable regulations that might affect realization processes
• Auditors—change of standard requirements (e.g., the revision of the ISO 9001 Standard)
• Employees—risks associated with safety during the realization of the product
The analysis may affect the processes of the QMS and would require the implementa-
tion of certain controls on one hand or may lead to improvement and innovation on 
the other hand. A very good and known example (which will be discussed in detail 
in chapter 8.4—Control of externally provided processes, products, and services, 
 section 8.4.1—General) is the evaluation or suppliers where activities are imple-
mented to select, evaluate, reevaluate, and rank suppliers. If we analyze these actions,
• The expectations of a supplier are known
• His performances are monitored
• Related data are analyzed, trends are indicated, and risks are monitored
• Actions to mitigate those risks are taken
Risks Related to Intended Results
Intended results relate to the objectives of various business operations that consti-
tute the QMS. One of the objectives of risk-based thinking is securing the delivery 
 

77
Planning
of indented results while addressing risks that might prevent the organization from 
achieving the objectives or identifying opportunities that may enhance the objec-
tives. In other words, risks or opportunities that affect the reliability of processes, 
resources, process environment, and infrastructures.
Implementing risk-based thinking when planning processes increases the prob-
ability of delivering intended results. Furthermore according to clause 4.4, you are 
required to address risks to the conformity of products and customer satisfaction if 
unintended outputs are not delivered. In this stage, you are to determine and address 
those risks. Which objective might not be achieved?
• Strategic objectives
• Quality objectives
• Product specifications
• Process parameters
In order to eliminate situations where these objectives might not be met, the relevant 
outcomes of the related operations must be analyzed and the causes that may prevent 
the organization from achieving its intended results must be identified. The organi-
zation can do it through the application of different controls in different areas and 
aspects of the operations:
• During design and development phases, addressing risks related to the realization of 
products enables the planning, in advance, of necessary verifications and  validations 
for realization stages. During the development stage, some critical process elements 
are determined and ensure intended results:
• Required resources for the realization
• Necessary training for the personnel
• Definition of process outputs
• Required verifications or validation of activities
• Statistical methods for the analysis of processes serve as tools for the evaluation of 
processes. Such methods indicate which process parameters or product character-
istics must be controlled.
• Audit and review of resources related to realization processes may indicate which 
risks are associated with those resources (in terms of availability and usability).
• A control over purchased products or services is necessary and the performance of 
external providers must be supervised.
Implementing these methods generates data and information and indicates trends 
in the processes. The next step is to identify whether any risk is associated with 
those processes and activities and to decide whether those activities must be con-
trolled. When risks are identified, the organization is to develop plans to address 
the risks with respect to the context of the organization and the expectations of 
interested parties:
• Would the quality objectives be achieved?
• Would the expectations of interested parties be fulfilled?
 

78
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Enhancing Desirable Effects (or Risks Related to Product Characteristics)
The standard specifically requires addressing risks in order to enhance desirable 
effects. Desirable effects in this context mean the achievement of business or product 
characteristics resulting from a previous activity. Product characteristics represent the 
expectations of customers and relate to the materials or components that the product 
is made of, the usability and the intended use, and other specifications such as storage 
or transportation. The organization needs to identify products and special character-
istics where the verification of their quality is required and determine for them their 
verification. In other words, if these characteristics are not verified, there is a danger 
of undesirable effects. Addressing the related risks enables the development of controls 
for preserving these characteristics, ensures desirable effects and achievement of pro-
cess objectives, and ensures the delivery of products to customers according to their 
expectations. One might say that those controls will be implemented during the qual-
ity assurance phase of product realization. Which controls may we find?
• Loading tests
• Product life tests
• Crash tests
• Tests of materials
• Tests of usability
Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities
At this point, it should be clear which risks or opportunities are associated with the 
realization of the product and in which context they might emerge. The next stage is 
to plan actions to address and control them. Actions for addressing risks are needed 
to eliminate, avoid, or control the risks and reduce the probability of errors in the 
processes and their effect. Actions for addressing opportunities are needed to promote 
improvements in the QMS. These actions must be planned in advance (the proactive 
approach—identifying in advance rather than acting upon events after their occur-
rence).The organization is required to show which methods it develops and implements 
to avoid, mitigate, or eliminate risks. The objectives of those actions are as follows:
• Avoiding situation and events that may avert the organization from achieving its 
objectives
• Creating understanding among the relevant parties of risks and their implications
• Informing the relevant parties when such events occur
• Preventing the organization from delivering unintended outputs
• Developing opportunities into improvements
When planning the actions, the following issues will be referred
• The responsible parties for performing the action.
• Identification of a process, activity, output, good, or service that is controlled.
• What are risks, what are their implications, which objective might not be achieved, 
and how to identify the situation or event in which objectives will not be achieved?
 

79
Planning
• How to analyze such events and find the root cause.
• Which methods are applied to control and measure these events or product specifications?
• Which resources are needed?
• Which information or data are to be used?
• Relevant documentations.
• Expected outputs such as forms or records.
The activities may be supported by procedures, work instructions, guides, etc. 
I  personally recommend documenting these activities; where a work instruction or 
procedure already exists, you might add a capital or paragraph for risks, and where 
such does not exist, create one.
The processes, activities, and tasks for addressing risks (how risks are controlled or 
which actions are to be implemented in order to control them) depend purely on the 
type and characteristics of the processes, the nature of the product, the complexity of 
the product, the risk associated with the realization of the product, and the objectives 
or expectations of interested parties. How to plan the activities? There are several 
types of actions that are applied at different stages of the realization:
• Identification of events or situations, during the realization, that may pose a risk
• Eliminating risks—identifying which activities are needed to drive activities away 
from those situations and events
• Avoiding risks—identifying which activities are needed to create conditions that 
avoid these events or situations
• Control risks—implementing solutions that reduce risks and minimize the impact 
or likelihood of the risks and ensure that those situations will not occur and when 
they occur, actions are applied
Let us see how these types of actions are applied in a real-life situation such as 
 assembling a product:
Action
At Which Stage of the Process 
Life Cycle It Is Applied
Example
Identification of events 
or situations, during 
the realization, that 
may pose a risk
These situations should be 
identified during the 
planning phase.
A product can be wrongly assembled 
during the realization.
Eliminating risks
Planning should suggest 
actions that eliminate risks.
Planning a quality test that includes all 
the parts of the product.
Avoiding risks
Planning should suggest 
actions to avoid risks.
Automating the process of assembly.
Training employees.
Mitigating risks
During the realization, 
actions to mitigate known 
risks are to be applied.
Setting all the components in a row: a 
worker cannot advance to the next 
product when not all components in 
one row are used.
Controlling risks
Appropriate controls are 
applied to ensure that risks 
are handled during the 
realization and requirements 
are met.
Applying a quality control that verifies 
that all parts were used during assembly.
Counting the parts that were used, with 
the amount of products that were 
assembled and deducting the scrap.
 

80
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Moreover, it is needed to implement actions for the tracing and retrieval of defective 
products according to the identified risks. Examples for such actions may include
• Identification and traceability of products or components of the products
• Batch of charge management
• Identification of products during transport and storage
• Management of validation date
Proportion to the Potential Effects
Conformity of goods and services as well as customer satisfaction play a main role when 
determining which actions are needed to address risks or opportunities and to what 
degree the actions should be applied. This is a stage where the organization must consider 
whether it should address risks or opportunities—controlling the risks combined with 
the impact of the risk or developing an opportunity combined with its benefits is worth 
 handling. The organization may consider a number of options for actions or combine 
them. On one hand, the actions must be sufficient to enable the conformity of goods or 
services and customer satisfaction, but on the other hand, the efforts must be  balanced 
against the benefits derived from reducing a risk or developing an opportunity. It means 
that the expected investment in terms of resources and efforts from the organization 
must be proportionate to the implications of those risks or opportunities in two levels:
• Effects on conformity of goods and services—it is necessary to measure the impact 
of a risk or an opportunity on the ability of the QMS to achieve or support confor-
mity of goods and services
• Effects on customer satisfaction—it is necessary to measure the impact of a risk or 
an opportunity on customer satisfaction
The organization assesses the degree of the actions according to the nature and 
characteristics of the risks. This assessment of proportion assists the organiza-
tion in determining which actions to choose (when there are more alternatives) 
and is important for the planning of those actions and for the allocation of the 
needed resources. Consideration of these implications determines the extent and 
degree of the criteria for accepting or rejecting processes. What might influence 
the decision?
• Regulatory requirements
• Effects on product requirements related to goods and services
• Effects on customer requirements and product specification as determined by the 
customer
• Effects on processes and activities needed to realize the product
Evaluating Effectiveness of Actions to Address Risks and Opportunities
After planning and implementing actions for addressing risks, it is necessary to eval-
uate their effectiveness and evaluate whether these actions do mitigate, eliminate, or 
 

81
Planning
reduce the risks to an acceptable level. The review of the effectiveness creates an itera-
tive process of improving the controls. If you decide to document risk-based think-
ing, include this stage as well. Two distinct verifications are expected:
• A verification that the required controls have been implemented as planned
• A verification that the risks  are controlled as planned
If the review shows that the action is not effective and the risk is not removed to the 
expected degree, the organization must determine
• Whether further controls are required
• Whether to accept the risk or to plan the QMS element again
For a practical review of the effectiveness, all the required data must be collected and 
examined. Therefore, the appropriate methods must be defined:
• Internal auditing is an effective tool for measuring the effectiveness of actions because 
it is a system that evaluates the improvement of processes over time and can deliver 
results regarding the ability of the organization to fulfill its objectives for the long term.
• Analysis and evaluation of data is an effective method for identifying the trends of 
processes. Evaluating the effectiveness of actions for addressing risks involves the 
integration of statistical methods.
• Many standards may include specifications or requirements regarding products or 
processes. By applying a standard, the organization can analyze the effectiveness of 
the actions. This is a good option where objective data or evidence for evaluating the 
effectiveness is absent.
6.2  Quality Objectives and Planning to Achieve Them
Quality objectives have a strategic role of carrying out the quality policy and its 
implementation through a quality management system (QMS) and provide a means 
to assess whether the QMS achieves its goals. The effectiveness of a QMS depends on 
the extent to which quality objectives have been achieved. In other words, quality 
objectives report the status of the effectiveness of the QMS. Without quality objec-
tives, the organization cannot promote some of the ISO 9001 Standard basic goals: 
meeting customer requirements, achieving the improvement of the QMS and its 
products, and enhancing customer satisfaction. This statement is valid to all areas in 
the organization. Let us review the ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
6.2.1  
Clause 6.2.1 prescribes how quality objectives are planned:
• Quality objectives shall be planned and allocated to the appropriate and relevant 
functions and processes on different levels of the QMS throughout the organization.
• Quality objectives shall be consistent with the quality policy.
 

82
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Quality objectives shall be measurable.
• Quality objectives shall be planned with reference to, and in accordance with, appli-
cable requirements.
• Quality objectives shall be relevant to the conformity of goods and services.
• Quality objectives shall be planned in order to ensure customer satisfaction.
• Quality objectives shall be monitored at planned schedules and time intervals.
• A system for communicating the quality objectives shall be planned and maintained.
• Quality objectives shall be updated as appropriate.
• Quality objectives shall be maintained on as documented information.
6.2.2  
Clause 6.2.2 dictates how quality objectives are implemented in the organization:
• The organization shall determine which actions are needed to achieve its quality objectives.
• The organization shall determine which resources are needed for achieving the quality 
objectives.
• Responsible parties shall be appointed for the quality objectives.
• A system for monitoring and reporting the status of the quality objectives shall be 
planned and maintained.
• A method for evaluating the results of quality objectives shall be defined for each 
objective.
Consistence to the Strategy of the Organization
Before we start with the ISO 9001 Standard requirements, I would like to point out 
the strong relation between quality objectives and the strategies of the organization. 
Quality objectives are strategical as well as operational steps that the organization 
defines. On achieving these objectives, quality goals are reached and the strategies 
of the organization are executed. The type and hierarchy of the objectives are to be 
planned in order to accomplish the strategies of the organization, and the quality 
objectives are determined according to the organizational goals and should support 
the achievement of the goals. It begins at setting strategic objectives and continues 
with defining operational objectives. The quality objectives are derived from
• The context of the organization—quality objectives adjust the organization to its 
relevant business and environmental conditions:
• Promoting strengths
• Handling weaknesses
• Promoting opportunities
• Reacting to the different economic or social environments
• Needs and expectations of interested parties—through the achievement of the 
 quality objectives, aspects related to the needs and expectations of interested parties 
are ensured:
• Customers’ requirements
• Customers’ satisfaction
• Competition
• Regulatory requirements
 

83
Planning
• Performance of suppliers
• Expectations of investors
• QMS requirements—quality objectives support the promotion of quality manage-
ment requirements:
• Relations and performance of processes
• Trainings, competence, and encouragement of human resources
• Management of knowledge
• Allocation of resources
• Addressing risks and preventing side effects
I add here some important principles to consider when planning quality objectives:
• Quality objectives should support decisions making—the data and information gen-
erated and gathered through the implementation of quality objectives allows differ-
ent managerial levels in the organization to make decisions regarding the QMS.
• Quality objectives should be relevant to the organization—quality objectives 
express the business expectations of the organization concerning its business and 
operational performances.
• Quality objectives must be achievable—it does not do any good to define quality 
objectives that look good on the paper and may make a good impression in the audit 
but in fact no one can actually measure or reach.
• Quality objectives should not be exceeded—it is not quite recommended to define 
too many objectives as this may cause frustration and dissatisfaction among employ-
ees rather than positive results.
• Quality objectives should be practical—they must relate to the processes, activities, 
and operations of the QMS.
Consistence to Quality Policy
The determined quality policy represents the general guidelines, intentions, and goals of 
the organization referring to its quality intentions. The policy demonstrates what qual-
ity signifies to the organization and defines the areas and scopes in which the quality 
is active and valid. Quality objectives are to be developed for those areas and scopes. 
Quality objectives are a result of the quality policy; quality goals are to be analyzed and 
operational measurable steps that assists in achieving them are to be planned as objec-
tives. Those objectives must relate to operational and practical activities. Practical qual-
ity objectives should lead the organization to achieve more high-level objectives until 
strategic destinations are achieved. For example, if the quality objective is to enhance 
customer satisfaction and you know that customers are complaining about the pack-
age of the product, the operational quality objective should relate to those activities and 
quality elements that handle the package of the product (directly or indirectly). In other 
words, the strategic goals and the quality policy are to be broken down into specific 
steps. By doing that, the goals and the quality policy will be fulfilled. One should take a 
look at the quality policy, review the quality objectives, and would be able to say, “This 
objective will achieve this aspect of the policy.” Examples:
• If your quality policy is, Our company is obligated to provide the customer with 
products and services at the agreed schedules, an appropriate quality objective may 
be 95% delivery reliability.
 

84
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• If your quality policy is, Establish, maintain and improve compliance to environmen-
tal regulatory requirements, an appropriate quality objective will be Certification to 
ISO 14001 in the next 2 business years.
Reference to Applicable Requirements
When requirements are part of the QMS and demand the achievement of certain 
goals, quality objectives refer to those goals. Applicable requirements:
• Regulatory or statutory requirements
• Quality requirements
• Sectorial requirements
• Market requirements
• Social requirements
Working in certain industries requires meeting certain requirements such as main-
taining designated management systems. For example, in the construction industry, 
there are many safety and health regulations that must be applied. The quality policy 
must certainly refer to those requirements and the quality objectives must as well.
If your policy is, Establish, maintain and improve compliance to health and safety 
regulatory requirements, an appropriate objective will be, Educating all employees 
about health and safety measures until the end of this business year or certifying the 
organization to the OHSAS 18001 Standard in 2 business years.
Measurable Quality Objectives
Quality objectives must be capable of being measured and must enable the effective 
assessment of processes, activities, and their outcomes. Measurable objectives refer 
to the ability to compare the results of actions or activities to the objectives—did 
the activity achieve its objective? For example, it is hard to measure a quality objec-
tive such as “Promotion of human resources.” Such an objective must be developed 
into a measurable plan, for example, planning three training programs in certain 
areas for the next business year. At the end of the year, one can determine, during 
an internal audit, for example, whether this objective has been met.
Quality objectives are determined with absolute figures (quantitative) or with 
scopes or ranges that measure the extent of achieving the objectives (qualitative). 
Quantitative objectives use a specific scale that may suggest whether the objectives 
have been met or not. Qualitative objectives use the weight of evidence, are based 
on professional judgment, and usually do not require a high analytical process or a 
method. Examples of quantitative objectives are as follows:
• Objectives related to customer satisfaction
• Reducing reaction time to customer call to 48 hours
• Preventing the loss of five customers this year
• 95% on-time shipments by the end of this quarter
• Objectives related to business development
• An increase of 50% in sales revenue in this business year
 

85
Planning
• Objectives related to quality
• Reducing 50% of customer returns
• Reducing 80% of quality costs until the end of this year
Examples of qualitative objectives:
• Objectives based on yes/no criteria
• Updating all work instructions until the end of the current business year
• The installment of a new quality portal in the premises of the organization
• Defining boundaries or thresholds of the results of activities
• Standing within the threshold of certain process limits
• Initiating actions or activities
• Using only REACH (Registration, Evaluation, Authorization and Restriction of 
Chemicals) authorized materials until the end of the next business year.
• Developing a line of web-based products in the next 3 years
• Implementing a service treaty until the end of the year
Relevancy to Roles and Responsibilities
Quality objectives relate to persons and responsibilities in the organization because 
the personnel are expected to achieve quality objectives. The relation between quality 
objective and a function ensures that each quality objective relates to an organiza-
tional role that through its work, activities, and actions the objective may be achieved. 
This assignment of responsibility has two levels:
• The managerial level
• Defining quality objectives by translating the organization’s strategic objectives 
into practical job objectives
• Implementing actions for achieving these goals
• Making sure quality objectives are measured and monitored
• Analyzing the status of objectives.
• The operational level
• Acting in order to achieve quality objectives
The same person or function may act in both roles. Reviewing the organigram may 
assist in locating necessary quality objectives by relating them to specific roles, stages of 
realization processes, or specific activities. Considering the organigram also facilitates 
the interfaces and relations between the objectives. Let us review the next examples:
Objective
Responsibility and Authority
Reducing reaction time to customer call to 48 hours
Customer service manager
Manger of help desk
Reducing 80% of quality costs until the end of this year
Quality assurance
Production manager
Scheduling an interaction with each customer at least once a year
Sale manager/key account manager
Implementing a service treaty until the end of the year
Vice president of services
Reducing 80% of production scraps
Production manager
Production employee
 

86
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Although it is not explicitly required, I would include in the job description the 
 relevant quality objective.
Ensuring the Conformity of Goods and Services
Another very important goal of quality objectives is the relevancy to the confor-
mity of goods or services. Quality objectives promote the requirements of prod-
ucts, services, and processes. Processes and activities related to the realization of 
the product must guarantee the conformity of goods and services. This is why the 
performance of those processes must be monitored. And in order to determine 
their effectiveness, they must have objectives that cover all levels of the realization 
of the product.
One aspect refers to the elimination or the reduction of the occurrence of non-
conformities. If you are aware of the root causes of the past quality problems where 
nonconformity occurred in your organization, it will be much easier to set appropri-
ate quality objectives to eliminate or reduce them. This is a reactive approach where 
you use quality objectives as a corrective measure, for example,
• Implementing a new visual quality control system in the next business year
• Improving design issues that affect product performance
The other aspect is a bit more complex; quality objectives lead to the achievement 
of conformity of goods and services. This is a proactive approach to handling and 
improving quality issues related to the performance of processes, products, or cus-
tomer satisfaction. In this case, you must set objectives in such a way that by achieving 
the objective, errors will be avoided in advance and thus conformity will be attained. 
Setting those quality objectives leads the organization to achieve conformity of goods 
and services:
• A more comprehensive study of customer requirements
• Implementing the process approach for improving and optimizing processes
This aspect has a direct relation to the prior clause 6.1—Actions to address risks and 
opportunities; setting appropriate quality objectives may address issues needed to 
secure the delivery of indented results.
Enhancing Customer Satisfaction
One of the main goals of a QMS is to enhance customer satisfaction. We are aware 
that the organization depends on its customers and must strive to exceed their 
expectations. Thus, the ambition to fulfill the expectations of interested parties and 
enhance customer satisfaction can be effective only when relevant objectives are set.
The first step in determining appropriate quality objectives is to understand 
and identify what the expectations and needs of customers are. Meeting customer 
requirements is achieved through the initialization of actions for understanding the 
needs and requirements of customers, identifying new requirements of customers, 
 

87
Planning
or handling situations where potential conflicts with customers may arise. This is 
defined, discussed, and planned in the next standard clauses:
• Clause 4.2—Understanding the needs and expectations of interested parties
• Clause 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities
In practice, those expectations are usually documented; a market research, on a con-
tract, an order, etc., and the handling of those situations are to be identified and con-
trolled through specific actions.
The second step is to identify those QMS elements that may affect the needs and 
expectations of customers. Factors that affect customer satisfaction vary from one 
organization to the other and are influenced by the nature of goods or services. After 
identifying those QMS elements, you may declare appropriate quality objectives. The 
appropriate quality objectives enable the organization to respond to the needs and 
expectations of customers.
Quality objectives also serve the top management in the matter of leadership 
and commitment with respect to customer focus where trends of data related to the 
quality objectives indicate the efficiency of resolving issues and problems related to 
customers.
Let us look at some examples of the objectives that promote customer satisfaction:
Aspect of Customer Satisfaction
Example for an Objective
Quality objectives should enhance the 
ability to solve the problems of customers 
as soon as possible.
Reducing reaction time to customer complaints.
Establishing plans to reduce customer complaints based 
on statistical analysis.
Understand and anticipate the needs and 
expectations of customers.
Scheduling an interaction with each customer at least 
once a year.
Quality objectives should increase the 
ability of the organization to meet 
customer satisfaction in the long run.
Informing customers of the progress of their contract 
or order.
Improving the interface between the development and 
customers concerning their expectation from the 
product.
Quality objectives should motivate actions 
to eliminate situations where customer 
satisfaction is not achieved.
Increasing quality tests before delivering goods to 
customers.
Handling nonconformities and corrective actions with 
the goal of achieving customer satisfaction.
The ability to ensure conformity of goods 
and services.
Quality objectives should create the 
conditions for applying sufficient 
resources needed to achieve customer 
satisfaction.
Implementing a new system for a better communication 
of customer requirements throughout the supply 
chain.
Developing products that achieve customer 
satisfaction.
Improving the review processes of product 
characteristics.
Performing a survey among customers for obtaining 
feedback and ideas for improvement in the next 
business year.
 

88
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Setting Actions Needed to Achieve Quality Objectives
Activities needed to define, implement, and measure quality objectives must be 
 determined. This requirement refers to the operational side of developing quality 
objectives in the QMS:
• Definition of quality objectives—who is responsible for defining the quality 
 objectives and for which organizational units
• Implementation of quality objectives—which activities are needed to implement 
quality objectives, for example, training
• Measuring quality objectives—how quality objectives should be measured: which method, 
how data should be collected and gathered, in which time frame, and which report
The ISO 9001 Standard expects a kind of a plan to deploy and implement  quality objec-
tives. The plan facilitates the deployment and achievement of the quality  objectives. 
I suggest the next hierarchy:
• Top management—providing the leadership and commitment needed to implement 
quality objectives:
• Leadership—demonstrating the commitment to ensure the definition and con-
trol of quality objectives
• Commitment—allocation of resources and periodical review
• First-level management—identification of issues that are related to the QMS and 
must be observed
• Second-level of management—setting practical objectives and gathering the data
• Operational level—performing the actions and activities needed to achieve quality 
objectives
Resources Necessary for Achieving Quality Objectives
When determining quality objectives and the actions needed to achieve them, the 
top management must allocate and provide sufficient resources: time, personnel, 
and budget (or purchasing software or computers, trainings, etc.). For each quality 
 objective, it must be clear which resource it requires:
• Infrastructures—systems, facilities and equipment
• Process environment—work conditions
• Competence of employees or external providers—appropriate qualifications and skills
• Knowledge—concepts, work methods, technical solutions, and user applications
Let us allocate the resources to one quality objective:
Quality objective
Reducing reaction time to customer call to 4 hours
Infrastructure
Purchasing and implementing a new CRM system
Improving communication channels and interactions between the 
customer service and other departments of the organization
Process environment
Allowing structural changes in offices in order to allow better 
communication between different departments
Competence of employees
Allocating and training specific employees to specific types of customer 
complaints
Knowledge
Developing processes and methods for communicating with customers
 

89
Planning
Furthermore, the allocation of resources needed for quality objectives should be 
reviewed periodically in order to ensure that the resources are still available and suit-
able. This review is part of the management review. When outsourced resources are 
needed, they are considered as well.
A System for Monitoring and Reporting the Status of Quality Objectives
In order to implement and maintain quality objectives, you must establish a system 
for monitoring and reporting the status of the quality objectives. By system, I mean 
processes, activities, and interactions for monitoring, controlling, and reporting the 
effective of the organization’s objectives. There is no explicit requirement for such 
system, but during an audit, you are required to prove that all the data and informa-
tion regarding the quality objectives are available, organized, and monitored. When 
planning or describing such a system, refer to the next aspects:
• Gathering data and information—The system must indicate clearly which type of 
data and information must be collected and processed. When the system refers to 
figures like turnovers, percentage of accepted offers, customer returns, and errors 
in the production, it must be clear where these data and information are available.
• Tracking and monitoring—The system should refer to the relevant QMS elements 
that must be monitored: processes, human resources, documentations, and records.
• Observing—The system should ensure that activities for maintaining the quality 
objectives are performed, the objectives are measured, results are communicated to 
the appropriate persons, and those persons invest the resources to review the results.
• Reviewing the results—The system must provide the view of trends indicating the 
business progress of the objectives and opportunities for improvement and include 
the comparison of periods.
• Reporting—The system should define the type of reports of the results of monitoring and 
measuring and should communicate them to the relevant persons in the organization.
• Resources—The system should refer to the allocated resources needed for the 
achievement of the quality objectives: trainings, software, tools, etc.
Examples of systems for monitoring and reporting the status of quality objectives:
• Objective card—a manual Excel sheet that summarizes information and data con-
cerning an objective
• BI system—a tool that draws operational as well as financial data from a data bank 
and presents it in a way that allows the organization to make decisions
• Internal audit—the internal audit is a very effective quality tool for providing infor-
mation regarding the progress of the quality objectives
• Balanced score card—a structured report that reports business and process indexes 
related to the strategy of the organization
Monitoring Quality Objectives in Planned Schedules and Time Intervals
To implement effectively a strategy, the organization establishes timelines and time-
frames for each objective. The standard expects an arrangement of events used to 
manage and follow the achievement of the objectives. It refers to the scheduling of 
progress and review of the objectives.
 

90
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Each quality objective must have a particular period of time for its comple-
tion—until the objective is achieved. This timeline is used to control the status of 
the achievement. The schedules should be stringent, and when an objective is not 
achieved in its defined period, an analysis of the cause must be performed and cor-
rective measures must be applied:
• Allocation of more resources
• Update of the objective
• Modification of the objective
• Change of the variables for measure
Let us take a look at the next objective and its planned schedules—Certification to the 
ISO 9001 Standard: 2015.
As you can see, you will need to draw a plan with schedules for achieving the 
 objectives. The schedule of each quality objective shall be determined according to 
the  availability of resources and the nature of the objective.
Communication and Awareness
The organization must initiate the communication of quality objectives; the qual-
ity objectives and their status of achievement must be consistently communicated 
among employees and submitted to a review through the use of a designated tool that 
compares the objectives and the actual situation (target–performance comparison) 
and declares the results. This communication promotes the awareness of the QMS 
and the quality objectives of the organization.
Employees must be aware of the quality objectives hierarchy and understand the rel-
evancy, relation, and effect of their actions and activities on the achievement of the quality 
objectives. Employees must understand the link between their activities and the objectives 
of the organization. They must understand that they bear the operative responsibility of 
Task
Time Objective
Adjustment of the QMS documentation according to the new ISO 9001:2015 
Standard requirements
June 2016
Adjustment of all operational documentation according to the new ISO 9001:2015 
Standard requirements
Jan 2017
Training to all the employeeson the new Standard and the transition from the 
ISO 9001:2008
March 2017
Starting preparation for the internal audit
March 2017
Internal audit
June 2017
Scheduling an external audit
June 2017
Internal audit—second round; corrective actions and improvements
September 2017
Starting preparation for the external audit
January 2018
Final external audit
April 2018
Certification
June 2018
 

91
Planning
achieving the objectives and experience and how their activities and the expected outputs 
promote the quality objectives. Such awareness enhances the identification of employees 
with the quality objectives and initiates the motivation to meet them.
Information regarding quality objectives that is to employees:
• What are their objectives (quantitative or qualitative)?
• What is the meaning of those objectives?
• How can these objectives be reached?
• How are these objectives measured?
• What happens when they achieve these objectives?
• What are the consequences when they do not achieve these objectives?
• What is the situation in comparison to these objectives?
A method for communicating quality objectives and relevant information, which 
I frequently encounters and is quite simple and effective (I might add), is publishing 
the quality objectives on the tabloid put up in the halls of the organization which 
employees daily pass by. Another method is to publish this information on the orga-
nizational portal.
Evaluating Quality Objectives
Quality objectives must be reviewed in order to evaluate their effectiveness—to what 
extent the quality objectives have been achieved. The evaluation of the quality objec-
tives demonstrates trends related to processes, activities, and outcomes. The goal of 
the evaluation is to detect obstacles and issues that prevent the achievement of the 
quality objectives and therefore the improvement of the QMS. The result of the evalu-
ation initiates decisions about further or corrective actions needed for achieving the 
quality objectives. I suggest the next practice for evaluating quality objectives on a 
continual basis:
• Operational objectives are to be frequently evaluated (once a week or once a month) 
on a lower managerial and operational level—a weekly team meeting or a quality 
circle meeting where regular business and operational issues are discussed.
• Strategical objectives are to be less frequently evaluated, but the evaluation should 
be conducted on a higher managerial level, such as top management, during the 
management review, for example, where the results of the QMS are presented to the 
top management.
Updating Quality Objectives
Quality objectives should be updated, on a regular basis, when changes in relevant 
QMS elements occur
• Changes in the context of the organization, for example, changes related to the strat-
egy or the quality policy of the organization such as new priorities or changes in 
trends, which may have an impact on the quality objectives
• Changes in applicable requirements such as regulations
 

92
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Changes in the needs and expectations of interested parties, for example, changes 
related to the expectations of the product
• Changes in processes, resources, infrastructures, or activities, for example, techno-
logical changes that require new quality objectives or changes in the availability of 
resources that may make it impossible to achieve objectives
What shall be updated?
• The relevant documented information (quality objectives) that describes the quality 
objectives
• The method for monitoring and measuring the quality objectives
• The method for communicating the quality objectives
• The method for evaluating the quality objectives
Ensure that the relevant documented information of the change in the quality 
 objectives is updated since this type of documented information must be controlled 
according to the requirements of clause 7.5.2, Creating and updating.
Documented Information for Quality Objectives
The organization must maintain documented information in order to prove that 
the quality objectives are defined, documented, allocated, measured, reviewed, and 
updated. There is no particular format of the documented information, and I recom-
mend designing one that suits your organization. With the documentation, it is easier 
to manage and follow the quality objectives and it is much nicer to present during an 
audit. I recommend the next structure:
• First level—declaring that you have quality objectives that are part of the QMS, and 
committed to fulfilling the quality policy; for example, if you maintain a quality 
manual, you may mention the quality objectives.
• Second level—a primary list of the definition of the organizational quality objec-
tives. Methods of defining quality objectives:
• Quality manual (as an appendix)
• Road map
• Action plan
• Business plan
 
  People are often used to include this list in the quality manual. It is not prohib-
ited but takes into account that those quality objectives will probably often change 
with time and that means you will have to update the quality manual each time the 
 objectives are changed what I find inefficient.
• Third level—a more detailed presentation of the quality objectives referring to roles, 
functions, divisions, departments, etc. For each quality objective, I will detail
• The goal and logic
• The method for the measurement
• The intervals for the measurement (each week, month, quarter, or year)
• Who is responsible the measurement
 

93
Planning
• Who performs the measurement
• The method and tools needed for the measurement
• The records that provide the data
 
This kind of documentation makes it easier to review and change the quality objec-
tives periodically. This level can be documented on a designated controlled list such 
as an objective card.
• Fourth level—the method for capturing and analyzing, which is the practical part of 
measuring the quality objectives:
• Excel sheet
• Balance score card
• BI system
• Process metrics
 
This level enables employees to be informed of their quality objectives and their status.
• Fifth level—report and review of the quality objectives and their trends and status. 
This, for example, is the input for the management review, enabling the top manage-
ment to review the overall status of the QMS.
Of course, you are not required to adopt and implement all the levels. But this struc-
ture assists you in navigating through your system of quality objectives. Ensure that 
this structure is submitted to the control of documented information as specified in 
clause 7.5—Documented information.
Example of Quality Objectives
I add here some rough examples for quality objectives: their context, type (qualita-
tive/quantitative), and how to measure them.
Quality objectives for the organization:
Quality Objectives
Type
How to Measure
Implementing and fulfilling regulatory requirements
Qualitative
Management review
Getting certified for certain standards (or their revision)
Qualitative
Management review
Securing or improving market position
Qualitative
Management review
Increasing revenues
Quantitative
Monthly turnover reports
Improving the QMS
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Benchmarking
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Reducing quality costs
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Internal audit
Implementing a management system
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Expanding to other types of the QMS or other certifications
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Enhancing proposals for improvement
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Enhancing the effectiveness of the QMS
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
 

94
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Quality objectives for the product:
Quality objectives for processes:
Quality objectives for customers:
6.3  Planning of Changes
Clause 6.3 deals with the management of changes and suggests measures that enable 
the organization to plan, in a methodical way, its modifications to the QMS. By man-
aging and controlling changes, the organization develops the ability to react quickly 
to changes in circumstances: changes originating from customer demands, competi-
tors, strategies, and revision of regulatory requirements. Managing changes refers to 
the actions of planning the activities for realizing the change and to the employment 
of controls of the result after the implementation. The ability in managing changes 
enhances the level of improvement in the organization, and failure to manage changes 
in the QMS is a major contributor to nonconformities. Following and implementing 
the requirements of this clause also ensures that changes to the QMS are consistent 
Quality Objectives
Type
How to Measure
Reducing scraps in processes
Quantitative
Percentage of the total output of a process
Enhancing the quality performance of 
external providers (of goods or services)
Quantitative
Supplier evaluation
Increasing product quality
Quantitative
Statistical measure of quality assurance
Increasing process capability
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Increasing customer confidence
Quantitative
Satisfaction surveys
Reducing recurrent errors
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Quality Objectives
Type
How to Measure
Benchmarking
Qualitative
Management review
Objectives related to realizing new products or adapting changes 
in existing products
Qualitative
Internal audit
Management review
Reducing recurrent errors
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Inventory turnovers
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Quality Objectives
Type
How to Measure
Reducing reaction time to order
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Increasing customer satisfaction
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Reducing the number of customer complaints
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Reducing the reaction time of complaints
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Increasing delivery reliability
Quantitative
Statistical measure
Increasing satisfaction from service
Quantitative
Satisfaction surveys
 

95
Planning
with the strategy of the organization and the needs and expectations of the interested 
parties. ISO 9001 Standard requirements are as follows:
• When changes to the QMS are required and determined by the organization, they 
are carried out in a planned manner (see clause 4.4)
• While planning changes to the QMS, the organization should consider the follow-
ing issues:
• The purpose of the changes
• The potential consequences of the changes
• The integrity of the QMS
• The availability of resources
• The allocation or reallocation of responsibilities and authorities
Identifying the Changes
A change is any modification to an element in the QMS or to a combination of sev-
eral elements that may affect the quality of the product or the service or the ability 
of the organization to realize the product or the service according to the specifica-
tions: subsystems, regulations, processes, activities, components, documented infor-
mation, resources, facility, software, infrastructures, training, personnel (in terms 
of organizational changes rather than dismissal). In order to evaluate the need for 
a change, one must provide supporting data and information. Process analysis may 
assist in determining where improvements are needed and identifying changes that 
may improve performance. Possible reasons for changes are as follows:
• Organizational changes may bring structural changes to the QMS.
• Processes may have to change in order to achieve the new desired performance.
• Regulatory or statutory requirements may mandate changes to the QMS.
• Changes requested by customers or dictated by the business environment.
• Change of process throughout the organization to bring about performance improve-
ment (process engineering or redesign).
• Key process indicators may indicate the need for changes in the organization.
Type of changes:
• Changes in process input or output
• Changes in the activities of processes
• Changes in product or process specifications—changes in the design
• Technological changes
• Environmental changes
• Economical changes
• Organizational changes
• Changes in the context of the organization
• Changes of resources related to the realization of the product:
• Personnel issues
• Infrastructure
• Monitoring and measuring devices
 

96
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Changes in documented information
• Changes as a response to nonconformity
• Changes in regulatory requirements
• Changes referring to specifications or expectations of external providers or relation-
ship with external provider
• Changes originating from corrective actions:
• Product specifications
• Activities
• Monitoring and measuring devices
• Documented information such as instructions or procedures
• Changes originating form the modification of the business strategy
• Changes required in response to risk analysis
• Changes in the expectations of interested parties
Understanding the Purpose of Changes
Changes have a purpose—the reason why you initiate them in the first place. Changes 
may take place, or are expected, in economic policies, product demands, technolo-
gies, regulations, environmental conditions, or social and cultural conditions. The 
intensity of a change is dependent upon the nature and complexity of the modified 
element, for example, of a process or its output. The purpose of a change refers to the 
anticipated outcome of the change, and it guides your planned actions. Thus, under-
standing the purpose of the change is critical for the planning of the change. The lack 
of understanding of the purpose leads to planning and implementing wrong actions. 
The purpose of a change is derived from its objectives. When planning changes, it is 
important to answer the following questions:
• Why is the change necessary—which quality problem it will solve or which improve-
ment will be achieved?
• What is the nature change—what will be done or changed?
• Where will the change be introduced—to which QMS element (or elements): a sys-
tem, a process, a resource, etc.?
• How will the change be implemented—which actions will be undertaken?
• By whom will the change be executed—who are the responsible parties for imple-
menting the change?
• Who will approve the change?
• When must the change be carried out—when must it be reviewed and when must it 
be approved?
• What are the impacts of the change on other QMS elements?
Planning and Implementing Changes in the QMS
The process of identifying the need for a change or planning a change in the organi-
zation is carried out in a planned manner and in accordance with the requirements 
 

97
Planning
of clause 4.4 (Quality management system and its processes). What are the principles 
of the process approach regarding changes?
• Objectives that are derived from the goal and purpose of the change are determined.
• Processes and activities, their sequences, and the interactions between them neces-
sary to carry out the change must be planned using a defined method (including 
transfer of relevant data and information).
• For each planned change, all the required inputs must be identified. Inputs of a 
change refer to the need for the change, the QMS elements involved, and data and 
information that support the activities.
• It is necessary to plan controls for the change that analyze and evaluate the progress 
and the effectiveness of the change. Those controls may act as monitoring, measure-
ment, analysis and evaluation activities, verifications, or validations of results.
• Criteria for monitoring and measurement necessary to ensure the effectiveness and 
the achievement of the changes must be planned.
• The resources required to implement the change and their availability must be deter-
mined: tools and equipment, applicable documentation, applicable knowledge, etc.
• The responsibilities and authorities for implementing the change must be allocated.
• Risks and opportunities relevant to the change must be identified and addressed.
• Where applicable, the changes should be submitted to the organizational arrange-
ments for improvement.
• Changes should be communicated to the appropriate persons and relevant inter-
ested parties at all levels of the organization using appropriate methods and tools: 
training, publication, meeting, documentation, etc.
• Documented information supporting the execution of the change should be main-
tained: procedures, diagrams, and forms.
These requirements come to ensure that new processes, operations, and activities 
or process outputs originating from a change in the QMS must be planned and con-
trolled like any other processes of the QMS. In practice, a kind of method for plan-
ning your processes and activities that operate the QMS should have already been 
determined and implemented. Now, it is time to introduce changes to this method. 
Other important issues are as follows:
• Changes in statutory and regulatory requirements should be tracked systemati-
cally. Such changes may have a great influence on the activities and operations of 
the organization.
• In some cases, it is necessary to get the approval of the customers of the process 
before the changes are applied.
• When the changes are technical, a consideration is given to gauge and measurement 
capabilities.
Understanding the Consequences of a Change
Due to changes, processes can become inconsistent to their original planning and no 
longer meet their objectives. An early analysis and understanding of the consequences 
 

98
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
of the changes ensure that those changes achieve their goals with a minimum impact 
on the QMS. An impact on the QMS refers to the negative effect that a change may 
have on the ability of the organization to provide conformed products. For example, 
when processes are modified, what would be the anticipated result in different areas 
in the QMS? Therefore, changes are reviewed, verified, approved, and reviewed again. 
In order to seize the real effect that a change might have, it is required to map the 
change in the overall process; the impact the change will cause upstream and down-
stream of the processes. Understanding the consequences refers to
• Understanding the business context in which the change takes place
• Identifying the relevant QMS elements that are affected
• Understanding how the change affects those QMS elements
Which QMS aspect that must be assessed?
• Must the quality objectives be modified after a change?
• Will the change affect realization processes?
• What is the impact on process outputs on one hand and process inputs on the other 
hand?
• Will the current controls, verifications, or validations still be valid or relevant?
• Will the product or service still conform to the agreed-to product requirements? Will 
the intended use be affected? Will the characteristics of the product be modified?
• Will different components of the product or system be affected by the change?
• Will customer requirements still be met? Will the product still meet its specifications?
• Will customer satisfaction be influenced?
• Will the change affect the regulatory status of the product?
• Must the interactions with external providers be updated?
Which controls may you implement?
• By providing as many examples or scenarios of processes where the change is imple-
mented and may be impacted as possible, you may increase the control of the change.
• Reviewing and assessing the risks related to changes to the QMS.
• Periodic reviews should be done on all the changes to ensure that the changes achieve 
their objectives and that no adverse impacts (that were not considered) occur. The 
periodical reviews should be set according to the complexity and the risks that the 
changes pose.
• Introducing the change as an improvement to the PDCA cycle (see clause 10.3—
Continual improvement).
• Comparison of situations, conditions, or results before and after the change allows a 
gap analysis, which shows the level and scope of the change. It allows the responsible 
team to revisit the existing state against the initial state and to ensure that the rear-
rangement in fact meets its expected objectives and resolves the issues discovered in 
the analysis stage.
Two practical suggestions are to introduce changes to the controls for addressing 
risks and opportunities (see chapter 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities, 
paragraph Actions to address Risks and Opportunities) or to submit the changes to 
the PDCA cycle (continual improvement—see clause 10.3).
 

99
Planning
Ensuring the Integrity of the Quality Management System during Changes
As mentioned earlier, changes may occur in different QMS elements. When imple-
menting a change, there is always a risk that the integrity of the QMS is not be pre-
served or is affected. Controlling the integrity of the QMS is critical for the continuity 
of the QMS. Ensuring the integrity means ensuring that after the change,
• Needs and expectations of interested parties are still maintained
• Quality objective are still met
• Interaction between processes and QMS elements and the exchange of inputs and 
outputs are not disrupted or broken
• Resources are not negatively affected
• Availability of the information is maintained
• Performance of processes, operations, and activities is not negatively affected
• The QMS is still effective
Ensuring the Availability of Resources
Changes may affect resources in the organization and their allocation. When plan-
ning a change, it is necessary to review its effect: would resources need to be replaced? 
Added? Protected? Upgraded? If the review shows that resources necessary for car-
rying out the change are not available, they must be provided. Which resources may 
be affected?
• Process environment
• Human resources and competence
• Knowledge
• Infrastructure
• Monitoring and measuring devices
Allocation or Reallocation of Responsibilities and Authorities
The organization should consider the allocation or reallocation of relevant responsi-
bilities and authorities when planning changes. Involving employees in the change 
is necessary to support and ensure the objectives of the change. The authorities must 
have an acquaintance with the processes, process output, or QMS elements related to 
the change that takes place and the area it affects. They must have the skills, quali-
fications, and knowledge to monitor and evaluate the progress of the change and 
its effectiveness. When training is required, it should be provided (with reference to 
clause 7.2—Competence).
These authorities could be the process owner of the relevant process, a manager, 
or an operator. The level of responsibility and involvement of each of the authorities 
depends on the scope and degree of the change. One person may serve as responsible 
and authorized at the same time when the organization finds it appropriate. The roles 
 

100
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
of these persons are to plan, implement, control, and improve the changes and to 
control their impact on other QMS elements. These authorities could be a person or a 
team, depending on the nature of the process or the change to be implemented.
Approving the Change
With the approval of a change at every stage before its implementation, you can 
ensure that the change has been identified, reviewed, understood, and planned. This 
surely makes a good impression during an audit. The approvals needed are as follows:
• Approval that the needed arrangements have been made
• Approval of the implementation of the change after the review of its implications
• Approval of the resources needed for the change
Assessing the Effectiveness of the Change
Although it is not explicitly required by the standard, I would consider actions for 
assessing the effectiveness of changes after they have been submitted for implementa-
tion. This is derived from the fact that a change is considered as an improvement and 
thus its effectiveness must be assessed. The effectiveness of a change refers to which 
extent its objectives have been achieved and indicates whether its purpose has been 
met. The effectiveness can be assessed through several aspects:
• Effectiveness of the planning of the change—assessing the effectiveness of planning 
meaning verifying that processes, operations, and activities have been implemented 
as planned.
• Effectiveness of processes and activities—assessing the effectiveness of processes and 
activities refers to the validation of performance of those processes and activities.
Implementing a Change
After the identification, understanding, planning, and approval of the changes, it is 
time to implement them. One option is to plan a designated process or an activity for 
implementing them in the QMS with all the necessary requirements. Another option 
is to decide that the changes should be treated as an improvement or handling of 
nonconformity and to submit to the controls suggested in clause 10—Improvement.
 

101
7 Support
7.1  Resources
Resources are one of the foundation stones of the quality management system (QMS) 
and, therefore, must be defined, managed, and controlled. The ISO 9001 Standard 
refers to four kinds of resources: human resources (people), knowledge, processes 
environment, and infrastructures. Resources are responsible for critical areas and 
scopes of the realization processes. Therefore, their appropriate definition and con-
trol are expected.
Resources are regarded as support tools for the QMS to meet the organization’s 
goals. Emphasis is given to the implications of not conforming to the management’s 
requirements. This means that the determination and definition of the resources 
must be aligned with the objectives of the QMS. The resources must be competent. 
Competence must be evaluated. In order to evaluate something, you need to have a 
scale of measurement. In other words, the standard expects you to be able to measure 
the compatibility of your resources to the expectations of the QMS. Furthermore, 
outsourced activities are regarded as external resources that must be defined and, 
subsequently, controlled.
7.1.1  General
Let us review the ISO 9001 requirements:
• The organization shall identify, determine, and define the required resources needed 
for establishing, designing, implementing, maintaining, and improving a QMS.
• The organization shall provide these resources.
• While doing so, the organization shall assess
• Its current process capabilities
• Its professional and organizational abilities and constraints
• The conditions that limit the organization
 
This assessment will indicate whether the organization is able to provide these 
resources or not
• The organization shall decide which resources will be provided internally and which 
will be provided by external providers.

102
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Determining the Resources for the QMS
Clause 7.1.1 (General) is regarded as clarification of the requirements regarding the 
provision of resources required for the realization of goods or services.
The manufacturer of a product or service is expected to analyze its needs for 
resources while considering certain organizational aspects. In other words, to 
sit, think, and examine which resources they need in order to produce the prod-
uct according to the expectations, which resources are available, how can they be 
deployed, and what are the limitations of its resources. The standard presents prin-
ciples to help us determine effectively the resources that will support the organization 
or service provider:
• Requirements: The resources are to support the organization in meeting customer 
and regulatory requirements.
• Quality policy: A correlation between the resources and the quality policy is 
essential. In the quality policy, the nature of the organization and its processes is 
determined, there is a commitment to meet customers’ as well as regulatory require-
ments, quality objectives (or principles for their determination) are set, and scope of 
activity is determined. Now, it is time to identify the necessary resources.
• Quality objectives: The defined resources must support the achievement of quality 
objectives.
• Realization processes: Processes are a crucial constituent for realizing goods 
or services. The processes determine the amount, extent, and complexity of the 
resources.
• Improvement: The resources are to support activities necessary to achieve improve-
ment of the QMS.
These are strategic aspects of the QMS. The standard expects specification of what 
resources are needed to assist and support in achieving these strategic aspects. The 
following types of resources are considered:
• Human resources
• Infrastructures
• Process (work) environment
• Tools and equipment
• Information systems
• Suppliers and partners
• Natural resources
• Financial resources
Review of Resources with Reference to Capabilities and Constraints
The resources of an organization enable its capabilities for maintaining the QMS; 
how the resources affect those professional capabilities and abilities of the organi-
zation. Constraint (internal or external) refers to those conditions under which the 
organization is active, that limits the organization, and that may prevent the orga-
nization from achieving its goals. An example of an internal constraint is the num-
ber of machines the organization deploys. An example of an external constraint is a 
 

103
Support
regulatory requirement that impels the organization to execute certain actions. The 
capabilities and constraints to be considered are
• Professional
• Financial
• Technological
• Regulatory
Reviewing those capabilities and constraints will indicate which resources are needed, 
which are available, and which activities are to be performed by external providers. 
The results of the review may serve as inputs for the management review and for the 
planning of the quality objectives (clause 9.3—Management review).
In practice (although documentation is not required), I would integrate this 
review in the method for documenting the processes of the QMS (part of the process 
approach) as required in clause 4.4—Quality management system and its processes.
Providing Resources for Improvement and Innovation
When planning activities for improvement (clause 10), the organization shall review 
and determine which resources are required for achieving the goals of the improve-
ment. Activities such as identifying the need for improvement, analysis of data, plan-
ning changes, and risk identification will determine the required resources such as 
knowledge, competence, infrastructures, and tools.
Assessing Future Resources
When reviewing the required resources, the organization must assess the need for 
future resources, including the needed competence of persons who will take part in 
the future plans. The assessment shall be based on an analysis of trends and future 
planning of the organization (remember SWOT and PEST analysis?). In other words, 
when you are planning something, whether it is an improvement, removal of a risk, 
or the development of an opportunity or a new product, refer to the requirement 
of the resources. This reference shall consider all five aspects: requirements for the 
QMS, quality policy, quality objectives, realization processes, and improvement.
Documenting the Resources
There is no explicit requirement for documentation of resources—you are not required to 
deliver a controlled list of your resources. The requirements for determination, definition, 
and documentation hide beneath the various standard requirements and are needed in 
order to answer other standard requirements. When thinking about it, the QMS includes 
many definitions and determinations of resources in various places and forms: quality plan, 
standard operating procedures (SOPs), work instructions, test instructions, user manuals, 
forms, and maintenance plans, where you mention and refer to relevant resources; just add 
a paragraph named “required resources.” The quality plan is a good example; the plan must 
include references to required conditions necessary for the realization of the  product—
among them, necessary resources. Thus, the documentation of the needed resources. 
We will deal with the details while discussing chapter 8.1—Operational planning process.
 

104
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
7.1.2  People
The ISO 9001 Standard requirement is as follows:
• The organization is required to determine and provide personnel necessary for the 
effective implementation, operation, and control of its quality management system 
and its processes.
Human resource has a significant weight and effect on the realization processes. In 
order to verify and validate the determination and deployment of suitable human 
resources when planning a QMS, the ISO 9001 Standard requires identifying specific 
requirements for certain personnel or functions related to its QMS and the realiza-
tion of the product. Which kind of requirements can we expect?
• Regulatory requirements
• Business requirements
In order to verify this, it is required first to define the following:
• Which are the functions or roles necessary for the operation of the QMS?
• Which qualifications do those functions or roles require?
• What are the necessary evidences?
Specific requirements and how to answer them will be discussed in detail in 
 chapter 7.2—Competence. In order to cover this requirement (7.1.2), I recommend 
the following:
• On the quality policy, mention that all requirements for human resources are 
reviewed, identified, and allocated, and add a reference to the organizational dia-
gram or any other documented information where all the functions of the organiza-
tion are described.
• If you do have specific requirements for human resources, add reference on the doc-
umented information of your processes.
• If you need another type of documentation, you may use the job description.
In this way, you can prove that all the requirements were reviewed and people required 
for the realization of the product were identified and allocated.
7.1.3  Infrastructure
Infrastructures are the stock of the basic facilities and equipment needed for real-
izing a product or providing a service. Infrastructures should provide the suitable 
conditions and accessories to perform the appropriate business tasks and activities 
and assist in achieving the desired conformity of product and service requirements. 
Thus, it is strongly related to the product or service and has a direct effect on their 
quality. The basic goal of the organization is to ensure the provision, availability, and 
 

105
Support
sustainability of infrastructures. Infrastructures include all the means, applications, 
interfaces, and facilities necessary for the realization of products or services from the 
design stages through its delivery and post-delivery activities. Let us take a look at the 
ISO 9001 requirements regarding infrastructures:
• The organization shall identify, determine, and define infrastructures necessary for
• Effective operation of the QMS
• The realization of products or services
• Meeting customer requirements
• Enhancing customer satisfaction
• Infrastructures include all applicable facilities that participate in the realization of 
the product: buildings, work spaces, tools, equipment, machinery, and associated 
utilities necessary for the realization of the processes.
• The provision of infrastructures shall include the resources and the necessary 
 services needed to support and operate them: transport, maintenance, communica-
tion, and information systems.
In general, the requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard are to ensure the availability of 
appropriate infrastructures throughout the realization processes. However, besides the 
provision of the infrastructures, the manufacturer is required to maintain and take care 
of them in order to ensure appropriate operation of processes and to avoid the prob-
ability of nonconformities. Maintenance of the infrastructures is a necessary precondi-
tion for the preservation of processes’ long-term capability, to ensure reproducibility of 
processes, and to guarantee the achievement of the product requirements. And what 
better way to reach such quality management goals than to identify, plan, and control. 
The control over the infrastructures shall reach all levels of process support. According 
to this basic rule, even equipment whose failure might not harm or affect the product 
directly, but will affect, for example, the organization’s ability to supply the product on 
schedule, a customer requirement, must be controlled and maintained.
Identification of Infrastructures as Process Equipment
What is infrastructure? Infrastructure is a structure that provides a framework that 
supports the operation of a system. In our case, structures that enable the realization 
of products or services. For example, a production hall enables the manufacturing of 
a product, a communication system at a call center enables the provision of services, 
a warehouse enables the storage of goods, and a CRM system enables data manage-
ment of customers. According to the ISO 9001 Standard, infrastructures include soft-
ware (the collection of functions and programs that provide instructions for a unit 
for the operation of activities) as well as hardware (the physical layout of components 
or parts of a system). Internet is a good example; the Internet infrastructure includes 
the telephone lines, the television cables, the routers, aggregators, and repeaters that 
channel the information that goes through the net, but also all software used to 
operate and manage the different Internet subsystems. In other words, the standard 
makes it clear that both areas are included under the definition of infrastructures, the 
virtual as well as the material. The definition includes services that support software 
and hardware and assist them in meeting the specifications.
 

106
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The first stage in initiating the control will be the identification of infrastructures 
relevant to the realization of the product or service. The objective is focusing only on 
infrastructures that support directly or indirectly the realization processes. I suggest 
here an effective way for identifying the relevant infrastructures:
• In the first step, you are to review the main process and its subprocesses that 
are related to the realization and are included under the QMS: capture of cus-
tomer requirements, planning of products and operations, purchase of goods 
or services, acceptance of goods and services, storage, transportation through 
various phases of the material flow, and manufacturing and delivery activi-
ties to the end customer. The review is part of the application of the process 
approach and should provide you with a long list of processes and activities that 
use infrastructures.
• The next step will be to map and list all the infrastructures that are being used for 
these operations and activities. Customers, as well as national or regional regula-
tions, may set requirements for infrastructures. This listing is very important to the 
later planning of the maintenance activities and prevention measures.
• Next you will analyze the relations between the processes and the infrastructures 
and indicate which parameters may affect the processes and quality of the product. 
Significance will be given to the effect of an infrastructure on a given process, and 
this is measured on various levels: process parameters, elements of infrastructure, 
operators and responsibilities, and stage of process. This is the time to ask your-
self the next question: How can infrastructures adversely affect process parameters, 
goods or service characteristics, and expected outcomes?
The review may come up with various types of infrastructures:
• Basic infrastructures like water supply, air systems, and electricity
• Buildings, structures, work spaces, and halls
• Design and development work spaces and tools
• Storage facilities
• Working tools, equipment, accessories, and monitoring and measuring devices
• Production facilities and machinery
• Computers, information systems, record-keeping systems and servers, and process 
automation and management systems
• Means of transportation and distribution
• Communication channels
• Means of security and safety
IT, ERP systems, and other information systems are regarded as infrastructures. 
Consensus indicates that today’s IT systems are integral elements of the realization 
process; these systems process data, information, process characters, or parameters 
related to the realization of goods and services, and thus should be included under 
infrastructures.
Examples for infrastructures are ovens, sterilizers, computer systems, ERP sys-
tems, CRM systems, labs, clean room controllers, CAD systems, operators and phone 
systems, HVAC, printers and copiers, air compressors, industrial vehicles, normal 
 

107
Support
vehicles, forklifts, aisle pickers, lifts, motorized pallet jacks, trucks, cranes, security 
and alarm systems, and filters.
In practice, the following table may serve as a tool for the analysis and determina-
tion of infrastructures:
Evaluation of Infrastructures
After determining the required infrastructures, we need to evaluate their suitability 
to the QMS. The evaluation shall be conducted with respect to quality objectives and 
quality planning. The goals of the evaluation are
• To ensure that the infrastructures are intact, sustainable, and stable
• To ensure that the infrastructures will support the organization in achieving quality 
targets and plans
• To verify that the infrastructures will not disturb the achievement of objectives or 
reduce the capability of processes
• To identify areas and ranges for control
• To determine which controls are needed
• When needed, to implement improvements or to update the infrastructures
The evaluation shall be conducted with six parameters:
 
1. Suitability: The quality of having the properties that are right for a specific purpose. 
This parameter evaluates how appropriate an infrastructure is to its final purpose 
and how much it can support this purpose.
 
2. Security: This parameter evaluates the ability of an infrastructure to guarantee that 
an expected outcome will be met.
 
3. Reliability: The quality of being worthy of reliance or trust. This parameter evalu-
ates whether an infrastructure is reliable while playing its role in the realization 
process.
 
4. Maintainability: The capability of being kept in good condition. This parameter 
evaluates how well can an infrastructure be maintained.
Process
Subprocess
Type
Related Infrastructure
Customer 
requirements
Determination of 
customer 
requirements
Communications
Operators and phone systems
Management of data
ERP system (customer master 
data module and order 
module)
Production
Packaging
Halls and buildings
Main storage
Preservation of 
product
Storage
Halls and buildings
Storage halls and environment 
controls
Delivery to the 
customer
Preparing goods 
for delivery
Equipment
Wrapping machine
 
Delivering goods 
to the customers
Means of transportation 
and distribution
Truck
 

108
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
 
5. Efficiency: The capability of the output to the input of any system. This parameter 
evaluates the results of an infrastructure with comparison to its objective.
 
6. Safety: The state of being certain that adverse effects will not be caused by using the 
infrastructures under defined conditions and controls the impact of the infrastruc-
ture on the work environment.
There is no requirement to include the evaluation of infrastructures in the  documented 
information but keeping records may assist you during audit in proving that you are 
conducting a methodic assessment of your infrastructures.
Effective evaluation may occur with the help of acceptance criteria: checklists that 
ensure specifications, allowable tolerances of equipment and machine performances, 
and user or supplier’s instructions. This will be performed as a kind of gap analysis 
between the requirements and the state of the infrastructures. The output of this activ-
ity will be the controls that are to be implemented in your infrastructure referring 
to required activities, responsibilities, and required tools, equipment, and intervals. 
Another option is to order an external evaluation that assesses your infrastructures. 
For example, a company that assesses the electrical network in the production halls. 
This is preferable because it will be an objective evaluation. The auditor would defi-
nitely appreciate it. The following matrix is a suggestion for a documented evaluation:
Parameter
Details
Measures
Required Controls
Suitability
How suitable is the 
machine for the 
production of 
product X?
Suitability is ensured 
because the product 
was designed to be 
manufactured on this 
machine
Records of test during 
development of the 
product
Reliability
How can we ensure that 
no collapse will occur 
during the activity of the 
machine?
Reliability is ensured 
through a weekly 
inspection of the 
elements of the 
machine
Periodical inspection plan
Security
How can we ensure that 
the products produced 
by the machine conform 
to specifications?
Security is ensured 
through regular control 
of machine outputs
Regular quality tests of 
machine outputs 
(products or parameters)
Maintainability
How can we ensure that 
the machine can be 
maintained?
The design and 
construction of the 
machine allows a 
periodical maintenance
Periodical
inspection plan
Efficiency
How can we ensure that 
the machine will 
produce according to 
planned results?
A periodical inspection 
of the machine ensures 
that the efficiency is 
controlled
Periodical inspection plan
Regular quality tests of 
machine outputs 
(products or parameters)
Safety
How can we ensure that 
the machine will avoid 
disruptions or failures?
Safety measures applied 
to ensure the 
appropriate function of 
the machine
Periodical inspection of 
safety
 

109
Support
If certain infrastructures require no maintenance activities, mention it on the 
 evaluation: such infrastructures were identified and evaluated, and it was determined 
that no maintenance is necessary.
Integration of Risk Analysis and Safety Measures
The use of the infrastructures throughout the realization processes may pose risks 
to the users as well as to the products. Such risks will be identified and evaluated for 
their impact on the expected results. Risks may appear as
• Process failures
• Risks to human resources
• Harm to the product
• Deviation from expected results
When such risks are identified, proper controls and prevention measures will be 
applied. For example, machine start-up must be carried out according to manufactur-
ers’ instructions. Failure to follow these instructions may lead to production faults. 
Risks like this must be identified and appropriate controls are to be applied at the 
appropriate process stages. Risks to human resources are to be referred to as well. An 
out-of-the-ordinary example that cost me a note in an external audit was an ordinary 
ladder; during one of my external audits, the auditor demanded to see records indi-
cating that a ladder was safe for use (?!). To tell the truth, it never crossed my mind 
to examine the ladder. But in fact this ladder was used daily to fill the machine with 
material and required a yearly maintenance according to the manufacturer’s specifica-
tions (oiling and fastening of screws). Imagine that. But a ladder is a simple infrastruc-
ture. What about machines, electro systems, cranes, conveyor belts, forklifts, etc.?
Outputs of this risk analysis may be used as inputs for the required actions 
for addressing risks and opportunities as requested in clause 6.1 of the ISO 9001 
Standard: Actions to address risks and opportunities. Each type of infrastructure can 
be reviewed according to the following discipline:
• The relevant risks must be identified.
• The impact of risks on the expected outcomes must be evaluated.
• The actions necessary for avoiding and reducing these risks must be planned and 
implemented.
• The effectiveness of these actions must be evaluated.
The necessary controls and preventions may be integrated into the maintenance activ-
ities. A plan for a solution of a problem related to the infrastructures is not required 
but may be implemented in the organization. The purpose of the plan is to define for 
the relevant parties or employees in different areas or departments what is to be done 
in case of a quality problem or failure concerning the infrastructures. The plan will 
refer to different aspects of the realization process—production, quality, storage, and 
distribution—and will provide details and instructions according to the case. Such a 
plan will be available at the workstations of the appropriate employees.
Here is a suggestion for such a plan (Figure 7.1):
 

110
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Implementing a Maintenance Plan
Before I start: there is no requirement for documented information regarding infra-
structures. However, I propose here a plan for maintenance. Such a plan will assist 
you in fulfilling the standard requirements and will help in time of need—the need 
to investigate a failure. The concept is simple—any type of infrastructure that has a 
risk of failure, which may affect the integrity and quality of products or services as 
well as customer and regulatory requirements, will be submitted systematically for 
 maintenance and prevention. The plan shall include definitions of responsibilities, 
maintenance activities, and prevention measures concerning the infrastructures. 
The plan will cover the following issues:
• The infrastructures required for control and maintenance will be identified and 
documented: machines, tools, systems, computers, servers, forklifts, and cranes. 
An identification method will be planned in order to identify infrastructures 
in a unique way: a number or a tag. The identification shall be visible on the 
infrastructure and will allow the responsible party to identify it during use and 
operation.
• Determination of maintenance activities and tasks including the definitions of 
intervals according to the specifications of the infrastructures will be done as a plan. 
The requirements and activities shall ensure stability of the infrastructure and the 
reproducibility of its processes over the long term. If water is supplied to the process, 
Machine malfunction 
during production 
In case the problem is not 
solved check user manual
In case the problem is not 
solved contact shift foreman
In case the problem is not 
solved contact production 
manager—see contact list
Check checklist for production 
malfunctions
Form number xx-xxx-999
Solution to the 
problem
Figure 7.1 A suggestion for a problem-solution plan.
 

111
Support
periodical inspection of the water system is required to be planned (not the quality 
of water but the system that is delivering it).
• Assignment of responsibilities of appropriate functions and roles for actions and 
tasks will be determined.
• The plan shall refer to the allocation of necessary resources: services, spare parts, 
special tools and equipment, materials such as oils or lubricants, and external main-
tenance services.
• Necessary documents such as user manuals, technical instructions, technical 
schemes, or drawings shall be mentioned, including their location and availability.
• Inspections, controls, and examinations of the infrastructures will be planned and 
documented. These controls will verify that the activities are performed and vali-
date (when needed) the results. When applicable, acceptance criteria will be defined. 
For example, specifications of machine or equipment provided by the manufacturer 
may serve as acceptance criteria for the comparison with the test results.
• The plan will initiate prevention measures through the identification of risks and 
the application of appropriate controls.
• When repair is required, it will be documented and revalidated.
• Required records and evidence indicating that maintenance activities and preven-
tions that were performed and controlled will be defined.
As mentioned earlier, a suitable function or responsibility for maintenance and con-
trol will be assigned to each infrastructure. The documentation shall identify which 
department is responsible for which infrastructure elements (at either the corporate 
or site level):
• The IT department is responsible for all computers, IT networks, databases (includ-
ing backup services and computer security), e-mail servers, program licenses and 
updates, antivirus software, user applications and passwords, interfaces between 
systems, etc.
• Maintenance is responsible for water infrastructures, forklifts, fire control equip-
ment, electrical infrastructures, natural gas, transportation, HVAC, landscaping, 
grounds maintenance, pest control, disposal of waste, and recycling.
• Environmental health and safety is responsible for environmental issues and safety 
equipment related to the different areas in the organization.
• When the responsibility lies with a supplier, the activities will be defined, a respon-
sible party will be appointed in order to evaluate the supplier’s activities, and the 
supplier is obligated to provide you with the necessary recorded evidence.
• When distributors are required to maintain certain infrastructures or conditions, 
they will provide the organization with the appropriate evidence for these conditions.
The matter shall not be limited to the appointment of a maintenance person, electri-
cian, or IT department but will spread down to the level of all employees using the 
infrastructures. For example, it will be defined for production employees how they 
shall safely use the infrastructures and what is required to be done at the end of each 
working day or job: turning off systems, cleaning instructions, daily maintenance, etc. 
The matter shall be integrated in the training program. Documentations may appear 
on a procedure (although this is not required), a form, a table, or a designated main-
tenance plan—whatever suits your organization and the nature of its infrastructures.
 

112
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Please take a look at the next two tables. They depict the steps described earlier:
Here’s a suggested maintenance plan for a machine:
Here’s a suggested list of maintenance activities:
However, today there are qualified information systems that provide you with the 
required planning of activities and follow-ups. Most of today’s ERP systems provide 
such a maintenance module. It may be that your supplier has already planned a main-
tenance plan and provides it.
7.1.4  Environment for the Operation of Processes
The environment for the operation of processes (in the ISO 9001:2008 Standard 
identified as work environment) consists of the premises, sites, and locations where 
Internal Machine No.:
10
20
30
Manufacturer:
xxx
yyy
zzz
Type of machine:
aaa-bbb
aaa-bbb
aaa-ccc
Daily inspection and maintenance
Hydraulic power unit
x
x
x
Safety devices
x
x
 
Pneumatic facilities
x
x
x
Automatic central lubrication
x
 
x
Lamps and signals
x
 
x
Order and cleanliness
x
x
x
Weekly inspection and maintenance
Programming unit
x
x
x
Fan filter
x
x
x
Daily Inspection and Maintenance
Internal Machine No.:
10
Manufacturer:
xxx
Type of machine:
aaa-bbb
 
Date
Name
Signature
Remarks
1
Hydraulic power unit
 
 
 
 
2
Safety devices
 
 
 
 
3
Pneumatic facilities
 
 
 
 
4
Automatic central lubrication
 
 
 
 
5
Lamps and signals
 
 
 
 
6
Order and cleanliness
 
 
 
 
 

113
Support
process-related activities (by employees or not) are being carried. I will refer to it 
from now on as “process environment.” The process environment is supposed to pro-
vide the manufacturer or service provider with the optimal conditions for the real-
ization processes and thus has a direct effect on products or services. The process 
environment includes not only the physical locations, but also the influence of equip-
ment or materials used during the realization processes. The goal of controlling the 
process environment is to determine, define, direct, monitor, regulate, coordinate, 
and, when necessary, document the conditions of the process environment. It will 
be done by introducing the environment to predefined activities and controls. The 
activities cover specific areas, and their parameters are confined to specified limits 
or definitions.
The determination of process environment condition influences the characteriza-
tion of tools, infrastructures, equipment, and human resources related to the realiza-
tion processes. These elements are required to be synchronized in order to provide 
optimal qualifications to the process environment. Let us review the ISO 9001 
Standard requirements for process environment:
• Process environment supports operations and activities related to the realization 
processes.
• Process environment shall ensure the provision of appropriate conditions required 
for the conformity of products, services, and customer satisfaction.
• Organizations will define, officially decide, make available, maintain, and preserve 
from failure or decline the process environment necessary for its operations.
• Parameters that influence process environment may include factors that affect the 
environment: temperature, recognition schemes, ergonomics, and atmospheric 
composition. Such factors may be social, psychological, or environmental.
• Besides the physical spaces or locations, social, psychological, and physical condi-
tions are considered as process environment.
Environment for the operation of processes is the collection and integration of differ-
ent conditions and influences (environmental, physical, ambient, and psychological) 
under which work and processes are carried out and that affect the process—a series 
of actions that realize or support the realization of goods and services. The environ-
ment is composed of
• The circumstances, objects, or conditions by which a process is carried out and pro-
cess elements such as resources or outputs are surrounded
• The complex of physical, chemical, and biotic factors that surround a process and its 
elements such as resources or outputs
• The collection of social and cultural conditions that influence a process and its 
 elements such as human resources
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements refer to all areas, spaces, and halls that serve 
the organization for operation and realization of products or services. These condi-
tions are included under the following categories: physical elements of work spaces, 
factors that may influence the processes and activities, and resources that are 
 

114
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
necessary or operate activities in the work spaces. These three are measured using 
three parameters:
 
1. The ability of activities and operations to achieve expected results and product 
requirements according to customer satisfaction and regulatory requirements
 
2. The ability of the process environment to support the resources that operate busi-
ness activities
 
3. The ability of the process environment to support the safety of products—the condi-
tions of protection against consequences of failure, damage, error, accidents, harm, 
or any other event that could be considered as nonconformity
These will ensure conformity of products and services and customer satisfaction.
Processes Environment versus Infrastructure
Before we start to specifically decipher the requirements, I would like to start with 
distinguishing between infrastructure and process environment. When infra-
structures include machines, the process environment is the area around the 
machine that is needed to realize products: a place for the worker to operate the 
machine, lighting above his head, the noise around the workstations that may affect 
the worker, and the area where the process outputs are being kept. Maintaining 
and controlling an infrastructure would require a periodic control plan—in our 
example a maintenance plan for the machine. Maintaining the process environ-
ment would require a control that certain conditions are being achieved—periodic 
inspection around the machine: cleanliness of the work space, sufficient lightning, 
appropriate storage conditions, and safe work environment. When infrastructures 
include storage halls, the process environment considers the conditions in which 
the goods are stored in these halls: temperature, humidity, safety, etc. Maintaining 
and controlling the storage halls as infrastructure will require building mainte-
nance or electrical maintenance activities—ensuring that the building would not 
collapse. This would also require an environmental control system of temperature 
and humidity as well as an alarm system for the provision of safety. Examples of 
processes environments and spaces include laboratories, logistic centers, ware-
houses, clean rooms, production halls, stores, loading areas, meeting rooms, dress-
ing rooms, and offices.
Definition and Determination of Process Environment
Defining the necessary conditions and applying the controls for process environ-
ment must cover all different areas and scopes of the realization processes. For 
example, storage of raw materials, parts, and components; aisles for transportation 
between departments and areas; manufacturing; and production halls for manu-
facturing and assembly activities. In order to reach and identify all the elements of 
process environment that may affect the goods, services, personnel, or processes, it 
is necessary to conduct a review, analysis, and assessment of all realization activities 
and processes and their outputs. The objective of the review is to understand the 
 

115
Support
relationship between the product, personnel, and the environment in which they 
interact. This review of activities will be conducted as follows:
• Analysis of all employees’ activities. The output is a list of all activities that are sup-
ported by work environment.
• In the next step, you will analyze behavior in and around workplaces or worksta-
tions. This is required in order to understand how the environment may affect activ-
ities and eventually the goods or the services.
• Now after understanding what influences are relevant to the process and may 
affect its outputs, you may define for each environment the conditions that must be 
controlled.
• In the next stage, you will define the necessary controls  and the behavior around 
the work environment.
Another important aspect is the influence that environment conditions have directly 
on the products or services. The objective is to study the status of the goods and to 
examine which conditions may affect them and how they are integrated or influence 
the process environment. This aspect will be reviewed as follows:
• Sample of process output (a semifinished product, a subassembly, a product or a record 
of a service). The sampling will occur at various locations and stages of the realization.
• Examination of the product’s characteristics and understanding the relation 
between them and the environment in which they are kept. The examination will 
recognize the environmental condition that may affect the products or the services.
• In the next step, you will define the controls necessary for the provision and main-
tenance of these conditions.
There is no requirement for the documentation of the reviews mentioned here. But 
their output will serve as inputs to the quality plan.
Review and Evaluation of Risks Related to the Process Environment
Process environment may cause a failure in the product when the required  conditions are 
not provided and maintained. Actions necessary for addressing risks are referred in the 
ISO 9001 Standard in clause 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities. Let us dis-
cuss the principles in order to understand the effect of risk on the  process environment.
The principle of risk management is evaluating situations that may set hazards to 
the realization of products and services at certain points, evaluating their degree, set-
ting controls and measures for eliminating or reducing the hazards, and evaluating 
the effectiveness of these controls. Outputs of the risk review and evaluation shall be 
integrated in the planning actions for control of the process environment. I suggest 
here a sequence for identifying the related risks of the process environment:
• In the first step, try to identify the relation between the product and its surrounding 
environment. You must identify those elements of the environment that may affect 
the product and its quality.
• Then you must assess its extent and impact on the product; when the extent might 
pose a hazard or prevent you from delivering a conforming product, it is a risk.
 

116
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• After identifying the risks for each element of the environment, you must find out 
which parameters in the environment must be controlled in order to alert you when 
risks emerge.
• When the parameters are known and clear, you may start to plan the appropriate 
controls and eventually implement them. The control must be proportionate to the 
extent and potential affect that the risks have on the intended outcomes.
Example: In the food industry, it is required to maintain a level of cleanliness in the 
production halls. Thus, the set of actions and controls are defined and implemented—
from dress codes, where personnel must wear certain clothing items, to behavior pro-
cedures around production areas and automatic systems that control the environment.
While reviewing risks related to the process environment, you should cover the dif-
ferent aspects of the relation between the product and its surrounding environment:
• The identification of process environment conditions that may harm or endanger 
products, its components, parts, or materials. When referring to services— conditions 
in the work environment that may lead to the delivery of poor-quality service.
• Reference to factors and characteristics of the product that might influence or con-
taminate the process environment, such as emissions of toxic materials or the effects 
of products with an expiration date on the environment.
• Reference to the effects and results of disposal of the products on the environment.
• Reference to the influence of the process environment on the package of the prod-
ucts and its integrity.
Regulatory Requirements
Local, national, or international regulatory requirements may demand the establishment 
and maintenance of specific controls of your process environment. When such regula-
tions are applicable and required, they are to be included in the planning of the controls. 
Try to review and identify under what relevant regulations you are realizing your product.
Conduct and Behavior of Personnel around the Work Environment
One of the most critical elements that affect the conditions of the work environment is 
the conduct and behavior of human resources. False actions may have adverse effects on 
goods or services. In order to promote employees’ awareness of the issue, the organiza-
tion must initiate actions and controls that will avoid such situations. In order to identify 
the activities and actions that may affect the conditions, the organization must identify 
all the roles and functions that have influence on the work environment on two levels: 
contact with the product and operation of realization processes and contact with the pro-
cess environment elements that may affect its conditions. Functions and roles from all 
the realization processes shall be reviewed: production, transportation, storage, quality, 
service, maintenance, and cleaning. For each role or function identified, the following 
points will be addressed:
• When certain accessories are necessary for the maintenance of the process environ-
ment conditions, they will be provided. For example, dressing—clothing, gloves, 
hats, gowns.
 

117
Support
• Work activities will be analyzed in order to verify that they are not creating a situa-
tion where the process environment is at risk.
• A set of activities and actions will be planned and defined to ensure that work-
ers’ behavior is appropriate around the workstations and their conditions are 
maintained. For example, during manufacturing processes, it is required to define 
how one shall handle the surroundings around the machines during and after any 
 processes—material handling, cleaning requirements, and order requirements.
• If needed, the appropriate documentation and instructions necessary for the main-
tenance of conditions will be established: instructions for behavior in the work envi-
ronment, dress code, cleaning instructions, and identification of nonconformities 
or potential situations that may create nonconformities. “If needed” means that you 
evaluated the environment and decided that for this particular environment docu-
mentation is needed in order to verify that conditions will be met.
After the identification of all relevant roles and functions, it is now time to define their 
training needs regarding the process environment. These needs will be integrated 
into the qualification and certification process of employees, and will be included in 
the training plan according to the specifications of clause 7.2—Competence.
Authorization and Access
In some cases, the safety of the work environment may be achieved by defining 
instructions for authorization and access to the work environment, sites, and loca-
tions: who is authorized and who has restricted access to or use of certain areas. The 
matter applies to external as well as internal users. External users may be customers, 
suppliers, auditors, or even employees from other departments.
For example, regarding manufacturing halls, the manufacturer may define who is 
authorized to go into the halls and who is not. Otherwise, you may find unwelcome 
guests. And when unwelcome guests are found, it should be defined what is to be 
done in order to verify that the defined conditions for the realization are still applied. 
The types of persons who could be moving around the facilities include the following:
• Internal: Manufacturing personnel, supervisors and productions managers, mate-
rial handlers, storage workers, design engineers, quality control or assurance, man-
agement and administration, and service and maintenance personnel
• External: Suppliers, service providers, subcontractors, visitors, auditors, and customers
In order to manage authorization and access effectively, you may define and imple-
ment a method. A good example is an authorization system—a system that is nor-
mally implanted in the premises of the organization. Such a system manages the 
access of certain personnel to certain areas.
Setting Parameters for Control over the Work Environment
We reviewed and understood the different elements that may affect the process 
environment:
• We distinguished the process environment from the infrastructures.
• We have identified elements of process environment that are to be controlled.
 

118
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• We have discussed the integration of the different inputs related to the process envi-
ronment (risks, regulations, authorization).
• We have set the requirements for the human resources conduct and behavior in the 
process environment.
Now we need to discuss the crucial conditions that are needed to be controlled, which 
parameters are to be controlled, and how. These conditions are supposed to preserve the 
product, its functionality, its safety, and eliminate failures that may result in an adverse 
effect on the product. These conditions are derived directly from the  characters and type 
of the product and will be controlled and verified through parameters that affect them.
Environmental conditions are the definitions of several parameters creating a situa-
tion or a status in a certain location to which the product and the workers are exposed. 
During the realization and through processes and activities, the product is subjected 
to various conditional stresses that may affect it. We need to identify these and control 
them. Determination of the conditions allows you to detect in advance which activi-
ties or lack of activities may create unwanted conditions that increase the probability 
of no conformity. For example, insufficient lighting in a production hall may affect 
the ability of employees to detect defects during production. As another example, for 
electronic components, levels of static electricity are harmful and it is very important 
to provide an environment free of electrostatic discharge. When such parameters are 
applicable to your organization, you will need to plan the suitable controls.
I would start by evaluating process environment conditions that may affect the 
product and its characteristics or employees that operate a process. The evaluation 
will cover the entire supply chain from the storage activities of raw materials and 
parts until the storage of finished goods. The evaluation shall detect extreme condi-
tions that the products may be exposed to:
• Examples of environmental conditions that may affect product include air quality, 
aerosols, vacuum and pressure changes, temperature and humidity, magnetic fields, 
external electrical influences, electrostatic discharge, clinical storage requirements, 
dust and particles, and ESD (for electronic components).
• Examples for conditions that may affect employees include lighting, noise, tempera-
ture, safety, acoustic conditions, and work space layouts.
I suggest here a method for analysis:
• Review all the environmental inputs and requirements such as product, packaging 
requirements, human resource, and risks.
• List all the related processes and activities.
• Examine the flaws of the material throughout the realization processes and inspect 
all the outputs of the processes.
• Involve all the participants of the processes in order to cover all aspects and receive 
all the needed information.
• Determine at each phase what the required conditions for the process environment are.
• Plan and implement tools that will record the status of the conditions.
• Control the conditions through analysis.
• Maintain documented information of the process when you find it necessary.
 

119
Support
The tool for the records of the condition should collect data regarding the process envi-
ronment during the realization stages. It can be a form that an employee fills up or it can 
be a sensor that writes data every second of the day on a big screen with a beautiful graphic 
interface with lots of greens and reds. The function is exactly the same; data regarding the 
condition—good or bad—are collected and analyzed. The extent of the control will be 
set according to the potential effects that a condition has on the product or service. In 
other words, if failure to achieve the required conditions causes nonconformity or lacks 
in terms of customer requirements, the degree of control will need to be higher.
Defining and Planning the Controls
After understanding the requirements regarding process environment, identifying, 
and determining what the relevant process environments are and understanding the 
relations between the realization of goods or services and the process environment, 
it is time to set the appropriate controls. The objective of the controls is to ensure that 
all optimal conditions are being achieved while realizing goods or services. When 
setting the controls, you should refer to the following issues:
• When measurable conditions are controlled, like temperature or humidity, you may 
need to define acceptance criteria. The criteria will relate to the fluctuations of these 
parameters and to limits and tolerances.
• In some cases, it will be necessary to integrate the controls of the parameters in the 
validations of the product’s provision (as required in clause 8.5.1) in order to prove 
that the process environment’s conditions were as required during processes. For 
example, in sterilization and cleaning processes, it is necessary to ensure that 
environmental conditions at the manufacturing site achieve predefined criteria. 
This is one of the process validations. Through the control of these parameters it 
can be guaranteed that products were produced and packaged in a qualified, con-
trolled environment. Other examples of environmental parameters, indicators, 
and controls are cleanliness of work surfaces, air filtration, pressure, and airflow.
• Psychological effects play an important role in the process environment. Agronomic 
and psychological factors affect the human resources and may prevent them from 
operating the process as expected. For example, long-term exposure to noise may 
result in distractions and disturbances, and certain shades of light may result in 
false identification of nonconformities. Such distractions may lead to inattention to 
the process. If preventions or accessories for these matters and issues are necessary, 
the controls will verify their availability.
• Environment conditions that may affect the packaging are to be taken into account. 
Here, I refer to conditions that may affect the integrity and quality of the package. 
For example, high temperatures may affect the material the package is made of and 
reduce its withstanding quality or even harm it.
• The use of tools and equipment necessary for the control shall be specified. The 
specification shall relate to safety measures of the environment as well as the per-
sonnel that operate it.
• When controls of the process environment are required by distributors of the goods, 
the requirements shall be communicated to them and they will implement them. 
The supplier is required to prove to you that these controls were implemented.
 

120
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The next stage is determining the means and tools with which you will implement 
these controls and measure these parameters:
• Control devices—monitoring tools, sensors, particle counters, devices to measure 
temperature and humidity, and gas filters
• Instructions—work instructions, procedures, checklists, forms, and environmental 
review instructions
• Tests—the verifications and validations that the parameters were measured 
 according to the definitions and that the required conditions were achieved through 
demonstration of results
The instruments for control will be planned to support and provide appropriate data 
regarding the conditions and in proportion to their potential effect on the product. 
For example, it is not enough to set a work instruction at the workstations; it is also 
required to verify that the relevant parties are aware of it and practicing it.
7.1.5  Monitoring and Measuring Resources
Monitoring and measuring resources are considered by the ISO 9001 Standard as key 
process elements of the realization process; measurements and monitoring activities 
are required to ensure that products meet specifications. The goals of controlling the 
monitoring and measuring devices are
• To control the monitoring and measuring devices
• To ensure that measurement and monitoring activities are planned according to 
requirements and are performed respectively
As always, we will begin with reviewing the ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
7.1.5.1  General
• The organization will define, officially decide, make available, maintain, and pre-
serve from failure or decline monitoring and measuring devices that are necessary 
for its operations and needed to verify conformity of process outputs to product 
requirements.
• The organization shall ensure that the monitoring and measuring devices are suit-
able and acceptable for their use activities and purpose.
• The organization will maintain the monitoring and measuring devices to ensure 
their continuing fitness for their purpose.
• The organization shall retain documented information as evidence, which shows 
that monitoring and measuring devices are fit for their purpose.
7.1.5.2  Measurement Traceability
• When traceability of measurements is a requirement or is considered by the orga-
nization as significant for proving confidence of measurements results, monitoring 
and measuring devices shall be calibrated or verified (or both) prior to their use.
• Calibration and verification shall take place at specific predefined intervals.
 

121
Support
• The calibration will be traceable to national or international standard measure-
ments. In cases where such standards do not exist or are not applicable, the cali-
bration and the basis for the calibration process (physical or calculating) shall be 
defined, justified, and recorded by the organization.
• Each of the monitoring and measuring devices shall be identified in order to deter-
mine the calibration status, validity, and intactness.
• The monitoring and measuring devices shall be safeguarded and protected in order 
to eliminate any situations or conditions that would invalidate them.
• When a monitoring and measuring device is found inappropriate for use, its calibra-
tion proves to be inaccurate, and measurement results has been adversely affected, 
the organization shall evaluate the validity of the accepted results, along with the 
ability of any products that were released with this device to meet their requirements.
Determine the Appropriate Monitoring and Measuring Devices as Resources
Clause 7.1.5 lays out the requirements and defines the controls for measurements and 
monitoring tools and instruments. These resources measure and monitor character-
istics of process outputs that have an effect on the quality of the final product and are 
necessary to ensure that they meet their own specifications. The controls mentioned 
in clause 7.1.5 will ensure their accuracy and precision. The first requirement refers to 
the definition and determination of the needed monitoring and measuring devices. 
The goal is to ensure their fitness for purpose; providing valid and reliable results 
during monitoring and measurement activities necessary for the conformity of prod-
ucts and services to requirements.
How do we know if a device is considered as monitoring and measuring device 
and must be controlled? When the device measures a product characteristic that is 
relevant to its intended use and is needed to verify conformity to product require-
ments, it means that this device has some responsibility regarding the quality of the 
product. Each of such devices must be controlled—identified, maintained, preserved, 
and calibrated. The goal is to ensure that the device is able to perform a series of tasks.
Types of Resources for Monitoring and Measurement Devices
The different types of monitoring and measuring devices require different types of 
controls. If we take the classic example of a scale, the required controls are pretty 
obvious; a yearly maintenance and calibration usually done by a certified lab. The 
record of this control is a documented certification received with the device when 
the control is done. But there are normally other devices that are laying around in 
the organization or other methods for monitoring and measuring that are used to 
validate and verify processes and process outputs that do not have clear and defined 
controls. But still they must be controlled and verified before their initial use. For 
example, in the injection molding industry, each batch is normally required to be 
compared to a master product that was approved by the customer; as production of 
a batch starts, the quality assurance takes some samples and compares them to the 
approve master. This master is a kind of measuring device. If the customer delivers 
you a device to control the function of a product that you are manufacturing, it is also 
a kind of measuring device.
 

122
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Guidelines for Controlling Monitoring and Measurement Resources
I would like to start with some guidelines and principles for determining monitor-
ing and measuring devices. These guidelines shall assist us in planning the relevant 
activities and controls:
• Measurement and monitoring needs: First of all, we must identify how a process 
or a product will be reviewed, and which of the measurable characteristics will be 
 measured. By identification, I mean the inputs to be considered when reviewing a pro-
cess or a product, that is, product characteristics, customer requirements, regulatory 
requirements, intended use, risk management, safety, and performance specifications.
• Definition of monitoring and measurement activities: After identifying what is to be 
measured, we will define how the measurement activities will be carried out. We may 
refer to issues such as instructions, frequencies, areas, measured materials, products, 
and processes. Design and development outputs may serve as inputs to the definition.
• Determination of the appropriate criteria: The requirements are defined and so are 
the activities. The next step will be to define how the manufacturer set the criteria 
for measurement results; for example, tolerances, limits, expected test results, cus-
tomer requirements, and regulatory requirements. When reviewing the criteria, 
one shall refer to relevant standards for comparison or assessment of the results.
• Allocation of tools and equipment: The following step will be to define and allocate 
devices and accessories needed for the measurements. Importance will be given to 
the appointment of a device to the predefined criteria; the device shall be able to 
provide the expected results.
• Identification of devices: After identifying which devices and equipment are 
 necessary, we must plan a method for their identification, for example, names, types, 
serial numbers, catalogue numbers, and relevant processes and locations.
• Required qualification for personnel: Employees using the devices must know how to 
operate the devices and/or equipment correctly. It is critical for the control of processes 
and expected results. Thus, it is required to define the suitable responsibilities for moni-
toring and measuring activities. This matter will be referred when applying controls for 
the requirements of clauses 7.1.6—Organizational knowledge and 7.2—Competence.
• Controls: It is necessary to define how the required controls and validations of such 
tools and equipment are determined; for example, through calibration activities 
(external and internal), maintenance, storage, and handling.
• Nonconforming equipment: Actions shall be clearly defined to handle tools and equip-
ment that were disqualified. The issue shall also cover the disposal of such devices.
• Records: The organization shall retain records as evidence, which shows that moni-
toring and measuring devices are fit for their purpose.
Maintenance of Monitoring and Measuring Devices
The ISO 9001 Standard specifically demands that you maintain the monitoring and 
measuring devices; preserve their fitness—the quality of being suitable or of being 
qualified to perform measurements and deliver reliable results. Bear in mind that the 
objective of maintenance is to protect a device’s
• Intactness and functionality, including deterioration over time
• Status of calibration—the device shall be protected from any cause that may alter or 
damage its calibration status
 

123
Support
Maintenance of monitoring and measuring devices refers to the following issue:
• Storage and handling of the monitoring and measuring devices
• Status: The maintenance will initiate actions to preserve a certain state of the 
monitoring and measuring devices.
• Safety: The maintenance shall keep safe and protect the monitoring and mea-
suring devices from damage, harm, decay, loss, or deterioration.
• Adjustments: The maintenance shall ensure that no adjustments that would 
invalidate the measurement results will happen to the monitoring and measur-
ing devices.
• Preservation
• Calibration: The maintenance shall ensure that the calibration of the monitor-
ing and measuring devices shall be preserved.
• Service: The maintenance will initiate (where applicable) service activities 
needed to preserve the monitoring and measuring devices.
• Precautions: The maintenance will indicate which precautions are required to 
preserve the monitoring and measuring devices.
How to practice the maintenance?
• Risk-based thinking: You may conduct a small-scale risk analysis and identify the 
risks regarding monitoring and measuring devices. What should the risks analysis 
consider?
• Adverse effect on calibrations
• Damage during use, transportation of storage
• Protections: When determining the necessary protection, you shall refer to param-
eters that may affect the device and its calibration status, for example, tempera-
ture, humidity, transportation, operation, or storage. The extent of the protection 
depends on the device itself.
• Documentation: Where needed, special instructions will be produced in order to 
ensure maintenance.
• Instructions of how to maintain the monitoring and measuring devices
• Instructions of how to protect the monitoring and measuring devices
• Training: Where needed, employees and personnel will be trained in how to use and 
handle the monitoring and measuring devices.
• Maintenance plan: When the monitoring and measuring devices need a periodical 
maintenance, it will be documented and records of the maintenance activities will 
be retained as evidence that
• The activities were performed
• The results prove that the monitoring and measuring devices are fit for their 
purpose
Usually, the manufacturer of the tool provides instructions regarding the protection of 
the device. You may use these or refer to them. If such instructions are not provided, 
you may contact the manufacturer. In any event, you are required to prove the ability to 
protect the monitoring and measuring devices, their intactness, and their calibration 
status. The easiest example is the caliper gauge; it must be kept in its pouch, protected 
from mechanical damage like bumps or shakings, and usually must be calibrated once 
 

124
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
a year. There is a requirement to maintain documented information of actions taken to 
maintain the device. The documented information shall prove that
• Employees actually handle it with care (trainings, instructions)
• It is calibrated once a year (certificate of calibration)
• The results of the calibration allow the use of the gauge (certificate of calibration)
Identification and Traceability of the Devices (Resources)
Traceability of monitoring and measuring devices refers to the ability to link process 
outputs with the devices that verified or validated them. If a manufacturer produces a 
part with a serial number and this part was measured with an identified monitoring 
and measuring device, somewhere it must documented (with documented informa-
tion) that this device measured this part with this serial number. This type of trace-
ability is practiced with components, materials, or process elements as they may also 
affect the quality of the product.
To begin with, each device shall be identified, and the identification shall be clear 
and available for people to see. For example, the identification may appear on the device 
itself—an internal number, manufacturer’s serial number, location, or a responsible 
party—according to the nature and type of device. The identification is important for 
the traceability of products that were tested and approved with the device.
Calibration
Calibration is comparing an instrument’s accuracy to a known standard—for exam-
ple, the length of a ruler A can be calibrated by comparing it to a standard ruler B, 
which has a known length and was tested and approved according to a predefined 
standard. Once the reference of ruler A to the standard is known and determined, 
ruler A is calibrated and can be used to measure the length of other things. Calibrated 
tools and equipment are necessary to achieve product quality objectives and ensure 
that processes will meet their requirements. Products or services (or realization pro-
cesses) have measurable characteristics that must be controlled, verified, or validated. 
Through a set of operations that may affect the ability of the device and its measuring 
results, the calibration ensures that measuring devices conform to the requirements 
of their intended use. Each monitoring and measuring device has several character-
istics that determine its performance and the influence of the results that it generates. 
The calibration and the set of operations will ensure that a device will conform to the 
requirements for its intended use. These activities usually include
• Calibration activities—a set activities needed to prove the ability of the monitoring 
and measuring a device to achieve its intended results
• Verification—comparing the results of the test to the applicable criteria
• Necessary adjustments or repairs in case the monitoring and measuring device does 
not answer its requirements
• Subsequent recalibration—for reverification
• Labeling—indication that the device is approved for use
The calibration of tools, monitoring, and measuring devices shall be traceable to pre-
defined criteria. The criteria may be either international or national measurement 
 

125
Support
standards, internal standards, or a predefined and documented basis established 
by the manufacturer, customer, or a regulatory requirement. This is an ISO 9001 
Standard requirement. Where required, the results of the calibration shall be trace-
able to international standards. This is normally (and effectively) achieved by sending 
the devices to certified calibration laboratories that have the knowledge and the tools 
to perform, correct, standardize, and calibrate devices according to international 
standards. When calibration is performed externally, the organization will receive 
a document indicating the standard to which the tools were calibrated. This is the 
evidence for traceability to such a standard.
When such international or national standards are not applicable, and the orga-
nization is calibrating according to an independent or internal requirement for 
calibration, you are required to document these calibration requirements as refer-
ence. If you are using a gauge delivered by the customer in order to verify a part’s 
characteristics, you need to establish a master or a reference part for the calibra-
tion of the gauge before each batch. In this case, it could be a product that the 
customer approved as a master product. By testing the gauge, you can ensure that 
it meets its intended use. I recommend you to document this issue (e.g., on the test 
instructions for the part). The supplier’s or manufacturer’s instructions may serve 
as calibration requirements. Bear in mind, however, that these instructions must 
be controlled.
Calibration and its verification will be performed prior to the use of the measuring 
device. That will ensure that only calibrated and verified devices were used to verify 
or validate goods, services, or processes. This means that if you introduced a gauge 
for the measurement of product characteristics, you may not use it as long as it is not 
submitted to calibration (internal or external). This way you prove by showing that 
the date of the calibration is prior to the date of the initial use. If it is a new gauge, 
make sure that it is already calibrated.
The records of the calibration are to be defined and maintained. The records shall 
cover the following details:
• A unique identification of the device tested
• A description of all the measurements and calibration activities that were performed 
for a single device
• Details regarding the measurements, that is, the date, location, conditions 
(if required), the person that performed the tests, and the tools and equipment used 
during the measurements
• A specification of the standards or criteria
• Reference to documentation, such as instructions (if applicable)
• The results of the measurements
• The status of the device
• Corrections, modifications, maintenance, or adjustments (if made)
Records of these actions must be maintained and shall be regarded as documented 
information and submitted to the control of documented information as required in 
clause 7.5—Documented information.
The following table suggests a method for documenting the calibration:
 

126
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Internal
Number
Description
Size/Type
Calibration
Int./Ext.
Calibration Interval
(Months)
Status
Last Test
Next Test
Location
C04A
Digital caliper
0–150 mm—digital
External
12
Calibrated
10/10/2015
10/10/2016
Quality Dep. Cabinet1
C05A
Caliper
0–600—mechanical
External
12
Not calibrated
23/05/2013
N/A
Quality Dep. Cabinet1
C06A
Depth gauge
300 mm
External
12
Calibrated
10/10/2015
10/10/2016
Production
C07A
Control gauge 
for product 
AX000234
Part no. 90012343
Internal
6
Calibrated
01/01/2015
01/07/2016
Quality Dep. Cabinet3
 

127
Support
Controlling the Status of Monitoring and Measuring Resources
The objective of the  control of monitoring and measuring devices is to provide infor-
mation and determine the status of the monitoring and measuring devices—indicate 
whether the monitoring and measuring device is
• Calibrated and permitted for use
• Not calibrated and not permitted for use
• Permitted for use, but under restrictions
The control will manage the tools according to various parameters. While planning 
the controls of monitoring and measuring devices, you can refer to the following 
aspects (when applicable):
• Category: Try to sort the monitoring and measuring devices according to a family 
type; that is, according to use, range, department, process, or product.
• External or internal calibration: Define for each monitoring and measuring device 
its external and internal calibration requirements.
• Location: Document where monitoring and measuring devices are stored and under 
whose responsibility. When the monitoring and measuring devices are used by 
more than one party in the organization (e.g., by different departments), it is recom-
mended that you manage their locations in order to maintain sufficient traceability.
• Calibration interval: Define for each monitoring and measuring device its calibra-
tion interval. This may be determined according to time periods or the number of 
uses; for example, for every 100 batches, the device must be calibrated. If you do not 
know what the interval is, try to look for them on the manufacturer instructions. 
This is an ISO 9001 Standard requirement.
• Calibration status: Indicates whether the device is calibrated and approved for use.
• Owner: You may receive monitoring and measuring devices or gauges from your 
customers in order to perform measurements on special products. In this case, you 
are required to document them under property belonging to customers.
The main idea is to manage a list of your monitoring and measuring devices. Choose 
the way that is most suitable to you (e.g., Excel chart, a form, or ERP system).
Advise: Some organizations may own many control and measurement devices that 
no one uses; these devices are either old (were purchased by previous employers) or 
are not relevant for the production anymore. However, the reason is that they should 
always be calibrated before the external audit because it is a standard requirement 
that all monitoring and measurement devices in the organization related to the real-
ization must be calibrated. This results in high expenses. Here is my suggestion for 
handling devices of this kind:
• Separate the used tools from the unused.
• For the unused, define a status as unusable (not necessarily not calibrated).
• Wrap or pack them in a way that any tampering or use of them is immediately noticeable.
In time, you should be able to reduce the number of control and measurement devices 
without failing to meet the requirements.
 

128
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
ISO 10012-1 and ISO 10012-2
I include here a reference to the ISO 10012-1 and ISO 10012-2 Standards. These are 
standards for guidance on developing, planning, and implementing effective mea-
suring equipment and measurement processes. The basic purposes of the ISO 10012-1 
and ISO 10012-2 Standards are how to
• Establish a measurement management system for planning, implementing, and 
managing the monitoring and measuring processes and activities
• Determine the level of control needed for the effective execution of implementation
It is not required that you implement the ISO 10012-1 and ISO 10012-2 Standards, but 
it is suggested that you consult them when planning your monitoring and measuring 
activities.
Process Assessment
There is another type of monitoring and measurement that must be discussed: process 
assessment. It refers to the control of monitoring and measurement devices like soft-
ware. During process assessment, evidence is collected with the objective to evaluate 
how well a test or a control has been carried out. Let us take, for example, software 
that is used to monitor and measure processes. You are required to ensure the fitness 
of software to reach its purpose in a methodic objective manner. A software is a set of 
actions that receive inputs, process these inputs, and deliver intended outputs. We can-
not take the software and calibrate it. Therefore, when a software is used to monitor and 
measure processes or products, we must prove its effectiveness through assessment.
What is process assessment and how does it refer to monitoring and measuring 
devices? Process assessment approves the capability of a system or activity to deliver 
process attributes. Process assessment is needed for identifying critical measures of 
performance and applying controls associated with those measures related to a set of 
processes. A set of sequential activities are used to monitor or measure a process. The 
result of the assessment is receiving a detailed summary regarding the factors that 
enable the decision whether a process or process outputs has reached its objectives. 
When planning assessment of a process, keep in mind the following parameters:
• Clear description of the process and it purposes
• Input required for the assessment
• The action for the assessment
• The expected results (of your assessment)
I suggest surveys as a tool to evaluate the effectiveness of a set of processes. The survey 
performs basic steps with the objective of demonstrating the level of effectiveness. 
The basic steps to initiate a survey are
• Defining methods for the evaluation
• Defining the point of a process when the evaluation is needed
• Collecting data
• Analyzing the data
• Evaluating the data and deciding whether performance is sufficient or not
 

129
Support
Validity of Previous Measurement Results
Another aspect of the traceability of the monitoring and measuring devices is the 
ability to undertake appropriate measures when a monitoring and measuring device 
was found not suitable for use in retrospect. Monitoring and measuring devices play 
an important role in the realization of products or services—according to the mea-
surement results, it is decided whether the product is released or not. However, you 
must prepare yourself for the possibility that monitoring and measuring devices will 
be found to be defective, inaccurate, with malfunctions, or not calibrated. This means 
that there is a possibility that a quality problem, a fault, or a nonconformity has not 
been detected in time and that products that were released, based on measurements 
made with the defective devices, do not meet their requirements and specifications. 
When such a situation occurs, the organization must evaluate the effect of the inac-
curate measurements on the quality of the product:
• It is necessary to trace back all the products that were tested with the defective device 
or all the products that are related to a process controlled with the defective device. The 
traceability and link between the device and the process outputs will serve you here.
• It is required that you assess the effect of the measurements on the quality of the prod-
uct and whether a potential nonconformity could occur as a result of the improper 
measurements.
• In case it is found to be as a nonconformity, it is required to specify which measures 
must be applied, for example, recall of a product for remeasurement, issuing of an 
advisory notice, a sample remeasurement, maintenance or service actions, and so on.
The matter shall be recorded and submitted to the processes and controls as  suggested 
in clause 8.7—Control of nonconforming outputs.
Records as Documented Information
Records and evidences for the fitness of the monitoring and measuring devices shall 
be retained as documented information. Generally, all of these activities must produce 
records that prove the fitness of the devices. Which types of records may we encounter?
• Lists of approved, disqualified, external, or internal monitoring and measuring 
devices used by the manufacturer
• Records of details of the monitoring and measuring devices
• Records of internal or external calibration activities, including results of measurements
• Certifications of monitoring and measuring devices according to specific standards
• Lists of approved laboratories for calibration of monitoring and measuring devices 
(can be eventually included in the list of approved suppliers)
• Records of service and maintenance activities applied to the monitoring and mea-
suring devices, including repairs or adjustments
• Records required to maintain traceability of monitoring and measuring devices
• Records indicating the validity of previous measurement results
I would like to expand about records of internal or external calibration activities. The 
records of calibration and evidence that the monitoring and measuring devices meet their 
requirements shall be regarded as documented information and will be submitted to the 
 

130
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
control of documented information as required in clause 7.5—Documented information. 
The records of calibration shall carry the following details (if necessary or applicable):
• Description and unique identification of the equipment, including information for 
its identification such as manufacturer, type, model, serial number, etc.
• Date on which the activity was carried out and completed.
• The interval required for the calibration. This interval will be used to schedule the 
next test.
• In the case a procedure or protocol is required for the calibration, it will be mentioned.
• A list of any calibration certificates and reports, and other relevant documents.
• Maximum permissible errors where applicable. These may be determined by the 
person who performs the calibration or by reference to the measuring equipment 
manufacturer’s specification.
• Relevant environmental conditions for the calibration.
• Identification of the person that conducted the test. Here you may include its competence.
• The results of the calibration obtained after the activities were carried out. If it is required, 
the results will be compared to the result before any adjustment, modification, or repair.
• Details of any maintenance, such as adjustment, repairs, or modifications, that were 
carried out.
• A statement about any corrections if necessary.
• Uncertainties if they occur during the calibration.
• Requirements for the intended use of the monitoring and measuring device in order 
to keep the device intact and fit.
• Evidence of the traceability of the calibration results.
7.1.6  Organizational Knowledge
Using knowledge as a resource and setting the knowledge of the organization in a 
knowledge base and allowing access to the relevant parties—this is the main mes-
sage of clause 7.1.6—Knowledge. The ISO standard (finally) gives the much deserved 
importance to knowledge. In the eyes of quality management, knowledge promotes 
the main goal: to improve processes by predicting, preventing, and avoiding non-
conformities and maintaining customer satisfaction through the use of knowledge. 
This is a new concept of the ISO 9001 Standard; until now, you were required “only” 
to determine which resources are necessary for maintaining the QMS effectively.
The knowledge that is required for realizing the product is considered as a resource. 
The ISO 9001:2015 refers to knowledge as a critical resource and requires a clear defini-
tion of processes or actions needed for identifying, obtaining, sharing, protecting, and 
maintaining knowledge that is necessary for the effective operation of the processes and 
making it accessible to the appropriate parties at the appropriate time and place. These 
actions should enable management of the knowledge. As always, before we plunge into 
the requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard and try and unfold them, let us review them:
• The organization shall decide which knowledge is necessary for the operation of its 
processes.
• The organization shall decide and determine which knowledge is necessary for 
obtaining and assuring conformity of products and services.
 

131
Support
• The organization shall maintain that knowledge.
• The knowledge will be established in an existing state, available to relevant parties 
as necessary.
• The knowledge will be preserved and protected from decline.
• When changes to the QMS, its environment, or business activities are considered or 
addressed, the organization shall assess
• The implication on the relevant knowledge base and the changes of the knowl-
edge will be controlled in a systematic manner
• The requirements for new knowledge necessary to support the changes or the 
new trends, its acquirement, and accessibility
• Note 1: Organizational knowledge
• Includes the information that is used and shared to achieve the organization’s 
objectives
• Is considered as knowledge that is used internally by the organization and
• Is generally acquired by experience
• Note 2: Organizational knowledge can be based
• On internal sources (e.g., intellectual property; knowledge gained from 
 experience; lessons learned from failures and successful projects; capturing and 
sharing undocumented knowledge and experience; the results of improvements 
in processes, products, and services)
• External sources (e.g., standards, academia, conferences, gathering knowledge 
from customers or external providers)
Quality management has defined goals of meeting customer requirements and 
 enhancing customer satisfaction. Knowledge as a resource must support these 
ultimate goals. The organization must identify which are the relevant practices, 
managerial  activities, and technical considerations to be reviewed when managing 
knowledge. I claim that an organization will increase the effectiveness and efficiency 
of its QMS when it will manage its knowledge. Because it is a new discipline for the 
ISO 9001 Standard, I decided to promote in this chapter the discipline of knowl-
edge management as I find the two disciplines (quality management and knowledge 
 management) congruent. Today’s business environment can very well support the 
knowledge management both ideologically and technically.
Identifying and Defining the Necessary Knowledge
But let us start from the beginning—in order to manage knowledge in the organiza-
tion, you must first identify which knowledge or types of knowledge are required for 
the operation of the process and business activities. The standard is pretty much clear 
to which type of knowledge you shall refer to as necessary:
• Knowledge for the operation of its processes
• Knowledge for obtaining and assuring conformity of products
As a rule of thumb, the necessary knowledge should assist individuals in turning pro-
cess inputs into expected outputs; whether it is a subprocess, an internal service that 
one department provides, or the end product delivered to the customer. This kind of 
knowledge can include work methods, instructions or trainings or experience—all 
the applications that a worker uses to operate an activity.
 

132
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Practically identifying the necessary knowledge will be done through mapping, 
categorizing, indexing, and evaluating organizational knowledge assets. I suggest the 
following approach—while determining the processes needed for the QMS and their 
application (clause 4.4.1), you may include a reference to specific required knowledge 
per process or activity.
Identifying Future Knowledge Needs
An organization must identify future knowledge needs that will be necessary for the 
operation of its systems:
• If the organization is developing a new product or a new service, it must make sure 
that the relevant knowledge will reach the appropriate people.
• If the organization is aware of upcoming structural changes, it must ensure that 
future people in future roles will obtain the necessary knowledge. The classic exam-
ple is a training program.
Leadership, Roles, and Responsibility
Success of knowledge management is heavily dependent on top management sup-
port. Knowledge management introduces a new way of sharing information. This 
new concept requires people to share knowledge that until today was considered 
almost private, and certain employees that “enjoy” a certain amount of prestige, due 
to their knowledge and experience, will find it hard to “share their prestige.” In order 
to overcome this obstacle, you must present the employees the benefits to the orga-
nization from sharing knowledge (e.g., unity of purpose). This is where leadership 
comes into play (remember clause 5.1—Leadership and commitment?).
Capturing and distributing the knowledge should be included under certain mana-
gerial activities. The conclusion of this is that activities for managing knowledge are 
considered as management of resources and have a relation to the realization pro-
cesses and an impact on the quality of products or services. This is why the ISO 9001 
Standard expects that such roles, responsibilities, and authorities be assigned properly.
Maintaining Knowledge
The organization must demonstrate its ability to maintain knowledge and apply the 
necessary activities (normally with technology but not necessarily). We maintain 
the knowledge because we want to create an environment that shares knowledge with 
the relevant parties. For this, we must preserve the knowledge and be able to offer it in 
an appropriate manner to interested parties. Each area in the organization uses dif-
ferent kinds of knowledge that appears on different types of media and is distributed 
using different methods. The process and activities characterize the way knowledge 
is maintained. How do we maintain knowledge? Maintaining knowledge is establish-
ing a set of activities that bring the knowledge to an existing state. In other words, 
maintaining knowledge is the ability to
• Capture the knowledge
• Describe the knowledge (metadata)
• Categorize the knowledge
 

133
Support
• Store, retrieve, and archive the knowledge
• Process the knowledge
• Distribute the knowledge
• Update the knowledge
System for Maintaining Knowledge
The ISO 9001 refers to knowledge that is necessary for the operation of processes and ele-
ments that make up the QMS. A system consists of many elements that maintain inter-
actions between each other and perform various activities. Each of the activities requires 
inputs and generates outputs. Each element has its objectives, but they all have some 
mutual goal, and each activity requires a certain degree of knowledge for its operation. 
In today’s environment, business processes are becoming more complex and dynamic. 
Daily activities require a high level of skills and expertise. What was done manually 
10 years ago is being replaced and automated by systems that require knowledge for their 
operation. In the (not-so-far) past operations, we were relying on data and information 
management in order to achieve goals. But today it is not enough and employees are 
required to obtain knowledge in order to operate a higher level of activities. And there is 
another challenge; the amount of knowledge available on any subject today is increasing 
to a level that requires a systematic management. Lack of such a system for maintaining 
knowledge will cause the loss of knowledge in the organization. This is why a new set of 
management is required in the organization—knowledge management.
Another aspect is the technology; the current technological and economic changes affect 
the factors that influence the QMS. Areas and functions in an organization are becoming 
more borderless. These changes bring a new factor into the equation—knowledge.
Making Knowledge Available with Knowledge Management
The explicit ISO 9001 requirement demands that knowledge be available to the 
interested parties of the QMS at the appropriate time and place. There is no specific 
requirement in the ISO 9001 Standard for a system for knowledge. But I chose to 
promote the discipline of knowledge management because I feel implementing such 
a system will assist in achieving the standard requirements.
Knowledge management is a set of concepts, work methods, technical solutions, 
and user applications that introduces a new way of information sharing and decision-
making. Knowledge management allows the organization to manage its knowledge 
in an effective way, to promote sharing of knowledge between interested parties, and 
to ensure continuing improvement of the organization (the organization becomes a 
learning organization). Knowledge management uses the tactic of relating knowledge 
in the organization between individuals that need it and its processes and activities. 
In other words, knowledge management implies getting the right knowledge to the 
right people at the right situation and to assist individuals in sharing information and 
striving to achieve improvement of the QMS.
Why do we need knowledge management? Relying on data and information man-
agement in order to ensure conformity of products may not be effective once the con-
ditions for realization are a bit complex or unpredictable. One may find themselves 
providing poor-quality products or services, being busy in redoing things, wasting 
 

134
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
time and money, and, most importantly, losing customer satisfaction. Deploying 
knowledge management as a strategic tool will reduce all these negatives symptoms.
It is important to understand the following approach—knowledge management 
shall be integrated in all of the business activities and will not be designated for one 
area. Each area and scope of the organization may have other knowledge needs that 
will set up its management of knowledge. That is why there is no precise requirement 
for a knowledge system but a requirement for implementing a knowledge system. The 
goals of knowledge management are
• Developing an organizational infrastructure for the management of knowledge to 
serve relevant parties in the organization
• Becoming a learning organization—training human resources in order to have the 
right knowledge and skills
• Developing processes needed to collect, store, retrieve, share, and leverage knowl-
edge assets
• Allowing access to knowledge infrastructures
• Providing the required knowledge and information as resources for the operation 
of processes
• Obtaining necessary external knowledge
• Maintaining and preserving necessary knowledge required for the operation of 
processes
• Integrating knowledge of employees with knowledge of systems
• Fostering innovation and collaboration
Applying knowledge management achieves the following objectives:
• Allowing codification and categorization of knowledge
• Relating business aspects to their knowledge issues
• Allowing the support of human resources in how to translate knowledge into pro-
cess outputs, goods, or services
• Maintaining knowledge relations with external parties of the organization such as 
customers, suppliers, stockholders, or governmental issues
In practice, knowledge management is a collection of activities for
• Capturing the organization’s collective expertise on any media (database, paper, or 
intellectual)
• Developing channels for sharing of knowledge
• Provisioning of knowledge to interested parties at the right situation
And those are the exact goals of the ISO 9001 Standard. Examples of systems for 
maintaining knowledge are
• The Internet
• Intranets or extranets—a system that allows the sharing of files within or outside 
the organization
• Organizational libraries—repositories of organizational knowledge
• Organizational processes and information systems—ERP or CRM systems
• Document/content management systems—systems that enable control over docu-
mentation or content in the organization
 

135
Support
• Expert systems—systems that support business activities, for example, CAD system
• Systems that support decision-making—BI, data warehousing, and data mining
Experience of developing, planning, and operating processes should be turned into 
knowledge and made available to all relevant parties. This can be used later on for the 
planning and developing of new processes. Such activity will serve the main goals of 
managing organizational knowledge: reproducing successes, elimination of repeating 
errors, and turning tacit knowledge into explicit knowledge. Such experience includes:
• Feasibility studies
• Risk analyses
• Knowledge related to tests and experiments
• Maintenance of infrastructures or devices
• Knowledge and Benchmarking or process engineering
Evaluating Knowledge
Employees or users are confronted daily with situations, activities, and problems that 
are unpredictable. Situations that do not allow a worker to proceed and where the 
acquired or provided knowledge is of little value and cannot provide with the appro-
priate answer. Making knowledge effective will be to anticipate which knowledge is 
needed or might be of use at a certain time or in a certain situation. For example, 
effective knowledge is combining the tacit knowledge with the explicit knowledge 
(more on that later); it is not enough to publish factual data. It is required to accom-
pany it with experiences, best practices, argumentations, examples, and approaches. 
In order to decide whether the knowledge is effective or not, you must evaluate it. 
Each type of knowledge shall be evaluated according to the nature of its purpose.
An easy example is the work instruction for operating a machine; maybe it will 
not be enough to describe which buttons you need to press in order to operate a 
machine—this is merely an administrative data. Everyone can operate a machine, but 
life is dynamic and situations occur out of the ordinary. The knowledge on that work 
instruction should allow each worker to deal with all scenarios and situations. Maybe 
it will be more effective to add some capital for troubleshooting that will allow the 
employee to deal with problems or situations like what to do when the machine jams 
or how to handle the machine when a part was produced did not met expectations—
this is the added knowledge that is missing. This is the tacit knowledge that is missing.
Explicit Knowledge and Tacit Knowledge
There are two distinctive kinds of knowledge in an organization. There is knowledge 
that is held privately by individuals and that is difficult to transfer to other persons in the 
organization. This type of knowledge is called tacit knowledge and is very hard to cap-
ture and document. The second type is knowledge that is articulated, codified, stored, 
and can be transmitted and shared among the interested parties of the organization. 
It is called explicit knowledge. We can view it in the following way: there is knowledge 
that was given to me and allows me to operate my business activities (e.g., a work pro-
cedure) and there is knowledge that I hold (inside my head) and is not organizationally 
 documented (e.g., based on my experience). Another expression for tacit knowledge is 
 

136
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
knowledge that is being transferred in brainstorming sessions and one-on-one conver-
sations where each individual brings their own tacit knowledge from experiences.
Systemizing the tacit knowledge is one of the challenges the organization is 
 facing—transferring and distributing the tacit knowledge from private hands to the 
public and initiating activities for sharing this private knowledge.
Codification of Knowledge
Codification of knowledge relates to the way we collect, codify, retrieve, and distrib-
ute the knowledge in the organization. Knowledge then is considered information 
that is saved and the organization has developed a way to manage it: capturing it, 
making it existent, preserving it, and allowing access to it. The goal is to create a 
system that manages organizational knowledge and turns it into a medium accessible 
to those who need it. Through codification, people or employees can recognize and 
retrieve it. The following are the categories of knowledge:
• Organizational/managerial: Internal procedures, forms, and instructions.
• Cultural: Social elements of knowledge dependent on organizational and community 
culture. Such elements may determine and set the conditions for knowledge sharing.
• Technical: Work instructions, information of product or customers, designated 
software (like CAD).
• People related: Personal files related to the realization of the product, for example, 
private files that are saved on an employee’s computer.
Personalization of Knowledge
The personalization of knowledge is the development of networks for linking individ-
uals so tacit knowledge can be shard and be accessible to parties who need it. This is a 
new initiative for many organizations that require some cultural changes. The orga-
nization must be aware that people are the main factor that influences the success of 
knowledge management (not the technology). The tactic here is to develop channels 
between individuals with the same area of (professional) interest or the same knowl-
edge needs in order to create the sharing of knowledge. The goals are focusing on 
developing and providing employees with channels or sources of valuable knowledge, 
which they can then use in particular situations. This can be achieved in many tradi-
tional ways: using communication traditional technologies (telephone, e-mail, video 
conferences) or with a new technology such as a system that channels knowledge 
from one to another based on predefined conditions such as webinars, content man-
agement systems, ticketing systems, Semantic networks, or decision support systems.
Communities of practice is a good example—a group of individuals with a com-
mon working practice who do not constitute a formal work team with the goal of 
sharing knowledge and experience that otherwise is unavailable. Each member is an 
owner of knowledge in his or her particular area of expertise. By exchanging ideas, 
problems, and solutions, they can share their collective knowledge. Initiating such 
communities in the organization will increase gaining of knowledge (by the mem-
bers of the community). Communities of practice could be voluntarily organized in 
areas where there is a need for knowledge transfer.
 

137
Support
Adapting and Controlling Changes
The systems for maintaining the organizational knowledge; the activities that oper-
ate it and the technology that supports it must be by nature flexible and ready for 
changes. This is a new discipline that emerges in a business environment that is ever 
changing. What kind of changes can occur?
• Changes in the product or service: Such changes concern the type, content, or nature 
of knowledge used by the organization. The organization might renew or revise its 
products or services according to trends in the market. Such changes require adjust-
ments in the knowledge that serves the organization.
• Organizational changes: New responsibilities and authorities may need to accom-
plish new managerial activities for knowledge management.
• Technological changes: New tools and instruments for channeling the knowledge 
in the organization.
And changes are likely to occur often. For example, if today you are carrying out 
periodical meetings face to face for exchanging ideas with one person taking notes, 
tomorrow you might need to do it over a video conference and input your inputs into 
a central information system. The goal is the same but the circumstances are changed.
The ISO 9001 Standard understands the reality of ever-changing business environment 
and trends and insists that these changes be controlled. The reason is that such changes 
may have a significant impact on the processes, products, or services. Clause 6.3 offers a 
very effective method for planning and controlling changes related to the QMS. When 
considering a change relevant to knowledge, the following aspects are to be considered:
• Changes will be submitted to a process for planning and controlling.
• The risks related to the change, provided opportunities, and the implications of the 
change on the relevant knowledge base must be reviewed.
• When the knowledge directly affects products or services, documented information 
related to those changes must be updated.
Let us review these requirements with an example. Say that your organization is 
installing a product in the customer’s premise. There are three kinds of activities 
regarding installation of a product: installation activities, configuration activities, and 
user activities. Each has its own knowledge needs. I summarize these in the following:
Activity
Required Knowledge
Installation activities
Work instructions
 
Checklists
 
Technical support
Configuration activities
Training
 
Technical support
User activities
Training
 
Technical support
 

138
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
One fine day the organization decides to change the technology with which the  product 
is working. It means that there are changes necessary in the knowledge involved. In 
this case, the changes must be submitted to a process that will control it. The following 
table describes the different knowledge elements and their response to changes:
Knowledge as Documented Information
There is no specific requirement for documented information regarding knowledge, 
but there is a direct connection between the two and I will prove it. Maintaining 
knowledge is necessary. That means you have to bring knowledge into an existing 
state, protect it, and make it accessible to parties who need it. You may maintain some 
kind of technology that enables management of this information and deliver it to 
the employees. Poor quality of information has a direct impact on decision- making 
and realization processes. Therefore, guidelines and principles must be planned and 
established for ensuring quality of information necessary to ensure integrity and 
consistency of data related to knowledge:
• A technology or a system that will serve the purpose
• Definition of persons who will enter the data or information into the system
• Identifying the elements of the data information required to preserve the integrity
Users have a significant role in the capturing of data and are responsible for its integrity 
and quality. This is why users must be involved in determining which information is 
going into the system and how it will be turned into knowledge. And that has a direct 
 
Work Instructions and 
Checklists
Trainings
Technical Support
Identification of the 
required changes—
which knowledge 
elements are affected?
Must the work 
instructions be 
changed?
Must the checklist be 
updated?
Must the training be 
redesigned?
Must the technical 
support acquire the 
new knowledge in 
order to be able to 
provide the appropriate 
support?
Planning the change—
How the different 
types of knowledge 
will be changed?
How and when will it 
update the work 
instructions or the 
checklists? Who will 
approve it?
Who is responsible for 
updating the training 
and when will they 
be planned?
How will the technical 
support obtain the new 
knowledge?
Evaluating the 
change—which risks 
or opportunities are 
associated with the 
change?
Must the work 
instructions and 
checklists be tried out 
before publishing?
Which experts must 
evaluate the training?
Must the technical 
support be provided 
with a troubleshooting 
document in order to 
address unexpected 
situations?
Reviewing the 
change—how can you 
ensure that objectives 
are achieved?
Planning actions for evaluation before the first installation of a new product.
Addressing changes according to the conclusions of this test.
Supervising and evaluating the first few installations and reacting according 
to the needs.
 

139
Support
relation to documented information. Knowledge is considered as a resource required 
for the processes, is related to the competence of a person, and its maintenance is 
crucial to the realization of the product. For conclusion, although it is not required by 
the ISO 9001 Standard, I recommend to submit knowledge about the requirements for 
documented information as presented in clause 7.5—Documented information.
External and Internal Sources for Knowledge
In every organization, there are events or opportunities for obtaining knowledge from 
various sources. There are internal and external sources of knowledge. Under internal 
sources, we may find intellectual property, knowledge gained from experience, lessons 
learned from successes and failures, capturing and sharing undocumented knowledge 
and experience, and the results of improvements in processes, products, and services. 
Under external sources, we may find standards, academia, conferences, and knowledge 
gathered from customers or suppliers. You must find a way to seize such events and oppor-
tunities and identify what knowledge you can obtain from them. Here’s a short review:
Type of Source
Event/Opportunity
Type of Knowledge
Internal
Event
Learning from 
successes and 
failures
Try to take cases (successes or failures) 
and see which part of the “story” could 
use other workers in order to eliminate 
the failure or recreate the success.
Internal
Opportunity
Experience of 
other employees
Experience of employees is a treasure of 
knowledge for less experienced 
employees. The organization must 
initiate sharing of knowledge through 
planned trainings or support meetings.
Internal
Opportunity
Know-how of 
other employees
Employee specialized in some areas can 
share their knowledge with other 
workers through planned training.
Internal
Opportunity
Sharing of 
knowledge in 
between areas
Communities of practice is a good 
example—a group of individuals with 
a common working practice who do 
not constitute a formal work team 
with the goal of sharing knowledge 
and experience that is otherwise 
unavailable.
Internal
Event
Information about 
innovations and 
updates
New technologies, new products, new 
product characteristics—informing 
employees through planned trainings.
External
Opportunity
External parties
Knowledge from external parties or 
partners such as customers, suppliers, 
or regulators—informing employees 
through planned trainings.
External
Opportunity
Academic and 
professional 
institutions, 
training courses
Sending your employees to external 
trainings or courses that are relevant 
to your organization.
 

140
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
7.2  Competence
Competence in the context of quality management is developing the ability to apply 
appropriate qualifications, skills, and knowledge to the right activities or operations with 
the goals of achieving intended results. Employees are considered to be a resource for the 
realization of products or services and have objectives that are derived from the context 
of the organization, its strategy, and the processes that operate the QMS. The needs for 
competences should be defined in a systematic way that can fulfill these goals and objec-
tives. Training and qualifying should be planned in order to enhance the achievement 
of these goals and objectives. While planning the human resources for the realization 
processes, the organization shall refer to the following ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• For each function or role that performs an activity that affects the quality of the 
product or its conformity to the requirements, the organization shall determine 
necessary qualifications, training, and certifications.
• The organization shall ensure that personnel and employees performing activities, 
tasks, and work that affect the quality and conformity of the product will acquire the 
adequate skills and be competent.
• Where needed, for the conformity of goods or services or where the organization 
finds it appropriate, it shall plan and implement training and certification activities 
in order to enhance the personnel to the required qualification level.
• Effectiveness of actions regarding training and certifications will be evaluated.
• The organization shall retain documented information and evidence of training and 
other actions related to the competence.
• Competence and adequate skills include hiring or contracting of competent per-
sons, reassigning employees, training, education, qualification, mentoring, coach-
ing, and experience.
Identifying Training Needs
One critical step in building competence is establishing an effective training and cer-
tification process. But before you set the certification process, you must identify and 
locate the relevant training needs. The trainings and the certifications of employees 
in a workplace are a process with the purpose of assisting the members of the orga-
nization in fulfilling their activities and tasks better and more effectively by intro-
ducing them to skills, knowledge, and professional and organizational approaches. 
Training and certifications may be needed in the following cases:
• Hiring and introducing new personnel
• Improving knowledge and skills
• Reassigning employees
• Introducing innovations in the organization
• Supporting organizational processes
By initiating actions, the organization promotes its personnel in achieving work 
objectives as well as quality objectives. The qualifications, skills, and knowledge 
 

141
Support
required for the fulfillment of the product objectives need to be defined and deter-
mined according to the products characteristics and the nature of the activities 
involved:
• The customer requirements
• The characters and features of a product or a service
• The processes for the realization of a product or a service
• The raw materials or components it is made of
• The processes that operate the product and constitute its functionality or generate 
the service
In the organization, in each organizational unit (production, logistics, development, 
purchase, marketing), different employees or agents (workers that were qualified or 
certified by the organization to perform an operation) perform different tasks and 
activities that promote shared quality goals: realization of the product or service and 
meeting customer requirements. For each level in each organizational unit, it is nec-
essary to define the level of qualifications and skills that those persons need to per-
form their tasks. As far as the ISO 9001 Standard is concerned, some elements and 
job characteristics must be defined and documented:
• Education: The level of knowledge and education required for a role will be deter-
mined: engineer, technician, programmer, biologist, and certified logistician. Some 
roles may not require an education or external certification at all. These definitions 
will be the preconditions for the hiring of personnel for specific roles.
• Regulatory requirements: When a regulatory requirement demands a certain cer-
tification according to a law or a standard, it will be mentioned as a precondition 
for hiring a person to the job. The matter will be verified with evidence prior to the 
hiring. That means that an auditor may ask to see different licenses or certifications 
of certain employees.
• Knowledge: The knowledge that is required for the operation of activities, realizing 
the product and meeting customer requirements.
• Experience: The extent of experience and background in parameters of time as well 
as areas and scopes of activities will be defined.
• Certification: The manufacturer will define a certification plan or process needed 
to introduce a person to a specific role: training about processes, procedures, work 
instructions, or activities related to the job. The plan shall cover both operational 
tasks related to the realization of the product or service as well as administrative 
and quality tasks.
• Training: The training (external as well as internal) for the role will be planned. It is 
necessary to identify the critical points or events in a process, which may affect the 
product and its integrity and to plan the training in accordance.
Certification Plan
Each employee that is recruited to the organization and will participate in the real-
ization of goods or services is obliged to go through a planned and documented 
 

142
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
introduction of the organization and its relevant processes. The plan will cover 
 specific areas and topics in the organization, such as
• Introduction to the organization.
• Administrative and human resources issues, for example, holidays, vacations, work-
ing hours, social conditions.
• Introduction to the different zones and areas in the organization and their use: caf-
eteria, parking places, toilets, and offices.
• Introduction to the organizational structure of the company and to different per-
sons and functions, for example, work colleagues. This is very important for the 
employees in order to orient themselves in the organization.
• Their part in the realization of product and quality processes.
The plan will be documented and controlled. Records indicating the performance of 
the plan shall be maintained as documented information.
I present here the next recommended method for developing qualifications. The 
method is based on the principle of Plan, Do, Check, Act:
• Planning of the certification (Plan): Building a process for qualifying and certifying 
a person for a role.
• Instructing the employee (Do): Applying the plan to the subject of the certification, 
directing and leading the subject in the new role.
• Supervising the work (Check): Monitor the work of the subject and provide feedback.
• Further guidance (Act): Providing the feedback to the subject and seeing that he is 
implementing it.
Another aspect of certification is the provision of personalized knowledge and 
best practices through internal networking for linking the subject of the certi-
fication to tacit knowledge. The tactic here will be to develop in the certification 
plan channels between individuals with tacit knowledge and the subjects of the 
certification.
Training Plan
After defining requirements for qualifications and skills, training, and certification, 
the organization is required to plan the training or other activities in order to meet 
these requirements. The objective of the training plan is to fill in the gaps between 
the training needs and objectives and the current situation of employees and persons 
that realize the products or services (regarding qualifications and skills). The matter 
can be completed in four stages:
 
1. The determination of target groups in the organization: departments, workers, 
 divisions, roles, or functions
 
2. The review and evaluation of the status with a defined method
 
3. The identification and mapping of the gaps in the organization
 
4. The development of a training plan according to results obtained
 

143
Support
Training is a broad and complex concept. The subject is discussed many times in 
many forums. However, the ISO 9001 Standard lays down some basic principles on 
what constitutes a training plan:
• The plan will be based on the nature of the processes and of the organization and the 
training activities will be oriented to support the realization processes.
• Each function, role, area, department, or field in your organization that is related to 
the realization of goods or services or may affect their quality will have a designated 
training plan that will relate to their field of activities. In the plan, the subjects of the 
training—the audience or target groups—will be defined.
• The plan will be periodical: Monthly, quarterly, or yearly, and will include dates 
and schedules (you are not required to provide specific dates—periods of the year 
are sufficient). The period will be set according to the type of the training and the 
target group. For example, refreshing work procedures may occur once a year. But 
customer complaints and nonconformities must reach employees immediately.
• A minimal specification of the topics of the training will be included.
• The plan shall define the methods for the training. The matter will be discussed in 
detail in this chapter.
• The plan will define the tutor: Is it an internal (an employee training another 
employee) or external tutor?
• The plan will cover quality aspects such as quality procedures and quality controls 
implemented throughout the QMS. For example, each employee must know how to 
identify a nonconformity and respond to it. But the matter will be different for a pro-
duction employee and a logistics employee. Therefore, for each target a designated 
plan is needed.
• The plan will relate to customers’ and regulatory requirements. The plan may cover 
specific requirements and will indicate to employees how he or she may access 
these requirements during the performance of its tasks and activities, for exam-
ple, customer requirements such as orders or signed offers and their location in the 
organization.
• The training shall be correlated with the quality policy and objectives. The matter 
will be discussed in detail in this chapter.
• The plan shall relate to training requirements derived from risk assessment based 
on risk-based thinking. The objective is to ensure workers whose activities or tasks 
may pose a risk to the products or services are identified and trained. It may include 
specific qualifications or certifications for particular processes or products.
• The plan will be evaluated for performance and results.
• The plan will define specific organizational events where training is necessary:
• Refreshing work instructions and work procedures
• Quality or work procedures
• Training related to structural changes; transfer of employees between depart-
ments or roles (structural changes) within the organization
• Transfer of employees between processes or products (within a department):
• Introduction of innovations within the organization; new products or projects
• Introduction of new technologies or new developments in the industry
• Introduction of new infrastructures, machines, or tools
• Training required by regulations or applicable standards
• Introduction of new regulations or refreshment of old ones
 

144
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Special, specific events that may affect the quality of the product (special  projects 
or special visits at various sites)
• Coaching employees
• Trainings required by customers
• Trainings provided to suppliers
• Customers’ complaints, nonconformities, or results of customer satisfaction surveys
• It is possible to define parameters within the training plan, such as
• Location of the training: meeting rooms, auditorium
• Required resources: computers, software, projector
• Length of the training
• Who the tutor is
One objective of training is to enhance personnel that are directly engaged with the 
products or services. The training should enable the development of skills and pro-
vision of knowledge in the area of product realization. The business environment 
(the external and internal issues) in which the company is active will be periodically 
reviewed in order to identify new training needs. The plan must be flexible enough to 
be updated at any time.
In order to create effective training that will assist your employees and provide 
them with tools and knowledge for their everyday work, I recommend that persons 
with the appropriate knowledge, background, and experience in a specific field super-
vise and navigate the training for each field or area of activity in the organization. It 
should be someone who possesses more than the explicit knowledge but also the tacit 
knowledge and best practices: someone who is aware of problems, special events, or 
situations, and particular cases that your employees will face during their daily tasks. 
The plan will then indicate to the employees how they should react. Here, just like 
by certification, I recommend developing channels between individuals with tacit 
knowledge and the subjects of the training.
Types of Training
There is no requirement to perform the training in the traditional way as frontal 
courses, lectures, or personal training. You may define training as self-learning 
or online tutoring, for example. The purpose remains the same however; only the 
method needs to be defined. Here are some examples of types of training:
• Frontal internal training performed by personnel of the organization
• Training provided on a digital format such as e-learning courses or webinars
• Purchasing literature
• External courses
• Exhibitions, conferences, or conventions
• Visit to suppliers’ premises
• Trainings provided by supplier about his products
So when employees pay a visit to a supplier, or participate in a conference, the mat-
ter may be considered as training as long as it enhances their knowledge and skills 
regarding the realization of the goods or services.
 

145
Support
Evaluating the Effectiveness of the Training
Training has objectives and goals. In terms of training, effectiveness is measured by 
whether the training has achieved its goal and to what extent. Specific training has 
its objectives, which support and promote the whole of the organization’s objectives. 
The ISO 9001 Standard is aware of that and thus requires a systematical evaluation of 
training. The standard relates to certain aspects of training:
• The evaluation will determine whether the training was effective or not. It is nec-
essary to define methods for the evaluation of the effectiveness of the training: 
reviewing processes, counting defective parts, measuring personal performances 
(qualitative as well as quantitative), and inquiry of employees.
• The evaluation will be done periodically.
• Each employee (on a personal scale rather than functional) will be evaluated for 
their competence for the training needs: required qualifications against current 
 status of qualifications.
The evaluation of training will be done based on several parameters:
• Evaluation of the relevancy of the training to the products and services and its field 
of activity. For this reason, the training is to be planned by professionals who have 
background, knowledge, skills, and experience in the field of activity. This is exactly 
where their added value is required.
• Evaluation of the employees— Check whether the employees have assimilated the 
training, skills, and knowledge that were assigned to them and implemented them 
in the realization processes. You can check this by conducting an exam (written or 
oral) at the end of the training or analyzing processes in a defined period of time. It 
is always recommended to examine the results of the related processes rather than 
gathering information from the employees themselves. An employee can always 
claim that they have implemented what they have learned, but the question is what 
is happening during the realization processes. Inspect for yourself what is going on.
• Evaluate the tutor or trainer. Do they really understand what they are talking about? 
Do they have the required qualifications and skills? How are their training and com-
munication skills? Can they really perform the training effectively? You may let the 
subjects of the training evaluate the tutor or trainer.
• Evaluate whether the training is updated. In our modern world, changes occur on a 
daily basis. What was relevant a year ago could be totally irrelevant today. Perhaps 
the organization has implemented new processes or technologies but the training 
refers to the old ones.
• Regulatory requirements. Regulatory requirements tend to change and be updated. 
In any case, it is required to update documentation regarding regulatory require-
ments regularly. This should also be done for training.
The most important evaluation is whether the training has achieved its goal. If the 
training is related to a certain customer complaint, it must be reviewed to ensure that 
that complaint will not be repeated. If the training is related to work instructions, the 
processes must be sampled and it must be verified that they are being done as speci-
fied. Such an examination will be planned in advance.
 

146
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Evaluation of Employees
Another required evaluation of performance, effectiveness, and competence of the 
human resource is the periodical assessment of employees. This evaluation has several 
goals:
• Ensure that employees are competent to perform their job and assess their compe-
tence and quality of work according to predefined parameters.
• Identify needs and suggest measures for the promotion of the employee in the 
organization.
Parameters related to quality issues for evaluation:
• Professional competence of the employee: Does the employee have the necessary 
practical or theoretical knowledge and the technical experience and background to 
perform their tasks?
• Attitude for dealing with and solving problems: Does the employee recognize prob-
lems and suggest solutions? Do they constantly seek and suggest improvements and 
optimizations?
• Approach to the company: Does the employee display a high level of commitment to 
their workplace? Are they proactive and reliable?
• Performance and approach to the company’s objectives: Are the performances of the 
employee satisfying? Is the employee committed to the goals of the company and 
achieving their personal goals?
• Approach to the work environment, tools, and equipment: Does the employee treat 
and behave in the work environment according to the firm’s values and code of eth-
ics or conduct? Do they utilize the working tools and equipment with responsibility 
and according to the specifications?
Such an evaluation will position the employee with regard to their qualifications and 
training objectives. The next stage is to assess the results and to determine whether 
further measures are required. Such evaluations can appear as a checklist or a form, 
with a qualitative or quantitative assessment. The results of the evaluation will be 
subjected to the requirements of documented information.
Expected Documentation and Records
As you have probably noticed, the issue of planning and managing human resources 
demands the establishment of certain documentations and the maintenance of 
records. For documentation, the following is required:
• Training needs: Definitions of qualifications and training requirements relevant 
to the role of function. I recommend including these definitions as part of the job 
descriptions. There is a direct relation between the list of activities and the required 
qualifications to perform it.
 

147
Support
• Certification plan: A list of activities and training required to introduce a person to 
a specific job or function. It may appear as a form, a checklist, or a procedure.
• Training plan: Although there is no requirement to document the plan, I suggest 
you do so. It will assist in following the implementation of training activities and 
may avoid answering some tricky questions during audits.
• Evaluation of employees: A plan that specifies the parameters for assessing and eval-
uating employees and proposes topics for discussion between the employee and his 
supervisor. This is normally managed by the personnel management.
The documentation will be submitted to the controls required in clause 7.5—Documented 
information. The following records must be maintained:
• External evidence that proves the competence of an employee according to the 
training and qualification needs: diplomas, certification of education, regulatory 
certifications, or licenses. For each employee, a correlation is required between evi-
dence of education and the definition of the job.
• Documented information and evidences of the internal certification activities for 
employees (certification plan). The records will identify employees who participated 
and specify with details the dates and the activities that were initiated in order for 
them to perform their job.
• Documented internal certification of employees that allows them to perform certain 
activities or relates to specific roles or functions. This may appear as an approval 
stamp on a copy of the certification plan or on a designated from. It is important to 
mention that the certification will be personal. Authority management in an ERP 
system is a good example.
• Records and evidences that prove that training activities have been carried out. The 
records will include details such as dates, tutor or trainer, participants, and topics 
of training.
• Evaluation of the effectiveness of the training actions taken. This may appear 
on the same records of the training or on a designated record. Records of 
employees’ evaluations of performance, effectiveness, and competence. These 
records may include records of physical examinations necessary for the realiza-
tion processes.
• Any other records required by regulatory requirements.
These records will serve as documented information and will be submitted to the 
appropriate control as required in 7.5—Documented information. A good way to man-
age it is to maintain a designated file for each employee with relevant quality records. 
My advice to you is to monitor how your human resources manage it—maybe they are 
carrying out most of the documentation already.
7.3  Awareness
Awareness is getting more importance from the ISO 9001:2015 Standard. It is so 
important that it even has its own clause. This I believe is because of the consensus 
 

148
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
that awareness of the QMS increases the motivation and devotion of employees. 
Awareness in the context of quality management refers to the understanding of the
• The context of the organization—conditions in which the organization is active and 
its values
• The quality policy and quality objectives of the organization
• The implications and consequences of actions of persons performing activities and 
operating in the QMS
However, because there are many subjects or topics that employees must be aware of, 
the standard specifies relatively clearly what the person who is operating the QMS 
must be aware of (the ISO 9001 Standard requirements):
• Persons doing work under the organization’s control shall be aware, know, and 
understand the quality policy.
• The organization shall ensure the awareness of personnel of the relevance of their 
actions and activities
• To the achievement of the quality objectives
• To the effectiveness of the QMS
• To the benefits of improved quality performance
• The organization shall ensure the awareness of personnel regarding the effects and 
importance of their actions and activities on the quality of the product and confor-
mity to the requirements.
Awareness and Motivation of Employees
Awareness initiates identification, devotion, and commitment to the goals of the 
organization among personnel. By promoting the awareness, the ISO 9001 Standard 
tries to avoid the following side effects:
• Not understanding the context of the organization
• Not knowing exactly who the interested parties are
• Not understanding or knowing what the customer requirements really are
• Delivering poor-quality products or services to the customer
• Promising the customer what cannot be achieved
• Ignoring or missing quality problems
• Reacting to quality problems instead of avoiding them
Sounds familiar? Well, these are quality objectives in their essence. In practice, 
 personnel should be aware of their
• Customers—identify who their customers are and to whom they are committed
• Duties—know which actions or activities are expected from them and what their 
duties are
• Requirements—know what the requirements are and how their actions affect meet-
ing these requirements
• Quality of their job—know when a process is effective and how to perform the job 
correctly
 

149
Support
• Relation to the quality objectives—understand how their actions contribute to the 
quality objectives
• Improvements—be aware of the need for improvement, know how to look and when 
to suggest improvements in the QMS
Awareness to an Effective Quality Management System
Employees must understand that they are part of the QMS and must be aware of their 
contribution to its objectives. Sometimes, the common consensus among workers is 
that the QMS revolves around the quality manager, the quality assurance, and involves 
some customer complaints, internal and external audits, and comes down to publi-
cations of the top management in the cafeteria regarding the ISO certification. These 
are their only touching points with the QMS. Even today, after 28 years of ISO 9001 
Standard, many employees do not feel part of a QMS and ISO 9001 is an alienating 
term for them. Why should it be otherwise? The certification just hangs in the office of 
the CEO and most of them never see it; during an external audit, employees are asked 
to project all is well, but when there is a quality problem, the employees are to blame. 
The new revision of ISO 9001 Standard wants to change it and demands the creation of 
awareness among all participants in celebration of quality; employees must understand 
the whole story of the organization in order to assimilate the fact that their actions mat-
ter. This is not an easy task. In many organizations, ISO 9001 is perceived as a bureau-
cratic topic and some people are trying to avoid having anything to do with it.
So how can you market the ISO 9001 Standard and the QMS as an exciting thing 
that has a direct relation to the daily job of employees?
• First of all, I would explain very easily and in layman’s terms and definitions that 
are used in QMS; quality policy, quality objective, product conformity, customer 
requirement, corrective action, etc. There is nothing more frustrating to an employee 
to be in a meeting and not understand what people are talking about—immediately 
you lose the attention of this certain worker.
• Second, I would present to the workers the structure of the QMS in the organization 
and explain to them where they stand and most importantly what is their contribu-
tion to the QMS.
• After covering the basics, I support the very simple method of demonstrating results, 
consequences, and implications of dos and don’ts.
The next one is a recommendation—I avoid using the words ISO 9001 Standard—I 
just feel that with some groups of people these terms create bad association or the 
wrong association.
Awareness to the Quality Policy and Quality Objectives
The QMS includes the quality policy and the quality objectives with the main goal of 
meeting customer requirements and improving it. Training is one means of imple-
menting the policy and achieving these objectives. Quality objectives are divided into 
 

150
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
subobjectives that are obtained through operative objectives. The issue filters down to 
the level of the single process: each process has its objective—the expected output. The 
employees must be aware of this hierarchy and understand the relevancy, relation, and 
effect of their actions and activities on achieving the quality objectives, meeting customer 
requirements, and improving the QMS. Employees must be aware that their activities 
and the delivery of intended outputs promote the quality objectives of the organization. 
Such awareness will identify the role of employees regarding the quality objectives and 
motivate them as necessary. The employees must understand that they are bearing the 
operative responsibility of achieving the objectives. How? By demonstrating (e.g., dur-
ing training) the relation between the results of their actions and the quality objectives.
The basic principle states that each employee must be familiar with the policy and 
objectives and therefore they are to be an integral part of the training plan:
• If one of the quality objectives is to meet specific personal customer requirements, 
employees must understand how their actions contribute to this objective; for example, 
during the delivery processes, an employee must identify these specific requirements 
and follow all instructions given to them by the customer. Plus, the employee must be 
educated on cases where customer requirements were not met and the consequences.
• If one of the quality objectives is to provide a product that conforms to a specific 
regulatory requirement, the employees must know these requirements and under-
stand that a product that leaves the factory must conform to those requirements. 
Plus, the employee must be educated on cases where regulatory requirements were 
not met and the consequences.
In practice, I would consider developing a system that will inform persons in the 
organization about the status of relevant quality objectives:
• Publish customer complaints: Cases where customer requirements were allegedly 
not met.
• Publish customer gratitude: Cases where customer requirements were met and the 
customer is well satisfied.
• Introduce to the organization a system that presents the practical work objectives 
such as status of orders, delays in deliveries, status of production orders, status of 
service calls: A tool or some means by which an employee can view the situation. 
Such systems promote the proactive approach and allow employees to act in a way to 
avoid such situations rather than having to face unwanted situations.
Such publications achieve several goals in the context of awareness:
• They promote discussion about customer requirements and their achievement
• They evoke conversation among workers about the objectives
• They create identification, devotion, and commitment to organizational goals
Awareness of Product Conformity
Awareness of product conformity is necessary in order for personnel to understand 
their direct contribution to quality of the product. In practice, you must evaluate how 
 

151
Support
well the employee is aware of the product or service requirements and how his or her 
work affects the quality of the product:
• Does the employee know what the product requirements are?
• Does the employee understand what a qualitative product is?
• Does the employee understand the consequences of a low-quality product?
• Does the employee know how they can increase the quality of the product?
• Does the employee know risks associated with the product?
• Is the employee familiar with known nonconformities?
Measuring the Awareness
Effectiveness is one of the most important principles of the ISO 9001 Standard and is 
relevant to awareness as well. Although it is not required by the standard, the organi-
zation may develop methods to measure the extent of awareness of personnel about 
their actions and how they are related to the quality objectives. Evaluating awareness, 
in my opinion, should be done on several levels: level of product, process, and QMS.
Level of the product: How well the employee is aware of the product or service 
requirements:
• What are the product requirements?
• What is a qualitative product?
• What are the consequences of a low-quality product?
• How can an employee increase the quality of the product?
Level of the process: How well the employee knows the processes they are involved in:
• Which are the activities (processes) of the employees?
• What are the required inputs?
• Which outputs or results are expected?
• When is the process considered effective?
• What are the results of an ineffective process?
Level of the QMS: How well is the employee aware of their place in the organization 
and their contribution to the QMS:
• Which quality objectives are related to the work of the employee?
• How can an employee contribute to achieving their quality objectives?
• Where can an employee identify opportunities for improvement?
In practice, you can conduct a survey among personnel to evaluate their knowledge 
and awareness regarding quality.
7.4  Communication
Communication channels (internal as well as external) play a very important role in 
an organization and in implementing an effective QMS and have a direct effect on the 
 

152
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
realization processes. Communication takes place everywhere and involves almost 
everybody in the organization. Communication encompasses all business activities 
and interaction between interested parties of the organization: employees, customers, 
suppliers, governmental offices, and other interested parties. These characteristics may 
cause disorder and confusion in the communication when not played appropriately. 
And here is what the ISO 9001 is trying to avoid through a definition of principles 
for communication. Let me put it in this way: If information does not reach the right 
people at the right time and place, you might not achieve quality objectives and you 
might deliver nonconforming products or services and decrease customer satisfaction.
The ISO 9001 Standard includes communication channels in clause 7—Support 
activities because communication channels are tools that promote your strategy 
and thus should support processes and encourage parties to share information and 
knowledge, and they do require resources. ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• The organization shall determine the relevant communications for its QMS (inter-
nal as well as external).
• Communication means shall be defined for each QMS element.
• For each communication means, it will be decided
• What will be communicated
• When it will be communicated
• Who will communicate
• To whom it will be communicated
Communication in the eyes of quality management means a process or activity for 
exchanging information between entities for the operation of the QMS. This process 
of communication has a structure and direction and uses technology, tools, means, 
or instruments. Communication may be internal (that takes place within the orga-
nization) or external (between organizational units and external interested parties). 
Communication channels have important strategic goals:
• Ensuring that information and knowledge reaches the designated persons
• Boosting the processes in the organization and contributing to their effectiveness
• Promoting the sharing of knowledge and information between entities or units that 
operate the QMS
• Promoting and conveying to employees the importance of meeting customers’ and 
regulatory requirements
• Helping identify problems and opportunities for improvement
Reference to the Process Approach
Which elements of the QMS must be communicated is a bit abstract. That is why 
I refer back to clause 4.4—Quality management system and its processes; when plan-
ning and implementing the processes of the QMS, you were required to
• Define the process of the QMS
• Determine for each process its necessary inputs and their sources
 

153
Support
• Determine for the operation of each process its expected outputs inputs and their 
receivers
• Determine the sequence and interaction of processes included in the QMS
The requirement in clause 7.4—Communication is how these processes will commu-
nicate/interact and how the inputs and the outputs will be transferred between the 
different parties and in what sequence. In practice, I suggest that you include in the 
analysis of the process the aspect of communication; for each process covered by your 
analysis, include the aspects of communication mentioned in this chapter. The defi-
nitions of the required communications shall include communication with external 
partners such as customers, suppliers, and other interested parties.
Defining What Will Be Communicated
Defining what will be communicated must be planned according to the following 
concept: it is necessary to understand who is expecting what. Defining what will be 
communicated refers to the content that will be transferred: data and information 
relevant to an activity or a context. The content must be significant to the recipient 
and they should be able to make decisions based on this content or understand or be 
able to evaluate a certain situation. For example, a customer should be able to under-
stand the terms of an agreement or a production manager should be able to have all 
the information in order to plan the resources for the next month. Referring back to 
the process approach, for each process you have defined what will be communicated:
• What the necessary inputs for each process are
• What the necessary outputs for each process are
Locating the means, tools, or instruments for the communication is essential to the 
definition, that is, if you are planning to deliver a report with certain information, 
you must make sure that
• You can summon the data related to the information
• You can work this data into the requested information
• You have the technology to present this information as a report to the person who 
awaits it
Referring to the process approach—for each process or subprocess, it will be clearly 
defined which information or data must be transferred and how it will be done.
Defining the Events for Communication
Delivering the message at the right moment is crucial for the effectiveness of its con-
tent. Process is built from many steps and sequences. Each step processes inputs and 
generates outputs. When planning the processes, one must consider at which step a 
communication must be initiated: incoming as well as outgoing. This aspect can have 
a significant effect on the objectives of the QMS; when a system fails to communicate 
 

154
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
customer requirements to the service technician, customer satisfaction may decrease; 
if a supplier does not receive the order on time or does not receive the schedules for 
delivery, he cannot deliver according to the plan and the organization may fail to 
deliver the product to the customer on time.
IT systems such as ERP or CRM can automate the transfer of such information:
• Each time QMS creates a nonconformity, a message is sent to the interested persons 
in the organization: CEO, product manager, key account manager, etc.
• MRP (material requirements planning) can automatically create and send purchase 
orders to suppliers with planned schedules.
• In many CRM systems, there is an option of automatically creating customer events 
based on business cases and designating them to users, for example, when customer 
sends a very low-ranked survey response, a message is sent to a representative that 
should contact the customer in order to understand why.
Referring to the process approach—the analysis of your processes will indicate in 
which business cases or events a communication will be initiated.
Defining with Whom to Communicate
Information and data delivered through the communication channel must find their 
target. In today’s business environment, people tend to be flooded with irrelevant 
information. This is why the destination of the information for each type or channel 
of communication must be clear:
• Management: It is necessary to define which information will be communicated 
from the top management and back (vertically).
• Employees: It is necessary to define for each activity the communication between 
personnel (horizontally).
• Customers: It is necessary to define which communications will be established 
with customers. This requirement is dealt with in detail in clause 8.2.4—Customer 
communication.
• Suppliers: It is necessary to define which communications will be established for 
external providers. This requirement is dealt with in detail in clause 8.4—Control of 
external provision of goods and services.
• Other interested parties (such as governmental bodies or stake holders): Communication 
for other interested parties must be clearly defined according to their expectations 
(which information they need and how they receive it—which technology).
Defining the Communication Channels
Each process or activity dictates the needed communication channel:
• Who initiates the communication? Who is the sender and who is the receiver?
• What information must be transferred and where is it available?
• Which technology will operate the communication?
• What knowledge, skills, or qualifications are required for the operation of the channel?
 

155
Support
Examples of communication channels:
• ERP system: Business management software of integrated applications that use a 
common database that allows the transmission of data and information in real time 
between different departments in the organization.
• CRM system: Is a system for managing interactions with current and future 
 customers for a company’s that used technology to organize, automate, and syn-
chronize internal as well as external communication.
• PLM system: A system that manages product life cycle by communicating its data 
with relevant interested parties: customer, design and development team, produc-
tion team, etc.
• Pneumatic tube system: A system that propels cylindrical containers through a 
network of tubes by compressed air or by partial vacuum used to transport small, 
urgent packages (such as mail, paperwork, or money) over relatively short distances 
(within a building or at most within a city, mostly seen in hospitals).
• Brochures: An informative paper document used to introduce a company or organi-
zation and designated to a target group.
• E-mails: Well, I bet you are familiar with this communication channel … .
• Internal news mails or organizational blog: Effective communication tool used to 
distribute information intended for employees in the company bearing relevant and 
useful information about important topics that employees should be aware of.
• Periodic meetings: This is the opportunity for mid-level shared employees to for-
mally meet to discuss and improve visibility of issues, share ideas, and support each 
other better.
• Training and lectures: These might be used as a means of communication to transfer 
information and data to employees or receive inputs from them.
For each type of channel, it is necessary to determine the frequency of use and the 
types of data or information that it will handle. And it can be planned using dif-
ferent approaches: Review what the required information to be transferred is and 
then plan the channels appropriately. If it can be seen that the process of handling 
customer complaints in the organization is not effective and parties are neglect-
ing their duties, a designated system may be implemented that will encourage the 
process.
Effectiveness of Communication Channels
Effective communication channels are important to an effective QMS because they cre-
ate transparency in the organization and allow the efficient flow of data, information, 
and knowledge. The effectiveness of communication channels is measured with the 
following:
• Verification that all needed communications are identified
• Verification that appropriate or correct data and information and knowledge are 
transferred
• Verification that data and information and knowledge reach their designated desti-
nation at the right time
 

156
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In order to achieve effectiveness, you should promote the following regarding the 
communication channels:
• Encouragement: The channels must be encouraged and be active at all organiza-
tional levels.
• Clear and understandable: Each role and responsibility must know its obligations; 
how it must communicate, when, and what.
• Bidirectional: If the information must travel in both ways (forward and backward—from 
sender to receiver and back), the channel must allow it.
• Adapted to language requirements: If employees of the organization speak more 
than one language, the communication channel must support it.
In practice, you may include all this in the qualification and training program.
Analyzing the Communication Channels
As mentioned throughout this chapter, the communication channels define the 
reporting methods, support the interaction of processes in an organization, and 
must be planned in accordance with its organizational structure and the workflow. 
I suggest here a simple method for analyzing the requirements for the communi-
cation channels. Basically, each employee, function, or role should know to whom 
they must report or who reports to them, with which tools they should be report-
ing, which inputs they should receive, and which outputs they should  deliver. 
And these are the parameters that you should identify. I divide them in the fol-
lowing way:
• Sender: Who is responsible for initiating the communication—this definition will 
be on level of a role/process owner.
• Event: At which time point or which activity initiates the communication.
• Recipient: Who is bound to receive the information—this definition will be on the 
level of a role/process owner.
• Deliverable: Which information must be delivered—the expectation must be clear 
and known.
• Schedule: At which point in the process flow must the communication be initiated.
• Method: How the information will be communicated—telephone, e-mail, ERP sys-
tem, automatically or manually.
• Acceptable: What information or data the sender expects in response.
Let us look at the following business cases: When a production manager needs raw 
material or components for the realization of goods, or when a service manager needs 
to plan work resources for the next week, communication channels with their sup-
pliers (warehouse, team manager responsible for the technicians) will be determined 
and established in an effective way. The following table gives an overview of how 
information should flow between entities in the QMS for this example:
 

157
Support
This kind of analysis can be part of your process analysis when applying the process 
approach.
7.5  Documented Information
Documents and information of the QMS must be controlled. This is a key element of 
a QMS. The main idea is to provide control over the documented information neces-
sary for the operation of the QMS. In order to achieve this high-importance qual-
ity objective, the ISO 9001 Standard expects a method. The new term “documented 
information” brings an improved and a closer reality perspective of documents and 
records into the ISO 9001 Standard requirements.
Documented information refers to the information necessary for the plan-
ning and operation of the QMS coming from any source and the medium on 
which it is contained. For the first time, the standard does not separate between 
procedures, documentations, and records and refers to all as documented 
Parameter
Business Case Production
Business Case Service
The person or role that initiates 
the communication (sender)
Production manager
Service manager
Defined point of time (event)—
when the communication must 
be initiated
According to the production 
plan (e.g., MRP), the 
production manager should 
know the schedules for 
production orders
According to the planned 
capacity (list of open service 
calls), the manager should 
know what tasks must be 
completed, what qualifications 
are needed, and their 
schedules
Target for the request 
(recipient)—to whom must the 
sender submit their request
The organizational unit that 
provides the raw material
Team manager—a person who 
is responsible for submitting 
people to work
Means of communication 
(method)—how shall the 
request be submitted
Supply request—through the 
ERP system, e-mail, or a form
Request through a CRM 
system, service system, e-mail, 
or a form
The required information 
(deliverable outputs)—which 
data or information must be 
submitted to the receiver
The person working in the 
warehouse will have all the 
necessary information:
who sent the request, which 
material is needed, the 
quantities, the schedules, and 
where should it be delivered
The team manager will have all 
the necessary information: 
who sent the request, to which 
department/area, how many 
employees are needed, when 
they are required, and which 
skills they require
The manner for returning an 
answer
The person who works in the 
warehouse will have a defined 
way to return an answer to the 
production manager about his 
or her request
The team manager
will have a defined way to 
return an answer to the 
service manager regarding the 
availability of the resources
 

158
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
information. The very strict definition refers to information used by the QMS 
or produced by it that
• Was defined by the organization as necessary for the planning and the opera-
tion of the QMS—the definition includes the media on which the information is 
stored and maintained. Information can be in any format and media and from 
any source.
• Is required to be maintained and controlled by the organization.
Documented information relates to four kinds of documentations distinguished with 
different characteristics related to context, use, maintenance, and media:
• Documented information needed to describe and document the QMS, for example, 
quality policy
• Documented information needed to document quality processes of the QMS, for 
example, form for management review or internal audit
• Documented information needed for the operation of the QMS, for example, work 
instructions, SOPs, process diagrams, etc.
• Evidence or processes or activities as records that are necessary to verify or validate 
results and to check and prove the effectiveness of the QMS, for example, production 
charts for quality control or results of customer satisfaction surveys
7.5.1  General
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements are as follows:
• The QMS documentation shall include documented information required by this 
international standard.
• The QMS documentation shall include documented information defined by the 
organization as needed to provide evidence of the effective operation of the QMS 
and of conformity of products and services.
• Note: The extent, scope, and size of documented information in organizations are 
affected by the following factors:
• The intended outcomes and results of the QMS
• The size of the organization
• The level of complexity, functionality, and interrelations between its processes
• The qualifications of the employees
• The quality objectives
A principle that must be considered when defining your documented information is 
as follows: the amount and details of the documented information must be relevant 
to the intended outcomes and results expected of the QMS.
Documented Information Required by the ISO 9001 Standard
Throughout the standard, there are requirements for documentations needed to sup-
port and operate the QMS. The last version was relatively clear and specified, where 
 

159
Support
the ISO 9001:2008 Standard expected procedures, documentations, and records. 
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard does not put itself anymore in the position of telling 
you which procedures to maintain, which procedures not to write, or which records 
are necessary. You will decide what is necessary for you to maintain the standard 
requirement. It is a harder task because it leaves more room for interpretations and 
debates for you and your auditor.
I propose in this chapter (as a recommendation only) a way to analyze the standard 
textually and assess whether documentation is required. Normally, the text of the 
standard implies with clear statements where documentation is expected. But some-
times you must read between the lines and figure it out. Let us look at some example 
statements:
• Clause 4.3 “The scope shall be available as documented information”: It is clear that 
documentation here is required.
• Clause 8.1 “Establishing criteria for the processes”: On the one side, it is not specifi-
cally stated that documentation is required, but, on the other hand, I cannot think 
of other ways to meet these requirements without maintaining documented infor-
mation of the mentioned criteria.
• Clause 9.1.2: It is required to determine methods for obtaining and using data relat-
ing to customer perceptions of the degree to which requirements have been met—
There is no need to provide documented information regarding those requirements, 
but there is a requirement to prove that these activities were planned and are being 
performed. There is also no need to develop a process or procedure that describes 
which methods are used, which tools are used to collect the data, and which tools 
are used to analyze the data. But it is required to prove that those were considered, 
planned, and are being performed.
Structure of the Documentation
A QMS must have a structure for the documentation it uses. The idea is to develop 
a structure that demonstrates the relations and interrelations between the vari-
ous documents throughout the QMS and enables tracing back a process through 
the documented information; some documents relate to other documents, outputs 
of one document are the inputs for another document, and so on. The structure 
should be effectively planned and should present the relations between the dif-
ferent types of the documents in the organization. These relations are based on 
your organizational needs and will support your activities. In other words, let 
your organizational needs and operational activities dictate the structure of the 
documentation.
A good example for relations and interrelations of documented information is a 
work instruction and the references to specific forms; a work instruction describes an 
activity of some kind and refers to a specific form that the employee must fill out in 
order to provide evidence and effectiveness of that activity.
The traditional and most common method to analyze the structure of the docu-
mented information in the organization will be to arrange, classify, categorize, and set 
levels to the types of the documented information used in the organization according 
 

160
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
to their characteristics and role in the QMS. I prepared here a diagram that suggests 
one way of defining the structure of documentation (Figure 7.2).
This pyramid of documentation describes the operational flow of documented 
information in the organization and represents the levels for the types of documents 
that are usually used in a QMS, from the planning of strategic stages to the daily work 
of performing activities and filling out forms. This method clearly illustrates that with 
each descending level of the pyramid, the amount of required documented informa-
tion will increase. This kind of pyramid provides navigation for users throughout 
the various documentations in the organization. In other words, when an interested 
party (internal like a user or an employee or external like an auditor) needs to get 
familiarize with the documentation of the organization, they can use this structure 
for orientation. Such a structure may set the basis for responsibilities and authorities 
regarding
• Planning and approval of documented information
• Updating documented information
• Locating and deposition of documented information
• Disposal of documented information
In the last revision of the ISO 9001 Standard (2008), it was required to maintain a 
quality manual and usually this structure was presented in that document. The ISO 
9001:2015 does not require the maintenance of such quality manual anymore. I find 
the quality manual very effective because it provides a frame for the documentation. 
Workflow and core 
processes
Quality procedures
SOPs, specifications, quality plan, work instructions 
and forms
Records
Quality 
policy and 
objectives
Key system objective
Procedure supporting quality activities
Description of the core process
Procedure and instructions for the 
operation of processes
Evidences and results
Figure 7.2 Documentation pyramid.
 

161
Support
The new revision of the standard (ISO 9001:2015) excluded this requirement, but you 
may still keep and maintain a quality manual, in which I suggest you document and 
include the description of the structure and its requirements. Let us review the differ-
ent levels and see how they serve the QMS.
Strategic Level
In the first level of the documentation pyramid, we will find documentation of declar-
ative statements by the organization that includes the key elements of the QMS, and 
that will set the strategic direction of the QMS. This documented information has 
a clear goal: to introduce and communicate the intentions, scope, and structure of 
the QMS in the organization. It includes elements such as QMS scope, quality poli-
cies, quality objectives or references to them, organizational structure, exclusions, 
general process of the organization, etc. The following table shows the types of the 
documented information suggested or required by the ISO 9001 Standard, which 
addresses this first level:
Subject
Relevant ISO 9001 Clause
Requirement for 
Documented Information
Description of the context of the 
organization
4.1 Understanding the 
organization and its context
No documented 
information is required
Description of organization and the 
organizational structure
5.3 Organizational roles, 
responsibilities, and 
authorities
No documented 
information is required
Description of interested parties and 
their expectations
4.2 Understanding the needs 
and expectations of interested 
parties
No documented 
information is required
Scope of QMS
4.3 Determining the scope of 
the quality management 
system
Documented information 
is required
Details of exclusions
4.3 Determining the scope of 
the quality management 
system
Documented information 
is required
Organization’s quality policy 
written in conformance with 
the ISO 9001C Standard 
requirements
5.2 Quality policy
Documented information 
is required
Quality objectives or reference to 
them
6.2 Quality objectives and 
planning to achieve them
Documented information 
is required
Identification of processes included 
in and are necessary to the operation 
of the QMS
4.4 Quality management 
system and its processes
Documented information 
is required
Description of process interactions or 
reference to another document 
specifying them
4.4 Quality management 
system and its processes
Documented information 
is required
 

162
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Reviewing this information mentioned in the table would provide answers to ques-
tions like
• Who are the interested parties of the organization?
• What is the scope of the QMS?
• What are the quality policy and objectives of the firm?
• What are the main products and services?
• How do the main processes flow?
Workflow and Core Processes
Workflow describes the work process of an organizational unit (an organization or 
a part of the organization) where each step depends on the preceding step. It depicts 
the business activity with step processes, their resources, their sequences (progres-
sion), and interactions that transform inputs into outputs, for example, materials 
into goods or information into services. Workflow can appear as a diagram or as a 
description (text). I prepared here an example for a diagram (Figure 7.3). It is very 
basic but enough to provide the main idea:
Each block describes a set of processes, subprocesses, and business activities for 
the operation of the QMS. The workflow should be aligned with the scope of the 
QMS; the workflow can include all of the organization’s processes or just a certain 
and identified functions of the organization, certain and identified units of the orga-
nization, or one or more functions across a group of organizations. The workflow also 
determines the needs for documented information.
Customer offer
Customer order
Purchase
Delivery
Development of product
Invoicing
After sales activities
Figure 7.3 Example for a workflow.
 

163
Support
Procedures or Process Diagrams to Support Quality Activities
On this level, you may include procedures or instructions that support quality activi-
ties that the standard describes and demands (the ISO 9001:2015 Standard requires 
activities not procedures). For example:
• Maintenance of documented information
• Control of nonconforming product
• Internal audit
• Corrective action
In practice, the new revision of the ISO 9001 (2015) does not require the establish-
ment and maintenance of quality procedures as the previous revision (2008). But 
still you are permitted to keep these procedures, maintain them, use them, and audit 
them if you find that they serve the QMS, they contribute to the effectiveness of the 
QMS, and they initiate improvement. I certainly recommend the use and mainte-
nance of these procedures because I find them as an effective tool for managing criti-
cal quality activities. But do not forget to
• Update these procedures according to the new ISO 9001 2015 requirements
• Remove procedures that support quality activities that are not required anymore 
(e.g., preventive action)
Quality Plan, SOPs, Specifications, Process Diagrams, Procedures, Work Instructions, and Forms
This type of documented information, which belongs to the fourth level in our pyramid, 
has the goal of supporting operations of processes and directing and instructing personnel 
on how to perform activities. This type of documented information has the objectives of
• Supporting the workflow in the organization
• Defining the required information and data needed to perform activities and oper-
ate processes
• Describing responsibilities and authorities of people and/or organizational func-
tions regarding processes and activities
• Ensuring effective planning, operations, and control activities during the realiza-
tion of the product
• Describing activities needed to support the workflow
• Describing the interrelations of processes or activities
• Describing methods for monitoring and measurement activities
• Describing the expected evidences and records
• Communicating information regarding processes and activities
• Assisting in training
• Reducing mistakes
Type of such documented information:
• Quality plan: A quality plan is a list of specifications or activities for the organiza-
tion to follow, meet, or maintain in order to realize a product according to require-
ments (customer’s or regulatory).
• Process diagrams: A process diagram describes the flow of several processes or activ-
ities, the required inputs and outputs, and the interactions between those activities.
 

164
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• SOP: Documented procedure describing step-by-step instructions to achieve 
an intended process objective or result. This type of documentation is usually 
planned according to a template: a model, a standard, or an outline dictating the 
structure, format, and content of such procedure. The SOP is part of the overall 
process.
• Specifications: Specifications is a document stating requirements unique to a  process 
or a product.
• Procedures: A procedure provides instructions to individuals on how to perform 
a specific activity; which resources are needed, which inputs are required, which 
activities are to be performed, and which outputs are expected from this specific 
procedure. Examples include capturing a customer order or transferring an order 
to production.
• Work instructions: Work instruction presents a detailed sequence of steps or actions 
to perform an activity or a task. It is a more detailed level of the procedure. The work 
instruction will be usually presented in the form of text but visual description can 
also assist. For example, instructions for entering a customer order into the ERP 
system will include a textual explanation of operating the ERP system accompanied 
by screenshots.
• Instructions for operations: This type of documented information is similar to a 
work instruction but refers to a specific machine or tool needed for the realiza-
tion of the product. Such instructions usually bear technical details. For exam-
ple, instructions for cleaning an injection molding machine between production 
orders.
• Test plans or protocols: Test plans or test protocols are documentations used to spec-
ify which tests must to be executed in order to demonstrate that results of an activity 
meet requirements previously established in a specification.
• Form: Logically structured document referring to a certain process and designed 
to document its execution. A form contains blank fields that indicate and instruct 
the users which data are required to be entered. Filled up (used) forms are usually 
considered records.
Regulatory Requirements for Documentation
When regulations require the maintenance of any kind of certain documented infor-
mation, it should be planned, established, implemented, and maintained. For exam-
ple, health records of personnel in certain positions or certain roles. The ISO 9001 
Standard gives such regulatory requirements the same scale as any standard require-
ment for documented information when it relates to the realization of the product. 
In practice, you must identify such requirements and include them in the list of the 
controlled documented information.
External Documentation
The control of documented information shall relate in addition to external docu-
mented information. External documented information will be distinguished, reg-
istered, and controlled. The method for control shall first identify which external 
documented information is necessary for the planning and operation of the QMS 
and thus requires control, for example, a technical drawing of a product received 
 

165
Support
from a customer. This is a classic external record that must be controlled for edition 
or version; using the older version may result in delivering the wrong product to the 
customer. Other examples of external documented information may be
• Information received from customers: drawings, packaging instructions, diagrams 
of production tools, quality requirements, design files, and customer’s approvals or 
agreements
• Information received from suppliers: drawings, use instructions
• Regulation and standards
It is necessary to verify that external documented information follows all of the 
 standard’s requirements.
Extent, Scope, and Size of Documented Information
The extent, scope, and size of documented information in organizations are affected 
by the following factors:
• The size of the organization: The more departments included under the QMS or the more 
activities needed to realize the product, the more documented information is needed.
• The level of complexity, functionality, and interrelations between its processes: The 
more complex and demanding the processes, the more intense and acute the docu-
mented information.
• The qualifications of the employees: For less qualified and trained employees docu-
mented information necessary for the operation of the QMS should be more exces-
sive and detailed.
• Quality objectives: The more the quality objectives that refer to organizational units 
and roles, the more the documented information will be necessary to prove the 
achievement of those objectives.
A good example to demonstrate this is the choosing between maintaining a process, a 
procedure, or a diagram. How can it be determined when a procedure is needed and 
when a process should be charted? The extent of the documentation of a process will 
be determined according to the parameters mentioned earlier. Choose a process and 
evaluate the following:
• How many departments and organizational units are included under the QMS?
• What is the level of its complexity? Do I need to document only the principles and 
main steps of the process or each activity?
• What is the level of the personnel’s qualifications? Do I need to provide them with a 
general guideline or a detailed description of the work instruction?
• How can I measure the effectiveness of this process? Do I need to collect results of 
this process? Do I need to analyze the results or is it enough to just review the output?
• Does the documentation assist me in achieving quality objectives?
List of Necessary Documentation Required by the ISO 9001 Standard
Please review the following table. It specifies the ISO 9001 documentation require-
ments for documented information.
 

166
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Clause
Description
Standard Requirement
Type of 
Documented 
Information
Requirement for Documented Information
4.2
Understanding the needs 
and expectations of 
interested parties
Determining and updating the 
expectations and needs of interested 
parties.
Document
It is not obligatory to maintain expectations and needs of 
interested parties as documented information but you 
will have to update them. Although it is not required 
anymore, a quality manual is an option.
4.3
Determining the scope of 
the quality management 
system
Establishing the scope of the quality 
management system.
Document
A document describing the scope of the QMS in the 
organization. Although not required anymore, a 
quality manual is an option.
5.2
Quality policy
Establishing a quality policy as 
documented information.
Document
It is obligatory to maintain a document describing the 
quality policy of the QMS and the quality objectives or 
reference to other documented information regarding the 
quality objectives as documented information. Although 
not required anymore, a quality manual is an option.
6.2
Quality objectives and 
planning to achieve them
Retaining documented information on 
quality objectives.
Document
It is obligatory to maintain the quality objectives as 
documented information. Although not required 
anymore, a quality manual is an option.
7.1.5
Monitoring and measuring 
devices
Retaining documented information as 
evidence of the fitness of monitoring 
and measuring devices.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain documented information as 
records regarding the fitness, status, and maintenance 
of monitoring and measuring devices.
7.2
Competence
Evidence of competence of person(s) 
doing work under its control that affects 
its quality performance.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain documented information as 
records regarding competence of personnel performing 
realization activities that may affect the product.
8.1
Operational planning and 
control
Determining, maintaining, and retaining 
documented information to ensure 
confidence of processes and to 
demonstrate the conformity of products.
Document
It is not obligatory to maintain the criteria and control of 
processes as documented information, but you will need 
it documented to perform the controls. Instructions and 
forms may serve here.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain evidence as documented 
information that the processes were performed as 
planned.
(Continued)
 

167
Support
Clause
Description
Standard Requirement
Type of 
Documented 
Information
Requirement for Documented Information
8.2.3
Review of the requirements 
for products and services
Results of the review of requirements 
related to the products and services and 
any new requirements for the products 
and services shall be maintained as 
documented information.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the results of the review of 
requirements related to the goods and services and any 
new requirements for the products and services as 
documented information.
8.3.3
Design and development 
inputs
Maintaining documented information on 
design and development inputs.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the inputs to development 
processes as documented information.
8.3.4
Design and development 
controls
Documented information of controls to 
the design and development process 
activities is retained.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain records as evidence for the 
implementation and execution of controls is required as 
documented information.
8.3.5
Design and development 
outputs
Retaining documented information on 
design and development outputs.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain records as evidence for the 
adequacy of design and development outputs.
8.3.6
Design and development 
changes
Retaining documented information 
regarding design and development 
changes and the relevant review.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain records regarding changes 
and their review in the design and the development.
8.4.1
Control of externally 
provided processes, 
products, and services/
general
Establishing criteria for the evaluation, 
selection, and reevaluation of external 
providers.
Document
It is not obligatory to maintain records of these activities 
as documented information but you will have to provide 
evidence of planning and controlling them.
Instructions may serve here.
8.4.1
Control of externally provided 
processes, products, and 
services/general
Results of evaluations of external 
provider shall be maintained as 
documented information.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the results of the evaluation as 
documented information.
8.4.2
Type and extent of control 
of external provision
The organization shall determine the 
verification, or other activities, to ensure 
that the externally provided products 
and services meet requirements.
Document
It is not obligatory to maintain this information as 
documented information but you will have to provide 
evidence of planning and controlling them.
Instructions may serve here.
(Continued)
 

168
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Clause
Description
Standard Requirement
Type of 
Documented 
Information
Requirement for Documented Information
 
 
 
Record
It is not obligatory to maintain records of these activities 
but you will have to provide evidence that performance 
of external providers meet the specifications.
8.4.3
Information for external 
providers
The organization shall communicate its 
requirements to external providers.
Record
It is not obligatory to maintain the records of those 
activities but you will have to provide evidences of 
performing them (e.g., purchase order).
 
 
 
 
 
8.5.1
Control of production and 
service provision
Documented information describing 
characteristics of the products and 
services, or description of activities to be 
performed.
Document
It is obligatory to maintain as documented information 
the characteristics of the products or services, or 
activities needed for the control of production of 
products.
 
 
 
Document
It is obligatory to maintain as documented information 
the required results of the controls.
8.5.2
Identification and 
traceability
Documented information of unique 
identification of traceability.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the outputs of tractability 
activities as documented information.
8.5.3
Property belonging to 
customers or external 
providers
Documented information needed to 
inform customer or external provider of 
the status of property belonging to 
customers or external providers.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain notices to customers or 
external provider regarding situation of their property 
as documented information.
8.5.6
Control of changes
Documented information describing the 
results of the review of changes.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain documented information for 
the review of changes and their results.
8.6
Release of goods and 
services
Maintaining evidence of conformity of 
product with the acceptance criteria.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain documented information 
necessary to provide evidence that products conform 
before releasing them and traceability of authorization.
(Continued)
 

169
Support
Clause
Description
Standard Requirement
Type of 
Documented 
Information
Requirement for Documented Information
8.7
Control of nonconforming 
outputs
Documented information describing the 
nonconformities and any following 
actions taken.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain documented information for 
the process of identifying nonconforming product and 
their handling.
9.1.1
Monitoring, measurement, 
analysis, and 
evaluation—general
Process for ensuring that monitoring and 
measurement can be carried out.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the results of monitoring, 
measurement, analysis, and evaluation as documented 
information.
9.1.3
Analysis and evaluation
The results of analysis and evaluation 
shall be used as an input to the 
management review.
Record
Results of analysis and evaluation are to be introduced as 
inputs to the management review. Although not 
mentioned, documented information will be needed 
here.
9.2
Internal audit
The organization shall retain the 
evidences for the implementation of 
audit program
Document
Planning and submitting the audit program shall be 
maintained as documented information.
9.2
Internal audit
The results of the internal audit will be 
maintained as documented information
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the audit results as 
documented information.
9.3.3
Management review outputs
Documented information as evidence for 
performing management review and of 
the results of management reviews
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the results of the management 
review as documented information.
10.2
Nonconformity and 
corrective action
Documented information as evidence of 
nonconformities, any following actions 
taken, and the results of any corrective 
action.
Record
It is obligatory to maintain the evidences of 
nonconformities, their handling, and results as 
documented information.
 

170
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Bear in mind that wherever a record is mentioned there must be some kind of system that 
can support that record, for example, a form (which is a controlled document) or a software.
Records
Records are evidences of performing an activity and represent outputs of a process. 
Records provide evidence that objectives were (or were not) met. Records are logi-
cally the last level of the documentation pyramid in your QMS and are the outputs 
of processes, procedures, work instructions, specifications, and plans. Records may 
serve two main purposes:
 
1. Verification of execution where records are used to prove conformity to require-
ments or specifications. A procedure, specification, or other documented require-
ment demands the execution of a process or activity. With records, it is possible to 
verify that it was done according to the specification: resources, sequence, responsi-
bility, and activities.
 
2. Evaluation of effectiveness. With the records, one can review the effectiveness of an 
activity and evaluate the results against criteria.
The two functionalities of a record and a form should not be confused. Once a form 
is filled in and filed, it becomes a record—an evidence that an activity was performed. 
Print a blank form—it is a document. Use it and write information in it—it is a record. 
A screen used to enter customer order in an ERP system may be counted as a form. 
The details of a certain order are the record. Types of records include
• Evidence of the supply chain: customer orders, delivery notes, invoices, credit notes, 
receiving slip, and certificate of compliance accepted from suppliers
• Evidence of the production phase: forms for production orders, test protocols with 
results, labels with production details such as serial numbers, validation forms, job 
release approvals, and records of quality assurance and batch approvals
• Records of maintenance of resources: records of machine maintenance, production 
tool status reports, and records of trainings
• Records related to quality activities: records of management review, internal audits 
and nonconformities, and filled-in customer questionnaires
ISO/TR 10013:2001
The ISO/TR 10013:2001 Standard guidelines for QMS documentation is a very effective 
tool for the development and maintenance of the documentation necessary to ensure an 
effective QMS. It uses disciplines that are well known in the quality management area and 
the standard is very easy to understand and implement. I warmly recommend using this 
standard while determining the structure and format of your documented information.
7.5.2  Creating and Updating
The definition of the documented information is combined from several  characteristics 
that affect the documented information and its functionality such as identification, 
 

171
Support
relevance, media, etc. All those properties must be defined and applied when design-
ing, releasing, and updating documented information. The ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements are very clear:
• When creating and updating documented information, the organization shall 
ensure that identification and description of this documented information are 
defined and clear. The identification and description may include characteristics like 
title, date, author, or reference number.
• For each type of documented information, the appropriate format will be deter-
mined and maintained.
• For each type of documented information, the appropriate media will be deter-
mined and maintained.
• When creating and updating documented information, the organization shall apply 
reviews and approval needed for the suitability and adequacy of this documented 
information.
Identification and Description of Documents
Any documented information (internal or external) must be identified and repre-
sented with words (described) in order to make the use and function of this docu-
ment clear. A document must have a name, catalogue number, or other means of 
identification. This is done through defining elements that can identify, describe it, 
and submit it to the control. Anyone in the organization that picks up the document 
will know where to assign it. The ISO 9001:2015 Standard requires the determination 
of a method for identification of documents. The following example for identification 
of documented information is quite basic but will hold in an audit.
The organization maintains the next operational hierarchy of documentations:
• Documented procedure that describes a process
• Work instructions that specify how activities will be performed
• Forms that document activities and deliver evidences
Let us assume that the organization manages a process for receiving customer 
orders. This documented procedure is numbered and identified: PR-004—Receiving 
Customer Order. This caption will appear on top of the documentation that describes 
or displays the procedure:
• PR: stands for procedure
• 004: the three digits represent the process in the workflow
• Receiving Customer Order: the name of the procedure
On the documented procedure (whether it is a diagram or a text that describes the 
procedure), references to lower work instructions will appear. Let us go one tier below 
to the work instruction. Take a look at the following number: WI-004-002: Entering 
Customer Order into the ERP system.
• WI: stands for “work instruction”
• 004: the first three digits represent the process
• 002: the second three digits represent the subprocess
• Entering Customer Order into the ERP system: the name of the procedure
 

172
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
And to it I add form FO-004-002-003: List of Open Orders
• FO: stands for form
• 004: the first three digits represent the process related to this form
• 002: the second three digits represent the subprocess related to this form
• 003: represents the third form related to this subprocess
• List of Open Orders: the name of the form
Together, they combine an identification number, maintain the interrelation between 
each other, but most importantly they provide identification of the documents. This 
kind of identification must be applied to documented information when creating or 
updating a document.
Identification of Records
Although the standard neglects the differentiation between documentations and records 
and refers to records as documented information, I would like to relate to the records 
because I feel that records do have special properties. Records like documents must be 
identified. A record must have a name, catalogue number, or other means of identifi-
cation: an element that identifies it. Normally, it inherits the identification of its related 
document. Anyone in the organization that stumbles upon it will know where to assign it.
But important is who performed the activity. As stated before, a record is an evi-
dence of performance. Each record must have the identity of the person that filled it 
or at least the function that is responsible for it. The classic way is the name, date, and 
a signature on the record. The identification of the person will be clear and under-
stood. A digital signature counts as well.
Format and Structure of Documented Information
The structure and the format for each type of documented information will be 
determined. The objective is to constitute unity when creating a document. In other 
words, to create a situation where all types of documented information look alike in 
the organization and to avoid different formats or structures and to reduce confusion 
and uncertainty. The types of formats may be text, flow charts, tables, a combination 
of the three, or any other method that will serve the organization.
The format and structure of the document will determine the content of the docu-
ment—what the document must contain. I suggest here a few elements that could 
appear on a document but are not obligatory:
• Title: The title should clearly identify the document. It can contain the caption and 
the catalog number of the document. Examples: PR-004—Receiving Customer 
Order, WI-004-002—Entering Customer Order into the ERP system, FO-004-002-
003—List of Open Orders.
• Review, approval, and revision: Information regarding the review and approval, 
 status and date of revision of the document must be indicated on the document.
 

173
Support
• List of changes: Changes of revisions, the approval, and their reason could be stated 
on the document (when not on the document somewhere else).
• Purpose: The purpose of the document should be described on the document. 
The idea is to allow anyone that reads the document to understand its objec-
tive. Example: This documented procedure has the objective of defining and 
 describing the steps that must be followed when receiving an order from a 
customer.
• Scope: The scope refers to the areas in the organization that the content covers. 
For example: “Sales” could mean the sales manager, sales personnel, and the back 
office. You may include which areas in the organization are not included in the 
scope.
• Responsibility and authority of executing the activities: Responsibilities and 
authorities of persons associated with the content of the document shall be 
defined in the document. Example: This documented procedure concerns the 
back office of the sales department and field sales personnel. That means that 
actions and activities together with the records that will be produced are in their 
responsibility.
• Description of activities: The activities and actions required to achieve the objective 
of the document are to be described. The level of detail depends on the complexity 
of the activities, the necessary methods, and the levels of skill and training of people 
that are needed in order for them to accomplish the activities. Nevertheless, a few 
aspects must be covered:
• In case of documented procedure, the customer of the process and its needs 
must be clear.
• In case of documented procedure, the inputs and outputs of the process must 
be clear.
• Special terms and definitions related to the activities will be explained.
• The resources required for accomplishing the objective of the process or 
instruction must be described (in terms of personnel, training, equipment, and 
materials).
• The sequence of activities and description of the needed activities must be 
clear.
• Within the activities and the sequences, it will be clear by whom or by which 
organizational function an activity must be performed; why, when, where, and 
how.
• The controls of the process or activities and their application must be 
described.
• When nonconformities are discovered, the measurements for the removal must 
be defined.
• References to documented information related to the required activities shall 
be indicated: further instructions, forms, or other means of documented 
information.
• Required records: The expected records related to the activities should be indi-
cated. When forms are to be used for these records, they should be identified and 
mentioned. 
 

174
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
I prepared here an example of a work instruction designed according to the require-
ments mentioned earlier:
Media of Documented Information
The media on which the documented information will be saved, stored, used, 
or archived must be defined. The definition will refer to any kind of media used 
by the organization: printed paper, magnetic, or electronic. When defining the 
media for each type of documented information, you should consider the follow-
ing aspects:
• Access of personnel to the media: When you define a type of media, be sure that all 
users have access to this media. For example: When you decide that forms will be 
saved as PDF files, be sure that all workstations have a PDF reader installed on them.
• Distribution of documented information: The media must support the distribu-
tion of documented information. For example, if you are updating a document fre-
quently, managing it as a hard copy may not be effective because then you will need 
to update all the copies.
• Revision, approval, and changes of the documented information: The media must 
support your requirements for changes, approval of changes, and the management 
of revisions. For example, a word document is very much limited when it comes to 
managing details such as approval and revision.
Title
WI-004-002: Entering Customer Order into the ERP System
Review, approval, 
and revision
Date
Revision
Approval through
01.01.2015
2nd
sales manager
List of changes
Date
Change
Approval through
01.01.2016
Update—Addition to Section 
2—capturing of additional 
information necessary for transfer 
to production
sales manager
Purpose
Describing the steps for entering a customer order into the ERP system
Scope
Sales back office
Responsibility and 
authority
Sales representatives
Required inputs
FO-004-002-001—Manual order from sales personnel
FO-004-002-002—Order form from web application
Description of 
activities
 1. Terms and definitions (e.g., sales program)
 2. Needed resources (e.g., user with sales permissions)
 3. Sequence of activities—what is needed to be done
 4. The controls of the process (e.g., activating a function that warns the user 
when a field is not filled out, reviewing the printout of the order)
Reference to other 
documented 
information
PR-004: Receiving customer order (related process)
WI-006-001: User guide for operating the ERP system
FO-004-002-004: 
Customer order
Required records
FO-004-002-003: List of open orders
 

175
Support
• Deterioration of media: The deterioration of electronic or magnetic media on which 
the records are kept, for example, plays an important role. Media such as CDs or 
magnetic tapes do not last forever. In fact, their lifetime is shorter than you think.
• Storage: The method for storage capabilities may affect the type of media.
• Removal of documented information: The removal of media can be very compli-
cated when documented information is scattered across many locations. Therefore 
it is important to decide upon where to store information.
Reviews and Approval for Suitability and Adequacy of Documented Information
Each document used by the organization must be supervised, reviewed, and approved 
prior to submission for use. The objective is to ensure that the document was appro-
priately designed, is suitable for working, and will assist the organization in meeting 
customer’s as well as regulatory requirements. For each document, the role, function, 
or authority that reviews, approves, and releases it will be defined.
The function or authority that reviews and approves the document must have 
some degree of relevancy to the document and the activity it supports. How is rele-
vancy determined? You need to review qualifications, experience, and background 
of the subject and their association to the activities. This requirement will ensure 
that documents will be checked by appropriate functions or roles and all impor-
tant aspects will be accounted for. For example, when you design a routing card for 
a production process, the production manager may be responsible for reviewing 
that all the required fields are on the form and approving it. But if you are creating 
a process validation form, there will be other parties that would like to share their 
opinion about it: the development and the QA for example. There are situations 
when more than one function would need to review and approve the document. 
This may occur when more than one process is recorded on one document, for 
example, packaging instructions. Then, the storage and the production manager 
will need to discuss the matter and together create the optimal document. When 
necessary, documented information will bear a validation period.
The activity of approval and release of a document will be defined, where approval 
is necessary. I used to print a master copy, get it signed by the responsible party, and 
store it in a master documents folder. But today you can achieve this with the help 
of document management systems (DMS) that provides digital approvals. Usually, 
these systems support the standard requirements. When purchasing such a system, 
make sure that it answers the ISO 9001 Standard requirements. If you do not have 
this option, a simple table or an Excel chart describing the document and the author-
ity for review and approval will be sufficient.
7.5.3  Control of Documented Information
After analyzing the needs for documented information necessary for operating the 
QMS, and developing the strategy to implement them, the organization shall estab-
lish efforts and create conditions in order to manage and control activities needed to 
administrate the documented information. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
 

176
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
7.5.3.1
• The organization shall ensure availability and suitability of documentation required 
by the QMS and by the ISO 9001 Standard.
• The organization shall control the sufficient and appropriate protection of docu-
mented information and will identify risks for its safety and integrity.
7.5.3.2
• Distribution, access, and retrieval activities necessary for the control of documented 
information shall be determined and maintained.
• Activities for storage and preservation, including activities to ensure that docu-
mented information remains legible necessary for the control of documented infor-
mation, shall be determined and maintained.
• Activities for the control of changes of documented information shall be deter-
mined and maintained.
• The different levels of access permissions to and the authority to modify the docu-
mented information will be defined and controlled.
• Activities for retention and disposition necessary for the control of documented 
information shall be determined and maintained.
• Documented information of external origin needed for the planning and operation 
of the QMS will be identified, controlled, and appropriately distributed.
• Documented information retained as evidence of conformity shall be protected 
from unintended alterations.
Availability and Distribution of Documented Information
Each document will be distributed and available to the relevant parties (roles or func-
tions) at the appropriate locations and at the appropriate point of use. Defining the 
availability and distribution of documents must include the following:
• User authorization: who is authorized to use a document
• Location of the document: where must a document be kept before and after use
• Form of availability: paper or magnetic media, for example
This availability should be defined and determined. I recommend tabulating that 
information as follows:
By the way, this table itself is considered as documented information.
Suitability of Documented Information
Suitability of documented information relates to the assurance that it was appro-
priately designed: it supports the processes and activities, is adequate for work-
ing, and will assist the organization in meeting the quality objectives and product 
Type of Document
Location (a computer file path)
Media
Work instructions
Company server/department/WI
PDF files
Forms
Company server/department/forms
PDF files
Quality forms
Company server/quality/forms
PDF files
 

177
Support
requirements. Each document shall be approved for suitability before release for use. 
Which aspects indicate the suitability of documented information?
• Purpose: The purpose of the documented information must be clear to the person 
who designs and creates it and to the users who use it.
• Work instruction or documented procedure: Users shall understand what is 
expected from them.
• A form: Users shall understand the significant of the entries, their flow to 
another process, and their use as evidence.
• Properties: The properties of the documented information are defined and applied, 
format and structure of a document maintained, identification applied, and protec-
tion measures carried out.
• Effectiveness: The documented information achieves its objectives and the process 
or activity that it supports is accomplished (and not just a form that needed to be 
filled up in order to satisfy the internal audit)
Legibility of Documented Information
Legibility of documented information refers to its quality of being understood:
• Documents will be legible enough to be identified.
• Records will be legible, readable, and retrievable for their entire retention time.
When you plan and implement the use of documents in the organization and the 
creation of records, some factors that may affect legibility must be considered:
• Intactness, clarity, usability, and accuracy: The factors almost directly affect leg-
ibility. Documents and records must be handled with care and the personnel are 
responsible for maintaining accurate and legible records with all the required infor-
mation filled out and correctly filed:
• Documented information must bear all the required information and details.
• I personally recommend recording the date of filling the records. People with 
problematic handwriting will have to work harder and provide legible data and 
information on the record.
• Deterioration: The deterioration of media on which the documented information is 
saved plays an important role. For example, media such as CDs or magnetic tapes 
do not last forever.
• Update of technology: Changing of technology used to save and access the docu-
mented information is a major aspect. The organization must ensure that they may 
access documented information in the future. A good example is the update of com-
puter operation systems where old files cannot be read with new versions.
• Relevance: It will be possible to submit the documented information to its relevant 
context, process or specific product or process:
• On documents, it will be clear to which process and product of part of the QMS 
they refer.
• Records shall not carry or store information that is not relevant to them.
• Digitization: Conversion of analog records or hard copies to digital formats can 
result in loss of information.
 

178
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• If you decide to scan records to computer files, please ensure that the scanning 
is done appropriately and the information on record is readable and clear after 
the scan. I sometimes find myself on all fours searching for old documents in 
cold cellars just because it was impossible to understand the information from 
the scanned record.
Storage of Documented Information
Storage locations, facilities, and conditions of documented information must be 
defined for each type of document and record.
• Documents: The designer and the users of all kinds of documents shall know the 
location where the document is stored and the media on which it must be saved.
• Records: The producers of records shall know where and how records must be saved; 
a closet, a designated folder, as an electronic file or folder, or as a software.
The objective is to allow each person in the organization to retrieve or track back 
documented information according to its type and context. Storage definition shall 
cover the archiving of the documented information as well. The organization shall 
consider storage factors that may create conditions for the protection and preserva-
tion of documented information. Important factors when considering the storage of 
documented information are
• Media of documented information: The type of media on which the documented 
information is saved defines usually the storage requirements and the physical con-
ditions such as temperature, humidity, or weight. Where there are known risks to 
the media, precautions will be taken.
• Access and retrieval of documented information: Storage conditions must support 
the access requirements to the documented information; who has access to and how 
and when to document necessary information.
• It is critical to avoid storing documented information on personal workstations 
such as computers in order to provide full access. For example, when employees 
leave or change jobs, the IT administration deletes the contents of their hard 
disk or personal files regardless of its value or significance to the QMS.
• Volume and growth rate of documented information: The storage must supply 
enough space according to the activity of the organization and place limitations 
must be accounted. If the organization is producing millions of records per year, the 
server capabilities must support this volume. By capabilities, I mean not only space 
but also the performance of the server must support access of many users.
• Workflow: Storage of documented information must support the workflow, in gen-
eral, and processes, in particular. Documented information usually acts as inputs 
or outputs to processes and all participants of the processes must have access to it.
• By storing documented information along the work flow, you may avoid losing it.
• Risks to the integrity of documented information: The integrity of documented 
information refers to the required conditions needed to preserve the content and 
completeness of documented information. The location or facility of the storage 
should not be exposed to external risks such as a flood, fire, or burglary and must 
prevent damages to the documented information.
 

179
Support
• Security and confidentiality requirements: Security protection measure (physical as 
well as logical) shall be implemented.
• Backup systems: Backup processes should be regularly executed and the retrieval of 
documents and records shall be planned in case of a disaster.
Storage must take into account the life cycle of documented information in the orga-
nization where for each phase it must be defined how documented information is 
stored. For example, let’s look at the life cycle of a customer order (a record):
When storage of records is outsourced, all of these must be discussed with the 
provider.
In my treatment of protection and preservation of documented information, 
I  separate documents from records because I find that these two types of documented 
information have different needs and therefore set different requirements.
Protection and Preservation of Documents
The organization shall determine actions to ensure that documents of all kinds will 
remain safe and available for use. These actions shall refer to the appropriate mainte-
nance conditions of documented information. What are the appropriate conditions? 
The ones that will prevent loss of confidentiality, improper use, or loss of integrity.
In practice, it is necessary to identify which conditions may affect each type of doc-
ument in the organization. Visit the different departments in the organization, take 
a look, and try to review the parameters that might affect the safety of the respective 
documents. When conditions that may harm or pose risks to documents are found, 
you must define what measures are required in order to avoid them. This is a kind 
of small-scale risk analysis regarding the safety of a document. Parameters included 
here are
• Environment
• Safety
• Ability to preserve retention value
• Handling of documents
• Unauthorized access
Phase
Action
Creation of the records
Signed customer order—a printed/scanned form filed in a designated folder
Assigning the records 
to some logical system
Enter the customer order into an ERP system or print a controlled form as 
Word document
Maintenance of the 
records
Integrity of records is controlled through verifications that direct the user in 
entering information into the ERP system or forms with defined fields
Use of the records in 
the workflow
Transfer to production—record in the ERP system linked with customer 
order number or scheduling a manual product order based on the 
customer order
Disposition or 
archiving of records
Once the customer order is closed, it receives a certain status or it will be 
identified on the form (e.g., with a stamp)
 

180
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
For example, water and heat may damage a paper document and therefore in such 
environments work instructions or documented procedures should be laminated, 
placed in a heatproof pouch, and kept away from hazards.
Backup and support systems for the company’s server are another example of protec-
tion. The organization is required to demonstrate that sufficient backup system is in place 
that allows access to documents when, for example, electronic systems crash or gener-
ally become unavailable. Another aspect is human resource behavior with documents. 
Define how employees should handle documents and where they should be stored. I find 
myself printing work instructions again and again because they get lost all the time.
Protection and Preservation of Records
Protection and preservation of records refers to the equipment and facilities that man-
age records and to the methods and techniques that are planned in order to protect 
records. Integrity of records is critical for business continuity, and therefore, records 
will be appropriately protected. Protection of records ensures that the information 
contained in the records is available and accurate for future reference and records 
must not be changed over time. For each type of record, you need to identify the risks 
(for damaged or loss) and apply appropriate methods of protection and preservation. 
In doing so, the following should be considered.
• Legibility: Protection of records shall support their legibility and ensure that the con-
tent in the records will remain clear and available for use over the life cycle of the record.
• Storage: It is necessary to ensure that storage of records is adequately in place accord-
ing to the type of the record, for example, organizing folders in the workstations, 
ensuring no confusion when filing, storing, or archiving the records or verifying the 
functionality of data repository.
• Flow of information: It is necessary to ensure that records will reach their destina-
tion and will not be lost. This is important for the flawlessness of the workflow.
• Unauthorized access: It is necessary to ensure that no misuse of records is possible 
(through management of access and authorization).
The solution for protection shall extend to all areas and scopes of the organization. 
Backup systems are one good example of how the organization protects its records. Such 
a system proves the integrity of records as well as provided a solution in case of a disaster.
Basically, an analysis regarding the following issues is required:
• Who is responsible for records?
• Which conditions may pose risks to the records?
• What measures are necessary in order to ensure records are protected?
• When and where should those measures be implemented?
A Documented Method for Managing Documents and Records
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard does not demand a documented method, that is to say, a pro-
cedure, for controlling your documents and records. The last revision of the  standard, the 
ISO 9001:2008, demanded a specific procedure for managing records (e.g., Documents 
 

181
Support
Control and Records Control). In case you already have such procedures in place, you 
are entitled to keep and maintain them. But do review their content once more and make 
sure that it covers all of the ISO 9001:2015 Standard requirements. Personally, I would 
adopt these procedures and update them regularly because I find these issues very critical 
and they need the support of a documentation that describes the methods, activities, and 
technologies used to implement the control of documents or records and the required 
evidences. In order to create an effective procedure, try to relate and include all the issues 
that were mentioned in this chapter 7.5—Documented information.
Access and Authorization to Documented Information
Authorization and access to documented information shall be defined and applied, 
and it is recommended to develop a policy in this issue. “Access” relates to
• The permission to view the documented information—users can only view docu-
ments or records but cannot change them (or at least the master document).
• The permission and authority to create, view, and change the documented information.
Management of access is required in order to protect documents from unauthor-
ized use or modification and records from unauthorized entries or modifications. 
Managing access and authorization means administrating the permissions of users 
or personnel to access different documented information in the organization. What 
factors may influence the permission?
• Workflow: Access to documented information must support the workflow. In other 
words, you must allow employees the access to documented information based on 
their function in the workflow.
• Roles, responsibilities, and authorities in the organization: Access to documented 
information is much affected by the functions in the organization and their need to 
view, use, or edit documented information.
• Language: Indirectly, the language of documents and records enables access to the 
information in the document or record.
• Content of the documented information: Access to documented information may 
be affected from the content of the documented information. For example, some 
documents will bear customer’s property and include classified information and 
thus must be confidential or at least restricted for changes.
• Media: Access and authorization depends on the type of documented information 
and the media on which the documented information is maintained.
In practice, the organization must demonstrate the ability to manage access and 
authority and to provide employees the access to documented information at “point 
of use,” meaning at their place of work. Which aspects of the documented informa-
tion are affected by access?
• Retrievability: Access to documented information defines the capabilities of retriev-
ing the data. In other words, how users or employees may access the data: existence 
of hard copies where necessary, saved documents on a server, access through the 
data management systems, etc. For example, setting an indexing and filing system 
for records (hard copy or computer) will ensure easy retrieval.
 

182
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Storage: The storage of the documented information must support access to it.
• Security: The security measures and their degree will be affected from the access. 
For example, where documented information is held electronically, adequate pass-
word or other access systems will be applied. Another example is the protection 
through antivirus and spy systems.
• Functionality: Access to documented information will be based on its use. For 
example, an ERP or CRM system can manage access and authorization to docu-
mented information (forms and records) through the management of user permis-
sion where each user receives access to defined system applications.
Updates and Changes to Documented Information and Version Control
Changes or updates to documented information must be controlled and documented. 
The documented information will bear details regarding the status revision and 
changes that have occurred in the documented information. The objective of con-
trolling versions is to ensure that individuals are using the correct information and 
to guide them in accomplishing activities and operating the QMS. The information 
and requirements that we use to operate the QMS and that appears on documented 
information change over time as conditions and requirements change. Changes in 
documented information may affect the QMS and its operation. Not controlling the 
versions of documented information may result in the use of obsolete or unapproved 
documents or distribution of incorrect records. This is why version control is critical 
for documented information. What are the attributes of version control?
• Version status: The revision of the version must always be identified and clear to the user.
• Version number control: Numbering versions is necessary for the tracking of the 
version and indicates which status has a document.
• Centralizing documents: All documents must be centralized in order to eliminate 
“islands” of independent documented information, for example, saving documented 
information on personal computers.
• Format: The format in which documents are saved and distributed must be defined.
• Distribution: Distribution as well as disposition or removal of obsolete versions must be 
implemented in order to ensure that only valid versions are available. Because it is not 
always possible for a user to verify that he or she has the latest version, you must ensure 
that only the most recent version of a documented information is available for use.
• User must have access only to valid forms
• User must have access only to valid records
• Disposal: It must be defined when and how documented information will be 
disposed.
When is it needed to control and document changes? And which changes are needed 
to be documented? Each time a change may affect the activity that the documented 
information supports (internal as well as external). For example when
• An employee requests for a change in a form
• A change occurs in a procedure or a process due to a customer complaint
• A customer requests for a change in product specifications
• There is a change in a requirement such as regulation or standard
 

183
Support
You need to identify these events and requests and initiate a change, review the 
change and its consequences, and reapprove the document. The control of changes 
will determine
• Identification of events or requests for change
• Identification of the relevant documents that will be affected by the change
• Identification of parties, roles, and authorities needed for the review and approval
• Method of review: what are the inputs, where and when will the review take place, 
and who will participate
• Form of approval and necessary records
• Submission to a process of removing obsolete editions, and distributing and 
implanting the new one
Which details are expected to be recorded?
• Date of the review
• Identification of the relevant document, its editions, or revision
• The reason and cause for the change
• What was changed
• Who reviewed
• Remarks
• Consequences for regulatory requirements
• Parties present at the occasion
• Approval
The details may appear in a designated form that follows all the changes, as in the 
following table:
I believe that managing such a table regularly will hold an audit. Controlling 
the  numbering of the revision is very much challenging, particularly in paper-based 
systems where the human factor is significant. Numbering of documented information 
can be done as follows: The revision will be indicated in the new form—FO-004-002-
003(003) or FO-004-002-003 (01/03/2016).
Document number
FO-004-002-001
Edition
001
Change requested by
Mr. White—Quality Assurance manager
Reason for a change
Request to add another field to the form:
Reason for stopping a machine
The field is necessary in order to document the reason for stopping a 
machine during a production batch
Approved by
Mr. Pink—Production manager
Signature
 
Date of approval
01.03.2016
New edition
002
Communication of change
01.03.2016
Removal of old editions
05.03.2016
 

184
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Another method for maintaining version control is implementing a system 
for the management of documents’ life cycle. With documents’ life cycle, the 
stages that a document goes through from its creation to its eventual archival or 
disposal are controlled. Normally, organizations purchase a designated software 
for this kind of management. This type of system determines for each type of 
document the
• Creation of documents
• Metadata of documents
• Approval and release
• Retention time
• Storage
• Management of changes
• Distribution and retrieval
• Archiving
• Backups
Change of Records
Credibility and reliability of records ensures that the information contained within 
the record is accurate for reference in the future. Change of records might impact 
processes or products (good or services) and may affect employees at all levels of the 
organization. For example, if in a service-providing organization the contract details 
of a customer are approved without a careful review, it will directly affect the service 
that the customer receives. It is important to identify the reasons or events that may 
cause a change in records. For example:
• Updates to a database, including changing records, for example, a cross-update to 
product descriptions—who is authorized to make such a change?
• Change of format of documented information may initiate change in records, for 
example, fields may be neglected or added on forms.
• Change of technology in the organization may require change in records; how 
employees process and distribute records (in all forms—physical and digital). If the 
organization decides to implement new software, it might require more or different 
information and thus the records will have to change.
• Changes in regulatory requirements, standards, or laws may initiate creation of new 
types of records or the alteration of existing records or set new retention periods.
The organization must determine a method to ensure that the changes are identified 
and controlled.
When a printed record is manually altered or corrected, I recommend that
• The original entry stay visible on the record
• The person who altered the record be identified
• The modification be dated (similar to a correction made on a contract)
• The reason for the correction be stated
 

185
Support
Protection from Unintended Change of Evidence of Conformity
The requirements for protection against unintended alteration of evidence of con-
formity are needed in order to preserve the accuracy, credibility, and reliability of 
documented information. This evidence has the very important role of proving
• That actions were undertaken in order to maintain conformity
• The conformity of products and services to the requirements of customer or regula-
tors are met
• The ability of the organization to meet the requirements
Unintended changes may be accidental, causeless, inadvertent, or made intention-
ally—any change that is not part of the process of using the documented information. 
Which records are needed to be protected from changes or alterations?
• Records or action needed to address risks or opportunities (Clause 6.1)
• Records needed for the maintenance of infrastructures (Clause 7.1.3)
• Records needed for the maintenance of process environment (Clause 7.1.4)
• Records needed for the maintenance of monitoring and measuring devices 
(Clause 7.1.5)
• Records proving the allocation of resources for the realization (Clause 8.1)
• Records proving the execution of necessary activities for the realization (Clause 8.1)
• Records of review of changes in design and development (Clause 8.3.6)
• Records related to the acceptance of purchased goods or services (Clause 8.4.2)
• Records needed for identification and traceability (Clause 8.5.2)
• Records needed for the preservation of products or services (Clause 8.5.4)
• Records for review of changes for production or service provision (Clause 8.5.6)
• Records of release activities (Clause 8.1)
• Results of analysis and evaluation (Clause 9.1.3)
Retention of Documented Information
Retention refers to the ability of the organization to
• Keep documented information in a secured and protected manner that will preserve 
the knowledge information and data in them
• To retrieve the documented information for possible future use or application
The retention time of documented information (documents or records) will be 
defined and known in the organization. For obsolete editions of a documented 
information, it is necessary to define the retention time according to the following 
conditions:
• The organization and management of documented information determine the abil-
ity to retrieve it.
• When regulatory requirements set retention time for obsolete documents, or 
records, the retention time will be accordingly maintained.
• Normally, retention time of an obsolete edition of a document will not be less than 
the lifetime of records that this document bears.
 

186
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Archiving of Documents
Activities for archiving old documents and obsolete editions will be determined. It is 
necessary to define what is to be done with old versions that are not updated, how one 
handles them, and whether they are to be disposed or archived:
• The storage of unupdated documents will be defined. The activities will define the 
location of the archiving, the retention time, and in which media.
• Invalid documents that are not disposed are to be indicated or marked. The mark 
will indicate the status of the documented information beyond any doubt and 
ensure that no one will use it.
If printed documents become invalid for use, you must ensure that they are not used:
• Destroy them.
• Mark each one with a stamp or a watermark.
• If the documents are saved on the company’s server, responsibility must be assigned 
to someone for deleting or archiving obsolete documents from the server or replac-
ing them with updated ones.
Implementing the awareness of not using obsolete documented information will be 
applied throughout the organization. Persons must understand
• How to identify an invalid documented information
• What are the consequences of using it
• What is to be done when one finds invalid documented information at the place of work
Archiving Records
Activities for archiving records will be determined. It is required to define what 
should be done with obsolete documented information or old records. The method 
shall refer to the following aspects:
• Is archiving necessary or disposal may be sufficient?
• How should the archived records be handled? Where should the archive be stored or 
in which media must the records be archived?
• How long should the documented information or records be retained?
• Are there any regulations or specifications that dictate requirements for archiving 
(very much common in the medical device industry)?
Once again, I suggest managing a table that describes the archiving parameters for 
each type of documented information:
Type
Test Protocols
Location
Server:\Public Quality\Quality
Archive\Test Protocols (a computer file path)
Media
PDF—scan of the paper form
Retention time
5 years
Archiving approved by
Mr. White—Quality Assurance manager
 

187
Support
Disposal of Documented Information
Disposal of documented information refers to the action or stage of a document or a 
record in which it is either destroyed or permanently retained. The ISO 9001 Standard 
expects that when a document or record is no longer needed or required, it would be 
removed from the QMS in order to ensure that it will not be used again:
• Users will not have the possibility to use this obsolete document
• Users will have no access to this certain record
Each type of documented information shall have its own disposal protocols indicat-
ing who will dispose it and when and how it will be disposed. The activity of disposal 
will relate to the following issues:
• For each type of documented information, disposal activities will be defined based 
on different properties of the documented information such as media, storage, and 
utilization.
• Authorities for disposal and approval of documented information will be 
determined.
• Removal from the QMS— make sure that all copies and editions are removed and 
cannot be used anywhere in the organization.
• It is recommended to set a schedule for disposal according to the retention time of 
each type of documented information.
• When documented information is converted to digital media, in some cases it will 
be possible to dispose the old media. But make sure that the retention time is valid 
for the new media.
• In some cases where documented information is transferred to outsourced archive 
or storage, it may be possible to dispose it.
In cases where disposal of documented information must be approved, I would set a 
process for request of documented information disposal. In this case, you can ensure 
that only approved documented information was disposed. Such processes can be eas-
ily covered with a form. In other cases, disposal may not mean complete destruction or 
deletion of documented information but removal from the QMS and transfer to archive.
A good example for managing authority for disposal is administrating rights to 
edit folders, where it is possible to allow certain users to delete files from a folder. 
Another example is managing user authorities on management systems such as ERP 
or CRM where certain users have authority only to view records, others have authori-
ties to perform transactions or actions with records, and other have the authority to 
delete them permanently from the database.
Documented Information of External Origin
The ISO Standard 9001:2015 explicitly indicates that documented information that was 
originally created externally but is necessary for the planning and operation of the QMS 
will be submitted to the controls suggested in this clause. For more details regarding the 
determination of external documented information, please see chapter 7.5.1—External 
documentation (of this book).
 

188
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Nevertheless, when addressing documented information of external origin, you 
must consider the aspects mentioned in clause 7.5.3:
• The documented information will be available at the relevant workstations at the 
appropriate stages of the workflow.
• The documented information will be suitable for use and remain legible.
• Storage, protection, and preservation requirements and conditions will be deter-
mined for documented information of external origin.
• Methods and activities for updating, removing, and disposition will be defined.
• Distribution, access, and use authorities will be defined and managed.
Method for Controlling Documents
As mentioned earlier, these is no standard requirement form for the management 
and control of the documented information, but you may follow a procedure to do 
so (what I would personally do). Another method for maintaining these require-
ments effectively is by creating charts or tables for managing all these demands where 
description of activities and the definitions regarding the documented information 
will be charted on tables according to the issues that the method will cover: chart 
for updates, chart for distribution, chart for editions, chart for revisions, chart for 
changes, chart for control, etc. (see paragraphs 7.5.2—Creating and updating docu-
mented information/format and structure of documented information and 7.5.3—
Control of documented information/availability and distribution of documented 
information or storage of documented information for more details and examples).
Another effective method for managing documented information is by implement-
ing a document management system (DMS) or a records and information manage-
ment (RIM) system. Such systems allow the administration and control of documented 
information through the management of metadata of the documented information 
(metadata refers to details regarding the documented information— origin, creator, 
version, date of creation, relevance, ownership, etc.) and the application of digital tools 
that submit the documented information to a logical process. What is the difference 
between these two systems—DMS and RIM?
• DMS: A computer program used to track and manage digitally the life cycle of a 
document. The DMS system performs actions like saving history of documents, 
managing versions of documents, and managing the storage and distribution of 
documents.
• RIM: A software that allows the practice of controlling records—data and informa-
tion in the organization covering the complete life cycle of a record. The RIM system 
performs actions like arranging and categorizing, prioritizing, storing, securing, 
archiving, preserving, retrieving, tracking, and disposing of records.
My definite suggestion when purchasing and implementing such a system is to 
ensure that the system covers all of the ISO 9001:2015 Standard requirements. 
Otherwise, you may find yourself managing parts of documented information 
manually.
 

189
8 Operation
8.1  Operational Planning and Control
Operational planning and control initiates the master planning for the realization of 
products or services with the objectives of planning, realizing, controlling,  leading, 
guiding, and instructing all participants on the different functions and roles that are 
involved in the realization of a product: how to manage design and  development, how 
to  prepare for the realization, how to identify and locate the appropriate resources, 
which  activities are needed, which controls are to be applied, which  documented 
information is necessary, how one verifies or validates the results, and which  evidences 
are expected. Let us review the ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• Processes, methods, and activities that were planned according to the requirements 
in clause 4.4—Quality management system and its processes—and are needed to 
meet requirements shall be developed, planned, implemented, and controlled.
• The quality objectives at relevant functions, levels, and processes shall be considered 
while planning the realization of the product.
• The methods and activities shall relate the actions needed to address risks and 
opportunities determined according to the requirements of clause 6—Planning.
• The planning of methods and activities for the realization of the product shall 
include the appropriate control of processes in accordance with the defined criteria.
• The appropriate criteria (acceptance or rejection) for these processes and activi-
ties shall be determined.
• The appropriate criteria (acceptance or rejection) for products and services shall 
be determined.
• The resources needed to achieve conformity to product and service requirements 
shall be determined.
• The organization shall determine the documented information necessary to provide 
evidences and confidence that processes were performed as planned and that the 
requirements were met.
• The organization shall determine the documented information necessary to 
provide  evidences and confidence that product and service conform to their 
requirements.
• The outputs of the planning shall be suitable for the organization’s operations; the 
organization may be able to maintain them and they will support its operations.

190
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Changes shall be submitted to the controls suggested in clause 6—Planning:
• Planned changes in the planning and the realization of the product shall be 
controlled.
• Unintended changes shall be reviewed for their consequences or any adverse 
effects, and actions to mitigate risks shall be carried out.
• Outsourced processes that are part of the process realization shall be controlled 
according to the requirements of clause 8.4—Control of external provision of goods 
and services.
Chapter 8.1 lays out the principles with which the organization should  integrate 
the requirements of the quality management system (QMS) in the realization of 
a  product. The ISO 9001 Standard requires practical actions needed for the plan-
ning and the controlling. The goals of practicing operational planning and control 
are to develop an interface between the QMS and the realization processes and to 
 provide a practical method to execute quality requirements. The objective is to pro-
vide  sufficient instructions to persons who realize the product or provide them with 
the services necessary for realization.
Planning Quality with a Quality Plan
In this book, I promote the use of the quality plan because I find it to be the 
most  effective method for planning quality. Quality planning requires a type of 
 blueprint or guideline for the organization that states how quality requirements 
are to be achieved, the quality plan, its methodical approach or structure that 
describes and specifies all the requirements needed to be followed, met, main-
tained, and  documented while realizing the product and consists of all necessary 
information that would assist the participants to manufacture a product that 
meets its requirements. I highly recommend the maintenance of such documen-
tation. The quality plan integrates all relevant demands for activities, resources, 
and information concerning the realization of a product and makes them avail-
able to any interested party. In other words, when one carries out all that is men-
tioned on this plan, the product is bound to meet its requirements. The goals of 
the quality plan include the following:
• Identifying all the specifications and characteristics of a product including quality 
requirements. These must match with the expectations of the customers.
• Identifying all the required processes and their activities needed for product 
realization.
• Describing the necessary or expected inputs and outputs of each activity and so 
defining the relations between the various processes.
• Defining the required resources and conditions needed to support these activities.
• Defining the controls that will ensure intended outcomes—validation and 
verification.
• Defining the criteria for acceptance (or rejection) of outputs of activities (processes 
or products).
 

191
Operation
The activities included in the quality plan must be determined by every depart-
ment or area of the organization that takes part in the realization of the product 
or has influence on the quality of the product: sales and marketing, development, 
process design, production, quality, and logistics. The idea is to let each person 
that uses the plan to deliver his or her inputs and to allow understanding what the 
other expects.
With regard to the customers, the quality plan must consider specifications, meth-
ods, and schedules that are dictated or requested by the customers, and when required, 
the quality plan shall be endorsed by the customer. The quality plan and its constituents 
are to be reviewed and updated regularly. Updating this plan shall be subject to the 
requirements of clause 6.3—Planning of changes.
The planning shall include the following information:
• Identification of the product—information that will link the planning with a prod-
uct or a service
• The relevant process flow diagrams
• The different levels of realization—manufacturing, testing, storing, or provision of 
services
• The different operations needed for the realization of goods or services
• Reference to documented information like work instructions or procedures— documented 
information that describes which activities are needed in order to  realize the product
• Quality requirements and process controls including instructions or test 
 protocols—these will define which methods and instruments are to be used to con-
trol processes or their outputs and which process parameters are to be controlled
• Required documented information for evidence—the documented information that 
will provide evidence that the operations were performed and that results meet the 
specifications
• Responsibilities, functions, and authorities for performing operations, activities, 
or processes related to the realization of the product
Where purchase and requirements for external providers are involved, they will 
be referred to. The plan shall include or refer to other documentations  indicating 
 characteristics of processes, required activities, and corrective actions  necessary to 
control the processes. The following are types of documented  information that may 
be used or referred to by the quality planning:
• Customer specifications
• Drawings
• Standards and regulations
• Process diagrams
• Instructions, such as work instructions
• Test protocols
Reference to the Quality Objectives
Establishing and maintaining a quality planning means implementing the QMS 
and its objectives while realizing products or services. Quality planning is to 
 

192
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
promote quality objectives by describing the activities, resources, controls, and 
documented information that shall support the achievement of relevant quality 
objectives. We already know that processes are to be planned and controlled 
in accordance with the organization’s strategy. The quality plan provides you 
with a practical approach to meet these objectives and implement the strategy 
by defining the exact tools and measures needed to achieve them, that is, by 
performing these activities, the quality objectives of the organization shall be 
reached.
For example, let us assume that the organization decided that one of its quality 
objectives is to reduce the number of customer complaints. After a review of last 
year’s complaints, it was discovered that most of these complaints are related to 
the  packaging activities and the packaging of the product. The conclusion is that 
 further  controls related to those activities must be planned and implemented in order 
to achieve this specific quality objective—reduce the number of such complaints. 
The quality plan is where you act to implement these controls.
Identifying Process Operations for Realizing Goods and Services
In clause 4.4 the standard specifically employs the process approach and requests:
• The establishment of a QMS according to the ISO 9001:2015 Standard
• The definition of processes and their interactions necessary for the operation of 
this QMS
• The improvement of the QMS and its effectiveness
The planning of the operations and their control is the exact point where the  outputs 
of the process approach (the definition of processes and their interactions and 
 controls) are in use. Identifying the processes and activities necessary for the real-
ization of goods or services is the first step of the operational planning and  control. 
The  definitions shall relate to the following:
• Specifications of activities needed to be carried out: methods, activities, techniques, 
practices, responsibilities, documentations, and specific records
• Required resources necessary to support the activities: infrastructure and human 
resources
• Documentations such as procedures, flow charts, diagrams, routing charts, check-
lists, work instructions, test instructions, or forms of any kind
• Records needed to provide evidence for these processes
At the end of this definition, the organization shall have a list of processes and activities 
that manage the realization of the product and thus must be planned and controlled.
The main function of the quality plan is the gathering and description of all 
 activities, operations, and processes with which the organization realizes goods or 
 

193
Operation
services. The planning shall relate to activities since the earliest phase of the realiza-
tion and shall cover all stages of realization. Which types of activities are expected?
• Management activities
• Provision of resources
• Activities for product realization
• Activities of monitoring and measurement including verifications and validations
• Reviewing activities
• Post-delivery activities
The above may include references to procedures, flowcharts, diagrams, routing 
charts, checklists, work instructions, test instructions, or forms of any kind. One 
may define generic procedures that relate generally to realization activities or 
plan specific procedures using a high level of details relating to specific process 
or product. The end result of this stage in the planning is that for each product, 
semiproduct, or service, the necessary activities for its realization are identified 
and defined.
An important aspect to be considered in the planning is the integration of quality 
principles and processes that are required by this standard. For example, documented 
information—the quality plan—shall ensure that all required documented informa-
tion was considered during the planning; specifications are available and records are 
maintained. Another important aspect is customers’ expectations.
Identifying Product Characteristics
The quality planning shall identify all of the product characteristics with respect to 
customer expectations or specifications:
• When necessary the planning shall indicate all the components, sub- or semiprod-
ucts, bill of materials, parts, and materials of the product.
• The plan will identify different characteristics of a product such as geometrical, 
material, or functional requirements.
• It is necessary to specify the tests that must be performed in order to ensure the 
adherence to the specifications of the product.
• A description of the material and function tests that are required and were deter-
mined either during the design and development phase or by the customer.
• Identification of all monitoring and measuring devices that are necessary for mea-
suring products and process outputs.
• A test for sampling products from a process.
• Requirements for purchase and external providers will be specified.
• A reference sample of the product may be used during the planning.
• If applicable, the management and routing of materials will be described.
When it is not applicable to include all this information, reference to the documents 
where this information exists will be included in the plan.
 

194
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Establishing Criteria for Acceptance of Products and Services
The organization shall establish criteria for
• Processes
• Acceptance of products and services
A criterion is an established set of values with reference to the outcome of an  activity 
used for the acceptance of process outputs (e.g., products or services). In order to 
evaluate whether process outputs met requirements and to decide whether to accept 
or reject the outputs, it is necessary to have some kind of a standard on which a 
 judgment or decision may be based. Establishing criteria for processes means setting 
a basis for comparison and evaluation of process outputs:
• The criteria are used for examining a particular set of issues and its results.
• The criteria are used to ensure that certain (defined) conditions are in place.
• The criteria are necessary for the evaluation of the accomplishment of the goals and 
objectives of a process.
• The criteria should allow you to measure a process and identify trends or changes.
Based on the criteria, a decision regarding the acceptance or rejection of a process, 
an activity, or an outcome could be made, and they have the instructional roles and 
guidelines that allow personnel to make a judgment or decision regarding process 
outputs, which include the following:
• Compliance with applicable standards
• Compliance with applicable regulations
• Compliance with quality objectives
• Compliance with intended outputs
• Compliance with product specifications
For example, in compliance with applicable quality objectives, when planning the 
 criteria of a process, the relevant quality objectives may be referred to. If one  quality 
objective is to reduce customer complaints and an analysis of the complaints show that 
a specific product characteristic generates the problem and the following  complaints, 
it would be necessary to define the appropriate control and relevant criterion for this 
characteristic.
The following are the types of criteria:
• Criteria for acceptance or rejection of process outputs—criteria that would ensure 
that process outputs achieve their objectives
• Criteria for acceptance or rejection of final product—criteria that would ensure that 
all product requirements are realized, for example, test protocols or test instructions
• Criteria for quality of special processes—criteria for validation and approval of 
 processes where the resulting output cannot be verified by subsequent monitoring 
or measurement
 

195
Operation
• Criteria for customer satisfaction—criteria that will be used to evaluate the degree 
of customer satisfaction
• Criteria for the evaluation of performance of external providers (suppliers or 
 subcontractors)—criteria related to performance of suppliers
• Criteria for the release of products or services—criteria that will be used to decide 
whether the product meets all its requirements
• Criteria needed to evaluate changes in processes or product requirements— criteria 
necessary to ensure that all conditions for the release of changes in process or 
 product are defined and to evaluate the consequences of the change
• Criteria for process environment—criteria necessary for approval that environmen-
tal work conditions that may affect processes or products were maintained
• Criteria for the handling of nonconformed products—criteria that should assist in 
deciding what is to be done with nonconformed products: approval for use, disposal, 
segregation, or rework
The following are principles for the setting up or the establishing of criteria:
• A determined method shall dictate the use of the criteria.
• The frequency of the measurement shall be defined and will be appropriate to the 
process or product it is measuring.
• Methods for analyzing and publishing of data shall be defined.
• The responsibility for conducting the measurement shall be defined.
• The distribution of data shall be defined.
After defining the appropriate criteria, it is necessary to bring it into effect, that is, for 
each activity or operation that must be measured, inspected, verified, or  validated, 
it must be clear what the relevant criteria are. One must provide users, personnel, 
or employees the ability to decide upon the quality of an output: a product or a pro-
cess. This link between activities and their relevant criteria may easily be executed 
on the quality plan—indicate to users of what they need to control and where the 
 information is available. The criteria may be documented on
• Contracts
• Work instructions
• Test instructions
• Procedures
• Guidelines
• Designated documented information
• Standards or norms
• Regulations
Resources Necessary to Support the Realization
The resources necessary for the realization of a product must be defined during the 
quality planning: facilities, machinery, knowledge, information, necessary work 
environment, storage requirements, working tools, and human resources— including 
 

196
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
training and qualification requirements. These resources are supposed to be clear at 
this point and arise from the requirements and specifications of the products and 
services. The objectives are as follows:
• To ensure the identification and definition of resources necessary to support the 
operation and monitoring processes and to deploy needed activities:
• The identification of outsourced resources shall be included.
• To promote the availability of resources needed to achieve customer satisfaction.
• To ensure the correct planning of resources, which means their effective allocation 
and efficient usage.
The end result of this stage of the planning is a listing of the needed resources for 
each activity or process related to the realization of the product. If the organization 
is outsourcing activities, the needed resources for those outsourced activities such as 
information, knowledge, expertise, technology, processes, and shared training shall 
be defined.
Let us review a common example—planning of human resources. In this case, it is 
necessary to define the required human resources for the realization of the product that 
will ensure fulfillment of customer requirements. Which aspects must be considered?
• Qualification, knowledge, or experience
• Training
• Availability
The above become significant in cases where only certain employees can perform 
 certain activities. In situations where the organization must employ workers who have 
 specific training in order to realize the product, it should be mentioned in the plan. 
The resources may be defined in a production plan along with the setup of machines, 
availability of production tools, and preparation of monitoring and measuring devices.
Controls of Processes
Process controls are needed for obtaining data and information necessary for the 
release of processes or products. Applying controls of processes and products  supports 
the process approach, where the organization is required to ensure that the control 
of processes is effective and implemented in the QMS. These controls are the means 
by which the business strategy (that was translated into activities and  operations) is 
being verified. Goals of control of processes include
• Monitoring and controlling activities of the QMS
• Monitoring and controlling the use of resources of processes
• Monitoring, measuring, analyzing, and improving operations related to the realiza-
tion of the product
• Ensuring process parameter and product characteristics
• Enhancing the effectiveness of processes through the use of appropriate methods
 

197
Operation
The process controls define the steps and operations for evaluating process  outputs with 
their relevant criteria needed to ensure that processes meet their  requirements. They
• Define which activities are included in the controls (and define those that are 
excluded)
• Provide means to collect data regarding the performance of a process or the char-
acteristics of a product
• Ensure that processes are performed within desired tolerances or specified scope 
(where a process begins and ends)
• Ensure that process outcomes stay within a desired range, which is defined through 
the criteria
• Enable the consistent realization of goods or services
• Achieve consistent, targeted results aligned with the organization’s strategic goals 
and quality objectives
The controls of the processes indicate points in the operation or stages where 
significant factors affect the process and its outcomes. Controlling these pro-
cess indicators provides significant information regarding process performance 
related to the quality objectives. One example is the key performance indicators 
(KPIs) where critical factors in the process are related to the quality objectives. 
Controlling of these KPIs
• Evaluates variations in a process
• Ensures that operations are being performed correctly
• Ensures that various elements in the process are functioning correctly
• Ensures that processes interact with each other (an objective of the process approach)
The controls of processes monitor their outcomes and provide the information nec-
essary to adjust resources in order to meet process objectives. We already know that 
output of one process is the input to the next process. And that gives a significant 
weight to the controls. Each process requires its appropriate controls needed for 
the demonstration of the ability to achieve planned results and for the transfer of 
desired outcomes between processes. Outputs of the design and development may 
indicate which controls are needed to maintain product characteristics and process 
parameters.
The controls shall prove the next process aspects:
• The appropriate inputs are delivered to the process.
• The necessary activities of the processes are carried out.
• The outputs are desirable and meet the specifications.
• Undesirable outputs are prevented.
Which process elements must be controlled?
• The resources that are applied to the process
• The process environment that is supporting the process
 

198
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The inputs that are delivered to the process
• Skills and qualifications of personnel that are operating the process
• Necessary knowledge is in place
• Necessary documented information is used to ensure effective planning, operation, 
and control of the processes is available
• The outputs of the process
Until now we discussed the inputs for the planning of controls over processes: 
which aspects must be considered and addressed when planning controls. Let 
us now proceed to the practical area: the quality planning must outline how the 
organization shall implement the controls in its internal business processes and 
describe the activities for applying these controls, that is, what are the verifica-
tion or validation activities. The main Idea: While a process progresses, methods 
and tools are collecting and evaluating data and comparing it to the defined  criteria. 
Their goal is to ensure that process objectives are met through reviewing the prog-
ress of the process, evaluating its outcomes, and using the criteria to arrive at 
 decisions. How is it done?
• A defined method for the measurement and control is implemented.
• The responsible parties for executing the activities are determined.
• The method refers to the appropriate criteria.
• It is determined where and how the method shall control the process.
• The method collects data that are relevant to the objectives of the process.
• The data are being analyzed, compared to the criteria, and reported.
• The relevant documented information is updated with the new data.
The controls should provide you with quantitative or qualitative data about the 
 effectiveness of the process. The methods with which the performance of a process will 
be controlled should be practicable and appropriate to the nature of these  processes 
and their outcomes and will be adapted to the type of the activities. The types of 
 process controls include
• Process controls—controls that collect data regarding outputs of processes: indus-
trial control systems, test protocols, procedures, and work instructions
• Controls of qualifications—controls that verify that the appropriate conditions for 
the resources are provided to the process
• Environmental controls—controls that collect data regarding the environmen-
tal parameters that influence the product and process: environmental control 
devices
• Regulatory controls—controls applied to verify that regulatory requirements are 
applied: audits and documented information
• Quality management-related controls—controls supervising that quality  requirements 
are being met: internal audit and control of nonconformities
Figure 8.1 illustrates how the control of processes shall be implemented during 
their planning:
 

199
Operation
Integrating Process Controls in the Quality Plan
While implementing the quality planning, it is time to determine where and how the 
controls will be deployed. For each activity or operation that requires a control, 
the plan shall indicate
• The exact stage of an activity that must be controlled—which input or output of 
which activity must be reviewed
• Which factors are to be controlled—which characteristics of a product or param-
eters of a process must be controlled
• How these factors will be controlled—what are the methods and the tools
• What type of results are expected—what type of information or data is expected
These controls may be described in
• Work instructions
• Test instructions
• Procedures
Traceability
The quality plan shall refer to the instructions and procedures related to traceabil-
ity requirements. The specific requirements for maintaining traceability are dealt in 
Chapter 8.5.2—Identification and traceability. When traceability is a requirement, 
Controls, verification and 
validation 
Results
Methods and actions
Criteria
Inputs to a 
process:
Resources 
Process 
environment 
Inputs 
Skills and 
qualifications 
Knowledge 
Documented 
information 
Activities for operating 
processes
Action for addressing risks
Operations or functions of 
external providers 
Changes (intended or 
unintended)
Outputs: 
Goods or services
product specs.
Quality objectives
Documented 
information
Figure 8.1 Implementing controls during the planning of the process.
 

200
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
the plan shall indicate which tools or methods ensure that products will be traceable 
in all stages of the realization and the supply chain:
• Which information is required for traceability
• Which method will provide traceability
• Which documented information is needed to provide evidence of traceability
The plan shall indicate—where applicable—methods and procedures for  accomplishing 
traceability:
• Work instructions
• Which product information is needed to maintain traceability
• Types of records (e.g., labels and etiquettes)
• Drawing for instructions (where and how traceability should be maintained)
The plan shall indicate other process elements that must be traceable:
• Status of monitoring and measuring devices
• Qualification of personnel
• Conditions of process environment
The plan shall indicate the necessary documented information for maintaining 
traceability:
• Shipping document
• Tags and marks
• Numbering systems
• Date stamping
• Barcodes
• Labels and etiquettes
• Attachments
When international standards, directives, or regulations related to the  realization of 
the product or provision of the service that demand the use of identification  methods 
of materials, products, process entities, or agents are applicable, the quality plan shall 
refer to them and indicate which identifiers are necessary.
Inclusion of External Providers
Methods and activities necessary for the control of outsources, processes, or 
 operations shall be considered, implemented, and applied when such operations are 
relevant to the realization of the product and may affect its quality. The objective of 
this principle is to ensure that external operations that are part of the realization 
of the product will deliver intended results. The organization may demand that its 
suppliers or subcontractors maintain high-quality requirements, but the responsi-
bility for the quality of the outputs lies directly with the organization. These will be 
 

201
Operation
planned with reference to the requirements of clause 8.4—Control of external provi-
sion of goods and services. The planning of related processes shall include references 
to the following aspects:
• Specific requirements—the planning of a process shall include or have access to the 
specific requirements of the external provider regarding the realization of the product.
• Interaction with the supplier—the interactions and interfaces with the suppliers 
shall be mentioned or referred to in the quality plan.
• Control and criterion—the controls and the appropriate criteria of the outputs 
received from supplier shall be defined and implemented.
• Documented information—the required documented information needed to pro-
vide evidence that external operations meet requirements is defined and maintained.
Addressing Risks and Opportunities
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard requires the evaluation of risks and opportunities, the 
planning of activities to handle those risks and opportunities, and their integration into 
the QMS in general and throughout the realization processes in particular. This is the 
core of the risk-based thinking and it was discussed in detail in  chapter 6.1—Actions 
to address risks and opportunities. Successful implementation of the risk-based think-
ing will allow the organization to obtain a systematic method for identifying, eval-
uating, and controlling risks and opportunities and—where needed (and defined in 
advance)—eliminating or reducing risks or using opportunities to leverage the QMS. 
Addressing risks and opportunities will span across all stages of the realization of 
goods or services:
• The planning stages of the product
• Purchasing of material
• Production of the product
• Marketing
• Delivery
• Installation
• Service maintenance
• Disposal
In practice, the outputs of the risk-based thinking according to clause 6.1 are to serve 
as inputs for quality planning. Those planned actions, controls, and tools derived from 
the risk-based thinking shall be integrated in the planning of processes (e.g., will be 
mentioned and addressed on the quality plan):
• Reference to the responsibilities and authorities
• Identification of the relevant products or components or service activities
• Identification of the relevant risks and identification of the QMS elements that may 
be impacted
• Identification of any specification regarding those risks: standards, technical, safety, 
customer, and regulatory requirements
 

202
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Definition of criteria relevant for risk acceptability
• Definition of specific controls and actions to address such situations—the required 
verifications or validations
• Definitions of the different stages of realization in which these activities are to be 
applied and control implemented
• Definition of corrective actions when such situations actually occur
Controlling Planned Changes
Changes to product specifications or activities needed for the maintenance 
or improvement of the performance of the QMS are a natural occurrence that the 
ISO 9001 Standard promotes and therefore provides appropriate controls:
• In clause 6.3—Planning of changes in the organization—it is required to plan and 
control changes to the QMS methodically.
• In clause 8.1—Operational planning and control—it is required to identify planned 
and unplanned changes in the planning of the processes and submit them to a 
control.
• In clause 8.5.6—Control of changes—it is required to review and control changes 
for production or service provision and provide necessary evidence.
Here while planning the processes, it is necessary to integrate the method of 
 undertaking changes to the processes or product characteristics. Since we are deal-
ing with operational planning and control, this requirement relates to processes and 
activities needed for the realization of the product or their outputs. Such changes 
may influence the interaction between processes or activities and affect the  workflow 
between the different related areas in the organization. This planning of changes 
refers to changes occurring with external providers as well.
When changes in the processes or product specifications are required, one will 
submit them to the method described in clause 6.3, where it is required to
• Determine which changes are necessary in order to maintain and improve the 
 performance of the QMS
• Determine a method for managing those changes
• Evaluate and control associated risks
• Identify and develop opportunities
• Evaluate with each change the potential consequences (this is the critical part)
In practice, undertaking changes in processes or product specifications may affect 
several process aspects: new activities, resources, or inputs:
• Applying a new set of inputs—Where and how these inputs will be integrated in the 
process? Which prior processes need to be modified in order to provide these new 
inputs? Which documented information needs to be modified (where formats are 
influenced) or updated (where records are affected)? How will these new inputs be 
transferred forward?
 

203
Operation
• Resources—How shall the tools, instruments, and resources that are used in the 
process handle the new inputs? Do process elements have the capability to process 
these new inputs in the first place?
• Operations—What is its influence on activities? Do current activities need to be 
changed or do new activities for processing these new inputs need to be planned?
• Controls—Do verifications or validations need to be changed as well?
• Risk-based thinking—Are there any influences on known risks? Must controls be 
updated?
• Outputs—What are the new process outputs that result from these new inputs and 
these new processings?
• Interaction—How will the new outputs be transferred forward? Does one need a 
new method to hand over these outputs forward?
Reviewing Unintended Changes
Unplanned changes refer to unexpected events and their consequences that were not 
submitted to the controlled method required in clause 6.3 and were imposed upon 
the organization due to some alteration of conditions:
• A breakdown in infrastructure
• Absence of employees
• Delivery failure from suppliers
Addressing these unplanned changes is a preventive action necessary to reduce and 
mitigate risks due to unexpected events. By reviewing these unplanned changes, you 
are required to assess consequences that may result after the change has come into 
force. This may be achieved through the establishment of a set of proactive actions 
that are developed to ensure that changes do not impact your quality objectives:
• Performing your business operations
• Delivering product according to specifications
• Maintaining customer satisfaction
Addressing these unplanned changes refers to those affected business operations 
related to the realization of the product. In this case it is not possible to
• Determine the need for the change
• Submit the change to the method for control
• Evaluate the associated risks
• Identify the opportunities
But it is possible to evaluate the consequences for unplanned changes that may arise 
from its occurrence. For each change it is required to analyze and assess what are 
the implications and consequences and form a set of actions to mitigate these con-
sequences. Such actions will reduce the nonconformities while business operations 
 

204
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
are required to work not as usual. Once again, the review of such unplanned changes 
may be through the review of several of the process aspects:
• Inputs—Does the change have any influence on process inputs? Are there any new 
inputs? Which documented information needs to be changed (where forms are 
influenced) or updated (where records are affected)? How will these new inputs be 
transferred?
• Does the change have any influence on tools and instruments and resources that are 
used in the process? Do these process elements have the capability to support the 
new  situation in the first place?
• What is the influence on activities? Do current activities need to be changed?
• Do any of the verifications or validations need to be changed as well?
• Are there any impacts on known risks? Should controls be updated?
• What are the new process outputs that result from this change?
The review will need to be integrated into a method that will ensure the smooth inte-
gration of unplanned changes. Unplanned changes in outsourced operations shall 
need to be considered as well.
Changes in the Quality Plan
The quality plan is an ever-changing document and might be impacted by changes. 
Therefore, it needs to be submitted to control that will check its accuracy and rel-
evancy and will update it when needed. Where processes, operations, or activities 
may be changed over time or where conditions are changed, their relevant documen-
tations such as procedures or instructions as well as relevant resources may need to 
be  modified and updated. Which types of conditions may demand updating the plan?
• Changes in the product
• Product’s characteristics that must be changed
• Change in suitability and compatibility of the QMS elements indicated by the plan
• Changes in processes
• Changes in resources
• Processes that are found unstable
These changes must be approved by all relevant parties that take part in the  realization 
of the product and influence the quality of the product. If required, changes will be 
submitted to customers for a confirmation. In case the quality plan is  controlled, it 
shall be submitted to the control of documented information including as  specified 
in clause 7.5.3—Control of documented information.
Necessary Documented Information
Documented information necessary for the confidence that the processes have 
been carried out as planned and process outcomes meet their requirements shall be 
 

205
Operation
planned, determined, defined, and maintained. The organization shall determine 
which documented information provides the most appropriate and effective evidence 
that the realization processes are performed according to the planning. The evidence 
shall provide the following information:
• The inputs are available.
• Activities are performed in the correct sequence.
• Process outputs are being generated and they are verified or validated.
What type of documented information is expected? The requirements for documented 
information are derived directly from the requirements in clause 7.5—Documented 
information:
• Documented information required by this international standard necessary for the 
realization of the product
• Documented information defined by the organization as needed to provide evi-
dence and confidence that processes are performed as planned and the outcomes 
meet the requirements
• Documented information as evidence that goods or services are realized according 
to their specifications
The extent, scope, and size or type of the documented information will be 
 determined by the types of activity, criterion, and controls. In other words, the type 
of   realization activity, its criterion for acceptance, and the implemented control 
shall define the extent and type of documented information. If the organization is 
manufacturing a measurable product, most likely the documented information of 
controls will consist of
• A test protocol that defines which product specification or characteristics must be 
controlled
• Records that provide evidence that the measured product meets its specifications
But if the organization delivers an online service, the scenario looks different: the 
customer logs in and performs an action, and the system saves the data—other 
 methods for control are needed here such as verification of customer details and 
verification of data. Such controls are not completed with the traditional documents 
and records but rather with codes and computerized applications, which act very 
differently.
One should distinguish between documents and specifications and records as evi-
dence. By documents I refer to those specifications that are used to document, design, 
analyze, and measure, support interaction between processes, and train and commu-
nicate business processes and requirements. They are also used to define the required 
resources for a process. They are needed to describe the sequence of  activities: at 
which point of time, in which location, reference to a process, and by which method. 
 

206
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
They deliver details regarding the performance of processes’ activities. Documents 
and specifications include
• Documented procedures that describe processes
• Work instructions that specify how activities will be performed
• Formats that document activities and provide evidence
Records are used to provide information and data regarding the performance of 
 activities of processes and to ensure that the processes have been carried out as planned:
• Evidence of the supply chain—customer orders, delivery notes, invoices, credit 
notes, receiving slips, and certificates of compliance (COC) accepted from suppliers
• Evidence from the production phase—formats for production orders, test protocols 
with results, labels with production details such as serial numbers, validation forms, 
job release approvals, records of quality assurance, and batch approvals
• Records of maintenance of resources—records of machine maintenance, produc-
tion tool status reports, and records of training
• Records related to quality activities—records of management review, internal audits 
and nonconformities, and filled-in customer questionnaires
A good example of a document as specification is the work instruction that assists the 
manufacturer in performing realization activities; it is a list of planned activities for 
operating a process, reference to the appropriate documentations, and a specification 
of the expected records. The records that are required from this work instruction and 
are used to prove its execution are considered as evidence.
Tables indicating the documentation requirements are mentioned in the chapter 
of this book—7.5 Documented Information.
Suitable Planning for the Organization’s Operations: A Practical Quality Plan
The organization is required to maintain output of planning suitable to the organiza-
tion’s operations, in other words outputs that the organization can maintain and that 
will support its processes. Since I support and recommend the use of the quality plan, 
I will try to describe how to maintain an effective one.
The output of the quality planning, that means the format, tools, and means with 
which you will apply the quality plan, may vary according to the nature of the prod-
uct, the nature of the activities for the realization, and the expectations and needs of 
the interested parties such as customers or suppliers. There is no ISO 9001 Standard 
requirement to document the method or to maintain any documented information 
applying to this method. But in an audit, you will need to prove design and imple-
mentation of such method, and therefore I suggest documentation. As a practical 
quality plan, I would manage on a conventional table in order to make it clear and 
usable. My objective is to create a table with which each user of the QMS can find his 
or her scope in the realization of the product, understand which actions and opera-
tions he or she must perform, which tools and information are available, and which 
outputs are expected of him or her. The following table is an example.
 

207
Operation
Area
Details
Responsibility
Reference to DI
Specifications of product—Identification of the product, its characteristics, and the expectations 
of the customer
Product 
specifications
Identification of the 
product (distinct or 
general)
 
 
 
Drawing of products
R&D
File on CAD system
 
Product dossier
product manager
 
Customer 
requirements
Customer orders
Sales back office
ERP system
 
Contracts
Sales back office
Contract according to 
customer identification
Allocation of resources—Identification of all needed resources and infrastructures necessary for 
the realization of the product
Resources for 
realization
List of required 
machines
Production supervisor
Form number FO-06-01-01
 
List of production tools
Production supervisor
Form number FO-06-01-02
List of required 
conditions of process 
environment
Production supervisor
Form number FO-06-01-03
Human 
resources
List of required 
qualifications
Production manager
Form number FO-06-01-04
 
List of required 
trainings
Production manager
Form number FO-06-01-05
Operations and activities—Realization activities, actions for addressing risks, activities for 
preservation of product, traceability, and post-delivery
Specifications 
of realization 
activities
Process diagrams
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-01-1
 
Procedures
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-02-1
 
Work instructions
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-03-1
 
Assembly instructions
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-03-2
 
Checklists
Production supervisor
Form number FO-05-01-05
 
Forms
Production supervisor
Form number FO-05-01-04
Controls including verifications and validations—Defines the controls, verifications, and 
validations, and criteria of process, resources, and infrastructures
Control of 
processes
Test protocols for 
processes
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-03-3
 
Criteria
Production manager
Procedure number PR-01-03-3
 
Forms
Production manager
Form number FO-01-03-01
Control of 
resources
Test protocols for 
productions tools
Production manager
Form number FO-01-03-02
 
Maintenance protocols 
for machines
Production manager
Form number FO-01-03-03
 
Maintenance protocols 
for infrastructures
Production manager
Form number FO-05-06-01
 

208
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
8.2  Requirements for Products and Services
8.2.1  Customer Communication
Communication with customers is considered to be one of the most common 
 business activities in an organization. The ways to communicate with your cus-
tomer may vary according to the type of activity related to the communication, 
the type of your product or service, or the type of the agreement that an organi-
zation has with its  customers, and there are cases and scenarios where commu-
nication will be dictated and controlled by a third party. All these issues will be 
structured in planned  arrangements for communicating with the customers. Let 
us review the requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard regarding communication 
with customers:
• The organization shall initiate communication with customers and delivery of 
information on various topics related to the product or the service.
• The communication will include sharing information with the customer regarding 
delivery or post-delivery activities including changes and updates relevant to the 
product or the service.
• The organization will exchange information with customers regarding enquiries, 
order handling, and contracts.
• The organization shall initiate communication for handling customer complaints 
and feedbacks.
• The organization shall initiate communication for issues related to the handling of 
customer property.
• The organization shall determine specific requirements for communicating issues 
related to contingency actions, when relevant.
The requirements for communication with customers shall be determined and estab-
lished: they will be decided, will be formally enacted, and will be clear to the users of 
the QMS. The ISO 9001:2015 Standard does not specify the need to develop a method 
or arrangements for communicating with the customer. However, during an audit 
you will be required to prove that
• The information for communicating with customers is defined as required earlier.
• This information is managed and maintained.
This is why you will need a method to prove these points. The method does not need 
to be documented but defined; you are not required to maintain procedures or work 
instructions but to prove that there are processes that maintain communication with 
the customers.
Information regarding the Product or the Service
The ISO 9001 Standard requires the initiation of communication with the  customer. 
The objective is to ensure that all necessary inputs have been accepted or  transmitted 
 

209
Operation
and all necessary outputs are determined and are being channelized to the customer. 
The flow of information is bidirectional—either transmitted or received. Two aspects 
may determine the type of communication channel and information that will travel 
through it:
• The characteristics and nature of the product or service will determine the type of 
information.
• The types of activities in the realization process that are related to enquiries by the 
customer.
This information may be communicated to the customer during various  activities 
related to the realization of the product:
• Acceptance of order or request for offers
• Information regarding development or design plans
• Enquiries of status of order
• Results of acceptance testing
• Deliveries of goods or services
• Requirements for inputs such as customer specifications
• Demonstrations and presentations of products, prototypes, or results of tests
• Information about defects or faults
Information regarding products or services may include attributes like
• The description of the product
• The usage of the goods or service
• Training necessary for the use of the product
• Instructions or warnings regarding the use and operation of the product
• Previous editions or versions of the product
• Materials, components, and characteristics of the product
• Processes and realization activities of the product
• Warnings and advisory notices regarding the product
• Changes, updates, and improvements in the product
Changes, updates, and improvements in the product or the service must be brought to the 
attention of the customer. According to the standard, “change” is any alterations made 
to the product’s features or to the attributes of a contemporary or future model that was 
ordered and agreed for with the customer. The rationale behind this is that the organiza-
tion is planning changes in the product and will deliver a modified product to its customer. 
The customer, on the other hand, has known expectations that after the change might not 
be fulfilled. Information regarding the product including changes and updates include
• Changes that may affect the characteristics of the product
• Improvements to the product
• Problems regarding the product that the customer must not know about
 

210
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The same applies to improvements (which are a kind of change); the organiza-
tion must communicate and announce to the customer of all improvements with 
 documentations, e-mails, telephone calls, written correspondence, or meetings.
If one decides to maintain a method, it shall describe all the arrangements for 
 communicating with the customer: what form of communication and through which 
media. One option is documenting the arrangement on customer order confirma-
tion. Take, for example, Microsoft. Microsoft has a very effective way to announce 
its users of Windows Operating System of any changes, updates, or improvements: It 
maintains a specific component in the operation system that allows the users to view 
the updates, changes, and improvements to the software and decide whether they 
wish to accept or reject them.
Investigations, Applications, or Inquiries Regarding Orders or Contracts
The standard requires communication for managing all inquiries from the customers 
regarding the status of orders or contracts. The objectives are
• To make it clear to the customer how he or she may contact the organization or who 
is the contact person regarding orders and inquiries
• To allow access to information regarding order-related subjects that may be of 
 interest to the customer
When defining the communication, the organization must take into consideration 
what information will be transmitted to customers:
• Orders or contracts—the process of submission of orders or contracts as well as 
inquiries or investigations before submission
• Status of orders—inquiries or investigations concerning the realization activities 
such as delivery dates, transportation, installation, and warranty claims
• Progress of activities that is the responsibility of the customer
• Technical support—how the technical support will be communicated and orga-
nized with the customer
• Service and maintenance—how activities of service will be coordinated with the 
customer
• Reports about present or future changes
• Information about nonconformities: defective products or services that were 
 delivered or provided to the customer
If you decide to maintain a method, it shall include the organizational  responsibility 
or a function that will manage it.
Customer Feedback
The ISO 9001 Standard requires the monitoring of customer feedback. While cus-
tomer satisfaction may be submitted as a subjective opinion, customer feedback 
provides an objective point of view on whether the organization supplied a product 
according to the specifications. Customer feedback provides an early warning about 
 

211
Operation
potential quality problems, effectively identifies risks or opportunities, generates the 
inputs for improvement, and initiates necessary corrective actions. Feedback evalua-
tion may be maintained through the following:
• Customer complaints—the organization monitors customer complaints regarding 
performance and functionality of the product.
• User surveys—the organization conducts surveys regarding functionality, charac-
teristics, and performance of the product.
• Reviews—the organization initiates a review regarding the product and its 
functionality.
• Journal reviews—the organization researches sector and industry tendencies.
For each of the aforementioned actions, it is necessary to define the information 
necessary for containing all the inputs of customer feedback and distributing them 
to the relevant parties. A method of review of the feedback will be dealt with in 
 chapter 9.1.2—Customer satisfaction—where determining the method for monitor-
ing and managing customer satisfaction is required. Here in clause 8.2.1—Customer 
communication—we are to determine the communication channels in this method. 
Handling complaints is dealt with in detail in the following paragraph.
Complaint Handling
The ISO 9001 Standard regards the issue of customer complaints as being highly sig-
nificant. An important aspect on this issue is the facility or means by which a customer 
can communicate with the organization and register a complaint. No less important 
is the organization’s delivery of a satisfactory response to the complaint. The first con-
cern of the organization is to define the information regarding the complaint. The ISO 
9001:2015 Standard requirement refers to the definition of the information for han-
dling complaints. As for my concern, handling a complaint should be managed using 
a tested method, an application process of the complaint. The information shall cover 
various aspects of the process, and a method shall be described in the following issues:
• Communication: The method shall describe to the customer how they may reach 
the organization to file a complaint. The method could be incorporated with other 
types of inquiries (such as ordering of products). However, the organization must 
prove that its customers are notified of the ways that they can submit complaints—
a specific telephone number, an online form, a designated e-mail address, and an 
interaction center—such options for filing a complaint must be made known to the 
customer, and the contact details must be published (printed on a brochure, the 
firm’s website, or on the product itself).
• Details: The method shall define the required information and details that must 
be recorded while receiving a complaint. The information and details should 
be  sufficient in order to ensure effective treatment. The organization must docu-
ment the information to ensure effective investigation into the nature and cause 
of the complaint. The details of the complaint are the inputs to quality processes 
and activities such as actions to address risks and opportunities, nonconformity, 
corrective action, and improvement. If the complaint refers to a product, then the 
following information must be specified: the model, identification, or traceability 
 

212
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
(batch  number or serial number), production details, contact person, delivery 
date, and any other information that would identify the product and support the 
 investigation. If the complaint refers to a service, then specify when the service was 
given, by whom, to which product (with identification details), and the service iden-
tifier. The best way to ensure that such details are provided is to design a format 
(manually or  electronically) and ensure that all fields are completed.
• Distribution: The method for handling a complaint shall consider the distribu-
tion of the information of the complaint to the appropriate roles or functions in 
the  organization. It will be achieved with the definition of the interface between the 
organizational unit that receives the complaint and the one that shall handle and 
investigate it: an e-mail, form, or designated system.
• Responsibilities: The function that would be in charge of the process of accepting 
the complaints must be defined (e.g., back office, customer support representative, 
a customer relationship manager, or an account manager). As well as defining the 
function responsible for accepting the complaint, the function responsible for han-
dling the complaint must also be defined. Some complaints may need to be passed 
on to a designated person in order for them to be appropriately handled. This person 
should be clearly appointed.
• Time frame: It is necessary to determine the exact time frame for the response and 
the treatment. The customer should not be left waiting for an answer. If the answer 
is taking too long, the customer should be notified and assured that the complaint 
is under investigation. Another aspect related to time frames is local or national 
regulations; where regulations require that you submit an action in a defined period 
of time, the organization must apply these requirements and implement them in its 
processes.
• Answer: After accepting, processing, and handling the complaint, it is necessary to 
inform and communicate the results to the customer. The method shall define the 
means and details. One cannot ensure that each complaint is closed to the satisfac-
tion of the customer, but one can ensure that the results were transmitted and the 
customer received them.
Communication regarding Handling Customer Property
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard defines another controlled type of information between 
the organization and the customer—information regarding property belonging to the 
customer. In clause 8.5.3—Property belonging to customers or external  providers—it 
is required by the standard to inform customers or external providers when their 
property is either damaged or found unsuitable for use. When such an event occurs, 
the organization must maintain documented information regarding the notification 
to the customer.
When defining communication and establishing communication channels, the 
matter must be considered and appropriate channels must be planned. This type of 
communication should be integrated into the quality processes:
• Upon receiving goods from the customer for processing
• When goods or equipment received from the customer are found unsuitable for use 
during the realization processes
 

213
Operation
The communication shall include information such as
• Which products were damaged
• When the damage occurred
• What happened
• Further actions or instructions
Communication regarding Requirements for Contingency Actions
Contingency actions are part of the risk-based thinking; they are a type of  output from 
the risk management and relate to actions that must be taken as a response to unplanned 
events and that require the attention of the customer. When defining and implement-
ing the information for communication with the customers, the issue of communicat-
ing contingency actions must be considered and appropriate channels must be planned. 
The standard states clearly that not all contingency actions must be communicated but 
only when necessary, that is, determined with the customer that he or she must be 
informed. For each contingency plan, the organization must define the following:
• Contact person
• Which information must be transferred
Effective Communication Channels
The main objective of clause 8.2.1 is to initiate effective communication channels 
with your customers, whether they are internal or external. Effectiveness of com-
munication is measured when the information has reached its designated goal at a 
defined point of time. Effectiveness of communication channels will be achieved by 
introducing the next points in the organization:
• A method for accepting customer requirements is properly defined and maintained 
in the organization.
• The customer receives all the information and data that he or she needs and that 
answers his or her enquiries.
• The organization maintains an effective way to receive complaints from the cus-
tomer and provides him or her with answers.
• The organization maintains an effective way to receive feedback from the customers.
• The organization maintains an effective way to communicate with customer regard-
ing his or her property.
• The organization maintains effective channels to share information and situations 
of nonconformed products.
• The organization maintains an effective way to inform and receive inputs from the 
customer in case of contingency.
Try to understand the rational view behind this requirement—the customer and their 
needs should be the center of your attention. When the customers have needs, they 
 initiate communication with the organization through defined channels. The organi-
zation is obliged to answer and fulfill these needs, which may be related to several issues 
and may take place at different phases of the realization processes: marketing, design 
 

214
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
and development, production, delivery, installation, and post-delivery activities like 
warranty claims, service and maintenance, feedback, and filing complaints. For each 
need or type of interaction, you must define the organizational tools with the right 
response and reaction: channel, responsibility, and information to be handled.
A Defined System
After the necessary information to be exchanged with the customer has been 
 considered and identified, the organization shall plan a method to manage the 
 different types of information. The method will be based on three simple principles:
 
1. How—the organization shall define by what means the information will be  managed, 
received from the customer, saved, and delivered to the customer: notices, printed 
media, CRM system, ERP systems, e-mail, fax, online via website, or designated 
software. The definition will be bidirectional—customer to business and business to 
customer.
 
2. Where—the organization shall define where the information will be maintained 
and kept. This depends very much on the type of information, communication, 
or activity, for example, on an explicit form in an information system or on the 
 client portfolio. Some of this information may be necessary for the planning of the 
control of realization of the product and thus must be controlled as documented 
information.
 
3. Whom—the distribution of the information to the relevant parties in the organiza-
tion that need this information for the realization of the product: marketing, design 
and development, production, logistics, and technical service.
Authorities and Responsibilities for Customer Communication
In order to maintain effective communication channels, the organization shall 
appoint designated roles for each type of customer communication. Each role will 
be responsible for managing the communication channel related to a specific  context 
(marketing, production, or logistics). The objective is to appoint a person or a  function 
that will bear the responsibility of operating the communication with the customer 
and exchanging the required information. For example:
• A sales representative is responsible for delivering price quotes and inputting orders 
to the marketing and sales information system.
• When developing a specific product with the customer, a project manager will be des-
ignated the task of communicating with the customer, receiving and documenting 
product specifications and requirements, conducting meetings with the customer, 
conducting meetings with the internal functions to realize the product, and so on.
• When operating a call center, a representative is then considered responsible for 
communicating with the customers on various issues.
• Key account manager or sales person is responsible about notifying customers when 
defective products or services are found or delivered.
The definition may appear on the job description, the role definition, or on a work 
instruction. Strong emphasis is given to the treatment of complaints and the handling 
 

215
Operation
of customer feedback. If the customer maintains a designated system for the cor-
respondence, then the relevant parties should receive training with instructions on 
how to use the relevant system.
Time Frames
Defining the precise time frames for each communication type or channel is  necessary 
in order to allow the continuous flow of information between the organization and 
the customer. The objective here is to specify the exact time frame for a response, 
that is, over what period of time must the requested information be transferred to the 
 customer. The time frame depends on the nature of the communication or the related 
activity. In principle the requisite response time for each type of communication will 
be defined. For example:
• An offer—the number of work days to handle a request for an offer would be defined.
• A complaint—an immediate answer would be delivered to the customer stating that 
the complaint is under review and that a full answer will be delivered to the cus-
tomer according to the priority and seriousness of the case.
• Changes or update to the product—the response time will be determined according 
to the nature of the change or update.
• Information and details about nonconformed products or services—the response time 
shall be determined according to the impact of the nonconformity on the product.
Documentation of these time frames depends on the business activity and its 
 specifications. These types of specifications appear usually on the contract. And so 
contractual business attributes such as type of customer (platinum, gold, silver) or 
type of service agreement (premium, normal) may set the reaction time. When this 
information is necessary for the planning of the control of realization of the  product, 
it must be controlled as documented information.
Customer Records
Customer records are considered as information and data that are necessary for 
 communication with the customer (among other activities such as invoicing or 
 delivery of goods). Such records shall be kept according to the nature of the com-
munication. The purpose is to define the needed inputs for initiating communication 
with the customer. The organization shall define which details are required in order 
to maintain an effective communication with the customer:
• Names and details
• Managing contact details such as telephone number, e-mail address, and postal 
address
• Managing details according to the activity—contact persons or activity hours
• Managing financial details—bank account details and credit card numbers
• Managing specific customer information related to the realization of the 
product— particular notices and remarks, examples of products, types of docu-
ments (order, delivery notes, invoices), or technical specifications
 

216
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The next stage is to define where, how, and in which format customer’s records will be 
maintained and distributed to relevant parties in the organization. These definitions 
will refer to the realization processes. Each realization step may require a different 
type of information from the customer and that means a different type of communi-
cation channel. The next table is a suggestion of how to manage this information:
Regulatory Requirements
Applicable statutory and regulatory requirements may demand communication chan-
nels and necessary details and information with customers on various topics other 
than complaints or customer feedback. If such requirements regarding communica-
tion with the customer are applicable, the organization must implement them. This 
fact may influence the entire communication process with the customer. It might be 
necessary to collect specific data or to design specific processes or documentation in 
order to respond to these needs. This is why the organization is requested to iden-
tify these applicable statutory and regulatory requirements and integrate them in its 
processes. See clauses 4.2 (Understanding the needs and expectations of interested 
parties), 5.1.2 (Leadership and commitment with respect to the needs and expecta-
tions of customers), 8.2.2 (Determination of requirements related to the goods and 
services), and 8.6.5 (Post-delivery activities).
8.2.2  Determining the Requirements for Products and Services
By determining the requirements for the product and the service, the organization deter-
mines exactly what the product specifications are, in order to evaluate later (clause 8.2.3) 
whether it has the ability to meet these specifications. The determination enables the 
later verification of its feasibility and ability to supply the product according to the cus-
tomer’s expectations and specifications. Thus, it is necessary to review all requirements 
from various inputs and conditions—customer, regulatory, safety, and organizational.
The requirements of goods or services are the collection of inputs needed to set cri-
teria for its validation. In order to accurately identify these, the organization needs to 
develop a method to collect and review these inputs. Here are the ISO 9001 requirements:
• The organization shall ensure that the requirements for the products and services to 
be offered to customers are defined.
• The organization shall identify and review regulatory requirements applicable to the 
product and service.
Process
Customer Records
Marketing lead
The name and telephone number of the prospect plus a completed lead survey 
for the sales representative to communicate to a potential customer
Sales order
Full customer details, including account details
Development
The name of a contact person by the customer related to the product
Delivery
Address for delivery and a contact person in the logistics
Accounting
Details for debit
 

217
Operation
• The organization shall determine additional requirements necessary for the 
 realization of the product or the provision of services.
• The organization must ensure and confirm that it has the capability to meet the 
 requirements and supply the product as required or offered to the customer.
The main objective of clause 8.2.2—Determining the requirements for products and 
services—is to ensure that all the requirements are clear, documented, and distrib-
uted to the appropriate parties in the organization or parties that take part in the 
realization of the product and the provision of the service. The standard introduces 
us to several main types of requirements that need to be reviewed when accepting or 
collecting requirements related to the product. Reviewing these will bring you closer 
to an accurate determination of the requirements. There are no standard require-
ments for documenting the process. However, during an audit, you will have to prove 
that all of the product requirements are clear and identified: product catalogs, offers 
or tenders, order, and so on.
Determining the Requirements for the Products and Services
A product may be developed as part of a contract, as a product available for a 
market sector, as product that is embedded in another product, or as a service. The 
product requirements are the collection of inputs that are supposed to fulfill the 
expectation of customers. In order to accurately identify these, the organization 
must create a method that collects and reviews these inputs. The objectives are to 
understand fully the expectations of the customer and to prevent misunderstand-
ings. The requirements for the product and services may be influenced by several 
factors:
• Requirements that are defined on a contract
• Results of a market research
• Known needs and expectations of the customer
• Requirements provided by the customer, for example, as a request for purchasing 
or a tender
• Necessary requirements of the organization like quality requirements or regulatory 
requirements
• New requirements that are the results of a change in customer expectations
All these types of requirements must be identified and known to the organization. 
Bear in mind that those requirements must be validated in the later stages of the 
realization. Thus, it is required to define a method for identifying and  understanding 
the needs and demands related to product and proving whether the organization 
is able to fulfill these requirements. The method shall include all the relevant par-
ties that participate in the realization of the product: sales, development, production, 
purchase, and so on.
There is no standard requirement for documenting the method; however, you will 
be requested to prove that this method is defined and implemented. It is  difficult to 
 direct as to how this is to be implemented because each type of product has its own 
 

218
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
manner of  determining the requirements. I would plan and introduce key tools that 
capture the expectations of the customers. These may include
• Customer files where specific customer requirements are saved
• Meeting summaries where the customer expressed his or her expectations
• Checklists that prove that I considered critical topics while determining the 
requirements
• Order forms that express customers’ expectations
• Management systems that manage all these elements
• A summary report of research if you ordered a market research
• A document of characterization when submitting a product for design and development
• Customer’s approval of the product characteristics
The requirements shall be communicated to all relevant parties in the organization. 
Where product requirements are changed, the organization shall ensure that relevant 
documents are updated and all relevant parties are informed.
Identifying Applicable Regulatory and Statutory Requirements
Applicable statutory and regulatory requirements may affect the ability of the orga-
nization in determining the requirements related to the product or the service. Such 
expectations of interested parties have a potential effect on the organization’s ability 
to consistently provide products and services that meet the requirements.
The identification of relevant regulatory requirements is critical when determining 
requirements related to the product. The regulatory requirements may include gov-
ernment, safety, and environmental regulations. These may contain provisions for 
product safety, characteristics, identification, and functionality; and they may affect 
or set the product’s requirements—design and development, production, assembly, 
storage and transportation, handling, recycling, and the disposal of materials or 
products. They may apply to realization activities such as acquisition, storage, han-
dling, recycling, elimination, or disposal of materials or products.
The objective here is to ensure that regulations are available and understood and 
submitted as inputs when product requirements are being determined. The process of 
determining the requirements will ensure that any changes or updates in the regulatory 
requirements are identified, gathered, and accounted for. This is how you may guaran-
tee that the relevant product requirements will be up to date with regard to the regula-
tions. Availability of the regulations is measured not only by their physical presence 
but also by the employees’ awareness of the regulations and their influence and effect 
on the product’s realization or service provision. For example, if one fixes flat tires, one 
may need to properly dispose of the old tires that were replaced because environmental 
regulations forbids one from throwing them in the garbage. This regulation shall be 
considered when one determines the requirements for the service to replace flat tires.
Additional Requirements Necessary for the Realization (or Provision) of the Product
The organization shall evaluate and determine other realization requirements 
that are not the customer’s concern or that the customer need know about, but are 
 

219
Operation
nonetheless necessary to the realization of the processes; these are likely to affect the 
quality of the product and may also affect the ability of the organization to meet the 
customer’s requirements. Such additional requirements may include
• Qualifications, skills, or knowledge of personnel needed to realize the product
• The use of special equipment, tools, and accessories (such as clothing or software) 
for the realization or provision activities
• The use of certain raw material or components
• The need for workshops and trainings to benefit the customer
• The need for certain resources such as workstations or infrastructure during the 
realization or provision activities
• Necessary processes for the realization or provision activities
• Required standards
• Activities for the disposal of products or materials
• Requirements for the operating environment of the product
The organization will ensure that all such requirements are identified and deter-
mined. Additional requirements relating to interested parties that may affect product 
requirements are
• Personnel—when employees must acquire certain qualifications or trainings.
• Customers—when the customer did not convey adequate specifications regarding 
its requirements.
• Technique—when the requirements have technical aspects that must be considered.
• Suppliers—when suppliers must ensure they are able to provide goods or services 
according to what was requested of them.
• Regulators—when regulatory requirements may affect the realization of the prod-
uct. For example, if one is delivering dangerous substances (where transportation 
is part of the delivery of the product), one may need the appropriate transport 
certifications.
Ensuring the Ability to Provide a Product or a Service
The output of the determination of product and service requirements is the proof that 
the organization is able to supply the product that will be offered to the customers. In 
other words, to transform the determined requirements into a set of desired opera-
tional terms that will assist the organization in deciding whether it has the ability to 
provide those requirements or not:
• Characteristics of the product such as functionality, intended use, safety, and secu-
rity are clearly defined and unambiguous.
• Resources (like infrastructures and knowledge) are available.
• Feasibility of realization—the organization maintains processes and operations 
that shall enable to achieve the requirements and the requirements are prioritized 
and approved.
• Traceability is established between the requirements of the product and the  customer’s 
requirements.
 

220
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
8.2.3  Review of Requirements for Products and Services
After determining the requirements for the product or the service, the organization 
is required to develop a method to review customers’ requirements. The review of 
the requirements for products and services refers to the examination of the opera-
tional conditions that may affect the ability of the organization to provide a prod-
uct  according to the requirements specified by the customer and determined by the 
 organization. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements are as follows:
8.2.3.1
• The organization shall review with the goal of ensuring its ability to meet the 
requirements for products and services to be offered to customers.
• The review of requirements shall be performed prior to the engagement by the orga-
nization to provide the product to the customer.
• The organization shall review product requirements specified by the customer. The 
determination shall refer to delivery and post-delivery activities as well.
• The organization shall review product requirements that are necessary for the real-
ization of the product.
• The organization shall review a product’s requirements that are not expressed or 
forwarded by the customer, but are required for obtaining the intended use of the 
product.
• The organization shall review regulatory or statutory requirements applicable to the 
product and service.
• The organization shall ensure that differences between the specifications conveyed 
by the customer and the actual requirements submitted to the customer are settled.
• The organization shall ensure that a product’s requirements are defined, clear, and 
understood, including the delivery and post-delivery requirements.
• When the customer does not provide documented requirements or specifications, 
the organization must obtain an approval prior to acceptance (forwarding for 
realization).
• In case the customer does not deliver its specific requirements, the review will be 
based on the product or service information available to customer.
• Note—in case the review is not practicable, the organization shall inform the 
 customers of the product’s specification prior to acceptance of order (like product 
catalogs in Internet sales).
8.2.3.2
• The results of the review shall be maintained as documented information.
• Where and when new requirements arise from the review, they shall be maintained 
as documented information.
The objective of these requirements is to provide an internal approval that the 
organization can realize and supply the product according to the requirements 
and expectations of the customer. The review will be conducted before the sub-
mission of a commitment to the customer. In other words, it must be clear before 
 

221
Operation
receiving the approval of the order what is to be done, by whom and when and 
whether the organization is capable.
Accepting a Request from the Customer
Review of requirements related to the product begins with a method for receiving the 
requirements and coordinating them with your organization. The objectives of the 
review are as follows:
• Capturing the requirements of the customer
• Translating the needs into organizational terms—product specifications, processes 
and activities, risks or opportunities, and regulations
• Reviewing, ensuring, and approving the ability of the organization to realize and 
deliver the product or to provide the service
The organization is required to incorporate these steps in its process of managing 
customers’ requests or orders. I suggest here some simple basic principles:
• Creating a tool for the presentation of product or service specifications to the cus-
tomer, where the customer is made aware of the product and its characteristics, 
customer offer, products catalog, and Internet site, participating in tender, or iden-
tifying a need in the market—the organization is aware that it has the ability to 
provide goods or services to interested or potential customers.
• Accepting a request from the customer for delivery of products or a service— creating 
an interface between the organization and the customer to receive, exchange, and 
transmit information related to the expectations of the customer regarding his product.
• Submitting the request for review and performing the review—the different organiza-
tional responsibilities shall share their inputs in the review and assess the ability of the 
organization to provide the product according to the specifications and expectations.
• Delivering a proposal to the customer—the assurance of the organization that it is 
able to supply the products or the services according to the requirements or inform-
ing the customer of differences.
• Settling differences—settling of differences is required if during the review the 
organization identifies deviations between the requirements of the customer and its 
abilities to provide the product or the service.
• Approving the review—the approval of the organization that it is able to supply the 
products or the services according to the requirements or informing the customer 
of differences and settling them.
I have listed here a few methods that are considered ways for capturing and 
 determining requirements related to the goods and services:
• Customer offer
• Tenders
• Customer order
• Order from Internet site
• Contracts
• Product catalog
 

222
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Reviewing Ability to Meet Requirements
The organization must evaluate whether it has the abilities to provide the customer 
with the product according to their requirements and specifications. In order to 
review the ability, certain information must be available during the review:
• Product specifications—how the organization perceives the product.
• Design specifications—specifications that indicate the characteristics of the product 
(e.g., drawings).
• Customer-specific requirements—how the customer perceives the product.
• QMS requirements—what verifications or validations are needed, which quality 
objectives are related, and which quality requirements are requested by the customer.
• Relevant standards—they may set additional requirements.
• Regulations—they may set additional requirements.
• Risks—risks related to the realization of the product must be taken into account.
• Terms for purchase—additional requirements for purchase activities related to this order:
• Certain suppliers
• Certain materials
• Additional outsourcing
• Capacity or availability of suppliers
• Terms of order—additional details regarding the order:
• Quantities—are the quantities achievable? Does the organization have enough 
capacity and resources to supply these quantities?
• Commitment for schedules—are the schedules achievable? Does the organiza-
tion have sufficient capacity and resources to meet schedules?
• Prices and payment conditions—Do the terms and payment conditions satisfy 
the organization and the customer?
• Environment and conditions—the environment in which the product must 
function or the service must be provided will be made known.
The review can be carried out by a certain function or a group of roles related to the real-
ization of the product. A good example is the internal Monday morning meeting where 
people from various functions in the organization sit together and discuss the work plan 
for the coming week. During the review, all quality requirements related to the product 
must be available and all parties that participate in the review must be aware of them.
Resolving Differences between the Organization and the Customer
The review of requirements related to the product or service occurs during the inter-
action between the customer and the organization. One of the objectives of the 
review is the confirmation that the organization can deliver a product to the cus-
tomer according to its needs and expectations even if disagreements, gaps, misun-
derstandings, or differences between the customer and the organization may arise 
related to the requirements of the product. According to the standard:
• Product requirements must be clear and unambiguous in a way that would allow 
effective product validation during later phases of the realization of the product or 
provision of services.
 

223
Operation
• Customer’s order should not be submitted for realization before all disagreements 
or differences between the customer and the organization are resolved.
• Resolving such differences is settled by accepting an approval from the customer of 
the terms for supplying the product or receiving the service.
• In case the organization is not able to provide the customer with a product accord-
ing to his or her specifications, the organization must inform the customer before 
the approval of the order.
• The customer shall confirm that he or she accepts the product as offered by the organization.
Differences between the organization and the customer refer to the fact that the customer 
wants a specific product or service but the organization is not able to provide it exactly 
as the customer expresses and expects. This is a natural occurrence. For example, dif-
ferences may appear as price disparities, functionality, attributes, and logistic issues like 
storage, packaging identification, delivery, and disposal or delivery schedules. These dif-
ferences must be resolved before the organization’s commitment to supply goods and ser-
vices to the customer or before the customer approves the order. The organization shall 
undertake measures to eliminate those misunderstandings or gaps. Through the process 
of accepting and reviewing an order, the organization must make it clear at which point of 
the review the customer agrees and approves the terms of the organization, for example:
• Signed form of the order confirmation
• An e-mail with affirmation
• The action of accepting terms and conditions on the Internet website
• Signing a service contract
Here are some ways to identify and eventually resolve such differences:
• Appointing a designated authority or function for receiving and understanding cus-
tomer requirements will reduce the number of opinions and interpretations.
• Identifying and contacting functions and roles by the customer. Such functions may 
assist and support the organization in understanding the requirements: quality con-
trol, purchase, design, and development.
• Ensuring that technical or professional terms and abbreviations are understood, 
well interpreted, and explained.
• When the requirements are in a foreign language, the organization shall ensure that 
it has the capacity to have these translated.
• Creating a communication channel designed to receive specific inputs will ensure 
the submission of definite inputs.
Approval of Requirements
The approval of the requirements related to the products or the services is the last step 
before forwarding the order for realization and thus may be critical. The objectives of 
the approval are as follows:
• Ensuring that the customer accepts the specifications of the product and the terms 
of delivery
• Avoiding nonconformity
• Eliminating waste of resources (and thus causing more nonconformity)
 

224
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When documented requirements or specifications regarding the product are not 
 provided by the customer, a confirmation of the same should be sought before accep-
tance, for example, a signed order conformation or an approval via e-mail.
Results of the Review as Documented Information
The results of the review shall be maintained as documented information and will 
serve as evidence. The evidence is to prove that all of the earlier mentioned methods 
have been carried out: accepting the request for the customer, reviewing the ability 
to meet requirements, resolving differences, reviewing changes, and approving the 
requirements. There is no specified format for such a requirement in which details 
may be documented. The results of the review have two main objectives:
• To ensure the ability of the organization to provide the product according to the 
specifications
• To define and determine product requirements and specifications necessary for 
 subsequent verification and validation
Documented information for new requirements for products and services has the 
following objectives:
• Make sure the new requirements and expectations of the customer are accepted by 
the organization.
• The organization has reviewed its ability to provide such requirements.
As I see it, the evidence of the review are divided into two types:
• Documented information that describes the review: procedure for contract review 
(not required but certainly recommended), formats for documenting meetings, 
 formats for order details, and ERP system for managing orders
• Documented information that proves the review itself: minutes of the meeting, 
 evidence of communication with the customers, like e-mails, records out of a CRM 
system, signed order conformations, or offers, internal orders, production plans with 
reference to orders, records of consignation, signed tenders, and contract agreements
Informal Review
In some cases customer requirements are based on a constant fixed list that repre-
sents all the product characteristics, for example, a shop that sells products (either 
the traditional shops or a web shop); the customer goes in, selects a product, makes 
a payment, and leaves. When accepting an order in those types of businesses, the 
traditional review, as mentioned earlier, is not practical:
• The organization offers its catalog of products with prices and delivery terms.
• The customer selects a product and accepts the terms by approving the conditions 
of the order.
With those two steps, the entire process is completed. In such cases, the review 
can cover other relevant information available to the customer. This note refers to 
 

225
Operation
information regarding the specification of the product that would be delivered to the 
customer in case a traditional review of requirements was conducted:
• Information regarding the product—information regarding the functionality 
and characteristics must be available to the customer. If it is a food product, then 
the ingredients, and if it is a product combined of multiple items, a list of the 
supplied items.
• Necessary conditions for fulfilling or operating the product—if it is a software, 
then the required operation system and technical specifications needed to install 
the software. If it is a food product that must be kept cool, it must be mentioned on 
the product.
• Necessary operating instructions—information regarding the operation of the 
product. If it is an electric device, instructions for the operation should be provided.
8.2.4  Changes to Requirements for Products and Services
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• When changes of customer requirements occur
• The relevant documented information will be updated or amended.
• The changes will be distributed and communicated to the relevant personnel.
Acceptance of Changes
The organization must manage and control changes in customer requirements. The 
ISO 9001 Standard is aware that customers may change their minds and needs. This 
is why manufacturers and service providers must maintain control over the updating 
and validity of the requirements. The objectives are as follows:
• Accepting the change—from the customer, a supplier, or an internal party such as 
employees from the logistic or production division
• Reviewing the change and its implications
• Informing the relevant parties—customer, suppliers, and organizational 
departments
• Accepting an approval that the information was delivered and the change is feasible
• Updating relevant documented information
The review of changes required by the customer shall determine whether the 
 organization is still capable of providing the product or the service. Thus, several 
contexts that may affect the products or the services must be reviewed:
• Order details like prices or quantities
• Product characteristics or technical specifications
• Implications on risks or opportunities
• Compatibility with regulatory requirements
• Technical abilities of the organization
• Availability of resources
 

226
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The first stage in the process is accepting a request for a change and submitting the 
change to the relevant parties for a review:
• Changes received from the customer
• Changes received from other interested parties that are involved in the realization of 
the product like a supplier or regulator
• Changes initiated by the organization—changes in conditions that were agreed 
upon with the customer and to which the organization is committed: materials, 
packages, processes, human resources, and transportation
This action of acceptance must be integrated into the method of the review. How to 
do it depends pretty much on the process of order management—the characteristics 
of the process will determine how a change will be reviewed and submitted forward. 
But the next issues must be determined:
• Who is responsible for the evaluation?
• What is to be evaluated?
• Which documentation needs to be reviewed and updated (diagrams,  specifications, 
instructions)?
• Who approves the changes?
• To whom must the changes be communicated?
By evaluation I mean the determination of the extent of the change—where would 
the change have implications:
• Identification of product specifications
• Identification of activities related to the realization of the product
• Identification of resources that might be impacted by the change
• Identification of the relevant organizational parties that must be informed
The outputs of these processes are as follows:
• Communication of the change to relevant interested parties that are involved: 
 personnel, suppliers, and regulators
• Updating relevant documented information that delivers inputs necessary for the 
realization of the product according to the specifications of the customer
Let us take, for example, a simple case of updating order confirmation; the  customer 
has made an order, and after a few days he or she has decided to add or subtract some 
items in that order and to change the delivery dates. The review may be conducted thus
• The customer initiates communication through defined communication channels 
(see clause 8.2.4—Customer communication).
• The sales person updates the order confirmation on the order form or in the ERP system.
• The sales person performs an availability check with the relevant parties either 
through the system or by communicating directly with them.
• After clearing the information with everyone, he or she approves to the customer 
the change.
 

227
Operation
The objectives were apparently achieved; the customer delivered his or her wish, 
everyone involved in the realization was informed, the documented information was 
updated, and the customer received his or her approval. The issue becomes compli-
cated when the product is more complex, and more parameters must be evaluated, 
more interested parties are involved, or where the product is a specially tailored one. 
In this case, one may need to update a whole set of documentation and to review the 
change with various departments or functions.
Updating Documented Information after a Change
The next objective is ensuring that all relevant documented information is 
updated with the changes to the requirements. Such assurance depends very 
much on the characteristics of your processes and the related documented infor-
mation. One is required to identify each type of documented information that is 
involved and be affected by the change in the requirements. Which information 
may be changed?
• Order details—information related to the delivery of the product or service: prices 
or dates of delivery and address for delivery
• Specifications of product—specifications for product, quality, packaging, produc-
tion, or purchase
• Requirements for resources—specifications regarding the resources that are used to 
realize the product
• Requirements for delivery—transport or geographical requirements
• Technical requirements—specifications regarding new technologies used for the 
realization of the product
Take, for example, a product that involves technical plans or diagrams. The customer 
wants to make a change to the technical specifications. This means the plans and 
 diagrams related to the design and development should also be changed or updated 
and these changes must be forwarded to production.
8.3  Design and Development of Products and Services
Design and development should be carried out according to a disciplined method 
to prevent or minimize the occurrence of quality problems. Hence, the organization 
should ensure that products or services are developed in compliance with the cus-
tomer specifications and requirements and in accordance with design and develop-
ment planning or quality planning.
Managing and controlling the design and development activities in the organiza-
tion defines the quality tasks necessary for design and development. Those activities 
shall cover the transfer of customer specifications and requirements into a desig-
nated process plan, translation of those requirements and specifications into tech-
nical details, and producing outputs necessary for the realization of the product. 
 

228
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Objectives of managing and monitoring the design and development under the QMS 
include the following:
• Identifying the necessary design and development tasks and setting the design and 
development activities as stages
• Ensuring delivery of a product or service according to the defined specification
• Defining the required inputs for the design and development activities
• Eliminating potential quality problems as much as possible
• Ensuring that the design and development progress according to regulatory and 
customer requirements
• Managing changes in design and development
8.3.1  General
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall plan and determine the design and development of activities 
as a process.
• The stages of the process shall ensure the subsequent provision through processes, 
operations, and activities for the realization of products or services.
Process for Managing the Design and Development
The organization is required to plan and develop its design and development activities 
as a process. The goal of this process is to ensure that the realization of the product or 
service will be according to their specifications. As we know each process under the 
QMS has distinct properties:
• The different process stages, their sequences and interactions, as well as the activi-
ties and operations for design and development shall be planned.
• Inputs for design and development will be defined and planned.
• Responsibilities and authorities will be defined and delegated.
• Specification of the product or the service as the customer expects—the require-
ments will be delivered to design and development activities clear and complete and 
will answer the expectations of the interested parties in the organization.
• Design and development output shall take into account the resources in the organi-
zation that support the realization processes:
• Personnel
• Infrastructures
• Processes environments
• Monitoring and measuring resources
• Knowledge
• External providers
• Support activities—design and development activities shall be planned in  accordance 
with the support operations in the organization for
• Competence
• Awareness
 

229
Operation
• Communication
• Documented information
• The controls of the process stages shall be defined:
• Verifications
• Validations
• Appropriate criteria
• Changes of the elements relevant to design and development will be managed.
Ensuring Subsequent Provision of Products and Services
The outputs of the design and development have the role of serving the planning of 
the realization. In other words, the role of the outputs of design and development 
will be to formulate the activities that will be used for the realization processes of the 
product or the service. This subject will be dealt in detail in chapter 8.3.2—Design and 
development planning—under paragraph Requirements for Subsequent Provision of 
Products and Services. The process will cover the following aspects:
• The stages or milestones of design and development
• The inputs for design and development
• The expected outputs from design and development
• The controls, verifications, and validations on the progress of design and development
8.3.2  Design and Development Planning
The design and development processes, operations, activities, and controls shall be 
planned in accordance to several requirements (the ISO 9001 Standard requirements):
• The nature, duration, and complexity of design and development activities
• The necessary process stages of design and development, including activities for 
design and development reviews
• Verification activities necessary for the control of the progress of design and 
development
• Validation activities necessary for demonstration and conformation of design and 
development
• Definition of the responsibilities and authorities in the design and development 
process
• Determination of internal and external resources needed for design and develop-
ment activities
• The need to control interfaces between persons involved in the design and develop-
ment process
• The degree of involvement of customers and users in the design and development 
process and the relevant process stages that they will be involved in
• The need for subsequent provision of products and services
• The expected degree of control on behalf of customers and other relevant interested 
parties in the design and development process
• Documented information of the design and development activities necessary to 
demonstrate that design and development requirements have been met
 

230
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Nature, Duration, and Complexity of the Design and Development Activities
In determining the stages and controls for design and development, the organization 
shall consider the nature, duration, and complexity of the design and development activ-
ities. This requirement is important for identifying the process environment in which 
the design and development will be planned and developed and for identifying the inter-
relations between activities of design and development or other activities of the QMS. 
According to those distinctive methodologies, frameworks and tools for the design and 
development activities shall be defined and determined. Let us discuss the three:
• Nature refers to the essential qualities, constraints, or characteristics of the design 
and development activities. It refers to the type of activities, the type of inputs and 
outputs, the type and amount of data that those activities require or generate, the 
personnel, their capabilities and experience, the process environment in which they 
will be performed, and the related risks and their controls.
• Duration refers to the planned period of time in which the activities must be 
accomplished.
• Complexity refers to the quality of process elements and their combinations. It is 
important to assess the complexity of the activities in order to be able to evaluate 
whether the organization can perform these activities. Another goal of understand-
ing the complexity is the ability to develop processes or activities that will serve 
this complexity. The complexity in turn will help in determining the requirements 
for inputs, personnel, or documentations and the interrelations between design and 
development activities and other activities of the QMS.
Process Stages of Design and Development
Process stages describing the design and the development process must be defined 
and determined. Process stages represent the main steps that the organization must 
 follow and complete while designing and developing. They are the basis for the method 
to manage design and development. Defining and mapping the process stages
• Is an important stage necessary to evaluate whether design and development has 
achieved its objectives
• Creates a clear picture of design and development progress
• Allows authorities in design and development to release the outputs to the next stage
• Assists in prioritizing the activities of design and development
When a group of activities is considered to be a stage of design and development, con-
tributes to the progress, requires inputs, and generates outputs, it should be counted 
as a process stage. For each process stage, you must determine
• Its relevant activities
• The associated resources (internal as well as external)
• The associated controls and actions for addressing risks
• The necessary development tools
• The necessary monitoring and measuring devices
• Its verification and validation activities
 

231
Operation
• Its responsibilities and authorities
• The need for involvement of customers and users
Examples of process stages include the following:
• Marketing reviews
• Concept and planning
• Research
• Prototype design
• Development realization process
• Development of realization controls
• Test of batch manufacturing
• Changes and modifications
• Launching the product
• Control after launch
• Updates and modifications
The most simple way to determine and define the process stages is using a process 
chart that illustrates the progress of design and development in the organization. 
After defining the process stages, you may derive the design and development activi-
ties and assign them to specific process stages.
Design and Development Review
At suitable process stages of design and development, methodical reviews of design and 
development shall be planned and performed. This review has the following objectives:
• Evaluating the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements
• Identifying any problems and proposing necessary actions
Verification Activities
Verification of design and development activities refers to the examination whether 
the development activities are advancing as planned. While planning the design and 
development process stages, the organization shall describe how one will examine 
whether design and development is advancing according to plan and when the verifi-
cation activities will occur during the design and development process stages.
In practice you must verify the progress of the development process by controlling 
it through attributes such as availability of inputs, transfer to development phases, 
performing activities, responsibility, time frame, risks, and acceptance of required 
outputs. The application of the verifications will be discussed in detail in clause 
8.3.4—Design and development controls.
Validation Activities
Validation of design and development activities refers to the examination and confir-
mation that inputs of the activities are competent and that the outputs of the activi-
ties achieved the required results.
 

232
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In practice you must include validation activities during the design and develop-
ment process stages to ensure that
• Inputs transferred into design and development are adequate and suitable
• The resources invested in design and development are adequate and suitable
• The outputs of the design and development activities meet their objectives
The test and assurance will be done with predefined criteria. The application of the 
validations will be discussed in detail in clause 8.3.4—Design and development 
controls.
Responsibilities and Authorities
The organization is required to identify the organizational personnel responsible for 
conducting, performing, and accomplishing design and development and quality 
tasks. The organization must refer to any role that performs any kind of activity in 
design and development: engineers, scientists, programmers, lab technicians, and so 
on. The bottom line is defining and determining which functions or roles participate 
in the design and development activities, and each of the participants in the design 
and development must have a clear and defined understanding of his or her respon-
sibilities and the activities that he or she is required to perform, how these activities 
are integrated into the development cycle, to whom he or she must report, and what 
the outputs expected of them are.
Each development and design activity has corresponding responsibility and 
authority assigned to it. This is also part of the process approach promoted by the 
ISO 9001 Standard. The responsibilities shall include
• Design and development tasks
• Design and development inputs—make sure that the inputs are available and 
complete
• The interrelation with other design and development roles
• Communication with the customer or his or her representative in the organization
• Conducting design and development reviews, verifications, and validations
• Approving changes to design and development
The definition may be documented on a job description, a development plan, or 
a procedure. You may also use a development team structure (like an organiza-
tional structure) with interrelationships outlined between the participants. In cases 
where certain tasks require training that was not included in the training program, 
such training must be identified, planned, and given to the appropriate parties.
Internal and External Resources
It is necessary to define which resources are required for the design and development 
activities or any development tools or instruments that will be used during the activi-
ties. The purpose serves to define the appropriate resources, accessories, and process 
 

233
Operation
environment used for the design and development activities and to eliminate the use 
of irrelevant or invalid resources. The types of resources include
• Human resources
• Infrastructures like labs
• Tools and equipment like software for design and development
• Monitoring and measuring devices
• Feasible materials like parts, components, and raw materials
• Documentations
I find it effective to define and allocate resources and their capacity to certain activi-
ties. Thus it will be clear which resources are necessary to each activity. Please review 
the following table:
Mapping the resources needed for design and development will assist you in 
 allocating organizational resources better. When it comes to external providers, it 
is necessary to define what products, components, or services are to be purchased in 
order to achieve the development, and the requirements for purchasing shall serve as 
input for the design and development process.
Control of Interfaces
The interfaces and interrelations between different design and development enti-
ties need to be defined. Interfaces refer to the overlap where more than one area, 
functional group, subject, or field involved in design and development may affect 
each other or have links to each other. It refers also to interfaces with external inter-
ested parties. The plan should specify those interfaces. The objective is to ensure 
effective interrelations between the different parties involved in design and develop-
ment: communication, clear assignment of responsibilities, ensuring that outputs 
are verified and suitable for the next phase, and the assurance that information and 
data can flow seamlessly. The success of design and development depends on the 
degree of communication and interrelation between all the functional groups that 
are involved.
In order to make the interface more effective, I recommend describing the inter-
face on a flow chart as a process explaining the relations and interrelations between 
the entities throughout the development stages—how documents relate to other 
documents, how the outputs of one document are the inputs for another, and so on. 
Process Stage
Activity
Resources
Prototype design
Test of prototype design
Technician—20 work hours
Testing lab—20 work hours
Software for testing—20 work hours
Test of batch manufacturing
First test batch
Technician—24 work hours
Production manager—24 work hours
Machine of type A—16 work hours
Test of batch manufacturing
Test of packaging
Order from Supplier XYZ of 200 packages
 

234
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
For example, if one is developing a product that has mechanical as well as electronic 
components, both developed by different teams, one must ensure both teams have 
efficient communication between them.
When defining the relations that serve the design and development process, one should 
refer to the interface with external objects, bodies, or parties that may have an effect on the 
process or may take part in any of the design or development activities. These may be cus-
tomers, suppliers, authorities, or other developing teams or organizational departments.
The organization needs to define controls of those interrelations in order to ensure 
that they are effective. Which aspects may be controlled?
• Transmission of inputs
• Acceptance of outputs
• Exchange of information
• Sharing of risks and actions to address those risks
• Common reviews
One way to define the controls of interfaces is to initiate a review that will involve 
areas of design and development. In this review the topics that were mentioned ear-
lier will be discussed.
Involvement of Customers and Users
Involving the customer during design and development increases the chances that the 
objectives of the product and the customer’s expectations will be properly achieved. In 
this way one may ensure that exchange of data and information with the customer is 
guaranteed. This involvement of customer may be performed as joint reviews that may be 
scheduled on a regular basis or at defined process stages. Which issues may be reviewed?
• Information regarding the product
• Progress of the development
• Conformance of the design and development outputs according to the customer’s 
specifications
• Conformance of design and development outputs according to regulatory require-
ments when such are applicable
• Demonstrations of the product and its features
• Results of validation activities
• Progress of activities expected by the customer
• Issues and problems that might have arisen during design and development
• Opportunities that occur during design and development
In practice the organization must define
• Where and when (in which design and development stages) will the customer be 
involved
• Which inputs must the customer bring at each stage
• Which outputs must the organization provide the customer with at each stage
Those definitions can be included in the development plan (in case one is managing 
the same).
 

235
Operation
Requirements for Subsequent Provision of Products and Services
The process of the design and development shall ensure that the outputs can be inte-
grated in the realization processes and activities once the development is released. 
This requirement emphasizes the relation between the outputs of design and devel-
opment and quality planning in the organization. There are two approaches to 
managing the link between design and development and quality planning:
• You may ensure that the products are developed in accordance with the quality 
planning implemented in the organization. This will ensure smoother integration 
of the new product in the realization processes.
• You may redesign quality planning along with the progress of design and devel-
opment, and items concerned with each stage of design and development shall be 
updated.
Control on Behalf of Customers and Other Relevant Interested Parties
When the customer or other interested parties are involved in design and develop-
ment, their role, responsibilities, and authorities must be defined in detail. Which 
other interested parties other than the customer may take part and which tasks might 
they fulfill?
Documented Information of the Design and Development Activities
The organization is required to retain documented information that demonstrates 
that design and development requirements have been met. The records have the 
 following goals:
• To prove design and development progressed according to the planned  process stages
• To prove that all the expected inputs were delivered
• To prove that all the expected results were accepted
• To prove that results of the design and development activities meet their objectives
• To prove that certain required conditions were fulfilled while conducting the design 
and development activities
Interested Party
Role
Customers
Approval of specifications of the product or service
Delivering inputs
Approval of outputs
Test of product functionalities
Approval of product before release
Employees who are not involved in design and 
development
Test of product functionalities
Regulators
Test of product functionalities
Approval of product before release
Suppliers
Delivering inputs
Approval of outputs
Test of product functionalities
 

236
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The records shall be designed in a format that will enable them to be delivered as 
inputs to subsequent stages in design and development. The required records shall 
cover the next areas of the design and development process stages:
• Design and development inputs
• Records of design and development reviews
• Design and development outputs
• Design and development changes
• Records of reviews of changes to design and development
The documented information shall be submitted to the controls suggested in clause 
7.5—Documented information.
8.3.3  Design and Development Inputs
Design inputs serve as the basis for product development. The inputs for design and 
development processes and activities must be determined in order to ensure their 
availability to those processes and activities. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements 
include the following:
• The organization shall determine the essential requirements of inputs to the specific 
types of products and services to be designed and developed.
• The next issues shall determine the type and extent of the inputs to design and 
development activities:
• Inputs relevant for the intended use and performance of the products or services
• Data and information derived from design and development of previous rel-
evant products or services
• Statutory and regulatory requirements
• Standards or codes of practice that the organization has committed to imple-
ment and act upon
• Potential consequences of failure of design and development to meet require-
ments or specifications derived from the nature of the product or service
• The inputs shall be
• Appropriate to the objectives and expected results of design and development
• Complete
• Unambiguous
• Conflicts that may arise from different types of inputs will be resolved.
• The organization shall retain documented information on design and development 
inputs.
Determine the Essential Requirements for Design and Development
The inputs serve as essential requirements necessary for the progress of design and 
development. Those requirements must all be defined as corresponding to the pur-
pose of the product or service. The inputs should be determined according to the 
planned activities of the design and development processes and the intended use of 
the product. The main concept of defining one’s design and development inputs is 
 

237
Operation
simple: the inputs must relate to the product’s intended use, functional performance, 
and quality and regulatory requirements. Within the design and development of 
inputs requirements, the organization must refer to the issues that will be discussed 
in this chapter. The inputs may be derived from
• Development of prototypes
• Need to modify earlier developments
• Request for changes
• Problems or failures with earlier versions
• Failure to comply with the acceptability criteria
• New customer requirements
• An iterative development
Clarity, Adequacy, and Completeness of Design and Development Inputs
When defining and introducing the inputs to design and development, you must 
ensure that they serve their purpose, or in other words, a design input requirement 
must be measurable, verifiable, and objective. The requirements for defining  adequate, 
complete, and unambiguous refer to the ability to verify those requirements of the 
product in later phases of the design and development. The standard demands of us 
to assess the quality of the inputs through several quality parameters:
• Adequacy—adequacy of the inputs refers to the ability of the inputs, their types, 
and content to meet the needs and expectations of the involved parties. Here it is 
required to ensure that requirements for the related product are appropriate and 
address the intended use of the product and the needs of the customer.
• Clarity—unambiguous inputs refer to the quality of having a single clearly defined 
meaning that leads to only one conclusion and that prevents misunderstandings or 
conflicts. Design input requirements that are ambiguous cannot be objectively verified.
• Completeness—completeness of inputs refers to the quality of having all the data 
and information that are required, and when something is missing, failures may 
appear down the road.
Example of an ambiguous and incomplete input will be as follows: “The application 
shall process adequate data in a considerable time.” No one can objectively verify or 
validate this specification because “adequate data” and “considerable time” are open 
for discussion. Instead, I would define “The application shall process 60 MB of data 
in 30 seconds.” I suggest considering and defining how the design and development 
inputs will be verified before they are submitted to the activities.
Avoiding Misunderstandings and Conflicts
While reviewing the design and development inputs, one must review any imprac-
tical requirements (requirements that cannot be fulfilled or that the development 
team might have problems fulfilling or understanding) or inputs that might conflict 
with each other. The goal is an early detection of any future difficulties, conflicts, or 
obstacles that may arise during the development phase. Resolving conflicts regarding 
 

238
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
the inputs refers to the review of the inputs and the approval that the inputs do not 
contradict each other and are suitable—the requirements of several inputs can be 
appropriately integrated in the developed product. It is possible to conduct the review 
together with the customer or with the responsible party for these requirements in 
order to obtain their points of view. Examples of conflicts or misunderstandings that 
may occur are as follows:
• Requirements that cannot be validated or verified
• Incomplete information or lack of information regarding the user or the intended use
• Lack of information or details regarding the user’s environment
• Contradictions between requirements
Inputs Relevant to the Intended Use and Performance
The organization shall determine product requirements for performance, function-
ality, and intended use in order to allow the identification of all necessary design 
and development inputs. The objective here is to ensure that the product will acquire 
all its expected features and functionalities. The intended use of the product or ser-
vice refers to its purpose, operation, and utilization and relates to user expecta-
tions. Intended use refers to information and outputs derived from market surveys 
or research, risk-based thinking outputs, customer requirements, and a review of 
requirements related to the product. The definition shall refer to  situations where it 
is inadvisable to use the product or provide the service. Let us review some aspects 
of the functional and performance requirements:
• Physical characteristics of the product such as plans, sizes, dimensions, diagrams, 
drawings, samples, and prototypes. The definition shall refer to tolerances and 
limits.
• Requirements for handling and behavior with the product and specifications of 
aspects such as packaging, storage, labeling, operation, handling, and maintenance 
requirements; anything that might affect the quality of the product or its intended 
use must be reviewed during the development stages.
• Definition regarding the operating environment of the product or the environment 
in which the service shall be provided. If the product is to operate under a controlled 
temperature, the design and development activities must take that into consider-
ation. This requirement is also valid when a software must be installed and there are 
technical specifications for installation.
• Interface with other products where the product is to be combined or installed with 
other products or pieces of equipment and/or accessories; this shall be referred to as 
inputs to design and development.
• Service requirement shall be taken into account. When it is already known that 
the product will require service activities in the long run, it will be reviewed in the 
design and development activities so that certain characteristics of the product may 
be planned appropriately.
• Compatibility of the product’s components shall be considered when the product is 
constructed or assembled from various components and materials; it is necessary to 
 

239
Operation
examine the materials used in order to ensure that the different components compete 
or match one another and the risk of contamination, error, or failure is prevented.
• The organization will specify any safety requirements that are needed to serve as 
inputs for the development and which may affect the design of the product and its 
characteristics and intended use.
• Appropriate considerations to the integration of environmental protection aspects 
shall be delivered as inputs to design and development as and when they are applicable.
In practice one has to demonstrate that for each product under design and develop-
ment, one has defined the required inputs and that the inputs are available. It is dif-
ficult to say how these inputs will be introduced to design and development because 
each type of input has its own characteristics and each will be documented in a differ-
ent way. In general, I recommend building a product file that includes all the required 
inputs. The format and structure will determine the types of expected inputs and 
their content.
Data and Information Derived from Previous Design and Development
Where applicable, the organization shall refer to outputs and experience of earlier, 
similar, or parallel developments that have been performed by the organization. The 
outputs of such developments may serve as inputs to future developments. The goal 
is to allow the knowledge and experience of the design and development to be inde-
pendent of persons in the organization. Using information derived from previous 
similar design and development activities may assist in preventing quality problems 
in future development; these problems may have already been prevented before and 
may help save resources.
When planning a new product that is based on a former product, the organization 
may (and should) use the experience and knowledge acquired in previous develop-
ments. This type of information refers to
• Experience from former developments or designs
• Knowledge acquired during former developments or designs
• Techniques developed from former developments or designs
• The use of development tools
• Outputs of former developments or designs
• Documentation of applicable earlier developments
• Complaints, failures, or other events regarding previous products
• History of the organization (a knowledge center)
In practice, the organization should create a database that is available to development 
teams, which they may access and fetch data and information of previous develop-
ments. Ways to transfer the experience and knowledge of previous developments 
include the following:
• Design and development manual
• Data and information regarding analyses of failures and nonconformities 
(like FMEA)
 

240
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Outputs and techniques of production optimization (that will be used in design and 
development)
• Results of experiments
• Reports about materials, components, techniques, and processes
Statutory and Regulatory Requirements
Many products must be realized under local or international regulations and exter-
nal requirements. These are applicable to the design and development stages as well. 
Both statutory and regulatory requirements are usually nonnegotiable and must be 
complied with. They were planned in order to assure that some conditions (e.g., reg-
ulatory and safety) are met while developing a product for use. So it is critical that 
the organization will identify those that are relevant to its products and areas. The 
relevant statutory and regulatory requirements should be identified while under-
standing the needs and expectations of the interested parties (see clause 4.2).
When planning the inputs for design and development, one shall identify, indi-
cate, and refer to requirements such as regulations, regional directives, or statutory 
requirements and particular requirements that serve as inputs and which controls are 
to be incorporated into one’s design and development activities.
Standards or Codes of Practice That the Organization Committed to Implement
The organization must identify and introduce standards or codes of practices 
that it has committed to implement during the design and development activities. 
Standard or codes of practices may suggest rules, mythologies, views, ideas, opin-
ions, life cycle models, or concepts related to design and development. Those types 
of requirements present restrictions, conditions, or constraints that must be inte-
grated into the activities and that may influence its performances, functionality, 
intended use, and safety.
These requirements are to be identified and made available to the relevant parties 
in the appropriate manner, with which they can understand those requirements and 
integrate them into the design and development activities. Under standards or codes 
of practices, you may find
• External procedures
• Policies
• International standards or technical requirements
• Environmental standards
• Technical specifications
• Industry standards or specifications
• Packaging requirements
Those types of standards or codes of practices are usually defined in the contract or pur-
chase order, and customers may demand that applicable standards or codes of practice 
typical in their industry shall be referred to while developing products for them. They 
can be introduced to design and development in the form of procedures, instructions, 
verifications, or validation controls and tools (like software or measurement tools).
 

241
Operation
Potential Consequences of Failure of Design and Development
Potential consequences of failure due to the nature of the product or service are sup-
posed to be addressed during the design and development activities. The detection 
and identification of such consequences and situations related to the use of the prod-
uct or provision of service should be completed as early as possible in its life cycle 
and that is in the design and development phases. One may reduce the probability 
of the occurrence of potential failures through the identification of situations where 
the product might fail, the analysis of related risks and their causes that might affect 
the objectives of the product, the implementation of controls, and the mitigation or 
elimination of known hazards during the design phases. The result is the inherent 
assurance that the product will act as expected. Addressing these potential conse-
quences during the design and development stages has several goals:
• To introduce risk management activities into the design control process and the life 
cycle management of the product or service
• To implement the appropriate control measures in the final design of the product 
or service
• To reduce the probability of potential consequences by improving those potential 
characteristics of the product or service
• To focus and refine the controls that will be implemented during the realization of 
the product
The organization shall also give its attention to environmental product aspects and 
should seek to minimize environmental impacts over the full life cycle of its products. 
This consideration shall relate to the design and development activities, the realiza-
tion and delivery of the final product or service, as well as the disposal of the product.
In practice I recommend conducting before the design and development begins 
a sort of review to identify hazards, evaluate risks, and  implement risk control 
measures, specify the activities and responsibilities, and refer to the required 
documentation standards, regulations, and records that may support the conclu-
sions of the review. The conclusions of the review will be introduced as inputs, for 
example, as data and information derived from previous design and development.
Documented Information of Design and Development Inputs
The organization is required to retain documented information on design and 
development inputs. This documented information has the purpose of demonstrat-
ing that the inputs submitted to design and development meet the requirements in 
clause 8.3.3—Design and development inputs. Examples for documented informa-
tion include the following:
• Documented product specifications
• Customer specifications of the product
• Minutes of development meetings
• Offers, orders, or contracts
• List of relevant statutory and regulatory requirements
• List of relevant standards or codes of practice
 

242
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
8.3.4  Design and Development Controls
Clause 8.3.4—Design and development controls—defines the type of controls that 
the organization is expected to apply to the design and development activities. The 
ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall apply the controls on the design and development activities.
• The controls shall ensure that
• Results for design and development are defined
• Reviews necessary to assess the ability of the results to answer their require-
ments are performed
• Verification activities necessary to ensure that the results conform to their 
requirements are performed
• Validation activities necessary to ensure that the results meet the requirements 
of specified application or intended use are performed
• Actions that are results of problems and events detected during the design and 
development reviews, verification, or validation activities are initiated
• Documented information that demonstrates the carrying out of these controls shall 
be retained.
• Note—reviews of verification and validation are activities with defined purposes. 
They can be conducted separately or in any combination, as is suitable for the prod-
ucts and services of the organization.
Controls on the Design and Development Activities
The organization is required to apply controls to the design and development process 
to ensure several objectives. But first I would like to understand the meaning of set-
ting up of control for design and development. Controls of design and development 
refer to techniques and tools including the qualifications necessary to ensure that 
the intended results of the activities are accepted. The objectives of the controls are 
as follows:
• Controls related to the design, with which the organization should ensure so that 
the product meets the acceptance criteria
• Setting up of the controls to ensure the appropriate progress of the design and 
development
• Eliminating undesired results and effects on the design and development activities
• Ensuring conformed inputs and outputs of design and development activities
For each design and development phase, process stage, or activity, the appropriate 
control will be identified and determined. The controls shall be adjusted to the activ-
ities that they are reviewing. The controls shall be planned in accordance to the criti-
calness and complexity of the activity and its related risks of failure. When planning 
the controls, one must take into account the different conditions in which the activi-
ties are performed. Those conditions may set the concept of the control. When one 
feels it necessary, one may document the controls in procedures or include them in 
 

243
Operation
design and development procedure or instructions. Principles in setting of  controls 
include the following:
• Identifying the design and development activity of process stages to be controlled
• Defining the purpose and objective of the controlled activity (what in the process 
stage is required to be controlled)
• Defining the control activities—how the control will be installed
• Defining means with which the controls are performed: related documentations like 
instructions or standard and monitoring and measuring devices
• The required records that will prove the control was performed and the results of 
the control
Clause 8.3.4 sets a list of design and development aspects that must be controlled. They 
will be discussed in the next paragraphs. The standard adds a note to the require-
ments of clause 8.3.4—Design and development reviews—verification and valida-
tion have distinct purposes. This note suggests that the organization may determine 
whether these controls will be conducted separately or in any combination that is 
suitable for the developed products and services.
Results for Design and Development Are Defined
For each process stage of design and development and activity, the required outputs 
are supposed to be defined. A control must be applied to verify that these outputs 
are defined and clear to the relevant parties participating in design and develop-
ment (external parties as well). This type of control will enable the interrelation and 
a smooth flow of information between the activities. The idea is to ensure that the 
design and development does not proceed to the next stage without all the necessary 
outputs of the previous stage or without the necessary verification of an activity or 
validation of results. Types of results include the following:
• Results of activities (the outputs)
• Results of verifications
• Results of validations
Once it is detected that the defined results are not acceptable, an action must be initiated.
Planning such a control, one must review all the design and development activi-
ties (whether as a procedure or a flow diagram), identify all the activities, and ensure 
that for each activity an output is clearly defined. Implementing such a control can be 
challenging. You may use a procedure or a form that implies which results are needed 
and whether they are defined in all process stages of design and development. But 
bear in mind that each type of product may have other process stages that require a 
different arrangement of the procedure or the form.
Design and Development Review
At suitable process stages of design and development, methodical reviews of design 
and development shall be planned and performed. This is an opportunity for an 
 

244
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
overview of the progress of the design and development when participants from dif-
ferent areas with different skills and points of view are brought together to discuss the 
design and development. Such brainstorming activity can provide solutions to many 
problems. This review has the following objectives:
• Evaluating the ability of the results of design and development to meet requirements
• Identifying any problems and proposing necessary actions
The type and manner of the review shall be appropriate to the complexity of the 
activities, the complexity of the product, its quality requirements, and the degree 
of risk associated with the specified use of the product or service. Preparing for the 
review, the necessary criteria for evaluating the progress of design and development 
will be provided. It refers here to progress on various aspects:
• Progress of the design and development according to the process stages
• Availability of inputs and their quality
• Availability of resources
• Performance of external providers
• Results of verifications and validations
• Achievement of product objectives (design and development outputs)
When determining the review, the next issues must be referred to:
• The topics or issues of the review shall be determined.
• The type of review, how the review will be conducted, and demonstrations of results, 
experiments, proof of correctness, or inspections.
• The participants of the review must be identified. Here you need to refer to func-
tionalities of design and development with the goal that each party will give its 
inputs.
• How the review will be conducted including activities or use of techniques or tools 
like software.
• What are the outputs of the review in terms of records and documented information.
• Reference to the standards or codes of practices that are to used or implanted dur-
ing design and development activities. The review will assess their applicability and 
whether their objectives are met.
• Reference to the regulatory or statutory requirements that are to be used or 
implanted during the design and development activities. The review will assess their 
 applicability and whether their objectives are met.
• Follow-up activities necessary to ensure that issues and problems that were identi-
fied during the review will be addressed.
As I see it, there is no simpler way to define the arrangement of the review rather than 
defining a form that covers all the issues mentioned earlier.
When nonconformities are detected during the review of design and development, 
the organization shall submit them to the process of handling nonconformities as 
required in clause 10.2—Nonconformity and corrective action. This way, it is ensured 
that nonconformities that occurred during the design and development stages are 
 

245
Operation
submitted to a controlled process and will be resolved. Further development activi-
ties shall be approved and preceded only after all nonconformities have been elimi-
nated or reviewed.
Verification Activities of Design and Development
The organization shall define and implement activities for verifying the design and 
development of the product or service. The objective of the verification is to confirm 
that design and development outputs meet the design input requirements. The verifi-
cation activities are to be included in the design and development plan. The verifica-
tion activities are not about studying the results of the design and development but to 
review its progress. What needs to be verified?
• All the expected inputs were delivered and are in the correct format.
• Design and development tasks were performed and accomplished.
• Knowledge required for the design and development activities is available and 
valid.
• Human resources who participate in the design and development activities are able 
to perform the required tasks; they are qualified, trained, and have the required 
experience.
• The required documentation is available and applicable, and the needed informa-
tion and data are available.
• All the required outputs were accepted.
• The outputs conform to the design and development inputs.
• The design and development controls were applied.
• The design and development processes were reviewed.
The definition of the verification shall refer to the
• Methods used for the verifications
• The personnel responsible in the organization that will perform the verifications
• The approval of the verifications
For example, when designing a product, the organization generates a document with 
specifications that include
• Customer expectations of the product
• Product characteristics such as measurements and tolerances
• The description of the intended use
• The necessary human resources for the development
• The required tools for the development
For each type of input, a certain documentation of the specification is expected:
• Customer expectations will be backed up with a document that describes them.
• Product characteristics will be backed up with documented descriptions of the 
product.
• Product measurements will be described with diagrams.
 

246
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The verification will ensure that all those documentations are available and are 
appropriate; that is, they deliver the required information or data and can be used 
for later design and development activities. An effective way to implement such 
 verifications is to maintain a product dossier for design and development that will 
define exactly which inputs are expected. Release of the design and development will 
be done only when the dossier is completed.
Validation Activities of Design and Development
The organization is to define validation activities to design and development. The 
validation is a critical test intended to prospectively ensure, with objective evi-
dences, that the output of design and development (the product or the service) 
satisfies its users’ expectations in terms of functionality, performance, safety, and 
intended use. Validation in the context of design and development is the confirma-
tion, through the provision of objective evidence and using supporting data, that a 
requirement, that is, an expectation for an intended use, or product characteristic 
that can be fulfilled.
The objective of the validation is to ensure that the design and development 
outputs, the product, its characteristics, and the intended use, conform to the 
specifications that were described in the design and development inputs. Another 
objective of the validation is to prove that the requirements will be consistently met 
throughout the entire life cycle of the product. Validation test will be practiced on 
a process output. It may span all the process stages of design and development. For 
products with several intended uses, for each type of intended use, a validation will 
be defined.
While planning the design and development validation, it is required to refer to 
conditions that will represent the use and the use environment of the product or 
the service. For example, if you are developing a software product, the validation 
activities shall be performed in an environment, where the software shall run and 
work: hardware specifications, version of operating system, and so on. Outputs of 
risks analysis may serve as the list of validations. Planning the validations shall refer 
to the following issues:
• Which product characteristics must be validated
• Which methods will be used to validate
• How much is needed to be validated
• What are the basis, criteria, norms, or standard that will serve as comparison
• How will the results be documented
The validation of design and development is to be applied to all elements and activi-
ties of design and development:
• Inputs to design and development
• Process stages of design and development
• Resources allocated to design and development
• Outputs of design and development
 

247
Operation
In order to simplify the matter, I divided the validation requirements into the following:
• Design and development inputs—validation that the inputs do deliver the informa-
tion and data that are expected.
• Process stages and activities—validation that the design and development activities 
will achieve the results that are expected.
• Design and development environment—validation that the environment in which 
the product will be designed and developed is suitable; safety measures are imple-
mented; conditions of the development conform to the predefined conditions (where 
the product will function or the service will be provided).
• Tools and equipment—validation that the tools and equipment that will be used 
for the design and development activities are intact, calibrated, used correctly, and 
maintained as planned.
• Design and development outputs—validation that the expected outputs are ade-
quate to the inputs and that the results conform to their objectives.
An important aspect in the validation of design and development is the identifica-
tion of the appropriate measurement devices and equipment monitoring tools. These 
must be able to provide with appropriate and reliable data in order to validate pro-
cesses. When a tool or piece of equipment is required for validation, it is necessary 
to define what it is and to verify that it is available. Say, for example, that one is using 
a certain material during the development and are required to monitor its behav-
ior in certain conditions. First, one needs to check how the data will be obtained. 
Second, one needs to define which monitoring equipment will obtain the necessary 
data. Next, one must see whether the equipment is available and ensure that it will 
provide the desired data.
Actions Taken on Problems
The next requirement refers to the assignment of controls over necessary actions 
that were initiated after identification of issues and problems or events that occurred 
during the design and development stages, reviews, and verification and validation 
activities. This requirement suggests that the organization shall deal with deficiencies 
or nonconformities that occurred during design and development activities and were 
identified during the review.
The progress of design and development should proceed only after the conse-
quences of all known deficiencies or problems are resolved or at least the associated 
risks are acknowledged. During the review, the following problems from different 
aspects may be detected:
• Problems regarding the progress of design and development according to the pro-
cess stages
• Availability of inputs and their quality
• Availability of resources
• Results of verifications and validations
• Achievement of product objectives (design and development outputs)
 

248
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
A problem may be best detected when an aspect of design and development was 
evaluated against a defined criteria and the assessment indicated that the objectives 
were not met. For example, verification problems indicate that inputs were not sub-
mitted to design and development as expected or outputs were not acceptable. To 
each detected problem, an action is supposed to be initiated as a reaction in order to 
solve the problem. The standard demands that such actions will be reviewed for their 
conduct and effectiveness. When actions or solutions to problems are detected, it is 
required that you also review their effectiveness, that is, whether they achieved their 
objectives and, more importantly, whether the actions or modifications met design 
and development requirements.
Documented Information of Design and Development Controls
Documented information needed to prove that the controls mentioned earlier were 
performed and their results are satisfying is to be retained:
• Documented information of reviews of design and development activities and the 
handling of problems detected during the reviews
• Verification results
• Validation results
The organization is required to determine the expected records for each of the con-
trols mentioned earlier. But in order to maintain those records, one is required 
to design the appropriate means that will gather the records. The purpose of 
the records then is to demonstrate the carrying out of the control and to present 
the results.
8.3.5  Design and Development Outputs
The outputs of design and development shall demonstrate that the activities were 
carried out in accordance with the plan through a traceability to the design and 
development inputs. In other words, the outputs will allow adequate evaluation of 
conformance to design input requirements. Design and development outputs shall be 
documented, reviewed, and approved before release. The ISO 9001 Standard require-
ments include the following:
• The organization shall define the design and development outputs.
• The outputs shall meet the design and development input requirements.
• The outputs shall reflect and describe the activities necessary for the realization of 
the product or the service.
• The outputs shall include or refer to monitoring and measurement requirements 
and to relevant acceptance criteria.
• The outputs shall specify the characteristics of the product that are essential for its 
intended use and safe and proper provision.
• Documented information of the design and development outputs shall be retained.
 

249
Operation
Definition of Design and Development Outputs
Design and development outputs are the results of design and development activities, 
and they represent the specifications for the product or the service:
• Characteristics of the product or service
• Specifications for the realization (manufacturing of a product or provision of a service)
• Monitoring and measuring activities to ensure conformity to the product or service
• Acceptance criteria for expected outputs of the realization activities
It must be clear to the design and development team which outputs are required, in 
which form and format, and what are the expected details. This definition of the out-
puts shall assist in controlling all the expected outputs that were accepted after each 
design and development activity and will allow traceability to the inputs. In the next 
paragraphs, I will go into details.
Compatibility between Design and Development Outputs and Inputs
The first requirement refers to the verification against input requirements. The design 
and development outputs shall be realized in terms that can be verified, validated, and 
proved for compliance against design input requirements. The verification of the outputs 
shall demonstrate that inputs to each design and development process stage are correctly 
reflected in the outputs. In other words, it will allow traceability between specifications 
(inputs) and results (outputs) and prove the accomplishments of the requirements.
This requirement demands that at the end of each design and development process 
stage, a verification between the output and the relevant inputs will be performed. Let us 
review how this type of verification may be integrated in the next sequence of activities:
• Input—a requirement to be designed and developed
• Area or scope of the requirement
• The nature or characteristics of the requirement
• Description of the requirement
• The required resources
• Output—the realization of this requirement
• Evaluation of the requirement
• Description and analysis of the requirement in terms of design and development
• Description of the solution—suggesting a solution and proving its feasibility
• Performing the solution
• Delivering the output—product, process, documentation, and so on
• Verification or validation—proving that the output is consistent with the requirement
• Description of the requirement
• Description of the verification—what has to be checked: availability of charac-
teristics, test of performance, and the use of certain resources
• Performing the verification
• Specifying the results
• Evaluating the results—is the output compatible with the input?
In practice I would define for each output documentation its verification against its 
relevant input.
 

250
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Activities Necessary for the Realization of the Product or Service
One of the main purposes of the design and development outputs is to prescribe the 
necessary requirements and activities necessary for the realization of the product:
• To demonstrate how the organization’s QMS applies to the realization of the product
• To demonstrate how realization activities may meet customer specifications
• To demonstrate how realization activities may meet regulatory specifications
• To describe how resources shall be used during the realization processes including 
reference to responsibilities and authorities
• To describe the controls that shall be applied on the realization processes
• To describe how risks shall be addressed during the realization processes
• To describe which documented information shall be maintained during the realiza-
tion processes: used documentation and expected records
These requirements and activities shall serve the next issues:
• The output shall indicate the workflow and processes needed for the realization of 
the product.
• The outputs shall specify the required materials (raw materials and/or components) 
and where applicable the specifications or standards to which the materials have to 
necessarily conform to for the realization of the product.
• The output shall include quality management requirements:
• Relevant quality objectives
• Addressing risks and opportunities
• Submitting changes to control
• Control of nonconforming product
• The output shall specify which resources are needed for the realization of the prod-
uct including reference to personnel and their training requirements necessary for 
the realization of the product.
• The outputs shall indicate which tools, models, and methods are to be used when 
realizing the product.
• When required the organization shall define characteristics and traceability  measures 
such as serial numbers, validity dates, or batch numbers, when such are required, to 
allow control over the realization of the product.
• The output shall provide appropriate information for maintaining effective working 
relations with external providers such as suppliers or subcontractors:
• Which product components, materials, parts, and so on must be purchased
• Which suppliers are selected for the purchases and which criteria are applicable 
when selecting a supplier
• Which information regarding the realization of the product must be commu-
nicated to the suppliers such as description of the product or service, delivery 
date, and conditions
• Which controls must be applied to those external providers or must be applied 
by the external providers
• Determine the verification, or other activities, necessary to ensure that exter-
nally provided processes, products, and services meet requirements.
• Determine and define controls such as verification, validation, or other activities 
necessary to ensure that the processes, products, and services meet the requirements.
 

251
Operation
• Where applicable the controls required by customers or regulatory bodies shall be 
defined. The definition shall include the following issues:
• Issues in the product shall be communicated
• The means to be used for communicating with the customer or regulatory bodies
• Responsibilities for the communication
• Relevant and necessary records
• How the feedback of the customer shall be integrated in the realization processes
• The outputs shall refer to required customer property and its handling.
• The outputs shall define which activities are necessary for the preservation of the 
product: handling, storage, packaging, and delivery.
• The output shall refer to risks and their subsequent nonconformities that may occur 
during the realization and how they may be reduced or managed.
• When appropriate, the output shall include generic or specific documented infor-
mation that is necessary for the realization: procedures, instructions, plans, blue 
prints, diagrams, quality tests, and so on.
• The output shall specify which records are required to be maintained while realizing 
the product.
Establishing a quality plan as an output of design and development may be an effec-
tive way to describe these requirements and activities necessary for the realization of 
the product, and these outputs may serve as a basis for the quality planning. You may 
refer to the template and specifications of the quality planning in order to understand 
which outputs for the realization are needed.
Monitoring and Measurement Requirements of the Product
Outputs of design and development shall identify and determine the necessary moni-
toring and measuring activities and the controls to be carried out when realizing the 
product. Monitoring and measurement activities shall provide the means by which 
evidence to conformity and meeting of specifications will be obtained. This require-
ment refers to the quality instructions of a product that define which process inputs 
(materials, components, qualifications), process (activities or operations), or process 
outputs (products or services) shall be measured. For each of the requirements men-
tioned earlier, it will determine
• At which stages the monitoring and measurement activities shall be performed
• Which characteristics will be monitored and measured
• Which parameters of realization processes will be controlled
• How the expected characteristics of the product will be measured
• Which methods are to be used to monitor, analyze, and evaluate process performance
• Which methods are to be used to monitor, analyze, and evaluate process outputs
• Which monitoring and measuring devices shall be used for monitoring and mea-
suring activities
• Which criteria are to be used for the evaluation
In some cases, it may be necessary for the customer to provide those requirements. 
In other cases, a third party like a supplier or a regulatory body may need to perform 
these activities.
 

252
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Acceptance Criteria
One output of the design and development activities shall be the acceptance crite-
ria for the product. The acceptance criteria are used as a basis for comparison or as 
a reference point against which the product can be compared, evaluated, and then 
released or rejected. A good example is the determination of quality specifications or 
characteristics of a product. These characteristics are to demonstrate the features of 
a product or a service such as measurements of the product, performance or func-
tionality, and tolerances and limits. These acceptance criteria shall be used during 
the realization of the product in order to determine the quality of the product and 
eventually enable the release of the product.
The acceptance criteria shall demonstrate traceability to the design and develop-
ment inputs. For example, one of the inputs is customer expectations of the  product—a 
specific feature. The acceptance criteria shall include an examination that this feature 
exists and answers the expectations.
Characteristics of the Product
The outputs of design and development shall specify the characteristics of the prod-
ucts and services that are essential for their intended purpose or use and their safe and 
proper provision. These specifications shall include the entire life cycle of the product: 
realization, sales, delivery, service, and disposal. Here is the reference to information 
of the product that will ensure that users and end customers use it properly:
• Information regarding the proper use of the product or the service
• Information regarding the environment where the product will be used or service 
provided
• Information regarding safety measures necessary to preserve the characteristics of 
the product
A good example is from the food industry; when an organization is developing a 
product, it is required to specify
• How the product will be consumed
• What are the ingredients of the product
• How the product will be packed
• How the product will be stored
• By the organization before delivery to the customer
• During transportation
• By the retailer that distributes the product to the end customers
• By the end customer that purchases the product
Examples of such outputs may be
• Warnings
• Labels
• User instructions
• Safety instructions
• Health notifications
 

253
Operation
Documented Information of Design and Development Outputs
The organization is required to retain documented information on design and devel-
opment representing each of the outputs. For each type of output, you must define 
with which format or method it will be documented: a list of specifications, a tex-
tual description, a form, a computer application, or a tangible model. It will also be 
defined on which media the records must be maintained (e.g., in electronic and hard-
copy formats). The outputs are usually documented as
• Documented instructions, information, and discipline to be used as guidance for 
the realization and use of the product or service:
• Work flow chart
• Process map
• Project plan
• Procedures (generic or specific)
• Matrices
• User guides
• Operator documentation
• Work instructions
• Checklist
• Training material
• Maintenance documentation
• Outputs in a form or a pattern that will demonstrate and represent the characteris-
tics of the product or service and based on which the product shall be realized:
• Prototype
• Models
• Drawings
• Engineering analysis
Those records must be submitted to the control of documented information as 
required in clause 7.5—Documented information.
8.3.6  Design and Development Changes
When changes related to design and development of the product are required or 
requested, they must be submitted to certain controls that will ensure the objec-
tive and expectations of customers and other third parties will be maintained. 
The objective of controlling the changes is to provide an overview of the require-
ments related to the product, its characteristics, and its status before and after 
the change.
Changes to design and development are to be identified and reviewed to assess 
and evaluate their potential consequences. The changes then shall be verified and 
validated, when applicable, and authorized prior to their implementation. The con-
trol will cover the entire life cycle of the product or service. The review of design 
and development changes refers to the identification, review, and control of the 
effect of the changes on products that are in the design and development phase or 
 

254
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
products that were already delivered to customers. The ISO 9001 Standard require-
ments include the following:
• The organization shall review and monitor changes in the design and development:
• Changes may occur during the design and development activities
• Changes may occur to the design and development activities subsequently
• The changes will be reviewed with the purpose to ensure that there is no adverse 
effect on the conformity of product as a result of the change.
• The organization shall retain documented information on
• The changes to the design and development of the product
• Results of the reviews regarding the changes
• The authorization of the changes
• Action taken in order to avoid or eliminate adverse impacts
Identifying the Changes
The first step in controlling changes is to detect in which phase of the life cycle the 
product is situated:
• Preproduction phase—the change occurs before the product has been released 
where changes are required due to design modifications, or in cases where designs 
have failed the verification or validation tests and cannot provide the required out-
puts, and, as a result, the design cannot be realized.
• Postproduction phase—the change occurs after design and development have been 
completed, and the product was released for realization and is being delivered to the 
customer. Sometimes more features and characteristics need to be added due to a 
customer’s request, the updating of a product, market fluctuations, or new regulatory 
requirements.
In case of changes in a postproduction stage, there will probably be need to  implement 
more changes due to the fact that they would have to be implemented on existing 
realization processes that were already released, are already operational, and these 
would involve many QMS elements.
Possible reasons or factors for change include the following:
• Results of design review: results of verification and validation activities, errors, or 
failure to provide satisfying results (e.g., in calculation, material selection)
• Failures or nonconformities detected on the product after release and the need for 
corrective measures
• Improvements or updates to the functionality or performance of a product
• Difficulties during the realization processes: production, installation, or service
• Changes in regulatory or safety requirements
• Change requested by customers or external providers
• Postmarket reviews and experience reports
• Changes required for corrective action
• Changes that are results of risk-based thinking
In practice you must identify those business cases where changes related to design 
and development occur, submit them to the control, and establish a method for 
 

255
Operation
identifying modification requests from the relevant interested parties of the organi-
zation. Let us review the following cases:
• One has reviewed one’s design and decided that the validation activities generate 
unsatisfying results. In response, the designer suggests using another type of mate-
rial or component and then to try to validate it again. This is regarded as a change in 
design and development where a factor in the product was modified.
• One has decided to replace a component in the product with a similar component 
that performs the same role, but from another supplier. This is regarded as a change 
where a factor in the product was modified because the conditions of the compo-
nents (other supplier) were changed.
• One has performed a validation activity and realized that the results deviated from 
the limits. The developer checked and detected that the method for the calculation is 
not correct. He or she has suggested correcting it and performing the test again. This 
case is not regarded as a change—you did not change anything; you only followed 
standard requirements and validated the design. It is not necessary to submit the 
correction to change control.
Characterizing the Change
In order to understand the scope and extent of a change, it is required to characterize 
it in terms of processes and products:
• The version, edition, or revision of the product—a distinct identification of the 
product.
• The status of the product—the status may refer to the lifecycle of the product or to 
its usability.
• The reason for the change:
• Improvement of the product
• A solution for a problem
• A change in the specification or the requirements (from the customer or from a 
regulatory body)
• The impact of the change.
• The scope and extent of the change—to which product characteristics the change 
applies and accordingly which realization processes it concerns.
Regarding the scope, the organization must assess its abilities; it may be that the 
organization has the knowledge and experience to handle the change or may be the 
change is new and requires new competence or knowledge in the organization.
Reviewing Changes in Design and Development
Before a change is forwarded for realization, it must be reviewed. The goals of the review 
are analyzing the need for the change and its potential impact on other characteristics 
of the product and ensuring conformity of the product after the change has been imple-
mented. The reason is that the change might not occur only in the product but might 
concern other QMS elements that affect the product and its realization: design inputs, 
verification tests, validation activities (product and processes), work instructions, quality 
tests, expected records, reference to competence of employees, and purchase requirements 
 

256
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
and verifications. Therefore, one of the results of the review is the controls that will be 
applied for evaluating the change. The review shall refer to the following issues:
• The effect the change has on the product specifications
• The effect the change might have on other realization processes related to the func-
tionality of the product
• The effect the change has on the intended use of the product
• The effect the change has on other components of the product
• The implication for the realization processes
• The implication for the relevant controls of the realization processes (verifications 
or validations)
• The requirement of new certifications or licenses
• The implications for existing documentations
Based on the review of the changes and its results, the organization shall plan actions 
for implementing the changes:
• The organization shall determine which design and development inputs such as 
documentation, processes, resources, component, or materials need to be modified.
• The objectives of the change will be defined.
• The activities and operations for carrying out the change will be defined.
• The necessary controls such as verifications or validations shall be defined with the 
appropriate acceptance criteria.
• The change shall be communicated in an effective way to all interested parties: 
employees who are developing, designing, or realizing the product, customers and 
end users, external providers, and regulatory bodies.
• All types of documentation related to the realization of the product that must be 
modified as a result of the change shall be identified.
After a design and development change is approved for implementation, you must 
control its progress, results, and effectiveness. This approval shall be documented as 
one of the results of the review. For more information and techniques about imple-
menting a change, please visit chapter 6.3—Planning of changes again.
The organization may develop a process using a format or a system for transferring 
the request for a change to the review. A format for a change request is a good example. 
Managing changes in design and development with a change request assists in control-
ling how requests will be submitted and handled. The details expected are as follows:
• General data such as date, employee details, and department that initiate the request
• Identification of the product, process, or other QMS elements
• Identification of the relevant characteristics
• Details of the requested change
• Why is the change required
• What will be the change or how will it be realized including details of related processes
• Review of the effect and impact of the change on other QMS elements
• How the implementation of change will be verified
• The results of the verifications or validations
• Who is authorized to approve or reject changes
 

257
Operation
Review for Adverse Effect on the Conformity
Reviewing adverse effects on the conformity of a product is the second part of review-
ing change. An adverse effect is considered as such when any nonconformity that 
may be related to the use of the product, or on the environment in which it is active, 
may occur as a result of the change. Reviewing adverse impact on conformity after 
changes refers to the analysis of the possible risks, assumptions, dependencies, and 
problems associated with changes to design and development. In other words, chang-
ing one characteristic of the product may have an unforeseen adverse influence on 
another aspect of the product directly or indirectly or may adversely affect the expec-
tations of the relevant interested parties: customers, regulatory bodies, or external 
providers. The objectives are to evaluate and assess whether a change may cause the 
product or the service not to meet its specifications or requirements and to allow the 
organization to understand how change may affect the products or services. Issues 
that may be referred to after the implementation of the change include the following:
• Deterioration in function or intended use of the product
• Failure to achieve the agreed specifications
• Deterioration in integrity or compatibility of components
• Disturbance in interface with other products or systems
• Problems that may occur during realization or installment
• Lack of feasibility of verification or validation
• Conformity to regulatory requirements
• Safety of the product
After reviewing the issues mentioned earlier, you may
• Conduct a risk analysis where the organization perceives how the change may 
adversely affect the product
• Identify process parameters, process activities, or process outputs that are affected 
by a change
• Establish a method to evaluate the level of the effect
• Define the controls that may indicate whether the change has adversely affected the 
process or the process output
• Initiate actions to eliminate adverse effects when such are detected
• Evaluate the effectiveness of those actions—are the adverse effects reduced or 
eliminated
All of the bullets mentioned earlier may be integrated in the change request.
Documented Information of Design and Development Changes
The organization shall retain documented information on
• Design and development changes
• Results of the reviews
• Actions taken to prevent adverse impacts
 

258
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The objective of the documented information is to provide evidences that a change 
was implemented under a controlled method and was identified, reviewed, verified, 
validated, implemented, and approved. It is necessary to document
• The requirements for the change (changes request)
• The review and subsequent analysis of the request
• The results of the review regarding the QMS elements that may be affected and 
potential adverse impact on conformity to requirements
• The necessary activities for implementing the change
• The approval and authorization for the change:
• The person that authorized the change
• Date
• Actions that were planned in order to prevent adverse impacts as a result of the 
review
The results of the review shall be sent to the appropriate authorities for informa-
tion, guidance, and action. As mentioned in the last paragraph, I support the mainte-
nance of a format or a system that will serve as change request—it is an effective way 
to manage change in design and development according to the requirements of the 
ISO 9001 Standard.
8.4  Control of Externally Provided Processes, Products, and Services
An organization uses the services of suppliers because either it lacks the resources to do 
the work itself or decided that it would be better to allow an external provider to pro-
duce the products or provide it with services. This is a natural process. But nevertheless, 
the ISO 9001 Standard requires structure and control when using services of external 
providers. The goals of this clause are to create trust in the abilities of a supplier to 
deliver goods or services that meet requirements in the long run, to manage better the 
relations with external providers, and to ensure that they will deliver according to their 
requirements. ISO 9001 Standard requirements are given in the following sections.
8.4.1  General
• The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products, and ser-
vices conform to specified requirements.
• The organization shall determine which controls are to be applied to the external 
providers and the externally provided processes, products, and services depending 
on the following circumstances:
• The products, goods, or services provided by the external provider will be incor-
porated into the end product or one of its components.
• The products, goods, or services provided by the external provider will be deliv-
ered directly to the end customer of the organization.
• A process, part of a process, or a function needed for the realization of products 
provided by the external provider is used in the realization activities.
• The organization shall evaluate, assess, and select external providers according to their 
performances and ability to supply suitable and appropriate products and services.
 

259
Operation
• The organization shall determine and establish the criteria for the external  providers’ 
evaluations and selections. The criteria shall assess the performance of external pro-
viders against the organization’s requirements.
• A reevaluation shall be performed.
• Documented information of the external providers’ evaluation should be main-
tained and kept.
Identifying the External Providers
An external provider is an interested party in the organization, though independent 
from the organization’s QMS. This also includes cases where a supplier may be part of 
the organization but maintains a separate QMS. For example, in some corporations, 
business unit A may receive services and goods from business unit B; though no 
financial transaction was carried out during their interaction, and both are paid by 
the same boss and have the same brand name, they manage two different QMSs. And 
so business unit B is regarded as an external provider to business unit A, and they 
maintain “organization–supplier” relationships. The term external provider refers to 
external business units that provide the organization with
• Physical elements related directly to the product like parts, components, or raw materials
• Products that are needed for the realization of a product such as infrastructure like 
software or machine maintenance services
• Process services that are required to realize the product like assembly of parts, 
 coating, painting, or cleaning
• Services like consulting or training
All of the earlier mentioned have one distinctive feature in common—they may 
 influence directly or indirectly the characteristics or quality of a product or the abil-
ity of the organization to meet predefined requirements. Including the control of 
external provision of products and services in the QMS extends the influence and 
effectiveness of the QMS to the performance of suppliers.
Ensuring Conformity of Externally Provided Products and Services
Outsourcing a process or purchasing goods or materials for incorporation in the 
product is a very common situation where the organization has chosen to perform a 
certain process or activity by an external organization (external provider), that is, the 
organization delegates the responsibilities of this activity to another organization. 
This process or purchased product is part of the realization of the final product and 
has a direct effect on the quality of the product or its conformity to requirements. 
The external provider in this case may be a supplier that is totally independent from 
the organization or another part of the same organization that is not subjected to the 
same quality management. The external provider can
• Deliver the organization finished goods that it has processed
• Perform realization processes for the organization
• Perform services on the organization premises
 

260
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The ISO 9001:2015 Standard expects that those goods, activities, tasks, processes, 
or assignments with influence on the quality of the product and its conformity with 
requirements, although performed by an external provider, will be under control 
of the in-house QMS. Assigning the task to the external provider does not absolve 
the organization of its responsibilities for conformity to all customer, statutory, and 
regulatory requirements. Apart from identification of those outsourced processes or 
purchased goods, the necessary verifications and validations will be determined and 
applied. These are submitted on three levels:
• The controls that the supplier shall implement and perform during the realization 
of its processes
• The controls that the organization has to implement over the supplier
• The controls that the organization has to perform when receiving product, pro-
cesses, or services from a supplier
The controls will be set in accordance to the complexity, importance, and effect that 
the purchasing process has on the final product. Planning the controls will include 
reference to the risks related to the product or service. In order to address those risks, 
the required controls will be defined and implemented by either the supplier or the 
organization.
In addition, the external provider must have a certain level of technical or profes-
sional knowledge, skills, and abilities that are
• Related to the processes and services that it provides
• Needed to control and approve the processed goods or services that the external 
provider delivered
Determining Which External Providers of Processes, Products, 
and Services Will Be Controlled
When the organization purchases, uses services, or integrates in its product goods 
of external providers that affect the product, a set of controls will be determined 
and established to ensure that externally provided processes, products, and services 
do not adversely affect the organization’s ability to deliver conforming products and 
services to its customers. The type and extent of those controls will be discussed 
in chapter 8.4.2. But in clause 8.4.1, the standard defines three distinctive business 
cases in which products or services of external provision shall be integrated into the 
 realization processes:
 
1. The purchased products are incorporated into the product that the organization 
is manufacturing (final or semiproduct). For example, in the industry of machine 
engineering, most parts of a machine are purchased.
 
2. Goods or services that the organization sells to end customers are provided by a 
third party—the external provider. This is a common feature among handlers or 
trading companies; customers purchase the goods from the company, but the deliv-
ery is effected by a third party.
 

261
Operation
 
3. Outsourcing of processes that are part of the realization of a product—in the electro 
industry, the organization may decide that it does not have enough knowledge and 
resources to perform the coating of parts and send those parts to a third party—a 
supplier of service that executes the coating and returns the parts to the organiza-
tion. Also there are subcases here:
 
a. The organization delivers two parts, and the supplier assembles them—the pur-
chase of a service.
 
b. The organization delivers one product, and the suppliers add another part to the 
product—the purchase here includes a service and goods.
 
 
The location where these processes or activities take place does not affect the 
definition; the supplier may perform the work on its own premises or in the 
organization’s premises.
Evaluation of External Providers
External providers shall be approved on the basis of their abilities to deliver products 
or services in accordance with predefined requirements. The approval will be given 
upon an evaluation. An effective and objective evaluation considers the significant 
parameters regarding the purchased product.
The evaluation is to be conducted on a periodic basis, and the frequency of the 
evaluation must be determined. The objective is to establish an ongoing control pro-
cess over the external provider in order to foresee events that might become noncon-
formities or quality problems. This is done normally once a year, but there are cases of 
purchased products that require a more frequent control, depending on the risk and 
effect that the purchased product has on the product.
The parameters for the evaluation should represent the ability of the supplier to 
deliver products or services that meet the requirements:
• Quality of goods or services
• Credibility and reliability of delivery
• Quantities
• Commitment to prices
• Maintaining conditions such as QMS (ISO 9001, ISO 14001)
• Parameters like willingness to solve quality problems or the ability to train personnel
These parameters will constitute the criteria for the evaluation. The criteria will situ-
ate the supplier or subcontractor with regard to their performance.
The controls that are applied to the external providers must deliver results and 
indicate whether a supplier or a subcontractor met its requirements while participat-
ing in the realization of the product.
The evaluation shall cover the following parameters related to the relationship with 
the external provider:
• Evaluation of realization processes
• Evaluation of quality processes
• Evaluation of delivered products or services
• Review of risks related to the supplier or subcontractor
 

262
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In order to determine which parameters the criteria shall cover for an external pro-
vider, I suggest the next approach—ask relevant questions regarding the conduct of 
the external provider:
• Does the supplier maintain stable realization processes?
• Does the supplier comply with regulatory requirements?
• Does the supplier maintain supporting documentation?
• Does the supplier maintain appropriate controls over its processes?
• How does the supplier handle nonconformities?
Answering these types of questions will create a status report regarding the sup-
plier and its performance. I recommend evaluating each supplier on its merits; 
each case or supplied product or services has its significant characteristics and 
therefore may require different parameters for evaluation, although it is very 
demanding.
The controls applied on external providers like delivery records, quality control 
reports, agreements, complaints, and nonconformities will provide objective evi-
dences, information, and data regarding their performances. These results will be 
reviewed and compared to the criteria, and conclusions will be drawn.
Setting the Criteria for the Evaluation of Suppliers
Effective evaluation of external providers must use criteria. Based on the criteria 
the organization can assess the performance of a supplier or a subcontractor and 
a decision regarding the approval of an external provider could be made. The 
objectives of the criteria are to rank the supplier in a quantitative or qualita-
tive manner and to assist with deciding whether the supplier can deliver under 
controlled conditions and meet requirements. The criteria should allow you the 
assessment of the supplier’s performance in a defined range, period, or area. 
For example, over a period of one year, the reliability of delivery on schedules is 
assessed. And so the evaluation according to the criteria allows you also to iden-
tify trends or changes in the performance of the supplier. The criteria shall relate 
to the products, processes, or services delivered by the supplier and will be based 
on three main issues:
• The quality and intended use of the purchased goods or services
• The conditions in which the product was delivered or the service was provided
• The effect that the purchased goods or services will have on the subsequent product 
realization or the final product
Those issues shall determine which parameters must be controlled. The derived 
parameters will be used to set the criteria. For example, a supplier delivers you 
packages that protect the product. The completeness and integrity of the pack-
age is critical for the progress of the packaging processes and the intended use of 
the product. When packages are not delivered as required, there is a threat that 
 

263
Operation
realization processes will be disturbed and that the product will fail. Let us review 
the three issues again:
• The quality and intended use of purchased product of the packages—integrity and 
completeness requirement.
• The conditions of delivery—delivery on time, the provision of the agreed amount, 
and protection of the goods.
• The effect—the intended use might fail if packages are not delivered according to 
the requirement.
According to the determination of the criteria, the tools and techniques shall be 
applied enabling the relevant parties to obtain the relevant data and information rel-
evant to the performance of the suppliers. And these data and information shall be 
compared with the criteria. Principles for setting or establishing criteria include the 
following:
• The availability of the required or expected data must be checked.
• The frequency of the measurement shall be defined and will be appropriate to the 
type of process or product it is measuring.
• Methods for analyzing and publishing the data and reports of the evaluation shall 
be defined.
• The responsibility for conducting the measurement shall be defined. Different 
responsibilities and roles from different areas in the organization should be involved 
in the setting of the criteria in order to provide their inputs.
• The distribution of the data shall be defined.
I have given here some example criteria for evaluating the performance of external 
 providers through common parameters.
Reliability of delivery—data will be extracted from the ERP system and purchase 
order module (requested date against date of receipt).
Criteria
Note
No delay
10
1–2 days’ delay
7
More than 2 days
5
Reliability of delivered quantities—data will be extracted from the ERP system and 
purchase order module (requested quantity against received quantity).
Criteria
Note
No deviation from the ordered quantity
10
Until (−5)% from the ordered quantity
7
More than (−5)% from the ordered quantity
5
 

264
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Quality of products—data will be obtained from quality assurance (test protocols or 
control reception notes).
Criteria
Note
Quality A
10
Quality B
7
Quality C
5
Quality of delivery—data will be obtained from the warehouse (delivery protocol).
Criteria
Note
Quality A
10
Quality B
7
Quality C
5
Quality of packaging—data will be obtained from the quality assurance (test proto-
cols or control reception notes).
Criteria
Note
Quality A
10
Quality B
7
Quality C
5
Quality of services—data will be obtained from the maintenance team (maintenance 
protocol).
Criteria
Note
Quality A
10
Quality B
7
Quality C
5
Certification to ISO 9001 Standard—data will be obtained from the purchase 
department.
Criteria
Note
Acquire Certification to ISO 9001 Standard
10
Does not acquire Certification to ISO 9001 Standard
5
Ranking External Providers and Setting the List for Approved Suppliers
The objectives of ranking or classifying external providers are
• To approve or disapprove suppliers and subcontractors from participating in the 
realization processes
• To create list of approved suppliers
• To drive suppliers to improvement
 

265
Operation
This ranking represents the supplier’s performance during the realization processes 
and shall allow you to decide whether they are suitable to provide the organization 
with conformed products or services. There are many ways to rank external provid-
ers. I will focus on a simple method where the output of the evaluation is a note or 
a grade—a relative position of value on a scale of quality for each supplier or sub-
contractor. The next step will be to classify these data on the predefined scale. For 
example, Classification of Suppliers:
Final Grade (Points)
Classification
 
81–100
A
Strategic
61–80
B
Preferable
51–60
C
Transactional
1–50
D
Declined
One may determine that one’s organization is willing to incorporate in the realiza-
tion of the product only suppliers with B classification and above. External providers 
that were ranked C will need to prove improvement measures and external suppliers 
with ranked D are to be discouraged from participating in the realization processes. 
When the evaluation failed and the supplier was found to be inadequate, one must 
define the necessary actions to be taken:
• Update the status of suppliers in the ERP system according to their rank: inactive 
for low ranked suppliers that no orders could be created.
• For open orders from low ranked suppliers, tighten the controls of incoming goods 
or provision of services.
• Notify all relevant parties in the organization of the rank of suppliers.
• Inform the suppliers of their rank:
• Initiate a discussion with the suppliers about their performances.
• Demand corrective action or an improvement plan from the supplier.
• Select another supplier that has achieved an acceptable rank.
However, the emphasis shall be on establishing an effective action, and it is required 
that one assesses its effectiveness over a defined period of time. If one has initiated 
a corrective action or an improvement plan from the supplier, it is required that one 
assesses its effectiveness over a defined period of time. In case the organization and 
the external provider decided to initiate a plan for improvement of its performance, 
the organization may submit it to the requirements of clause 10—Improvement.
The outputs of the evaluation process are to be recorded and maintained as docu-
mented information. During later stages, one will have to retain this information and 
compare results of old evaluations with reevaluations. I suggest planning a simple 
 format (digital or analog), and bear in mind that this is not a one-off action, but an 
ongoing one. This record will need to be updated. The standard does not demand 
a documented process specifically for the evaluation process but only a defined 
method to ensure that purchased products conform to specification. I believe that 
 

266
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
such documentation may assist one; however, when documenting the method on a 
procedure, there are some issues that must be considered:
• The type of suppliers that are included under the evaluation
• The parties responsible for conducting the evaluation
• Reference to the criteria
• The frequency of the evaluations
• Inputs required for the evaluation
• The type of evaluation or a description of the evaluation method—performances 
compared to the criteria
• Outputs of the evaluation
Reevaluation of External Providers
After one has evaluated the supplier and has provided them with one’s feedback, one 
should, in a defined period of time, reevaluate their performances again. This is an 
ISO 9001 Standard requirement. The frequency of reevaluation will be determined in 
accordance to the effect that supplied goods or services have on the product and in 
accordance to the effect wtih that of the associated risks.
The reevaluation shall refer to the last evaluation, and the results of the two should 
be compared. In cases where measures or actions were applied to the supplier due to 
the last evaluation, the reevaluation should indicate their effectiveness.
List of Approved Suppliers
The output of the evaluation and reevaluation process shall provide one with a doc-
umented list of approved suppliers. This list indicates which external provider is 
approved to participate in the realization of the processes, which external provider 
must improve, and so on. The requirement is to provide the results of the evaluation, 
and the most effective and logical way is a controlled list. One will probably be asked 
to present such a list during an audit.
If one maintains an ERP system or any other systems that manages one’s pur-
chasing processes, (naturally) one’s suppliers will be entered in this system. One 
need only define that approved suppliers are documented on your ERP system. 
Using the status of one’s supplier on that system (e.g., whether they are active, inac-
tive, suspended, etc.), one may declare and document the approval. One may also 
produce a report from the system: a list of approved suppliers and the date of the 
approval. This option may allow one to keep the list up to date. I propose here a 
format for the list:
• Supplier’s name
• Supplier’s details
• Status (approved or not approved)
• Rank or classification
• Date of approval
• Last rank or classification (from the previous evaluation)
• Remarks or reference to relevant documentation
 

267
Operation
Maintaining Documented Information
The next type of documented information is expected in the context of evaluation, 
selection, monitoring of performance, and reevaluation of external providers:
• Criteria for evaluating the external providers
• Records of evaluation and reevaluations
• Rank of the external providers
• A list of approved external providers
8.4.2  Type and Extent of Control
The main challenge with external providers is the ability to achieve control over 
actions that are not directly under the organization’s supervision. This will be achieved 
by developing the appropriate controls. A consequent control of delivered products 
or services shall reduce nonconformities and complaints from the end customer and 
will enhance the quality of the end product. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements 
include the following:
• The organization shall ensure that externally provided processes, products, and ser-
vices do not adversely affect the organization’s ability to consistently deliver con-
forming products and services to its customers.
• Outsourced processes or realization processes that are being performed by external 
providers shall be included within the control of the QMS.
• The organization shall define the controls it intends to apply to the external provider.
• The organization shall define the controls it intends to apply to the resulting outputs.
• While defining the controls, the organization shall consider
• The potential impacts of the provided products or services on the organiza-
tion’s ability to consistently meet customer and applicable statutory and regula-
tory requirements
• The effectiveness of the controls applied by the external provider
• The organization shall define controls, verifications, validation, and other activities 
necessary to ensure that the externally provided processes, products, and services 
meet requirements.
Ensuring the Ability of the Organization to Consistently 
Provide Conforming Products and Services
Before the ISO 9001 Standard introduces us to the practical requirements for controlling 
external providers, it presents us with the main objective of those controls: ensuring the 
ability of the organization to consistently provide conforming products and services. In 
other words through applying appropriate measures, the organization shall ensure that 
deliveries of processes, products, or services are well controlled. In order to reach this 
objective, the organization must have clarity on the following main issues:
• It must be clear which processes, services, or products are externally provided. 
Inputs to this issue may derive from the following quality elements:
• Context of the organization—where generally external issues of the organiza-
tion are determined.
 

268
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Process analysis—the analysis of processes indicates which processes are pro-
vided externally.
• Requirements for resources—where needs for services from external providers 
are defined.
• Requirements for knowledge—where needs for external knowledge are defined.
• Product specifications—in the specifications it is defined which products or 
parts of the product will be delivered by external provider.
• Planning the controls for external providers refers to the following aspects:
• Outputs of the actions to address risks and opportunities—where it is identified 
where and how the organization may fail to provide conformed products or ser-
vices and which actions must be initiated in order to eliminate such situations
• Relevant quality objectives—where it is defined and what is expected of the 
organization and its processes
• Controlling changes—where management of changes may refer to changes of 
externally provided processes, products, or services
After understanding the issues, one may advance to developing the controls. For 
those required controls, the standard introduces clear requirements.
Including the Processes of External Origin in the QMS
Processes of external origin are to be included in the QMS. Inclusion of those pro-
cesses in the QMS means that the organization must plan, determine, implement, 
control, measure the effectiveness, and improve those processes. The reference applies 
the following types of activities:
• QMS activities, for example, system audits
• Provision of goods or resources, for example, provision of components or out-
sourced personnel
• Performance of processes that are part of the realization of the product including 
manufacturing activities, handling, activities of measurement, and analysis
• Performance of services, for example, transport services or consulting services
These processes or business activities provided by an external provider are supposed 
to be identified as part of the determination of the QMS, its processes, and interac-
tions (see clause 4.4). In clause 4.4 it is required to maintain documented information 
concerning the processes—that means the list of the QMS processes. Thus, list of the 
externally provided processes should be available. This determination should indi-
cate to one exactly which processes are to be included under the controls suggested in 
clause 8.4. Which aspects of the process approach are to be considered?
• The following are responsible parties and authorities in the organization that par-
ticipate in the processes of purchasing and may affect the quality of the purchased 
goods or services:
• Purchase managers
• Carrier
• Warehouse workers
• Production managers
 

269
Operation
 
The definition shall relate to the interrelations between the participants—what 
the role of each participant in the process is and how they interact (how do they 
exchange information regarding purchased goods or services).
• Necessary inputs required for the process are as follows:
• What are the inputs
• Where the inputs are located (data or materials)
• Who is responsible for their delivery
• Reliability and integrity of inputs (e.g., the quality and correctness of suppliers’ 
master data)
• What is the expected format for types of information like addresses of suppliers 
or conversion units of products
• Interactions with other processes of the QMS
• Expected records (outputs) to support the process:
• Information regarding the processes or products like purchase orders or 
acknowledgment of acceptance
• Outputs of purchase activities, for example, reports from the management 
system
• Reference to other procedures, such as acceptance procedures and formats in the 
process
• Addressing potential impacts related to purchased products—identifying the risks 
and applying controls to manage them:
• Risks related to the ordered processes, products, or services
• Risks related to their delivery or provision
• A description of needed controls over the process—where and how will the pur-
chased products or services be controlled:
• Incoming control over quantities and prices
• Control over quality
• Reviewing performed services
 
The acceptance processes and activities shall be planned in order to support those 
defined requirements for approval.
• Required outputs—documented information that the supplier must deliver:
• Delivery note
• Certification of quality
• Results of quality tests
In clause 8.4.2, there are no requirements to document the matter. However, 
clause 4.4.2 demands the maintenance of documented information to support the 
operation of processes. In that case, you will be expected to present some kind of doc-
umented definition. The quality plan may be a good place to document this definition.
Eliminating Potential Impact Related to Externally Provided Products or Services
When purchased processes, products, or services are introduced into the realiza-
tion of the product, there are risks that these might be nonconformed. Introducing 
nonconformed goods or services is considered as the potential impact of the prod-
uct, may cause critical consequences, may have a strong effect on processes or the 
quality of the product (final or semi), and thus may adversely affect the ability of 
the organization to consistently deliver conforming products and services to its 
 

270
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
customers. Such issues, situations, or risks that may bring about those potential 
impacts must be identified and managed. Here are some of the issues to be reviewed 
when identifying risks:
• Complexity of the provided product or service
• Ability of the supplier to continually supply
• Ability of the supplier to manage and control complex production processes
• Liability and stability of processes
• Reaction to failures and nonconformities
• Liability of products
• Qualification of personnel
• Awareness of quality
• Availability and cooperation of the supplier or subcontractor
• Legal status
• Capital investment and financial viability
Reviewing these issues (or risks) as mentioned earlier will assist in developing and 
applying the appropriate methods or controls over the suppliers: when, where, and 
how one must invest one’s resources when controlling the supplier. After identifying 
those issues, situations, or risks, one is ready to apply the controls at suitable stages of 
the purchase process necessary for addressing them:
• Selecting the supplier
• Ordering
• Accepting goods or services
• Incorporating goods or services in the product (semi or final)
In order to manage those issues effectively, I would
 
1. Include this review of risks and their impact already in the risk-based thinking 
phases of the planning of the QMS (where you are required to address risks).
 
2. Evaluate the extent and degree to which the control of an externally provided pro-
cess is shared between the organization and the provider.
 
3. Persuade the external providers to initiate actions for addressing the output of the 
risk-based thinking throughout their relevant realization processes. In this way one 
promotes the control one step forward and apply controls already during the real-
ization of the externally provided goods or services.
 
4. In case it is required to submit for realization unreleased delivered goods or services, 
a special release must be planned.
The training of personnel of the supplier or subcontractor is another issue that may 
directly affect the goods or the services. You are required to ensure that the personnel 
realizing the products are qualified and have the appropriate skills and knowledge 
before they take part in the realization of the product.
Identification and labeling of the delivered goods or services is needed in order to 
allow a distinction among approved products, processed products, and services from 
 

271
Operation
those unapproved. This distinction will prevent the use of nonconformed products 
or assist in case nonconformed purchased products were submitted to the realization 
processes. According to the outputs of risk-based thinking, the appropriate means 
for identification and traceability will be defined and communicated to the supplier: 
batch number, lot number, or number of production order.
Controlling Changes of Externally Provided Products or Services
When one’s external provider changes the product or the performance of a service, 
it must notify in advance and receive one’s approval when the change may have an 
impact on the product. The requirements for the communication will be discussed in 
chapter 8.4.3.—Information for external providers.
Before accepting the change, the organization needs to evaluate the requested change 
and its implication on the final product and its quality. In case the changes do affect 
the product, it must be ensured that the intended use of the product will not be affected 
and conformity to the requirements is guaranteed. When required the changes will be 
reviewed by the appropriate teams where each team evaluates the matter from its aspect:
• A review of the development team
• A review of the production team
• A review of the quality team
In order to implement an effective change control, I propose here the next sequence 
of activities that will enable you to control changes:
 
1. Initiating a change, documenting the need for a change, and describing the change
 
2. Communicating and notifying the organization about the requested change and the 
reason for it
 
3. Delivering data to demonstrate that changes do not cause any modifications to the 
product
 
4. When the change does cause a modification of the product, information and details 
shall be delivered to the organization
 
5. Defining a responsible party or parties from the organization to review the request
 
6. Establishing a review committee consisting of delegations from the supplier and the 
organization
 
7. Communicating with the supplier and announcing that the request has been 
reviewed and accepted or rejected
 
8. Documenting outputs and decisions of the committee
 
9. Conducting validation of the change
 10. Issuing a documented approval for the change
 11. Updating the relevant documentation
 12. Implementing
Planning and Applying Controls to External Providers
The controls applied to external providers shall ensure the capability of suppliers 
to deliver a product that meets the requirements. The objective of the controls is to 
eliminate any potential failures where the organization does not have a direct access 
 

272
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
to processes or their outputs. The type and extent of the controls should be relevant 
to the activity of the supplier. The following issues must be reviewed:
• Preliminary or introductory conditions for collaborating with the supplier (if 
required):
• Maintaining quality system requirements
• Maintaining sufficient skills and competence of personnel
• Maintaining special work environment conditions
• Maintaining minimum inventory levels
• Revealing financial strength
• Preliminary or introductory requirements like regulatory requirements (if 
applicable):
• Maintaining social conditions for employees
• Controlling the use of restricted or prohibited materials
• Maintaining environmental requirements
• Implementing controls related to processes:
• Audit on the supplier’s premises
• Process audit by the supplier
• Control of further tier suppliers
• Controls over equipment and machinery
• Control over monitoring and measurement tools used by the external provider
• Verification of competence of personnel of external providers through control 
of qualification and training
This topic will be discussed during the contract stage in order to ensure the supplier’s 
engagement with the matter. Which quality instruments may assist you?
• Results of supplier’s evaluation
• Supplier’s performance history
• Supplier’s questionnaire (delivers an overview concerning the requirements or 
 precondition of suppliers, delivered products, or services)
• Maintenance of management systems—quality, environment, and safety
• Accreditation of processes
• Training of personnel
• Protection of data
• Management of documents
• Protection of customer’s property
Planning and Applying Controls to the Resulting Output
The controls that will be applied to the resulting outputs shall be proportionate to the 
effect that the purchased product or service has on the finished product or final ser-
vice. The controls must be performed according to a defined plan. The goal is to prove 
the functional and performance requirements of the purchased products before sub-
mission to further processes in order to ensure the final intended use of the product. 
Products or services may also need to be validated against the acceptance criteria.
Applying controls of products will span from the moment materials begin arriv-
ing from the supplier until it is submitted to the supply chain in the organization or 
 

273
Operation
from the moment a service is provided until it is approved by the organization. The 
definition shall refer to properties of the product that must be controlled. The inspec-
tions, controls, tests, and expected results that the external supplier must perform 
and deliver shall be defined and clear. The definition may include the following:
• The type and scope of the tests
• In which point of time or process must the test be performed
• What is the amount of tested products
• Who is responsible to perform the tests
• What is to be performed in the tests
• What are the criteria
Which types of controls may we encounter?
• Realization requirements—how to ensure that product or service will be realized as 
required and which verification or validation activities are needed:
• The organization shall describe which validations are required when products 
or services are not able to be verified (e.g., products where the resulting output 
cannot be verified by monitoring or measurement activities).
• Material handling requirements—which evidences are expected to prove that 
materials, parts, or components were handled as required. When needed, 
the definition shall refer to the identifications of the delivered products or 
services.
• Handling of nonconformed products or services.
• Product requirements—how to ensure that the product is provided as expected:
• Configuration of the product
• Functionality tests of the products or parts
• Quality specifications and requirements—what quality or acceptance tests are 
necessary
• Traceability
• Measurement and monitoring of parts or components
• Control of stored goods
• Process audit for conditions during realization—which evidences are required 
to prove that necessary process conditions were achieved during the realization 
processes.
• Requirements for delivery—when purchasing a product or service, a consideration 
must be given to how these will be packed and transported and under what conditions.
• Handling property, data, or information of customers—which evidences are 
expected to prove that property, data, or information of customers was handled as 
required.
• Measurement requirements—which measurements and analysis activities are 
needed to be performed during the realization processes or at the process outputs 
and the results expected.
• Monitoring and measuring devices—which tools and instruments must be used.
The earlier mentioned may be included in procedures, work, or test instructions that 
the supplier must follow and implement when realizing the product or the service. 
Defining these arrangements will give validity to test results and will be considered 
 

274
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
as a precondition to the acceptance of the products or services. How and when this 
information will be communicated to the external provider will be discussed in 
chapter 8.4.3—Information for external providers.
According to the risks related to the product, the organization shall manage 
traceability of purchased products or services. The objective is to enable the orga-
nization to identify end products whose quality was adverted by supplied products 
or services which were nonconforming. A clear identification of goods or services 
must be practiced in order to separate conforming from nonconforming delivered 
product or services. It must be clear to the users of the QMS what the status of the 
delivered products or services is. This will be practiced in the premises of both the 
suppliers and the organization. It can be achieved with managing batch  numbers or 
order numbers. Pay attention that such requirement of one’s product will require the 
inclusion of related records in the control of documented  information as required 
in clause 7.5—Documented information.
Delivery of evidences of tests and quality certifications will indicate which tests 
were conducted and what are the results. Definition of the relevant documents and 
records delivered from the supplier that are defined include
• The type of documented information
• Their content
And the organization must ensure their availability on reception of goods or services 
from the external provider. Delivered evidences by the external provider must relate 
to a specific delivery. When it is required that only a certain supplier must conduct 
the tests, the supplier must deliver evidences that it is the case.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Controls Applied by the External Provider
The effectiveness of the controls applied to the external providers will be expressed 
by the ability of those controls to deliver products or perform services or processes 
according to their specification. The organization shall assess the performance of its 
external providers:
• Examination of the conformity of products or process outputs
• Handling nonconformities
• Proving improvement of processes
For example, if you are noticing that there are many nonconformities  concerning 
a supplier, you might need to examine its controls. But it does not end by the 
 nonconformities. You must assess how the supplier reacts to the nonconformities 
and which actions it initiates in order to reveal the root cause and eliminate their 
recurrence. A system audit is a good way to investigate the processes of your suppliers 
and its relevant controls.
 

275
Operation
Activities Necessary to Ensure Requirements
One main objective of clause 8.4.2 is to ensure that only released purchased products 
will be used in the realization. Although purchased products or services are delivered 
from a third party, the responsibility to ensure appropriate provision of purchased 
products or services lies with the organization.
Information and data regarding the performance of the external provider shall be 
gathered and monitored over time. This requirement relates directly to the require-
ments of clause 9.1.3—Analysis and evaluation—where it is necessary to analyze and 
evaluate the performance of the external providers. The objective is to maintain a 
continual control over the performance of the external provider in terms of product 
realization through activities of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation. 
Which parameters may be evaluated? The parameters that influence the quality of the 
delivered product (much of those who will be used for the evaluation of the supplier 
as required in clause 8.4.1—General), include the following:
• Credibility and reliability
• Quality of delivered products or services
• Adherence to specifications
• Quality of goods or services
• Quantities
After deciding which parameters will reflect the performance of the external pro-
vider, one will need to include these measurements of performance when planning 
activities for monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation:
• Decide which methods for monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation will 
be used.
• When will the monitoring and measuring be performed.
• How and when will the results be analyzed and evaluated.
• Retain the appropriate documented information as evidence of the results.
8.4.3  Information for External Providers
The organization is required to ensure with a method that all the necessary informa-
tion regarding the purchased product is identified prior to their communication with 
the external provider. The goals are to
• Ensure that all the requirements regarding purchase are identified, including 
approval of the requirements and definition of controls
• Develop the ability to transfer to one’s supplier clear specifications regarding the product
• Ensure that the supplier receives all the information it needs in order to verify its 
ability to deliver the products or services according to the requirements
• Ensure that all the required information is received from the supplier
 

276
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall ensure the adequacy, quality, and clarity of specified require-
ments of purchased products or services prior to their communication to the external 
provider.
• The organization shall communicate to the external provider the requirements of 
the services or the products including important information. The information shall 
include the description of the products and services to be provided or the processes 
or activities to be performed.
• The information shall include requirements for approval and release activities 
 necessary to ensure that externally provided processes, products, and services will 
be delivered as expected.
• The information shall refer to methods, processes, procedures, and the use of tools 
and equipment needed for the realization of purchased products or services.
• The information shall include necessary release activities—activities for the verifi-
cation that all requirements were met.
• The information shall include competence, training, and qualification requirements 
relevant to the realization of the purchased products and services.
• The information shall describe the methods and content of the interactions between 
the organization and the external provider.
• The organization shall determine and implement activities and controls and  monitor 
the performance of the external providers.
• The organization shall determine the verification or validation activities that the 
organization or its customer intends to perform at the external providers’ premises.
Method for Ensuring Adequacy, Quality, and Clarity of 
Specified Requirements of Purchased Products
Information regarding the purchased product or services must be reviewed and veri-
fied before submission to the external provider. Thus, it is required to determine a 
method for reviewing the purchasing information before it is submitted for realiza-
tion. The objective of the method is to ensure that the content of the information and 
the means with which it was communicated are used as planned. The information 
submitted to the external provider must be
• Correctly communicated—the organization shall use the appropriate communi-
cation channels to convey the information. Using the appropriate communication 
channel shall ensure that the data reaches its destination.
• Clear—all the required data are understood by the supplier.
• Sufficient—the information is sufficient to accomplish the task and the external pro-
vider has all the details that it needs.
• Approved—a responsible party (from the organization) has reviewed and approved 
the content.
Such method for ensuring adequacy and clarity depends much on the type and nature 
of the purchased product. Authorization of persons who approve the transmission of 
the information to the external provider can be defined on a job description. There is 
no requirement to document the method of transmitting the information to the exter-
nal provider, but you will be required to produce  evidence that such a method exists.
 

277
Operation
In simple cases where the information is easy to transmit, a format for the  purchase 
order may serve here as a control tool—filling all the fields means that all the require-
ments are there. It becomes complex when the products or the required services are 
complex and influence the amount and extent of the necessary details, for example, 
in a project where many aspects must be considered:
• Technical issues
• Customer specifications
• Project with long-term assignment
• Special, not ordinary, or out of the standard requirements
Communication and Interaction with the External Provider
One issue this method will cover is the definition of the interaction with the external 
provider and the relevant communication channels for that purpose. The communi-
cation with the external provider is a critical process that ensures that data and infor-
mation or goods (components or materials) are properly transferred from customer 
(the organization) to supplier and from supplier to customer. This is why a method 
for communicating with the suppliers is essential: what, how, by whom, and when 
will the information be submitted to the supplier.
For each stage of the purchase process, the designated communication channel 
will be defined. It is critical for both supplier and customer to know how they interact 
with each other along the supply chain:
• How orders are being transmitted
• How orders are being conformed to
• How changes will be communicated
• How goods or services will be delivered
• How nonconformities will be managed
• How financial transactions will be preceded
Arrangements for communication with external suppliers may be managed through 
personnel or through systems. Communications and interactions can occur such as 
sending printed orders and e-mails, installation of supplier’s terminal at the orga-
nization’s premises, or maintaining EDI between the organization and the supplier.
Exchange of Documented Information with the External Provider
The next aspect of interaction with external providers is the provision of the rel-
evant inputs to each stage in the process of purchasing and the acceptance of the 
expected outputs in terms of documents or records: information or data that are 
required to operate the purchase activities and that the supplier or the employee of 
the organization must be aware of. There is no standard requirement for maintain-
ing these documents or records as documented information. The types of docu-
ments or records related to the purchase processes and supports of these processes 
must be defined. The format and extent of the documents or records is influenced 
by the information that is needed to be conveyed to the supplier as well as the 
information that must be received from the supplier. In order to define clearly 
 

278
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
these different types of documents or records, it must be clear which information 
as inputs or outputs is expected for each type of interaction with the organization.
I suggest analyzing the purchase process in order to effectively identify all the 
required documents or records. Let us review the (traditional) purchase process:
Stage
Type of Documented Information
The organization sends to one or several 
suppliers a request for an offer.
Request for an offer with description of the 
purchased products or services including 
quantities and schedules
The organization orders goods or services from 
the supplier.
Purchase order with quantities, schedules, purchase 
declarations, instructions regarding delivery or 
transportation, required tests and inspections and 
payment conditions, discounts, or surcharges
The supplier approves the acceptance of the 
purchase order and its conditions.
Order confirmation from the supplier
Change of purchase order—the supplier or the 
organization initiates a change in the details of 
the purchase order.
Request for a change and the approval of the 
organization that the change has been accepted
Receiving goods or services—the organization 
receives goods or services from the supplier.
Receiving note—which identifications or labeling 
of the product are required
Control of goods or services—the organization 
performs internal controls of received goods 
or services.
Test protocol—documented information as 
evidences of quality control
Approval of goods or services.
Which documented information is required as 
approval of release of the product and of 
inspections or tests that are conducted (signature 
or a stamp with details of the approval)
Return of goods—the organization sends 
products back or rejects a service after control.
Delivery slip—which documented information 
must be attached to the returned goods
The organization delivers money in return for 
the goods or services that it received from the 
supplier.
Supply invoice
Each stage of the purchasing process may include or demand other types of informa-
tion from other sources in the organization. For example, the content on the purchase 
order (which is a document that is being submitted outside the organization) will dif-
fer from the content on the receiving slip, which is normally an internal document.
Description of the Products and Services
A detailed description of the purchased product or service will be transmitted to the 
external provider in order to describe the expectations of the organization. Which 
information is expected to be detailed?
• Identification of the process, product, or service—all information that identifies the 
required product for purchase: name or description of the product or service, cata-
log number (internal or external), edition, version or revision of diagrams, configu-
ration, and model. When needed, a reference to supplier’s internal description of 
products or service (supplier product number) shall be mentioned.
 

279
Operation
• Information regarding the purchase process—required quantities, delivery dates, 
prices, discounts, and addresses for delivery and billing. This information shall 
relate to the internal processes or arrangements of the supplier that will ensure the 
correct delivery—for example, the conversion of unit for measure (when the organi-
zation manages the stock in units but the supplier delivers it in kgs).
• Information regarding operational requirements, technical specifications, instruc-
tions, and guidance that the supplier must follow—packaging requirements,  delivery 
requirements, transportation conditions, development environment, operational 
environment, work instructions, procedures, and diagrams.
• Information regarding quality requirements—test instructions, inspection instruc-
tions, quality records, quality protocols, tools and equipment for control, quality 
 certifications, and statistical data.
• Information regarding any supplementary requirements—regulatory requirements, 
safety documentation, and so on.
Requirements for the Approval of Purchased Products and Services
The organization must plan, define, and communicate to the external provider 
which activities for approval or release of products or services must be conducted by 
the external provider prior to delivery to the organization. Those requirements for 
approval and release must be defined as part of the purchasing requirements. Such 
activities may be performed by the supplier or in some cases by the organization 
upon receiving the goods or approving the services. The information delivered to the 
supplier shall cover the following issues:
• Processes for the approval of products or services
• Procedures specifying the controls that have to be applied during the realization of 
goods or services
• Monitoring and measurement activities that will indicate how processes or their 
outputs must be controlled and will ensure that processes deliver intended results
• The use of tools and monitoring and measuring devices that is needed to approve 
and release process outputs
• Quality control tests including final tests that must be performed on outputs of pro-
cesses necessary to ensure that the finished product complies with specifications
Communicating effectively the requirements for approval and release of products 
or services and ensuring their implementation during the realization stages to the 
external provider will reduce the need for quality control of incoming products or 
services. Outputs of risk-based thinking and design and development verifications 
and validations of the product may serve as inputs for planning the activities for 
approval and release of purchased products. This information will be used by the 
external provider to
• Plan its realization methods, processes, and activities
• Plan which equipment must he or she use during the realization of the product
• Plan its controls over the realization processes
• Deliver to the organization the necessary evidences that delivered products or ser-
vices meet the specifications
 

280
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
It is important to convey to the external provider the relevant instructions that will 
define expected activities, the extent of the tests, and criteria that will allow him or her 
to perform those activities and will enable a comparison to expected process results:
• Work instructions
• Test instructions
• Inspection procedures
• List of monitoring and measuring devices
If it is a manufactured product, ensure that the conditions for allowable tolerances 
are defined and known to the supplier. In case of service, the specifications of accep-
tance must be defined and clear.
Controlling Changes of Externally Provided Products or Services
When your external provider changes the product or the performance of a service, it 
must notify you in advance and receive your approval when the change is significant 
and may modify the product. The process of communicating and approving changes 
shall be defined and agreed upon on an agreement or contract level. Changes may 
occur to each parameter of the realization process:
• Material
• Production processes
• Assembly processes
• Human resources and personnel
• Equipment or machinery
• Test equipment and tools
• Documentation
• Packaging
• Storage conditions
• Transport conditions
Competence of External Personnel
When certain competence of personnel and training regarding the realization of the 
purchased product are needed, they must be identified by the organization. When 
such requirements are applicable, they must be communicated to the external pro-
vider. And it is the responsibility of the organization to prove that these personnel 
were trained according to the requirements. One may train the personnel oneself or 
demand that the supplier do so. Training of external personnel may be applicable in 
the following cases:
• Special processes
• Regulatory requirements
• Changes in production processes
• New contracts
• New parts
• New suppliers
• Nonconformities
• Rework
 

281
Operation
Control and Monitoring of the External Provider’s Performance
Information and data regarding the performance of the external provider shall be 
gathered and monitored over time, and this information shall be communicated 
to the external provider. This requirement relates directly to the requirements of 
clause 9.1.3—Analysis and evaluation—where it is necessary to analyze and evaluate 
the performance of the external providers. The objective is to inform the external 
 provider which aspects or issues are important and may affect the quality of the pur-
chased processes, products, or services.
Verification or Validation Activities at the External Provider’s Premises
A conducted inspection by a representative of the organization or its customer may 
be needed in order to verify that certain requirements are in place and are being 
implemented and that products or services being realized are consistent with the 
specifications submitted before. The need for inspecting processes or products at 
the premises of the supplier is determined from the required verifications or vali-
dations of the externally provided product. This inspection may be independent, 
periodical, or in the nature of follow-ups (the outputs of one inspection serves as 
inputs to the next). The nature and frequency of the visits depend on the quality 
capabilities of the supplier or the complexity of the product. In which case a review 
may be required
• In cases where processes are outsourced and the organization would like to audit 
them:
• Inspect the quality assurance
• Inspect process conditions
• Inspect personnel
• In cases where the supplier uses a third party to realize the products or services 
that it delivers to the organization; the organization may want to review this 
third party.
When visits to the premises of the external supplier are needed, it is necessary to 
define and communicate
• The purpose of the visits—what product or processes will be evaluated
• The interval of the visits—how many visits per period
• The participants of the visits—from the side of the organization, the supplier, and 
when applicable the end customer (of the organization)
• The activities that will take place during the visit—the verification or validation 
activities that the organization will perform during the visit
• The required inputs to the visit—which inputs shall each party prepare in advance
• The outputs of the visit—what will be documented and in which format
An effective way to document these visits is by planning and introducing some 
kind of visit report to the QMS, but there is no requirement for documented 
information.
 

282
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
8.5  Production and Service Provision
8.5.1  Control of Production and Service Provision
Implementing production and service provision under controlled conditions refers 
to the assurance of variables that affect the performance of an element used in the 
realization of the product or service. The control is achieved by applying and enforc-
ing a set of principles and conditions that will guide and accompany the realization 
processes. The control allows the organization to monitor the different variables dur-
ing the realization that may affect the performance of the QMS and the quality of 
the product and to extract reliable data and information regarding the realization. 
These data will be used to verify the results. Let us review the ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements:
• The organization shall implement production and service provision under con-
trolled conditions.
• The organization shall ensure the availability of documented information that 
defines
• The characteristics of the products to be produced or the services to be provided
• The activities to be performed
• The expected results of those activities, products, or services
• The organization shall ensure availability and use of suitable monitoring and mea-
suring devices.
• The organization shall implement monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evalua-
tion operations and activities at the appropriate process stages. These operations and 
activities shall ensure that criteria for control of processes or outputs and acceptance 
criteria for products and services have been met.
• The organization shall ensure the use of suitable infrastructure and process envi-
ronment for processes and operations.
• The organization shall ensure the availability of competent personnel and necessary 
qualifications for the operations and activities.
• The organization shall ensure that activities for validation, and periodic revalida-
tion, of the ability to achieve planned results of the processes for production and 
service provision, are performed, where the resulting output cannot be verified by 
subsequent monitoring or measurement.
• The organization shall initiate activities for preventing human errors.
• The organization shall implement activities for release, delivery of product, and 
 services as well as post-delivery activities.
Production and Service Provision under Controlled Conditions
Before beginning with the production of the product or providing the service, the 
organization shall define and determine the conditions necessary for the realization 
of the product or the service. It will be done by organizing and ensuring a set of 
conditions, processes, and activities that will transform requirements into a product. 
The implementation of realization processes includes specification of process inputs, 
parameters, and conditions that will ensure conformed process outputs, for example, 
 

283
Operation
under which conditions may the intended outputs be achieved or the requirements 
of the process and the operating environment that are needed for achieving the 
intended outputs.
The following principles are clearly defined:
• The organization shall define the condition necessary for the realization.
• The organization shall define the controls over these conditions.
• The controls shall ensure and provide evidences that the conditions are maintained 
during the realization processes.
Chapter 8.5.1 describes the different requirements and suggests practical ways to 
implement them in the QMS.
Availability of Documented Information Describing the Product Characteristics
The standard requires that the organization shall make available all product char-
acteristics with documented information. The objective of this documentation is to 
provide the employee, supplier, subcontractor, or any other party that participates 
in the realization processes full access to the required product characteristics. With 
this documented information, they can assess and evaluate the conformity of process 
outputs with the product specifications.
An effective documentation will be used for the verification and validation of the 
product. This can be used twice: once during the process in order to evaluate the per-
formance of the process and once when the process ends to verify and validate the 
process outputs.
For example, the assembly of products, when a product is assembled, specific 
assembling instructions, data forms, and inspection instructions—including all the 
required documentation, such as diagrams and criteria—will be available at the work-
station. The employee has all the information that it requires to perform the assembly. 
Another example refers to the quality tester that while using documented information 
knows which process outputs he or she has to validate when testing a product; the 
quality tester has a test instruction that identifies the part to be tested, the machine 
that realizes it, the interval of the test, the sequence of the validation (the test), and 
the criteria for acceptance. All the required data and information are defined, docu-
mented, and made available at the appropriate process stage and locations.
What are the objectives of the documented information?
• Defining the different characteristics of the product/service
• Defining its intended use
• Defining the expectations of the customer regarding the product/service (aside from 
the product characteristics—delivery schedules, special packaging instructions, 
special payment conditions)
• Defining the materials, parts, or components that assemble the product
• Defining the conditions of the environment that may influence the product or its 
characteristics
• Defining the known associated risks and their controls
 

284
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Defining the processes, operations, and activities that are needed or expected for the 
realization of the product, or shall I say how these operations and activities produce 
the product characteristics
• Defining the quality requirements of the product or product/service including the 
known quality problems of the product/service
When producing such documented information, you shall make sure that the partici-
pants of the realization know
• Where the documented information is located
• How to use it
When a regulatory requirement needs certain documented information regarding 
product characteristics, it will be made available to the employees.
Types of documented information include
• Requirement specification—documented requirements for material, design, prod-
uct, or service
• Functional specification—documented specifications that describe the functional-
ity of a product using a method such as block diagram or flow chart
• Design or product specification—documented specifications detailing designed 
solution or final produced solution
Availability of Documented Information Describing the Required Activities
The standard requires that the organization shall make available all essential activi-
ties necessary for the realization processes with documented information. At any stage 
during the realization, documented description and instructions or specifications for 
production, assembly, storage, installation, service, or support are to be available for 
anyone who is involved in the processes. The objective here is to provide the employee, 
supplier, contractor, or any other party that participates in the realization processes 
with full access to information such the required tasks specifications and their influence 
on the product characteristics. This information will be used by the relevant parties to 
do the job correctly: carrying out activities, measuring performances against specifica-
tions, and verifying and validating the process outputs. If any questions, uncertainties, 
or issues regarding the realization arise, the enquirer may use this documented infor-
mation as a reference. Which common documentation is already used and may serve as 
documented information describing the following required activities:
• For the overall planning, the organization may create a documented plan for the real-
ization, which will ensure that customer requirements are met. The plan will provide 
all the data and information necessary for the realization of the product and will link 
activities of the realization to the order of the customer (its needs and expectations). 
For the manufacturing organization, it may be the production plan and for the ser-
vice provider a service plan. This plan will control tasks, resources, and schedules.
• For quality assurance, a test instruction is required, which identifies the part to 
be tested, the machine that realizes it, the interval of the test, the sequence of the 
 

285
Operation
validation (the test), and the criteria for acceptance. All the required data and infor-
mation are defined, documented, and made available. Through this documentation, 
an employee is in a position to control process output.
• For the assembly of a product, specific assembling instructions, data forms, and 
inspection instructions including all the required documentation, such as diagrams 
and criteria, will be available at the workstation.
The documented information will cover the following realization issues:
• Overall planning of the realization in order to ensure that customer demand will 
be met
• Process or process flow that persons or parties that participate in the realization 
must be aware of
• Tasks or activities needed to be carried out
• Description of responsibilities for tasks or activities and their required qualification 
(when such indication may influence the quality of the product and the organization 
finds it important to mention)
• The use of infrastructure and behavior in the process environment
• Relevant equipment to be used during the activities
• The expected results of the activities
This documented information will instruct the employee on
• How to behave in the process environment
• How to handle materials, parts, or components
• Which tools and equipment are to be used
• How to perform certain activities such as assembly, construction, installation, pack-
aging, labeling, or storing
• How to perform tests, inspections, verifications, or validations
When an acceptance or quality approval is required for parts, materials, or compo-
nents in order for them to be used in the realization process, the approval will be 
documented and made available to the worker, and he or she will use these parts only 
when an approval has been given.
When training for employees, contractors, or suppliers is necessary, in order to ensure 
that they follow the instructions, this training will be documented and controlled. For 
example, when the documented information includes technical details, you ensure 
that the personnel that use this documented information understand the contents and 
objectives.
When outputs of risk-based thinking specify the need for documentation such as 
control requirements or safety measures, these will be made available at the worksta-
tions. Where appropriate, training will also cover this topic.
When a regulatory requirement requires certain documented information for the 
realization, for example, at a workstation, it is to be made available to the employees. 
For example, material safety data sheets (MSDSs) are the internationally standard-
ized way for documenting the hazardous properties of chemicals and other agents. 
 

286
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In several countries, occupational safety and health regulations require the availabil-
ity of such charts, when they are used during the realization.
When the documented information is exposed to environmental conditions that 
may harm and wear it, it is necessary to implement protective precautions and to 
locate the documentation in a safe area in order to ensure its use (i.e., a pouch, in 
laminated folder or covers, etc.).
Types of documentation include
• Documented instructions
• Standard operating procedures
• Specifications
• Work instructions
• Test specifications
• Blending or mixing procedures
• Step-by-step procedures
• Flow charts
• References for measurements and monitoring
• References for measurement procedures
• Routing cards
• Operation instructions
• Packaging procedures
• Service manuals
• Process control charts
• Diagrams
• Fabrication drawings
• Assembly drawings
• Subassembly drawings
• Technical (engineering) drawings
• Label drawings
• Package drawings
• Samples of finished products
• Samples of assemblies
• Models
• Reference material
Availability of Documented Information Describing the Expected Results
The organization is required to ensure that documented information that defines the 
results to be achieved will be available during the realization of processes. The records 
shall provide evidences that results were achieved during the realization. Results to 
be achieved refer to the
• Required conditions and inputs necessary for the realization:
• Availability of suitable inputs for the realization
• Allocation of resources
• Availability of knowledge and competence
• Availability of required documented information for the realization
• Process outputs meeting their specifications:
• Availability of product characteristics and customer requirements
 

287
Operation
In order to plan effectively a format that will gather all the necessary data and infor-
mation regarding the progress of the realization, I suggest the following:
 
1. Get a clear description of the realization process: a process flow chart or the quality 
plan. It is important to have a detailed description because each process stage might 
need to be monitored.
 
2. Decide for each process stage what are the critical conditions—conditions that must 
take place in order to achieve product conformity:
 
a. Specifications of the product
 
b. Operations and activities
 
c. Controls including verifications and validations
 
3. Describe for each process stage the expected results.
One way is to plan this format according to the quality plan. This type of documented 
information may be attached to the product file, as attachment to the customer file 
(when it is a customer-specific product) or as instruction.
Infrastructure and Process Environment
The infrastructures needed for the realization of the product or provision of  service 
must be used under controlled conditions. The goal is to monitor parameters 
and aspects that may affect the performance of the infrastructures or the process 
 environment and the quality of the product. The aspects that will be controlled are 
specified in clauses 7.1.3—Infrastructure and 7.1.4—Environment for the operation 
of processes. It is defined there how one must plan and implement the infrastructure 
and the operating environment of processes. Now, while realizing the product, we 
must ensure that those plans are implemented effectively.
The performance of infrastructures and process environment is affected when 
they are not functioning under conditions that were set and determined as needed 
for the quality of the product or not properly used. When the performance is poor, it 
affects directly the conformity and the quality of the product. The critical parameters 
must be identified, and suitable controls must ensure that they are maintained before 
and during the realization.
The organization shall identify the key processes, activities, or operations that 
affect the quality of the product and the relevant infrastructures and process envi-
ronment and make sure that they are intact before and during the realization. The 
organization must provide the necessary resources as well. For that, an effective and 
preventive system must be developed, planned, and implemented. The system will 
refer to the following issues:
• Identification of all relevant infrastructures and process environment and their 
 contribution to processes or activities
• Definition of proper or appropriate methods for maintaining the infrastructure and 
process environment
• Planning of activities needed to maintain the infrastructures and process 
environment
 

288
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Planning of maintenance and preservation of accessories and equipment related to 
infrastructures and process environment
• Definition of responsibilities
• Availability of spare parts
Documented information related to infrastructures and the process environment 
is necessary for its operation to be maintained. The goal is to ensure the correct 
use of these during the realization processes; it must be clear to the users which 
parameters of the process environment or how the use of infrastructure can affect 
the conformity and quality of the product or the service and which controls are 
required:
• Instructions for proper operation and the use of tools and equipment related to the 
process environment and the infrastructures.
• Machine maintenance procedures.
• Test instructions and schedules for activities (maintenance and service).
• Troubleshooting procedures.
• In cases where there is a risk for the safety and intactness of the infrastructure and 
work environment, an appropriate measure of precaution should be implemented in 
order to ensure their protection.
This documented information shall be available for persons who use the infrastruc-
tures and process environment for realizing the product as well as for persons who 
are responsible for maintaining and servicing them. It is necessary to identify the 
departments or individuals that use the infrastructure and process environment 
while realizing the product and to verify that they are trained, qualified, and have the 
proper skills to use them.
When the organization finds it necessary, it must provide evidences that these 
maintenance activities were undertaken before and during the realization. When is 
it necessary? It is necessary when the process environment and the infrastructures 
directly affect the quality of the product. In practice you may use forms or procedures 
that describe
• The activities for the maintenance—it is important to identify activities that affect 
the performance of the infrastructure or process environment that affects the 
 quality of the product.
• The period in which the activities shall be performed.
• The responsibilities.
• The approval.
Examples include
• Test protocols for production tools
• Maintenance protocols for machines
• Maintenance protocols for infrastructures
 

289
Operation
Take a look at the following example of a format for weekly control of a production 
machine.
Activity
Date
Name
Signature
Remark
Control of hydraulic power unit
 
 
 
 
Control of safety installations
 
 
 
 
Control of pneumatic system
 
 
 
 
Testing the automatic central lubrication
 
 
 
 
Testing all lamps and signals
 
 
 
 
Controlling cleanliness
 
 
 
 
Testing the general function of the machine
 
 
 
 
Availability and Use of Suitable Monitoring and Measuring Devices
During the realization process, monitoring and measuring devices are used for the 
validation of products, processes, infrastructures, equipment, and the required envi-
ronmental conditions. The selection of such devices and their implementation will be 
done in accordance with the nature of the product. The use of those monitoring and 
measuring devices plays an important role during the realization process.
For each product, process, infrastructure, piece of equipment, and work environ-
ment that must be monitored and measured, the organization will identify, allocate, 
and make available the appropriate monitoring and measuring device, for example, 
scales, caliper gauges, software, or particle counters.
The organization will identify the roles that are responsible for the use and 
operation of these devices or are responsible for their activity, namely, quality 
testers, maintenance technicians, laboratory technician, and assemblers. They 
each use different tools to control their activities and process outputs. One must 
ensure that
• They are using the appropriate devices related to the processes they are realizing
• They are qualified to use the monitoring and measuring devices
• The appropriate operation and user instructions are available
• Documented criteria, such as tolerances, limits, weight, and the allowed deviations 
required to evaluate results (whether the output is validated or not), are available
• Any training necessary is provided
Documented information is required according to the context of use of the monitor-
ing and measuring devices. In other words, where documented information related 
to the use of monitoring and measuring devices is necessary to prove the conformity 
of the product, you may need to document
• The availability of the monitoring and measuring devices during the realization
• The methods for using monitoring and measuring devices
• The results of the measurements
 

290
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
For example, if you measure a process output and the results are needed for the release 
of the product, the identification of the monitoring and measuring device that was 
used to perform this measurement will need to be documented besides the results, as 
evidence of fitness of the monitoring and measuring device.
Labeling Activities
The label has an important role in the use and functionality of the product; it pro-
vides information regarding several parameters in the product. Labeling refers to 
issues such as
• Identification of the product itself and when necessary the traceability and unique 
identification of the product (with serial numbers or batch numbers)
• Identification of components in the product
• The status of the product regarding its readiness for use, that is, not released, ready 
for use, and disqualified
• The product’s safety, functionality, performance, and intended use
• Special requirements such as for the automobile industry or the food industry
Labels are actually outputs of different realization processes and are part of approval 
processes:
• Design and development processes—model, edition, components, parts, ingredi-
ents, and intended use
• Realization processes—identification, dates, and traceability
• Risk-based thinking—alarms, warnings, and safety instructions
The labeling activities also refer to information and data published on the package, 
that is, the name, model, pictures, warnings, and user instructions (the next para-
graph, packaging activities, will refer to the packaging of the product). The label is 
considered to be documented information. There are three distinct types of labels, 
and each is influenced by different needs:
 
1. Labels that indicate the status of the product during the realization processes
 
2. Labels that are attached to the product that provides information regarding its 
 components or intended use
 
3. The information of the product that is provided on the package
While defining labeling processes and labels, the following issues are to be 
considered:
• The label should be intact and resistant to the ravages of time, the operation envi-
ronment, storage, delivery, and use.
• The label will be protected from damages during the realization processes, namely, 
production, assembly, packaging, storage, delivery, and service and maintenance. 
When it is known that an activity damages the label, replacement of the label will be 
planned (e.g., when servicing a product and the label must be peeled off).
• It is required that one ensures that the use of the product will not damage the label.
 

291
Operation
• It is important to ensure that the label will not damage the product or components 
and will not affect their functionality or performances, that is, electrical currents, 
sterilization, or chemical reactions.
• The location of the labels on the product must be defined.
• Graphics, diagrams, and pictures will be controlled and maintained as documented 
information.
• Labels and labeling activities are to be planned in accordance with standards, tech-
nical specifications, sectoral or regional and regulatory requirements.
• When the label is a part of the package, you may need to perform a compatibility test 
to ensure that the material that the label is made of does not affect in any manner the 
product’s components or processes.
The details on the label will be appropriately planned according to the nature and use 
of the product and will include information and data such as
• Identification of the product and the components (i.e., name and model)
• Edition or version
• Dates that are relevant to the realization of the product, that is, production, assem-
bly, and the next service.
• Dates that are relevant to the characteristics of the product, for example, expiry dates
• Identification of production and traceability (serial number and batch number)
• Process approval
• User instructions
• Performances of the product (e.g., electrical)
• Alarms, warnings, and safety instructions
• Storage instructions
• Delivery instructions
Packaging Activities
The operation and activity of packaging the product may be a critical issue and 
may affect the quality of the product, and the packaging processes are reviewed 
as any other realization process and thus must be controlled. The handling of 
packages and materials will be controlled in order to preserve them and their 
characteristics during storage, processing, handling, and delivery. The controls 
shall cover issues like sealing of packages (where required); the use of appropri-
ate materials for a package; performing the right packaging activities (which will 
not damage the product); ensuring the safety, functionality, and performance 
of the product; and the preservation of packaging materials while handling or 
storing them. The control of the packaging activities shall also include valida-
tion of equipment, tools, processes, as well as materials. Outsourced packaging 
processes are taken into account as well.
In some cases, the package affects further realization activities of the product. For 
example, in the automotive industry, the packaging and quantity of delivered parts is 
planned according to the requirements of the assembly line. In other cases, the pack-
age may represent or support a feature in the product, or carry important informa-
tion regarding the product and its use.
 

292
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The package is considered to be one of the product specifications and shall protect 
the product from
• Handling, processing, and storage
• Delivery activities until the package is opened
• The environment and possible contaminations
The packaging operations and their controls are planned and designed during the 
design and development stages. During the realization, those operations and controls 
are to be implemented and are needed to be verified or validated.
Environmental factors are to be taken into account when storing and realizing 
materials for packaging. The environmental parameters that may affect the package 
are to be defined and controlled, for example,
• The permissible level of moisture and humidity
• The pemissible storage temperature range
• The lifespan of packages and materials
• Hygiene control
When the package and the packaging activities may have an effect on the quality 
of the product and the risk of performing the activities incorrectly or not using the 
packaging as specified exists, validations shall be planned and implemented in order 
to ensure that the quality of the product is maintained. For example, if the product 
must be sealed, there are a lot of critical issues to attend to that may affect the prod-
uct and its characteristics: physical, chemical, as well as biological. The controls may 
include quality assurance tests on samples of packed product and process validations 
of the sealing itself.
When applicable significance will be given to statutory and regulatory requirements, 
standards, and technical specifications related to the product that describes packaging 
requirements. When such are relevant, the organization will control that the specifica-
tions, activities, so that the required controls are implemented and practiced.
Information regarding the packaging will be communicated to distributors. The 
objective is to give instructions concerning the risks related to the package and the 
handling and safety of the package.
One may use procedures, work instructions, drawings, pictures, or examples of 
packaging at the workstations. The documented instructions shall relate to the pack-
aging operations and provide a specific description of the activities to be carried out. 
When documented information is required, it will cover the following issues:
• Identification of the relevant product that will be packed.
• Identification of the different types of packages and the required packaging and 
 materials necessary for the packaging process (such as adhesives and sterilizers).
• Definition of target groups that will perform the packaging activities.
• Storing and handling of packages and related materials.
• Definition of required tools, equipment, or machinery, including setups and 
required maintenance and their operation.
 

293
Operation
• The physical parameters of the package are to be defined (size and dimensions, form 
or shape, weight, consistency, color and graphics, and power requirements).
• A description of the packaging activities (e.g., the materials used, the packaging 
activities, and the operation of tools, equipment, or machinery).
• The required controls for validation (where applicable).
• The required controls for quality of the package.
• Required delivery specifications.
I used to photograph each product as to how the packaging of the product should 
be with important remarks on the photo itself and attach the photo to the work 
instructions.
Release Activities
The organization shall implement planned arrangements for the release of the prod-
uct or service, at appropriate process stages and locations, needed to verify that the 
product and service requirements have been met. During the realization processes, 
one must ensure that those requirements are implemented and practiced. The stan-
dard requirements for the release activities are detailed in clause 8.6—Release of 
products and services. Please refer to chapter 8.6 for detailed information.
Delivery Activities
Transportation and delivery may be critical processes and may affect the quality of 
the product and thus will be defined and controlled. The objectives are to ensure the 
product’s functionality and safety and to prevent any nonconformities during the 
delivery. The scope of the definition will refer to the entire realization process:
• Delivery of goods from external providers
• Transfer of goods to manufacturing
• Delivery of products to subcontractors for processing like coating or furnishing
• Delivery of the final product to the final customer
The delivery conditions are to be planned and defined during the determination of 
requirements related to the product (see clause 8.2.2). Now is the time to implement 
the controls that will ensure their implementation. When initiating controls over 
delivery processes, the following issues are to be considered:
• The controls will ensure that the delivered products are safe and secured during the 
deliveries and that all transport requirements are met.
• The products will be protected from environmental factors that may affect them, for 
example, heat, cold, humidity, moisture, dirt, and light.
• When there are requirements for controlled temperatures, the necessary conditions 
will be provided.
• The identification and labeling of the products will be intact and safe.
• The products are protected from damage such as spillage, shaking, collision, or 
other accidents.
 

294
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• There should be protection against contaminations from substances of other 
 products  and contamination that may be caused by damage to the products 
themselves.
• There should be a protection against pests or microorganisms.
• When there are requirements for special vehicles, containers, packages, or their 
labeling for the transportation, the necessary means will be provided.
There is no requirement for a documented procedure, only a definition. But there is a 
requirement to provide documented information that necessary activities were per-
formed and that the product was preserved under appropriate conditions through-
out the delivery process. Then one will be required to provide evidence that the 
delivery conditions were imposed and practiced. So I recommend one define the 
documented information that is needed to control the delivery conditions through-
out the transportation activities. These records and evidences will serve you during 
audits, regulatory controls, or customer complaints. The documented informa-
tion is divided into two categories: the instructional records and the evidence of 
performance:
• The instructional documented information are the definitions of controls to be 
implemented during the delivery process, which are needed to support the delivery 
activities. They include
• Packaging instructions
• Delivery or transportation specifications
• Specifications for protection
• Documented precautions or warnings
• Customers’ delivery instructions
 
 This documented information will be made available to the relevant parties when 
required.
• The evidence is a record of performance, and the objective here is to prove that 
 delivery specifications were met:
• Labeling and identification of the product
• Delivery notes, including details of delivery like dates and carrier
• Reports of transportation or storage conditions during the delivery processes, 
such as data registration of temperature or moisture
• Pictures taken as evidence
The organization will appoint a responsible party for the verification that the delivery 
activities are performed according to specifications. Normally it will be a person in 
storage who prepares the goods for delivery. If distributors are receiving and deliver-
ing the product to the final customer, the organization is responsible for dictating the 
delivery requirements to them. The distributors will have to provide the manufac-
turer with evidence of performance.
The organization shall define what is to be done with the product once a deviation 
from the delivery specifications has occurred and there is a danger that the product 
is no longer meeting the requirements. In this case, a link to the process of control-
ling nonconforming process outputs must be established and the employee will know 
how he or she shall report this nonconformity.
 

295
Operation
Installation Activities
Installation is regarded as a realization process, and the organization shall ensure 
that all the required inputs, conditions, and resources are defined and available at 
the time of the installation. The purpose is to ensure that the product will operate 
properly after the installation in terms of functionality, performance, safety, and 
intended use:
• The organization shall ensure the proper installation of the product and deter-
mine the necessary installation activities, steps, inspections, verifications, and 
approval.
• The organization shall document and provide all necessary data related to the instal-
lation of the product, such as instructions, specifications, procedures, or any other 
documentation that is necessary for the execution of the installation.
• The organization shall make sure that all the necessary inputs are available, for 
example, parts and components.
• Tools, equipment, and the qualifications of the personnel necessary for the installa-
tion shall be defined and available.
• The organization is to define what the necessary conditions for the installation are 
and ensure that they are available at the time of the installation.
• Access to the location of the installation shall be granted.
• Outputs of risk-based thinking shall be considered and the necessary controls shall 
be implemented.
Emphasis will be given to the required controls, inspections, and testing and its rel-
evant acceptance criteria, that is, the activities that will verify and validate that the 
product is adequately installed, that its requirements are met, and that the intended 
use is accomplished. The common example is designing a checklist that verifies that 
all the steps of the installation were performed and all the results after the installation 
were accepted.
Conditions for the installation are important because they may influence the 
 quality of the product. The organization shall ensure that the conditions necessary 
for the installation that are necessary to achieve conformity of products and services 
are available. The conditions may be
• Environmental conditions like cleanliness
• Weather conditions
• Hardware requirements
• Infrastructural requirements like power grid
• The availability of certain locations or access to locations
There are cases where installation is performed by a third party, for example, the 
customer or a supplier. In these cases, the organization must provide them with 
the  installation instructions, inspection, and criteria for acceptance, must define 
the responsibilities (between the organization and the third party—who is respon-
sible for what), and must train and qualify the installer. Where applicable the third 
party shall provide documents and records that prove that the installation was per-
formed according to specifications.
 

296
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The stages and activities of the installation may be enclosed on a quality plan (or any 
other installation plan) and may include
• A definition of responsible roles for each activity
• Documented customer specifications
• A specific description of the installation activities and the required results
• Definition of the necessary conditions for the installation
• A reference for tools and equipment and their use
• Reference to the operation environment, customer facilities, and other devices that 
may affect the installation
• Supporting documentation required to perform the installation (including trouble-
shooting documents during the installation)
• Tests, controls, validations, and verifications—including criteria
• Reference for schedules and time objectives
• Expected records
Post-Delivery Activities
The realization of the product or provision of the service may include post-delivery 
activities. During the realization processes, you must ensure that those requirements 
are implemented and practiced. The standard requirements for the post-delivery 
activities are detailed in clause 8.5.5—Post-delivery activities. Please refer to chapter 
8.5.5 for detailed information.
Preventing Human Errors
Preventing human errors during the realization of a product or service refers to 
design and formation of the realization environment and conditions that will proac-
tively prevent persons from making errors during their work. This will be achieved 
through analysis of risks at the workplace associated with human actions and the 
initiation of actions that should create understanding among workers of what are 
their quality objectives and how should they perform their work. The following are 
examples of actions that can be initiated:
• Maintain effective qualification and certification activities when incorporating 
 personnel in the organization.
• Plan training and repetitions of training.
• Standardize best practices in the work area.
• Maintain order in the workplaces or adopt (appropriate) frameworks for orderliness 
in the workplaces.
• Reduce chances of being disturbed with unnecessary items or events in the workplaces.
• Perform maintenance activities as planned to prevent machinery and equipment 
deterioration.
• Promote awareness of contribution to the effectiveness of the QMS, including the 
benefits of improved performance.
• Make relevant documentation available and accessible at the appropriate worksta-
tions or at the appropriate process stages.
• Implement troubleshooting documentations.
• Segregate nonconformed process outputs, tools, or equipment to eliminate their use.
 

297
Operation
• Clarify safety measures and instructions.
• Define access to the different work areas.
• Obtain feedback from workers.
• Set quality objectives related to the work areas.
In practice one may use the process of improvement to initiate such actions. For 
documentation purposes, one may include preparations for these actions on the 
quality plan.
Validation and Periodic Revalidation
Before I begin with the issue of validation, I would like to discuss a few terms and 
definitions (just to toe the line between us):
• Verification: Confirmation, through the provision of objective evidence, that a pro-
cess delivered its specified requirements. The verification will be achieved through 
activities that control process outputs, such as calculations, measuring, or tests, and 
compare them to specifications.
• Validation: An approval, through the provision of objective evidence, that a process 
delivered its specified requirements for a specific intended use or application. The 
validation is achieved through the collection of data and information during the 
realization, which establishes an evidence that a process is capable of consistently 
delivering qualitative product and that requirements for a specific intended use or 
application have been fulfilled.
• Revalidation: A reapproval of validation in case it is evident that a process does not 
deliver its expected outputs or any changes occurred within the process—a change 
of equipment, a change in human resources, raw material, and so on—that may 
affect the product.
The organization is required to validate realization processes and their outputs where 
their results and outputs cannot be verified—monitored, measured, and evaluated. 
These are processes whose outputs cannot be controlled at the end of the process or 
as a finished product and thus cannot provide evidence, through verification, that the 
product meets its specification. Before the release of the product for use, the organiza-
tion shall establish a high degree of assurance in the performance of the manufacturing 
process that defined inputs were submitted to the process and certain conditions were 
controlled during the realization and so ensuring that characteristics of the product 
will be met. For example, in a welding process, in order to verify the welding, you must 
enact pressure on the welding spot and see if it breaks (not so practical as a test). Process 
validation refers to the assurance that certain process parameters were attended when 
the process took place during the realization. In the example of the welding parameters, 
those parameters will be arc voltage, welding speed, and heat input rate.
Planning process validation involves a series of activities taking place over the real-
ization of the product that controls the parameters. The assurance should be obtained 
from objective information and data gathered before and during the realization pro-
cesses. An effective validation depends upon the information and knowledge that 
resulted from design and development. Design and development outputs indicate, 
 

298
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
determine, and define validation activities necessary to ensure that the  processes, 
products, and services meet their requirements.
For the planning of process validation, the organization shall
• Identify the parameters that affect the process and the product characteristics
• Define tolerances or limits for those parameters
• Identify the impact of the variation of those parameters on the output of the process
• Control the variation of those parameters in a manner appropriate to the risk and 
impact it represents to the process and product
• Identify which changes in the process may affect those parameters and control those 
changes (changes in materials, equipment, production environment, personnel, and 
manufacturing procedures)
The organization shall develop a method for collecting and analyzing product and 
process data with the objective of identifying quality issues in the process— situations 
where the requirements will not be met. These data and information may be used 
for process improvements. The organization may apply sampling and testing of 
in- process materials that will provide evidences that processes are performing as 
expected and that may serve as a process validation.
Evaluating and Identifying Processes for Validation
Before we plan the validation of a process, we must decide whether we need to validate 
it or verify it. What is the difference between a process that needs to be verified and a 
process that needs to be validated? The rule of thumb is to ask whether a process can 
be verified with monitoring and measurement activities or needs to be validated. I pre-
pared here a scheme that describes the process for such evaluation (Figure 8.2).
The outputs of this evaluation shall provide a list of processes that must be validated.
Is redesign of process possible?
Start: Is it possible to
verify the process?
Is the verification
sufficient and cost‐
effective?
Process verification
Process validation
Yes
Yes
Yes
Redesign Process
No
No
No
Figure 8.2 Evaluation of the necessity of validating a process.
 

299
Operation
Process Parameters for Validation
Parameters of the process affect the performance of the process; thus, the parameters 
are related directly to the quality, functionality, performance, safety, and intended 
use requirements. After defining the processes to be validated, it is required that 
you define for each the parameters that will be controlled. In order to implement 
effective validations, you must understand what the key parameters affecting the 
quality of the product or the performance of a process are, for example, tempera-
ture, pressure, compound of raw material, concentrations, tension, time, machine 
cycle, and setup conditions. Identifying key parameters will help you indicate what 
is to be measured.
To begin with, review and analyze the effect of each process on the specifications 
and characteristics of the product. For example, in the food industry, the sealing 
 process of the package may affect the quality of the product. Values and levels for 
these characteristics should have already been determined (e.g., outputs of design 
and development). In order to reach these specifications of characteristics, the seal-
ing process must maintain certain conditions; during the sealing process, the tem-
perature and the pressure of the clamps are critical in order to reach the required 
level of strength.
When determining the parameters for control, it is important to correlate the 
inputs with the outputs. For example, in a plastic molding, the injection forma-
tion of the part is affected by the holding time of the part on the production tool 
before opening and releasing the part (a fraction of a second can be critical). The 
input (holding time) is directly related to the output (form of the part). These 
parameters will indicate the stability of a process; thus, these parameters will 
need to be controlled.
After identifying these parameters, it is necessary to relate them to the tools 
and the elements (in the process) that are influenced by those parameters, namely, 
machines, software, production tools, human resources, and infrastructures. 
These elements will supply us with the data and results regarding the process 
parameters.
Failure in equipment, tools, systems, and components may affect the pro-
cess and the quality of the product. The organization must assess the impact of 
such failures on the product and its characteristics. The impact may be direct or 
indirect:
• Direct impact results in the failure of the system used in the realization of the prod-
uct, for example, machines, production tools, raw material, and components.
• Indirect impact results in the failure of systems that support the realiza-
tion systems, such as utilities and infrastructures, human resources, and work 
environments.
The evaluation of the impact may assist in planning the control and validation tests 
more effectively. Risk analysis may serve as an input for such assessment.
 

300
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Acceptance Criteria (Desired Outputs of Processes)
After identifying the parameters for validation, you need to determine, for each pro-
cess, the target values and their acceptance criteria. Target values are the optimal 
values for the process parameter. These values will demonstrate the stability and capa-
bility of a process and ensure that requirements are met and accepted. Maintaining 
process parameters within the criteria ensures that it will deliver expected product 
characteristics and specification.
The criteria are used for the evaluation of the results compared to the require-
ments. The limits of the criteria (target values, upper and lower control limits) are 
based on product or process specifications. The objectives of the criteria are to dem-
onstrate the effectiveness of processes and to support decisions for judging, evalu-
ating, and determining by facts, values, and data the compliance of the processes. 
The criteria will support the validation by indicating the status of the parameters, 
that is, either accepted or rejected. The criteria will be planned according to the 
types of data and statistical analysis methods. Deciding upon limits depends on 
the analysis method used, for example, action levels, control levels, acceptance lev-
els, specification levels, and worst case conditions. The objective of these limits is 
to instruct the organization when process adjustments are required; for example, 
when results show that the process is deviating, then an action needs to be taken in 
order to restore compliance. The criteria may be objective or subjective:
• Objective criteria mean distinctiveness, invariance, and controllability; the results 
are being compared to a set of determined values, and a decision is made based on 
the comparison: either accepted or rejected.
• Subjective criteria are when the results are being evaluated and submitted for 
assimilation by an individual. The criteria are subjected using knowledge and 
experience. Subjective criteria need to be supported with justifications for process 
conformity.
The criteria will be documented on the test protocols and are required to be approved 
before submission for use. The following issues are to be considered:
• For each process that requires validation, the organization shall develop criteria for 
the evaluation of the performance of the process and the acceptance of its outputs.
• The organization will develop a policy for establishing and determining the criteria: 
scope, relation to the processes it serves, objectives, activities, method for documen-
tation, and methods for reporting. For more information about this policy, I refer 
you back to chapter 8.1, paragraph Establishing criteria for acceptance of products 
and services, of this book.
• The criteria will be designed in order to provide alarms regarding the status of the 
output and to define when the results are regarded as nonconforming.
• The criteria shall refer to documented product requirements or characteristics that 
they control—materials, functionality and technical specifications, product charac-
teristics, reference to drawings, and quality requirements.
 

301
Operation
• The criteria will be integrated into the quality requirements (e.g., can be docu-
mented into the quality plan).
• When external requirements for criteria for a certain type of process or prod-
uct are applicable (standard requirements, regulatory requirements, or tech-
nical specifications), it is necessary that these criteria be implemented in the 
validations.
• When activities for addressing risks in the realization (outputs of risk-based think-
ing) specify criteria, they will be incorporated in the validation.
The next issue regarding the criteria is worst case conditions. This principle is 
required, for example, in the automotive or the medical industry. The worst case 
conditions are a set of conditions covering the upper and lower limits of process 
parameters. These conditions simulate possible circumstances during the real-
ization process, which indicate a clear unwanted trend in the process (regarding 
its performances). The conditions will be defined according to the risks related 
to the process. Reaching these levels does not indicate that the process is noncon-
forming yet, but they warn and notify the manufacturer that the situation might 
pose a risk to the outputs of the process and may impact the integrity of the prod-
uct. For example, there are products that must be realized in an environment that 
maintains a certain level of cleanliness. The parameter level that ensures the level 
of the cleanliness during the realization is already defined. For these levels, one 
determined the values for lower and upper limits and the target results. Now one 
must determine the lower and upper limits in the level of cleanliness in a worst 
case condition.
Selecting a Method for Analyzing the Data
Methods and techniques for analysis and demonstrating parameter results for 
 validation must be determined. The purposes of the techniques are
• To demonstrate objectively, through data, that processes meet their specifications
• To replicate actual use conditions
The method shall be selected and developed according to the type of data that are 
required to be collected and analyzed. Using the method will provide you with an 
actual and accurate status report regarding the processes:
• The method will allow comparison to the objectives and the goals of parameters.
• The method will provide the organization with alarms regarding the processes.
• The method will enable the organization to compare new data with old data.
• When international, national, or local standards for analysis techniques are 
demanded, they will be implemented.
• The use and instruction for implementing the method will be documented or 
referred to (e.g., on the quality plan).
 

302
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
I suggest here several methods for statistical analysis:
Method
Objective
Statistical Technique
Acceptance sampling 
plan
Determining through the product 
the acceptance level of the 
process
Sampling of a product and through 
analyzing particular characteristics 
of this sample deciding whether to 
accept or reject a process
Capability study
Evaluation of the ability of a 
process to consistently stay in its 
limit specifications by sampling 
its outputs
Examining the processes over a 
period of time by sampling outputs 
of the process and placing them on 
a control chart, comparing them to 
control limits and criteria
Control charts
Identifying and analyzing changes 
in the process and mapping their 
trends. The identification and 
examination will detect the 
root cause of a change
Sampling process units according to 
a plan and identifying and 
analyzing changes in the process. 
After the change is identified, trends 
are analyzed. Such a technique 
assists in identifying process 
parameters with high potential to 
induce a change
Dual response approach 
to robust design
Robust design methods
Robust tolerance analysis
Robust processes by detecting 
their optimal values for process 
parameter
Reducing variations of process 
outputs by selecting the optimal 
process inputs and introducing 
them to a statistical calculation
Response surface study
Tolerance analysis
Planning the optimal process 
output
Calculating the statistical relation 
between process inputs and process 
outputs. Using such methods can 
assist in identifying the optimal 
combination between different 
inputs and augment the process
Process simulation
Identifying exceptions and 
providing important insights on 
required interrelations between 
tasks, operations, and systems
Mathematical simulation of a process 
under various scenarios, conditions, 
or loads
Revalidation
Revalidation is required in situations where you detected that process parameters 
may not provide the necessary outputs, for various reasons, and you need to apply 
an action to restore conformity. The objective of the revalidation is determining how 
much a process is stable and capable after a change or correction was applied.
The following events may require the initiation of revalidation:
• When corrective action was implemented in a process or a product
• When changes or improvements in the product design, and thus the process, were 
initiated and implemented
• When the personnel operating the process were changed, and it affected the quality 
of the product
• When work instructions or work methods were changed
 

303
Operation
• When inputs to the process such as material or components were changed and may 
affect the quality of the product
• When a new supplier is introduced to the process
• When a new tool or equipment was introduced to the process
• When deviations or negative trends were detected and measures such as corrective 
actions or changes were applied
• When periodic maintenance to equipment or infrastructure is not performed as 
scheduled and there is a risk that they will fail
• When there are changes in the packaging processes of the product
• When a certain process produces excessive defects or indicates negative trends
• When evaluation of troubleshooting of a process is needed
• When controls to the process were changed or replaced
The revalidation of tools, machines, and equipment is referred to as requalification. 
Requalification is needed
• When a service, maintenance, or major repair was carried out to the machines or 
equipment
• When production tools or production molds were amended
• When adverse trends in equipment performance occurred
• When the process was relocated to another environment, machine, or facility
• When the replacement of critical spare parts was initiated
The need for revalidation shall be evaluated and documented on the validation plan 
(the validation plan will be discussed later on). For each revalidation activity, criteria 
will be defined according to the type of revalidation. When revalidation is required, 
I suggest to include it in a validation plan.
Periodic Revalidation
The QMS elements that participate in the realization of the product or the service are 
submitted to constant changes or situations that may alter them. In order to regularly 
control capability of a process, a periodic revalidation is required. The following are 
reasons for applying periodic revalidation:
• The process wears out equipment or the infrastructure that supports the process.
• Historical data of the process suggest that the process may not be stable in the long 
run.
• When a manufacturer of equipment or tool suggests or even implies performing 
periodic revalidation.
• When a regulatory requirement demands the performance of periodic revalidation.
• When risks associated with the process are known and cannot be reduced.
When processes need a periodic revalidation, you must plan them in advance at 
planned schedules. This plan will be retained as documented information. For 
each periodic revalidation activity, criteria will be defined according to the type 
of revalidation. When periodic revalidation is required, I suggest to include it in a 
validation plan.
 

304
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Validation Circle
In order to initiate and implement effective validations of your processes, the matter 
must be considered by the interested parties related to the realization of the product. 
This is why I suggest initiating a validation circle in the organization. In the valida-
tion circle, you assemble a group of people who are involved in the design of the 
product and the process realization of the product and discuss the process by having 
each person in the group describe each activity and its process outputs. Each one will 
share his or her opinions and aspects on the matter, and together they will plan an 
effective validation activity. Who is to contribute to the circle?
• Sales will be responsible for communicating the important customer requirements 
(reflected as product characteristics).
• Research and development will deliver the relevant product characteristics that 
need to be validated.
• Production team will share its opinion on how to implement the validations effec-
tively throughout the realization process.
• Regulatory affairs will provide all the relevant inputs for the regulatory require-
ments that must be accounted for during the realization processes and their effect 
on the process validation.
• Quality will be responsible for the following two issues:
• Implementation of the validation throughout the QMS, for example, through 
documentation such as procedures and work instructions, forms and records, 
training, and by implementing the verification in the internal audit plan
• Planning and implementing of the monitoring system and processes, the analy-
sis of the data, and the reporting and alert system
Validation Plan as Documented Information
Validation plan, also known as a validation protocol, is one way to implement effectively 
validation processes in the organization. It defines a set of rules and events describing 
how validation activities will be performed. The objective of the validation plan is to 
present a documented approach, strategy, and methodology in conducting validation 
processes with reference to the relevant elements that will support the validation. The 
plan will identify the processes to be validated and determine the activities, timelines, 
criteria, and schedules for the validation, the interrelationships between processes 
requiring validation, references to documentation, and the timing for revalidations. In 
practice, one needs to develop a document that describes how the validation of prod-
ucts or processes in the organization is conducted. The plan will include
• The scope of the plan, that is, which processes and products are included under its scope.
• Identification of equipment, tools, systems, and components that may affect the 
process.
• Description of activities and their sequences of the validation processes, such as 
activities, timelines, schedules, and locations.
• Reference to relevant documentation, for example, procedures, process flow dia-
grams, test protocols, customer requirements, instructions, technical specification, 
and technical details.
 

305
Operation
• Reference to the criteria for acceptance or rejection of a process.
• Description of roles and functions that are involved in the validation activities. 
When defining the role, it is necessary to relate each role to its duties and specific 
responsibilities in the validation processes.
• Instructions on how to detect, evaluate, and react to deviations.
• The requirement for revalidation and the events where revalidation activities are 
needed will be identified.
• The outputs of the validation plan; the format of the results of the validation and the 
expected records.
The results of the test and validations shall be retained as documented information:
• A designated format or system to collect the data shall be planned.
• The format or the system shall be suitable to the type of the data it is collecting.
• The appropriate analytical method shall be applied for the analysis of the data.
• The results and the information shall be accessible to the appropriate persons in the 
organization or interested parties to ensure a quick reaction to trends and events in 
the process.
8.5.2  Identification and Traceability
Implementing identification and traceability allows the organization to effectively 
trace back the activities, operations, processes, and process outputs from both sides 
of the supply chain (customer and supplier) and enables the identification of all ele-
ments that participated in the realization of the product or provision of the service. 
Management of status enables the organization to distinguish the different elements 
that combine the product: materials, parts, and components, with different charac-
teristics from the different stages of the realization process. The ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements include the following:
• The organization shall use methods and means suitable to its processes and process 
outputs for the identification of process outputs when it is necessary to ensure the 
conformity of products and services.
• The status of process outputs shall be established and identified with respect to 
monitoring and measurement requirements throughout production and service 
provision.
• When traceability is a requirement, the organization shall control the unique iden-
tification of process outputs and shall retain documented information necessary to 
enable traceability.
Goals of Identification and Traceability
Traceability refers to the development of a method for collecting data related to the 
use, history, and location of an object and following it based on a recorded iden-
tifier. The traceability will be guaranteed through the linking of characteristics of 
processed materials with products and its deliverables, for example, applying a serial 
number to a product or batch number to a produced batch. Managing a unique batch 
 

306
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
or a charge enables the traceability when a problem arises, the flow of material will 
be assured, and the disposition of the materials to the realization will be much more 
accurate. Traceability refers to the
• Origin of materials and parts
• The processing history
• The distribution and location of the product or service after delivery
Identification refers to the establishment of a method or an activity with means for 
identifying an object and providing evidence to its identification and status.
Managing identification and traceability before, during, or after the realization 
activities has the following clear goals for supporting the QMS:
• Describing the areas, scopes, materials, products, parts, components, or finished 
goods that are under the scope of identification and traceability
• Defining the inputs for the identification requirements: customer requirements, reg-
ulatory requirements, risk management outputs, supplier instructions, and design 
and development requirements
• Determining the activities with which the identification and traceability shall be 
accomplished
• Defining which records are supposed to be generated to enable the identification 
and traceability
• Enabling forward and backward tracking of the product and its constituents.
• Instructing employees on how to handle the product, parts, or materials before, 
 during, or after realization
• Specifying the information and details that the identification and traceability shall 
include: type of product or material, quantities, units of measure, reference to docu-
mentation or process certifications, batch numbers, serial numbers, details of pro-
duction, manufacturer details (including addresses), and communication details
• Indicating responsibilities and authorities required to perform the identification 
activities
• Avoiding incorrect identification of nonconformed products, submission to realiza-
tion, false delivery to customer, or contamination of conformed products
• Enabling the application of corrective actions when defects are detected during or 
after the realization
• Allowing follow-up of product characteristics like validity date or management of FIFO
• Allowing the identification of personnel during the realization processes where 
qualifications and training are critical
Planning the Identification and Traceability
The identification and traceability of the product are regarded as the collection of 
related information throughout the supply chain management that may indicate or 
affect the quality of the product. Thus, it is necessary to identify which information 
and data are needed, which activities generate the data, at which points of time, and 
by what means or methods can the data be collected. The final stage is linking the 
product or process outputs to these data.
 

307
Operation
When planning identification and traceability methods and activities, bear in 
mind that some questions need to be answered when a person samples a product 
from a process or a location:
• What is the origin of the item?
• When was it manufactured?
• From what is it constructed, and are the materials or components that construct it 
approved?
• What is the usability status of this item?
• Where should it be stored?
• Where is this item heading? What is its next stop? To whom does it belong?
Planning identification and traceability will be done according to the nature and char-
acteristics of the product or the service and when the organization finds it necessary.
A correct definition and implementation of identification and traceability will 
 provide full transparency regarding the product or the service:
• It will allow the identification and tracking of all of the elements mentioned earlier 
throughout the realization processes until the delivery or disposal of the product, 
that is, storage of raw materials, components, and other materials used for pro-
duction, tracking inventory in process, storage of finished goods, delivery to the 
 customer, distribution, installation, and service.
• In case quality problems occur, the identification shall support the traceability of the 
product or service, facilitate fault diagnosis, and assist the organization in detecting 
defective products.
• The identification shall provide information regarding the product’s usability status 
and, where applicable, shall relate to the expiry date or shelf life of materials.
• Identification will ensure the use of appropriate materials, components, or items 
during the realization of the product.
• The identification shall eliminate the risk of mixing products of different status.
• The identification shall indicate to the user when the product was manufactured or 
assembled, how it was done, and by whom.
• The identification will support action for addressing risks, for example, the ability to 
identify product characteristics related to the risks or hazardous situations during 
the realization of the product.
• The identification and traceability shall assist in minimizing damages and implica-
tions of nonconformities, when such are detected, through enablement of tracking 
of associated processes, operations, and process outputs.
Through the assignment of activities, means, methods, and identifiers throughout 
the material flow such as codes, tags, or product serial numbers, products will be cor-
rectly integrated in the realization processes. The production elements that are to be 
identified and tracked include
• Raw materials, components, and parts
• Purchased goods or services
• Materials used for the production
• Lots or batches
• Finished goods
 

308
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Installations
• Defective or returned goods
• Operations (in case of service)
Implementing Traceability and Identification
The implementation of traceability and identification must be suitable to the type of 
the process outputs, in other words, processes must support this method. Each  process 
output has its own identification needs and possibilities. And the  identification and 
traceability provides its relevant information and details. For example, the identifica-
tion of a raw material must refer to its expiry date, MSDS, date of manufacture and 
of arrival, storage conditions, and COC. Another example is that a manufactured 
part shall be identified with the catalog number, marking date of production, edition, 
model, lot or batch numbers, and relevant quality protocols. Data that may serve for 
identification and traceability include the following:
• Product numbers and catalog number
• Batch/lot number
• Serial number
• Dates like validity dates or manufacturing date
When implementing traceability and identification, you shall refer to the following issues:
• The identification details and references shall be planned according to the proper-
ties, attributes, and characters of the identified process outputs.
• For each product, the needs for identification and traceability management will be 
implemented with a unique identification. This method shall be applied in those pro-
cess stages where the identification and traceability affect the quality of the product.
• The organization shall plan techniques or methods for maintaining identification and 
traceability. Each techniques or method for indicating the identification shall refer to 
a type of data: a catalog number identifies the product and its edition, batch number 
indicates information about its manufacturing, and quality status indicates the usabil-
ity of the product. A quality plan, a work instruction, or a procedure may indicate 
which methods and means will be used for the identification at a certain process stage.
• The identification shall be implemented on the product according to its nature but 
where it is accessible to all. When the status is not explicit, users or persons will be 
informed where to look for the status. The type of identification shall be planned 
in proportion to the effect of the product on the process or the process output. The 
means of identification shall be planned in a way that will not harm the product or 
its materials, its properties, its intended use, or its packaging.
• When components, parts, or materials that construct the product or activities that 
constitute the service may cause it to not meet its requirements, the organization 
shall define special traceability activities. The traceability will be implemented in a 
way that will enable the link between the end product and its materials or compo-
nents or the service between its relevant activities.
• The association or relation to specific processes, realization operations, or activities 
will be possible and comprehensible. It will be possible to use the identification in 
order to receive details, information, and history about the object sampled. A job 
order number is one example.
 

309
Operation
Status of Products
Status of products shall be integrated in the management of materials, parts, components, 
and finished goods. When it comes to services, the status shall indicate whether the service 
was completed and the target object of the service is usable. The status refers to the rela-
tive position or a state of product in a particular point in the process stage and the certain 
characteristics it bears at this point. Applying status management ensures that the product 
or the service, components, parts, and materials are being controlled and introduced to the 
necessary activities, tests, inspections, or concessions before they are released to the next 
stage (i.e., introduced to a process, packed, delivered, or installed). The syllogism is that 
a status of the product indicates its history. Allow me to explain. When I pick a product 
with a certain status, it means that the product went through different realization stages 
through which it earned its status. Objectives of the status management include
• Eliminating the possibility of mixing materials, parts, components, or products 
with different status
• Indicating in which process stage the product is situated
• Situating a product in its life cycle
• Providing information regarding the fulfillment of the product’s requirements
The status management shall be integrated with the identification and traceability 
methods and techniques used in the organization. The following are a few process 
 factors that may influence or determine the status of a product:
• The situation of a product regarding its realization
• Activities that were applied on the product
• Results of inspections and tests that the product has undergone
Indicating the status of goods and products is critical. One should be able to sample 
any product, material, or component and declare its status. Status of products will be 
determined with respect to the relevant monitoring and measurements requirements. 
In other words, the results of the monitoring and measurements activities shall deter-
mine the status of the product. The identification of the product shall present the user of 
the QMS or the customer the status of the product in terms of the following realization:
• Tested/not tested
• Released/not released
• Useable/not useable
The status shall be identified using auxiliary tools such as routing cards, labels, usabil-
ity tags, signposting, or serial numbers. The important thing is that the status must be 
clear to all users and personnel participating in the realization processes or using the 
product. When the status cannot be indicated physically on the product (due to the 
product’s nature and characteristics), it is necessary to define other methods to identify 
its status, for example, the location or segregation of products or logical management.
Types of Status
Different types of product status shall be determined in order to clarify the signifi-
cance and consequences of each status. The definition will determine how products 
 

310
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
receive their status classification (e.g., their quality status, undergoing a certain pro-
cess, comprising certain materials, being defective, being given quality status after 
assembly, or before packaging). In case it is applicable, criteria shall be assigned to the 
transition from one status to the next.
Management of status must refer also to product under service and to post-delivery 
activities. During the service or maintenance activities, an indication regarding the 
usability of the product will be determined, that is, usable, in repair, or defective. The 
status will be clearly shown on the product in a location where all users may view it. It is 
possible to deactivate or disable only a part or function of the product. Service and main-
tenance activities may create defective parts or components. Therefore, it is required that 
one initiates and defines the status of those nonconforming parts or components.
Reference to the Quality Plan
The determination of the traceability, identification, and status may be integrated 
with the quality plan and may cover the entire life cycle of the product: material, 
development, production, storage, installation, and servicing. The status can indicate 
where the product is situated regarding the plan. Another way to put it is that the 
progress of a product in the life cycle determines and indicates its status.
Reference to Monitoring, Measurement, and Validation Activities
Monitoring and measurement activities, as well as process validations, determine 
the status of process outputs. The status of a product indicates which inspections 
the product underwent and their results: whether they were successful or not and 
whether the process output meets its requirements or not. These tests, inspections, 
and controls carried out during the realization perform a comparison between the 
product’s specifications and the actual results of processes and determine the status 
of the product: either accepted or rejected. Releasing a product or a component to 
the next realization stage or changing its status and updating its usability is done 
through a set of predefined verifications and validations.
Putting it into practice, you will need to prove the link between monitoring and 
measurement activities, as well as the verifications of process outputs and validations 
of processes, and the status of the product. For example, each time a product, a batch, 
or a lot passes a quality test, the status is modified. This will ensure that only products 
with the appropriate status reach the next stage.
Usability of the Product
Status of the product indicates its usability and determines the allowed applicable 
activities, for example, it can be used in certain conditions, it is allowed to be assem-
bled, it needs to be reworked, it is rejected, or it needs to be disposed of. Types of 
usability status include the following:
• The product is approved for use or further realization.
• The product is approved for use or further realization but with restrictions.
• The product is approved for use or further realization under concession.
 

311
Operation
• The product is suspended or put on hold.
• The product is rejected from use or further realization.
This combination of the identification, traceability, and status shall indicate when 
the product was manufactured or when the service was provided, what is the status 
in terms of usability, and to whom it belongs. The identification shall also eliminate 
the risk of mixing products, parts, or materials from different origins or with dif-
ferent status.
The identification shall provide the required information regarding the status of 
a product referring to a process stage and the meaning and significance of this sta-
tus to the product: controlled material before processing, sterilized products, prod-
ucts or packages provided by the customer, batch numbers before release, devices for 
 delivery, defective parts, and so on.
Integration of Risk-Based Thinking
When the risk analysis indicated that there are some critical characteristics that must 
be traced in the long term, identification, traceability, and management of status will 
assist you in controlling this characteristic. The necessary controls of the detected 
risks may be identifiers like validity date or labeling that indicate how the product 
may be used. Let us review the following examples:
• When conditions of the work environment may affect materials, parts, or compo-
nents of the product, and cause it to fail to meet the requirements, the organization 
shall include these under traceability. And so traceability shall enable the tracking 
of the conditions in the work surrounding and the parameters that created these 
conditions during the realization of the product.
• When activities and actions of human resources during the realization processes may 
affect certain materials, parts, and components in the product, and cause it not to meet 
the requirements, the organization shall include these under traceability. And so when 
actions that were indicated as critical to the integrity of the product, identification of 
personnel that performed these activities will be included under traceability.
• Identification shall be applied to process inputs when they may affect the conformity 
of the process outputs. A good example is cleaning operations where the cleaning of 
products may affect its quality and intended use. In some cases, identification of the 
cleaning material will have to be managed. When a quality problem occurs, the man-
ufacturer may verify that the input to the operation of cleaning was conformed to.
• When a recall of products in case of safety problems is required, the organization may 
use the identification and traceability as means to track down products and maintain 
operations for limitation and restriction and minimizing damages of nonconformed 
products. This activity shall span the entire life cycle of the product: from the storage 
of materials until the delivery of the end product to the end user.
• For preservation and maintenance of property belonging to the customer or exter-
nal provider, the organization may use traceability and identification as a means for 
control.
• When segregation and separation of products is necessary, the organization shall 
develop appropriate methods and will use identification to support this method.
 

312
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Identification and Traceability of Monitoring and Measuring Devices
Identification and traceability refer also to the use of monitoring and measuring devices; 
when monitoring and measuring devices were found to be inadequate or not suitable, 
one might need to revalidate the series of batches of products that were controlled and 
released based upon the results of those monitoring and measuring devices. Through 
identification and traceability, you will locate those batches and product relatively easily.
Customer Requirements
When required, the method shall integrate customer requirements for the identifi-
cation of traceability methods: requested labels, barcodes, identifiers, protocols, or 
markings. In some cases, the identification will be part of the packaging instructions. 
When the customers deliver materials, parts, or components for assembly or use in 
the realization process, they will be identified in order to enable the requirements of 
clause 8.5.3—Property belonging to customers or external providers.
Regulatory or Statutory Requirements
International standards, directives, or regulations related to the realization of the 
product or provision of the service may demand the implementation of identification 
methods of the materials, products, process entities, or components used in the real-
ization. These shall be taken into account when applying traceability and identifica-
tion. Requested documentation such as specific forms and tests or work instructions 
shall be planned and implemented. Records that are needed to prove the performance 
of the requirements will be maintained.
Identification and Traceability of Externally Provided Products or Services
Requirements for identification and traceability shall cover also products and services that 
are provided externally. By introducing the purchasing process to traceability control, the 
organization can trace back all the products or services that were realized using externally 
provided products or services. The main purpose is to provide the ability to trace back all 
purchased products. When the externally provided products or services are considered 
as critical to the quality of the product, and it is necessary to control those components, 
materials, or purchased processes, the traceability of the purchased products would begin 
from the purchasing order and continue till the final product itself (after delivery).
Configuration Management
Configuration management is a method that can be used to meet the product identifi-
cation and traceability requirements specified in the ISO 9001 Standard. Configuration 
management is a means through which the organization may trace its products and 
maintain information regarding them. Implementing the configuration management 
shall provide full transparency of status and the components of which a product is 
comprised. Anyone who inspects the product could extract the information that was 
documented and trace its history. Another objective is to eliminate the possibility that 
wrong components could be applied to the product. The activities for configuration 
 

313
Operation
management must be planned in accordance to the nature of the product and its con-
stituents. Here is a short review of the configuration management principles:
• A unique identification of each item under configuration management.
• A unique identification of the items that construct the unique product is to be 
planned (e.g., material, components, and parts) where the items are distinguished 
by unique, durable identifiers or markings, where appropriate.
• A unique identification of the version or edition of the product and its attribution to 
a group or category of products.
• Identification of the status of the product in its life cycle: design and development, 
realization, delivery, service, disposal, out of date, and so on.
• Identification of the changes or updates that were introduced to the product.
• Tracking of points of time where changes or updates were introduced.
• Definition of activities, responsibilities, and necessary tools and their use for updates 
and changes in the product.
• Introducing controls and tests to the product after changes or updates.
• Definition of release activities after update or changes.
• Definitions of the necessary documented information to support the configuration 
management.
Documented Information for Enabling Traceability and Identification
Where traceability is a requirement (thus affects the quality of the product), it is nec-
essary to retain the documented information for enabling traceability. The objective 
of the records is allowing the organization the ability to relate a unique product to 
its historical information. In plain words, when you sample a product with a serial 
number, for example, it will be possible to identify information about the product, its 
realization, and its version and track its records and data effectively. So, by review-
ing a single product, one can trace back (through a logical link with identifiers and 
numbers) all the records related to the realization of the product. Examples for such 
records are as follows:
• Tags
• Tickets
• Stickers
• Packages
• Signs
• Forms
• Labels
• Shipping documents
• Marks
• Barcodes
• Stamps
• Etiquettes
• Quality protocols
The type of record and its application on the product shall be defined in accordance 
with the nature of the product, and the application will not harm the product or 
 

314
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
its intended use. This documented information shall maintain several types of data 
and information:
• General information about the product, for example:
• Identification number
• Title
• Information regarding the realization of the product, for example:
• Batch/lot number
• Serial number
• Dates like validity date
• Regulatory or statutory requirements
• Information about changes, updates, or configurations, for example:
• Version of the product
• Revision status
• Records of change history
Which situations may require documented information?
• When identification and traceability of parts or materials that are used to realize 
the product or activities that constitute the service are critical to the quality of the 
product, define the necessary documented information to trace and identify them.
• When the process environment may affect the quality of the product and must be 
traceable, the organization shall define which documented information will support 
this traceability.
• When traceability is a requirement and the organization distributes the products 
through distributers, they will maintain the appropriate documented information 
to support this traceability.
• When localization of the product is required for its realization, traceability may 
include data and information such as addresses and contact details, for example, in 
services where it is required to know where the product is situated.
• When it is required to identify process outputs before they are submitted to another 
process, the appropriate records shall accompany the process outputs.
These records are to be protected from unauthorized modifications and be submitted 
to the control of documented information as suggested in clause 7.5—Documented 
information.
8.5.3  Property Belonging to Customers or External Providers
Property belonging to customers or external providers refers to objects that were pro-
vided to the organization without charges and must be used in the realization of the 
end product. Property belonging to customers or external providers must be handled 
with care, cautioun, and responsibility. Such property may play a vital role in the real-
ization of the product and may gravely influence the later production stages and qual-
ity of the product. The organization must take the necessary precautions in order to 
preserve this property. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall handle customer or external provider property while it is 
under the organization’s control or being used by the organization, with care, cau-
tion, and consideration of predefined requirements.
 

315
Operation
• The organization shall define a method for the identification and verification of 
 customer or external provider property.
• The organization shall define activities and controls for the protection and safety of 
customer or external provider property.
• The organization must define communication channels with the customer or the 
external provider to notify them when its property has been damaged, lost, or found 
unsuitable for use.
• The organization shall retain documented information regarding the  communication 
with the customer or external provider.
• Note—customer’s or external provider’s property can include materials, compo-
nents, tools and equipment, premises, intellectual property, and personal data.
Property Belonging to Customers or External Providers
Property belonging to customers or external providers refers to property, for exam-
ple, goods, authorization to use premises, or data, that were delivered cost-free to 
the organization for further processing: for use during the realization processes, 
for incorporating into the product, or for the support of realization processes. The 
owner of this property is the customer or the external provider. The requirement 
applies for anything that they provide:
• Raw materials or components supplied for inclusion in the product
• Packaging materials
• Products supplied for service, repair, maintenance, or upgradation
• Products supplied for further processing (e.g., coating or painting)
• Design and development tools and software that the customer lent for a defined 
period of time
• Production tools, molds, and equipment delivered for work
• Monitoring and measuring tools and equipment for the measurements of particular 
products
• Knowledge in any form or kind and on any media or carrier
• Goods that are stored for consignation
• Software provided to the organization (e.g., terminal to the supplier’s system)
• Diagrams, product plans, and technical specifications
• Customer’s intellectual property
• Customer’s or supplier’s premises when a service or installation is provided on the 
premises of the customer, including the use of customer’s facilities and information
• Customer’s property that has been delivered to the organization for service activities
• Personal data or confidential information
• Trade secret information
• Intellectual property such as texts, patents, or professional contents
Agreement
The most effective way to define the scope, conditions, restrictions, and requirements 
regarding property belonging to customers or external providers is to limit the issue 
within a contract or an agreement signed by the organization and its partner. This will 
ensure that both sides have reviewed the matter and the requirements; have defined 
 

316
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
the needs, controls, and activities; and have reached an understanding regarding the 
care and exercise of property. This agreement may also appear on the purchase order 
or customer order as defined text blocks.
Verification of Property
The organization shall define acceptance and verification activities of property 
belonging to customers or external providers. Once the property enters the organiza-
tion, these activities will be carried out, and a documented approval will be produced. 
The objective is to create control of incoming property before it is submitted for the 
realization processes. If problems arise, they could be detected earlier. For each type 
of property, the organization shall define a specific incoming test. The definition shall 
relate to issues such as
• Responsibility: for each type of property, a responsible party shall be assigned for 
the control and verification. Naturally, the responsibilities shall be assigned accord-
ing to the type and nature of the property.
• Compatibility of the delivery: The first test would be to examine that the expected or 
agreed goods are really what was delivered.
• Quantity: An examination of quantity will be defined.
• Intactness after transportation: An inspection is required for the verification that 
nothing was damaged during transportation.
This test shall be documented on designated forms or checklists. Fulfilling this 
requirement would save you a lot of controversies later on.
Identifying the Property
All properties belonging to customers or external providers must be identified 
throughout the organization premises, and for each type of property, it is required to 
define the type of identification. The method for identification shall be determined 
according to the nature and characteristics of the goods. How you shall identify the 
property may vary according to the following cases:
• If you are managing a customer’s mold for plastic injection, a tag or a sign that will 
be visible on the mold can be applied.
• If you are saving a technical diagram on the company’s server, it is required that you 
identify the folder where it is filed.
• When this diagram is printed out, it shall carry identification details enough to 
assign it to a specific customer.
• If the customer delivered the diagram without details, you may add a staple or write 
it by hand.
• When you manage for each customer a different product with different item num-
ber, the product number on the diagram may serve as an identifier.
Protection and Preservation of Property
The organization shall plan and implement protection measures for property belong-
ing to customers or external providers in order to safeguard it from any harm, danger, 
 

317
Operation
or potential danger. Dangers for property may come in various manners and cases. In 
order to fulfill these requirements, a few measures will be initiated:
• Capturing specific requirements for handling the property, such as instructions for 
use, treatment, storage, or maintenance
• Defining specific requirements for internal or external transportation
• Identifying risks that the property may be exposed to while being stored, realized, or used
These requirements could be critical, for example, when service is provided at the 
customer’s premises. The requirements are to be documented and available to the 
relevant personnel in order to implement and control them effectively. When it is 
required by the customer, the external provider, or a relevant regulation, the organi-
zation shall maintain the proper documented information as evidence.
Storing of Property Belonging to Customers or External Providers
For each type of property, you shall define the storage activities, conditions, and 
controls. In particular, the organization shall review the environmental condi-
tions in which the property is stored. It may be that one will need to evaluate the 
type of goods and conduct a small-scale risk analysis in order to examine which 
environmental conditions may affect the quality and integrity of the products or 
equipment. The customer or the external provider may deliver goods of a new type 
and nature to you that require special conditions. Where maintenance activities 
are required, they will be identified, and I recommend that they should also be 
documented.
It is most applicable when the partner delivers equipment or tools for realizing 
the product, which needs periodical maintenance. In such cases, you need to clear 
the matter with the partner and identify all the maintenance needs. The appropriate 
personnel shall be identified, and the requirements will be made available.
Service Operations
Handling customer property refers also to service and maintenance activities that 
are performed, whether in the organization’s facilities or at the customer’s premises. 
Service is a complex issue with critical implications. It is advised that one conducts a 
review of one’s service activities in order to examine how one may deal with customer 
property and to define the appropriate controls. If products are delivered for service 
and repair, the requirements apply to them too. The property of one’s customers must 
be properly identified, safeguarded, and preserved. The organization must define 
how it shall maintain the requirements:
• If you are operating a service team that visits the customer’s premises, it shall 
 exercise care and caution when handling the product and the surroundings where 
operations are being conducted.
• If you are operating a service center that receives products for service or mainte-
nance, the personnel that operate the center will be introduced to the controls of the 
customer’s property including identification and traceability.
 

318
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Notification to the Customer or the External Provider
The standards demand that one notifies the customer or the external provider in 
cases where their property has been damaged, lost, or found unsuitable for use. The 
matter requires that one develops a communication channel with one’s partner con-
cerning the issue:
• The organization shall maintain the partner’s details needed for the establishment 
of communication: contact person and communication details.
• The organization shall appoint an authorized person for the notification.
• Documented information of this notification and approval of acceptance must be retained.
Notification may be performed with any of the traditional documented communica-
tion tools: fax, mail, and e-mail. Telephone notification alone may not be sufficient 
since one is required to maintain documented information. In which cases are you 
required to notify the partner? The general principle is very clear: where property 
is damaged, lost, or found unsuitable for use. However, the question is as follows: 
Which actions or activities may create such situations? These include
• Damages that occurred as a result of transportation activities
• Delivery from the partner of wrong goods or wrong quantity
• Delivery from the partner of defective property
• Quality problems that occurred vis-à-vis the goods or goods that do not meet the 
requirements
• Goods or property with expired validity date
• Goods that require rework
• Damages that occurred during the realization processes or storage
• Safety issues (property was harmed or stolen)
The ISO 9001 Standard requires retaining documented information that describes 
the occurrence and provides information that judged the property to be unsuit-
able for use. An effective way will be to deal with such cases like a nonconformity 
and to submit the occurrence to the process of handling nonconformities. Sufficient 
 documentation will follow naturally.
8.5.4  Preservation
Preservation refers to the conformity and integrity of the product. The requirements 
for preservation of products are valid to all realization processes and span the time the 
materials or parts are received in the organization and continue to when the product 
is delivered to the customer or maintained at the customer’s premises, and in some 
cases the control may extend to service and maintenance activities. The ISO 9001 
Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall act to preserve process outputs during the realization or 
the service provision.
• The preservation of process outputs shall ensure their conformity to the requirements.
• Note: Preservation can include identification, handling, contamination control, 
packaging, storage, transmission or transportation, and protection.
 

319
Operation
Preservation of Product or Service
Controlling and maintaining preservation of the product deals with the identifica-
tion and management of all factors that may adversely affect the product, its con-
stituents, or the operations of service provided: personnel, infrastructures, or work 
environment. Damages may occur due to realization processes, transportations, stor-
age, time deterioration, service activities, or other harmful factors, such as
• Mechanical factors: movement, vibration, shock, or abrasion
• Cleanliness factors: segregation from other products, dust, and particles
• Environmental factors: corrosion, temperature variation, electrostatic discharge, or 
radiation
• Human factors: handling the products without care or improperly
The organization is to provide instructional requirements for product preservation. 
The requirements for the preservation shall be planned in accordance with the nature 
of the product, its components, or the work processes and will:
• Identify products that are required to be preserved or areas that are required to be 
controlled
• Identify responsibilities and authorities
• Determine necessary trainings and qualifications
• Describe activities for preservation
• Create necessary documentation to support those requirements
• Define the requirements for records and evidence that preservation activities are 
being performed when the preservation is critical to the quality of the product
Reference to Risk-Based Thinking
When planning the activities for product preservation, the organization must refer 
the outputs of risk-based thinking and implement the suggested controls and preven-
tive measures in order to reduce risks related to product preservation.
External Interested Parties
All of the requirements mentioned in this clause are applicable to external parties that 
may take part in the product realization. These parties are obligated to implement the 
required activities, use the documentation, and provide the appropriate records:
• Suppliers of services, processes, storage, or transportation
• Distributors that store, provide services, or transport and deliver the product
• Customers that use the product temporarily (e.g., renting)
Storage Activities
The storage of the product will prevent mix-ups, contamination, or any other adverse 
effects that may harm it or its characteristics. Storage requirements shall relate to all 
materials, parts, components, packages, and accessories related to the realization of 
the product and that may affect its quality.
 

320
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Storage may be implemented using segregation areas, special areas, and the iden-
tification of products and products’ usability status. Where required, environmental 
control systems shall be installed. When storage is outsourced and the organization 
uses suppliers, their services and activities must be included under this control and 
the measure shall be implemented at their premises too. The suppliers must provide 
evidence that they have followed all the requirements. The storage conditions must be 
defined, and the following issues shall be referred to:
• Work environment and storage parameters such as temperature, humidity, cleanli-
ness, and dust (particles count) shall be defined and, when necessary, documented.
• The storage facilities will not harm the product and will provide it with sufficient pro-
tection to preserve its characteristics (i.e., intended use, functionality,  performance, 
and safety).
• Special tools or equipment required for the storage of different types of parts, com-
ponents, or materials shall be defined and allocated.
When necessary, documentation of those requirements shall be defined and distrib-
uted to the right persons at the right process stages, for example, printing on a receiv-
ing slip the storage instructions of incoming goods. When possible you may demand 
such instructions from the supplier.
Packaging
Packaging activities, operations, and conditions must be verified in order to ensure 
that they do not harm the product or influence its quality. For example, when you 
are packaging the product in a container, you are required to prove compatibility 
between the container and the product; that is, perform a test that the container does 
not harm it or alter its characteristics. In some cases the matter must be validated and 
supported with evidences. The organization is required to implement controls and 
verify that the product is packed according to specifications. These tests are normally 
done and verified during the design and development stages. But still, it may be that 
the customer requires a new form of packaging that has not been verified.
Security, Safety, and Protection
Product or their constituents may be exposed to external factors, which are not part of 
the realization processes like theft or damage from unauthorized persons. Security and 
protection of the product must be defined, and appropriate measures and definitions 
shall ensure the safety of the product. Activities such as handling of product, compo-
nents, materials, and all other items related to the product that may affect its quality 
including controlled access to products and safety measures shall be implemented:
• Identification of devices, components, parts, or materials is needed in order to indi-
cate their usability status and allow the implementation of suitable preservation 
measures.
• Authorization and access to the products, components, parts, or materials shall be 
defined and implemented according to organizational rules.
 

321
Operation
• Safety measures shall be taken regarding storage facilities.
• Protection measures to preserve the product during realization processes are 
required.
• When required, documented information shall be maintained: definitions of the 
measures and evidence for practicing.
Transportation
Transportation conditions must be defined and documented. Preservation of the 
product during transportation means undertaking all necessary measures in order 
to protect the product and its package and preserve their characteristics:
• The product, its characteristics, quality, and package shall be protected from exter-
nal factors during transportation.
• Special tools, equipment, or accessories required for transportation activities shall 
be defined and controlled.
• Only certified employees may perform certain transportation activities using desig-
nated tools and equipment (cranes, forklift, etc.).
Transportation refers to external transportation, such as by air, sea, and land, as 
well as internal, that is, performed within the premises of the organization (as by 
forklift, or between processes). Each transportation type shall be analyzed, and 
suitable actions and activities shall be planned. Requirements for certification may 
appear on work instructions. The definitions shall be appropriate to the nature of 
the product.
Products with a Limited Shelf Life
Special attention shall be given to products with limited shelf life. The objective is 
to eliminate the use and distribution of products whose characteristics have been 
damaged or altered. The characteristics and quality of products with an expiry date 
deteriorate over time. Such products have a defined period of life with an exact date 
indicating when the status of the product changes and the product can no longer 
be used, in other words the exact date on which the product is declared as noncon-
forming. From this date on, the product shall be treated, handled, and disposed of 
according to one’s specifications of control of nonconforming products, as required 
in clause 10.2—Nonconformity and corrective action.
This requirement refers to products that the organization produces and realizes 
as well as purchased goods stored in the organization facilities (that have a limited 
lifetime). These products will be identified, indicated, and treated with different mea-
sures. In practice the organization shall make sure that
• Those products are identified
• Effective controls, activities, or operations over these products are implemented
• The usability of those products is evaluated before submission to realization
• When the product is no longer valid, it is notified to the person who needs it, an 
activity is taken to alter the status of the product, and it will be disqualified for use 
or distribution (as a nonconforming product)
 

322
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When necessary documented information shall be maintained. The documentation 
may appear on a procedure or a work instruction and shall include and describe spe-
cific control activities. When necessary evidences and records will be defined to assist 
and maintain this control. Types of possible evidences include
• Labeling on the products
• A designated log for the product
• An inventory or stock management system with management of characteristics
When the product is distributed or delivered by an agent of the organization or 
 distributors, they must follow these requirements:
• The appropriate requirements and documentation shall be available to them, or they 
will maintain similar requirements.
• They shall provide the organization with evidence that these requirements have 
been applied.
Products with Special Storage Conditions
Special reference shall be given to products requiring special storage conditions. 
These are products whose characteristics or qualities might deteriorate due to a 
failure to provide them with specific and defined storage conditions; thus, the sta-
tus of these products changes and their use is forbidden. In other words, failing to 
comply with these specifications may result in a situation where the product will be 
nonconforming; and since the organization cannot allow such a situation, it must 
ensure the implementation of all necessary measures in order to create the optimal 
conditions and, of course, provide suitable evidences. The requirements refer to 
products that the organization produces and realizes as well as purchased goods 
stored in the organization facilities. The requirements refer to materials, parts, 
components, or packages. These products will be identified, indicated, and treated 
with different measures.
Special conditions may be required during the storage, realization processes, 
or transportation activities. These conditions and their controls are normally 
defined during the design and development stages. When planning activities for 
handling special storage condition, the organization shall refer to the following 
issues:
• Such products shall be identified.
• The special storage conditions shall be defined.
• Measures in order to provide these conditions shall be planned and implemented.
• Tools, equipment, or facilities necessary for maintaining these conditions shall be 
identified and allocated.
• Effective control activities for ensuring these conditions shall be planned and 
implemented.
When necessary, documented information shall be maintained and may appear 
on a procedure or work instruction. The documentation is to include and describe 
 

323
Operation
specific control activities. Records and evidence of maintaining the requirements 
shall be kept:
• Environmental conditions
• Performance of activities
When deviations or departures from these conditions are identified, the product 
shall be reevaluated and the usability status reexamined. The examination may be 
performed according to specified criteria or designated quality tests (e.g., worst case 
scenarios). The reevaluation shall be documented and records shall be maintained.
When the product is distributed or delivered by agents of the organization or dis-
tributors, they must also follow these requirements:
• The appropriate documentation shall be available to them or they will maintain 
similar documented requirements.
• They shall provide the manufacturer with evidence that these requirements were 
applied.
8.5.5  Post-Delivery Activities
The realization of the product may not be completed with the delivery of the goods 
or the services to the customer and may require further actions. These actions are 
referred by the standard as post-delivery activities and include operations like main-
tenance plan, support, or service contracts. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements 
include the following:
• The organization shall meet requirements for post-delivery activities associated 
with the products and the services.
• While identifying the requirements and planning the activities for post-delivery 
activities, the organization shall refer to the following issues:
• Statutory and regulatory requirements
• The nature, use, and expected lifetime of the product or the service
• The potential undesired consequences associated with its products and services
• Customer requirements
• Customer feedback
• Note—post-delivery activities may refer to activities that are considered under war-
ranty, contractual obligations, maintenance engagements, and additional activities 
such as disposal and recycling.
Definition and Planning of Post-Delivery Activities
The first operation performed on the product after its delivery to the customer is 
regarded as a post-delivery activity. While managing and controlling those activi-
ties, the organization shall plan and provide an overall description of the actions 
to be carried out including the sequence of events. The objective is to provide rep-
resentatives of the organization, for example, a service technician, with detailed 
specifications regarding what has to be done in certain events, conditions, and cases 
 

324
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
concerning a product or one of its constituents. The organization shall plan and 
implement a process for managing the post-delivery activities. This process has the 
following goals:
• Clear identification of the product that comes under post-delivery activities
• Identification and analysis of the need for post-delivery activity (e.g., periodic main-
tenance, warranty claim, service, malfunction, or disorder)
• Planning of the activity
• Identifying the events, conditions, or business cases in which these activities are 
required
• Verification or validation of the activity
• Informing the customer of requirements for post-delivery activities when such are 
not known to the customer but are necessary for the specified intended use
• Documenting and reporting
The planning of the activities shall refer to the following issues:
• Identification of the product that is under the post-delivery activity.
• The definition of responsible personnel to perform the activities, including required 
qualifications.
• Planning and specifying the activities according to events (e.g., periodic service or 
required maintenance).
• The definition of accessibility to the product, with locations or the need for 
authorizations.
• Indicating the necessary documentation, such as technical specifications, drawings, 
plans, or user manuals.
• Identifying relevant regulatory requirements that may dictate certain activities.
• The specifications of tools and equipment that are required to be used during the 
activities.
• The acceptance of validations and verification of the activities.
• Ensuring product preservation; the product features will not be harmed during the 
activities.
• Ensuring preservation of property belonging to the customers or external providers.
• Defining the need to provide training associated with the specific post-delivery 
activity.
• Reference to relevant documented information needed to support these post- delivery 
activities.
Types of post-delivery activities include the following:
• Service
• Maintenance
• Actions under warranty provisions
• Supplementary services such as recycling or final disposal
• Product modifications or updates
• Help desk
• Support of any kind
• Trainings
 

325
Operation
Responsible Parties
Since the post-delivery activities such as service or maintenance can be complex 
and may have implications, for each activity the personnel that will perform it must 
be defined with the required qualifications. Naturally, the suitable trainings will be 
defined in the QMS, as required in clause 7.2—Competence—and incorporated into 
the training program.
When the service or maintenance is performed by a third party (the customer 
or supplier), the organization must define in detail which post-delivery activities 
are expected and provide them with the necessary documentations answering the 
requirements mentioned earlier. When the organization is outsourcing the service 
activities, it is the organization’s responsibility to control and verify it. Thus, it is 
required that the organization train the supplier appropriately in order to qualify and 
control its services. The performance of the supplier during the service activities will 
be evaluated and included in the general evaluation of the suppliers, as required in 
clause 8.4.2—Type and extent of control. The supplier is obligated to perform all the 
service requirements as specified by the organization and to provide the necessary 
evidence and process validations.
Time Intervals for Service and Post-Delivery Activities
The intervals for carrying out post-delivery activities such as service or maintenance 
are to be defined for each product, part, component, or service. The definition for the 
period may be
• An output of the design and development stages
• Instructions of the supplier from whom the organization purchased the product
• Instruction of a third party for which the organization provides services as a 
subcontractor
The definition shall refer to the identification of the product; required service or main-
tenance activities; documentation of the date when the activity was performed, for 
example, when the service was delivered; and schedule for the next activity. Another 
way to define it is to maintain a service or maintenance plan. The performance of the 
periodic service activity shall be visible on the product, for example, like a sticker 
with the date of the service, identity of the person that performed it, and the date of 
the next service.
Status Identification
During post-delivery activities (service or maintenance), an indication regarding the 
usability of the product will be determined, that is, whether it is usable, in repair, or 
defective. The status will be clear to all users, that is, on a location or with means where 
all users may view it. It is also possible to deactivate or disable only a part, or a function, 
of the product as long as the intended use, functionality, performance, and safety are not 
affected; but do not forget to identify the status. When necessary the action of deactivat-
ing only a part of the product shall be planned, reviewed, approved, and documented by 
an authorized person before allowing a service employee to perform the deactivation.
 

326
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Service and maintenance activities may create defective parts or devices. Therefore, 
it is required that you initiate the interface between the service and control of non-
conforming products.
The Nature, Use, and Expected Lifetime of the Product or the Service
The post-delivery activities are decided according to the nature, use, and expected 
lifetime of the product or the service. Here the organization must identify in which 
situations or conditions the post-delivery activities are critical or necessary for main-
taining the expected lifetime of the product and initiate those activities. What types 
of cases may we encounter?
• Cases where the organization must complete the realization activities after the product 
was delivered to the customer, for example, configuring the product after installation
• Cases where a periodic service or maintenance is necessary in order to ensure the 
functionality and intended use of the product, for example, a periodic service for a 
lift that ensures its safety
Those activities are to be
• Planned, for example, on a quality or maintenance plan
• Communicated to the customer, for example, on a contract or an order (see clause 8.2.3—
Review of the requirements for products and services)
• Scheduled
• Recorded or documented as documented information
Reference to Regulatory and Statutory Requirements
When national or local regulations require a specific activity to be carried out or spe-
cific data to be recorded during the post-delivery activities, this requirement will be 
implemented and the coverage of required data will be incorporated into the activi-
ties. Regulatory and statutory requirements, in the context of post-delivery, aim to 
mitigate ill effects that may result from post-delivery activities. For example, in the 
medical branch, such requirements refer to special reporting in case of malfunctions 
or disorders in the medical device, or when its performance might pose a hazard to 
users or patients when such are detected during service or maintenance activities.
During the planning of the activities you will need to identify which requirements 
are dictated by national, regional or international regulations and apply to your product, 
and to implement the demands into one’s post-delivery processes: what information is 
to be gathered, how the information will be forwarded, and the subjects of the report.
Potential Undesired Consequences
Post-delivery activities may be associated with risks concerning the use of the prod-
uct or its handling after delivery: a service, repair, or maintenance may affect the 
product directly or their components and thus affect its functionality. Therefore, 
the risks during the post-delivery activities are to be reviewed and addressed. In 
other words, it is necessary to analyze and understand how post-delivery activities 
 

327
Operation
including service and maintenance may cause nonconformities. The results of this 
review are the appropriate controls to be implemented, for example, user manuals, 
trainings, or web page support online. These controls will be reviewed and approved 
by authorized personnel.
In practice, I recommend that each post-delivery activity will be reviewed by an 
appropriate employee in order to validate and verify it. Thus you may ensure that 
certain activities will not affect the product or other components, parts, or processes 
in the product. The evaluation of the activity will be cross-referenced and will include 
all relevant aspects of the product.
What quality tools do we have in order to control potential undesired consequences?
• Verification—verification is necessary to ensure that all the required post-delivery 
activities were performed by the appropriate person, on the appointed time, and on 
the designated product. In case of service or maintenance activities, for example, a 
sticker will be placed on the product indicating that maintenance was performed 
along with the next schedule for treatment. The sticker is a classic quality record. 
A checklist specifying all the necessary actions is also acceptable for verification. 
The verification will be documented.
• Validation—validation, on the other hand, is to ensure that after post-delivery 
activities have been carried out, the product still functions according to its require-
ments, that is, intended use, functionality, performance, and safety. This is more 
complex. In order to ensure its effectivity, plan a validation test for every service 
activity. Measurement procedures and material references will help. The functional-
ity of the product must be validated after the service activities. The validation will be 
documented. I refer to chapter 8.5.1 paragraph Validation and periodic validation 
for more details on how to implement validation effectively.
• Monitoring and measuring devices—in some cases monitoring and measuring 
devices are used to measure outputs of processes during the post-delivery activi-
ties such as service and maintenance activities. These devices must be calibrated 
and controlled. Their use will be documented in order to prove their compatibility. 
Documentation may indicate their traceability, for example, an internal number 
and serial number. In this manner, you prove that the monitoring and measuring 
devices were qualified during use.
Updates and Product Modifications
Modification of the product or a part of it may influence its functionality, its intended 
use, and its safety or may cause negative implications on the quality of the product. 
When post-delivery activities create a change or modification in the product, you 
will need to evaluate the implication on the product and control, verify, and validate 
that the functionality, intended use, and safety were not affected by the change. For 
example, an update of software may bring new functionalities or improve others 
and must be appropriately communicated to the customer. Management of prod-
uct configuration is an effective tool for controlling such changes or updates and 
was discussed in detail in chapter 8.5.2—Identification and traceability. This topic 
was also discussed in chapter 8.3.6—Design and development changes—where the 
evaluation of changes in the product and their implications must be identified and 
 

328
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
controlled. Those outputs of the requirements mentioned earlier (8.3.6 and 8.5.2) 
should be incorporated into the post-delivery activities.
Reference to Customer Requirements
Some post-delivery activities shall be planned according to customer demands for 
operations after the product was already delivered. Those requirements were referred 
to while reviewing the requirements for products and services (clause 8.2.3) where the 
organization is required to confirm that it has the ability to perform those require-
ments before forwarding the request for realization. The bottom line—before you are 
realizing post-delivery activities that are required by the customer, you must ensure 
the following issues:
• When post-delivery activities are part of the product or service or the customer 
demands them, they shall be reviewed.
• The organization shall review the requirements for post-delivery activities prior to 
the engagement with customer.
• The organization shall ensure that differences between the specifications  conveyed 
by the customer and the actual requirements submitted to the customer are settled.
• The organization shall ensure that the requirements for post-delivery activities are 
defined, clear, and understood.
• When the customer does not provide documented requirements or specifica-
tions, the organization must obtain an approval before acceptance (performing the 
activities).
• The results of the review shall be maintained as documented information (accord-
ing to clause 8.2.3).
• Where and when new requirements for post-delivery arise from the review, they 
shall be maintained as documented information (according to clause 8.2.3).
• Where the customer is responsible for certain activities, they will be clearly defined, 
for example, allowing access to certain locations or information or preparing for the 
post-delivery activities.
These requirements are supposed to be available in QMS on tenders, contracts, or 
order conformations. The most effective way to handle this requirement is to transfer 
information from those tenders, contracts, orders, or changes to contracts or orders 
to the quality plan or post-delivery plan (maintenance or service plan).
Reference to Customer Feedback
Post-delivery activities such as service maintenance or warranty claims are to be used 
as a means of identifying quality problems in the product related to the postproduction 
phases. The issue relates indirectly to clause 8.2.1—Customer communication—where 
it is required to obtain customer feedback relating to products and services and collect-
ing data and information regarding the use and performance of the product through 
the planning of communication channels. Data and records related to the post- delivery 
activities are one way to reach this goal. During the post-delivery activities, one is 
required to document the problems or events, the causes or factors, and the correc-
tive or preventive measures that were carried out. One may manage the maintenance 
 

329
Operation
history of a product. The following details for records are just a suggestion and may be 
incorporated on a format that will gather the following feedback information:
• The unique identification of the product (product number and characteristics such 
as serial number where it is applicable)
• The identification of post-delivery activity (e.g., service call number, service ticket 
number) and date of service
• Identity of the personnel who performed the activities
• The identity of the contact person at the customer’s premises who received the service
• A description of the activities that were performed
• Identification of designated tools or equipment used to perform the activity, such as 
measuring and monitoring devices (for traceability needs)
• A list of parts or components that were repaired, maintained, or replaced, including 
identifiers such as model, catalog numbers, serial numbers, or batch numbers
• The tests and inspections that confirmed that the post-delivery activity achieved its 
objective (verification or validation)
• Description of how and where the product or the service did not meet its intended 
use or specifications and the events that brought about this situation
Communication with the Customer
The organization must develop and maintain a process, an interface, and a commu-
nication channel between the different interested parties of the organization (internal 
such as service teams as well as external such as subcontractors) and the organization 
itself. The goal of this process is to enable the reporting of problems and issues that 
were identified during post-delivery activities or were reported by the customers. The 
methods for the communication shall be planned according to the nature of work of 
those interested parties:
• Identifying the internal and external parties that are involved in post-delivery activ-
ities and their particular needs
• Identifying resources available to address communication
• Identifying and selecting possible communication methods
Here I will refer to clause 8.2.1—Customer communication—where one is required 
to define and establish communication channels between customers and the orga-
nization regarding post-delivery, among other issues. With respect to service and 
maintenance, the organization needs to define communication channels, interfaces, 
and processes covering both transmission of information and execution of activities:
• Transmission of information: definition of how a customer may contact the orga-
nization or service provider in case of need, for example, via e-mail, fax, telephone 
call, and company website, and which information must be gathered or shared in 
order to provide efficient service or maintenance.
• Execution of activities: definition of how the provider can access the customers in 
order to perform the activities, for example, in-person visits, service center where 
the product is delivered for repair, and telephone support.
• It may be that the organization will have to initiate contact with the customer when 
maintenance for the product is periodically required.
 

330
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When a contract or an agreement for customer support services exists, the organiza-
tion shall ensure the following issues:
• Identify which organizational units are involved; it may be that not only the cus-
tomer support is taking part in the processes or the services but also units that are 
responsible for the realization of the product.
• Identify all the resources that are necessary and available for managing customer 
service applications.
• Plan and arrange training for the involved persons of how the processes, operations, 
and activities of the service are to be performed.
Issues to be addressed are as follows:
• Planning of service routes or courses
• Requirement for training users of the product
• Management of supply of spare parts
• Technical support
• Verifying qualification of employees
Documented Information for Post-Delivery Activities
There is no specific requirement for maintaining and retaining documented infor-
mation for the post-delivery activities, but when such documented information may 
influence the quality of the product and the achievement of customer requirements, 
one may need to manage it. In other words, it is up to one to decide whether docu-
mented information is required. If one is managing the documented information, 
it will be made available to the relevant parties in the appropriate places and at the 
right times or events.
The objectives of the documented information are as follows:
• To provide the ability and means to perform post-delivery activities according to 
a plan
• To prove that post-delivery activities were performed as planned and the results are 
satisfying
Relevant parties may be members of the organization like service technicians as well 
as the customers. An appropriate place can be the company’s server, help module on 
the user’s application, technical files, web pages, accompanying documentation for 
technicians, and service manuals for customers. The right time or event is the defini-
tion of the use case in which the documentation is to be used. The documentation 
may include
• Procedures
• Work instructions
• Reference material
• Troubleshooting documents
• Reference measurement procedures
• Quality plan
 

331
Operation
Evidences of post-delivery activities may be required when it is needed to prove that 
the activities have been done according to a predefined plan and were verified, con-
trolled, and accepted and the product is approved for use.
The history or log of post-delivery activities of the product plays an important role 
when servicing or maintaining it. The history describes the functionality and perfor-
mance of the product concerning its intended use. Thus, the history of servicing and 
maintenance is to be documented and managed.
8.5.6  Control of Changes
Clause 8.5.6 refers to changes that may occur in the controlled conditions of the real-
ization or service provision and which the organization is committed to provide. The 
objective is ensuring quality requirements after changes have been submitted to the 
realization or service provision. It is important to understand how the change may 
affect or impact other aspects or conditions of the realization and to react accordingly. 
Such monitoring should enable the organization to identify, assess, and manage the 
changes in the conditions of the realization. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements 
include the following:
• The organization shall review and control changes for production or service provision.
• The control and review shall ensure continuing conformity with requirements.
• The organization shall retain documented information describing
• The results of the review on changes
• The person or persons authorizing the change
• Any necessary actions arising from the review
Understanding the Changes in Conditions for Realization
Clause 8.5.6—Control of changes—deals specifically with changes that relate to the 
conditions of the production and service provision, in other words those conditions 
that affect the operations and activities that consist of the production or the provision 
of service of the product. Such changes may influence the interaction between pro-
cesses or activities and the workflow between the different related areas in the orga-
nization and affect the specifications of the product. Thus, such a sequence of events 
may affect the quality of the product. When planning and executing the realization 
of the product, one provides certain inputs to a process:
• Materials or components
• Technology
• Knowledge
• DI
• Resources
• Work methods
• Human resources
• Infrastructures
• Process environment
 

332
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When the realization begins, respectively, when you process the inputs, they are 
going through the process stages. Each process stage uses its necessary inputs (men-
tioned earlier). The end result is process outputs according to a specification. When 
one of those conditions is unexpectedly changed, for example, a breakdown of infra-
structures, absence of employees, or delivery failure from one of the suppliers, it will 
have implications on the final result of the process, and the goal of clause 8.5.6 is to 
control and manage those changes.
Identifying What Was Changed
Change is regarded as any modification to an element or to a combination of several 
elements that may affect the realization and thus the quality of the product or the ser-
vice or the ability of the organization to realize the product or the service according 
to the specifications. There are two types of changes:
• Proactive changes—changes that are planned. In such cases the organization shall 
control the changes that are implemented as planned.
• Reactive changes—changes that are being under taken in reaction to a change of 
situation or of conditions. For such changes, the organization shall review whether 
the consequences of the unintended changes impact the process or the product.
The proactive changes to the QMS and for the realization of the product will be 
addressed according to the requirements in clause 6.3—Planning of changes. The 
requirement of clause 8.5.6 deals with the reaction to unplanned changes—changes 
that were forced upon the organization—and the organization did not have the time 
to plan them and assess their impact. While controlling these unplanned changes, 
one reviews and assesses consequences that may occur after the change has been 
enforced. Possible reasons for changes are as follows:
• Changes requested by customer or dictated by the business environment.
• Update of regulatory or statutory requirements may mandate changes to the prod-
uct or its realization.
• Technological changes may bring changes to the realization of the product.
• A key process indicator may indicate the need for changes in the realization.
• Corrective actions as a response to nonconformities.
• Changes originating from risk assessment, for example, risks related to changes in 
technology.
• Changes referring to specification or expectations of external providers or relation-
ship with external provider.
• Changes in external documented information such as standards, technical specifi-
cations, or procedures.
Which process elements might be changed?
• New specification for the product due to customer request
• New materials or components that are submitted to a process
• Qualification of personnel that are realizing the product or providing the service
• New technology that is being used during the realization
 

333
Operation
• Lack of knowledge (due to changes in personnel)
• Update of documented information
• New resources or replacement of resources due to a breakdown
• Applying new work methods
• Changes in human resources due to absence
• Changes in infrastructures due to breakdown or malfunction
• Changes in the process environment
Reviewing of a Change
Changes in the conditions of the realization may affect the process and the process out-
puts and may have implications on the end result of the process and the quality of the final 
product. The intensity or effect of a change depends upon the nature and complexity of the 
related element, process, or its output. The organization is required to review and control 
the changes to the extent necessary to ensure continuing conformity with requirements. 
In order to determine the extent necessary to ensure continuing conformity with require-
ments, one must understand how the change may affect the product and its  conformity. 
What does it mean to ensure continuing conformity with requirements?
• The change will not affect the quality and requirements of the product—process 
outputs, after the change was applied, still meet the predefined requirements.
• The change will not affect the integrity (the state of being complete or whole) of the 
process or the realization.
• The change will still enable the organization to meet the needs and expectations of 
interested parties.
Reviewing the change shall address the following process aspects:
• Inputs—does the change have any influence on process inputs? Are there any new 
inputs? Which documented information supporting the process is needed to be 
amended (where procedures, diagrams, work instructions, or forms are influenced) 
or amended (where records are affected)? How will these new inputs be transmitted?
• Does the change have any influence on tools and instruments and resources that are 
already being used in the process? Do these process elements have the capacity to 
support the new situation in the first place?
• What is the influence on activities? Do current activities need to be changed?
• Do any verifications or validations need to be changed as well?
• Were the risks relevant to the change and were the impacts of the change on other 
product or product realization elements addressed? It is important to understand 
the impact of the change on other elements involved in the realization.
• What are the new process outputs that resulted from this change?
• Are the actions required to implement the change carried out? Planned processes 
and activities, their sequences, and the interactions between them necessary to 
carry out the change must be reviewed.
• Were all the elements involved in the process where the change takes place reviewed? 
Is it necessary to identify all the elements that are involved and their interrelations 
in order to understand the influences of the change?
• Was the change communicated to all relevant participants of the process such as 
employees, external providers, and, when necessary, customers?
 

334
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In order to evaluate the effect of change, one must have access to supporting data 
and information before and after the changes were applied. When a change is known 
to be implemented in the realization, I would use my existing quality tools to help in 
the review:
• Results of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation that will indicate 
whether process outputs still meet their requirements, for example, verifications of 
process results or validation of process outputs will indicate whether a change has 
affected the process or its ability to provide conformed outputs.
• I would initiate a process audit and evaluate whether the change still receives its 
needed conditions and practices its requirements and whether the ability of the 
changed process to achieve its goals is still maintained.
• Feedback from interested parties may provide indications whether their expecta-
tions are still being met after the change was implemented.
Retaining Documented Information
The organization must retain documented information regarding the review of the 
change. The documented information shall include
• Results of reviewing the change—here one will need to document whether the 
change achieves its objectives or not.
• Identity of the person that authorized the change—the goal here is to ensure that 
persons with the appropriate competence reviewed and authorized the change, for 
example, the process owner and head of the department, but bear in mind that the 
authority should be available to react and authorize the change quickly without the 
need to wait too long for its authorization.
• Documentation of actions that were derived from the change and its review.
To make the documented information practical and not complicated, you will need to 
integrate such documented information in your daily operations, which means allow-
ing and training the persons who are operating the process to initiate or at least review 
the change. The authorization will be done by a responsible party. As a matter of fact, 
any documentation that will collect the information mentioned earlier may be suitable:
• The review can be designed as a checklist or questionnaire where all the issues 
 mentioned earlier are listed. But allow space for references or remarks.
• If one is practicing a process audit in the QMS (see chapter 9.1—Monitoring, 
 measurement, analysis and evaluation—paragraph Process audit), one may use this 
method for evaluating the results of the change.
Documented information of any necessary actions arising from the review refers to 
the following cases:
• The objective is achieved and the change can be fully integrated in the QMS—then 
one will need to update documentations, schedule trainings, and so on.
• The objective was not achieved and an improvement is required—then one will need 
to initiate the process once again or submit it for improvement.
 

335
Operation
• The nonconformity was not removed and one must address the issues once 
again—try to implement the change once again with modification or try it 
another way.
• Initiate contingency action (an output of the risk-based thinking), actions that must 
be undertaken in order to respond to unplanned changes or events.
One may incorporate it directly on the same documentation, but I suggest that 
one should refer to the relevant documentation. Each of the three (nonconformity, 
improvement, or change management) is an input to another quality activity.
Changes in the Quality Plan
The quality plan is an ever-changing document and might be impacted by unplanned 
changes. Therefore, it will be submitted to control that will check its accuracy and 
relevancy and will update it when needed. Where processes, operations, or activities 
may be changed over time or where conditions are changed, their relevant documen-
tations such as procedures or instructions as well as relevant resources may need to 
be modified and updated.
These changes must be approved by all relevant parties taking part in the realiza-
tion of the product and who influence the quality of the product. If required, changes 
will be submitted to a confirmation by the customers. In case the quality plan is con-
trolled, it shall be submitted to the control of the documented information including 
as specified in clause 7.5.3—Control of documented Information.
Tracking Changes in the Realization of the Product
I recommend managing traceability of changes. The traceability will allow you to 
take one step back when a change does not achieve its goals or creates a quality prob-
lem. To deploy a change effectively, the organization should
• Identify the relationships between its processes and activities and the sequence and 
interactions of the processes
• Identify the risks that are associated with the change and plan the appropriate 
controls
• Keep track of what was changed or modified in those elements
8.6  Release of Products and Services
Release of the product or service refers to the required activities and their documented 
approval that products or services that are delivered to the customer fully meet their 
requirements. The objective of release activities is to ensure that the realization of the 
product or the service has been successfully completed and that the product or the 
service meets all its requirements and is ready for delivery to the customer. This will 
be done with the definition of final acceptance activities or final release tests, that is, 
activities that will ensure that the product or the service was realized according to 
the requirements and that all controls were implemented and the product meets the 
 

336
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
acceptance criteria. These activities will be supported with records. The ISO 9001 
Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall implement arrangements and activities to verify that product 
and service requirements have been met.
• These activities and arrangements shall take place at the appropriate process stages.
• Release of products and services to the customer shall proceed when the planned 
arrangements have been satisfactorily completed.
• When the planned arrangements have not been completed, the release shall be 
authorized by a relevant authority or by the customer (when applicable).
• The organization shall retain documented information on the release of products 
and services. The documented information shall include
• Evidence of conformity with acceptance criteria
• Traceability to the person that authorized the release
Release of Products and Services to the Customer
Release activities refer to making products or services available for the use of the cus-
tomer. The release activities will examine that the product was assembled or manu-
factured from conformed materials or components, all the necessary operations were 
performed (for goods as well as service provision), the required controls were applied, 
and their results are satisfactory.
The general idea claims that the realization of a product is combined from various 
elements. And at some point of the overall process, before delivery to the customer, 
the organization must stop and review the realization and decide whether the prod-
uct meets its requirements. Thus, releasing a product or service to delivery to the 
customers means
• The realization of the product or provision of the service is completed; the product 
or service went through all the required realization stages and activities.
• Each process was controlled: tested, verified, validated, and approved according to 
specified criteria.
• All the required validation activities and quality tests (for products, parts, and pro-
cesses), during and after the processes, have been completed, and the results are 
satisfactory.
• Actions derived from risk-based thinking have been appropriately implemented.
• The required realization records are completed and available.
• The product is identified, labeled, and packed as specified.
• The product is stored under appropriate conditions.
• The product was transported to the customer as specified.
• All the required records needed to prove that realization is completed.
• Traceability is maintained as specified.
When product or a service operation is updated or modified, their release to the cus-
tomer will be controlled. All the interested parties shall be informed of how to release 
an updated product or service.
 

337
Operation
Actions and Arrangements for Verification of Product 
and Service Requirements
Fulfilling the requirements of clause 8.6 is the definition, planning, and implementa-
tion of arrangements needed to verify that the product and service requirements have 
been met. As mentioned earlier, the organization must, at a certain point of the real-
ization and before the final delivery to the customer, stop and review the realization 
and decide whether the product meets all requirements. This is why the review before 
release must cover all the elements that are involved in the realization of the product 
and may affect its quality. Results of the release activities may differ:
• Release of the product or service for delivery to the customer
• Release under concession for delivery to the customer
• Suspension or quarantine or declaration as scrap of a product
• Transfer to rework
These arrangements shall be integrated in the realization processes at the appro-
priate process stages. That means that although the product was delivered to the 
customer, in some cases the release activities will need to be performed after the 
delivery:
• A common example is installation by the customer—the goods were delivered but 
the total of the requirements include an installation. After that the product may be 
released.
• When the organization provides services, maintenance, or warranty operations, 
the release activities shall be integrated into them as well. For example, after a ser-
vice was performed, the employee runs a list of tests before redelivering it to the 
customer.
• In some cases the environment, location, or conditions for the release will be 
exceptional, for example, the release must be conducted in the premises of the 
customer.
• Release activities may be externally required, for example, customer requirements 
or regulatory requirements. In that case those release activities must be planned and 
integrated into the realization of the product.
In order to maintain effective release activities, one must ensure that all required 
inputs and data are available to the relevant person at the time of the release. This 
information shall assist the person in deciding whether the product meets its require-
ments or not:
• Evidences that the product went through all the necessary process stages.
• Characteristic evidences that the product meets its requirements: quality tests, veri-
fications, and validations are available and clear.
• All the required resources were available at the time of the realization.
I would integrate the release activities into the quality plan where it will be clear to 
the employees which release activities must be performed, which inputs are needed, in 
 

338
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
which process stage must it be taken, and which records are expected. The  organization 
may use processes that already exist, for example:
• If one decides that after realization and the storage of the product on the shelves the 
product is released for use, one may define that the last operation shall be consid-
ered as release activity. In that case, one shall need to provide all evidences that the 
product meet its requirements.
• When the organization installs equipment or devices at the customer’s premises 
and the customer approves and signs the delivery of the installation—this may be 
 considered as a release activity and the signature and approval may be used as docu-
mented information for the release.
Acceptance Criteria or Standard Measures for Release
The release will be approved against defined acceptance criteria.
The objective of the criteria is to assist the person releasing the product to decide 
whether the product or service is ready for release.
The release activities must verify compliance to the product requirements, 
and therefore an acceptance criterion is needed. When releasing a product, cer-
tain tests and reviews of the functionality, characteristics, or intended use of the 
product must be conducted using standard measures, such as criteria. It does 
not mean that one needs to perform all the tests and verifications of the product  
all over again. One needs to provide the service person with a list of the tests or 
checks and the expected results for the release. The release will be authorized 
when the results are satisfying:
• For each type of product or service, criteria for the release will be established. 
The criteria will be planned to ensure that the product meets its requirements or 
specifications.
• The criteria for the release will be available to the appropriate persons at the appro-
priate process stage.
• The use of the criteria will be clear to the person who carries out the release activities.
• The stages in which the measurements shall be conducted shall be defined.
• The manner in which the results shall be recorded will be defined.
Developing an effective release test will cover the following issues:
• The release tests will ensure that the product does achieve its objectives and 
intended use.
• The release tests prove that all the specified characteristics are available.
• The release ensures that additional requirements are delivered like special delivery 
requirements or schedules.
In order to define release criteria and conduct the release effectively, I suggest to 
 conduct a small-scale audit and develop a tool (a format, a checklist, or a procedure) 
 

339
Operation
that will measure and determine the extent to which the requirements of the product 
are fulfilled. What issues shall this audit cover?
• Identification of the product or the service that is to be delivered to the customer.
• Verification that all process inputs such as materials, components, or information 
were available for the realization.
• Verification that the employees realizing the product were qualified and trained.
• Verification that the equipment, tools, and infrastructures that were used to realize 
the product were controlled and whether there were any disturbances during the 
process.
• Verification that processes were verified and approved by authorized parties.
• Review of product and process controls and verification indicating that the results 
of the tests are within limits or tolerances.
• Verification that all the validation activities were performed and the results are 
satisfactory.
• Verification that the monitoring and measuring devices that were used to realize the 
product are maintained and controlled.
• Verification that the required documentation was available.
• Verification that packaging activities were controlled and that the product was 
packed in the appropriate way.
• Verification that the package was stored under appropriate conditions before 
delivery.
• Verification that the storage conditions are appropriate.
• Review of all records and verifications to ensure that they are complete and 
accurate.
• When quality problems are detected during the release activities, they shall be 
 documented and managed.
Authorizing the Release
The release of the product or service shall be performed by an authorized person 
of the organization. This person shall authorize the release of the product for fur-
ther use after a defined verification (the release activities) and with satisfactory 
results. The authorization of the release shall be retained as documented informa-
tion. Documenting the person who authorizes the release provides traceability to 
qualifications and then accountability of the person. This traceability will assist the 
organization in case quality problems arise later.
According to the nature, type, or operation of the realization, a defined role will be 
designated for reviewing and authorizing the release. The definition of the authorizer 
may appear in a job description or a procedure. But in any case, the identification will 
be documented in a clear manner indicating that he or she authorized the release of 
the product: a manual signature on a form or allowing an authorized user to perform 
a function in the ERP system. This person may be an employee but also an external 
party like an external provider or a regulator. A good example is the construction 
industry where an external supervisor approves the results of the organization.
 

340
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Concession for Releasing Products or Services
There are cases where not all planned arrangements have been satisfactorily  completed, 
and as a result the product may not fulfill 100% its requirements but will nonetheless 
be released. This is also known as a release under concession. Concession refers to a 
documented approval for the release of a product or service that did not go through 
all the planned arrangements, at appropriate stages, and that all its requirements have 
been met. The release of products under such conditions is a state where although 
the product may not fully meet its requirements, under the appropriate approval, the 
release of the product for delivery was authorized.
The allowed deviation or tolerance must be defined whether by the customer or through 
a regulatory requirement (when the release is done according to regulations). A good exam-
ple of the concession of a product is when a process was performed, but with deviations. 
These deviations were reviewed, and it was decided that they were not crucial, they do not 
affect the quality of the product, and therefore the product was approved and released.
The release under concession shall be authorized by a designated person in the 
organization. It may be that the person authorizing the release may not have  sufficient 
qualifications to approve under concession.
When planning how concession will be managed in the QMS, one must refer to 
the following issues:
• It will be defined whose responsibility it is to review and approve a concession.
• Products that were released under concession must be identified. The identification 
shall link to the documented information of approval. The goal is to be able to locate 
approval of a certain product.
• A reference to the suitable records shall be available, for example, the results of the 
measurements and the justification for the concession.
• The approval will be accompanied with the identity of the approver.
• The concession and the release under concession shall be documented.
If a reported problem has a temporary solution or a work-around that does not impair 
the quality of the product and its intended use or pose any risks, this solution may be 
considered as a condition for the release.
Retaining Documented Information of the Release
The review, approval, and release will be documented and maintained as documented 
information. The goals of the documented information are to identify the release activi-
ties and to prove that the product requirements are met. The documented information 
will contain evidences of the release activities or at least the critical activities that ensure 
that the requirements of the product are achieved. The documented information will
• Define to the user of the QMS what the release activities are and which acceptance 
criteria he or she must use
• Document the execution of those release activities
• Provide evidences of conformity with the release criteria: the product meets its 
requirements
 

341
Operation
The documented information shall enable traceability of the release activities to 
the product or service operations, for example, by reference to a serial number, a 
batch number, or a service ticket number. The traceability will allow the users of the 
QMS to link the activities, the criteria, and the released product. Which information 
and data may be recorded?
• Unique identification of the product or service operation.
• The person who authorized the release.
• Data and information regarding traceability of the product such as batch number 
or serial number.
• Date of release.
• Relevant acceptance criteria (or reference to it) that were used to approve the release.
• Results of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation whose results were 
used to compare with the criteria.
• The results of the release—documentation of the actions that provide the user with 
understanding that the product and service requirements have been met.
• When monitoring and measuring devices were used in the release activities, it will 
be mentioned.
• When conditions of the environment for the operation of processes are critical for 
the release of the product, they will be documented.
• When necessary, according to the nature of the product, as per customer request or 
regulatory requirements, the documented information of the release will be retained 
for the lifetime of the product or for a predefined period.
8.7  Control of Nonconforming Outputs
As soon as nonconforming outputs are detected within the organization, they must 
be identified, recorded, and controlled; and most importantly, they must be treated. 
The objective is to prevent the release, delivery, or use of nonconformed products or 
services by the customers. Treating and managing nonconformities is one of the basic 
objectives of the ISO 9001 Standard. Nonconforming outputs refer to the outputs of 
processes that do not fulfill a requirement that is a need or an expectation of one of the 
interested parties of the organization that is stated, implied, or obligated. Controlling 
the nonconforming outputs is planning activities for detecting  nonconforming out-
puts and deciding what is to be done with them. And the ISO 9001 Standard spe-
cifically mentions what options one has. Let us review the ISO  9001  Standard 
requirements.
8.7.1
• The organization shall ensure that outputs that do not conform to  requirements or 
expectations of the interested parties are identified and controlled to prevent their 
unintended use or delivery.
• The organization shall take the appropriate action based on the nature of the 
 nonconformity and its effect on the product or the service.
 

342
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Those actions shall refer and be applied to products or services that are being real-
ized or were already delivered or provided to the customer.
• The organization shall manage nonconforming outputs in one or more of the fol-
lowing ways:
• Correction
• Segregation, containment, return, or suspension of provision of products and 
services
• Informing the customer
• Obtaining authorization for acceptance under concession
• When nonconforming outputs are corrected, they will be verified once again in 
order to ensure their conformance.
8.7.2
• The organization shall retain documented information for
• Describing the nonconforming outputs
• Describing the action or actions taken to manage the nonconforming outputs
• Documenting accepted concessions
• Identifying the authority that approved the actions for managing the noncon-
forming outputs
Detecting the Nonconforming Outputs
Controlling the nonconforming outputs will allow the organization to minimize 
their effect. Nonconformance can occur in raw materials, components, in goods that 
are in process or finished goods, or service operations. When nonconforming out-
puts are detected, the first step is to identify them. In order to effectively identify 
nonconforming outputs, one must understand which quality tools will indicate that 
a process output is nonconforming. The ISO 9001 Standard requires quite a few con-
trols that may be of use:
• Verification activities—when verifications deliver unsatisfying results, it may mean 
a nonconformity. The verifications may refer also to conditions that were necessary 
during the realization but were not achieved, for example, cleanliness conditions—
the product itself may be conforming, but the required conditions of cleanliness in 
which it should have been realized were not. Therefore, the product may not meet 
its requirements.
• Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities—results of monitor-
ing, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities may indicate that process out-
puts do not meet their specifications. If the quality test shows that a certain measure 
of the product is unsatisfactory, it may indicate that the output is nonconforming.
• Controls of external providers—when controlling products or services delivered 
from external providers, products or services may be found as nonconforming.
• Release activities—the release activities are a list of verifications that the product 
went through the necessary operations before it is delivered for the use of the cus-
tomer. When the release activities reveal that certain activities were not performed 
or were performed but their results are not satisfactory, it may indicate that the 
 

343
Operation
output is nonconforming. If a service summary report describes a problem in one 
operation, it may be indicating a nonconformity.
• Audits and process audit—during audits, product or process outputs may be sam-
pled and found to be nonconforming.
• Risk-based thinking—during the deployment of activities of risk-based think-
ing,  the organization may judge that certain risks may produce nonconforming 
outputs.
• Customer feedback—feedback from customers may point to cases in which noncon-
forming outputs were delivered to the customers.
The ISO 9001 Standard expects that this information will flow to the system of 
 managing nonconforming outputs at the right time before the output is submitted to 
the next process stage.
Reaction to Nonconformity
As soon as nonconforming outputs are detected, the organization must react to them. 
The ISO 9001 Standard expects several basic actions for managing nonconformity. 
Let us review them and how they may be implemented in the QMS:
• Identification
• Segregation
• Correction
• Containment
• Informing the customer
• Suspension of provision of products and services
For more details and information of each action, please see the designated paragraph 
in this chapter.
Let us take, for example, a case where one, as a productive company, delivers parts 
as a supplier to one’s customers. A customer called and reported that one delivery 
contains nonconformed product. You will (as suggestion for reaction)
• Ask that the whole delivery be removed from the environment and be marked as 
nonconforming
• Organize a new delivery
• Get access to the nonconformed parts
• Examine the nonconformity and gather all the required information
• Begin the process of analyzing the nonconformity
Identifying the Nonconforming Outputs
After spotting the nonconforming outputs, one must identify them as a means of 
classifying them. The standards specifically demand the identification of noncon-
forming outputs in an injective manner. This means that each nonconforming prod-
uct or service will be identified independently (physically as well as logically). The 
objective of the classification is to prevent the use of those outputs before it is decided 
what is to be done with them.
 

344
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
One objective is to determine which products are involved in the nonconformity. 
The identification will be done according to realization process identifiers—produc-
tion time intervals, batches, production machines, production areas, or products. Bear 
in mind that when one defective product is detected, the whole batch may be suspect.
A second objective is differentiation, segregation, and distinction of the nonconform-
ing output from the conformed outputs in an explicit manner. This ensures that the 
nonconforming product would not contaminate the conformed ones. Defective prod-
uct may contaminate, pollute, infect, or trigger any other defects to others. Therefore, 
segregation from the conformed products will be applied; that is, the nonconforming 
products will be removed from the realization area to a specific controlled area. In case 
a component used in the assembly of the product, or a raw material used to realize it, 
has been detected as nonconforming, you will have to consider identifying the finished 
product. Processes of traceability and identification as planned according to clause 
8.5.2 (Identification and traceability) will support the distinction of such products. The 
segregation may be physical or logical, for example, in the case of software.
A third objective is ensuring, beyond any doubt or possibility, that the noncon-
forming product will not be used, applied, submitted to realization processes, or 
delivered to the customer, before it is decided what to do with it. The status of the 
product must be changed in order to ensure this. The product’s status shall indicate 
its conformance or nonconformance. In other words, the status shall indicate to a 
user or an employee whether the goods (finished product, service that was provided, 
or materials) are usable or not. The status shall be clearly identified, and any employee 
should recognize the status at any given moment at any location—within the organi-
zation or at the customer’s premises. The means of identification of nonconforming 
outputs shall be maintained as documented information. How are these identified?
• When it is a tangible output like a product or a component, it will be clear to the user 
of the QMS that this is nonconforming: tags, signs, stickers, ribbons, changing serial 
numbers, certain boxes, areas, or locations in the organization where the outputs 
are stored, for example, a red strip that announces the segregation. Consider also 
access authorization to such areas.
• If the output is not tangible, one may need to identify it in an appropriate way. That 
is the case with services. If the organization is providing a cleaning service and the 
customer is not satisfied, one cannot suspend the entire house of the customer as a 
nonconforming output but one may create some kind of a format that will indicate 
that this service provided on this date by this employee is nonconforming. A ticket 
system is the classic example.
• If one revealed a deviation in a process, one may then track down the time when the 
deviation occurred and trace potential nonconformed products. Areas impacted by 
the nonconformity should be identified and tested as well.
The issue of identifying nonconforming outputs is relevant to products that have 
already been delivered for distribution or are in use (and one has the information 
regarding their status). Since one cannot physically identify products that are outside 
one’s premises, one needs to identify them logically; that is, create a list with all the 
products according to production identifiers that indicate these as nonconforming.
 

345
Operation
Obtaining Authorization for Acceptance under Concession
Concession refers to the approval of a product with restrictions. This is a state where 
the product does not fully meet its requirements or specifications, but under the 
appropriate concessions, the release or use of the product is approved. Concession 
may be regarded as the release of a nonconforming product. The concession may 
minimize the costs of repairs, rework, or recall of the product. The concession is 
generally approved to the delivery of products and services within specified limits or 
quantities.
The risk lies in cases where the organization may not correctly assess the severity 
of the nonconformity or may prefer to release a nonconforming product instead of 
investing resources in correcting the failure. Furthermore, when initiating a conces-
sion, one must identify regulatory requirements relevant to the matter and, when 
applicable, find out how they refer to release under concession.
When determining the process or procedure for obtaining a concession, a few 
 conditions must be kept in mind:
• The concession must be evaluated carefully for its effects and potential effects on the 
product, on the end user, on the environment, and so on.
• The concession is to be limited in time, parts, products, models, components, and 
so on. These limitations shall be documented. The concession should be limited pre-
cisely to a batch, a product with serial number, production dates, a certain delivery, 
or a customer. The objective is to avoid “flowing” of the concession to other products.
• The concession is to be approved by an authorized person, and it will be defined 
whose responsibility it is to review and approve a concession.
• The concession and the decision are to be documented, and a reference to the suit-
able records shall be available, for example, the justification of concessions.
• The acceptance criteria that assisted in the decision-making are to be documented 
or referred to.
• The approval will be accompanied with the identity of the approver.
A good example of the concession of a product is when a process was performed, but 
with deviations. These were reviewed, and it was decided that they were not critical, 
and therefore the product was approved. Such a concession may create a special status 
for the product.
The review is to be registered as documented information. It is important to indicate 
that the documentation will include the identities of all relevant individuals and authori-
ties that participated in the decision-making and approval of the concession. You may 
involve the customers in the review and accept their opinion on the matter. However, 
the approval is to be conducted solely by the organization. The main goal is to explain 
why the nonconformity is being approved. I suggest planning a format that guides the 
responsible parties through all the required stages, investigations, and questions.
Responsibilities and Authorities
The organization is required to appoint and certify authorities and responsible parties 
for identifying and controlling nonconforming products throughout the processes 
 

346
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
of managing them. Responsibility and authority are separated into two main roles 
regarding the identification of the nonconforming outputs: the responsibility to 
detect them and the authority to decide what to do with it.
Each member of the organization that takes part in or operates a process or a part of 
it shall have the competence, skills, knowledge, and means to identify nonconforming 
outputs throughout the processes. The authority for reporting and documenting non-
conformity to a supervisor shall be granted to personnel in the organizational structure:
• A production employee will have the qualifications to assess process outputs during 
the realization and decide whether they are conforming or not. For example, before 
each batch, I used to conduct a small-scale training (right in the production area) 
regarding the quality of the produced part and known quality problems and to place 
a sample of a conformed product as a reference.
• A quality person responsible (e.g., quality assurance) will perform the needed exam-
ination in order to control the process.
• A storage employee will have the qualifications to determine whether goods, mate-
rials, components, or finished goods were stored appropriately before submitting 
them to realization or delivering them to the customer.
For such a person, it will be clear
• When he or she shall look for nonconformities—when arranging incoming goods 
on the shelves, when preparing goods for realization, when removing a product 
from the machine, or when packing a product
• Which product characteristics the person must control
• In case a nonconformity is detected, which actions must he or she perform: put the 
outputs aside, stop the machine, report it, and so on
• To whom, how, and what information must he or she report
The issue will be implanted in each training program. This will ensure the timely 
detection and treatment of nonconformities.
The second level responsibility is the authority to make a decision or initiate an 
action based on the discovery. This person shall be identified:
• The authority shall be granted: on a job description or a procedure describing the 
treatment of nonconforming outputs.
• This authority shall determine when and how a decision and an action regarding the 
nonconformity will be initiated. This identification shall appear on the designated 
documented information.
It may be an individual or a number of persons. The objective, however, is clear: at 
any given moment throughout the process, a responsible party will be appointed and 
qualified to react to nonconformity.
Correction of Nonconforming Products
Corrections of nonconforming products may be initiated as reworking, removing, or 
reprocessing. The correction includes the repair, rework, reprocessing, or adjustment 
 

347
Operation
of the product in order to eliminate the nonconformity and ensure that the prod-
uct meets its specifications. Correction refers to parts, component, materials, or the 
entire product or the reexecution of service operations. Like everything else, param-
eters of the correction that may affect the quality of the product will be evaluated:
• Scope of correction and identification of the product—each component or part of 
the product that requires correction will be identified.
• Objective of the correction—define which problem or nonconformity the correction 
will solve. One may include a reference to the documentation of the nonconformity 
that initiated the process.
• Planning of correction activities—define which activities and actions are necessary 
in order to achieve the objective.
• Risks
• Evaluate whether the correction may pose new risks to product or service.
• If there are controls that need to be implemented during the realization of the 
product due to risks, they will be applied during correction as well.
• Responsibilities—identify the roles and responsibilities of personnel that are to per-
form and approve the correction (certain roles, employees, and authorities). One 
may include this matter in the training plan.
• Tool and equipment—determine which tools and equipment are needed to perform 
the correction.
• Materials, parts, and components—determine which materials are needed to per-
form the correction.
• Status—define the status of corrected product (before correction, after correction, 
after revalidation).
• Necessary documented information—identify the necessary documentation needed 
for the correction (work instructions, diagrams, charts, drawings, etc.), for example, 
you may document the correction in a designated work instruction.
• Tests, validations, and revalidations—the required controls are to be implemented 
in order to verify that the results are achieved.
• Revalidation—define revalidation tests to the product after the correction is done.
• Training—submit correction to training program in order for it to reach the appro-
priate roles.
• Statistical analysis—data related to the correction will be recorded and will serve 
later for product analysis.
Correction may require a change in the product. Therefore, before submitting the 
product to correction, it is necessary to evaluate the feasibility and the effects (or poten-
tial effects) of the correction on the product specifications, that is, the functionality, 
performance, safety, and intended use, as well as on other components in the product:
• Each person involved in design and realization of the product will evaluate and give 
their professional opinion regarding the effect of the correction on the product, for 
example, engineering, design and development, quality department, manufactur-
ing, and the customer.
• The review of the authorized roles will include the development of corrective 
activities. Each activity of correction must be reviewed and approved by an 
authorized person. If one is replacing an electrical component in a device, the 
 

348
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
appropriate engineers must evaluate the replacement and its effects and give 
their approval.
• This review will include the design of revalidation; each correction process and 
activity must be revalidated to ensure that the product will meet its specifications 
after the correction. The revalidation will include the regular product validations 
and tests that prove that the product meets its specifications, but also verification of 
the correction activities.
• Correction may lead to the creation of a new version or configuration of the product. 
In such cases when the organization finds it suitable, there is a need to implement 
controls as required in clause 8.5.2 (Identification and traceability).
• This review will be documented and retained as documented information.
After the correction is applied to the product, the conformity to the requirements 
shall be verified. This may be achieved by
• Applying the product verifications and validations once again before submitting it 
for use
• Applying the revalidation or reverifications for the corrected product
This verification shall be documented and retained as documented information:
• The description of the tests that shall be performed including the characteristics that 
must be proved and the test actions that must be applied
• The criteria that support the test
• The results of the test and the evaluation whether the results are satisfactory or not
Return of Nonconforming Products
Return of a nonconforming product is an action taken to address a problem that 
occurred in the product after it was already delivered to the customer that exceeded the 
requirements, specifications, and accepted tolerances. Delivery to distributers counts 
here as well. Return of the product is also known as a recall. When referring to the 
return of nonconforming outputs, the organization shall define a few ground principles:
• The organization shall define in which cases or under what severity of nonconform-
ing outputs the product must be returned.
• The organization shall define how it will communicate to the customer or how 
the customers may communicate with it in order to coordinate the return. These 
communication channels shall be planned according to the requirements of clause 
8.2.1—Customer communication.
• The organization may plan actions of how the product will be returned to the 
organization:
• Repair center
• By post
• By special delivery
• The organization should define what actions shall follow the return of the product:
• Replacement of the product
• Correction
• Delivery of another product
 

349
Operation
• Local or regional regulation or statutory requirements may set rules regarding the 
return. Such requirements must be identified and implemented, for example,
• Requirements regarding the severity of the nonconformity that requires return
• Requirements regarding the communication with the customers regarding the 
nonconformity
• The return process generates data and information regarding the use of the product. 
I definitely suggest that you develop a systematic collection of data and the analysis 
and submission for improvement.
Of course, each case, product, or service type demands a separate reaction. I certainly 
suggest implementing return activities with a documented plan or a procedure with 
objectives, implementation measures, simulations, analysis, and the submission for 
improvements. In order to implement such a plan effectively, there are a few issues 
that must be referred to:
• The identification of relevant regulations in accordance with the region where prod-
ucts are being distributed.
• The implementation of the requirements in your activities for returning products.
• The creation of effective communication processes and channels between the orga-
nization and the subjects of the return, for example, customers, users, distributors, 
and other responsible parties (such as authorities). The requirements for an effective 
communication channel are discussed in clause 8.2.1 (Customer communication).
• The initiation of an effective interface between the return processes and plan and 
the quality improvement processes (corrective action and risk-based thinking), in 
other words how the returned product shall be submitted to the process of handling 
of nonconforming products.
Documented information:
• Which products must be returned. This documented information may include ref-
erence or a link to the relevant customer.
• Documentation of the event of receiving the nonconforming output in the 
organization:
• Date
• Receiver
• Product
Segregation of Nonconforming Products
Segregation is the act of separating the nonconforming process outputs from the con-
formed ones by transferring the nonconformed items out of a production or testing 
environment into a separated environment. The objectives are differentiation and 
distinction by transferring the nonconforming process outputs into an environment 
different from the realization environment and distinguishing the nonconform-
ing products from the conformed products in an explicit manner. This ensures that 
the nonconforming outputs would not affect the conformed ones and will not be 
used. The nonconformed products will be removed from the realization area to a 
 specifically controlled area. One may define designated area.
 

350
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When segregating, one may prepare a list of the products under segregation. The 
classic way is managing a stock for segregated products. Pay attention that within the 
segregation area one may need to separate each product from another because of risk 
of contamination.
Containment of Nonconforming Outputs
Containment refers to the initiation of actions to prevent nonconformities from 
spreading and extending to other processes or other process outputs. When a non-
conformity is detected during the realization process, the person who identified it or 
is responsible for the process shall take suitable action to prevent the nonconformity 
from spreading further into other outputs of the same process, other products, or 
other processes. The difference from segregation is that it may be necessary not only 
to separate the nonconforming outputs from the conformed ones but also to apply 
further measures that shall involve elements of the QMS to prevent the nonconfor-
mity from spreading as mentioned:
• Replacing human resources in the process due to incompetence
• Replacing inputs to the process such as materials or components due to nonconformity
• Replacing resources that support the process such as infrastructures or process 
environment due to failure or disorder
Let us review an example: during a batch production, one noticed that realized parts 
(process outputs) are nonconforming. A short investigation reveals that one of the pur-
chased material used in the process is noncompliant to its specifications. This material 
is also being used for other parts for other products. As a containment, one should
• Detect all the material that is in the stock and suspend it from being released for 
further realization of other products
• Inform the supplier of the problem
• Request the supplier to replace with new and conformed material as soon as possible
The actions that one is initiating shall be documented:
• Description of the QMS element that was found to be relevant
• Analysis of its impact on the process outputs
• Measures undertaken to prevent the nonconformity from spreading
Suspension of Provision of Nonconforming Products and Services
Suspension of provision of products and services refers to the action of preventing the 
delivery, provision, or use of nonconforming products and services:
• Identifying or detecting other products or services that were delivered to the  customers 
that are or may be nonconforming
• Contacting distributers and informing them about the nonconforming outputs or 
products
 

351
Operation
Let us review an example from the service sector; let us assume that one detected 
a nonconforming service operation due to lack of knowledge—a service technician 
performed an operation wrongly because he or she did not have the correct know-
how (regarding this operation). The result is a nonconforming service operation. One 
has identified the required knowledge and provided it to the technician. In order to 
prevent other technicians from repeating the same error, one must inform them of the 
nonconformity and provide them with the required knowledge to avoid this mistake.
Informing the Customer
In case the defective product was delivered or the nonconformed service was pro-
vided to the customer, the customer must be informed. In clause 8.2.1—Customer 
communication—one is to determine the communication channels between the 
organization and the customer regarding several issues. The subject is widely dealt 
with in chapter 8.2.1 of this book. It is just as important to add that the ISO 9001 
Standard expects you to maintain a communication channel and method between 
the organization and the customer when a nonconforming output is detected. The 
goal is to inform the customer of
• Which product is affected
• Who is the contact person in the organization
• What is the nature and cause of the nonconformity
• Whether the customer can still use the product
• What is going to happen with the product
• Whether it has to be returned
• How is it planned to handle or correct the nonconformity
• What are the next stages of the handling of the nonconforming:
• Return
• Replacement
• Submission for correction
This subject is very important, and during the years I have noticed that organizations 
do not give enough importance to the fact that their customers are not  sufficiently 
informed when nonconformity occurs. This leads to dissatisfaction among  customers. 
I urge you to refer to chapter 8.2.1—Customer communication—where I discuss the 
principles, objectives, and methods of communicating with the customer.
Another issue to be informed to the customer is the reference to contingency actions 
(which is also discussed in chapter 8.2.1). Contingency actions are executed as a response 
to unplanned events and require the attention of the customer. Those events may be the 
detection of nonconforming outputs and require the attention of the customer.
Retaining Documented Information
Documenting a description of the nonconforming outputs is required by the ISO 9001 
Standard as a documented information. I regard this documented information as 
critical because it includes the primary information gathered about the nonconform-
ing output and any information that would help you to investigate the nonconformity 
 

352
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
later on. The objective of the information is to assist you in mapping the problem and 
tracking down the root cause. Bear in mind that this documentation is the first step 
in a process that will later lead to a corrective action. Details, information, and data 
regarding the nonconforming output that will be documented include the following:
• Statement of the starting date.
• Identification and detail of the product (e.g., product name, model, catalog number, 
serial number, batch number, date of manufacture).
• Identification of the individual that detected or identified the nonconforming out-
put (employee, customer, supplier, regulatory authority, etc.).
• Type of nonconformity (production error, customer feedback, supplier error, etc.).
• Time and date of receiving or detecting the nonconformity.
• Quantities that were identified as nonconforming.
• Description of how the nonconforming outputs were labeled.
• Specific areas where the nonconforming output was detected or related to the prod-
uct (department, production hall, machine, etc.).
• Description of the nonconformity (e.g., why it fails to meet the requirements—one 
can write here a literal description, or even attach other documents such as statisti-
cal analysis or photos).
• Reference to documented evidence.
• Immediate remedial action that was applied to the matter (correction, segregation, etc.).
• Relevant procedures or work instructions.
• Categorization of the nonconformity—this is not required by the ISO 9001 Standard 
but is highly recommended and will assist you later with a statistical analysis of the 
nonconformities.
You may design a format that includes all the details that are relevant to your 
 organization and type of products.
The second requirement for documented information is the reaction to the non-
conformity. The standard suggests a few types of reactions: correction, segregation, 
containment, return, or suspension of provision of products and services. They 
were all discussed earlier in this chapter. Each action that was undertaken must be 
described and documented. The documented information shall include the identifi-
cation of the authority deciding on the action in respect of the nonconformity.
In order to be practical, I would include these two requirements of documentation 
in the format or technique that you use to describe the nonconformity. So you main-
tain the information in one place.
The next requirement for documented information refers to the documenting 
of the concession obtained. Please refer to the paragraph Obtaining Authorization 
for Acceptance under Concession for details and information about the expected 
 documented information.
 

353
9 Performance Evaluation
9.1  Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation
9.1.1  General
Measurement, monitoring, analysis, and evaluation are critical for the assessment 
of the performance of the quality management system (QMS). The goal is to reflect 
the quantitative and qualitative performance of the QMS and to report the degree to 
which processes meet their stated objectives. This activity is regarded by the ISO 9001 
Standard as one of the tools that promotes improvement of the QMS. Clause 9.1.1—
General—lays the required principles to be considered while determining and cre-
ating methods for monitoring measurement analysis and evaluation of processes or 
process results. In other words, when you plan, determine, and define how you will 
monitor, measure, analyze, and then evaluate a process or its outputs, make sure 
that you are applying and practicing the following principles (the ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements):
• The organization shall determine which quality elements shall be monitored and 
measured.
• Methods for monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation shall be deter-
mined. The methods shall define which activities are needed to ensure valid results 
of monitoring and measurements.
• The methods shall define the stages and the intervals in the process when activities 
of monitoring and measurements must be performed.
• The methods shall define when results of monitoring and measuring shall be ana-
lyzed and evaluated.
• The results shall enable the evaluation of the performance and the effectiveness of 
the QMS.
• Documented information on the results of the monitoring, measurements, analysis, 
and evaluation shall be retained.

354
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Terms and Definitions
Before we begin, let us understand the difference between monitoring, measuring, 
analyzing, and evaluating a process:
• Monitoring—a continuous inspection or observation of process performance or 
process output for a special purpose through a defined scope (e.g., with a sample 
size or over a period of time) and maintaining records of those observations
• Measurement—the activity of delivering data to a method in order to define objec-
tively a quantitative or qualitative measure and capturing a situation without any 
references to the significance
• Analysis—a set of techniques for examining trends and tendencies of measurements 
of an output (process or product)
• Evaluation—the action of comparing a process or process output measurements 
against given criteria to determine the performance of the process or conformity of 
a process output
Goal of Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation
The goal of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation is to provide the 
decision makers an understanding through a situation report concerning the per-
formance of processes. The data that the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation provide shall relate directly to the controls suggested by the standard such 
as supplier evaluations or control of nonconform products. Those activities shall 
indicate the effectiveness of the QMS and the extent to which the QMS achieves its 
quality objectives. This type of reporting shall regularly provide the different organi-
zational units data and information regarding quality issues.
These needs should be known and available through the outputs of the process 
approach—which processes must be measured in order to control their perfor-
mance and verify their conformity. In clause 4.4—Quality management system 
and its processes—you were required to
• Determine the processes needed for the QMS
• Evaluate these processes and implement any changes needed to ensure that these 
processes achieve their intended results
• Improve the processes and the QMS
In other words, for each process, with outputs having an effect on the quality of 
the product (or service), a suitable method for measuring and monitoring must be 
planned and applied. The method shall be planned in accordance to the nature of the 
process and the nature of its outputs. Regarding the quality objectives, for each area 
in the QMS, the relevant quality objectives are defined. The definition of the quality 
objectives should relate to specific realization activities. Now it is required to define 
how those quality objectives shall be monitored and measured or in other words to 
break down the quality objectives into operational measurements:
• Which processes and activities must be monitored?
• Which process outputs must be monitored and measured?
• Which methods shall be used for monitoring the activities and measuring the data?
 

355
Performance Evaluation
What are the advantages of implementing monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation?
• Implementing a systematic control of the realization processes
• Identifying deviations in time and submitting them to a controlled process for treatment
• Allowing users of the QMS to make decisions regarding results of processes
• Allowing the users of the QMS to prevent nonconformities by identifying gaps in 
a  process and preventing the transition of nonconform outputs to the next process
• Determining the effectiveness and efficiency of processes
• Using the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation as means for con-
tinual improvement
• Promoting the achievement of quality objectives through key process indicators 
related to the objectives of the organization
Defining the Methods for Monitoring, Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation
Each monitoring and measuring activity must be conducted according to a defined 
method. The goal is to identify, for each process, the parameters of outputs that affect its 
quality and determine the activities necessary to ensure valid results, activities that will 
ensure that the monitoring and measurement deliver results that can be analyzed and 
evaluated. The methods shall enable a comparison of the results with the objectives, for 
example, measuring the performance of a machine where the results are ranked in within 
upper and lower limits. Such ranking provides the status of the process—either within 
tolerances or not. The new revision of the ISO 9001 Standard (2015) does not separate 
the requirements for monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation of products or 
processes. But there are some distinctive requirements that I would like to discuss.
When monitoring and measuring a process, the following issues shall be referred:
• Identification of the processes or process outputs that must be monitored and measured
• Identification of those parameters or outputs that may indicate how the process 
behaves
• Identification of the function or the role responsible for conducting the activities of 
measurement (designated employees, a certain department, organizational unit, etc.)
• Definition of parameters for monitoring such as process conditions, interval, sam-
pling rates, batch loads, and quantities
• Description of the stages during the process where measurement activities shall be 
undertaken
• Tools, equipment, or software required to perform or assist in the measurement
• The activities and the use of techniques of measuring the process
• Where and how the results must be documented
• The criteria necessary for the evaluation of the results (the objectives)
• Action required in case nonconformities are detected
When monitoring and measuring a process output or a product, the following issues 
shall be referred:
• Definition of the objectives of the measurement, the characteristics of the  product or 
the service that is to be measured—a specific material, product, part, or component 
for the monitoring or a service stage or a specific activity
 

356
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Identification of the characteristics of those outputs that may indicate how the 
 product was realized
• The definition including the extent of the test, that is, the time interval and the 
sampling rate
• Tools, equipment, or software required to perform the test
• Identification of the function or the role responsible for conducting the activi-
ties of measurement (designated employees, a certain department, organizational 
unit, etc.)
• The exact realization stage where the product or service is to be sampled and 
controlled
• The sequence of events in order to perform the monitoring and measurement activi-
ties and the conditions for the test that are to be defined, such as room conditions, 
material conditions, and specific processes
• Where and how the results must be documented
• The availability of the criteria needed for the comparison of results and evaluations
• Action required in case nonconformities are detected
Defining the Process Stage, the Interval and Timing for Monitoring and Measurement
Each activity is measured from the time the input flows into a process and initiates 
the activity until the desired output is accepted (this activity might include subse-
quent activities). The measurements, collecting the data regarding a process or a pro-
cess output, must be conducted in a defined stage, period of time, points and events 
in a process, under defined conditions, and according to a sample rate that will sup-
port decisions. The goal here is to ensure that the monitoring and measurement shall 
deliver valid results:
• Process stage—it will be clear to the users which are the points or events in an opera-
tion that must be measured and which process stage, phase, after which activity, or 
during which operation the measurements will be conducted.
• Product sample rate—the user shall know exactly how much process outputs he or 
she must sample.
• Conditions—the conditions under which the measurement will be conducted will 
be defined.
• Interval—the scope and interval of the measurement will be defined.
• Area and extent of the process—for each process the definition shall indicate which 
area shall be monitored and measured.
I suggest here a way to detect the critical process stages for monitoring and 
measurements:
 
1. Define the critical measures of performance related to the relevant quality objectives.
 
2. Define the critical triggering events, inputs, key steps, and results for the process.
 
3. Assess the process’s current performance.
 
4. Determine the level of desired performance for the process expressed by the relevant 
quality objectives.
 
5. Assess the size of the performance gap between the current performance and the 
objective.
 

357
Performance Evaluation
 
6. Initiate an improvement plan, which refers to the relevant process scope, that may 
influence the performance of a process. This improvement will be naturally submit-
ted to the requirements as presented in clause 10—Improvement.
Analyzing and Evaluating Results of Monitoring and Measuring
The activities of monitoring and measuring generate data that must be analyzed and 
evaluated. The methods shall indicate in which point of the process the results will 
be analyzed and evaluated. The goal is to support the decision makers of a process 
and to provide them with the understanding of the current state of the process and 
its alignment with the objectives at the appropriate point of time, in other words to 
deliver them the data they need in time to make the right decision. According to the 
results, it will be necessary to derive actions for corrections or improvement of the 
processes. This issue is discussed in detail in chapter 9.1.3—Analysis and evaluation.
Defining Roles and Responsibilities for Monitoring, Measuring, 
Analyzing, and Evaluation of Processes
Each monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activity shall be conducted 
by qualified personnel. Thus, it is required to define which skills and competencies 
will enable effective monitoring and measurement of processes and products. The 
definition can be on
• Work instruction or any kind of documentation that describes the activities of the 
monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation
• Job description
Training and qualifying personnel for monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
 evaluation shall be mentioned to on the organizational trainings program.
Evaluating the Effectiveness and Performance of the QMS
Effectiveness of the QMS refers to the extent to which objectives of processes were 
achieved and may indicate the degree of improvement or the potential for improvement. 
We know already that the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities 
enable an effective interrelation between processes by ensuring submission of appropri-
ate outputs between processes. The approval of those outputs (the feedback from the 
customer of the process) allows a smooth workflow or demands changes and improve-
ments. This issue will be discussed in detail in clause 9.1.3—Analysis and evaluation.
Maintaining Documented Information Related to Monitoring, 
Measurement, Analysis, and Evaluation
Retaining documented information regarding the monitoring, measurement, anal-
ysis, and evaluation is required when the organization finds it appropriate and when 
the organization decides that maintaining this documented information will affect 
the quality of the product and is necessary for the effectiveness of the QMS. Now, 
do not allow yourself to underestimate the requirements; it will be harder in an 
 

358
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
audit to persuade the auditor why you do not need a documented information than 
to present the documentation. I tend to divide the documented  information into 
two levels:
• First level—the definitions and instructions of the monitoring, measurement, 
analysis, and evaluation activities: test instructions, quality instructions, etc. The 
effectiveness of this documented information means that the relevant personnel 
will know how to perform the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation 
activities. This type of documentation shall be affected by the complexity and the 
necessary knowledge for performing the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation activities. This type of documented information shall cover the  following 
issues:
• Describing how the practice of the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation will be applied (which activities)
• Responsibility (who collects the data)
• Frequency of the activities (when and how much from the process must be 
measured)
• Methods and techniques for the evaluation of the data (which tools)
• Interpretation of trends (how to analyze the results)
• Distribution (who views the data)
 
 If you decide that the activities of the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and eval-
uation are considered as knowledge and are necessary for the operation of its pro-
cesses and for obtaining and assuring conformity of products and services, it will be 
needed to document them. This level includes also regulatory requirements: when 
national or regional regulations might require the implementation and documenta-
tion of statistical methods or techniques, they must be maintained.
• Second level—this level refers to how the results are reported: the required docu-
mented information that provides data, information, insight, and feedback about 
processes and process outputs (the records). The main objective of this type of 
documentation is to enable decision support for process owners and managers. 
Effectiveness of this documented information means that the documentation shall 
indicate clearly the trends in the processes and their outputs, for example, electronic 
charts or SPS software and forms. I find that this level is more critical than the first 
one because this type actually holds the important information regarding the pro-
cesses and their outputs.
The documented information shall be planned according to the nature of the 
 processes that are measured and the nature of the interrelated processes:
• The instructional level will be planned and adjusted to the processes—if the activi-
ties are taking place in a production hall, then protected hardcopies are required. 
But if the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation take place in digital 
environment such as a computer software, a digital copy may be suitable.
• Tools for collecting results and data and information shall be adjusted to their type 
of data.
 

359
Performance Evaluation
In any case, the documented information will be submitted to the requirements of 
clause 7.5—Documented information.
Key Performance Indicators
Although the standard does not specifically refer to the issue of key performance 
indicators (KPIs), I would like to review it shortly because it has a direct relation 
to monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation of the business activities and 
processes and may be used as an effective tool for implementing the requirements of 
clause 9.1—Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation.
KPIs are performance measurements of processes or activities in the organization 
used to evaluate the effectiveness of a system. Monitoring and measuring the KPIs 
present the performance of processes, operations, and activities related to those KPIs. 
Effectiveness is determined through measurement of factors that influence those pro-
cesses or activities. Influencing those factors may initiate changes in the QMS. When 
the data and information do not conform to their objectives, the organization may 
apply changes to the QMS, allocate resources better, and initiate corrective actions, 
preventive actions, or improvements. When choosing the KPI, the organization shall 
consider the following issues:
• The KPIs shall be related to the needs and expectations of interested parties, for 
example, KPIs may be part of the customer satisfaction or product performance 
objective.
• The KPIs shall be aligned with organizational strategies and drive the organization 
to achieve its quality objectives, for example, KPIs shall relate to quantity of noncon-
formities or level of customer satisfaction.
• KPIs should focus on a few high-value activities that reflect effectiveness of the pro-
cess and that will deliver the most adequate data.
• KPIs shall provide critical information and data. In other words, changes that will 
be based on results of monitoring and measuring the KPI will induce changes and 
reactions on the organization.
• KPIs may be based on standard definitions, rules, and calculations, in order to 
enable a better analysis of the data they provide.
• For each KPI, an individual, a group, or a specific person shall be held responsible, 
for example, a process owner.
• KPIs shall be practical, which means it will be possible to draw conclusions from the 
data that are delivered.
• KPIs should relate to the activities and operations of the QMS, and the relevant 
 personnel may understand how they may influence them.
• The KPIs shall indicate points and events in a process that must be analyzed and 
evaluated.
• KPIs shall relate to the business activities and will make it possible for employees 
to know and identify when their intervention is needed when nonconformities are 
detected.
• Different KPIs should reinforce each other and not compete, contradict, or arouse 
conflicts with other KPIs.
 

360
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The KPIs are to be defined according to the nature of your organization, its pro-
cesses, and its products or services. So it would not be practical to suggest KPIs in 
this book. But what I do suggest is to define KPIs that cover the entire life cycle of 
the product:
• Design and development activities
• Realization of the product
• After-sales activities
Process Audit
Process audit is another effective method that you may apply in order to measure 
and evaluate performance of processes, their ability to create a product according to 
its specifications, and the extent to which process output meets their requirements. 
The process audit serves to examine whether the product quality requirements are 
met through the assessment of processes and to determine whether a process is con-
trolled and capable. Through reviewing the operations of the process and auditing 
their parameters, you measure the controls that are applied to the process and decide 
whether they are effective or not.
The objective of the process audit is to detect opportunities for improving a pro-
cess. The process audit may be applied when the organization realizes that it has 
quality problems, there is an increase in the number of customer complaints, changes 
are incorporated in the realization, or the organization has the desire to reduce costs. 
Which process parameters may be examined?
• Process audit examines the conformity of predefined process parameters such as 
time to process and machine parameters such as accuracy, temperature, or electrical 
current supplied to the process. The examination provides evidences that indicate 
how well the process performs.
• Process audit examines resources and process environment conditions that support 
the process in processing inputs into outputs. In practice you audit whether the 
defined requirements for a process and conditions for process environment, perfor-
mance of infrastructures, and deployment of competent personnel were supplied.
In order to implement a process audit, you need to define, for each critical process, a 
process that may affect the quality of the product—an audit plan. The audit itself may 
be planned in advance or be unscheduled. The plan will include
• Unique identification of the process and the process outputs that will be audited—it 
must be clear which process is audited.
• The structure and flow of the process, its operations, and their sequence must be 
defined and clear to the auditor. It is very important so he or she can follow the 
process effectively.
• The objective of the audit.
• Documented information for reference: flowcharts, work instructions, description 
of process parameters, etc.
 

361
Performance Evaluation
• The actions that are required to audit the process and their sequence.
• Responsibilities that take part in the process and operate it must be defined—those 
persons will answer the questions regarding the process.
• How data and results will be documented.
• Tolerances and limits in order to evaluate the performance of the process and to 
determine whether a nonconformity has occurred.
The end result of the planning is a questionnaire or a catalogue of questions. And 
through answering these questions, a process and its ability can be evaluated. Let us 
review a few examples of how the questions shall be formulated:
• Are the requirements of the process customer and the specifications of the process 
outputs defined and available to the operators of the process?
• Drawings
• Orders
• Contracts
• Are the flow of the process, its operations, and their sequence defined to the opera-
tors of the process?
• Description of the process and its operations
• Trainings
• Documented information
• Schedules
• Special cases
• Are the outputs of the process defined?
• Process outputs
• Expectations of preceding processes
• Are the capacity and resources of the process planned?
• Production planning
• Allocation of resources
• Costs of operations
• Planning of scrap
• Were the resources and support of the process available at the time of the 
processing?
• Infrastructures
• Process environment
• Were the required conditions for the resources provided at the time of the processing?
• Environmental conditions
• Required knowledge and competence
• Condition necessary to operate infrastructures
• Are the goals or objectives of the process achieved?
• Process objectives
• Needs and expectations of interested parties, for example, customer and regula-
tory bodies
It must be very clear to the auditor of the process which process or part of the pro-
cess he or she must audit. The unique identification of a process should refer to a 
 

362
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
customer order, a production order, or a batch. Flowcharts, process maps, or process 
flow diagrams may help you orient in the process and understand which parameters 
you must audit and at which process stage. The output is a report that indicates the 
performance of the process through the results of the different proven elements that 
were audited. Where the process audit finds that a process is incapable, it may be for-
warded to a corrective action or improvement.
9.1.2  Customer Satisfaction
One of the declared goals of the ISO 9001 Standard is to allow the organization to 
enhance customer satisfaction (see clause 1—Scope). This is achieved by continually 
and systematically evaluating whether the product or service that the organization 
provides meets the requirements and expectations of its customers throughout its 
life cycle. The strategy is to create a systematical method that evaluates customers’ 
perceptions of the degree to which their needs and expectations have been fulfilled. 
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements include the following:
• The organization shall monitor customers’ perceptions of the degree to which their 
needs and expectations have been fulfilled.
• The organization shall determine and develop methods to collect data, process 
information, evaluate that information, and present results regarding customer’s 
satisfaction.
• Remark—among the methods used for monitoring and evaluating customer satis-
faction or perception, the organization may use customer surveys, customer feed-
back on delivered products and services, interviews with customers, market share 
analysis, compliments, warranty claims, and dealer reports.
Needs and Expectations of the Customer
Monitoring customer satisfaction enables the early identification of problems con-
cerning quality, performance, and functionality of the product and unfulfilled 
expectations of customers. The organization’s success depends on its customers, and 
therefore, understanding current and future customer needs will allow meeting cus-
tomer requirements and exceeding customer expectations. Customer satisfaction 
is associated with the level of expectation on behalf of the customer: What are the 
expectations of the customer? What had the organization delivered? Had the expec-
tations of the customer been fulfilled? Understanding what the expectations of the 
customers are is the first step when wanting to evaluate their satisfaction. I tend to 
divide the expectations into two types:
• Objective expectations—objective expectations refer to the characteristics of a 
delivered product or service that were communicated to the customer and upon 
which the customer submitted an order. This type of evaluation shall indicate 
whether agreements with the customer were fulfilled or not. The evaluation of 
 

363
Performance Evaluation
those expectations considers specific elements or aspects of the delivered product 
or the realization processes.
• Subjective expectations—subjective expectations refer to customers’ perceptions of 
the degree to which their needs and expectations have been fulfilled. This type of 
evaluation shall indicate
• Which customer expectations were not fulfilled
• Which customer expectations were not identified
Each product has its characteristics that reflect customer expectations and the qual-
ity of the product. Those characteristics are results of product realization activi-
ties. And these are the activities that must be measured in terms of customers’ 
expectations.
After understanding what the relevant expectations of the customer are, you must 
measure them using the method for monitoring the customer satisfaction. Let us 
take, for example, a software product:
• Evaluating the objective expectations will examine whether all the functionalities 
or characteristics of the software that had been promised to the customer were actu-
ally delivered.
• Evaluating the subjective expectations will examine whether
• The functionalities or characteristics of the software that were delivered do 
 fulfill the expectations of the customers.
• Other functionalities or other characteristics of the software are expected by 
the customer.
Determining the Method for Monitoring Customers’ Satisfaction
After understanding what the expectations of the customers are, you need to 
develop a method for monitoring customer satisfaction. The objective of the 
method is to gather data and information regarding the extent to which customer 
expectations are fulfilled, submit it for analysis, and initiate actions upon its con-
clusions. When determining the method, please refer to the following issues: The 
method shall
• Indicate who the target group of the analysis is
• Indicate how customer satisfaction information is to be obtained or with which 
tools the data and information will be collected
• Define responsibilities for obtaining the data
• Indicate which business activities are to provide that data
• Indicate which methods or tools will be used to analyze the data
• Indicate the communication channels to allow data to flow between interested 
parties
• Indicate the interface between the conclusion of the analysis and the improvement 
processes
• Indicate to whom the data and its analysis is designated
 

364
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
The following table lays out the method in terms of process elements:
Process Element
Method Requirements
Relevant business activity for obtaining data:
• Survey
• Complaint handling
• Interviews with customers
• Creating proactive operations (initiated 
operations) that will deliver data and information 
regarding customer satisfaction (like customer 
surveys).
• Identifying business activities that may provide 
data and information regarding customer 
satisfaction (like complaint handling).
• Determining who the responsible person for this 
activity is.
Data
• For each type of activity, determine which type 
of data will be collected.
• Determining which tools or techniques will be 
used to collect the data.
Resources
• Employees
• Information system
• Additional software for reporting
• For each type of monitoring, the required 
resources shall be identified and allocated.
System for gathering the data
• Which system in the organization shall gather 
the collected data.
Analysis
• Statistical methods
• Quantitative/qualitative analysis
• For each type of data, it is needed to define 
which method or technique shall be used to 
analyze the data.
Reporting
• For each type of data, how the conclusion will be 
reported needs to be defined.
Actions that are required upon the result
The responsible parties for taking actions upon the 
results must be defined.
• In order to ensure that actions upon the results 
are performed, an interface between the system 
and the responsible person must be defined.
Defining Time Frames
It is necessary to define time frames or periods for each of the customer satisfaction 
activities (e.g., those mentioned in this table). This definition of time frames or inter-
vals has two objectives:
• Scheduling or planning the activities for measurement of customer satisfaction
• Allowing the corrective actions or improvements to achieve their objectives
However, a customer satisfaction survey may be consecutive, which means that the 
collection, gathering, and analysis of the data may be an everyday task. But please 
allow time between one measurement of customer satisfaction to the next in order to 
evaluate the effectiveness of corrective actions and improvements.
 

365
Performance Evaluation
Defining Who Is the Customer
When measuring and analyzing the satisfaction of customers, one must first define 
who the customers are. I divide customers into two types:
• External customers—External customers are the entities that receive the end prod-
ucts or services. One of the main goals of the ISO 9001 Standard is to enhance their 
satisfaction by meeting their requirements. Through their purchase and the revenue 
that they provide, the organization can survive. Not meeting the expectations of the 
external customers may result in the risk that they will not purchase the goods or 
services again. If we refer to the sales cycle, the end customer that receives the goods 
is the external customer.
• Internal customers—Internal customers include those members of the organiza-
tion who operate the activities and rely on assistance from other internal entities 
to fulfill their duties. A good example is the sales cycle—the logistics (the depart-
ment that processes deliveries) is the customer of the sales department (sales per-
sonnel)—the sales delivers process outputs that the logistics must use in order 
to process an order. If the organization feels that the satisfaction of the internal 
customers may affect the quality of the end product, the organization may moni-
tor it as well.
Methods for Monitoring Customer Satisfaction
There are many methods for monitoring and evaluating customer satisfaction (and 
the standard counts some of them): customer surveys, customer feedback on deliv-
ered products and services, interviews with customers, market share analysis, com-
pliments, warranty claims, and dealer reports. The sheet here is too short to review 
them all, and you must choose the ones that are most suitable for the nature of your 
organization and your customers. But nevertheless I decided to focus on the most 
common and, to my opinion, the most simple ones.
Customer Surveys
Customer surveys are an effective tool for collecting data from customers regarding 
the use, performance, quality, delivery, after-sales service, or other issues concern-
ing the product or the service. The survey will measure characteristics related to the 
product, its delivery, and the performances of the organization that are relevant to 
the satisfaction of the customer. The objective of a survey is to reflect the opinion of 
the customers regarding the quality, functionality, and performance of the product. 
Data from the survey may serve later on for analysis purposes. There are two types 
of surveys:
• Qualitative survey—a qualitative survey is designed to measure the satisfaction 
of customers that will assist the organization to understand the perception of the 
degree to which their needs and expectations have been fulfilled, for example, inter-
view with the customer where the customer provides his/her personal opinion on 
the product or the performance of the organization.
 

366
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Quantitative survey—a quantitative survey is designed to measure the degree of 
customer satisfaction. The quantitative survey will measure the satisfaction of cus-
tomers in different areas or operations of the organization in calculable or quantifi-
able terms, for example, with notes from 0 to 10.
While planning the survey, be sure to refer to the following issues:
• The questions—it is very important to identify the topics and issues that reflect the 
expectations of the customers. Those may be related to the realization processes, 
quality, functionality, and performance of the product.
• The target group of the survey is to be defined—that is, direct customers, end users, 
or distributers.
• The method for the survey—the method of how the survey will be conducted, that 
is, how the questionnaire will be submitted to the customers and how they submit it 
back must be defined. The questionnaire can be printed and filled out manually, or 
it can be a digital form. Today, most management systems provide the possibility of 
electronic questionnaires. When your management system does not provide such a 
solution, you may find many online solutions.
• Interval or frequency of the survey—the interval of the survey must be defined. In 
any case you must allow time to handle risks, improvements, and nonconformities 
that were detected during the last survey before you submit a new one.
• Sample size—the sample size for the survey must be determined. The size will be 
determined in order to obtain sufficient reliable data for the analysis. If you are 
managing 1000 service calls per year that involve 10 service representatives and 
20 technicians, you must set a sample size that will ensure that activities of all of the 
involved persons are measured.
Customer Complaints
A complaint is an effective way to receive a customer’s opinion regarding the use of 
the product. A complaint is an application communicated to the organization from a 
customer regarding events or the disturbances of performance, functionality, intended 
use, or safety of the product during use. It serves as an indication that the product has 
not reached its purpose or met its requirements. Thus, a complaint is a reliable source 
of feedback regarding the product, its design and development, and its realization pro-
cesses. Using the complaint for measuring customer satisfaction, the organization shall 
focus on complaints that relate to the functionality, characteristics, and performances 
of the product. When determining that complaints are an instrument for measuring 
customer satisfaction, please make sure that the following issues are addressed:
• Communication: The method shall describe how customer complaints are received in 
the organization—a specific telephone number, an online form, a designated e-mail 
address, and an interaction center—such options for filing a complaint must be made 
known to the customer, and the contact details must be published (printed on a bro-
chure, the firm’s website, or on the product itself). The method could be incorporated 
with other types of inquiries (such as ordering of products or visits to customers).
• Details: The method shall define the required information and details from the 
complaint that are required in measuring customer satisfaction. The details and 
 

367
Performance Evaluation
information should be sufficient in order to ensure effective analysis. If the com-
plaint refers to a product, then the following information must be specified—the 
model, identification or traceability (batch number or serial number), production 
details, contact person, delivery date, and any other information that would identify 
the product and support the analysis of (eventually) the nonconformity. If the com-
plaint refers to a service, then specify when the service was performed, by whom, to 
which product (with identification details), and the service identifier. The best way 
to ensure that such details are provided is to design a form (manually or electroni-
cally) and verify that all fields are completed.
• Availability of data: The method for handling a complaint shall consider how the 
data and information necessary for the analysis will be available.
• Awareness: The function that is in charge of the process of accepting the complaints 
must be informed that the data that are gathered during handling of complaints are 
used for the purposes of measuring customer satisfaction.
Customer Feedback
One way of measuring customer satisfaction is customer feedback. While customer 
satisfaction may be submitted to subjective opinion, customer feedback provides an 
objective point of view on whether the organization supplied a product according to 
the specifications and expectations. Customer feedback provides an early warning 
about potential quality problems, effectively identifies risks or opportunities, gener-
ates the inputs for improvement, and initiates the necessary corrective actions. By 
measuring customer feedback, importance is given to the fulfillment of the product’s 
requirements rather than the perception of the customer as to whether the organiza-
tion has met its requirements. Customer satisfaction is a subjective matter, whereas 
achieving product’s specifications is an objective issue that can be assessed and mea-
sured. Feedback may be measured through the following business activities:
• Customer complaints—the organization monitors customer complaints with regard 
to the performance and functionality of the product.
• User surveys—the organization conducts surveys regarding the functionality, char-
acteristics, and performances of the product.
• Reviews—the organization initiates a review regarding the product and its functionality.
• Journal reviews—the organization researches sector and industry tendencies.
The feedback shall indicate the status of the delivered product or service compared to 
its requirements. The data and information from the customer feedback are gathered 
in the postproduction phase, for example, transportation activities, storage, installa-
tion, service, and use.
Bear in mind that the data collected via feedback methods are to be used at later 
stages as inputs for processes of analysis of data as required in clause 9.1.3—Analysis 
and evaluation. Thus, it is recommended that when you plan the activities for collect-
ing and characterizing the data, you should consider future analyses. Once quality 
problems are detected, they are either handled as nonconformity or submitted to 
improvement processes. The objective of the analyses is to demonstrate the suitability 
and effectiveness of the QMS and to evaluate whether improvements of the effective-
ness of the QMS are needed.
 

368
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Communicating and Reviewing the Results
The method for monitoring customer satisfaction shall indicate how the results of the 
evaluation shall be communicated to the relevant interested parties in the organiza-
tion. Each interested party of the organization has other interests and therefore needs 
other type of reviews:
• Top management will require a general analysis of the overall customer satisfaction.
• Second level management will need to view data and results concerning their area 
of business.
• Operational level will need to have access to detailed information in order to be able 
to deal with specific cases of customer dissatisfaction.
Here I recommend you to develop an interface between the results and the analysis 
and the persons involved. By interface I mean the interaction between the provider of 
the results and its client. A simple way will be to allow certain roles in the organiza-
tion access to the data and its results and to plan for each level its designated reports.
Submitting the Results for Improvements and Corrective Actions
After collecting the data and understanding how customers perceive the degree to 
which their needs and expectations have been fulfilled, one must examine the need 
for further actions and when required to submit the conclusions for
• Addressing risks or opportunities
• Initiating corrective actions
• Initiating improvements
For example, if the organization detected through customer feedback that risks 
 during the realization processes were not effectively addressed, and in certain cases 
led to nonconform products, the organization will be required to submit such risks 
to the process of handling risks. Which tools allow us the standard for submitting 
results for improvements?
• Management review where the results of customer satisfaction will serve as an input
• Complaint handling
• Investigating and handling exceptional cases where satisfaction is proved to be very 
low (Dissatisfaction may indicate nonconformity)
Retaining Documented Information
The standard requires determining a method of obtaining, monitoring, and review-
ing this information. In other words, you are not required to document the method, 
but you are required to
• Prove that a method was planned and is implemented
• Show evidences of actions for measuring and monitoring customer satisfaction
• Show how those results were analyzed and concluded
• Provide evidences that nonconformities were submitted for correction when such 
were detected
 

369
Performance Evaluation
During an audit, try to present the processes as a whole and not only the forms of 
customer survey. One way to prove determination of methods for measuring and 
monitoring customer satisfaction is to relate records of the QMS to its operation or 
activity. Take a look at the following table:
Activity
Expected Records
Customers surveys
Filled-out questionnaires
Customer complaints
Records of customer complaints and records of the investigations
Service calls
Service reports for analysis
Bear in mind that the results of the analysis are required as an input to the man-
agement review: customer satisfaction and feedback from relevant interested parties.
9.1.3  Analysis and Evaluation
Clause 9.1.3 lays out the requirements for analysis and evaluation of the perfor-
mance of the QMS. The organization is to assess the progress in achieving planned 
results. These are to be reflected in the mission, vision, policies strategies, and 
objectives at all levels and in all relevant processes and functions in the organiza-
tion. The performance of the QMS will be measured through QMS aspects men-
tioned in this clause. Let us review them. The ISO 9001 requirements include the 
following:
• The organization shall analyze and evaluate appropriate data and information aris-
ing from the monitoring and measurements activities.
• The results of the analysis shall serve for the evaluation of
• Conformity of products or services
• The extent of customer satisfaction
• The performance and effectiveness of the QMS
• The effectiveness of planning and implementing of the QMS
• The effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and opportunities
• The performance of external providers
• The need for improvements to the QMS
• Remark—Methods for analyzing data can include statistical techniques.
Terms and Definitions
Before we begin unfolding the requirements, I would like to toe the line regarding 
what is analysis and evaluation in terms of quality management.
• Analysis in the eyes of the ISO 9001 Standard refers to a detailed examination or 
an investigation of the elements of the QMS and reaching their goals, using a set of 
techniques for detecting and identifying trends.
• Evaluation is the estimation of the nature, value, quality, ability, extent, or signifi-
cance of those elements or structures through the results of the analysis.
 

370
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Identifying the Appropriate Performance Indicators
Analysis and evaluation have the objective of interpreting and understanding the 
current situations of quality elements, resources, processes, products, and services, 
through different quality aspects using different methods. The goal is to decide 
whether those elements reach their desired objectives. The aspects of the QMS that 
are to be analyzed and evaluated are specifically defined by the standard (see the 
ISO 9001 Standard requirements clause 9.1.3).
Analyzing and evaluating a process indicates to which degree activities were 
performed and resources were used. The end result will provide a situation report 
regarding each of the quality aspects mentioned in this clause and will enable the 
organization to initiate the appropriate corrections or improvements.
Measuring and monitoring those elements generates data. The indicators should 
have already been determined, and you should already have applied monitoring and 
measurement activities that generate the data (see clause 9.1.1—General). Now it is 
the time to analyze the data and evaluate the condition and status of those specific 
quality elements with reference to their objectives. In order to be precise, you must 
indicate for each of the quality elements:
• Which indicators shall be analyzed and evaluated?
• How will they be analyzed or with which methods?
• What are the relevant objectives? Are the objectives relevant?
• Who are responsible for performing those analysis and evaluation activities?
• How will it be reported?
• Who is the target group that will use the results of the analysis and evaluation?
Sources for data and information for analyzing and evaluating include
• Process planning outputs
• Results of process performance measurements (quality tests)
• Analysis of process variations
• Analysis of occurrences (like nonconformities)
• Results of audits
• Results of validation activities
• Results of verification activities
• Results of supplier evaluation
Evaluating the Extent of Customer Satisfaction
When evaluating customer satisfaction, one must consider appropriate data and 
information arising from the monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evalua-
tion activities that will serve the analysis and evaluation. Customer satisfaction 
is measured through the customers’ perceptions of the degree to which their 
needs and expectations have been fulfilled by the delivered product. The objec-
tives and the methods are well discussed in chapter 9.1.2—Customer satisfaction. 
Please refer to this chapter for more details and techniques. After defining how 
customer satisfaction will be measured, you are required to decide how or with 
 

371
Performance Evaluation
which methods the data will be analyzed and evaluated. Types of data that will 
be analyzed may include
• Results of customer surveys regarding satisfaction
• Data of customer returns
• Data of customer complaints, customer dissatisfaction, or loss of customers
• Customer feedback
Evaluating Conformity of Products or Services
When evaluating conformity of products and services, one must consider the appro-
priate data and information arising from the monitoring and measurement activities 
that will serve the analysis and evaluation. It is required to provide data and figures 
that will represent the degree of conformity of products and services. The data shall 
refer to two aspects:
• Analyzing data of nonconformities encountered—from these data and information, 
it will be possible to identify the root causes of quality problems or nonconformities 
and to derive corrective actions and improvements of
• Processes and realization activities of products and services
• Products, their characteristics, or intended use
• Analyzing data of actions taken for the elimination of those nonconformities—from 
these data and information, it will be possible to
• Update activities for addressing risks and opportunities
• Apply changes to the QMS
For each type of data, you must assign the appropriate method for analysis and 
 evaluation. Types of data that will be analyzed may include
• Data regarding the waste and scrap of process outputs
• Added value of corrective actions
• Data regarding costs of quality
• Data of customer returns
• Data of rework or corrections of process outputs
• Data from customer complaints, customer dissatisfaction, or loss of customers
• Fault of extern delivered goods or services
• Data from warranty claims
When planning the reports for the analysis of conformity of goods and services, 
please refer to the following issues:
• The reports must be presented in a realistic and clear format that will enable 
 conclusions, further actions, and improvements.
• The reports will indicate trends of processes, activities, or characteristics of  products 
or services.
• It will be possible to compare results of reports between periods in order to prove 
effectiveness.
 

372
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Evaluating the Performance and Effectiveness of the QMS
Effectiveness of the QMS refers to the extent to which objectives of processes were 
achieved and may indicate how much the QMS has improved. Performance of the 
QMS is measured by certain indicators of processes and their relevant criteria, which 
suggest how much processes achieve their objectives (or not). The standard demands 
that the organization shall use its methods of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and 
evaluation to prove the ability of the processes to attain desired results. According to 
the results of the analysis, resources and activities shall be adjusted in order to meet 
business objectives.
Process performance is measured with comparison to the quality objectives. In 
other words, a process or an activity shall be evaluated and its performance shall 
be determined according to the extent its relevant quality objectives were achieved. 
Those activities related to the objectives of the organization as well the expectations 
of the interested parties are to be analyzed and evaluated:
• Processes—the objective is to review the effectiveness and efficiency of processes. 
For example, evaluating a process will review its progress made on achievement of 
the process objectives.
• Resources—the objective is to ensure that resources that are used in the realization 
processes, such as equipment, monitoring and measuring devices, facilities, knowl-
edge, and personnel, are used effectively and efficiently.
• Process outputs—the objective is to ensure that process outputs such as products or 
services meet their specifications (customer or regulatory).
Performance indicators may include
• Achieving process objectives
• Allowable process variations
• Achieving expectations, specifications, and needs of process customers
• Obtaining intended results
• Measuring process parameters that indicate the performance of a process: duration 
of activities, costs, scrap, quality, and capacity
• Improvement of processes in the long term
In practice, each method shall evaluate and indicate whether processes operated in their 
full potential and whether they deliver the expected outputs. They shall refer to a basis 
for comparison or a reference point against which process outputs can be evaluated, for 
example, criteria that will enable decision making regarding the performance of a pro-
cess—whether it has achieved its objectives or not. A simple example is the instruction 
for quality test, a document that specifies what the expected product’s characteristics are. 
This is the base for the evaluation. The monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evalua-
tion in this case should represent trends and changes in the process or the product.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of the Planning of the QMS
The ISO 9001 Standard requires that the effectiveness of the implementation of the 
planning of the QMS be regularly analyzed and evaluated. Evaluating the effectiveness 
 

373
Performance Evaluation
in this case means measuring whether the processes, operations, and activities of 
the QMS are implemented as planned. The purpose of this evaluation is to detect 
necessities for the allocation and optimizations of the QMS activities. Evaluating the 
planning of the QMS refers to the different elements of the QMS that are used to 
operate it. This type of evaluation considers qualitative activities such as
• Planning—the evaluation shall assess whether planning activities are performed as 
required by the ISO 9001 Standard:
• Processes are planned with process approach.
• Actions to address risks and opportunities are applied.
• Quality objectives are defined and measured.
• Changes are identified and submitted to control.
• Resources—the evaluation shall assess whether the planned resources that are sup-
posed to support the processes are applied:
• The appropriate human, knowledge, and competence resources were allocated 
to the operations.
• The appropriate infrastructures are available and maintained.
• The appropriate process environment is provided and maintained.
• Product and service requirements—the evaluation shall assess whether activities 
necessary to identify product requirements are implemented:
• Review of requirements for product or service.
• Customer communication activities.
• Processes—the evaluation shall assess whether all process activities are performed 
as planned:
• Inputs are flowing as required.
• Controls are applied as planned.
• Results of process are controlled against criteria.
• Outputs are released as planned.
• New processes or modified processes achieve their objectives.
• Design and development is being managed as required:
• A design and development plan is in place.
• The design and development is verified, validated, and reviewed.
• External providers:
• The controls over external providers are defined and implemented.
• The external providers are controlled and evaluated.
• Production and service provision:
• Identification and traceability are controlled and activities to manage them are 
defined.
• Postdelivery activities are defined and controlled.
Tools for obtaining data regarding the effectiveness of the planning include the following:
• Internal and external audit—audits provide you with data regarding the degree of 
implementation of processes against their planning.
• Inputs to the management review—those inputs include information regarding the 
implementation of the QMS.
• The degree of implementation of a quality plan—which defines the planning of 
processes.
 

374
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
When evaluating the planning of the QMS, the results shall indicate whether the 
processes are implemented, partly implemented, or require a corrective action. The 
results may be qualitative and quantitative.
Evaluating the Effectiveness of Actions for Addressing Risks
Effectiveness of actions for addressing risks refers to the achievement of their goals: 
mitigate, eliminate, or reduce the risk to an acceptable level. The objective is to create 
an iterative process of ever-improving the controls. Evaluating the effectiveness is 
done through two aspects:
• Verification that the required controls were implemented as planned
• A verification that the controls reduce the risks as planned
The results of the evaluation shall indicate
• Whether further controls are required
• Whether to accept the risk or to plan the reviewed QMS element again
This issue is discussed in detail in chapter 6.1—Actions to address risks and oppor-
tunities under paragraph Evaluating effectiveness of actions to address risks and 
opportunities. Please review this paragraph for more detail.
Evaluating the Performance of External Providers
Evaluating performance of external providers refers to their abilities to deliver 
products or services in accordance with predefined requirements. An effective and 
objective evaluation considers the significant parameters regarding the purchased 
products or services. The objective is to establish an ongoing control process over the 
external provider in order to foresee events that might become nonconformities or 
quality problems. The evaluation shall assess the risks and effects of the purchased 
product on the end product.
This issue is discussed in detail in chapter 8.4—Control of external provision of 
products and services under paragraph Evaluation of external providers and the fol-
lowing paragraphs. Please review this paragraph for more details.
Evaluating the Need for Improvements to the QMS
Last but not least is the requirement to provide data and information that will 
suggest the need for improvements to the QMS. Analysis of data and information 
related to the quality goals mentioned earlier will provide information regarding 
situations of areas in the organization or scopes of the QMS and will indicate their 
need for improvement. The evaluation of the data can lead to improvements, rede-
sign, or reengineering of business activities, and the results of the analysis and 
evaluation will allow the organization to determine whether certain opportunities 
 

375
Performance Evaluation
shall be forwarded to the process of continual improvement. The data and informa-
tion that will be analyzed shall refer to
• The degree to which products or services answer the expectations of customers or 
regulatory requirements
• The influence of nonconformities on product or service characteristics
• The performance of the processes and operations of the QMS
The evaluation of the information shall suggest
• Improvements of elements or scopes of the QMS
• Improvements of realization processes
• Improvements of products or services
How these data and information shall be used and how improvement shall be 
 developed will be discussed in chapter 10—Improvement.
Selecting Methods for Analysis and Evaluation
In a note the standard indicates that methods to analyze data can include statistical 
techniques. And I would like to add some inputs regarding selection of a method for 
the analysis and evaluation:
• A method should be selected upon its ability to provide data that will accurately 
indicate process performance.
• The relevant personnel shall have the qualifications to use those methods, collect the 
data, and analyze it. When required you may include the issue in requirements for 
competence of persons who operate the relevant processes.
• The methods shall support and provide relevant personnel with the correct data 
needed to evaluate the progress of a process with relation to its desired results or 
objectives.
9.2  Internal Audit
Internal audit is an effective tool that is used for self-assessment of the organiza-
tion and to determine the extent to which the QMS requirements are fulfilled. The 
results of the audit (the audit findings) shall demonstrate the effectiveness of the QMS 
and identify nonconformities and opportunities for improvement. Let us review the 
ISO 9001 requirements.
9.2.1  
• The organization shall conduct internal audits at planned intervals.
• The internal audit shall provide information on whether the QMS conforms to the 
organization’s own requirements for the QMS.
 

376
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The internal audit shall provide information on whether the QMS conforms to the 
requirements of the ISO 9001 Standard.
• The internal audit shall provide information on whether the QMS is effectively 
implemented and maintained.
9.2.2  
• The organization shall define, implement, and maintain an internal audit program. 
The program shall refer to
• The frequency and intervals of the audit
• The methods for conducting the audit
• Roles and responsibilities that take part in an internal audit
• Planning requirements
• Reporting the results
• The organization shall define the scope of the audit.
• The results shall include reference to
• The importance of the audited processes, activities, or operations
• Changes that may affect or might have affected the organization
• The results of previous audits
• The organization shall define the criteria for the audit.
• The organization shall select auditors and conduct the audit to ensure objectivity 
and the impartiality of the audit process.
• The organization shall ensure that the results of the audit are communicated and 
distributed to the appropriate relevant managerial levels.
• The organization shall ensure that nonconformities are addressed and corrective 
actions are applied without unnecessary delays.
• The organization shall retain documented information referring to the findings and 
results of the audit as evidence of the implementation of the audit program and the 
audit results.
• Remark—the ISO 19011 Standard may serve as guidelines for establishing and 
implementing QMS auditing.
Audit Program
The organization must maintain a documented program for conducting audits 
( internal and external). An audit program is a series of steps or specifications required 
by the organization in order to be able to conduct the audit. The goal of the program 
is to identify the required organizational elements that will be audited and determine 
when they will be audited. The program has several objectives:
• The audit program will ensure that the audits are conducted as planned.
• Through publication of the program, employees and personnel will understand that 
the internal audit is a continuous measure of the QMS and not a capricious decision 
made by the top management.
• The audit program shall introduce the auditor with the scope and objectives of the 
audit (fields, subjects, departments, locations, sites, products, areas, roles, processes, 
or the specific status of processes).
 

377
Performance Evaluation
• The program shall specify the authorities and responsible parties that will partici-
pate in the audit (the auditor or audit team, employees, specific roles, management 
representatives, technical experts, etc.).
• The program shall detail the resources required for the audit (meeting rooms, 
 personnel, records, products, production lines, etc.).
• The program shall give a description of the agenda or topics and issues that will be 
audited and discussed.
• The program shall indicate scheduled time frames for the different audit stages.
It is recommended that you publish and communicate the audit program. The program 
can appear as a list or a procedure. The following is a suggestion of an audit program:
Example of an audit program
Time and date for part 1 of the audit:
• 8:00–12:00 12/12
Deportment:
• Assembly
Topics to be reviewed:
• Accomplishment of work instructions
• Accomplishment of cleanliness instructions
• Performance of trainings
• Nonconformities
Resources:
• All work instructions are to be available
• All required records are to be available
References:
• Audit plan
Time and date for part 2 of the audit:
• 13:00–17:00 12/12
Deportment:
• Warehouse
Topics to be reviewed:
• Accomplishment of work instructions
• Accomplishment of cleanliness instructions
• Performance of trainings
Nonconformities
Resources:
• All warehouse employees are to attend the audit
References:
• Audit plan
Some organizations also include detailed tests, investigations, or examinations 
that are conducted during the audit. I will refer to it as the “plan” of the audit. The 
program must be documented and will be submitted to the controls suggested in 
clause 7.5—Documented information.
 

378
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Audit Scope
The first step in implanting effectively the internal audit is to define the scope of the 
audit. The audit scope defines the extent and the boundaries of the internal audit: the 
areas and limits to which the audit is applicable and which the audit must control. 
The scope shall cover the following issues:
• The purpose of the audits (e.g., compatibility to the ISO 9001 Standard requirements).
• Physical locations (like branches or affiliations).
• Different organizational units like divisions or departments.
• The relevant or related activities and processes to be audited.
• The time period to which the audit results are valid and after this period a new audit 
shall be conducted (a year, a quarter, a month).
• Additional standards or regulatory and contractual requirements that may serve as 
audit criteria.
• The expected records.
This scope will be managed and implemented through the audit program and plan 
(which will be discussed later on in this chapter).
Audit Plan
The audit shall include and specify the activities necessary for organizing and con-
ducting the audit and describe the required resources for the audit. For this purpose 
you may define and use an audit plan. By audit plan I mean a specification (may appear 
on a document) that describes all the tests and examinations that must be performed 
during an audit and needed to be done in order to evaluate the extent of meeting 
requirements. The plan will direct the auditor during the audit. The objective of the 
plan is to ensure that all aspects of the scope are covered and to allow auditees to pre-
pare and organize for the audit. While auditing the QMS, you are required to evaluate 
it through three distinct aspects (each of them will be discussed in detail separately):
• Implementing all the relevant ISO 9001 Standard requirements
• Achieving the organization’s requirements for its QMS: quality plans, processes and 
procedures, and maintenance of records
• Extent of effectiveness of implementing the QMS: achieving quality objectives, cus-
tomer satisfaction, and improving the QMS
The audit plan should include reference to the following issues:
• The audit scope
• Locations where the audit activities are to be conducted
• The audit topics
• Time schedules
• Information for the opening of the audit
• Changes in the QMS that must be mentioned before the audit begins
• Results of the last audit
• Open nonconformities
 

379
Performance Evaluation
• Required resources
• The audit criteria and reference to relevant documents
• The auditor or the audit team
• Roles and responsibilities of the auditee
• Other required accompanying persons
• The audit tests, inspections, and examinations
You may manage a general plan that will refer to all the organizational units and will 
ask to evaluate performance of procedures and work instructions, evaluate quality 
procedures, and sample evidences of executing those processes. Such a plan will be 
applicable to the entire organization. But I recommend adopting a more specific plan 
designed to audit one specific organizational unit and is therefore not applicable to 
other units. Such a plan will refer to specific processes related to this unit, will con-
sider the interrelations of this unit with other organizational units, will present with 
the appropriate criteria for evaluation, will examine specifically the quality require-
ments of this unit, and will ask to review documented information related to its pro-
cesses. This plan is more effective; for example, if the auditor is auditing a warehouse, 
a specific plan will direct them to the appropriate processes and activities, support 
them with the right criteria, and describe to them which records must they sample.
Defining Planned Intervals for Internal Audits
The audits will be planned and conducted at planned intervals. The intervals shall be 
documented on the audit program. The goals of planning ahead are
• To allow the different units of the organization time to prepare for the audit
• To maintain a periodical plan for internal audits (usually an annual plan)
• To ensure the continuity of the audit
In practice, you may define appointments for the audit on the organizational  calendar. 
The ISO 9001 Standard does not require specific dates but it is more practical. If you 
would like to perform “unexpected” audits, then define them on the program but do 
not publish them.
Conformance of QMS to the Organization’s Requirements
The organization has determined its own requirement of the QMS while designing 
and developing it. The internal audit is one instrument for self-review of whether 
those requirements are achieved. Which type of requirements?
• Quality plans for the product: Any requirement for product realization must be eval-
uated on whether it was performed as planned. The best way is to sample and evalu-
ate a product against its relevant predefined criteria. Sample a product or an output 
of a process, review its quality plan, detect its specifications, and check whether the 
product was realized according to the plan. Document the results.
• The identification and implementation of international, national, or local regula-
tions will be evaluated. The audit shall examine the identification of appropriate reg-
ulations, their introduction to the quality processes (such as management review, 
 

380
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
or integration in the training program), implementation throughout the realization 
processes, and maintenance of the appropriate records.
• Processes and procedures: The audit must evaluate whether the realization processes 
are performed as required. It could be correlated with the quality plans. The evalu-
ation would refer to required results or predefined criteria. Generally speaking, an 
audit must sample the processes and outputs and evaluate two things:
• Whether the process is managed as planned: according to its definition (process 
chart,  diagram, SOP, etc.)
• Whether the process achieves its objectives: if the parameters of the process are 
valid and the outputs are as expected
Conformance of QMS to the ISO 9001 Standard Requirements
Aside from the organization’s requirements, the audit shall evaluate the implemen-
tation of the ISO 9001 Standard requirements. The implementation of the ISO 9001 
Standard requirements for quality processes includes, for example,
• The specific documentation requirements
• Addressing risks and opportunities
• Implementing the required purchase controls
This part of the audit must be conducted throughout the entire organizational 
units related to product realization, or are under the scope of the QMS. For each 
organizational unit, it is required to audit how much quality management tools are 
implemented, for example, management of resources, knowledge and competence, 
maintenance of quality documented information, or management of nonconformities.
Effectiveness of the Implementation and Maintenance of the QMS
The audit must provide the ability to evaluate whether the QMS is effective or not. 
The effectiveness of the QMS refers to the extent to which objectives of processes were 
achieved and may indicate how much the QMS has improved. This will be reviewed 
through two aspects of the QMS:
• Quality objectives: The audit must indicate whether the organization has achieved 
its quality objectives. During the audit the relevant quality objectives will be 
reviewed for their relevance to the process and how they are measured and to what 
extent they were achieved (the results of the measurement). When it is found that 
an objective has not been reached, the cause must be presented and the measure 
taken to handle it.
• Improvement of the QMS: The audit must indicate whether measures and actions were 
undertaken in order to improve the QMS and whether those actions were effective—
the improvement was achieved.
The Auditor
Conducting the audit pretty much depends on the personal and professional com-
petence of the auditor. It is equivalent for appointing an experienced investigator. 
The auditor shall be objectively related to the organizational unit or function that he 
 

381
Performance Evaluation
or she is auditing and try as much as possible to conduct the audit objectively and 
impartially. This alone demands from the auditor the ability to
• Accept opinions that are different from his or hers
• Look at things with open- or broad-mindedness
• Understand and accept other points of view of the issues that are being audited
Beside its personal approach, an auditor must have a minimum acquaintance with the 
field of the organization in order to evaluate the processes and their results beyond 
the working procedures, work instructions, and documentation (the documented cri-
teria). This kind of knowledge can give him or her the ability and the consideration 
to evaluate situations while identifying any nonconformities or faults. The ISO 9001 
Standard refers us to the ISO 19011 Standard (guidelines for quality and/or environ-
mental management system auditing), which specifies the required auditor qualities:
• Ethics: An auditor will possess personal characteristics like credibility, integrity, 
and honesty and provide reliable information and results regarding the unit the 
auditor is auditing.
• Open-minded: An auditor will be willing to listen, learn, and accept new ideas and 
to reflect them on the situations or requirements. Sometimes auditor may encounter 
new approaches or opinions. An auditor must have the ability to assess and accept 
different points of view as long as they achieve the requirements.
• Diplomatic: An auditor will be polite and well-mannered; an auditor serves as the 
representative of the top management.
• Observer: An auditor will have the ability to recognize and evaluate what he or she 
sees and to understand and interpret events without deep interrogation.
• Perspective: An auditor will have the ability to evaluate situations beyond the 
person’s appearance, with a systematic view of things, and will have the ability to 
understand the organizational consequences of the evidence he or she finds.
• Versatile: An auditor will have the ability to mobilize from one situation to another 
without losing direction. One moment the auditor may audit one field; the next 
moment it may be another. An auditor must be able to stay focused.
• Structured: An auditor will advance and progress the audit according to a defined 
method or plan and within the boundaries of the scope.
• Persistence: An auditor must be persistent with their objectives, so that when they 
ask a question, they must receive an answer to it and not be diverted by interferences 
or disturbances.
• Independent: An auditor shall have their own opinions on things, will not be influ-
enced by the environment, and will be free from conflict of interest.
• Decisive: An auditor must be ready to make decisions even when they are hard or 
will not satisfy the auditee.
Roles and Responsibilities
The audit program shall specify the responsible parties that will participate in the 
audit. The roles may induce the following:
• The auditor or audit team
• The management representatives
 

382
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Employees or specific roles such as technical experts, specific managers, or specific 
functions that will be audited
• External parties such as specialists or consultants
The top management has a special responsibility; it is obligated to monitor the inter-
nal audit process by
• Ensuring and verifying the conducting of the audits according to the program and 
the plan
• Reviewing and evaluating the results of the audit
• Verifying that all nonconformities detected during the audit are addressed and closed
Submitting regularly the results of the audit to the management review (as required 
in clause 9.3.2—Management review inputs c, 6) answers this requirement. In big 
organizations, I used to perform a regular internal audit in the different units or 
affiliates (according to a planned program). The results were then sent to a contact 
person at the top management on a regular basis.
Audit Criteria
In order to conduct effective tests or inspections, you need to assign and document 
criteria to each test. Criteria are set of policies, procedures, or requirements used as a 
reference against which audit evidence is compared. The objectives of the criteria are
• To support decisions for judging, evaluating, and determining by facts, values, 
and data the compliance of the outputs to the requirements; the auditor samples 
a  process or process output, views it, turns to the criteria, and decides whether the 
process was effective or not
• To enable the determination of the extent of conformity of processes or process 
outputs
The audit plan shall refer each test to its appropriate criteria. The criteria may be 
quantitative such as tolerances and limits of processes, number of trainings per year, 
and number of accepted nonconformities or qualitative such as estimations of knowl-
edge and skills. One important property of the criteria is the ability to evaluate audit 
findings against it. In other words, the criteria must be adjusted to the type of find-
ings; if you are auditing the processes of certifying new personnel, the criteria should 
be a procedure or a checklist that describes which activities must be accomplished 
when accepting a new worker.
The criteria will provide a successful validation by indicating whether the findings 
are accepted or rejected. The criteria will present a method for the evaluation and will 
refer not only to products, parts, or components but also to realization processes and 
conditions for realization. Types of criteria include
• Policies
• Working instructions, test instructions, and procedures
• Drawing and specifications
• Management system requirements
 

383
Performance Evaluation
• Quality plans
• Standards and technical specifications
• Laws, regulations, and directives
• Documented customer requirements like orders or contractual requirements
• Industry or business sector codes of conduct
Audit Results (Findings and Evidences)
During the audit, the auditor samples, observes, asks questions, examines processes 
or processes outputs like records or products, or observes locations where a service 
was provided. The inspections or observations shall be considered and recorded as the 
audit findings. The findings will be used for the audit’s conclusions and will describe 
what the auditor saw and revealed. These shall then be compared to the predefined 
criteria and shall indicate the status of the processes or products: conformity, noncon-
formity, or opportunity for improvement. The findings include the evidence that the 
auditor reviewed (e.g., processes, products, records); for each, he or she may document
• What was presented or found—whether it is a product or a record
• The context: what is the relevant process or product
• The requirement or the relevant criteria
• The significance of the process to the QMS and its influence on the quality of the product
• Changes that may affect the QMS (will be discussed in the next paragraph)
• Results of the previous audits (will be discussed in the next paragraph)
Indicating the significance is important for the classification of the findings, particu-
larly when the auditor reveals a deviation from the specifications and must decide 
whether to submit it as a nonconformity (when the process is significant) or just as 
an opportunity for improvement. That is why the auditor must have the knowledge, 
the ability, or at least the minimal understanding of the area he or she is auditing for 
deciding what is significant and what is not.
Accuracy of the documentation is important for the next step; the classification, 
for example, good, opportunity for improvement, or corrective action, is required 
(which will be reviewed later). This is the most important part of the audit report.
Changes Affecting the Organization
One of the issues that must be reviewed during the audit is the effect of occurred 
changes on the QMS and their consequences. If such changes are relevant, they and 
their consequences will be mentioned to the auditor at the beginning of the audit. 
A good example is changes in the product—the auditor must know about such a 
change in order to assess whether it was properly implemented. Changes to the QMS 
are referred two times on the standard:
• 6.3—Planning of changes—where it is required to develop a method for planning 
the implementation of changes
• 8.5.6—Control of changes—where it is required to ensure that changes do not affect 
the ability of the organization to continually provide goods or services that conform 
to the requirements
 

384
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Those two aspects of changes will be reviewed during the internal audit, and the 
auditor will review
• Changes that occurred in the QMS since the last audit
• Changes in the specifications or requirements of the product
• Changes in processes
• Change in resources
• Changes in documentations
• Changes that were submitted to a planned method for implementation
• Changes that were reviewed for assurance that they do not affect the ability of 
the organization to continually provide products or services that conform to the 
requirements
In practice, the audit plan shall include references to changes in the QMS, shall 
indicate their consequences and the results of the audit, and shall prove that those 
changes were reviewed.
Results of Previous Audits
The results of previous audits shall be referred in the internal audit. This requirement 
refers mainly to nonconformities that were revealed during previous audits but may refer 
also to opportunities for improvement. The organization shall prove to the auditor that
• For each nonconformity, a corrective action was taken within the scheduled time 
frame, the treatment was effective (objectives were achieved and the nonconformity 
was removed), and the nonconformity did not occur again
• Where opportunities were adopted, the implementation was effective
In practice, the audit plan shall include references to the results of previous audits, 
and the results of the internal audit shall prove that those findings were addressed.
The Classification of Audit Findings
Any findings during the audit shall be indicated with one of the following 
classifications:
• Conformity—the process or product sampled was in accordance with the relevant 
requirements and criteria.
• Opportunity for improvement—in the auditor’s opinion, an improvement can be 
applied to the matter, and the organization may or may not adopt this opportunity 
and submit it to the control of opportunities as required in clause 6.1—Actions to 
address risks and opportunities.
• Nonconformity—the process sampled was not according to the requirements and 
the audit criteria.
• If the organization feels the need to add another classification suitable to its nature 
or processes, it may do that.
 

385
Performance Evaluation
This classification is important for the auditee to know afterward where he or she 
must invest resources; nonconformities must be removed while opportunities for 
improvements may be considered.
Nonconformities Revealed in the Audit
Nonconformities revealed during the audit must be addressed, documented, and sub-
mitted for correction. The nonconformities may be documented three times  during 
the audit process:
 
1. Within the audit report along with the audit findings. We can also refer to it as the 
report itself.
 
2. Where it is suitable, as nonconformities. Any audit report should contain a sum-
mary of the nonconformities revealed during the audit.
 
3. As an input for a corrective action followed by the audit.
When nonconformities are revealed, they should be applied to a controlled process. 
The ISO 9001 Standard specifically requires that for each nonconformity, a decision 
and an action will be determined without unnecessary delays in order to ensure 
that they will be handled and removed. The goal is to verify that the nonconformi-
ties are removed or eliminated and will not be repeated. In order to ensure the sub-
mission to the correction, you need to initiate the interrelation between the internal 
audit process and the control of nonconformities (as required in clause 10.2—
Nonconformity and corrective action), where the outputs and the nonconformities 
discovered in the audit shall serve as inputs to the control of nonconformities and 
opportunities shall serve as inputs to the continual improvement process.
Communicating the Results
Any audit must have a summary report that will communicate the results to the 
appropriate persons in the organization. The auditor should gather all the informa-
tion, data, findings, nonconformities, and opportunities for improvement and pres-
ent them together in one report. The goals are to provide the organization with a 
status report regarding the QMS and for follow-up during the next audit, to review 
the treatment, and to verify that all nonconformities are closed. Who are the target 
groups of this report?
• The function that is responsible for the auditee
• The auditee—workers of personnel if the organization finds it appropriate
• The top management
This report is a tool for those target groups for understanding the status of the QMS 
and of the organization with reference to the requirements or the criteria. Therefore, 
it is recommended that the report be designed in a format that would be easy to 
understand.
 

386
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Retaining Documented Information
The documented information of the internal audit is the output of the audit pro-
cess. The organization shall retain documented information as demonstration for the 
planning of the audit as well as evidences for implementing the program and plan and 
conducting the audit activities. The records of the internal audit have several goals:
• Planning the audit and the audit activities
• Ensuring that the audit was conducted according to its scope
• Proving that activities were performed according to the plan
• Proving that objectives of the audit were achieved
The documentation shall be submitted to the control of documented information as 
required in clause 7.5—Documented information. The ISO 9001 Standard chooses 
not to refer to the distinction between two types of the documentations:
• Documented information used for the planning of the audit such as the audit pro-
gram and plan
• Records and evidence of the implementation of the audit program and the audit 
results such as audit protocol or audit report
Which documented information may we expect?
• Audit program—a document describing the program
• Audit plan—a document describing the activities of the audit
• The audit report
• The reviewed issues such as changes or follow-ups of previous audits
• The findings of the audit—a documentation of what was inspected and observed
• List of detected nonconformities and opportunities
• Summary report
ISO 19011
The ISO 9001 Standard refers us to the ISO 19011 Standard—Guidelines for audit-
ing management systems and for more references and guidance regarding planning 
and conducting the internal audit. I definitely recommend reviewing the ISO 19011 
Standard because it broadens the issue of the audit and provides good techniques and 
ideas for conducting an effective internal audit.
9.3  Management Review
The management review is a management tool in the hands of the top management 
for evaluating the QMS. It is one method (among others) dictated by the standard 
for monitoring the QMS and evaluating its performances and effectiveness. The 
management review is an activity usually performed as a meeting where represen-
tatives of the top management are presented with data and information regarding 
 

387
Performance Evaluation
the performances of the QMS. The objective of the review is to give the top manage-
ment a chance to periodically evaluate the QMS. Let us review the ISO 9001 Standard 
requirements.
9.3.1  General
• Top management shall review the QMS at defined intervals.
• The review shall be planned in advance.
• The review shall ensure the consecutive suitability, adequacy, and effectiveness of 
the QMS.
• The review shall ensure that the QMS is planned with alignment to the strategy of 
the organization.
9.3.2  Management Review Inputs
For effective review and decision making, the management review shall take into 
account the following issues:
• Follow-ups from previous reviews and status of decisions and actions taken.
• The review shall discuss changes in external and internal issues that are relevant to 
the quality management and their influence on it.
• Information regarding the performance of the QMS with reference to trends and 
indicators such as
• Results of customer satisfaction and feedback measurements
• The extent to which quality objectives have been met
• Process performance and product conformance supported by evidences
• Audit results: internal, external, and customer audits
• Information about nonconformities and status of corrective actions
• Results of monitoring and measurement activities
• Issues related to suppliers and external providers that may affect products, 
 services, and the QMS
• The adequacy of resources.
• The effectiveness of actions taken to address risks and opportunities.
• Opportunities for improvement.
9.3.3  Management Review Outputs
• The outputs of the management review shall include decisions related to
• Actions for improvement or further decision regarding opportunities for 
improvements
• Any need for changes to the QMS
• Any need for resources
• The inputs and the results of the management review shall be retained and handled 
as documented information. Evidences for actions taken as a result of the manage-
ment review shall be retained as documented information as well.
 

388
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Goal of the Management Review
The ISO 9001 Standard clearly specifies the goal of the management review—to 
ensure its continuing suitability, adequacy, effectiveness, and alignment with the 
strategic direction of the organization of the QMS. Let us interpret it:
• The strategic direction of the organization was determined while discussing the 
context of the organization and should be documented (e.g., in the quality manual 
in case you are still choosing to maintain one). In practice, you may review the qual-
ity policy in order to ensure its suitability to the purpose of the organization.
• To ensure the continuing suitability of the QMS refers to the review whether char-
acteristics of the QMS are appropriate for their objectives.
• To ensure the adequacy of the QMS refers to the review whether the QMS can act 
correctly in order to fulfill its requirements and achieve its objectives.
• To ensure the effectiveness of the QMS refers to extent of achievement of quality 
objectives.
Participants of the Management Review
Participants of the management review are clearly defined by the standard—the top 
management. But who is considered as the top management? According to the ISO 9000, 
the top management consists of persons or group of people who direct and control an 
organization at the highest level. To this definition I choose to add a person or a group 
of persons who have the authority to appoint resources for the QMS. But when the scope 
of the QMS refers only to a part of the organization, for example, the logistic center or 
the service center, the top management is not considered as the board of directors of the 
whole organization but the organizational role who steers and directs the logistic center 
or the service center. This fact makes it simpler to define the  relevant top management.
Intervals for the Management Review
In the standard it is written specifically that the management review shall be held 
at planned intervals. The ISO 9001 Standard knows that the top management is busy and 
sometimes the QMS is not on its top priorities. Sometimes it is really hard to summon 
the top management and to convince them that the management review regarding the 
situation of the QMS is important. And when an appointment is already set, it is exposed 
to postponements. The standard shows understanding but insists that the QMS shall be 
reviewed by the management at planned intervals. Planned intervals refer to a planned 
period of time from the last review. The interval will be determined with accordance to 
the nature and complexity of the activities. There are two main goals for this requirement:
• The management review must be performed on a regular basis in order to ensure 
continuing involvement of the top management in the QMS.
• The periodic management review allows the top management to determine trends of 
the QMS and degree of achievement of its objectives.
I suggest here a practical method for obtaining this requirement. As I functioned 
as a representative of the top management, I recommended that the QMS will be 
reviewed by me (a delegate of the top management) and other delegates from the 
 

389
Performance Evaluation
different organizational levels (who are not considered as top management) once a 
week as a quality circle. In addition, the entire top management will review the status 
of the QMS twice a year. In cases and situations where a higher decision or interven-
tion is needed, an exceptional meeting with the rest of the top management will be 
summoned ad hoc. In order to institutionalize the matter, I created a procedure that 
defines it. But keep in mind that a procedure is compelling and you will be requested 
in an audit to demonstrate the implementation of this procedure.
Inputs for the Management Review
As you might have noticed, the standard is quite explicit regarding the information and 
data that are required to be reviewed during the management review. This list of inputs 
for the management review should reflect trends in the QMS and involves aspects of 
performance, control, consulting, changes, improvements, and risks. The information 
(the processed inputs) should assist in determining the achievement of planned results. 
The challenge here will be to identify the sources of data and the responsible parties in the 
organization that can provide these data, collect them in an orderly manner, and present 
them in an acceptable way. From my experience, I can give you the next advice—do not 
wait until month or two weeks before the review to summon and organize the data; you 
will find it hard and one cannot ensure that the data will be reliable. Instead, try to create 
a system of reporting according to the management review that will generate the data on 
itself. The objective here is to automate the gathering of the data. For example:
• If you are implementing a system that gathers and monitors nonconformities, make 
sure this system can provide you with a report appropriate for the management 
review: the nonconformity, the details, the corrective action that was taken, and the 
effectiveness of the corrective action.
• If you are implementing a system to monitor and control processes (SPC), try to see 
whether this system generates a report with annual results that show trends of the 
processes.
• If you implemented a system to collect and analyze customer feedback, I am almost 
positive that such system can offer a summary report.
The data and information may be presented and maintained as documented informa-
tion that will support top management in discussing and making decisions: results 
of surveys, reviews, audits, summary reports, presentations, and statistical charts. 
What are the required inputs?
Follow-Up Actions from Previous Management Reviews
Decisions for actions determined in previous reviews will be presented and discussed: 
what was decided, what was carried out, and what was turned down, rejected, or post-
poned. The review will examine not only whether they were applied and implemented 
but also whether the actions were effective and achieved their objectives.
Changes Affecting the QMS
Changes regarding internal and external issues that are part of the QMS and might 
have affected the QMS or the product will be reviewed for their influence and impact 
 

390
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
on the QMS. It refers to all events that occurred since the last management review 
and were not referred by the top management. This is a chance for the top manage-
ment to be informed of those changes and address them. The review shall relate to the 
nature of the change and its relevance to organizational issues—internal or external.
Internal issues relate to internal strategies, policies, and objectives that steer the QMS 
and to the resources that are required to implement and achieve them. For example, an 
implantation of a new ERP system is an internal issue of high importance because it 
refers directly to the processes and has a direct impact on the operations of the QMS. 
When such event occurred in the organization, the management review should assess it 
(as a change) and its consequences. Which internal changes may we encounter?
• Changes in product specifications or customer specifications
• Changes in the production installations
• Organizational changes
• Changes concerning human resources
External issues are environmental factors in which the organization is active: politi-
cal, legal, regulatory, social and cultural, financial, technological, economic, and 
natural. When events regarding those issues occurred in the organization and had 
an impact on the QMS, the top management must review it: receive the information 
about it and understand the impact on the QMS. For example, when a regulation 
relevant to the realization of the product has been changed, the top management will 
review the change and the requirements for the implementation of new or revised 
regulatory requirement. Which external changes may we encounter?
• Political changes
• Regulatory or legal changes
• Economic changes
• Technological changes
• Changes in work regulations
The type of review of changes will ensure that changes that affect the QMS (internal 
and external) have been taken into account and when applicable the quality policy 
has been updated appropriately. In practice, when changes to policy were required, 
add (in the documentation of the management review) that the policy was updated. 
But pay attention; if you did change the policy, be sure to submit the revision to the 
requirements of clause 7.5—Documented information. A good example is the revi-
sion of the ISO 9001 Standard—I am convinced that your current quality policy 
refers to the last revision ISO 9001:2008. It will be necessary to update the policy and 
change the reference to the new revision of the standard. I recommend that this will 
be reviewed and referred in the management review.
Status of Quality Objectives
One of the most important purposes of the management review (in my opinion) is 
the examination of quality objectives. The management review shall review the extent 
to which quality objectives have been met. Quality objectives are an efficient tool for 
 

391
Performance Evaluation
maintaining the effectiveness of the effective QMS, and the control and review of the 
top management play an important key role in this mechanism. The examination will 
focus on two areas:
• The achievement and fulfillment of quality objectives like quality plans, objectives of 
performances, marketing objectives, customer-related objectives (e.g., complaint or 
feedback related), or quality management objectives (e.g., audit or training related).
• The compliance of the objective and their level of effectiveness concerning the QMS. 
This examination will determine whether the objectives are appropriate to the 
nature of the organization (will be discussed in details in the next paragraph).
Result of Audits
Evidences of whether the organization’s activities and processes conform to planned 
arrangements and are effectively implemented and maintained will be presented 
through audit results. This includes results from internal, external, supplier, and 
customer audits. The review shall refer to the findings, the rejections, the required 
actions, and the recommendations for improvements. Results of audits demonstrate 
the compliance of the auditee against the given criteria.
Result of Monitoring and Measurement Activities
The result of monitoring and measurement activities will be introduced as inputs to the 
review. The results shall indicate the achievement of process objectives and conformity 
of process outputs. During the review, the top management shall evaluate the results and 
decide whether they are sufficient or improvements are needed. The format and manner 
with which the results will be presented depend much on the type of data and information.
Customer Satisfaction and Feedback
Information and results of monitoring customer satisfaction and feedback will be 
presented and will enable the top management to evaluate whether requirements and 
expectation have been met. The information that will be presented
• Shall reflect the performance of the QMS, which means it shall shed light on how the 
activities of the organization affect customer satisfaction
• Shall allow the top management to understand how the customer perceives the 
organization, its processes and activities, and the products or services
This review may include passive feedback data that were received in the organization 
like customer complaints and feedback activities that the organization initiated such 
as customer feedback surveys or analysis of data gathered during service activities.
Supplier and External Provider Issues
Issues related to external providers and suppliers shall be presented in the management 
review. The objective here is to present the issue, review the performance of the exter-
nal providers, and explain the impact on the QMS. In case a problem was discussed 
to which a solution was not found, a decision of the top management is required here.
 

392
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Process Performance and Product Conformity
Data regarding process performance and product conformity are needed to dem-
onstrate ability of processes and quality of products. Evidences that demonstrate 
the ability of realization processes to achieve planned results and the conformity of 
products (process outputs) to the acceptance criteria will be presented. The informa-
tion will include data from statistical analyses of product characteristics and process 
performances. In other words, allow top management to evaluate the performance of 
processes and products in comparison with the criteria. Try to reflect successes and 
failures of certain cases onto other cases.
Nonconformities and Corrective Actions
Status of actions taken to eliminate the causes of nonconformities or potential noncon-
formities since the last review will be discussed. Nonconformities and the corrective 
actions that were initiated throughout the organization are to be discussed and ana-
lyzed. In particular, relate to the effectiveness of the actions and to the extent to which 
objectives were achieved. Again, try to analyze and reflect successes and failures. I bet 
that the top management would be highly interested in this information because this is 
their opportunity to be informed of those cases. In practice, I would prepare in advance 
a report that gathers all the nonconformities and indicates the trends in the QMS.
Adequacy of Resources
Adequacy of the resources of the QMS shall be discussed in the review. The goal here 
is to indicate how the resources perform and how well they meet their requirements. 
This can be expressed through the following perspectives:
• Relevant nonconformities
• Related risk or opportunities
• Data of performance
• Suggestion for improvements
For example, when an infrastructure cannot support the activities of the QMS 
 anymore and must be replaced or improved, the management review is an opportu-
nity to discuss the matter with the top management.
Opportunities for Improvement
Opportunities for improvements in the QMS will be reviewed. The top management 
must review each opportunity, assess its impact on the QMS, refer to internal and 
external issues, and decide whether the improvement is feasible or not. Improvements 
may occur in
• Products or services
• Achievement of customer requirements
• Realization processes and quality management processes
 

393
Performance Evaluation
The source for opportunities must be identified:
• Employees—one of the most common sources for opportunities for improvement is 
employees. In many organizations, I encountered a form that allows an employee to 
suggest an improvement. It is very effective and normally the employee is rewarded 
when a suggestion is adopted. But the true question is as follows: Where does this 
form end up, and how is it reviewed?
• Audits—another effective source is recommendation for improvements from audits; 
an objective party had visited the organization, sampled activities or product, 
detected an opportunity for improvement, and suggested it.
• Customer feedback—suggestions from customers may indicate unfulfilled needs 
and may serve as opportunities for improvement.
Addressing Risks and Opportunities
A new requirement of the ISO 9001:2015 is addressing risks that may prevent the orga-
nization from achieving its intended results or create undesired effects in processes, 
products, or services and addressing opportunities that will reduce the probability of 
undesired effects and enhance customer satisfaction. Undesired effects include noncon-
formities, not achieving customer requirements, and the lack of customer satisfaction. 
Another aspect of risks is risks related to changes and improvements that were implanted 
in the organization and their potential impact on the organization and its processes. 
This issue is well discussed in chapter 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities, 
where the organization is required to develop and implement plans and activities for this 
identification and handling of related risks or opportunities. The management review 
shall refer to those issues, examine new risks and opportunities, discuss their relevance, 
and assess the effectiveness of the implemented plans for reducing or eliminating those 
risks. Which inputs related to risk and opportunities can we expect?
• Risks or opportunities related to strategic changes
• Risks or opportunities related to availability of the resources for future activities or 
potential scarcity of resources
• Risks or opportunities related to infrastructure and their use
• Risks or opportunities associated with the relationships with external interested 
parties such as suppliers or customer (partners)
• Risks or opportunities related to changes in knowledge and technology
• Risks or opportunities related to new developments
• Risks or opportunities that were identified in audits
Management Review Outputs
The outputs of the management review are decisions and actions that must be carried 
out as a reaction to the data and information that were presented and discussed dur-
ing the review. In practice, the outputs should include decisions and actions related to
• Opportunities for improvement of the QMS
• Need for changes in the QMS
• Needs of recourses
 

394
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
Implementing Decision and Actions
The decisions and required actions of the management review shall be presented 
and suggested in a way that will facilitate the implementation of activities for pro-
cess improvements. In other words, try to make feasible decisions instead of calls for 
actions lacking in meaning. Your objective is not to publish the wishes for improve-
ments but to allow and enable their implementation:
• Be precise—which business activity must be changed or improved.
• Delegate responsibilities and indicate who will be in charge of implementing.
• Set definitive objectives for the decisions.
• Allocate resources.
Always bear in mind that in the next review, you are required to assess the success 
of those decisions. For example, instead of declaring “we must enhance our custom-
ers’ satisfaction,” try “we should enhance customers’ satisfaction during installa-
tion activities.” The second form indicates a precise business activity that may be 
improved and ease the implementation of such decision. Plus in the next review, it 
will be easier to show whether an improvement was achieved or not. These decisions 
should be communicated in the organization in order to create awareness among 
interested parties (intern as well as extern).
Opportunities for Improvement
The outputs regarding those opportunities for improvements shall be formulated with 
actions: which action shall be undertaken in order to promote those improvements. 
The outputs regarding those opportunities for improvements shall be formulated with 
actions, which action shall be undertaken in order to promote those improvements.
Benchmarking may serve as a tool for implementing improvement as output of the 
management review. The objective of benchmarking is to allow the organization to 
develop plans for improvements; the management had just reviewed the status of the 
QMS and recognized the need for changes or improvements. Now it is recommended 
to develop plans on how to plan resources, implement the tools and techniques, or 
adapt specific best practices, in order to achieve those improvements. But bench-
marking may be quite a challenge for the organization.
There are many methods for conducting benchmarking. This is done through a 
research that brings data and information and eventually points out the critical topics 
that require reference and improvement. Which methods can we use?
• Interviews with customers, employees, or suppliers
• In-depth marketing research
• Quantitative research
• Surveys
• Questionnaires
• Reengineering analysis
• Process mapping
• Quality control variance reports
 

395
Performance Evaluation
All these techniques require inputs such as
• Relevant interested parties or populations (for the interviews, in-depth marketing 
research, or questionnaires)
• Performance data of processes
• Methods for the research like techniques for collecting data, interviewing tech-
nique, or methods for analysis
All these techniques generate outputs that shed light on trends and status of pro-
cesses, activities, and goods or services such as
• Information
• Conclusions and suggestions for improvements
• Results of measurements or analyses
Need for Changes
The inputs of the management review and the followed discussion may generate 
planned changes to the QMS. The outputs regarding those changes shall be formu-
lated with actions, which activities are required in order to implement and control 
those changes. Changes may occur in
• Strategic direction of the organization and the quality policy
• Quality objectives
• Processes, operations, or activities
• Resources
• Products
For example, if strategic changes in the QMS objectives are required, an update of 
the quality policy will be considered, suggested, and eventually carried out. If quali-
tative or quantitative changes in the objectives are required, the relevant objective 
controls will be updated. The next management review will verify if those changes 
were implemented.
Resource Needs
The output of the management review shall assess the adequacy of available resources 
and review requirements for further resources necessary for
• Improvements in the QMS
• Changes in the QMS
• Addressing risks or opportunities
• Addressing changes in the QMS
• Achievement of quality objectives
• Corrective actions
It is necessary to mention for each decision which resources are required. The ref-
erence will act as a commitment on behalf of the top management for the alloca-
tion of those resources. In other words, when an auditor observes allocation of 
 

396
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
resources on the management review outputs, he or she would expect to see that 
those resources were invested.
Documented Information
The organization is required to retain (to secure and keep the records of the review 
for future uses and to eliminate from lost or discard) documented information. It 
refers to the inputs as well as outputs of the management review; the inputs of the 
review shall be documented and the decisions and required actions of the review 
shall be documented. The standard does not specify any particular method for docu-
menting the review. The documentation may appear on a designated form, a meeting 
summary, or a special report—whatever suits the organization. But always remem-
ber that this is the beginning of a long-term review process, where information and 
data from last reviews will always be queried and will be needed to be presented and 
re-reviewed. It should be also documented in a way that allows follow-ups and com-
parisons at later stages: a report, a form, or a presentation. I suggest designing and 
maintaining a designated form for the matter that will document
• The date and location where the review took place
• The participants
• The issues that were discussed
• Evidences and records that supported the issues or referred to them
• Decisions including schedules, resources, and responsibilities for execution
Bear in mind that I mentioned a form, but in today’s electronic environment, a form 
may be digital and not the traditional paper form. In any way the documented results 
of the review shall be submitted to the control of documented information as required 
by clause 7.5—Documented information of the ISO 9001 Standard.
 

397
10 Improvement
Improvement in the eyes of the ISO 9001 Standard is a concept that will drive the 
organization into meeting customer requirements and enhance the achievement 
of the quality objectives and customer satisfaction. Improvement means, in a way, 
 finding the parameters that affect the attainment of goals and submitting them to 
change. The challenge is identifying the specific processes that have the most effect 
on conformity of goods to customer satisfaction. The ISO 9001 Standard requires the 
identification of those poor in performance and effectiveness processes or  process 
outputs (products or services) and the implementation of controlled changes that will 
improve them. As a result, the quality management system (QMS) and its  effectiveness 
will be enhanced. Let us review the ISO 9001 Standard requirements.
10.1  General
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• The organization shall determine and select opportunities for improvement and 
 implement actions necessary to meet customer requirements and enhancing  customer 
satisfaction. This includes
• Improvement of products and services in order to meet current as well as future 
expectations of interested parties
• Corrective actions
• Preventive actions
• Actions for reducing undesired effects
• Improvements of the performance of the QMS
• Improvements of the effectiveness of the QMS
• Note—Examples of improvement can include correction, corrective action, 
 continual improvement, breakthrough change, innovation, and reorganization.
Improving Products and Services
We plan, implement, and control improvements to meet customer expectations 
and to maintain their level of satisfaction. When planning the identification and 

398
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
implementation of improvements in the organization, the actions for improvements 
must achieve two objectives (clause 1—Scope):
• Meeting customer requirements—This objective refers to the improvements of 
products and services in order to meet current expectations of customers. These 
improvements relate to the objective expectations of customers from the product or 
service and its characteristics that were communicated to the customer upon sale or 
delivery. This objective refers also to regulatory requirements.
• Enhancing customer satisfaction—These improvements relate to a subjective 
 perception of the customer to the degree to which their needs and expectations have 
been fulfilled:
• Which customer expectations were not fulfilled?
• Which customer expectations were not identified?
Correcting, Preventing, and Reducing Undesired Effect
Undesired effect refers to an impact caused by a quality problem. For example, lack 
of qualification in a work station may cause a high level of scrap and maybe even lead 
to nonconformity. Undesired effect has the risk of affecting other processes or other 
process outputs further on the supply chain. These undesired effects were supposed 
to be identified and addressed during the review of risks and opportunities. After 
identifying events that may cause the undesired effect, the goal of improvement is to 
remove the obstacles, interferences, and  interruptions. The standard demands initiat-
ing improvements that will correct, prevent, or reduce them. If we look back at the 
example of the scrap, then the organization will need to initiate actions to correct, 
prevent, or reduce the undesired effect:
• Analyze the root causes for the scrap related to the performance of personnel—
which activity is not performed well and why?
• Suggest ways to handle those root causes—what kind of training may help personnel 
to do their job better?
• Control the improvements—measure the scrap before and after the improvement.
Improving the Performance of the QMS
Performance of the QMS is measured by certain indicators of processes and their 
 relevant criteria, which suggest how much processes achieve their objectives (or not). 
The performance of the QMS is monitored, measured, and evaluated through 
many quality tools and methods suggested in the standard. An analysis of process 
 performance may result in improvement, redesign, or reengineering of the QMS 
activities.
The standard requires that the organization improve the ability of the  processes 
to attain desired results. Based on the results accepted from the monitoring, 
 

399
Improvement
 measurement, analysis, and evaluation, activities shall be initiated in order to 
meet the business objectives. Improvement of process performance means improv-
ing the ability of processes to achieve intended results and thus the achievement 
of the quality objectives. One must initiate specific activities and promote them to 
achieve their objectives. Improvement may be introduced to one of the following 
process factors:
• Process inputs that are delivered to the process
• Activities that operate the process
• Resources used in the processes
• Process outputs accepted from the process
Improving the Effectiveness of the QMS
Effectiveness of the QMS refers to which extent objectives of processes were achieved 
and may indicate how much the QMS has improved. Effectiveness of the QMS is 
regarded from several aspects:
• Effectiveness of the planning of the QMS—Improving the effectiveness of the 
 planning refers to the implementation of processes, operations, and activities of 
the QMS.
• Effectiveness of processes and activities—Improving effectiveness of process and 
activities refers to their performance.
• Effectiveness of performance of external providers—Improving the performance 
of the external providers refers to their abilities to deliver products or services in 
 accordance with predefined requirements.
Identifying Opportunities for Improvement
An improvement in the organization will be achieved by identifying oppor-
tunities or needs for improvement, and submitting these needs to a planned 
implementation.
• The organization shall create the awareness and understanding that improvements 
concern all process stages and organizational units.
• Identification of opportunities shall span all levels or areas of the organization or in 
all organizational units that are under the QMS.
• The importance and significance of the matter shall be introduced to all of the 
relevant personnel in the different organizational units during training and 
certification.
• The appropriate tools shall be identified in order to provide employees with the 
suitable platform to promote improvements (forms, meetings, reviews, motivation 
plans, competitions, incentives, etc.).
 

400
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• The organization shall promote improvement at external providers and distributers.
• The tools for the implementation of improvements shall be suitable to the processes 
of the organization as well as their outputs (products).
The ISO 9001 Standard expects the organization to define which inputs and 
sources of information in the QMS may indicate the need for improvement. 
The standard refers to some well-known and widely used quality tools and their 
outputs:
• Quality policy—Deviation from the general guidelines, intentions, and goals 
 referring to quality may suggest that an improvement is required.
• Quality objectives—The purpose of quality objectives is to carry out the quality 
policy and implement it in the QMS. These objectives are to be aimed, planned, and 
implanted for achieving improvement. Lack of obtainment of these objectives may 
suggest that an improvement is needed.
• Results of audits (internal or external)—Audit is an effective tool in identifying 
opportunities for improvements, since the outputs of the audit indicate whether 
a nonconformity (which is, by definition, a lack of achievement of objectives) or 
opportunity for improvement was detected.
• Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities—A quality  activity 
that indicates the status of processes or process outputs with reference to their 
 criteria may point out opportunities for improvements.
• Results of process audits—Process audit is a method that you may apply in order 
to measure and evaluate performance of processes, their ability to create a product 
according to its specifications and the extent to which process outputs meet their 
requirements. Where the results indicate inability of processes, it may indicate the 
need for improvement.
• Nonconformities—Nonconformity is an indication that the product has not met its 
specifications, suggesting a need for improvement.
• Addressing risks and opportunities—Improvements may be suggested while con-
ducting activities to reduce or eliminate risks or promote opportunities.
• KPI—Key process indicators identify performance gaps and indicate areas for 
potential improvement.
• Customer feedback, warranty call, and complaints—These are activities that 
involve direct communication with the customer regarding the performance and 
 characteristics of the product or service. These types of outputs are very effective for 
identifying opportunities for improvements.
• Corrective actions—There is a correlation between the improvement and the 
 corrective actions, since each of these may be considered an improvement. Therefore, 
these actions may be presented as improvements. However, there are cases where 
corrections are temporary, and thus a long-term action of  improvement is required.
• Management review—One of the outputs of the review is the suggestion for 
 improvements and changes to the QMS and its processes.
• Employees—Another effective source for improvement is collecting ideas for 
improvement from personnel that operate the QMS. It is a very effective source 
because employees know the processes and the activities and face the daily  problems. 
A classic method is for employees to fill in a form, where they can describe their idea 
for improvement.
 

401
Improvement
The next aspect to be considered is the information and data that those inputs pro-
vide. In order to initiate improvements in the organization you have to make sure 
that relevant and accurate data and information flow to the appropriate persons:
• Information and details about the need for the improvements
• Data must be measurable, accurate and reliable, and usable to indicate need to 
improve process efficiency and effectiveness
• Data that will support the decision for the improvements
• Data that will enable monitoring of the effectiveness of the improvements
After collecting the inputs for the improvements, one must determine where the 
improvement shall be applied. Improvements may be introduced to the following 
QMS elements:
• Products—improvements related to the intended use of products
• Processes
• Improvements related to the activities and operations
• Improvements related to their interrelations with other processes
• Organizational structures
• Resources
• Improvements related to the use and deployment of resources
• Improvements related to competence and knowledge of personnel
• Improvements related to infrastructure and technology
• Improvements related to process environment
• Relations with relevant interested parties
• Improvements related to external providers
• Improvements related to the expectations of customers and other interested 
parties (like regulators)
Initiating Actions for Improvement
The organization is required to implement any necessary actions to achieve improve-
ments that were identified. As mentioned earlier, the goals of such actions must be
• To meet customer requirements
• To enhance customer satisfaction
An improvement envisions a new process, operation, activity, or process element and 
the actions taken would normally bring about a change in the QMS. Each action 
refers to its relevant ISO 9001 Standard requirement:
• When an action causes a change in the product or service, you must determine to 
which QMS requirement it shall be submitted:
• Changes in the QMS
• Changes in the planning of processes
• Changes to requirements for products and services
• Design and development changes
• Control of changes for production or service provision
 

402
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• When an action initiates a new activity or a process, it shall be submitted to the 
planning of processes.
• When a corrective action is initiated, it will be submitted to the controlled process 
of corrective actions.
• When documentation is changed, it will be submitted to the control of documented 
information.
In addition
• The organization shall analyze and provide the required resources needed for 
improvement.
• Improvements must be prioritized according to their effect or impact on the confor-
mity of products and customer satisfaction.
• Many process improvement efforts tend to focus on one functional area without 
considering other consequences that may influence the QMS.
• When initiating an improvement, make sure to involve those individuals and 
groups in the organization that have the knowledge, information, and experience of 
the process and who can point out how changes may be effectively applied.
• Actions of improvement may be assigned to a process owner so they may control 
the progress and make decisions that affect the development, maintenance, and 
improvement of the process:
• Defining goals for the improvement
• Defining the plan for achieving the improvement
• Scheduling the steps
• Addressing risks
Examples for Improvements
A practical method for practicing improvement in the organization is required (and 
will be discussed) in clause 10.3—Continual improvement. Other improvement 
methodologies:
• Benchmarking
• Redesign of processes
• Six Sigma
• Lean
• TQM (total quality management)
• ABC (activity-based costing)
• Performance improvement model
Each methodology has its advantages and disadvantages. You must pick the one that 
suits your organization and its capabilities and operations.
Introducing Innovation for Improvement
Innovation refers to the creation of a new QMS element (a new product, resource, 
or process) resulting from a need for improvement. Innovation must be significant 
 

403
Improvement
in its effect in order to justify the related investment. The objective of consistently 
 meeting requirements and addressing future needs and expectations may be achieved 
when applying or introducing innovation in the organization. Furthermore, many 
of the necessary improvements will require the application of innovation in various 
fields and areas of the organization. Another trigger for innovation is changes in the 
 business environment of the organization, which presents new technologies or new 
market needs. A good and relevant example is the Internet that impels many orga-
nizations to develop an online platform for their distributing their products and ser-
vices. This kind of change demands from those organizations to drop their  traditional 
activities and develop new innovative operations. The following events may involve 
innovation:
• Organizational changes as a result of self-assessment
• Potential changes in the organizational environment that may affect the realization 
processes or the product directly
• Changes as well as potential changes in the expectations of customers or regulatory 
requirements
• Technological changes as well as potential changes that may affect the realization 
processes or the product directly
• Needs for optimizing the performance of the organization
• Results of monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation that indicate a need 
for improvement
Innovation may be applied to
• Organization and organizational units that operate the QMS
• Processes that are realizing the product
• Technology in the organization used for the realization of products
• Product characteristics and features that are expected by the customer
The approach for adapting innovations may include the planning of activities for 
identifying needed innovations and the applied innovations may be implemented 
with a plan. The plan may then consider the following:
• Need for the innovation—which improvement requires innovation and which QMS 
element will be innovated
• Prioritization of the innovation and deciding whether it is applicable
• Introducing the innovation to a controlled process, that is, introducing it as an 
improvement:
• Planning actions
• Identifying which knowledge is required in order to implement the innovation
• Schedules for implementation
• Allocation of resources
• Planning of controls
• Review and assessment of related risks and planning actions for minimizing 
the risks
• Application of corrective actions when needed
 

404
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
10.2  Nonconformity and Corrective Action
Corrective action is one of the foundation elements of quality management and is 
 essential for sustaining improvement of the QMS. The main concept of  corrective action 
promotes a systematic analysis of quality problems that have already occurred, and 
the elimination of any root causes of nonconformities through the  implementation of 
controlled measures. As per clause 0.1—Introduction the  organization, it is required 
to develop the ability to demonstrate conformity to  specified QMS  requirements. 
In other words, your customers gain confidence in the organization’s ability to 
 consistently provide products and services conforming to their requirements and 
specifications. The ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
10.2.1  
• The organization shall react when nonconformity occurs, including  nonconformities 
that were reported during a complaint.
• The organization shall initiate an action to control and correct the nonconformity.
• The organization shall analyze and react to the consequences of the nonconformity.
• The organization shall evaluate the need for an action to eliminate the cause or 
causes of the nonconformity in order that it does not reoccur or occur elsewhere.
• The organization shall review and analyze the nonconformity.
• The organization shall detect the root cause for the nonconformity.
• The organization shall initiate actions to remove the root cause.
• The organization shall determine whether similar nonconformities exist, or 
could potentially occur.
• The organization shall initiate and implement the necessary actions for the correc-
tion of the nonconformity.
• The organization shall review the effectiveness of the actions taken to correct the 
nonconformity.
• The organization shall update the risks and opportunities related to the corrective 
action during their planning.
• The action for the correction shall be appropriate to the effect of the nonconformity.
10.2.2  
• The organization shall retain documented information as evidence of
• The nature of the nonconformities
• Any subsequent actions taken
• The results of any corrective action
Terms and Definitions
Before we start, let us review some terms and definitions in order to toe the line:
• Conformity—Demonstrating fulfillment of a requirement.
• Nonconformity—An unfulfillment of a specified requirement. Nonconformity has two 
aspects: the realization of defective products that cannot perform their intended use and 
situations where the QMS does not perform in accordance to the ISO 9001 requirements.
 

405
Improvement
• Root cause—An initiating cause of either conditions, factors, or parameters that led 
to an undesirable outcome (nonconformity).
• Corrective action—An activity that was taken to eliminate the cause of nonconfor-
mity and to prevent its recurrence, for example, rework or repair.
Developing a Method for Handling Nonconformity and Applying Corrective Actions
For handling nonconformity, the organization is expected to develop a method with 
the objective of ensuring that all discovered nonconformities are identified, analyzed, 
managed, and controlled. Handling the nonconformity should follow a scheme for 
categorizing and prioritizing the nonconformity, analyzing it, and suggesting the 
appropriate actions. The goal is the successful implementation of the corrective 
action. The objectives of the method are
• Capturing and identifying the nonconformity
• Reacting to the nonconformity
• Prioritizing, analyzing, classifying, and recording the nonconformity
• Analyzing and assessing the nonconformity and detecting the root cause
• Handling and solving the nonconformity through planning and implementation of 
corrective actions
• Tracking the corrective actions and evaluating their effectiveness
The documentation, classification, and categorization will be useful for  statistical pur-
poses, for the identification of the root cause, for trend analysis, and  problem  resolution. 
Setting priority or severity of the nonconformity is important for  allocating resources 
and initiating the handling of the nonconformity.
The last edition of the standard (ISO 9001:2008) demanded the maintenance of 
a documented procedure that described how such a method is exercised. The new 
revision (2015) does not require such a procedure anymore. You can use this kind of 
documentation if you feel it will assist you in defining and implementing the method. 
I personally think that a detailed form may do the job.
Sources for Identifying Nonconformity
In order to handle nonconforming products, one must first detect them. For  identifying 
the nonconformity, you shall initiate activities or operations that will measure, inves-
tigate, compare, and assess whether an attribute, a feature, a characteristic of a process, 
process outputs, or elements that are part of the QMS are performing as expected. 
These expectations indicate the quality of the product and when not satisfied a non-
conformity occurs. During the planning of the QMS the organization identifies and 
determines activities, operations, or process stages where controls are necessary. The 
ISO 9001 Standard suggests several quality management tools to control activities and 
operations of the QMS and evaluate the results against the requirements:
• Audit—Auditing the QMS (internally or externally) is an effective way of identify-
ing problems and nonconformities and the results of audits contain information on 
compliance against given criteria, that is, nonconformity. One clear objective of the 
 

406
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
internal audit, for example, is the sampling of processes and activities of the QMS 
and evaluating them against predefined criteria. When the test shows that processes 
were not performed as planned, that may indicate a nonconformity.
• Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities and KPIs— 
Monitoring, measurement, analysis, and evaluation activities determine the 
extent to which a process is quantitatively or qualitatively stable, capable, and pre-
dictable within defined limits and provide the decision-makers a situation report 
regarding the performance of processes and activities. Evaluation of KPIs may 
demonstrate where performance of processes is not as expected and may indicate 
nonconformity.
• Need for revalidation—The need for revalidation may indicate, in certain situations, 
where process parameters have not met their requirements and a corrective action 
is therefore required.
• Quality costs—The increase of quality costs may indicate that a quality problem 
exists and therefore somewhere along the process flow of the QMS a nonconformity 
exists. Quality costs may be generated through scrap, rework, deviations of quanti-
ties, unplanned tasks or jobs, time between failures, and increase in required gestures 
to customers.
• Customer complaints—A complaint is an effective way of receiving customer’s 
opinion regarding the use of the product. A complaint is an application commu-
nicated to the organization from a customer regarding events or the disturbances 
of performance, functionality, intended use, or safety of the product during use. It 
serves as an indication of lack of customer satisfaction and that the product has not 
met its requirements. Thus a complaint is a reliable source for indicating the exis-
tence of nonconformity.
• Risk-based thinking—Risk-based thinking outputs may assist you in evaluating the 
severity and need for controls over nonconformities.
• Quality assurance and quality control—Planned and ongoing quality assurance 
programs or control activities and tasks are an effective method for detecting 
 nonconformity during the realization processes. The quality assurance samples pro-
cess outputs according to a defined sampling plan and compares them to predefined 
criteria. When the output does not meet its criteria it may be considered as a non-
conformity. The quality assurance process consists of two main quality concepts:
 
1. Verification activities—where process outputs are inspected against product 
output requirements
 
2. Validation activities—where process parameters are evaluated against predefined 
requirements
These quality activities are only reliable when the relevant quality records are 
 appropriately maintained and are accessible.
Reaction to Nonconformity
As soon as nonconformity is detected, the organization must react to it,  identify it, 
segregate it, and ensure, beyond any doubt or possibility, that the  nonconforming 
product will not be used, applied, submitted, to realization processes. Actions of how 
to react to nonconformity are detailed in chapter 8.7—Control of nonconforming 
outputs.
 

407
Improvement
Correction of Nonconforming Products
Part of the reaction to nonconformity is its correction. Corrections of nonconform-
ing products may be initiated as reworking or reprocessing. The correction includes 
the repair, rework, reprocessing, or adjustment of the product in order to eliminate 
the nonconformity and ensure that the product meets its specifications. Actions 
of how to correct to the nonconformity are well detailed in chapter 8.7—Control 
of  nonconforming outputs.
Dealing with the Consequences of Nonconformity
Reacting and correcting nonconformity shall put you in a position to understand 
what its effect is, which will help you deal with the consequences—suggesting an 
action to repair the damage that the nonconformity caused and ensuring that the 
product meets its specifications. Dealing with the consequences of nonconformity 
first requires the understanding of
• The effect of the nonconformity on the process
• The effect of the nonconformity on process outputs
Dealing with consequences may be realized through repair, rework, swap of  products, 
or rejection. In order to deal with the consequences effectively, you must
• Determine the scope of the action—in which area of process or product must be the 
action applied
• Define the objective of the action—what is to be achieved
• Determine the needed activities—which activities are to be undertaken, what are 
the relevant tools and equipment, what is the necessary documentation, and what 
are the necessary qualifications
• Evaluate relevant risks—assessing further consequences of those actions and which 
controls are to be set
• Allocate responsibilities and resources—who should perform those activities and 
what resources are required
• Accepting concession—when it is required to concede responsibility for activities 
that led to the nonconformity
Identifying the Root Cause of the Nonconformity
When a nonconformity was detected and reported, it is required to methodically 
identify and correct or remove its root causes. The real cause for the nonconformity 
may not be obvious. The objective is to identify the real reason for the nonconformity 
and to entirely prevent the problem from reoccurring by analyzing the events and 
factors that led to the nonconformity and identifying which elements of the pro-
cess deviated from their requirements, were responsible for the nonconformity, or 
affected the quality of a process or product.
A nonconformity suggests that a set or processes or their outputs do not sat-
isfy their expectations and their requirements are not met. One may say that you 
need to understand the sequence of events or combinations of conditions that 
 

408
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
induced the nonconformity. The source of the nonconformity may occur in vari-
ous elements throughout the QMS: a product, a process, a machine, an employee, 
a supplier or an infrastructure. Root cause refers to deviations in the predefined 
conditions of a process in its intended environment. One or several root causes 
may lead to nonconformity. These conditions were not available at the time of the 
realization because of a certain sequence of events. These combinations of events 
and conditions created deviations that affected the process and its outputs. The 
cause for the deviation of these conditions must be identified and understood. 
The identification and correction or removal of those factors or conditions will 
prevent the reoccurrence of the nonconformity. In other words, fixing the problem 
ought to prevent the whole sequence of events from reoccurring. The challenge 
is to detect all root causes. The investigation into the root cause shall produce 
three main conclusions:
 
1. The reason for the nonconformance that will need to be removed—which conditions 
or parameter did not achieve their objectives.
 
2. The severity of the nonconformance—how many resources must be invested in 
order to remove the root cause.
 
3. The impact of the nonconformity—which other products, elements, or other areas 
may have been affected by this nonconformity.
After realizing these, you may need to exercise the following activities:
• Defining the problem and understanding which objective was not achieved. The 
characterization of the problem should be quantitative or qualitative of the undesir-
able outcomes.
• Gathering of data, information, and facts related to the problem.
• Analyzing the process and the activities relevant to the nonconformity.
• Associating the gathered data, information, and facts with the operations and 
 activities of the process.
• Understanding which activity or operation produced the problem.
• Analyzing the conditions and factors that influence the activity, which can be 
divided into the following main types:
• Conditions regarding the inputs of the process
• Conditions regarding the planning of the process
• Conditions regarding the resources that support the process (competence 
knowledge, documented information, infrastructures)
• Conditions regarding the controls of the process
• Understanding the influence of those conditions and factors.
• Identifying the root cause for the nonconformity.
The investigation, its findings, and conclusions will be retained as documented 
 information. Once the reason is identified, all the relevant parties and authorities 
are to be notified in order to allow follow-up treatment of the nonconformity. You 
may implement and use different methods for identifying the root cause: histograms, 
fishbone diagrams, using the five Whys analysis, statistical analysis, correlation dia-
grams, and so on.
 

409
Improvement
Evaluating the Need for Corrective Action
After identifying the root cause that led to the nonconformity, you must decide whether 
a corrective action is necessary. The question is, whether the deviation is considered to 
be a nonconformity or whether it is tolerable. Intuitively, deviation or variation from 
the specification is considered a nonconformity when process specifications have not 
been met. There are, however, cases where the deviation is considered and accepted. 
Not every deviation will prevent the product from meeting its requirements. It is 
under the responsibility of the organization to define what deviations are acceptable.
I suggest here a review for measuring the severity of the nonconformity, and to 
decide whether a corrective action is actually required. Basically, the organization 
shall take corrective actions when quality management goals are not achieved. But 
there are cases or situations where you may choose to live with the root cause. In case 
you decide not to initiate a corrective action, provide sufficient justification. You may 
define criteria, a checklist, or develop an independent review of the matter in order to 
reach a decision. Possible reasons for not initiating corrective actions:
• The root cause happened only once and the organization cannot in any way 
 control it.
• The nonconformity and its related corrective action are not worth the investment.
The decision will relate to all product or process elements that may have been affected; 
you may decide that corrective action is required on all elements or aspects of the 
process or none at all.
Implementing Corrective Action
After the first reaction to the nonconformity, the analysis of the root cause, and decid-
ing that a corrective actions is necessary, it is required to initiate a corrective action—an 
activity that will eliminate the cause of the nonconformity and will prevent its recur-
rence. Elimination of the nonconformity means the correction of a product or a pro-
cess and the assurance that the nonconformity will not happen again. Implementing 
the corrective action includes planning activities in order to correct identified devia-
tions and variations from the objectives. Your goals should be to
• Eliminate the cause for the detected nonconformity
• Prevent potential nonconformity
The elimination of the nonconformity must be effective. This means that objectives 
for the corrective actions of elimination are to be determined, and a control is to be 
implemented to ensure that they will be achieved. In the spirit of the ISO 9001:2015 
and the process approach the issue shall be planned and incorporated into the QMS. 
I suggest here some guidelines for planning and carrying out a corrective action:
• Characterizing and clarifying the nonconformity
• Identification of nonconformities
• Analysis of the root cause
 

410
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Setting objectives
• Determining the operative objectives
• Defining the timeframes
• Planning
• Promoting a systematic method for the evaluation of root causes and the 
 determination of appropriate solutions
• Planning actions to be implemented, approved, and tested
• Defining the required results that will approve that the corrective action is 
 effective and the root cause is eliminated
• Carrying out the implementation of the actions
• Defining the controls needed to be implemented in order to test the effectiveness 
of the corrective action
• Defining of the expected records that will demonstrate the results
• Defining the resources
• Determining responsibilities and authorities for the execution and  implementation 
of the corrective action
• Determining the necessary tools and equipment
• Identifying the training needs
• Identifying the relevant documentation
• Evaluation of the corrective actions and its results:
• Evaluation and review of risks and the consequences of actions that may affect 
the realization processes or the product
• Review of the effectiveness of the corrective actions and the achievement of the 
objectives
• Defining which documents must be updated
You may design a form that follows all of the above and ensures that all issues were 
referred to or include these issues in an existing form.
The planned corrective actions shall be appropriate to the effects of the noncon-
formities encountered. Conformity of goods and services as well as the severity and 
impact of the root cause play a main role when planning the corrective action. On one 
hand, the actions must be sufficient to ensure the conformity of goods or services and 
customer satisfaction but, on the other hand, the efforts must be  balanced against the 
need for a corrective action:
• Effects on conformity of goods and services—It is necessary to measure the impact 
of the nonconformity or its influence on the ability of QMS elements to achieve or 
support conformity of goods and services.
• Effects on customer satisfaction—It is necessary to measure the impact of the non-
conformity on customer satisfaction.
Consideration of these implications shall determine the extent and degree of the 
 corrective action. What might influence the decision?
• Regulatory requirements
• Effects on product requirements related to the goods and services
• Effects on customer requirements and product specification as determined by the 
customer
• Effects on processes and activities needed to realize the product
 

411
Improvement
Effectiveness of the Corrective Action
The organization is required to review the effectiveness of the corrective action. The 
goal is to examine whether the corrective action has reached its objectives. It will be 
achieved through the evaluation of results of the corrective action. The action shall 
then receive a status (I suggest here some types): open, in process, or closed. The review 
shall also consider the results: success, failure, or perhaps more time or other actions 
are required to examine its effectiveness. The results of the review are to be docu-
mented and serve as documented information. When the corrective action was found 
effective, the organization may close it. A closed and effective corrective action means
• The corrective action was suitable to the nature of the nonconformity.
• The corrective action could be introduced to the necessary elements of the QMS and 
be properly implemented.
• The objectives of the corrective action have been achieved.
• The corrective action is effective and the nonconformity did not, and will not, 
reoccur.
The results of the nonconformity shall be evaluated with the objective of ensuring 
that problems have been resolved, determining whether additional problems have 
not been introduced, ensuring that adverse effects have been eliminated, and changes 
have been correctly implemented in the QMS activities. While closing the corrective 
action, the identification of the approver who concluded the corrective action is to be 
documented.
When a corrective action is found to be ineffective, it is recommended that you 
take a new one, because an unsuccessful or ineffective corrective action indicates that 
the root cause of nonconformity has not been eliminated.
Addressing Risks and Opportunities
Results of analyzing and understanding the root cause of the nonconformity may 
suggest new risks or opportunities in the QMS that must be addressed. When 
associating risks with the nonconformity, you must consider the significance of 
the nonconformity, its frequency, and how well can the users of the QMS identify 
it. The main goal is to promote a proactive approach that will enable the identifica-
tion and handling of potential quality problems before the nonconformity occurs. 
Risks to the QMS are associated with the nonconformity when it creates a situa-
tion where
• The QMS will not achieve it quality objectives
• Desirable results of process may not be accepted
• Process or product characteristics may not be achieved
• Adverse effects are possible
• Customer satisfaction may be harmed
When such situations occur, they must be submitted to the planned activities for 
addressing risks as suggested in clause 6.1—Actions to address risks and opportunities. 
 

412
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
In practice, you must plan the interface between the QMS processes—corrective 
action and risk-based thinking.
Implementing Changes in the QMS
A corrective action may trigger changes or updates to the QMS. Such changes, initi-
ated by, or resulting from the corrective action in QMS elements are to be controlled 
and implemented. Changes may occur in quality policy, quality objectives, processes, 
procedures, work instructions, resources, infrastructures, process environment, and 
documented information. This is why you have to evaluate where such changes may 
occur when initiating a corrective action. Changes will be submitted to the appropri-
ate controls as suggested in clause 6.3—Planning of changes or clause 8.5.6—Control 
of changes (depending on the context).
Retaining Documented Information
Documentation of nonconformance and the following corrective action is required 
by the ISO 9001 Standard. A detailed report shall be defined and prepared to describe 
the nonconformity and the subsequent actions taken. This report shall support the 
closed-loop process of planning a correction and evaluating its effectiveness.
The first level of documentation is the primary information gathered about the 
nonconformity and any information that would help you to investigate the noncon-
formity later on. The objective of the information is to assist you in mapping the 
problem and tracking down the root cause. This information was gathered while the 
nonconformity was identified (see clause 8.7—Control of nonconforming outputs). 
Bear in mind that this documentation is the first step in a process that will later 
lead to a corrective action or improvement. The second level of the documentation is 
the corrective action initiated to remove the root cause and will serve as a follow-up 
tool to evaluate its effectiveness. Let us review which details, information, and data 
regarding the nonconformity you should document:
• Statement of the starting date
• Identification and details of the product (product name, model, catalog number, 
serial number, batch number, date of manufacture, etc.)
• Identification of the individual that detects it (employee, customer, supplier, 
 regulatory authority, etc.)
• Identification of who is responsible for handling the nonconforming product—it 
may be an individual or a committee
• Type of nonconformity (production error, customer complaint, supplier error, etc.)
• Time and date of receiving or detecting the nonconformity
• Quantities that were identified as nonconforming
• Description of how the nonconforming products were identified or labeled
• Specific areas where the nonconformity was detected or related to the product 
(department, production hall, machine, etc.)
• Description of the nonconformity (e.g., why it failed to meet requirements—you can 
provide here a literal description, or even attach other documents such as a statisti-
cal analysis)
 

413
Improvement
• Immediate treatment that was applied to the matter
• Reference to documented evidence
• Relevant procedures or work instructions
• Categorization of the nonconformity—this is not required by the ISO 9001 Standard 
but is highly recommended and will assist you later with a statistical analysis of the 
nonconformity
• Details and information of the investigation of the root cause
• The evaluation of the need for a corrective action
Details, information, and data regarding the corrective action:
• Statement of the starting date
• Details for reference or identification of the corrective actions
• The team that participates and is responsible for the planning and implementation 
of the corrective action
• Description of the relevant nonconformity or reference to its documentation
• Description of immediate or short-term corrective action (if undertaken), its results, 
and reference to the relevant records
• Reference to the results of the root cause analysis investigation and the conclusions
• Description of the solution and planned corrective action to be taken with  reference 
to the relevant factors: departments, products, processes, packages, tools and 
 equipment, monitoring and measuring devices, and controls
• The objectives of the actions taken, including timeframes
• Review and results of the implementation and it effectiveness
The record may appear as a form, a work plan, a project plan, or refer to such dossiers. 
However, the principle demands a specification of activities or milestones assigned to 
responsibilities and framed with objectives of time and results. Useful documentation 
of the plan will also include the results of the implementation. In the case the corrective 
action was found ineffective, then a following action—an improvement or a change to 
the corrective action—must be initiated. When designing a form, I recommend design-
ing it logically as well as chronologically. Bear in mind that the form is a tool in the 
hand of the employee while gathering the information about the nonconformity and 
initiating an investigation. You may attach records of customer complaints or pictures 
of nonconforming process outputs on the form.
I suggest here a format for the documentation that I find very effective because it covers 
all the aspects mentioned in this chapter and follows a rational course for handling non-
conformity and applying the corrective actions effectively. You may adapt it to your needs.
 
1. The first part refers to the relevant interested parties:
Customer/supplier/department:
Date of creation:
Date of update:
Details of contact person
External Reference No.
 

414
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
 
2. This part refers to the product or process where the nonconformity was detected:
 
3. Definition of the team that will handle the nonconformity (personnel or other inter-
ested parties that are involved):
 
4. Description of the nonconformity—the failure and which objectives were not met:
 
5. Description of the immediate measures taken:
 
6. Evaluation of other products affected by the nonconformity:
 
7. Analyzing the reasons for the nonconformity and description of the introduced 
 corrective actions on processes and resources:
 
a. Actions taken to eliminate the root cause
 
b. Actions taken to prevent recurrence of the root cause
Identification of product or process
 
Identification of relevant complaint
 
Identification of involved resources
 
Name
Role (involvement in the nonconformity)
 
 
Description of the nonconformity
 
 
Responsibility
Date
Effectiveness
Immediate measures taken to handle the nonconformity
 
 
 
Measures taken to ensure that no nonconforming 
products will not be delivered to the customer
 
 
 
Are any other products affected by 
the nonconformity
□ Yes
□ No
List of affected products
 
 
Definition of the basic 
problem and the root causes
Description of the durable 
corrective action for each 
root cause detected
Responsibility
Date
Effectiveness
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

415
Improvement
 
8. Updating the relevant documentation:
10.3  Continual Improvement
The ISO 9001 Standard strives to introduce improvements in the organization into 
a method that will control it and will ensure that its objectives will be achieved. 
Continual improvement is a type of learning where the organization evaluates itself 
constantly, makes informed judgments and decisions based on the results of such 
analyses, and initiates actions for improvement. The standard promotes the approach 
of the PDCA (Plan-Do-Check-Act) cycle, which will be discussed in detail later on. 
The ISO 9001 Standard requirements:
• The organization shall continually improve the suitability, adequacy, and effective-
ness of the QMS.
• The organization shall review and evaluate the following types of results:
• Results of analysis and evaluation
• Results of management review
• The objective is to determine if there are opportunities for improvements, which 
may be considered as inputs for continual improvement.
Improving the QMS
Continual improvement implies that changes that happen frequently and system-
atically can have a significant effect on the QMS. Controlling and improving those 
changes made to the QMS leads to process and product optimization. The organiza-
tion is required to continually improve the suitability, adequacy, and effectiveness of 
the QMS. The following distinctive characteristics of QMS shall be improved:
• Adequacy—refers to the ability of the QMS, its processes, and products (and  services) 
to meet the needs and expectations of interested parties satisfactorily.
• Suitability—refers to the quality of having planned processes, resources, and 
 controls that may assist in achieving the quality objectives.
• Effectiveness—refers to the quality and capacity of being able to achieve planned objectives.
An effectively implemented method for continual improvement is likely to achieve 
the following goals:
• Enhancing effectiveness of processes and driving process results—Through the 
improvement of factors that influence the processes, and interrelations between 
QMS entities, process performance, and productivity of processes increases.
• Improving the quality of products—Improvements in processes, operations, and 
work activities improve process outputs.
Documentation
Relation to the nonconformity
Responsibility
Date
 
 
 
 
 

416
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
• Creating value to the organization and reducing quality costs—Through treatment 
of factors that cause nonconformity.
• Enhancing customer satisfaction—Through the delivery of full conform products.
• Enabling meeting quality objectives and driving alignment of processes with 
 business strategy—The actions for improvements are aimed at quality objectives 
that were not achieved.
Inputs for Continual Improvement
In order to be able to improve processes or products, you must first know what 
is needed to be improved and need have the necessary inputs to indicate where 
 improvements are needed. The Standard defines two quality management tools for 
performance evaluation that may introduce inputs to continual improvement:
• Results of management review—The management review collects many inputs 
from many QMS activities that refer to their performance. The outputs of the 
 management review shall serve as inputs to the method of continual improve-
ment. The top management has a significant role in introducing the approach of 
 continual improvement in the organization and is committed to promoting it and 
ensuring  effective results. Opportunities for improvements were submitted to the 
 management review as inputs and were reviewed. The outputs of the management 
review refer to improvements the organization should initiate.
• Results of analysis and evaluation—The results of analysis and evaluation shall 
be used to evaluate opportunities for improvement. Monitoring, measurement, 
 analysis, and evaluation activities gather data and information that refer to the 
 performance of processes and the quality of its outputs. Process analysis
• Identifies processes or products that may improve performance and helps in 
determining the root causes of the inadequacies
• Assists the organization in understanding how and where improvements should 
be applied to gain the maximum achievement of objectives
For example, information of KPI—These key process indicators deliver data concern-
ing the performance and effectiveness of their related processes. Those results indi-
cate where objectives were not achieved or where nonconformity may occur or has 
already occurred. Be aware that too much information may result in “too much” and 
irrelevant information.
Other inputs that may be submitted to continual improvement are suggested 
in chapter 10—Improvement under the paragraph Identifying Opportunities for 
Improvement. Those inputs, recommendations, ideas, needs, suggestions, or propo-
sitions will be introduced to the process of continual improvement.
PDCA Cycle
The Plan-Do-Check-Act (PDCA) is a concept (one of many) that drives continual 
improvement in the organization. The ISO 9001 Standard employs the process 
approach that incorporates the PDCA cycle. The process approach, promoted by the 
 

417
Improvement
ISO 9001 standard, systematically identifies and manages processes that operate the 
quality system and maintain its interactions. The process approach uses the PDCA 
cycle to improve itself constantly.
The principle of the PDCA cycle exists in all of our daily business activities. We 
use it both formally and informally, and the PDCA cycle never ends. Its objective is to 
maintain continuous improvement. The method combines planning, implementing, 
controlling, and improving of the different operations of the QMS; the PDCA can 
be implemented at the core process, at a minor process or even at several processes 
altogether, a product, or a resource. The PDCA is divided into four stages:
 
1. Plan—The planning stage is the starting point and will take place after you have 
located your need for improvement where you already have all the information and 
inputs. During this stage you may ask yourself the following questions:
• Why is the improvement necessary? Indicate which quality or process objectives 
have not been met or which quality problem has occurred.
• What needs to be done? Set the activities needed to achieve improvement. Break 
down the goal of the improvement into feasible activities.
• How much must be done? Set the objectives, goals, and targets that you would 
like to achieve. Of course they must be derived from the ultimate goal of the 
improvement.
• Where must it be done? Set the scope, areas, processes, and process outputs 
where you would like to achieve improvement.
• Who should do it and how should they do it? Set the resources and responsibili-
ties required to achieve the results.
• When must it be done? Set a timeframe in which you would like to achieve the 
improvement.
 
 Consider writing the plan with the participants themselves; they may provide appro-
priate inputs and set effective activities. Try to make the “Do” part (the next stage of 
the PDCA) easier for them to perform. During the “Plan” stage you can use quality 
planning tools mentioned in clause 6 of the standard: actions to address risks and 
opportunities, quality objectives, and planning of changes.
 
2. Do—This is the second stage where you realize your plan. This stage refers to the 
operation of your plan. During this stage, you submit the plan (through the rel-
evant participants) for execution on the related areas or scopes in the organization. 
This is a hard part where you will put words into actions. Therefore, try to make 
the plan as clear, precise, and detailed as possible. The outputs of the “Do” will be 
incorporated in your quality activities for the operation of the QMS mentioned in 
clause 8 of the standard—planning and control, determining and reviewing the 
requirements for products and services, design and development, control of exter-
nally provided processes, products and services, control of production and service 
provision, etc.
 
3. Check—In the third stage you assess the effectiveness of the operation of the plan. 
You will monitor and measure the activities that you have planned and evaluate their 
progress according to the objectives of the plan. Then, you must report the results. 
This part is crucial and for every objective set in the “Plan” stage, you must evaluate 
the results. This stage will verify that the activities were performed as planned and 
validate that their outputs conform to their objectives. Depending on the results 
and conclusions of this stage, you would advance to the next stage—“Act.” In the 
 

418
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
“Check” stage, you may use your quality tools for performance evaluation as sug-
gested in clause 9 of the standard, such as monitoring, measurement, analysis and 
evaluation, internal audit, and review.
 
4. Act—In this fourth stage, you are acting for improving the performance of your 
plan. At any point where you are not satisfied with the results of the plan’s progress, 
review your plan and act to improve it. Examine in which parameters you failed to 
reach the objectives and try again, or try it in another way. This is how you maintain 
constant improvement. In the “Act” stage you will need to practice principles of 
leadership and commitment, as suggested in clause 5 of the standard, such as taking 
accountability for the effectiveness of the QMS and engaging, directing, and sup-
porting persons to contribute to the effectiveness of the QMS.
Figure 10.1 demonstrates how the PDCA cycle integrates into the QMS.
Support processes play an important role in the PDCA cycle because they transfer 
significant resources such as competence of personnel, technology, and knowledge to 
the improvements.
Although documented information is not required, I would document its appli-
cation. The documentation will help prove that you have implemented the tech-
nique of the PDCA in your QMS. The most common method is managing the 
process with a form that will gather and manage all the information in one place 
Support processes (7)
Operations (8)
Performance 
evaluation (9)
Leadership (5)
Planning (6)
Do
Check
Act
Plan
Realizing the improvement 
using the planned 
activities. Tese activities 
will be incorporated in 
your quality activities for 
the operation of the QMS.
Optimizing the performance
or  introducing changes to the 
improvement with practice of 
leadership and commitment.
Setting the objectives for 
the improvement activities  
and addressing risks. Here 
you may use quality  
planning tools. 
Monitoring, measuring, analyzing 
and evaluating the performance 
and effectiveness of the 
improvement using tools for 
performance evaluation.
Figure 10.1 Integrating the PDCA cycle in the quality management system.
 

419
Improvement
and will be used as a report for the PDCA activity. The form may be designed in 
the following format:
• The report will cover all the stages of the PDCA cycle and therefore will be respec-
tively divided.
• To each section of the report you will detail the following:
• Who are the responsible parties to this stage?
• What are the required inputs?
• What are the required resources?
• What are the expected outputs?
• Were the activities of this section effective?
• What is the relevant documentation?
• Details of the improvement—Reference to a process, activity, product, or resource. 
In this part, you will identify to which element or entity of the QMS the improve-
ment concerns.
• Planning of the improvement (Plan):
• Description of the case (I tend to be as detailed as possible).
• Who or how the need for improvement was identified: results of monitor-
ing, measurement, analysis and evaluation, nonconformity, reported by an 
employee, need for innovation, or output of management review.
• What is the reason for the improvement; which objective has not been met?
• Which action will be executed?
• Who are the responsible parties that will accomplish it?
• By when should the action be accomplished?
• What are the expected results and how they will be measured for their 
effectiveness?
• How will it be documented?
• Implementing the actions (Do)—Here you need to collect and gather data and infor-
mation regarding the carrying out of the planned actions. For each action you need 
to indicate the following:
• What are the sources for the data and information regarding the operations of 
the initiated actions?
• Which reports will be used to deliver the data and information?
• Who are the responsible parties to deliver the data?
• Controlling the accomplished actions (Check)—Which control measures will be 
applied in order to ensure the effectiveness of the actions taken. Controls may be 
management review, audits, or analysis and evaluation. At this stage you will ensure
• That all actions were undertaken (verification)
• That the results are satisfying (validation)
• The level of effectiveness
• Initiating further actions (Act)—According to the results of the control, you must 
decide whether further corrective actions must be initiated in order to meet the 
objectives or optimize them:
• Repetition of the planned actions
• Change of the already planned actions
• Initiating new actions
Naturally, this stage brings us back to the first stage—planning.
 

420
ISO 9001:2015—A Complete Guide to Quality Management Systems
I illustrated the PDCA cycle with the next form. You may modify it according to 
your needs:
Optimization
 
Argument
Responsibility
Resources
Documentation
Schedule
Expected results
Action 1
 
 
 
 
 
 
Action 2
 
 
 
 
 
 
Action 3
 
 
 
 
 
 
Control
 
Control to Be Applied
Type of Control
Date Received
Date
Effectives
Remarks
Action 1
 
 
 
 
 
Action 2
 
 
 
 
 
Action 3
 
 
 
 
 
Details
 
Process/Product/Resource/Org. Unit
 
Further Details
 
Planning
 
Description of the case
 
Identifier
 
Relevancy (to quality 
objective)
 
Actions to be 
undertaken
Responsibility
Resources
Documentation
Schedule
Expected Results
Action 1
 
 
 
 
 
Action 2
 
 
 
 
 
Action 3
 
 
 
 
 
Operation
 
 
Type of Data or Information
Source
Report
Responsibility
Action 1
 
 
 
 
Action 2
 
 
 
 
Action 3
 
 
 
 
 

