

IT Auditing and Application
Controls for Small and
Mid-Sized Enterprises

Founded in 1807, John Wiley & Sons is the oldest independent publishing company in 
the United States. With offices in North America, Europe, Asia, and Australia, Wiley 
is globally committed to developing and marketing print and electronic products and 
services for our customers’ professional and personal knowledge and understanding.
The Wiley Corporate F&A series provides information, tools, and insights to corpo-
rate professionals responsible for issues affecting the profitability of their company, from 
accounting and finance to internal controls and performance management. 

IT Auditing and Application 
Controls for Small and 
Mid-Sized Enterprises
Revenue, Expenditure, Inventory, 
Payroll,  and More
JASON WOOD 
WILLIAM BROWN 
HARRY HOWE

Cover Image: © iStockphoto/Andrey Prokhorov
Cover Design: Wiley
Copyright © 2013 by John Wiley & Sons, Inc. All rights reserved.
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey.
Published simultaneously in Canada.
No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any 
form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, scanning, or otherwise, 
except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 1976 United States Copyright Act, without 
either the prior written permission of the Publisher, or authorization through payment of the 
appropriate per-copy fee to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, 
MA 01923, (978) 750-8400, fax (978) 646-8600, or on the Web at www.copyright.com. Requests 
to the Publisher for permission should be addressed to the Permissions Department, John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc., 111 River Street, Hoboken, NJ 07030, (201) 748-6011, fax (201) ­748-6008, or online 
at http://www.wiley.com/go/permissions.
Limit of Liability/Disclaimer of Warranty: While the publisher and author have used their best 
efforts in preparing this book, they make no representations or warranties with respect to the 
accuracy or completeness of the contents of this book and specifically disclaim any implied war-
ranties of merchantability or fitness for a particular purpose. No warranty may be created or 
extended by sales representatives or written sales materials. The advice and strategies contained 
herein may not be suitable for your situation. You should consult with a professional where 
appropriate. Neither the publisher nor author shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other 
­commercial damages, including but not limited to special, incidental, consequential, or other 
damages.
For general information on our other products and services or for technical support, please 
­contact our Customer Care Department within the United States at (800) 762-2974, outside the 
United States at (317) 572-3993 or fax (317) 572-4002.
Wiley publishes in a variety of print and electronic formats and by print-on-demand. Some 
­material included with standard print versions of this book may not be included in e-books or 
in print-on-demand. If this book refers to media such as a CD or DVD that is not included in the 
version you purchased, you may download this material at http://booksupport.wiley.com. For 
more information about Wiley products, visit www.wiley.com.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data:
Wood, Jason, 1976–
  Information technology auditing and application controls for small and mid-sized businesses : 
revenue, expenditure, inventory, payroll, and more / Jason Wood, William C. Brown, Harry Howe.
    pages cm. — (Wiley corporate F&A series)
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-1-118-07261-5 (cloth) — ISBN 978-1-118-22245-4 (ePDF) —  
ISBN 978-1-118-23319-1 (ePub) — ISBN 978-1-118-80102-4 (oBook)  1.  Information 
technology—Auditing.  2.  Small business—Information technology.  I.  Brown, William C. 
(Business writer)  II.  Howe, Harry, 1952– III.  Title. 
  HD30.2.W66 2013
  658.150285—dc23
2013025396
Printed in the United States of America
10   9   8   7   6   5   4   3   2   1

A warm and loving thank you to our respective families, 
who gave us the time to undergo this effort.
Thank you to my wife, Heather, and children, Stephen, 
Kaitlyn, and Andrew, for giving me encouragement and 
support. —Jason Wood
I thank my wife, Bonnie, for being patient and support-
ive and always wearing a smile. —William Brown
Thank you to my wife, Lauren, and sons, Benjamin and 
Noah. —Harry Howe


vii
Contents
Preface  xi
Acknowledgments  xiii
Chapter 1: Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor
and the Financial Statement Audit? 
1
Management’s Assertions and the IT Audit 
2
Objectives of Data Processing for Small 
and Medium‐Sized Enterprises (SMEs) 
5
Special Challenges Facing SMEs 
8
Research Confi rming the Risks Associated 
with SMEs 
13
A Framework for Evaluating Risks and 
Controls, Compensatory Controls, and 
Reporting Defi ciencies 
16
Summary: The Road Ahead 
20
Chapter 2: General Controls for the SME 
21
General Controls: Scope and Outcomes 
22
The “COSO Process”—Putting It All Together: Financial Statements,
Assertions, Risks, Control Objectives, and Controls 
30
Summary 
35
Chapter 3: Application‐Level Security 
37
Key Considerations 
37
Initial Security Setup 
40
Security Role Design 
42
Password Confi guration 
44
Segregation of Duties 
48
Personnel, Roles, and Tasks 
49
Access Reviews 
56
Human Error 
58
Summary 
58
Chapter 4: General Ledger and the IT Audit 
59
The General Ledger: A Clearinghouse of 
Financial Information 
60

viii	
◾  Contents
Chart of Accounts for QuickBooks
62
SME Risks Specific to the General Ledger and the  
Chart of Accounts
65
Assertions Underlying the Financial Statements and General 
Ledger Controls
66
IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger
66
Summary
78
Chapter 5: The Revenue Cycle
81
Risk Exposures and Subprocesses
81
Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related 
Audit Procedures
84
Summary
105
Chapter 6: The Expenditure Cycle
107
Risk Exposures and Subprocesses
107
Application Controls, Expenditure Cycle Risks, and Related 
Audit Procedures
111
Summary
133
Chapter 7: The Inventory Cycle
135
Risk Exposures and Subprocesses
136
Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related 
Audit Procedures
143
Summary
157
Chapter 8: The Payroll Cycle
159
Risk Exposures and Subprocesses
159
Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related 
Audit Procedures
163
Summary
248
Chapter 9: Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an 
Overlay of COSO on COBIT
249
PCAOB Warnings: Insufficient Evidence 
to Support Opinions
250
How We Got Here: A Historical Perspective
251
Risk
260
Risk and Fraud
261
Controls
262
Financial Reporting
269
PCAOB Guidance on IT Controls
279
Integrating COSO, COBIT, and the PCAOB
280
Summary
286

Contents  ◾        ix
Chapter 10: Integrating the IT Audit into the 
Financial Audit
289
Risks, Maturity, and Assessments
290
Cross‐Referencing COBIT to the PCAOB and COSO
295
Plan and Organize
303
Program Development and Change
311
Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data
317
Monitor and Evaluate
330
Summary
334
Chapter 11: Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
337
Specific Types of Risks and Exposures
338
Research on Errors in Spreadsheets
339
Compliance Dimensions of Spreadsheet Risk Exposures
344
Spreadsheet Auditing Tools
348
Governance of Spreadsheets and Desktop Tools
352
Control Considerations
355
Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline
356
Life after the Baseline: Maintaining Spreadsheets and 
Desktop Tools
368
Summary
369
Chapter 12: Key Reports and Report Writers 
Risk Exposures
371
How Reports Are Used
371
Original Reports within the Application
372
Modified or Customized Reports within the Application
376
Reports Using Third‐Party Packages
378
Analyzing and Validating Reports
382
Summary
383
Chapter 13: IT Audit Deficiencies: Defining and  
Evaluating IT Audit Deficiencies
385
A Framework for Audit Deficiencies
385
Types of IT Audit Failures and Illustrative Cases
388
Use of Compensatory Controls
388
Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues
388
Summary
398
References    399
About the Authors    405
Index    407


xi
 Preface 
 R
ISK IS INEVITABLE. AS AUDITORS, we help our clients manage their risk by 
performing audits and other assessments. Our work helps the client understand 
the nature and extent of risks that exist in the control environment. Information 
technology (IT) controls are a key aspect of that control environment—albeit one that 
may be less familiar to the auditor than the purely accounting and ﬁ nancial dimensions. 
The purpose of this book is to illustrate and explain many of the basic IT controls com-
mon to the types of reporting systems used by small and mid‐sized enterprises (SMEs), 
and to help ﬁ nancial auditors to provide better services to their clients in the context of 
application controls. 
 Historically, IT auditing has not been given the attention it deserves in regard to 
the ﬁ nancial audit. With an increase in governmental regulations and corporate boards 
realizing the importance of IT, IT auditing has risen to a level where every company, 
private or public or nonproﬁ t, regardless of size, needs to understand the risks and con-
trols around their ﬁ nancial applications. 
 This book is useful for various audiences, including students, academics, 
practitioners, auditors, and management. It discusses the purpose of information 
 technology auditing, and how it relates to the financial audit. Using QuickBooks 
(QB) and Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (also referred to as Microsoft Dynamics GP, 
GPD, or Great Plains) as illustrative examples of ﬁ nancial applications within SMEs, 
the book walks through various ﬁ nancial statement cycles to help the reader better 
understand cycle risks, controls, and illustrative application‐level controls. This book 
is not meant to be exhaustive on the subject matter, but gives executive‐level insights 
into IT auditing and application‐level controls for SMEs. 
 We hope to provide some meaningful insights on the importance of understanding 
IT risks and controls and how they relate to ﬁ nancial applications. 


xiii
 Acknowledgments 
 T
HE AUTHORS ACKNOWLEDGE AND APPRECIATE the many lively 
 conversations and classroom contributions of graduate students at State 
University of New York–Geneseo and State University of New York–Buffalo, and 
the assistance of Geneseo accounting majors Alexander G. Rienzie and Stephen Csapo. 


1
1
 CHAPTER  ONE 
 Why Is IT Auditing Important to 
the Financial Auditor and the 
Financial Statement Audit? 
 M
ANY FINANCIAL AUDITORS BELIEVE THAT complex IT environments 
require a technically trained professional to fully comprehend the technolo-
gies employed in the environment. Other fi nancial auditors may decide to 
rescope the audit (if a non‐Sarbanes‐Oxley [SOx] engagement) in order to avoid looking 
at internal controls, or at least the IT controls, while yet others may perform a super-
fi cial, high‐level review of the IT controls and hope no one notices that it was not very 
detailed. 
 Anything that a client provides that is not manually created relies on IT for the 
accounting process, and you must understand how to test the IT systems and whether to 
rely on it. By appropriately assessing the IT controls, you may be able to reduce the overall 
effort of the audit, and bring new observations to your client about the IT environment. 
 An effective assessment of IT controls may actually increase the amount of 
time required to perform an audit. However, consistent with Auditing Standards (SASs) 
Nos. 104–111, if you have an adequate understanding of the entity, its internal control 
and processes, and its environment and other factors, the cost increase will likely be 
less because the auditor will have a reduced learning curve. The cost to make audit 
methodology changes could be signifi cant in the fi rst year, but is likely to increase the 
effi ciency with which you conduct your future audits, minimizing audit fee increases 
to the less complex clients. 
 It is common in academic curricula and continuing professional education to 
describe audits by one of four categories:
 1.  Internal audits 
 2.  Financial or external audits 
 3.  Fraud audits 
 4.  Information technology audits 

2 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
 Following graduation from an accounting or equivalent program and certifi cation 
as a Certifi ed Public Accountant (CPA) or in another area (e.g., Certifi ed Internal Auditor 
[CIA]), the practitioner keeps those defi nitions in mind. As a practical matter, these 
“silos” are helpful to delineate the differences between the audits, but they overwhelm-
ingly ignore one common reality: All fi nancial audits require the auditor to under-
stand where the information comes from and what processes ensure its reliability. A 
second reality is that information technology is becoming increasing pervasive and 
more sophisticated. 
 Our philosophy of IT auditing embraces the answer to a question you may have 
asked:  Where does IT auditing fi t into the fi nancial auditing process? We believe that it 
should fi t in throughout the entire engagement. At any step in the process, when we 
are retrieving information for any cycle, we need to ask—and to be able to answer—
questions about where the information came from and what processes ensure 
its reliability. In virtually all phases of the audit, the auditor must understand the 
answers to those questions, including the IT controls that cover a particular system 
or process and knowing how to test these controls in order to provide evidence that 
they are working properly.  
MANAGEMENT’S ASSERTIONS AND THE IT AUDIT 
 Auditors are familiar with the concept of  management assertions , the idea that the fi nan-
cial statements imply a set of claims concerning the reported amounts and balances. 
Each of these assertions can be associated with potential misstatements and in turn with 
audit procedures. In the following paragraphs we review the principal assertions and 
briefl y expand the fi nancial‐auditing discussion to encompass related IT‐auditing issues. 
 Existence 
 Many account balances purport to describe quantities that actually exist (e.g., stocks of 
inventory or amounts owed to the company for past sales). Over‐ or understatements of 
these balances may result in material errors, and audit procedures typically rely on a 
combination of process analysis and physical counts or sampling approaches to evaluate 
the plausibility of a reported balance. The fi nancial auditor ties information in the sys-
tem back to transaction (source) documents (which may be paper or another electronic 
fi le), and, accordingly, he or she needs to understand the system’s overall design, the 
fl ow of information, and the nature and location of fi les. 
 The IT audit process goes beyond a merely conceptual understanding of these 
issues in order to focus on specifi c features of the accounting system. The IT audit must 
evaluate the likelihood that problems or defects in design or operation could lead to 
misstatements. Thus there is an IT corollary to the fi nancial statement assertion of 
existence, namely that the application controls that support processing integrity exist. 
These include such IT‐based items as access controls, proper segregation, and appropri-
ate confi gurations. For instance, when an IT auditor tests for access control, we would 
expect the existence of signed forms with management approval that specify the access 
needed. When an IT auditor tests change management, we would expect to see change 

Management’s Assertions and the IT Audit  ◾        3
control forms with the requested changes that are approved for each change that is 
captured in the system. In smaller organizations, this type of existence assertion can 
be challenging to achieve due to lack of supporting documentation.
In later chapters we examine these types of issues in specific detail for each of the 
major transaction cycles.
Completeness
The completeness assertion refers to the integrity of the recording process and the abil-
ity of the company’s accounting system to ensure that the effects of all transactions, 
balances, accounts, estimates, and so on have been included in the financial statements. 
Traditional audit techniques such as cross‐footing and internal validity checks of totals 
and subtotals can help to ensure that financial information flows correctly (as missing 
values may cause the statements and supporting schedules not to tie). At the IT level, 
the auditor is concerned with how the system ensures completeness—for instance, does 
the report writer pull all the items from the chart of accounts?
There is also an IT corollary to the completeness assertion, namely that all nec-
essary and required controls exist. This completeness assertion differs slightly from 
the existence assertion: While the latter requires the IT auditor to verify that claimed 
controls actually exist, the former requires that he critically evaluate the overall sys-
tem design and perhaps recommend additional controls or procedures. Note also that 
in smaller organizations it may be challenging to achieve completeness due to lack of 
understanding of how to determine how the accounting system pulls its data.
Rights and Obligations
This assertion addresses the legal status of a company’s assets and liabilities and it can 
create exposures and areas of interest from an IT perspective. As an example, consider 
a company that ships merchandise on both a free‐on‐board (FOB) destination and FOB 
shipping point basis. The accounting system should be configured so as to properly 
classify these transactions and support accurate reporting of inventory, receivables, 
and sales.
There is also an IT corollary to the rights and obligations assertion, namely own-
ership of and responsibility for information resources controlled within the company’s 
accounting system. Thus, from this perspective, adequate control over segregation of 
duties becomes an important part of the overall structure of rights and obligations as 
they affect accounting information. In some organizations, a person may have certain 
responsibilities that are well‐controlled outside the system, but the system itself may 
not coordinate the necessary data access rights for employees to function effectively. 
Additionally, the company will usually have an obligation to protect data privacy.
Valuation
The area of valuation can range from the accuracy of original costs to complex 
and esoteric calculations relating to financial instruments. In order to ensure that 
account balances, transactions, fair value estimates, and other amounts are reported 

4 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
appropriately, the IT auditor may need to examine things such as links to pricing 
tables and lookup tables, the design and accuracy of spreadsheet models, and the 
integrity of proprietary data sources. The widespread use of spreadsheet models for a 
variety of valuation‐related activities creates many exposures related to data transfer 
and change management. 
 IT and valuation intersect when the auditor needs to estimate the potential cost 
exposure from an IT audit issue. For example, if an auditor determines that inappropri-
ate individuals have access to make adjusting journal entries, the auditor should then 
determine if any unauthorized journal entries were actually made by examining the 
general ledger entries. If any are identifi ed, then the auditor would need to value the 
exposure to the fi nancial statements. 
 Accounting Procedures 
 The realm of accounting procedures includes classifi cation and aggregation pro-
cedures, proper cutoffs at the end of each accounting period, the preparation and 
posting of adjusting entries, the preparation of disclosure and supporting schedules, 
and the fi nal presentation of the fi nancial statements. It also presumes the fundamen-
tal accuracy of arithmetic processes and conformity with appropriate accounting 
standards. 
 At the general fi nancial level, the auditor may review personnel records in order to 
evaluate the suitability of individuals who perform these various tasks. The IT analog 
would include an analysis of access rights and log-on records. For instance, the IT audi-
tor might run all the adjusting entries, check to see who posted them, and evaluate the 
list according to a chart of responsibilities. 
 In addition, the auditor should examine the confi guration settings in the computer 
system to ensure that proper cutoff is achieved. For example, does the computer system 
confi guration close the accounting period, or does the accounting period remain open 
indefi nitely? Does the system have the correct days set for each month? When the fi nan-
cial statements are being produced, the IT auditor needs to ensure that all data within 
the accounting system are being pulled to the fi nancial statements, confi rming, for 
example, accurate tie‐backs between subledgers, the general ledger, and the fi nancial 
statements. 
 A Note on Sarbanes‐Oxley  
 T
he discussion in this text does not focus on the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act (SOx), in 
part because most SMEs do not have to comply with these provisions, and in 
part because there is already a signifi cant quantity of published guidance in this 
area. It’s worth noting, however, that many items of SOx guidance could be use-
ful for a variety of general controls and as part of a program that addresses other 
company‐specifi c control issues. 

Objectives of Data Processing for Small and Medium‐Sized Enterprises (SMEs)  ◾    5
OBJECTIVES OF DATA PROCESSING FOR SMALL 
AND MEDIUM‐SIZED ENTERPRISES (SMEs) 
 There are several paradigms and methodologies for conducting IT audits. As discussed 
in the sidebar titled “Committee of Sponsoring Organizations,” many of these focus on 
high‐level concepts and principles that should guide the IT audit process. These para-
digms share three pervasive IT objectives: the  confi dentiality ,  integrity , and  availability
(CIA) of data. From the Guide to the Assessment of IT Risk (GAIT) methodology we focus 
on three crucial IT domains: (1) change management, (2) operations, and (3) security. 
 In this section we briefl y discuss CIA and then identify some crucial intersections.
 1.  Conﬁ dentiality: The confi dentiality of data refers to both internal and external 
users. Internally, the system of rights and permissions to access and modify data 
is an essential building block in the design of properly segregated duties (or a key 
feature to analyze when insuffi cient personnel make it impossible to achieve an 
ideal level of segregation). Externally, the confi dentiality of data rests on such IT 
constructs as fi rewalls, encryption, and access protocols. 
 2.  Integrity: In an accounting context, data integrity relates directly to the manage-
ment assertions discussed in the preceding section, and to the Conceptual Frame-
work’s notion of  representational faithfulness . Thus, accounting information should 
represent what it purports to represent—quantities that actually exist, calculated 
from complete records, with due consideration to appropriate legal rights and obliga-
tions, and correctly valued in accordance with acceptable accounting procedures. 
 3.  Availability: Data that is not available to users is by defi nition useless to them. 
Relevant IT concerns include server reliability, access controls, protocols for dis-
tributing data, and concurrency issues. 
 As Figure  1.1 suggests, there are crucial interconnections between these objectives. 
Confi dentiality and integrity intersect in the design of a company’s internal control sys-
tem, as inadequate attention to confi dentiality issues may create exposures that either 
 FIGURE 1.1  CIA 
CONFIDENTIALITY
INTEGRITY
AVAILABILITY

6 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
 Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
 T
he Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) was organized in 1985 to 
sponsor the National Commission on Fraudulent Financial Reporting, an inde-
pendent private-sector initiative that studied the causal factors that lead to fraudu-
lent fi nancial reporting (COSO 2013a). COSO is comprised of fi ve organizations, 
including the Institute of Management Accountants, the American Accounting 
Association, the American Institute of Certifi ed Public Accountants, the Institute of 
Internal Auditors, and Financial Executives International.The stated goal of COSO is 
to provide thought leadership on governance, enterprise risk management (ERM), 
internal controls, and fraud deterrence. The 1992 COSO report is recognized as an 
authoritative source on internal controls and provides a framework against which 
internal control systems may be assessed. In 2006, COSO issued guidance on how 
to apply the COSO framework to smaller public companies. Chapter 9 includes an 
extensive discussion of COSO’s guidance for smaller public companies as many of 
the concepts apply to SMEs regardless of whether they are public or private. 
 COSO released an updated Internal Control—Integrated Framework in 2013 
(COSO 2013b). The most current release formalizes many of the fundamental con-
cepts introduced in the original COSO framework. The fi ve principles of internal 
controls in 2013 were the fi ve concepts of internal controls in the previous COSO 
release. Consistent with earlier frameworks, the 2013 principles provide the user 
with assistance in the design and implementation of internal controls and a frame-
work against which internal control systems may be assessed. 
 Sarbanes-Oxley 
 In response to the series of business failures and corporate scandals that began 
with Enron in 2001, the U.S. Congress enacted the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 
(SOx). The stated purpose of SOx is to protect investors by improving the accuracy 
and reliability of corporate disclosures made pursuant to the securities laws (Public 
Law 107–204 2002). There are 11 sections of SOx-defi ning auditor and corporate 
responsibilities, including expectations for fi nancial disclosures, strong penalties 
for white-collar crimes, and protection for whistleblowers. Like many legislative 
acts, the U.S. Congress did not provide the necessary specifi city for implemen-
tation. Practitioners from public accounting and companies that had to comply 
reached back to the 1992 COSO report as an authoritative source to produce the 
necessary specifi city to implement SOx. 
 SOx also created the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) 
to oversee the audits of public companies to protect the interests of investors 
and to further public interest by the preparation of accurate and independent 
audit reports. The PCAOB issued guidance for IT controls and thus falls within the 
broader topic of IT audit concerns. 
COBIT 
 While COSO provides thought leadership on governance, ERM, internal controls, and 
fraud deterrence, COBIT 4.1 provides thought leadership and guidance within the 
IT function to address risk management, internal controls, and other relevant best 
practices. Chapter 10 provides an extensive discussion of COBIT 4.1 and its intersec-
tion with COSO. Chapter 10 also includes a discussion of previous PCAOB guidance 
and its intersection with COBIT. The intersection of COBIT with COSO is extremely 
important to the fi nancial or IT auditor, given COSO’s signifi cance to risk and internal 
control guidelines regardless of whether the enterprise is small, large, public, or 
private. COBIT 5, an update of COBIT 4.1, remains very relevant to COSO as this 
framework shifts from an IT-centric view to an enterprise view and considers IT and 
its collective contribution (e.g., enterprise data) within the larger risk framework .

Objectives of Data Processing for Small and Medium‐Sized Enterprises (SMEs)  ◾    7
corrupt the integrity of data or, at a minimum, raise concerns about the potential for 
this to happen. Confi dentiality intersects with availability where the scheme of permis-
sions and access rights is defi ned. Availability and integrity intersect at the point where 
information is required to process transactions (e.g., data from a customer’s subledger 
account must be available when a payment is received), make estimates (e.g., receivables 
and collection data should be available in order to estimate credits to the valuation 
allowance), or prepare statements and schedules. 
 Table  1.1  illustrates some of the important intersections between CIA objectives 
and the three IT domains of change management, operations, and security. The change 
management process should minimize the exposures created by transition from one 
state to another, and ensure that the change results in a stable endpoint. Operations 
need to occur in a stable and secure fashion. Security is a pervasive concern.
 Conﬁ dentiality 
 ▪
Change management: Segregation refers to the well‐established principle that 
programmers should not have access to data, and that those entrusted with data 
should not have programming rights. As examined in detail in later chapters, we 
defi ne  programming broadly so as to encompass the many methods of altering how 
software functions and the results it produces. When an IT auditor tests change 
management, we would expect to see change control forms with the requested 
changes that are approved for each change that is captured in the system. 
 ▪
 Operations: Confi dentiality concerns in the operations domain include issues such 
as the storage location of backup tapes. There’s a difference between a sock drawer 
and a fi reproof safe! It’s important to remember that the data on the backup tape is 
confi dential and may be readily converted to useful information without someone 
having access to the system. With respect to access control, IT auditor tests should 
expect the existence of signed forms with management approval, specifying the 
access needed. 
 ▪
 Security: This intersection includes topics such as passwords, permissions, log-on 
histories (detective control), and penetration testing. The auditor should determine 
whether company personnel have access only to the data they need—or to more. 
It is important to understand and  document the business reason for data access 
protocols. 
 TABLE 1.1  IT Objectives and Domains Mapped to CIA 
IT Objectives/
IT Domains 
Confi dentiality 
Integrity 
Availability 
 Change 
Management 
Segregation, 
authorization 
Accuracy and reliability 
of changes 
Rollback 
procedures 
 Operations 
Safety of backups, 
access to backups, 
access control 
System restorability 
Server capacity, 
licenses, personnel 
backups 
 Security 
Permissions, 
log-on histories 
Nature and reliability 
of controls 
Security roles exist, 
passwords exist 

8 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
 Integrity 
 ▪
Change management : The IT audit should ensure that appropriate end‐user test-
ing has occurred and that changes are working as intended and in a manner that 
can be relied upon. 
 ▪
 Operations: Concerns in this area include testing of backup tapes for system restor-
ability. If data cannot be restored, the company may have incomplete records. 
 ▪
 Security: The auditor should understand whether she can rely on the system’s 
security. Are there ways in which it could be bypassed or compromised? What are 
the overriding security controls? Are they soft or hard? 
 Availability 
 ▪
Change management: Is the source code in a location where it can be restored? 
Are there rollback procedures in case of a failed change? Is the backup tape avail-
able in case management needs to access data that is not currently in the system? 
 ▪
Operations: The IT auditor should consider the ability of the server system to han-
dle the day‐to‐day load. Does management have all the needed licenses and are they 
current? Are there any concerns about the computer system’s availability? The loca-
tion and availability of backup tapes is important. How, if it were necessary, would 
an employee access prior‐year information that is no longer kept in the system? 
 ▪
 Security: Whereas the primary security concern is unauthorized access, it’s also 
important that the system not lock out users who have innocently lost or forgotten 
a password. The IT auditor should understand procedures that ensure, as well as 
restrict, availability. 
 SPECIAL CHALLENGES FACING SMEs  
 How a Small Business Evolves 
 Almost everyone has heard the story of how Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak developed 
a business from a single concept that preceded the Lisa and the Macintosh and led to a 
 Hard and Soft Controls 
 A
t the organizational level, the terms  hard  control  and  soft  control  refer to the 
dichotomy between formal and restrictive policies that represent externally 
imposed discipline, and the sorts of informal, shared values that promote high 
levels of cohesion and commitment to the unit’s objectives. In the IT domain these 
terms have an analogous relationship to each other, but generally refer to the spe-
cifi c features of the software that either prevent a user from doing certain things 
(hard control) or warn her about specifi c consequences or problems (soft control). 
 As an example, consider an Excel template that is used for pricing. A soft 
control would be an error fl ag that produced a warning message if input values fell 
outside of a specifi ed range. A hard control would be a protected sheet with pric-
ing inputs restricted to input from a dropdown menu or a lookup table. Data entry 
to unprotected cells can be restricted in various ways. 

Special Challenges Facing SMEs  ◾        9
series of steps that eventually evolved into Apple Computer (Apple 1 2013). The char-
acteristics of the first business created by Jobs and Wozniak are emblematic of many 
SMEs: a high concentration of ownership, a high emphasis on revenue generation and 
cash, a niche product, and a handful of valued employees. The working relationships 
were very close as familiarity bred longtime friendships and real or perceived trust. 
Wozniak was among the first to be interviewed following Jobs’ death and described the 
passing of Steve Jobs as a significant loss (Metz 2011). Jobs and Wozniak sold their first 
“Apple 1s” to the Byte Shop in Mountain View, California, for $666 each. Apple 1s were 
the first single‐board computers with onboard read‐only memory and included a video 
interface—a niche product with a narrow geographical reach.
Although little documentation exists about the early stages of Apple 1, it’s reason 
able to speculate that bookkeeping and the associated controls were low priorities. 
It’s unlikely a full‐time, seasoned Certified Public Accountant was on the payroll to 
supervise and prepare the financial statements, let alone was an internal audit function 
established to review compliance to internal controls and assess enterprise risk. A posi-
tive cash flow versus compliance to generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) 
was more likely the first priority as Steve Jobs sold a Volkswagen minibus for investment 
infusion into a newly found passion. The bookkeeping was probably very simple, e.g. a 
checkbook, and did not include Excel spreadsheets, QuickBooks, or Microsoft Dynam-
ics as those products were not yet invented. No one was concerned whether program 
changes to the bookkeeping software were unauthorized or whether anyone using the 
software was qualified because the software didn’t exist. With data captured in a check-
book, daily data backups in the office and another with more time periods in another 
offsite location are not required. Beyond the bookkeeping and financial reporting, what 
else is relevant to the internal controls for this small business?
The opportunities for management override of internal controls (assuming some 
controls existed) by either Steve Jobs or Steve Wozniak was a significant risk as either 
could have taken the proceeds of a product delivery and “disappeared.” But each partner 
knew the operations, including product deliveries, revenue proceeds, and a sense of 
reasonableness. Unusual transactions would have been noticed immediately. Developing 
an environment in a smaller business with reduced risk requires clear objectives with 
an organization qualified and trained for the responsibilities. The tone at the top or 
at the senior management level emphasizes integrity and value systems consistent 
with a sound control environment. It is very likely that technical skills related to the 
Apple 1 were highly revered by Jobs and Wozniak with administrative and internal 
control skills as a distant second or even a remote priority. Competent personnel at all 
levels of the enterprise were something for the future, but not when they were selling 
personal assets to finance the business. The concepts of IT governance or the Committee 
of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO) did not exist in Steve Jobs’ or many Fortune 1000 
board members’ vocabulary or list of priorities. Steve Jobs never lamented the role of 
a weak or nonexistent board of directors for the Apple 1 business. The previous three 
paragraphs describing Apple 1 and Steve Jobs during its early years, albeit hypothetical, 
are very different from the SME environment that exists today.
Although there was no evidence of fraud in the early business ventures by Jobs 
and Wozniak (nor are we in any way implying that fraud existed), research by the 

10	
◾  Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE) suggests that small companies are 
among the most vulnerable to fraud and loss. According to a report from ACFE, The 
2012 Report to the Nation on Occupational Fraud and Abuse (ACFE 2012), small businesses, 
defined as those with less than 100 employees, suffered both a greater percentage of 
frauds (32 percent) and a higher median loss ($147,000) than their larger counterparts. 
These findings accentuate the problems associated with SMEs. They are limited in the 
amount of financial and human resources, including trained IT personnel, to deter fraud 
and abuse. According to ACFE research, billing schemes, skimming, cash larceny, and 
payroll fraud were noticeably more common in businesses with less than 100 employees. 
Across all sizes of organizations and government entities, tips were the most common 
detection method, followed by internal controls and internal audits. Pragmatically, few 
if any SMEs employ internal audits and must rely on other vehicles, if any, for fraud 
detection. Publicly traded companies cited the smallest percentage of fraud detected by 
external audits even though they are the only type of organization that is required to 
have an external audit.
The 2012 ACFE report is reinforced with more recent experience from the U.S. 
Secret Service and Verizon Communications Inc.’s forensic analysis unit, which inves-
tigates hacking attacks (Fowler and Worthen 2011). The forensic units responded to a 
combined 761 data breaches, up from 141 in 2009. Of those, 482, or 63 percent, were 
at companies with 100 employees or fewer. Visa Inc. estimates about 95 percent of the 
credit‐card data breaches it discovers are on its smallest business customers. Hackers 
would rather spend time on SMEs and make a quick harvest than break into a Fortune 
500 with substantially more effort. According to Symantec, the credit cards and bank 
accounts offered in the underground economy are worth more than US$7 billion.
The Control Environment for SMEs
Since Apple 1, software applications and the Internet have emerged to be significant 
control topics for the SME. Today, an SME would likely use Excel spreadsheets, Quick-
Books, or Microsoft Dynamics with the potential of cloud applications such as Google 
Apps for Business. QuickBooks has an active user base of 4.5 million companies and is 
the world’s most popular accounting software (Collins 2011). While much has changed 
since Apple 1 with the evolution of new software products such as QuickBooks and 
Microsoft Dynamics, much remains unchanged. Adequate staffing, segregation of 
duties, competent personnel, qualified board members, the tone at the top, and general 
controls are among the topics for SMEs that remain constant before and after the emer-
gence of Excel spreadsheets, QuickBooks, or Microsoft Dynamics. While these controls 
remain constant, they must be adjusted for the new reality of software applications that 
did not exist in the previous generation of SMEs. For example, the definition of competent 
personnel must now include an employee who understands QuickBooks at a minimum 
level of proficiency. A new genre of internal controls described as IT controls has emerged 
with a reliance on the new software technology.
Adequate staffing to support segregation of duties is an ongoing concern with SMEs. 
The person who opens the mail and logs payments should not be the same person who 
makes deposits and maintains the bookkeeping records. Additional segregations of duties 

Special Challenges Facing SMEs  ◾        11
should be in place: Receipts should be offered to all customers with the requirement that 
subsequent transactions be accompanied by a receipt; excessive voided sales should be 
investigated; all credit memos and write‐offs should require management approval; 
and management should investigate customer complaints about unusual balances 
(Raimondi 2011). Segregation of duties is also important for cash disbursements: A 
review of the original invoice should be made prior to payment; purchase orders should 
be used for all significant purchases; the purchase orders should use an approved 
vendors’ list (management approves the list of approved vendors); the check signor 
should not be the bookkeeper; all online payments are approved by a second person; 
and one person controls payments while a second person controls blank checks and 
monitors check numbers. Additional areas that should require segregation of duties 
include payroll reviews, fixed asset inventories and reviews, and bank credit card 
activities. Has anything else changed as a result of QuickBooks, Microsoft Dynamics, 
and Excel in the SME? Management and auditors alike need to reflect on this question 
in order to ensure that all risks and controls have been considered.
The need for general, often physical, controls outside of the IT environment, includ-
ing locked doors, cash registers, offices, file cabinets, and control of blank checks, has 
changed little with the emergence of QuickBooks, Microsoft Dynamics, and Excel. 
Within the IT environment, the emergence of server cabinets and backup files has 
increased the need for greater security for servers (and backup servers) and offsite stor-
age of files. Wireless access to the SME network should include the appropriate encryp-
tion (e.g., WiFi-protected access [WPA2] or a more recent product). With software on 
servers and Internet availability, restricted access through passwords and the appro-
priate implementation of firewalls and ongoing file backups should be normal protocol. 
Background checks and security cameras should be implemented wherever appropriate 
and particularly where high‐value inventory exists. A broader discussion of general 
controls for SMEs occurs later in this book.
Significant application controls for Excel, Microsoft Dynamics, and QuickBooks 
include access controls, closing dates, a variety of reports validating the data, budget-
ary controls, customer credit card protection, and user preferences. In this chapter, 
we introduce application topics for further review in more detail in later chapters. In 
QuickBooks, user names and passwords can be administered for sales and accounts 
receivable, purchases and accounts payable, checking and credit cards, inventory, time 
tracking, payroll and employees, sensitive accounting activities, sensitive financial 
reports, changing or deleting transactions, and changing closed transactions. In the 
QuickBooks Enterprise Solution, customization to enable application control fine tun-
ing includes predefined roles, individual reports, bank accounts, lists, and activities 
with the ability to customize each user’s access to view‐only, create, modify, delete, 
and print. Controlling transactions in closed periods is particularly important to the 
integrity of financial reporting. In QuickBooks, the closing date password can be estab-
lished with the ability to restrict access to prior periods. A closing date exception report 
is available for management review. Additional application controls include reports 
for the audit trail, voided/deleted transactions, previous reconciliation, discrepancy, 
closing date, and exception report. Additional application controls will be reviewed in 
later chapters.

12	
◾  Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
The Board’s and Management’s Roles in  
the SME Control Environment
According to the SEC’s Office of Economic Analysis, insiders own on average approxi-
mately 30 percent of the company’s shares (GAO 2006) for those public companies with 
a market capitalization of $125 million or less. With the high concentration of owner-
ship in smaller public companies, the same need for significant investor SEC protection 
in a Fortune 1000 company with broad stock ownership does not exist. However, while 
there is some benefit in concentrated management and ownership, there are also exten-
sive and numerous risks, including management override of internal controls.
While the risk of management override exists with a concentration of management 
and ownership, greater oversight, exposure, and transparency of the business can also 
evolve from a smaller company, provided senior management creates the leadership 
for those characteristics to evolve. Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak were hands‐on dur-
ing the evolution of Apple 1 and were very aware of product movement, product costs, 
and administrative expenses. Achieving and evaluating effective internal controls over 
financial reporting can be simplified if management maintains hands‐on involvement 
and awareness of sales, costs, and administrative expenses.
SME shareholders, the board, managers, and audit committees (if an audit commit-
tee exists) should actively (and periodically) evaluate their organizational maturity for 
all software implementations, including Excel, QuickBooks, and Microsoft Great Plains 
Dynamics. The assessments should be based on the premises that:
▪▪
All organizations are at risk due to a lack of resources or ineffective leadership, but 
SMEs are particularly at risk given the evidence from Sarbanes‐Oxley implementa-
tions and research from the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.
▪▪
A minimum of internal controls should be attained for any software implementation.
▪▪
Successful IT implementations are inextricably linked to qualified staff and effec-
tive project management. A priority for the audit committee, the board, corporate 
officers, and the external auditor is to understand the impact of IT requirements 
on internal controls, as IT domain weaknesses spill over to other IT and non‐IT 
internal control effectiveness in other COSO domains.
Recruiting a qualified board for SMEs can be very challenging as qualified board 
members are in high demand and those who do qualify may want to avoid the board 
member liabilities associated with higher‐risk SMEs. Recruiting qualified board and 
audit committee members for SMEs creates the potential for board members to add 
perspective, value, and oversight for financial reporting in a longer‐term relationship. 
However, many prospective recruits to the board or audit committee may perceive 
excessive risk in a smaller company given the potential for shareholder litigation for a 
variety of reasons, including fraudulent financial reporting. Meaningful internal con-
trols can facilitate board member recruiting.
Internal controls can be strengthened by active and visible participation by man-
agement in the internal controls for SMEs. For example, managers can review system 
reports of detailed transactions; select transactions for review of supporting documents; 

Research Confi rming the Risks Associated with SMEs  ◾    13
oversee periodic counts of physical inventory, sign off on system access or program 
changes, and compare equipment or other assets with accounting records; and review 
reconciliations of account balances or perform them independently. In many SMEs, 
managers already are performing internal control procedures, but documentation is 
less than complete. Credit should be taken for their contribution to effective internal 
control through written job descriptions and logs that document the periodic steps taken 
to support their written job descriptions. 
 The authors believe that a critical success factor lies in an organization’s capa-
bility to implement and maintain fi nancial software while sustaining or improving 
internal controls. Most SMEs have the advantage of simpler operating requirements, 
which should translate into the acquisition of software packages to meet operating 
requirements and avoid risks associated with in‐house developed systems. Main-
tenance and development are borne by the vendor, which is a much better choice 
than the IT staff of an SME who typically lack technical expertise in that particular 
software. Commercially available software can offer features for controlling data access, 
performing checks on data processing completeness and accuracy, completing sys-
tem and data backup, and maintaining related documentation. Over the last decade, 
additional application controls have been added in Excel, QuickBooks, and Microsoft 
Dynamics as those products have evolved. Although management may be able to take 
the leadership in training operating staff on general and application controls, it is more 
likely that outside resources such as CPAs with suffi cient depth in internal controls 
would be required for periodic consulting engagements. With appropriate training, 
application controls can help improve operational consistency, facilitate log reviews, 
automate reconciliations, provide meaningful exception reporting, and support proper 
segregation of duties. 
RESEARCH CONFIRMING THE RISKS ASSOCIATED 
WITH SMEs 
 The awareness of control challenges associated with SMEs has increased signifi cantly 
since the fi rst pronouncement by the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the 
Treadway Commission (CSOTC) in 1992. It’s reasonable to assume that controls that 
we associate with CSOTC were rarely in place for many SMEs up to and including the 
implementation of SOx. The events that followed the implementation SOx in 2002 
include independent research from academia, congressional hearings, reports from 
the General Accounting Offi ce (GAO), and eventually a new pronouncement by COSO 
in 2006 that shed light on the state of controls in SMEs. The report from the ACFE, 
The 2012 Report to the Nation on Occupational Fraud and Abuse (ACFE 2012), confi rmed 
the vulnerability of businesses with fewer than 100 employees to fraud and higher 
average losses. 
 The original 1992 CSOTC report defi ned  internal control as a process, affected by 
an entity’s board of directors, management, and other personnel, designed to provide 
reasonable assurance regarding the achievement of effectiveness and effi ciency of 
operations, reliability of fi nancial reporting, and compliance with applicable laws 

14	
◾  Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
and regulations. Five concepts were emphasized by the 1992 CSOTC: (1) a sound con-
trol environment defined by a qualified board, the tone at the top, and competent 
personnel throughout the organizational structure; (2) ongoing risk assessment of 
financial reporting including the potential of fraud; (3) both procedural and infor-
mation technology controls that respond to a broader risk assessment of the enter-
prise and the environment; (4) effective financial and internal control reporting; and  
(5) ongoing evaluations of the internal control environment to enable management to 
respond. COSO remains tethered to Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework 
(ERM) whether it’s an SME or a large public company. Following the 1992 pronounce-
ment by CSOTC, numerous events, including the failure of Enron, the initial imple-
mentation of SOx in 2004, and subsequent assessments by the GAO, Congress, and 
COSO (2007), led to a reemphasis on the five components of COSO for SMEs whether 
they are public or private.
Independent research on firms that reported at least one material weakness for 
those companies in the initial SOx implementations from 2002 to 2005 found that 
these firms were more likely smaller, younger, riskier, more complex, and financially 
weaker, with poorer accrual earnings quality. In their independent research, Klamm 
and Watson (2009) examined 490 firms reporting material weakness in the first year 
of SOx compliance to evaluate the interrelatedness of weak COSO components and IT 
controls. Their research identified relationships between the reported material weak-
ness and the five components of COSO, including:
▪▪
A weak control environment has a positive association with the remaining four 
weak COSO components; that is, COSO components are likely to affect one another.
▪▪
IT‐related weak COSO components frequently spill over to create more non‐IT‐
related material weakness and misstatements.
▪▪
IT‐related weak COSO components negatively affect reporting reliability and add to 
the number of non‐IT material weaknesses reported.
Moreover, the conclusion from Klamm and Watson’s research is that the IT domain 
appears to affect overall control effectiveness.
Cumulative evidence from IT projects in the past 15 years and SOx suggest several 
risk drivers for internal controls, including:
▪▪
Complexity of the enterprise, including the number of subsidiaries and the nature 
of assets and liabilities
▪▪
Smaller, younger, riskier, more complex, and financially weaker organizations that 
lack either adequate resources or the leadership to execute an effective or controlled 
change management
The General Accounting Office (GAO 2006) in its Report to the Committee on Small 
Business and Entrepreneurship, U.S. Senate, in 2006, identified the resource limitations 
that make it more difficult for smaller public companies to achieve economies of 
scale, segregate duties and responsibilities, and hire qualified accounting personnel 

Research Confirming the Risks Associated with SMEs   ◾        15
to prepare and report financial information. Segregation of transactions and the 
associated division of responsibilities in a smaller company absorb a larger per-
centage of the company’s revenues or assets than in a larger company. About  
60 percent of the smaller public companies that responded to the GAO survey 
reported that it was difficult to implement effective segregation of duties. Several 
executives reported difficulty in segregating duties due to limited resources. Other 
executives in the GAO survey commented that it was difficult to achieve effective 
internal control over financial reporting because they lacked expertise within their 
internal accounting staff to complete the accounting for such complex topics as 
stock option valuations. So while it’s more difficult to implement internal controls, 
the AICPA noted that smaller public companies often do not have the internal audit 
functions referred to in COSO’s internal framework guidance and therefore can-
not provide oversight (GAO 2006). The nature of SMEs creates difficulties with 
internal controls and oversight, leading to modified expectations for shareholder  
protection.
In connection with SOx compliance, the SEC requires the implementation of Enter-
prise Risk Management—Integrated Framework (ERM), authored by the Treadway Com-
mission’s Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO 1992). The report, Internal 
Control for Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies, issued in 2007 by 
COSO following the GAO report, reemphasizes the five concepts originally identified in 
1992. The five concepts are:
	 1.	 A sound control environment defined by a qualified board, the tone at the top, and 
competent personnel throughout the organizational structure.
	 2.	 Ongoing risk assessment of financial reporting, including the potential of fraud.
	 3.	 Both procedural and information technology controls that respond to the risk 
environment.
	 4.	 Effective financial and internal control reporting.
	 5.	 Ongoing evaluations of the internal control environment to enable management to 
respond. COSO remains tethered to Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Frame-
work (ERM), whether it’s an SME or a Fortune 100 enterprise, after the original 
pronouncement 14 years earlier.
In the Internal Control for Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Compa-
nies, COSO reemphasized the need for management to weigh costs against benefits 
particularly for those companies that have focused considerable attention on the costs 
associated with Section 404 compliance. While the costs of internal control are appar-
ent, the benefits of capital market access to provide funds for innovation and market 
expansion may not be as obvious. Additional benefits include more reliable financial 
reporting; consistent mechanisms for processing transactions across an organization; 
enhancing speed and reliability; and the ability to accurately communicate business 
performance to partners and customers. Private companies that do not rely on public 
financing still require bank financing and, potentially, external investors from time 
to time.

16 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
A FRAMEWORK FOR EVALUATING RISKS AND 
CONTROLS, COMPENSATORY CONTROLS, AND 
REPORTING DEFICIENCIES 
 A review of the Apple 1 business identifi ed numerous internal control challenges that 
are associated with small businesses. Small staffs with the inability to segregate the 
transaction cycle, the potential for management override because of management’s 
dominance of day‐to‐day activities, qualifi ed accounting personnel with adequate train-
ing in Excel, QuickBooks, or Microsoft Dynamics, and maintaining current updates for 
software applications are among the control challenges for SMEs. All of these examples 
deliver threats to the ability of the enterprise to provide reliable fi nancial transactions, 
accounting records, and fi nancial statements. So when does a threat become a  mate-
rial weakness and which framework is applicable to making an assessment about the 
appropriateness of various controls? 
 In 2007, in the context of a Section 404 discussion within SOx (SEC 2007a), the SEC 
delivered clarifi cation on the term  material weakness as “a defi ciency, or combination of 
defi ciencies, in internal control over fi nancial reporting, such that there is a reasonable 
possibility that a material misstatement of the company’s annual or interim fi nancial 
statements will not be prevented or detected on a timely basis.” A  signifi cant defi ciency 
exists if one or more control defi ciencies exist that create a fi nancial reporting misstate-
ment that rises to a level that is less than a material weakness. “Our guidance enables 
companies of all sizes to focus on what truly matters to the integrity of the fi nancial 
statements—risk and materiality,” said Securities and Exchange Commission chief 
accountant Conrad Hewitt. While the following discussion applies to publicly traded 
SMEs, the principles provide a framework for risks and controls for fi nancial reporting 
for all SMEs irrespective of the capital structure and the ultimate regulatory framework. 
 The SEC delivered its interpretative guidance in 2007 for public companies of all 
sizes, including publicly listed SMEs, around two key principles:
 1.  Management should evaluate whether it has implemented controls that adequately 
address the risk that a material misstatement of the fi nancial statements would not 
be prevented or detected in a timely manner using a top‐down, risk‐based approach 
including the role of entity‐level controls (including general controls). 
 2.  The evaluation procedures should be aligned with those areas of fi nancial report-
ing that pose the highest risks to reliable fi nancial reporting with more extensive 
testing in high‐risk areas. 
 For principle 2, the evaluation procedures include a fi ve‐step process that requires 
management:
 1.  To identify those risks of misstatement that could, individually or in combination 
with others, result in a material misstatement of the fi nancial statements 
 2.  To evaluate whether it has controls placed in operation to adequately address the 
company’s fi nancial reporting risks 

 3.  To consider the nature of the entity‐level controls and how those controls relate to 
the fi nancial reporting element 
 4.  To consider the adequacy of both general controls and application controls for IT 
processing underlying the integrity of fi nancial statement reporting 
 5.  To maintain reasonable support for its assessment, including documentation of the 
design of the controls management has placed in operation to adequately address 
the fi nancial reporting risks 
 Management should be able to assess the fi nancial reporting risks underlying their 
internal controls. (See Figure  1.2 .) Higher risks associated with fi nancial reporting risks 
require more evidence; lower risks associated with fi nancial reporting require less evidence. 
 In the SEC’s interpretive guidance in 2007 of how to assess Section 404 of SOx, an 
example of how management should evaluate the likelihood of the possibility of a control 
failure included an assessment of eight attributes of controls, all of which are applicable 
to SMEs (SEC 2007b). Management’s assessment of fi nancial reporting misstatements 
includes both the materiality of the fi nancial reporting element and the susceptibility 
of the underlying account balances, transactions, or other supporting information to 
a misstatement that could be material to the fi nancial statements. The attributes that 
would be evaluated are:
 1.  The type of control (i.e., manual or automated) and the frequency with which it 
operates 
 2.  The complexity of the control 
 3.  The risk of management override 
A Framework for Evaluating Risks and Controls ◾    17
 FIGURE 1.2  Determining the Sufﬁ ciency of Evidence Based on Internal Control over 
Financial Reporting (ICFR) Risk 
Source: Commission Guidance Regarding Management’s Report on Internal Control Over 
Financial Reporting Under Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (SEC 2007b) , 
www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33‐8810.pdf. 
<100
100–999
Number of Employees
Percent of Cases
1,000–9,999
10,000+
36.0%
20.3%
24.8%
18.9%
38.2%
2006
2008
0.0%
5.0% 10.0% 15.0% 20.0% 25.0% 30.0% 35.0% 40.0% 45.0%
20.0%
23.0%
18.9%

18	
◾  Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
	 4.	 The judgment required to operate the control
	 5.	 The competence of the personnel who perform the control or monitor its performance
	 6.	 Whether there have been changes in key personnel who either perform the control 
or monitor its performance
	 7.	 The nature and materiality of misstatements that the control is intended to prevent 
or detect
	 8.	 The degree to which the control relies on the effectiveness of other controls (e.g., IT 
general controls), and evidence of the operation of the control from prior year(s)
Evaluation of these eight attributes could be applied to the Apple 1 business described 
earlier and to any SME that employed Excel, QuickBooks, or Microsoft Dynamics.
A risk‐based audit approach (Romney and Steinbart 2011):
	 1.	 Determines the threats.
	 2.	 Identifies the control procedures to prevent, detect, or correct the threats.
	 3.	 Evaluates that the controls that are purported to exist actually exist.
	 4.	 Makes a final determination as to whether the purported controls are adequate or 
effective and whether additional audit procedures should occur.
After determining the threats in Step 1, Step 2 in the risk‐based audit approach, the 
identification phase, includes all controls that management has put into place. Step 3, 
the evaluation step, includes a system review to determine whether control procedures 
are in place and tests to determine whether the controls are working as intended. If the 
controls are inadequate or ineffective in Step 4, compensating controls should be consid-
ered as a replacement for the primary controls. The SEC defines compensating controls as 
controls that serve to accomplish the objective of another control that did not function 
properly, helping to reduce risk to an acceptable level. To have a mitigating effect, the 
compensating control should replace the original control to prevent or detect a material 
misstatement to the financial statements.
A sample framework for the audit of QuickBooks processing controls integrat-
ing a risk‐based audit approach would include the following assessment in four 
categories.
Types of Errors and Fraud
The types of errors and fraud determinants in the framework include:
▪▪
Failure to detect incorrect, incomplete, or unauthorized input data (e.g., override 
by management)
▪▪
Failure to properly correct errors flagged by data editing procedures
▪▪
Introduction of errors into files or databases during updating (e.g., updates from 
add‐in inventory system that were not reviewed using reasonableness tests, or man-
agement override)
▪▪
Improper distribution or disclosure of QuickBooks output (e.g., password controls 
with strong passwords)

▪▪
Intentional or unintentional inaccuracies in reporting (e.g., a monthly review of 
reports on missing inventory, excessive credit memos, or adjustments to accounts 
receivable)
Control Procedures
The control procedures in the framework include:
▪▪
Data editing routines of source data
▪▪
Reconciliation of batch totals
▪▪
Effective error correction procedures (e.g., management approval for voiding or 
deleting transactions in QuickBooks)
▪▪
Competent supervision of QuickBooks with trained personnel
▪▪
Effective handling of data input and output by data control personnel (e.g., pre-
defined user roles are available in the Enterprise edition of QuickBooks, which limit 
a user’s role in extreme detail)
▪▪
Maintenance of proper environmental conditions in the computer facility (e.g., 
locked server cabinets, background checks on key personnel, etc.)
Audit Procedures
The audit procedures in the framework that follow fall into two categories: system 
review and tests of controls.
System Review
▪▪
Review administrative documentation for processing control standards (e.g., a 
review of the logs of management approval for voided or deleted transactions).
▪▪
Review systems documentation for data editing and other processing controls (e.g., 
a review of logs of data backup and testing of files).
▪▪
Document operations for completeness and clarity.
▪▪
Observe computer operations and data control functions.
Tests of Controls
▪▪
Evaluate adequacy of processing control standards and procedures.
▪▪
Evaluate adequacy and completeness of data editing controls.
▪▪
Verify adherence to processing control procedures by observing computer and data.
▪▪
Verify that application system output is properly distributed.
▪▪
Reconcile a sample of batch totals; follow up on discrepancies.
▪▪
Trace a sample of data edit routines errors to ensure proper handling.
▪▪
Verify processing accuracy of sensitive transactions (e.g., management approval 
for accounts receivable write‐offs).
▪▪
Verify processing accuracy of computer‐generated transactions (e.g., test credit 
card transactions).
▪▪
Check accuracy and completeness of processing controls by using test data (e.g., the 
transaction list by vendor should be reviewed for check detail, purchases by vendor 
detail, purchases by item detail, open purchase orders, and budget vs. actual).
A Framework for Evaluating Risks and Controls  ◾        19

20 
◾ Why Is IT Auditing Important to the Financial Auditor?
 Compensating Controls 
 Finally, the Audit Trail Report in QuickBooks is an example of a compensating control 
to use to answer three essential questions:
 1.  Who added/edited/deleted the transaction? 
 2.  When was the transaction added/edited/deleted? 
 3.  What were the relevant details of the transaction (i.e., date, amount, accounts, 
names)? 
SUMMARY: THE ROAD AHEAD 
 A robust implementation of COSO’s  Internal Control—Integrated Framework , and an imple-
mentation of the Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) 
framework, are effective responses to the risk drivers for the SME. The authors believe 
that the board, management, IT, business operations, and accounting organization 
must be able to support COSO on a  systematic and repeatable level —and that the controls 
are integral to the operation of the enterprise. The authors also believe that even with 
commercially available fi nancial applications, organizational maturity may be a major 
risk factor for SMEs as evidenced by the conclusions of reports of SOx compliance, GAO, 
ACFE, the U.S. Secret Service, Verizon, and others. Given the high level of risk exposure 
to fraud and abuse in SMEs and low levels of success attributable to external audit and 
the near‐absence of internal audits in smaller businesses, effective internal controls and 
COSO compliance are critical success factors in the fi nancial health of the SME. 

21
2
 CHAPTER  TWO 
 General Controls for the SME 
   T
HIS CHAPTER REVIEWS THE CONCEPTS of  fair presentation of fi nancial 
statements and internal controls, and general controls, and the relevancy of 
those controls to the  fair presentation of fi nancial statements. The chapter also 
addresses internal controls and IT general controls relevant to QuickBooks, Microsoft 
Dynamics, and Microsoft Excel. While QuickBooks, Microsoft Dynamics, and Microsoft 
Excel are applications and require application controls, they must operate in a secure IT 
environment.  So why are general controls for the IT environment important? 
 An insecure or mismanaged IT environment will create a wall of worry for the IT 
auditor for any fi nancial applications or any of the systems or subsystems that feed mate-
rial fi nancial information to the fi nancial statements. For the very small enterprise, a 
handyman or a person with limited IT experience may be in charge of the company’s 
networks, servers, and databases. For the auditor, the fi rst challenges are to get comfort-
able with IT governance and to gain some assurance that IT general controls (ITGCs) are 
in place, effective, and operating as described on a consistent basis. Without assurances 
that ITGCs are in place and operating effectively and consistently, the auditor may have a 
very steep wall of worry to climb. That wall of worry may ultimately be insurmountable. 
 An integrated view of general controls (Palmas 2011) shows general controls encap-
sulating the IT environment that holds all business processes, business units, and appli-
cation controls (Figure  2.1 ). Application controls are specifi c to a business process and 
each business process supports a business unit. A particular business process may sup-
port several business units. For public and other Sarbanes-Oxley-compliant companies, 
tests are appropriate for both business processes and the IT environment. Consistent 
with the IT environment and the business processes (the larger box and everything 
that’s in the box), the objectives of fi nancial reporting, the assertions of existence, com-
pleteness, rights and obligations, accuracy, cutoff, and classifi cations, must meet the 
fi nancial statement reporting objectives of the enterprise. 

22 
◾ General Controls for the SME
 This chapter discusses what (or who) is responsible for IT general controls and what 
types of general controls support the fi nancial assertion objectives. Later in this chapter, 
we will step through the  COSO process , a best practice, to include an integrated view of 
the fi nancial statements, assertions, risks, control objectives, and eventually applica-
tion controls. The application controls for any particular account (e.g., Revenue) will be 
residing in a business process within the IT environment as shown in Figure  2.1 . The 
IT environment and ITGCs have a signifi cant role in the COSO process, where we will 
examine the fi nancial statements and specifi c IT controls and whether they are in place 
and working to support the fi nancial assertions. 
GENERAL CONTROLS: SCOPE AND OUTCOMES 
 The term  general controls offers little insight into what it encapsulates in the context 
of controls for an SME. The defi nitions used by COSO, ISACA, and other authoritative 
bodies in the fi eld typically defi ne general controls in terms of  what the controls do or their 
intended outcomes within their scope of activity . 
 FIGURE  2.1  IT General and Application Controls 
Source: Adapted from Palmas 2011. 
Sarbanes-Oxley Tests
Financial Statements
IT General Controls
IT Application Controls
Business
Unit
Business
Unit
IT Environment
Business
Unit
• Existence or occurrence—
Assets, liabitities, and
ownership interests exist at
the balance sheet date as
presented in the financial
statements.
• Completeness—All
transactions and other
events and circumstances
that occurred during a
specific period have been
recorded.
• Rights and obligations—
Assets are the rights and
liabilities are the obligations
of the entity at the balance
sheet.
• Accuracy, valuation, or
allocation—Asset, liability,
revenue, and expense
components are recorded at
appropriate amounts.
• Cut off—Transactions and
events have been recorded
in the correct accounting
period.
• Classification and
understandability—Items in
the statements have been
properly described, sorted,
and classified.
Process 1
Process 2
Process 3

General Controls: Scope and Outcomes  ◾        23
COSO was among the first to create a framework and to create definitions that 
divide IT controls into two types: (1) general computer or IT controls and (2) application‐ 
specific controls. Outcomes and their scope define general controls:
▪▪
Data center operations (e.g., job scheduling, backup, and recovery)
▪▪
Systems software controls and access security
▪▪
Application system development and maintenance controls
Application controls:
▪▪
Control data processing of a particular application.
▪▪
Ensure the integrity of transactions, authorization, and validity.
▪▪
Encompass how different applications interface and exchange data.
Figure 2.1 includes general controls in the IT environment, while application con-
trols are included in specific business processes.
ISACA’s IT Assurance Framework (ITAF) (ISACA 2013) ranks at or near the top 
as the most comprehensive framework for an audit of general controls and according 
to ISACA provides a single point of reference to host standards, guidelines, tools, and 
techniques to conduct IT assessments. Section 3000 of the ITAF identifies IT processes 
or IT audit processes and includes a narrative description of the guideline item, presents 
information about the subject area and the assurance issues, and provides direction to 
IT audit and assurance professionals. More specifically, Section 3630 of the ITAF, Audit-
ing ITGCs (ISACA 2013), includes definitions of general controls and the corresponding 
IT assessments.
▪▪
An introduction to ITGCs, the components of ITGC, and the difference between 
ITGCs versus IT application controls
▪▪
Information resource planning, IT planning processes, and the alignment of enter-
prise initiatives, budgets, and planning
▪▪
IT services delivery, standards of delivery, and existence of service‐level agreements
▪▪
Information systems operations, end‐user computing, education and support, net-
works and network management, and human resources (HR) issues, including 
staffing, training, and career management
▪▪
HR issues unique to IT, skill identification, management challenges, and  
governance
▪▪
Outsourced and third‐party activities, insourcing, offshoring, facilities manage-
ment, and the issues concerning each
▪▪
Information security management within IT and end‐user IT controls over security 
management
▪▪
Systems development life cycle (SDLC) over traditional internal development, 
customizing packages, acquiring enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, and 
nontraditional development models that include outsourcing and offshoring
▪▪
Business continuity planning (BCP) and disaster recovery planning (DRP), impact 
assessments, scenarios, responses, and communications

24	
◾  General Controls for the SME
▪▪
Database management and controls to ensure up‐to‐date and readily available 
information
▪▪
Network management and controls, the protection of the networks, internal and 
external risks, and encryption
▪▪
Systems software support, migration issues for new software and hardware 
changes, version management, maintenance, release control, and patch 
management
▪▪
Hardware support, acquisition, maintenance, and deprovisioning
▪▪
Operating system management and controls, implementation, version and patch 
management
▪▪
Physical and environmental control, security, network switches, wiring closets, 
end‐user computing, and notebooks in use while away from the usual place of  
business
▪▪
Enterprise portals, e‐business, open and closed user groups, and various means to 
protect the organization from disruptions in the enterprise portals
Particularly noteworthy in the ITAF discussion is the scope within the organiza-
tion. While many general controls can be isolated to the IT organization (e.g., network 
security), and strategic alignment of the IT function to the enterprise, many topics, 
including budgeting, ERP systems, and IT human resources, are among the significant 
IT issues that reach into the executive office and ultimately corporate governance. The 
chairman, president, and CEO are involved with general control and governance issues 
for the IT organization.
Types of Controls
For either general controls or application controls, three types of controls generally 
coexist: (1) preventive controls, (2) detective controls, and (3) corrective controls.
Preventive controls avoid errors, fraud, or events not authorized by management. 
Preventive controls are designed to stop undesirable acts before they occur. A dis-
cussion of preventive controls for security and access includes such topics as locked 
doors or intrusion alarms. A retinal eye scan or other biometric preventive controls 
prevent unwelcomed intruders into a protected space; a lock prevents access to a 
car, house, or other protected space. However, a creative burglar can circumvent a 
lock with either brute force or creative problem solving; retinal eye scans are more 
difficult to override. Ultimately, a cost benefit analysis drives the design of the pre-
ventive controls.
Because preventive controls can fail, detective controls may be required. A fire alarm 
detects smoke, makes a shrill noise, and is a detective control, but it cannot prevent a fire 
nor can it extinguish a fire. The role of a detective control is to communicate a warning 
or a failed condition.
Finally, corrective controls are those steps undertaken to correct an error or prob-
lem uncovered via detective controls. A recovery of a file, a building, or a business is 
a corrective control and restores a situation back to its original state before an event 

General Controls: Scope and Outcomes  ◾        25
occurred. A corrective control cannot prevent a catastrophe but it plays a very significant 
role in risk management. Concepts such as preventive, detective, or corrective controls 
begin to emerge and are part of the overall fabric of general controls. Preventive, detec-
tive, or corrective controls for financial recordkeeping would appear as an application 
control in Process 1, 2, or 3 in Figure 2.1.
It is typical that 60 to 70 percent or more of the controls in an environment are 
preventive, another 20 to 30 percent are detective, and the remaining 10 to 20 percent 
are corrective. As such, the controls should be used in combination to reinforce one 
another with selective redundancy, much like a portfolio manager would structure vari-
ous investments to manage risk. As one control fails, another control will compensate 
for the first control’s failure. A log (frequently used as a detective control) can identify 
intruders if the intruder overrides a preventive control. The objective is to create an 
outcome greater than what any single control can deliver by itself. It is unlikely that any 
one preventive or detective control can survive a determined individual whose objective 
is to override the system.
Perhaps the most significant corrective control is a business or disaster recovery 
plan, which requires active support and sponsorship from the chief executive officer 
(CEO) and the board. Without an effective business recovery plan, the survival of 
an enterprise is vulnerable to catastrophic events. This corrective control restores 
an enterprise back to its original operating mode. While the initial introduction 
to preventive, detective, or corrective controls discusses locks, fire alarms, retinal 
eye scans, and the like, the most significant controls require support from the CEO 
and the board, where the lack of a control can have a devastating impact on an 
organization.
Examples of General Controls
For purposes of illustration, sample preventive, detective, or corrective controls for 
authentication of users and limiting unauthorized access, hacking and other network 
break‐ins, and the physical environment and physical security of the system and busi-
ness continuity are included in Tables 2.1, 2.2, and 2.3.
IT Governance and General Controls
Preventive, detective, or corrective controls apply to all levels of the organization, includ-
ing the board, senior management, corporate governance, and IT governance, as well as 
the accounting clerk who opens the accounts receivable submissions at his or her desk. 
A frequently referenced preventive control is to hire qualified staff at all levels, includ-
ing the CEO, the controller, and even the mailroom clerk. The most significant driver 
for general controls is IT governance as it defines the hiring process and ultimately 
the employed personnel, the internal processes, the leadership, and the organizational 
structures. The authors concur with the definition of IT governance that Shimamoto 
suggests (2011): “IT governance is the leadership, structures, and processes that busi-
ness owners put in place to ensure that their business’s IT sustains and extends their 
business strategy and objectives.”

26 
◾ General Controls for the SME
 TABLE 2.1 Authentication of Users and Limiting Unauthorized Access
User IDs
Preventive: Must be unique for each user.
Authentication 
of Users
Preventive: A process or procedure in an IT system to ensure that the 
person accessing the IT system is a valid and authorized user.
Passwords
Preventive: A secret set of characters that identify the user as the authentic 
owner of that associated user ID.  Signiﬁ cant attributes include (but are not 
limited to):
 ▪
Passwords should be at least eight characters in length and contain at 
least one nonalphanumeric character.
 ▪
Passwords should be case sensitive and changed at least every 90 days.
Two-factor 
Authentication: 
Smart Card
Preventive: The smart card authenticates a valid user. 
 ▪
The smart card is a credit-card-size device with an integrated circuit that 
displays a constantly changing ID code.
 ▪
The user enters her password, and then the smart card displays an ID 
that she uses to log in the system. 
 ▪
The smart card changes the user ID systematically every few minutes or so.
Two-factor 
Authentication: 
Security Token
Preventive: A security token plugs into the USB port and thereby eliminates 
the need for a card reader. The purpose and use of the security token are 
equivalent to the smart card.
Computer Log
Detective: All accesses should be logged with a complete record of all 
dates, times, and uses, for two purposes. 
 ▪
Abnormalities in login or use can be examined to determine any 
weaknesses in login procedures. 
 ▪
The login procedures and logs establish nonrepudiation of users.
Limit Login 
Attempts
Preventive: The login procedure should be established so that the session 
is terminated after three unsuccessful attempts and that these terminated 
sessions are also logged. The purpose of the log is to allow proper follow-up 
if there are patterns of abnormal login or terminated logins. To maintain 
a record of login attempts, the system should keep an automated log to 
detect suspicious or unusual login attempts.
User Proﬁ le
Preventive: Should be established for every authorized user.
 ▪
Determines each user’s access levels to hardware, software, and data 
according to the individual’s job responsibilities.
 ▪
The level of access should be established within the authority tables.
Authority Table
Preventive: A list of valid, authorized users and the access level granted 
to each one. One user within the payroll area may need to both read and 
write data, while another ma y need only read access. These user proﬁ les are 
deﬁ ned in the authority tables.
Conﬁ guration 
Tables
Preventive: Conﬁ guration tables for hardware, software, and application 
programs that contain the appropriate set-up and security settings. It 
is important to limit user access to these conﬁ guration tables so that 
security settings are not changed by unauthorized users. The hardware 
and operating system conﬁ guration table contains security and operating 
settings for hardware and the operating system.
Source: Adapted from Turner and Weickgenannt 2008. 

General Controls: Scope and Outcomes ◾    27
 TABLE 2.2 Hacking and Other Network Break-Ins
Firewall
Hardware, software, or a combination of both that is designed 
to block unauthorized access. All data traveling between 
the internal network and the Internet should pass through a 
ﬁ rewall. 
Encrypted
Plain text data converted into encrypted code is referred to as 
cipher text. 
Symmetric and Public Key 
Encryption
Symmetric encryption uses a single encryption key that must 
be used to encrypt data and also to decode the encrypted 
data. The sender of the data and the receiver must have the 
same encryption key. Public key encryption uses both a public 
key and a private key.
Wired Equivalency Privacy, 
or WEP
An encryption method for wireless network equipment, wired 
equivalency privacy (WEP) employs 64, 128, or 256 encryption 
methods. 
Wireless Protected Access, 
or WPA
WPA offers improved encryption and user authentication. 
With the improved encryption method, WPA can check 
to determine whether encryption keys have been 
tampered with. 
Service Set Identiﬁ er (SSID)
The SSID is a password that is passed between the sending 
and receiving nodes of a wireless network. Most wireless 
network equipment sets a default SSID of “any” so that any 
wireless equipment can connect to it. 
Virtual Private Network
Authorized employees should connect to the IT system by 
using a virtual private network, or VPN, which utilizes tunnels, 
authentication, and encryption within the Internet network to 
isolate Internet communications so that unauthorized users 
cannot access or use certain data. 
SSL
In addition, network trafﬁ c between the organization and all 
authorized users that is sent via the Internet should limit access 
by the use of web-based technology called secure sockets 
layer, or SSL. 
Viruses
A virus attaches itself to other programs and data and 
performs malicious actions such as deleting ﬁ les or shutting 
down the computer. 
Worm
A worm is a small piece of program code that attaches to the 
computer’s unused memory space and replicates itself until 
the system becomes overloaded and shuts down. 
Vulnerability Assessment
To monitor exposure long range, the organization should 
engage in vulnerability assessment, intrusion detection, and 
penetration testing. 
Intrusion Detection Systems
Intrusion detection systems are speciﬁ c software tools that 
monitor data ﬂ ow within a network and alert the IT staff to 
hacking attempts or other unauthorized access attempts. 
Source: Adapted from Turner and Weickgenannt 2008. 

28 
◾ General Controls for the SME
 TABLE 2.3 Physical Environment Table and Business Continuity Planning
Controlled 
Environment
Preventive: A large-scale IT system must be located in a building that 
properly controls dust, temperature, and humidity. The ﬁ re prevention 
systems should use gas such as Halen that eliminates oxygen in the room, 
since a ﬁ re cannot burn without oxygen.
Uninterruptible 
Power Supply
Preventive and Corrective: The computer system should also have both an 
uninterruptible power supply (UPS) and an emergency power supply (EPS). 
 ▪
A UPS includes a battery to maintain power in the event of a power 
outage in order to keep the computer running for several minutes after 
a power outage. 
 ▪
An EPS is an alternative power supply that provides electrical power in 
the event that a main source is lost. 
Access Control
Preventive and Detective: The hardware and data in an IT system are also 
vulnerable to damage, destruction, disruption, or theft if an unauthorized 
person can physically access them. Large-scale IT systems should be 
protected by physical access controls. Such controls may include:
1. Limited access to computer rooms through employee ID badges or 
card keys
2. Video surveillance equipment
3. Logs of persons entering and exiting the computer rooms
4. Locked storage of backup data and offsite backup data
Business 
Continuity 
Planning (BCP)
Preventive and Corrective: Business continuity planning (BCP) is a 
proactive program for considering risks to the continuation of business and 
developing plans and procedures to reduce those risks. BCP focuses on 
key personnel, resources, and activities critical to business continuation. 
A strategy should be in place for backup and restoration of IT systems, 
to include redundant servers, redundant data storage, daily incremental 
backups, a backup of weekly changes, and offsite storage of daily and 
weekly backups.
Backup 
Systems for 
Hardware, 
Software, and 
Data
Preventive and Corrective: If IT systems are to continue without interruption, 
it is important to have backups for hardware, software, and data. 
 ▪
One approach to a backup processing system is called redundant 
servers—two or more computer networks or data servers that can run 
identical processes or maintain the same data. If one of the servers 
fails, a redundant server functions in its place. 
 ▪
In many IT systems, redundant data storage is accomplished by the use 
of redundant arrays of independent disks (RAIDs), often set up such 
that two or more disks are exact mirror images. If one disk drive fails, 
the mirror image on a second drive can serve in its place. 
 ▪
This backup protection is improved by off-site backup, an additional 
copy of the backup ﬁ les stored in an offsite location. In some cases, 
on-site backups may be destroyed and the offsite backup ﬁ les would 
be necessary. 
 ▪
The plan for the continuance of IT systems after a disaster is called a 
disaster recovery plan (DRP). Whereas BCP is proactive planning, DRP 
is a more reactive plan to restore business operations to normal after a 
disaster occurs. 
Source: Adapted from Turner and Weickgenannt 2008. 

General Controls: Scope and Outcomes  ◾        29
Weill and Ross (2004) describe IT governance as “specifying the decision rights 
and accountability framework to encourage desirable behavior in the use of IT.” Hall 
(2011) describes IT governance as “a broad concept relating to the decision rights and 
accountability for encouraging desirable behavior in the use of IT.” For very small orga-
nizations, the outside auditor may be the first party to ask any questions about how IT 
governance supports the organization’s strategies and objectives.
IT Governance for the SME
Those responsible for IT governance usually address large enterprises, including the 
examples in the preceding paragraph. The IT governance discussion typically assumes 
that the enterprise has a chief information officer (CIO), vice president (VP) of opera-
tions, VP of sales and marketing, and so on. Therefore, many of the corporate officers 
are members of a strategy council that is involved with strategy planning, program 
management, and project management, and is outward‐facing from IT to the enter-
prise (Shimamoto 2011). Typical issues for the large enterprise include whether (1) the 
business units and IT operate in separate silos, and (2) IT function is centralized or 
decentralized. The environment can be very different for an SME.
Although statistics are limited, it is more likely that many SMEs have CEOs who 
play multiple roles in the enterprise. The CEO may assume the role of day‐to‐day 
marketing, operations, human resources, customer service, and logistics. The chief 
financial officer (CFO) may assume the role of the CIO, who manages the day‐to‐day IT 
operations of the enterprise. With major IT projects, the SME is required to outsource 
IT to external providers. The question is whether the CFO, the IT manager, and the 
outside contractor have the IT and business acumen for a larger set of questions. It is 
more common to have technically qualified individuals who lack business acumen. 
The issues for the SME are:
▪▪
Clear and open communication between the enterprise and IT operations
▪▪
Lack of understanding from SME owners of IT to perform alignment to business 
needs and opportunities
▪▪
Potentially a large portion of IT capabilities being outsourced and IT service provid-
ers servicing multiple customers
While the risk of a complete IT failure is lower with an external service provider, 
failure can be due to materially reduced benefits in the form of lower throughput, service 
delays, inaccurate processing, and so on.
The most fundamental problem for the SME is the enterprise operating on a 
day‐to‐day basis without IT expertise. Without an understanding of the day‐to‐day opera-
tions, how can IT leadership provide the necessary preventive, detective, and corrective controls? 
Without clear responsibilities and accountabilities within the IT organization, it is very 
possible an SME faces less‐than‐optimal use of its IT operations while simultaneously 
creating an insecure IT environment. Common complaints from IT in the SME environ-
ment include (Shimamoto 2011):
▪▪
“Nobody told us it was changing!”
▪▪
“We didn’t receive any training for the new technology.”

30 
◾ General Controls for the SME
 ▪
 “The data is organized differently from the old system.” 
 ▪
 “The computations are performed differently from the old system.” 
 The outside auditor should verify that IT responsibility and accountability is 
established for:
 ▪
Availability: It is available for use  when needed. 
 ▪
Accessibility: It is usable  where needed. 
 ▪
Functionality: It provides the functionality needed. 
 ▪
 Accuracy: Computations are correct. 
 ▪
 Integrity: The integrity of data/fi les is complete. 
 ▪
 Usability: It is easy to use and intuitive. 
 ▪
Responsiveness: Actions are responsive within a reasonable time or expected time. 
 ▪
 Security: Data/fi les are secure (including addressing confi dentiality and privacy). 
 Change management is a very signifi cant consideration given the possibility of low 
communications between IT and the enterprise on a day‐to‐day basis. These changes 
sometimes mean that compromises in availability, accessibility, functionality, and secu-
rity occur. 
 Frequently, strong personalities drive SMEs and, as such, their confi dence pervades 
all communications ranging from employee relations to fi nancial reporting. Compe-
tency and effective governance at all levels of the enterprise, including fi nancial report-
ing, IT, the board, and the CEO, are essential for ongoing success. While the primary 
purpose of this chapter is to discuss fi nancial statements, general controls and corporate 
and IT governance have very important roles in the ongoing ability of an enterprise to 
successfully conduct business. 
 IT will continue to expand its role in the SME and the respective business processes. 
The external auditor must come to grips with signifi cant trends within his or her SME 
client base, and the major variables that drive risk factors and that ultimately affect audit 
reports. IT governance (or lack thereof) is a major contributor to the risk environment. 
In addition to IT governance, this chapter reviews internal control objectives, a fair pre-
sentation of the fi nancial statements and COSO, and preventive, detective, and corrective 
controls within the context of general controls for the IT environment. IT governance 
is a particularly signifi cant preventive control for the SME and rates as critical to the 
well‐being of internal controls. 
 THE “COSO PROCESS”—PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER: 
FINANCIAL STATEMENTS, ASSERTIONS, RISKS, CONTROL 
OBJECTIVES, AND CONTROLS 
 This chapter introduces COSO in reference to general controls, with a more complete 
discussion in Chapters  9 and 10 as it relates to COBIT, fi nancial reporting, and applica-
tion controls. 

In December 2006, the Auditing Standards Board issued SAS Nos. 104 through 
111, including eight standards with new guidance for auditors assessing risks and con-
trols in financial statement audits:
	 1.	 SAS No. 104, Amendment to Statement on Auditing Standards No. 1, Codification 
of Auditing
	 2.	 SAS No. 105, Amendment to Statement on Auditing Standards No. 95, Generally 
Accepted Auditing Standards
	 3.	 SAS No. 106, Audit Evidence
	 4.	 SAS No. 107, Audit Risk and Materiality in Conducting an Audit
	 5.	 SAS No. 108, Planning and Supervision
	 6.	 SAS No. 109, Understanding the Entity and Its Environment, and Assessing the 
Risks of Material Misstatement
	 7.	 SAS No. 110, Performing Audit Procedures in Response to Assessed Risks and 
Evaluating the Audit Evidence Obtained
	 8.	 SAS No. 111, Amendment to Statement on Auditing Standards No. 39, Audit Sampling
Given the IT environment described in Figure 2.1, the financial statements, the 
assertions, the risks, the control objectives, and the applications controls, how does it 
all fit together into an integrated framework? Moreover, what roles do general controls 
have in this evaluation process? In addition, given the release of SAS Nos. 104 through 
111, what additional requirements should those responsible for IT meet within the COSO 
process?
Following the implementation of the eight audit standards in 2006, Charles Lan-
des, AICPA Vice President–Professional Standards and Services, recommended an 
implementation of the COSO process as a best practice as auditors evaluate the internal 
controls related to the financial statements (Ramos 2009). To implement the COSO pro-
cess, the auditor starts at the highest level of aggregation of the financial statements.  
(See Figure 2.2.) The auditor then proceeds through a sequence of analyses that become 
increasingly granular until he or she ultimately assesses the application control activities 
related to the financial statements (see Controls below Control Objectives in Figure 2.2).
It is important to note that the controls at the lowest level in Figure 2.2 are appli-
cation controls. It is also important to note that the balance sheet accounts (the high-
est level of aggregation) are contained within the general ledger, and related financial 
recordkeeping. The general ledger and the respective accounts are a part of the IT general 
controls and reside on a server within the IT environment that supports the account-
ing department. For the SME, it’s not unusual to have sales and marketing, operations, 
human resources, and other applications reside on the same server and thus the general 
controls have a larger role to fulfill beyond the financial reporting. Beyond an examina-
tion of an individual account (e.g., the revenue as in the case in the previous paragraph), 
Auditing Standards Board pronouncements in 2006 (Fogarty, Graham, and Schubert 
2007) carry a larger set of implications and responsibilities for the financial auditor:
▪▪
Auditors must consider risk and determine a materiality level for the financial state-
ments taken as a whole.
The “COSO Process”—Putting It All Together  ◾        31

32 
◾ General Controls for the SME
 ▪
 The auditor must assess the effectiveness of the internal controls and ultimately 
whether they are working as intended as the auditor evaluates the fi nancial statements. 
 ▪
 At the end of an audit, the auditor must evaluate whether the fi nancial statements 
taken as a whole are free of material misstatements. 
 ▪
 Auditors are required to obtain a suffi cient understanding of the entity and its envi-
ronment, including its internal controls, to assess the risk of material misstatement 
in the fi nancial statements. 
 FIGURE  2.2  The COSO Process 
Source:  Adapted from Ramos 2009. 
Assertions
Risks
Control Objectives
Controls
Existence
Risk # 1
Objective A
Control # 1
Control # 2
Control # 3
Objective B
Objective C
Risk # 2
Risk # 3
Complete
Valuation

The auditors must develop audit plans to reduce the audit risks to acceptably low 
levels. To rely on the effectiveness of company internal controls, the auditor must 
test both general and application controls, but only after assessing that the design is 
effective. The auditors must understand whether a control design is effective before testing 
the controls. If the design is effective, the auditor may rely on control tests and other 
evidence from prior audits when the audit evidence and related subject matter have 
not changed.
The Vasa: Governance and General Control Failures
The legacy of the Vasa illustrates the lack of general controls in a shipbuilding effort 
using new technology in the 1620s, almost 400 years ago. Governance, whether it is 
the king of Sweden or the CEO of an SME, whether in shipbuilding or state‐of‐the‐art IT 
systems to achieve an aggressive organizational strategy, has similar characteristics. 
The purpose of this story is to illustrate general controls for the SME.
The Vasa legacy describes an entrepreneurial effort with seemingly skilled staff 
that created a disastrous outcome. The Swedish warship Vasa, built in the 1620s, 
characterizes a case study of strategy, requirements, and an architectural solution 
that created demands for new organizational capabilities similar to many SMEs. 
While IT and related technologies did not exist 400 years ago, this story is about the 
application of new shipbuilding technologies that were evolving rapidly. Financial 
constraints did not exist and the Swedish government underwrote the development 
of the newest shipbuilding technologies. A new shipbuilding technology could create 
an edge in geopolitical armed conflicts during that era. In 1625, the Swedish king, 
Gustavus Adolphus, ordered the construction of the Vasa at the Stockholm shipyards 
(Vasa Museum 2012). Henrik Hybertsson, an experienced and well‐respected Dutch 
shipbuilder, was to lead the shipbuilding.
Henrik Hybertsson’s experience was much needed as the Vasa was to be the most 
formidable warship in the world, armed with 64 cannon on two decks. Two gun decks 
were a significant departure from traditional shipbuilding in the 1620s—a configura-
tion that significantly changed the weight distribution of a ship built in that era. On 
August 10, 1628, the Vasa sailed on her maiden voyage. Spectators filled the beaches 
around Stockholm. The maiden voyage was to be an act of propaganda for the ambi-
tious King Gustavus Adolphus. The Vasa set sail and fired a salute. Shortly after the gun 
salute to commemorate her sailing, the ship began to heel over. The Vasa righted herself 
slightly—and then heeled over again. Water gushed in through the open gun ports and 
to everyone’s disbelief, the Vasa suddenly sank!
What factors contributed to the disaster? King Gustavus Adolphus was anxious 
to acquire a ship with as many heavy cannon as possible. The king had personally 
approved the dimensions, the cannon configuration, and the timetable; he was anxious 
to have the Vasa in service as soon as possible. With heavy cannon on two decks and 
the capacity to carry a large number of armed troops, the Vasa and a fleet of comparable 
ships could alter the balance of power in Europe.
Hybertsson was a skilled shipbuilder with an excellent reputation and many 
previous successes. He developed the requirements with the king, and succumbed to the 
The “COSO Process”—Putting It All Together  ◾        33

34	
◾  General Controls for the SME
demands of the king despite the fact that current ship technology had not yet attempted 
what the king was requesting. Most analysts now believe the ship was disproportion-
ately narrow for a second tier of heavy cannon. Hybertsson extended the standards 
typically used for smaller warships of that day but did not factor the weight distribution 
appropriately. His unexpected death a year prior to Vasa’s completion complicated the 
final stage of product delivery.
Admiral Klas Fleming could have stopped the shipbuilding for further engineering 
review after the Vasa failed a stability test just prior to the maiden voyage. Thirty men 
ran back and forth across the Vasa’s deck just prior to sailing. The men had to stop after 
three runs, well before the test was complete; otherwise, the ship would have capsized. 
Fleming, one of the most influential men in the navy, monitored the tests. He acquiesced 
to the king’s pressure to have the Vasa sail as soon as possible and agreed to let her sail 
her maiden voyage.
Captain Söfring Hansson sailed a new ship with new shipbuilding technology with 
no precautions (open gun ports) or a backup plan. The Vasa sank when water gushed in 
through the lower gun ports after the ship leaned heavily to one side after the cannon 
fired a salute in the harbor. After the Vasa, many successful ships included two, three, 
and even four gun decks. What are the lessons learned?
The Vasa Was an Architectural Failure
Even with access to government resources and some of the best shipbuilders of the day, 
the Vasa was an architectural failure.
▪▪
One of the most successful project leaders built the Vasa, but past successes do not 
assure future success when deploying new technology.
▪▪
Senior management (the king) signed off on the final requirements at key decision 
points in the project, but true alignment did not exist between risk and value, as 
the shipbuilder could not deliver the requirements.
▪▪
The king ignored risk management and should not have, as signs during the ship-
building process would have foretold the fate of the Vasa.
▪▪
The Vasa was an entirely new concept, using an extension of existing technology. 
The new concept did not use an effective weight distribution, creating a fundamen-
tal design flaw.
▪▪
The project leader appeared unwilling to confront the king in his quest for new 
technology and an aggressive timetable to complete the new design that leapfrogged 
earlier shipbuilding technology.
Vasa Governance Was a Failure
The belief systems espoused by King Gustavus Adolphus communicated urgency, large 
numbers of cannon, and a willingness to do whatever is necessary to meet the objectives. 
The king’s boundaries were apparently undefined and unlimited provided the deadline 
remained. The king was unwilling to share the responsibility of seeking the best solution 
and signed off on the design, but ultimately had no idea what he was signing. He neither 

Summary ◾    35
had a grasp of the risks and threats nor did he or could he develop responses and action 
plans to proactively deal with high‐level issues, including the replacement of the original 
shipbuilder/designer. 
 General Controls Were Weak or Nonexistent 
 The  Vasa legacy and its failure reach well beyond a singular preventive, detective, or 
corrective control. The  Vasa legacy includes one preventive control: 30 men ran back 
and forth across the deck. Moreover, when the ship began to lean heavily, the captain 
ordered those men to cease their activities. The captain chose to ignore the warning 
when the ship leaned to one side. What other observations are available from  Vasa ’s 
general controls? 
 The scope of preventive controls reaches into the competency of personnel and 
governance. The qualifi cations of the personnel and the governance of the  Vasa project 
were fl awed at several levels. Although it appears the king hired the most competent 
shipbuilder available, a less‐than‐competent designer replaced the shipbuilder. Auditors 
frequently overlook governance as a critical part of designing effective general controls. 
 A top‐down risk assessment did not occur or, if it did, the king ignored it. An effec-
tive risk assessment evaluates the linkage between functions. The  Vasa had to operate 
upright (a normal operating mode) while simultaneously shooting a cannon. Ultimately, 
the  Vasa could not operate in an upright fashion while shooting its cannon. 
 It appears that the king and his lead designer also ignored other controls, includ-
ing detective and corrective controls. The king chose not to establish an advisory panel 
around him that would provide him better insight into shipbuilding and mixing new 
technologies of the day. In today’s environment, that advisory panel would be the board 
of directors and it would be labeled  corporate governance and  IT governance (which is part 
of corporate governance). 
SUMMARY 
 As part of the fi nal review in an IT audit, one or more reviewers (the team leader, 
audit manager, partner, or some combination) will assess the general controls in the 
context of risks and the related control objectives (Singleton 2013). Particularly in 
the context of fi nancial reporting, the reviewer(s) will want to examine the relevant 
IT general and application controls for fi nancial reporting to gain a proper under-
standing of applications, transactions, and infrastructure that affect the fi nancials. 
Risk remains a signifi cant driver as to the scope and nature of the IT audit and the 
nature of documentation. A publicly traded company, a company with a signifi cant 
reliance on IT, or a company with signifi cant weaknesses in general controls may 
be considered a higher‐risk environment and, as such, all aspects of the audit that 
are relevant to those risks must be addressed accordingly. As the risk increases or as 
the audit environment grows in complexity, more reviews may be appropriate and the 
reviewer credentials may have to be elevated (e.g., subject matter expert) to match the 
circumstances of the audit. 

36	
◾  General Controls for the SME
An IT audit should have identified existing general and application controls and 
provided an assessment of the design effectiveness. The audit work papers should include 
documented IT process maps and existing controls. Tests to evaluate controls and an 
assessment of operating effectiveness are integral to the design process itself. The work 
papers support the assessments through identified control deficiencies and analysis of 
whether the deficiency elevates to a significant or material weakness. Any follow‐up 
on the control deficiencies with management through subsequent periods is integral 
to the work papers and their design. Deficiencies remediated during the audit year and 
additional testing procedures require documentation in the work papers. The audit 
work papers should be prepared in sufficient detail to provide a clear understanding of 
nature, timing, extent, and results of procedures performed, evidence obtained, and 
conclusions reached.

37
3
 CHAPTER  THREE 
 Application‐Level Security 
   A
PPLICATION‐LEVEL SECURIT Y IS A CRITICAL component in ensuring 
the integrity of data within a fi nancial application, the supporting fi nancial 
cycles, and associated sub‐processes. Application‐level security can be defi ned 
as the collection of preventive and detective controls that support the confi dentiality, 
integrity, and availability of data. Within small and mid‐sized organizations, man-
agement must ensure the protection of the data within the accounting information 
system. This is imperative in order for internal and external users to rely on the fi nancial 
information. The protection of the information is achieved by ensuring various security 
controls are designed into the system, either inherently or via confi gured attributes; 
security is also achieved through the manual intervention of management in reviewing 
information within the system to make intelligent security decisions. 
KEY CONSIDERATIONS 
 There are several key considerations for application‐level security:
 ▪
Administrator ID and passwords: This is the  super‐user account that has full 
access to the system and the full functionality of the system. While this access is 
typically reserved for information technology (IT) personnel, some end users in the 
fi nance or accounting organization are given this type of access. Management must 
secure and restrict who has the keys to the kingdom. In addition, the passwords 
for administrator accounts should be more robust than typical end‐user accounts, 
resulting in longer, more complex passwords that are changed more frequently. 

38	
◾  Application‐Level Security
▪▪
End-user IDs and passwords: This is the setup and configuration of user IDs and 
password settings for end users. This is where management should have a common 
naming convention for the issuance of user IDs, and the passwords should meet 
appropriate complexity requirements and other password configuration settings 
to ensure that access to the account is not compromised. This is synonymous with 
having a key to the front door of the application and the key has to be protected 
(i.e., protect the password).
▪▪
Access rights: Access is assigned to end users based on the assignment of roles, 
menus, or tasks. This is synonymous with opening the front door, but once the 
user is in, the user is restricted to only those rooms that can be visited according 
to the access rights assigned. Management needs to ensure that the access rights 
assigned are commensurate with the user’s job responsibilities and do not violate 
segregation‐of‐duties concepts.
▪▪
User management: This includes the management of how new users get access 
to the system, how existing users have access modified in the system (e.g., change 
in job roles, transfer), and how users are removed/disabled from the system (e.g., 
termination). Management needs to ensure robust user management practices are 
implemented so that security remains a defensible fortress.
▪▪
Security logs and audit trails: This includes the capture of security information 
that can be reviewed by management (e.g., failed login attempts). Some systems will 
enable management to capture data on security events that can be reviewed either 
in real time or at a later date for forensics purposes.
These key considerations can be addressed by examining the risk exposures within 
application‐level security. Application‐level security contains several risk exposures. 
These include:
▪▪
Initial security setup: Are system users assigned user IDs that align with a nam-
ing convention? Are employees provided with an initial password to access the 
system? Are employees required to change their initial password? Do management 
and appropriate data owners sign off on and authorize the access rights given to a 
user during initial setup? Are the access rights assigned specific to the user or is it 
simply a “give access like Jane has” assignment?
▪▪
Security role design: Are the security roles defined in a manner that is consistent 
with segregation of duties? Does the naming convention of roles align with the 
actual tasks assigned to that role? Does management have a process in place for the 
addition and modification of security roles and the respective design of the security 
role? Does management perform a periodic review of the security role design to 
ensure that unauthorized changes to the design have not occurred?
▪▪
Password configuration: Are passwords required? Do passwords have to consist 
of a combination of alphabetic, numeric, and special characters with at least one 
uppercase character and one lowercase character? Are passwords required to be 
a certain length? Can passwords be repeated or is password history enforced? Do 
passwords have to be changed within a certain interval? How many failed login 

Key Considerations  ◾        39
attempts are allowed? Are administrator password configuration requirements 
more stringent than end‐user password configuration requirements?
▪▪
Segregation of duties: Are users assigned access rights based on their job respon-
sibilities? Are access rights within and across systems analyzed to determine if seg-
regation‐of‐duties conflicts exist? What prevents incompatible duties from being 
assigned to a user? How does management minimize the risk if segregation of duties 
cannot be enforced?
▪▪
Access reviews: Does management review the access rights assigned to individu-
als to ensure that appropriate access is granted? How often are the access reviews 
performed? Does management accept the risk of segregation of duties conflicts and 
review reports to ensure that inappropriate activity has not occurred with the con-
flicted access?
▪▪
Accumulation of access rights: Are employees’ access rights revoked and/
or reviewed when job responsibilities change? Are access rights from previous 
roles removed or disabled if the employee no longer needs that functionality in 
the new job role? How does management ensure that access rights assigned to 
users across disparate systems do not create an accumulation‐of‐access‐rights 
concern?
▪▪
Removal of access rights: Are access rights removed or disabled when an 
employee is terminated? Is the removal or disablement done in a timely manner? 
Are logs reviewed to determine if terminated individuals have inappropriately 
accessed the system after the termination date? Are logs reviewed to determine 
if other individuals have used terminated individuals’ login credentials after the 
termination date?
▪▪
Reports: Does management review security logs, audit trails, and reports to deter-
mine if inappropriate or unauthorized activity has occurred? Is activity monitoring 
turned on in the system, or does management not have reports available?
▪▪
Human error: Do employees know how to protect the security of the system? Do 
employees write down passwords? Do employees use screensavers or lock their com-
puter screen when leaving their computer area? Are employees adequately trained 
in security awareness? Do employees share passwords?
These risk exposures can be further analyzed to illustrate what management could 
do to prevent, detect, or minimize the risk associated with the risk exposure. For any 
risk within an organization, management has to decide if the cost associated with pre-
venting, detecting, or minimizing the risk is in line with the financial wherewithal 
of the organization or the risk is within its risk tolerance levels. Management needs 
to remember that, with application‐level security, adequate financial and personnel 
resources should be dedicated to the protection of the financial information. Financial 
information that cannot be secured runs the risk of being unusable to internal or exter-
nal users without costly auditing and supporting evidence to validate that the data has 
integrity/reliability. Some organizations could have spent less money implementing 
preventive or detective security controls instead of retroactively evidencing the integrity 
of the financial data.

40 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 INITIAL SECURITY SETUP 
 When an organization fi rst sets up its fi nancial system, initial security confi guration 
settings are established. These settings can impact how the data is processed within the 
system on a go‐forward basis. One of the initial security confi guration settings is how 
user IDs and passwords are set up in the system. 
 Users are assigned a unique user ID and password. The user ID should follow a stan-
dard naming convention such as last_name_fi rst_initial (e.g., “smithj”). The standard 
naming convention will help management keep track of who has an account and can 
help facilitate management reviews and revocation of access. 
 When the users are set up, management will have the option to indicate if the user 
will be forced to comply with the password policy or if alternative password confi gura-
tion settings are needed. 
 Figures  3.1 and  3.2 illustrate the requirement to have a user ID and password to 
access the Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (GPD) system.  
 Figure  3.3 shows the password setup screen for the system administrator (SA) 
for QB where users granted these privileges would be configured with ID and pass-
word. Note that the password has to be confirmed by reentering it. An important 
application control configuration setting is the “enforce password policy” option 
that enforces password expiration and required change of the initial password 
immediately after the first login. Figure  3.4 shows the setup for a user in QB that 
requires a password.   
 FIGURE  3.1  Login Screen for GPD  

Initial Security Setup ◾    41
 FIGURE  3.2  User Setup for GPD  
 FIGURE  3.3  QB Setup and Access Control—SA  

42 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 SECURITY ROLE DESIGN 
 The design of the security role is a critical component of ensuring a strong security 
environment. When companies use preconfi gured roles that come with a system or 
build customized roles, the company needs to ensure that the access rights associated 
with that role are appropriate for the company. In addition, the naming convention of 
the role needs to be descriptive to refl ect the access rights given within that role. It is 
unfortunately common that some companies give a generic title (e.g., “A/R clerk”) to a 
role, but the role in fact has privileges beyond what is typically expected of an A/R clerk 
(e.g., A/P posting). 
 Companies should put in place a robust process to protect the creation and modifi -
cation of security roles. On an annual basis, a company should review the security role 
design to ensure that no unauthorized changes to the role have occurred. 
 In Microsoft Dynamics, security roles can be set up whereby the company can use 
the predefi ned security role or add/remove security tasks associated with the security 
role, as shown in Figure  3.5 . Checking a task, as shown in Figure  3.6 , associates a task 
with a security role. If the task is unchecked, then the task would not be associated with 
that security role. To access the security role setup in Microsoft Dynamics, one clicks 
Administration>Security Role Setup and chooses the role ID from the drop-down list. 
The system shows the tasks assigned to a role.  
 Microsoft Dynamics allows A/R clerks to process only certain transactions and 
limits access to data that is not related to their job. A/R clerks are unable to input trans-
actions that they are not authorized to perform. This security control prevents unau-
thorized modifi cation as well as facilitates segregation of duties in the system. 
 Within QuickBooks, users are assigned roles, but the roles are predefi ned and are 
not changeable. Having default security roles that are not changeable is a good con-
trol; however, it reduces the ability for a company to specifi cally design its own optimal 
access roles. 
 FIGURE  3.4  QB Setup and Access Control—User  

Security Role Design ◾    43
 FIGURE  3.5  GPD Security Role Setup 
 Source: Brunsdon, Romney, and Steinbart. 2009. This image was taken using the dataset provided from this 
book. Note that the screenshot says “S&S Incorporated,” which is the dataset of these authors.  
 FIGURE  3.6  GPD Security Role Setup—Task Selection
 Source: Brunsdon, Romney, and Steinbart. 2009. This image was taken using the dataset provided from this 
book. Note that the screenshot says “S&S Incorporated,” which is the dataset of these authors.  
l
k
l

44 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 PASSWORD CONFIGURATION 
 Password confi gurations represent the keys to the front door of a computer system. 
Unfortunately, end users sometimes get password fatigue and become lazy in the cre-
ation and protection of passwords. Passwords need to be kept secure and be of a certain 
caliber to prevent unauthorized access to the system. 
 In general, passwords should have the following characteristics:
 ▪
Alphanumeric/special characters: Passwords should require at least one upper-
case alphabetic character, one lowercase alphabetic character, one numeric char-
acter, and one special character. 
 ▪
 Password length: Passwords should be at least eight characters in length. It is 
common for administrator passwords to be longer. 
 ▪
 Password change intervals: Passwords should generally be changed every 30, 
60, or 90 days, depending on the sensitivity of the data that the password grants 
access to. It is common for administrator passwords to change more frequently and, 
in some organizations, tokens are used where passwords change every 60 seconds 
to prevent unauthorized access. 
 ▪
 Password history and reuse: A password history should be maintained and users 
should be prevented from repeating previous passwords. Some organizations use 
5, 10, or higher history settings to prevent the reuse of a password. In addition to 
password history, organizations should limit how often passwords can be changed 
so an end user does not simply reset the password  x times to get back to his or her 
original password (usually performed in a matter of minutes). 
 ▪
 Failed login attempts: Systems should be confi gured so that the account is 
locked after a certain number of failed login attempts. Typically, password fail-
ures should be set to a minimum of three, but the limit could be higher or lower 
depending on the sensitivity of the data being accessed. When an account reaches 
the maximum login tries, the account should either be locked for a period of time 
before automatically being reset or released, or locked for manual intervention 
by the system administrator.  
 Figure  3.7 demonstrates confi guration of the password settings in GPD. In order 
to change the user password, which is especially important if there have been signs of 
a breach in security, click on User Preferences, which will open the “User Preferences” 
window. Click on Passwords to open a new window, “User Password Setup,” where the 
company must fi rst confi rm the old password before entering and confi rming the new 
password.  
 Figure  3.8 shows three activities within GPD that can be tracked: failed login 
attempts, successful login attempts, and successful logout attempts. Also, the tracking 
can be set to follow a specifi c user or many users, and elections can be made to track 
specifi c databases. Failed login attempts are the most important to track, in order to 
determine if an unauthorized person has tried to gain access to the system. Tracking 
the successful logins is also of importance. This allows the administrator to determine 
if only authorized users actually gain access to the system and detect any persons who 
should no longer have access capabilities. 

Password Confi guration ◾    45
 FIGURE  3.7  GPD Password Settings Conﬁ guration  
 FIGURE  3.8  GPD Password Activity Tracking 
Source: Brunsdon, Romney, and Steinbart. 2009. This image was taken using the dataset provided from this 
book. Note that the screenshot says “S&S Incorporated,” which is the dataset of these authors.  

46 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 Although GPD offers the ability to track successful logout attempts, they would 
not be as vital to track as logins since a database manager should be more concerned 
with who is entering the system and the damage that is caused by unauthorized access, 
as opposed to whether someone logs out. Additionally, tracking login and logout 
attempts requires additional hard drive space, so for effi ciency purposes it is best not to 
track activities that do not provide truly useful information (Brunsden, Romney, and 
Steinbart 2009). 
 The system provides the ability to enable tracking features of the access, fi le, pro-
cess, and posting activities. All activities include the user and database selection fea-
tures. The differences are the types of subactivities the administrator wants to track. 
 FIGURE  3.9  QB Password—Menu 
 Source: Intuit, Rock Castle data ﬁ le. 

Password Confi guration ◾    47
 FIGURE  3.10  QB Password—Security Questions  
 Source: Intuit, Rock Castle. 
 Figures  3.9 ,  3.10 , and  3.11 outline the QuickBooks (QB) security process. A user’s 
password can be changed by going to Company>Setup Users and Password>Change 
Your Password. When the user changes the password, the old password has to be 
entered before the new password can be entered. In addition, the new password has 
to be confi rmed to continue. Users also have the ability to set up a security‐challenge 
question that further protects the account. Users have various security questions that 
could be chosen to answer.   

48 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 SEGREGATION OF DUTIES 
 Segregation of duties (SOD) is one of the most critical controls within a system. Unfor-
tunately, this area is where small and mid‐sized companies typically struggle due to a 
lack of resources. Within the system, each user ID is assigned a role or collection of roles 
in order to perform tasks within the system. Depending on the system, the user ID may 
be relegated to a single role or may have the ability to be assigned multiple roles. Each 
role shall be defi ned such that the segregation of duties is preserved and, accordingly, 
each role shall be input into the system. Each role shall be defi ned in the system so that 
when an employee signs into the system, her defi ned role has already been assigned 
and the system will only allow this employee access to the documents suitable for that 
role. Access to individual documents shall also be restricted to one person at a time, so 
that if a second person wished to open the document she would only be able to access 
a read‐only version of the fi le. The reason that the segregation of duties is so important 
is that it hinders theft and fraud within an organization. For example, if someone has 
access to the inventory item and can also record transactions related to that time, then 
 FIGURE  3.11  QB Password—Changes  

Personnel, Roles, and Tasks ◾    49
he can steal it and falsify the records to show a sale, whereas a thief wouldn’t be able to 
cover up his theft if he couldn’t record the transaction needed to account for the drop 
in inventory. Companies need to ensure that only authorized personnel have access to 
the information they need in the system. 
 Security of an application system takes different forms:
 ▪
 Administrator account setup with a password that meets certain criteria. 
 ▪
 Each user needs to be set up in the system. The individual user will be assigned 
roles and tasks associated with the rights and responsibilities that that person will 
need to do his or her job. Also, each individual needs to have a password set up and 
it needs to meet certain criteria. 
 If we look ahead, many companies are challenged with too few people to do too 
many jobs. The result is typically poor or inadequate security and the possibility that 
fi nancial data is at risk for errors or inaccuracies. Preventive controls in the system such 
as strong passwords, good security roles design, careful user‐role assignment to ensure 
appropriate SOD, or good detective controls for unavoidable SOD confl icts can mitigate 
the security risks. The detective controls may be in the form of management reviewing 
reports to determine if something bad has happened. For example, in the general ledger, 
what happens if someone has access to the general ledger and she needs that for her job 
role? Management can typically review who has posted entries into the general ledger 
and trace back to source data. 
 PERSONNEL, ROLES, AND TASKS 
 Personnel, roles, and tasks can be divided into general authorization and specifi c autho-
rization. For general authorization management can authorize employees or the system 
to handle routine transactions. However, for specifi c authorization, certain activities 
or certain transactions require management to authorize that transaction. How this is 
often done is that thresholds are set within the system; purchases, for example, can have 
levels set so that if they are small purchases an employee can approve the transaction, 
but if they go over a preset amount, then the transactions will not go through without 
specifi c authorization from a manager. 
 The recording roles are where source documents are created and the journals are 
maintained, but they cannot specifi cally authorize the transactions they are dealing with, 
nor will they have access to the assets within the transactions that they are recording. 
The ability to record transactions should be restricted to authorized personnel. 
 The custody roles are where the person has physical access to the asset. For exam-
ple, the person counts and stores the inventory. Segregation in this case is achieved not 
only by preventing this person access to the accounts controlling these calculations, 
but also by not having people in the other two roles. For the accounting information 
system (AIS) this is also the person who receives the checks or money from the client but 
would not be able to apply them to the client’s accounts (Romney and Steinbart 2009). 

50 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 Figure  3.12 illustrates the desired (bold, solid lines) and potentially problematic rela-
tionships between personnel, software‐designed roles, and tasks associated with roles. 
Access to various system tasks is assigned to roles, which can be either generic default 
roles defi ned by the software vendor or custom roles designed by the system adminis-
trator. By selecting tasks that are consistent with an overall segregation of duties, the 
system administrator can help to ensure that, when these roles are assigned to specifi c 
individuals, a reasonable level of internal control is supported and maintained.  
 Problems may arise when the system allows someone to redefi ne the scope of a 
role by adding additional tasks to it, or to assign additional task rights directly to a 
specifi c user. 
 The IT auditor should check to ensure that roles are properly designed (as previously 
discussed) to ensure that segregation of duties is not inappropriately designed into the 
system’s roles. However, most SOD confl icts arise when user IDs are associated with 
multiple roles. The roles on a stand-alone basis provide adequate segregation of duties; 
however, the collection of multiple roles may present SOD confl icts. Management should 
review reports of access given to users to ensure that the access associated with the 
roles assigned to the users does not cause a segregation‐of‐duties confl ict. If a confl ict 
exists, the auditor needs to ensure that management has alternative controls in place to 
monitor the user’s activities to ensure that inappropriate activities have not occurred. 
 As a specifi c instance of potentially incompatible duties, consider the list of functions 
traditionally associated with some part of the accounts receivable (A/R) process. Figure 
 3.13 sets these out in roughly chronological order: A new customer is entered into the 
system; the credit department determines suitability and appropriate limits; pricing infor-
mation enters the system; sometimes this pricing information is modifi ed by the terms 
of a special promotion; order information is entered into the system (frequently by an 
accounting clerk, who receives this data from someone in the sales department); invoices 
are generated (automatically in many cases), reviewed, and dispatched to customers; infor-
mation concerning returned goods must be used to adjust customer account balances; and 
transactions are posted to customer accounts (with a control posting to the general ledger). 
 X marks indicate incompatible duties that should ideally be assigned to different 
personnel. X* marks indicate tasks that might be assigned to the same person, given 
 FIGURE  3.12  Personnel, Roles, and Tasks  
Person
Role
Tasks
Task # 1
Task # 2
Task # 3
. . . . . . .
Task # n

Personnel, Roles, and Tasks ◾    51
controls such as tolerance levels or preapproved guidelines. An empty cell indicates the 
absence of a strong incompatibility. Here is the reasoning behind our marks:
 ▪
 Ideally, credit approval serves as an independent check on the validity of a custom-
er’s assertion regarding its promise to provide valuable consideration entity assets 
obtained via sales transactions. Combining setup and credit approval violates the 
independence and provides the risk exposure that fraudulent or fi nancially suspect 
entities will gain undesirable access to the company’s goods and/or services. 
 ▪
 Credit approval is so potent a trigger to the departure of entity assets that very few 
other A/R functions are truly compatible with it. The potential abuse of authority 
in the case where one individual had responsibility for both credit status and sales 
terms justifi es the common practice of maintaining a separate credit department 
(or function) within an organization. The clerical duties of processing customer 
returns relate to sales processes that originated and were processed independently, 
and so might be a function that, in a very small enterprise, could be assigned to a 
credit specialist without creating a defi nable risk exposure. 
 ▪
 Pricing policy affects the sales–A/R cycle right from its start, and the potential for 
manipulation of pricing terms and sales initiation suggests the desirability of main-
taining these functions independently. In the case where a company follows a stan-
dard policy of marking up merchandise a fi xed percentage over cost, the IT auditor 
should control who has access to override company policy within the system. 
 ▪
 It would be desirable to isolate order entry from invoice processing in order to pro-
vide independent review of sales terms for conformity with company policies. The 
IT auditor should verify which tasks provide access to this functionality to ensure 
that the functionality is appropriately restricted to authorized personnel. 
 ▪
 Returns and posting to accounts involve the classic confl ict of physical custody and 
recordkeeping, the two inherently incompatible roles. 
 FIGURE  3.13  Tasks, Roles, and Incompatible Duties—Accounts Receivable  
Customer Setup
Credit Approval
Base Pricing 
Special Promotions
Order Entry
Invoicing
Returns
Posting to Customer Account
Customer Setup
X
Credit Approval
X
X
X
X
X
Base Pricing 
X X*
Special Promotions
X*
X
X
Order Entry
X
Invoicing
Returns
X
Posting to Customer Account

52 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 Given this, an ideal configuration of responsibilities might include half a 
dozen individuals, as illustrated in Figure  3.14 . The paired numbers (2 and 3) 
indicate functions that one individual might perform, while the single numbers 
(1, 4–6) indicate functions that ideally should be performed by different individuals. 
Needless to say, a very significant percentage of SMEs would find this staffing 
requirement impractical or prohibitive. Thus, IT controls that compensate for inher-
ent SOD exposures are an important aspect of secure and reliable processing of 
financial information.  
 Even with the best SOD setup, it is diffi cult for management to prevent collusion. 
Frauds have occurred in many organizations where appropriate segregation of duties 
was set up within the system, but two or more users colluded to perform actions within 
the system to bypass controls. 
 The IT auditor should understand the organization and the number of employees 
available to perform duties. In some instances, cross‐functional support and backups 
between personnel may be acceptable without creating additional SOD risks; however, 
when SOD confl icts are created due to the lack of personnel, then management needs to 
implement alternative detective controls to minimize the risks. The detective controls 
typically include a review of reports to determine what transactions have occurred to 
ensure unauthorized activity has not taken place. 
 With Microsoft Dynamics, once a user has been created within the system, manage-
ment would open the User Security Setup window by clicking on Microsoft Dynamics 
Button >Tools> Setup> System> User Security Setup. The ideal situation for this is that 
each employee has only one role. For smaller companies this may not be possible. In that 
case you want to assign each employee to one type of role. 
 Figure  3.15 shows the GPD window accessed in order to set up user security. 
1 Credit Approval
2 Customer Setup 
2 Base pricing 
3 Special  Promotions
3 Posting to customer account
4 Order entry
5 Invoicing
6 Returns
FIGURE  3.14 Role Design in an Ideal System—AR 

Personnel, Roles, and Tasks ◾    53
 FIGURE  3.15  GPD User Security Setup  
 Within QuickBooks, a user is assigned specifi c roles during various screens of the setup 
process. The user can be granted no access, limited access, or full access to the functional-
ity/process. When management assigns these accesses, it needs to ensure that segregation 
of duties is maintained. If full access is granted to a specifi c area, a pop-up box may ask if 
this is correct before proceeding. This is an important application control to ensure that 
full access is appropriate. If a user tries to access functionality that has not specifi cally been 
granted, then a pop-up box typically warns the user that the access has not been granted. 
 When initially setting up a user in QB, the system administrator needs to make 
decisions regarding the scope of access to be provided. Figure  3.16 illustrates how the 
user can be assigned to some areas of QB, all areas, or provided the role of external 
accountant, with the limitations on this last role noted in Figure  3.16 .  
 Figure  3.17 illustrates a soft control that prompts the system administrator for con-
fi rmation when assigning sensitive access such as the external accountant role.  
 If the user was set up for selective access, the system administrator would have gone 
through additional screens to identify specifi c types of access within various modules, 
as, for example, illustrated in the case of Sales and A/R (Figure  3.18 ) or Checking and 
Credit Cards (Figure  3.19 ).  
 Figure  3.20 illustrates attempted access to unauthorized functions prevented by a 
hard control.   

54 
◾ Application‐Level Security
FIGURE  3.17  QB User Security Setup—Soft Control
 FIGURE  3.16  QB User Security Setup  

Personnel, Roles, and Tasks ◾    55
 FIGURE  3.18  QB User Security Setup—Sales and A/R Access  
 FIGURE  3.19  QB User Security Setup—Checking and Credit Cards 

56 
◾ Application‐Level Security
ACCESS REVIEWS 
 On a periodic basis, management should verify the access of the users within the system. 
Ideally, access was initially designed and issued to users while maintaining segrega-
tion of duties. However, it is not uncommon for good processes to inadvertently not be 
followed, which could result in inappropriate access. In addition, new, transferred, or 
terminated users may have affected the users within the system. For example, access 
reviews are a great way to determine if all terminated users have been properly removed 
from the system. 
 Figure  3.21 illustrates an access review screen that shows a user’s assigned access 
rights.  
 Security reports and audit trails facilitate analysis of security setups in the sys-
tem by user, role, task, or activity. Such a report allows management to review the 
history of transaction processing (audit trail) and determine whether the process-
ing was performed by an authorized individual. It is also possible to tie back to 
source documentation.  GPD allows management to run various security reports 
that describe access assigned to users, and tasks assigned to roles. The task setup 
report describes capabilities assigned to tasks and the security role setup assigns 
tasks to roles. Many tasks are preassigned to specific roles. The system administra-
tor can modify or customize these assignments. User security setup assigns roles to 
specific individual users.  
 Accumulation of Access Rights 
 Companies want to ensure that management has given individuals the access they 
need to do their jobs; however, the access should not accumulate to create segrega-
tion‐of‐duties confl icts. However, small and mid‐sized organizations may not be able to 
 FIGURE  3.20  QB User Security Setup—Hard Control  

Access Reviews ◾    57
 FIGURE  3.21  QB User Security Review  
avoid certain SOD confl icts. Given this, management should ensure that good detective 
controls are in place if someone has to wear multiple hats and have multiple accesses 
in the system that would traditionally be considered SOD confl icts. In QB and GPD, 
there are different reports in the various cycles so management can see what activities 
have happened and can determine if the confl icted access was inappropriately taken 
advantage of. 
 Removal of Access Rights 
 When a user no longer needs access due to changing roles within the organization, or 
termination, retirement, or death, management needs to permanently disable or remove 
the access right for that user ID. This enables the account to go into an inactive status, 
if disabled, or to be removed entirely. Depending on the application, removal of a user 
ID could disrupt transactions associated with that ID, so some organizations have the 
practice of disabling the ID until the historical transactions can be assessed. 
 Many times, organizations rely on either HR or department managers to notify IT 
when a user needs to be removed from the system. However, this communication does 
not always occur in a timely manner. Ultimately, a user account should be removed 
immediately or within a short period of time after the notifi cation date depending on 
the severity of the removal (hostile termination) or the access level that the terminated 
user had (super‐user). 

58 
◾ Application‐Level Security
 HUMAN ERROR 
 Human error is one of the most challenging areas in security. When security breaches 
occur, many times it is due not to poor design of the security within the system but rather 
to simple human error. Users may inadvertently give out login information and/or other 
sensitive security information without realizing that it has occurred. Social engineer-
ing is a common practice where nefarious individuals will attempt to extract security 
information from end users by posing as legitimate users that need access to address a 
problem. Other times, users may write down security information in a visible location, 
thereby resulting in someone being able to log in as that user. 
 SUMMARY 
 Application‐level security is a critical component in ensuring the integrity of data within 
a fi nancial application, the supporting fi nancial cycles, and associated subprocesses. Key 
considerations in evaluating application‐level security include the review and analysis 
of permissions and access rights, and this process necessarily entails that the IT auditor 
obtain a wide understanding of job design within the organization. Given the relatively 
limited resources available to most SMEs, achieving appropriate segregation of duties—
or compensating for its absence—remains a key challenge. 
 The concepts shared in this chapter highlight the importance of logical security 
within the fi nancial application. Without robust application‐level security and segre-
gation of duties, the fi nancial application is at risk of endangering the integrity of its 
confi dential information. 

59
4
CHAPTER FOUR
General Ledger and the IT Audit
 T
HE  CHART OF ACCOUNTS IS a list of all  general ledger accounts an entity 
uses for fi nancial reporting in connection with compliance, regulatory, and 
bank loan requirements and management reporting for internal management 
and control. 
 The structure of the chart allows transaction data classifi cation, coding, and entry 
into the proper accounts. The chart of accounts structure is a critical dimension of 
fi nancial reporting within the general ledger system (see Table  4.1 ) because it directly 
affects the preparation of fi nancial statements and reports. The chart of accounts and 
the general ledger system:
 ▪
 Are at the heart of the system; all fi nancial modules and interfaces fl ow into them. 
 ▪
 Defi ne ease of use, fl exibility, and competency of execution of fi nancial and manage-
ment reporting. 
 ▪
 Provide a foundation for expansion as well as storage of current and historical 
information. 
 ▪
 Provide the basis for compliance and bank reporting, including footnote disclosure. 
 ▪
 Provide the basis of granularity or adequate account detail to enable an organiza-
tion to manage its operations effectively. 
 This chapter reviews the concepts associated with the chart of accounts and IT audit 
issues for SME environments and then identifi es those characteristics associated with 
QuickBooks (QB) (see Figures  4.2 through  4.5 ) and Microsoft Dynamics implementa-
tions for SMEs.

60 
◾ General Ledger and the IT Audit
 THE GENERAL LEDGER: A CLEARINGHOUSE OF 
FINANCIAL INFORMATION 
 The general ledger system (see Figure  4.1 ) is a clearinghouse that collects fi nancial 
information from other subsystems such as payroll, billing, and accounts receivable. 
Applications outside the general ledger record events in separate subsystems using 
special journals and subsidiary accounts. Summaries of these transactions fl ow into 
the general ledger and become sources of input for the management reporting system 
and fi nancial reporting system. The bulk of what fl ows into the general ledger system 
comes from the transaction processing subsystems. Also, note that information from 
the fi nancial reporting system and management reporting system fl ows back into the 
general ledger system. 
 Table  4.1 shows the chart of accounts for Luther Sound Exploration Inc. (LSE), a 
company that produces imaging equipment used in the extractive industries. Each 
account code is four digits long. Typical of most charts of accounts, the LSE uses the fi rst 
2999 account numbers for the balance sheet, with the remainder (3000 through 9999) 
 FIGURE  4.1  Transaction Cycles and the General Ledger System 
Financial
Reporting
System
Billings
General
Ledger
System
Sales
Management
Reporting
System
Inventory
Control
Payroll
Cash
Disbursements
Accounts
Payable
Cost
Accounting
Cash
Receipts

The General Ledger: A Clearinghouse of Financial Information  ◾    61
 TABLE 4.1  Chart of Accounts for Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.
Account Code 
Account Name 
Account Code 
Account Name 
1010
1040
1050
1200
1260
1300
1360
1500
1520
1550
1600
1700
1800
2000
2100
2150
2300
2350
2400
2450
2500
3000
3100
3210
3220
3230
3240
3300
3600 
Current Assets 
Checking Account
Savings Account
Petty Cash
Accounts Receivable
Allowance for Doubtful Accounts
Notes Receivable
Allowance for Notes Receivable
Inventory—Raw Materials
Inventory—Work in Progress
Inventory—Finished Goods
Supplies
Prepaid Rent
Prepaid Insurance
Noncurrent Assets 
Land
Buildings
Accumulated Depreciation—
Buildings
Equipment
Accumulated Depreciation—
Equipment
Furniture & Fixtures
Accumulated Depreciation—
Furniture & Fixtures
Other Assets
Liabilities 
Accounts Payable
Wages Payable
Employee Income Tax Payable
FICA Tax Payable
Federal Unemployment Tax 
Payable
State Unemployment Tax Payable
Accrued Interest Payable
Other Liabilities  
4000
4100
5010
5020
5100
5110
5200
5300
6000
6110
6120
6130
6200
6300
6400
6500
7010
7020
7030
7100
9100 
Equity Accounts 
Common Stock
Retained Earnings
 Revenues 
Cash Sales
Credit Sales
Sales Returns & 
Allowances
Sales Discounts
Interest Revenue
Miscellaneous Revenue
Expenses 
Cost of Goods Sold
Wages Expense
Commissions Expense
Payroll Tax Expense
Rent Expense
Travel Expense
Supplies Expense
Bad Debt Expense
Depreciation Expense—
Buildings
Depreciation Expense—
Equipment
Fixtures
Income Tax Expense
Summary Accounts 
Income Summary
  

62 
◾ General Ledger and the IT Audit
of the code numbers utilized for the income statement and summary accounts. Accounts 
in the general ledger appear in the same order of their appearance in fi nancial state-
ments accounts and use assigned numbers to match the order of their appearance in 
fi nancial statements accounts. Thus, account 1200 represents accounts receivable and 
1300 represents notes receivable.
 A chart of accounts reflects the nature and purpose of an organization. 
For example, the chart of accounts for LSE indicates that the company is a 
corporation. A partnership would include separate capital and drawing accounts 
for each partner, instead of common stock and retained earnings. Likewise, because 
LSE is a manufacturing organization, it has only three types of general ledger inven-
tory accounts. In a simple retail company, management may elect to use one inven-
tory account. 
 Subsidiary ledger accounts often have longer account codes than general ledger 
accounts. At LSE, each account receivable will have a six‐digit code.
 ▪
 The fi rst four digits are 1200, the code for accounts receivable. 
 ▪
 The next two identify up to 99 individual customers’ journals. A journal collects 
transaction data before entry into the ledger (for simplicity, the customer codes 
omitted in Table 4.1). 
 ▪
 A journal entry shows the accounts and amounts debited and credited. 
 ▪
 A  general journal records infrequent or nonroutine transactions, such as loan pay-
ments and end‐of‐period adjusting and closing entries. 
 ▪
 A  specialized journal records large numbers of repetitive transactions such as sales, 
cash receipts, and cash disbursements. 
 CHART OF ACCOUNTS FOR QUICKBOOKS 
 A chart of accounts in QB can originate from a generic chart of accounts offered with the 
software or it can originate from another source. Using the Easy Step Interview within 
QB allows a user to select the appropriate legal form and industry chart of accounts as 
shown in Figures  4.2 through  4.5. 
 If a user is unable to fi nd his or her precise industry, importing a chart of accounts 
into QB is an option. To view a chart of accounts in the QB Home page’s Company panel, 
click “Chart of Accounts” (or press Ctrl+A). 
 Subaccount Tracking in QuickBooks 
 Subaccounts can track details such as airfare, lodging, and limousine services. 
When users post transactions to subaccounts only, a grand total for a report shows 
subtotals for the subaccounts and a grand total for the parent account, such as a 
travel account and its subaccounts, airfare, lodging, and limousine. Subaccounts 
are useful for assigning similar expenses to different lines on a tax form. For exam-
ple, the IRS does not treat all travel expenses the same, so only 50 percent of the 

Chart of Accounts for QuickBooks ◾    63
 FIGURE  4.3  QB Choosing the Legal Entity 
 FIGURE  4.2  QB Choosing the Industry 

64 
◾ General Ledger and the IT Audit
 FIGURE  4.5  Establishing Income and Expense Accounts 
 FIGURE  4.4  QB Establishing the Administrator Password 

SME Risks Specifi c to the General Ledger and the Chart of Accounts  ◾    65
meal and entertainment expenses are deductible while other travel expenses are 
fully deductible.  
 Changing Account Types in QuickBooks 
 QuickBooks has several restrictions regarding changing account types. Account types 
cannot change if the account’s type has:
 ▪
 Subaccounts 
 ▪
 An accounts receivable or accounts payable account 
 To modify an account, in the Chart of Accounts window, select the account you 
want to edit and then press Ctrl+E. 
 Account Deletion in QuickBooks 
 Users have the option of hiding accounts not used in QB. The records of past trans-
actions are important, whether a compliance or tax report is for a bank or the IRS. 
Deleting accounts is a far more serious undertaking. For example, LSE should not 
delete an Exploration Service income account because of termination of the service. 
The income earned from that service is taxable and retained in the records. Hiding 
accounts does not mean withholding key fi nancial investigative queries. Hidden 
accounts in QB continue to hold historical transactions even though the account 
does not appear in account lists.  
 SME RISKS SPECIFIC TO THE GENERAL LEDGER 
AND THE CHART OF ACCOUNTS 
 Risks  specifi c to the chart of accounts and general ledger activities can arise or change 
because:
 ▪
 A new account number may go into the system without approval or review in con-
trast to a previous time when the company was much smaller. Changes in the oper-
ating environment can result in changes in competitive pressures and signifi cantly 
enhance risks as an enterprise faces fi nancial pressure resulting in reduced staff 
levels or new personnel taking on new and unfamiliar tasks. Management that once 
dominated a smaller enterprise may not have the capacity or the time to manage a 
growing and fast‐changing environment. 
 ▪
 New personnel may have unfettered access to password controls, and may not 
fully understand system permissions or understand the consequences of account 
changes, misclassifi cations, or omissions. New personnel may have inadequate 
understanding of internal control as training typically falls into second priority 
with SMEs. Particularly challenging for SMEs is hiring qualifi ed personnel. 
 ▪
 New or revamped information systems as signifi cant and rapid changes occur in 
information systems can change the risk relating to internal control. Upgrades and 

66 
◾ General Ledger and the IT Audit
changes in information systems require a transition of old account numbers to new 
account numbers with numerous opportunities for the integrity of the data to be 
compromised. 
 ▪
 New business models, products, or technology are common in the technology sector 
and other parts of the U.S. economy, creating new business areas or transactions 
(and new accounts). An entity that has little experience may introduce new risks 
associated with internal control. 
 ▪
 Corporate restructuring may be accompanied by staff reductions and changes in 
supervision and controls; for example, the segregation of duties may signifi cantly 
change the risk associated with internal control. 
 ▪
 Expanded foreign operations create all new dimensions of risk, including all aspects 
of when to recognize revenue and currency changes. New and often unique risks 
that may affect internal control can also be created, such as additional or changed 
risks from foreign currency transactions. 
 ASSERTIONS UNDERLYING THE FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 
AND GENERAL LEDGER CONTROLS 
 Financial statement assertions are affected by factors that include the IT controls under-
lying the chart of accounts, the monthly closing process, the creation of new accounts, 
the closure of old accounts, the misclassifi cation of accounts, and the omissions of jour-
nal entries. Financial statement assertions are management’s implicit or explicit rep-
resentations regarding the recognition, presentation, and disclosure of information in 
the fi nancial statements and related disclosures. Assertions underlying the fi nancial 
statements fall into three categories (Ratcliffe and Landes 2009):
 1.  Appropriate classifi cation of transactions 
 2.  Accurate account balances 
 3.  Presentation and disclosure 
 A complete discussion of all the assertions underlying the fi nancial statements and 
a more comprehensive discussion of IT controls in connection with fi nancial statement 
reporting occurs later in this book. 
 IT CONTROLS, THE TRANSACTION LEVEL, AND 
THE GENERAL LEDGER 
 At the  entity level , the IT planning committee should oversee the development of the 
IT internal control strategic plan and assess other risks, such as IT management, data 
security, program change, and development. At the  activity level there should be risk 
assessments throughout the systems development methodology, the infrastructure 
operation and change process, and the program application change process. Common 
design errors for the chart of accounts that strongly suggest ineffective systems develop-
ment methodology, infrastructure operation, and change process include:

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        67
▪▪
Adopting a chart of accounts from a previous general ledger system and migrating 
that system to a new release without a conscious design of current or anticipated 
needs.
▪▪
Creating a chart of accounts without discussion and feedback from management or 
the outside auditors. As such, the accounting system may be very short‐lived before 
major changes are likely to be required in the accounting structure.
▪▪
Country, industry, compliance, and organizational factors on reporting require-
ments and chart of accounts structure are ignored in the design of the chart of 
accounts.
▪▪
Inadequate reporting and summarization of data in the general ledger.
▪▪
Replication of data between subledgers or modules, leading to inaccurate financial 
reporting.
Whether the enterprise is extremely small or has 500 employees, senior manage-
ment has a role in identifying all aspects of internal control associated with financial 
reporting. Self‐assessments measure the effectiveness of an internal control linked to 
a specific type of financial reporting risk. Corporate governance experts should review 
risk and control matrixes to ensure an appropriate level of control is in place to fit the 
risk profile (completeness, cutoff, presentation, recording, safeguarding assets, validity, 
valuation, and fraud). Risk and control monitoring should include company, depart-
ment, and secondary controls appropriate for the type of business models in place.
Within an SME, internal controls surrounding the financial closing process are 
essential, particularly with lean staffs, undertrained personnel, or middle or senior man-
agement that may not always be available to monitor activity or to sign off on journal 
entries. Without structure, timetables, and adequate documentation, the assertions 
of the financial statements are potentially at risk (Kelso 2011). A complex entity will 
require more communication, more documentation, and potentially more flexibility. 
As the complexity of an entity increases, the potential for surprises also increases as the 
variability of the quality and timeliness of the information are more at risk for decline. 
With more complexity, more structure may be required to offset the risk of an incomplete 
or flawed financial close.
There are eight essential controls for the financial closing process (Kelso 2011):
	  1.	 A secure password environment to prevent unauthorized access to the chart of 
accounts and financial reporting systems [a preventive control]
	 2.	 A closing calendar [a preventive control]
	 3.	 Specific procedures identified on the calendar [a preventive control]
	 4.	 A month‐end journal entry checklist [a detective control]
	 5.	 Templates for journal entries [a preventive control]
	 6.	 Standard analytical review processes [a detective control]
	 7.	 Report generation and analyses [both preventive and detective]
	 8.	 Communication and risk management [both preventive and detective]
An SME should, at a minimum, use some variation of the eight controls the previ-
ous paragraph identifies. A more expansive list of controls is available by integrating 

68	
◾  General Ledger and the IT Audit
COBIT 4.1 application controls (ISACA 2007) into steps 1 through 8. Specific to the 
chart of accounts and associated activities, COBIT 4.1 ensures six application controls:
	  1.	 Accurate and authorized source data
	 2.	 Data input is performed in a timely manner by authorized personnel
	 3.	 Transactions are accurate, complete, and authentic
	 4.	 transactions are processed with integrity and validity
	 5.	 there is adequate output review, reconciliation, and error handling
	 6.	 Authentication and integrity exist for processing between applications
For each of the six items just addressed, an illustrative set of application controls for 
a general ledger application is enumerated using COBIT 4.1 in the following discussion. 
This discussion identifies controls in the context of the SME adapted from COBIT 4.1 
and other sources. It is reasonable to assume that Microsoft Excel will play a significant 
role in application controls in most SMEs. An end‐user computing policy should be in 
place to ensure that every worksheet is protected, version control and release dates are 
adhered to, and a supervisor has reviewed all worksheets for accuracy and risk before 
implementation. The reader is encouraged to review the chapter on Microsoft Excel 
controls.
COBIT 4.1 Application Control 1: Source Data  
Preparation and Authorization
The first of six COBIT 4.1 application controls ensure that source data is accurately 
prepared and authorized:
Ensure that source documents are prepared by authorized and qualified per-
sonnel following established procedures, taking into account adequate segre-
gation of duties regarding the origination and approval of these documents. 
Minimize errors and omissions through good input form design. Detect errors 
and irregularities so they can be reported and corrected.*
Illustrative controls for the SME supporting source data preparation and authoriza-
tion include (adapted from COBIT 4.1 and other sources):
▪▪
Each area of responsibility creates journal entries using a standard template. 
For most SMEs, journal entries should originate through Microsoft Excel spread-
sheets and as such are the basis of templates for month‐to‐month entries. The 
templates have as many attributes prefilled as possible to ensure accuracy (legal 
entity or corporation number, account, or center); contain hidden help (accept-
able date formats); and detect errors (e.g., debits and credits are not equal and 
offsetting).
▪▪
An online library retains templates and has a specific journal identifier and a nar-
rative describing the nature of the transaction posting. In addition to the mini-
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        69
mum attributes required by the local general ledger posting system, an effective 
spreadsheet organization requires contact information identifying the area, owner, 
or creator in the details available for subsequent querying of posted transactions.
▪▪
Source documents support accuracy, control the workflow, and facilitate subse-
quent reference checking.
▪▪
Unauthorized documents are returned to the submitting originators for correction. 
Logs track incoming journal entries and returns of entries to originators.
▪▪
A person with supervisory authority periodically reviews logs to verify that cor-
rected documents return for ultimate disposition.
▪▪
Pattern analysis and root cause review are part of the accounting supervisor’s 
responsibilities. With the appropriate design, Microsoft Excel spreadsheets can sup-
port pattern analysis and root cause review.
COBIT 4.1 Application Control 2: Source Data  
Collection and Entry
The second of six COBIT 4.1 application controls ensure that source data is accurately 
prepared and authorized.
Ensure that data input is performed in a timely manner by authorized and 
qualified staff. Correction and resubmission of data that were erroneously input 
should be performed without compromising original transaction authorization 
levels. Where appropriate for reconstruction, retain original source documents 
for the appropriate amount of time.*
Illustrative controls for the SME supporting the second COBIT application control 
include (adopted from COBIT 4.1 and other sources):
▪▪
Resubmit corrected data that was erroneously inputted without compromising 
original transaction authorization levels.
▪▪
Define and communicate criteria for timeliness, completeness, and accuracy of 
source documents. Microsoft Excel templates reflect the criteria used for timeli-
ness, completeness, and accuracy.
▪▪
Use only prenumbered source documents for critical transactions. If proper 
sequence is a transaction requirement, identify and correct out‐of‐sequence source 
documents. If completeness is an application requirement, identify and account for 
missing source documents.
▪▪
Define and communicate who can input, edit, authorize, accept, and reject trans-
actions, and override errors. In the SME, it is likely that only one or two people on 
the accounting staff will have this authority. Implement access controls and record 
supporting evidence to establish accountability in line with role and responsibility 
definitions.
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

70	
◾  General Ledger and the IT Audit
▪▪
Define procedures to correct errors, override errors, and handle out‐of‐balance 
conditions, as well as to follow up, correct, approve, and resubmit source docu-
ments and transactions in a timely manner. These procedures should consider 
things such as error message descriptions, override mechanisms, and escalation 
levels.
▪▪
Generate error messages in a timely manner as close to the point of origin as pos-
sible. Microsoft Excel templates for journal entries can include multiple real‐time 
messages to the journal entry originator with the appropriate design. Processing 
stops unless errors are corrected or appropriately overridden or bypassed. Errors not 
corrected immediately are logged in an automated suspense log, and valid transac-
tion processing continues. A person with accounting supervisory authority should 
review error logs in a reasonable period. In practical terms, the small accounting 
staff of the SME with management being in close proximity should facilitate close 
communications and timely error reconciliation.
▪▪
Review errors and out‐of‐balance reports within a reasonable period and, where 
necessary, senior managers review exceptions. Automated monitoring tools iden-
tify, monitor, and manage errors.
▪▪
Ensure that source documents are safe‐stored (either by accounting or by IT) for a 
sufficient period in line with legal, regulatory, or business requirements.
COBIT 4.1 Application Control 3: Accuracy, Completeness,  
and Authenticity Checks
The third of six COBIT 4.1 application controls ensure that transactions are accurate, 
complete, and authentic:
Ensure that transactions are accurate, complete and valid. Validate data that 
were input, and edit or send back for correction as close to the point of origina-
tion as possible.*
Illustrative controls for the SME to support accurate, complete, and valid transac-
tions for general ledger transactions include (adapted from COBIT 4.1 and other sources) 
the following:
▪▪
Implement a comprehensive financial close calendar for the entire fiscal year, 
including the year‐end. The financial close calendar considers holidays, vaca-
tions, major business events, and the external audit or review schedule. All 
parties to the financial close, including the IT support organization, vendors, 
senior management, and outside partners, should be aware of all critical dates 
in the financial closing calendar. System upgrades, maintenance, company 
picnics, annual meetings, training events, fire drills, office moves, or facility 
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        71
changes and upgrades avoid conflicts with the financial close calendar. Vendors 
and other third‐party service providers outside the enterprise are aware of the 
financial close calendar.
▪▪
Implement a month‐end journal entry checklist that includes details about the jour-
nal entry originator, type (revenue, expense, asset, liability, etc.), brief description, 
date executed, effective date, amount, legal entity number, general ledger account 
number, cost or profit center number(s), account name, journal number identifier, 
currency, and other local system ledger information.
▪▪
Verify that all journal entries are posted as expected by viewing the financial sys-
tem accounts and reporting and updating the checklist accordingly. Review and 
exceptions during the close process and make corrections before the final system 
cutoff. This checklist is an essential component of the organization’s corporate gov-
ernance compliance process.
▪▪
Itemize subsystems that require closure before the general ledger is closed by using 
a monthly close schedule. Each financial close participant should identify specific 
procedures that detail required deliverables such as journal‐entry posting (accruals, 
recurring‐entry setup), financial system querying, financial system report process-
ing, consolidation rules, allocation processing, financial system maintenance, and 
tax rate processing. For example, payroll systems should be closed one or two days 
before the payroll information is posted to the general ledger. This would allow a 
review and sign-off of all payroll entries moving into financial reporting. Materiality 
thresholds and methods for approval of post‐close adjustments for financial correc-
tions are documented and posted.
▪▪
Ensure that transaction data are verified as close to the data entry point as possible 
and interactively during online sessions. Ensure that transaction data, whether 
people‐generated, system‐generated, or interfaced inputs, are subject to a variety of 
controls to check for accuracy, completeness, and validity. Provide understandable 
error messages immediately such that efficient remediation occurs.
▪▪
Implement controls to ensure accuracy, completeness, validity, and compliancy 
to regulatory requirements of data input. Controls may include sequence, limit, 
range, validity, reasonableness, table lookups, existence, key verification, check 
digit, completeness (e.g., total monetary amount, total items, total documents, hash 
totals), duplicate and logical relationship checks, and time edits. Validation criteria 
and parameters should be subject to periodic reviews and confirmation.
▪▪
Establish access control and role and responsibility mechanisms so that only autho-
rized persons input, modify, and authorize data.
▪▪
Define requirements for segregation of duties for entry, modification, and autho-
rization of transaction data, as well as for validation rules. Implement automated 
controls and role and responsibility requirements.
▪▪
Report transactions failing validation and post them to a suspense file. Report all 
errors in a timely fashion, and do not delay processing of valid transactions.
▪▪
Ensure that transactions failing edit and validation routines are subject to appropri-
ate follow‐up until errors are remediated. Ensure that information on processing 
failures allows for root cause analysis to help adjust procedures and automated 
controls.

72	
◾  General Ledger and the IT Audit
COBIT 4.1 Application Control 4: Processing Integrity and Validity
The fourth of six COBIT 4.1 application controls ensure processing integrity and validity:
Maintain the integrity and validity of data throughout the processing cycle. 
Ensure that detection of erroneous transactions does not disrupt processing 
of valid transactions.*
Illustrative controls for the SME supporting the fourth COBIT application control 
include (adapted from COBIT 4.1 and other sources) the following:
▪▪
Maintain the integrity and validity of data throughout the processing cycle. Ensure 
that detection of erroneous transactions does not disrupt processing of valid trans-
actions. IT should be able to support recovery throughout the data processing cycle.
▪▪
Establish and implement mechanisms to authorize the initiation of transaction 
processing and to enforce that only appropriate and authorized applications and 
tools are used.
▪▪
Verify that automated tools completely and accurately identify and correct errors, 
where appropriate. Controls may include checking for sequence and duplication 
errors, transaction/record counts, referential integrity checks, control and hash 
totals, range checks, and buffer overflow.
▪▪
Post and report failed validation routines to a suspense file. Where a file contains 
valid and invalid transactions, ensure that the processing of valid transactions 
avoids delays. Identification of errors is timely and available for review. Ensure that 
information on processing failures allows for root cause analysis and helps adjust 
procedures and automated controls, to ensure early detection or to prevent errors.
▪▪
Ensure that transactions failing validation routines are subject to appropriate 
follow‐up. Remediation of errors occurs or the transaction terminates.
▪▪
Ensure production jobs do not acquire extraneous data or delete data during 
processing.
▪▪
Verify the unique and sequential identifier to every transaction (e.g., index, date, 
and time).
▪▪
Maintain the audit trail of transactions processed. Include date and time of input 
and user identification for each online or batch transaction. For sensitive data, 
before and after images ensure that accuracy and appropriate authorization exist.
▪▪
Maintain the integrity of data during unexpected interruptions in data processing 
with system and database utilities. Ensure that controls are in place to confirm 
data integrity after processing failures or after use of system or database utilities to 
resolve operational problems. A business owner reviews changes before processing.
▪▪
Review all adjustments, overrides, and high‐value transactions in detail for appro-
priateness with an appropriate level of supervision.
▪▪
Reconcile file totals. For example, a parallel control file that records transaction 
counts or monetary value as data should be processed and then compared to mas-
ter file data once transactions post. Identify, report, and act on out‐of‐balance 
conditions.
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        73
COBIT 4.1 Application Control 5: Output Review, Reconciliation, 
and Error Handling
The fifth of six COBIT 4.1 application controls ensures output review, reconciliation, 
and error handling:
Establish procedures and associated responsibilities to ensure that output is 
handled in an authorized manner, delivered to the appropriate recipient and 
protected during transmission; that verification, detection and correction of the 
accuracy of output occur; and that information provided in the output is used.*
Illustrative controls for the SME supporting the fifth COBIT application control 
include (adopted from COBIT 4.1 and other sources) the following: 
▪▪
Use a standard checklist within each area of the SME that creates or runs financial 
reports (for internal or external users) to verify report attributes. Parameters of 
accuracy exist for key report elements to indicate a level of comfort from histori-
cal reporting and the experience of senior‐level report creators. Report reviewers 
should scan the reporting for accuracy indicators and sign off on checklist items. 
The review process should use comparative periods (prior month, prior quarter, 
and prior year). Investigate and document large‐dollar, large‐percentage, and other 
anomalies in variances. Document all exceptions for supervisory review, which is 
performed before the report is issued, with particular attention paid to all excep-
tions (variances) noted. The SME management and potentially the owners of the 
enterprise should be actively reviewing reports.
▪▪
Follow defined procedures and consider privacy and security requirements for han-
dling and retaining output from IT applications. Define, communicate, and follow 
procedures for the distribution of output.
▪▪
Inventory all sensitive output, such as negotiable instruments, and compare it with 
inventory records. Create procedures with audit trails to account for all exceptions 
and rejections of sensitive output documents.
▪▪
Match control totals in the header and/or trailer records of the output at data entry 
to ensure completeness and accuracy of processing. If out‐of‐balance control totals 
exist, the differences should be reported to an appropriate level of management.
▪▪
Validate the completeness and accuracy of processing before other operations using 
the same data begin. If electronic output is used as input into a subsequent opera-
tion, ensure that validation has occurred prior to subsequent uses.
▪▪
Review by the SME’s middle and senior management of final output for reasonable-
ness, accuracy, and completeness. Supervisory authority in the accounting depart-
ment and business owners report potential errors, log the errors in an automated 
centralized logging facility, and resolve errors in a timely manner.
Implement distribution controls for sensitive output, including who can receive it, 
using labels that are recognizable by people and machines, and implement the controls 
accordingly.
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

74	
◾  General Ledger and the IT Audit
COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Transaction  
Authentication and Integrity
The sixth and final COBIT 4.1 application controls ensure transaction authentication 
and integrity:
Before passing transaction data between internal applications and busi-
ness operational functions (in or outside the enterprise), check it for proper 
addressing, authenticity of origin and integrity of content. Maintain authentic-
ity and integrity during transmission or transport.*
Illustrative controls for the SME supporting the sixth COBIT application control 
include (adopted from COBIT 4.1) the following:
▪▪
Implement agreed‐on standards of communication and mechanisms for 
authentication, error handling, and log reconciliation. The standards should 
include the responsibilities of all parties and how exceptions are handled. 
This control is particularly important for SMEs with transaction processing at 
multiple locations.
▪▪
Maintain adherence to industry standards to facilitate counterparty authentica-
tion, provide evidence of nonrepudiation, and allow for content integrity verifica-
tion upon receipt by the downstream application.
Analytical Reviews Using the General and Subsidiary Ledger Data
A basic premise underlying the application of analytical procedures is that relationships 
may exist among the chart of the accounts, the subsidiary ledger, and the general ledger 
data. Items such as unusual journal entry dates, missing entries, new account numbers, 
unusual patterns of activity, and payments made after the close of the general ledger 
exemplify conditions that require follow‐up. Analytical procedures from AU Section 329 
do the following (PCAOB 2013b; AICPA 2013):
▪▪
Assist the auditor in planning the nature, timing, and extent of other auditing 
procedures.
▪▪
Act as a substantive test to obtain audit evidence about particular assertions related 
to account balances or classes of transaction.
▪▪
Serve as an overall review of the financial information in the final stage of the audit.
Analytical procedures range from a simple review of journal entry dates (e.g., 
identification of weekend journal entries or the identification of missing journal entries 
that should exist in a prenumbered sequence) to the use of sophisticated statistical 
* COBIT 4.1 ©2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission.

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        75
techniques such as Benford’s Law with the implementation of tools known as computer‐
assisted audit techniques (CAATs).
Forensic analytics, a closely related discipline to financial analytical reviews, can 
detect accounting errors such as under‐billing, overpayments, fraud, and unusual 
transactions. The main steps in forensic analytics are:
	 1.	 Data collection
	 2.	 Data preparation
	 3.	 The use of forensic analytics
	 4.	 Evaluation, investigation, and reporting (Nigrini 2011)
These analytic methods can be directed at determining the likelihood or mag-
nitude of fraud occurring. They would be a part of a fraud deterrence cycle that 
would include other steps such as employment screening procedures, including 
background checks. Given the high rate of fraud in the SME, these methods are par-
ticularly relevant. In particular, cash and cash‐related accounts, including accounts 
payable and accounts receivable, are the most common areas of fraud in the SME. 
The techniques outlined in the following discussion (Shein and Lanza 2009; Nigrini 
2011) use account data in the general ledger, usually transactional data, but at times 
other data such as statistical data or aggregated data. What is important in this 
discussion is to recognize that the general ledger or subsidiary ledgers (depending 
on the structure of the system installation) by themselves offer fertile ground for 
investigation.
Excel, Access, and CAATs
The availability of computing power in Excel and Access and the relatively easy access 
to audit tools such as ACL (ACL 2013), IDEA (CaseWare 2013), and ActiveData for 
Excel (InformationActive 2013), known as CAAT, have accelerated the analytical 
review process. Within the normal course of an engagement, external auditors, 
internal auditors, data analysts, and forensic analysts should have access to the 
electronic records supporting the general ledger. With access to the accounting 
server and related applications to the general ledger (e.g., inventory), CAATs are very 
powerful companions. A demonstration of how to use Excel and Access or any of 
the audit tools referenced using these investigative techniques is beyond the scope of  
this text.
Descriptive Statistics
Descriptive statistics provide simple summaries about the sample and about the 
observations available through further analysis. Such summaries may be either 
quantitative (e.g., summary statistics using ratios or percentages), or visual 
(e.g., simple‐to‐understand graphs). These summaries may form the basis of the 
initial description of the data as part of a more extensive statistical analysis, or 
they may be sufficient in and of themselves for a particular investigation. The 

76	
◾  General Ledger and the IT Audit
objective of using descriptive statistics is to isolate unusual patterns in comparative  
general ledger data to enable the auditor to make specific queries and meaningful 
drill‐downs.
Vendor Summary Analysis for the Evaluation of  
Period‐to‐Period Comparison
The purpose of the vendor evaluation is to identify trends in vendor purchase history. A 
trend analysis can identify key vendors that have increased or decreased substantially in 
purchase volume. Based on the changes in the business environment and/or new com-
pany projects, a reasonableness assessment identifies major changes in vendor activity. 
A common fraud is an employee(s) submitting invoices for a fraudulent legal entity that 
does not exist. That legal entity should appear in a vendor review and analysis with a 
significant increase in purchasing activity.
Benford’s Law
Benford’s Law originates from the late Dr. Frank Benford, a physicist at the General 
Electric Company. Benford’s Law theorizes the expected frequencies of the digits 
in tabulated data (Benford 1938). Benford found that contrary to intuition, the  
digits in tabulated data are not all equally likely and skew in favor of the lower digits 
(Nigrini 2011; Huxley 2013). Benford showed that on average 30.6 percent of num-
bers had a first digit “1,” and 18.5 percent of the numbers had a first digit “2.” This 
means that 49.1 percent of his large data samples had a first digit that was either 
a 1 or a 2. At the other end of the digit‐scale, only 4.7 percent of his samples had a 
first digit “9.” The actual proportion for the first digit 1 was almost equal to the com-
mon logarithm of 2 (or 2/1), and the actual proportion for the first digit 2 was almost 
equal to the common logarithm of 3/2. This logarithmic pattern continues through 
to the “9” with the proportion for the first digit 9 approximating the common  
logarithm of 10/9.
Why is this important? Fraudsters are more likely to use fraudulent invoice 
numbers using either an equal distribution assuming that the first digit 1 will appear 
10 percent of the time or another invoice number pattern that does not resemble 
the predicted distribution using Benford’s Law. Most contemporary CAATs support 
Benford’s Law.
Above‐Average Payments to a Vendor
Unusually large payments to a vendor in relation to the average are signs of error (i.e., 
key error) or fraud (i.e., kickback scheme where vendors pay kickbacks to an employee). 
For vendors with unusual payments above the average, a sample of the “average” pay-
ment invoices as well as the unusual payment invoice is part of the review. The docu-
mentation determines the reasonableness of the purchase. The auditor should be aware 
of unusual payments and/or the possibility of the vendor deliberately overcharging the 
organization.

IT Controls, the Transaction Level, and the General Ledger   ◾        77
Duplicate Payment Testing
Duplicate payments to vendors may represent errors that the QB or another general 
ledger system was unable to detect. In most systems, a check confirms whether the 
vendor number, invoice number, and amount are the same. This test ensures this basic 
control is operational and tests for other permutations of duplication. Any results from 
this test should indicate trends with a visual inspection. For example, rent payments 
that occur on a monthly basis may appear to duplicate payments when in fact they are 
simply regularly occurring payments.
Payments Made after Period‐End for Valid  
Liabilities at Period‐End
This analysis identifies unrecorded liabilities. A common scheme is for an organization 
to hold an invoice by not entering the payable into the system. Then, after period‐end, 
the invoice enters into the system, thereby evading the expense charge in the year under 
review. The invoices identified in this test are reasonable and material using visual 
inspection. If not material, further test work is not necessary. If material, trends or pat-
terns can identify types of invoices, vendors, or the supervisor or manager who approved 
the invoice.
Journal Entry Gap Test
Gaps may signal incomplete data processing or, in the situation of journal entries, 
possible hidden entries. Usually, a method to identify these occurrences, along 
with a review by an independent party, is sufficient to ensure the completeness and  
accuracy of processing. Gaps in the journal entry sequence raise questions 
and require the accounting department to answer simple queries. The test work 
should answer:
▪▪
What procedures exist to document and approve all gaps in the respective sequences?
▪▪
How is management made aware of the gaps?
Identify Standard and Nonstandard Journal Entries  
Made after Year‐End
Nonstandard journal entries generally are those posted manually. Such entries 
are more prone to error and fraud due mainly to human error, judgment normally 
applied in the support for the entry, and the possibility for management override 
in authorizing the entry. This is especially true for entries made just after year‐end 
(related to the prior year, as these entries are more prone to be adjustments for the 
fiscal year’s annual reporting). Given all these possibilities, the test of these entries 
should include a review of the journal entry and associated supporting documenta-
tion, ensuring the approvals are appropriate for the size and nature of the journal 
entry, and assessing whether generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP) are 
being applied.

78 
◾ General Ledger and the IT Audit
 Summarize Activity by User Account 
 This test looks for:
 ▪
 Standard password names such as “DEFAULT” or “TEST.” Replacements for these 
generic passwords should be strong passwords (e.g., wBROWN6633#) or pass-
phrases associated with that person. 
 ▪
 Unrecognized or terminated employees. This test focuses more on the IT function 
to ensure that at any point only authorized employees are on the list. 
 ▪
 Users who have access beyond their level of responsibility. This access may highlight 
a lack of segregation of duties where a person has an opportunity to commit fraud 
by being able to initiate, authorize, and/or record a transaction. 
 Recommendations include:
 ▪
 Replacing weak passwords with specifi c IDs using strong password design. 
 ▪
 Deleting employees not on the active employee roster. 
 ▪
 Reviewing users that are posting high activity or may have access to other nonseg-
regated functions to assess whether other controls are needed to mitigate the access 
level being afforded to the individual. 
 ▪
 Reviewing all procedures and permissions that allow access to the passwords. 
 Identify Weekend Journal Entries 
 This analysis evaluates entries made during the weekend. Except for a year‐end close 
or a close delayed for uncontrollable circumstances, a company does not typically close 
the general ledger over the weekend. Therefore, it is useful to extract all of these entries 
to determine if there are any patterns in their processing. For example, a particular 
user may be constantly processing a certain set of entries over a weekend to reduce the 
processing load during the week. If the test fi nds weekend entries, the auditor should 
review these entries to determine whether there are any unusual patterns or entries 
posted during these unexpected times to escape detection and approval. 
 SUMMARY 
 Whether the system is manual or computerized, access to the general ledger should 
occur only when proper authorization exists. In a manual general ledger system, seg-
regation of duties would not allow general ledger employees simultaneously to do the 
following three tasks:
 1.  Authorize journal vouchers. 
 2.  Have custody of assets. 
 3.  Have recording responsibility for any special journals or subsidiary ledgers. 

Summary  ◾        79
Microsoft Dynamics and QB achieve segregation by allowing different levels of 
access to different employees. Only certain employees have access to the general 
ledger functions, including account creation, postings, and other activities. Segre-
gation of duties is maintained in Excel spreadsheets by requiring a second party to 
review complex spreadsheet designs, analytical reviews of month‐to‐month journal 
entries, and journal entry creation. The second party of the Excel review would 
not have access to assets or have conflicting responsibilities for journal entries or 
ledgers.
An organization must have a well‐defined chart of accounts to maintain internal 
control. The chart of accounts must have adequate granularity (i.e., adequate break-
down of accounts) to facilitate the accurate classification and control of transactions. 
Adequate breakdown of revenue and expense categories should occur to enable a 
meaningful management review. Coarse‐grained charts of accounts are typical for an 
SME, but as the SME grows in revenue and complexity of operations increases, finer 
granularity (i.e., more accounts) should be sought to maintain an understanding of 
the operations.
All transactions should have an audit trail to enable transaction tracing from their 
initial source documents through the general ledger. The audit trail should also enable 
general ledger account tracing to the original source documents. It is likely the audit 
trail will include electronic and manual documents as well as transaction logs, transac-
tion files, and master files.
The ultimate output of the general ledger includes the balance sheet, income state-
ment, statement of cash flows, and statement of owners’ equity. Internal reporting 
should enable analytical reviews such as an aging analysis of accounts receivable or 
an analysis of production hours and labor costs if the organization is a manufacturer. 
A retail organization may focus on an inventory analysis of fast‐ or slow‐moving inven-
tory items as well as stockouts of high‐demand inventory. A treasurer or CFO may focus 
on cash management and future financing requirements. The chart of accounts is the 
source of internal reporting and is a critical source of information for the financial 
health of the organization. For the auditor, the activity related to the general ledger itself 
(e.g., Sunday closing entries or above‐average payments to a vendor) provides informa-
tion about unusual activity related to the financial closing and reporting process for the 
general ledger and subsidiary ledgers.


81
5
 CHAPTER  FIVE 
 The Revenue Cycle 
   T
HE REVENUE CYCLE ENCOMPASSES ALL processes, personnel, and activi-
ties that relate to the receipt of purchase orders from customers, credit approval, 
delivery of goods and/or services, and receipt of payment. Process descriptions of 
the revenue cycle are relatively universal, with differences generally refl ective of process-
ing technology (e.g., batch or continuous), specifi c company policies (e.g., credit‐related, 
exception routines for backorders, etc.), and goods‐based versus services‐based business 
models. 
 RISK EXPOSURES AND SUBPROCESSES 
 The revenue cycle contains several risk exposures. These include:
 ▪
 Sales: Is the order from a valid customer? Does the system contain correct and 
up‐to‐date information about the customer? Are there holds or credit limits on the 
customer’s account? Has the transaction been properly authorized? Are recorded 
transactions valid? Have all valid transactions been recorded accurately? 
 ▪
 Credit approval: Does the credit approval process protect the organization against 
excessive credit losses? 
 ▪
 Warehouse: How are assets protected against loss or theft? Does the accounting 
system provide good detective controls that would bring shrinkage to the attention 
of management? How often are inventory counts reconciled to accounting records? 
Are ordered goods available in suffi cient quantity to satisfy customer demand? 
Are backorder processes in place to protect against customer dissatisfaction from 
stockouts? 

82	
◾  The Revenue Cycle
▪▪
Shipping: What controls are in place to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of 
shipped orders? Are processes in place to manage multiple ship‐to addresses?
▪▪
Billing: What controls are in place to ensure the accuracy and timeliness of 
billings? Are backorders, partial fills, returns, and other nonroutine transactions 
processed in such a way as to ensure accurate and complete records?
▪▪
Cash receipts: Does the organization use lockboxes? Do cash receipt processes 
provide independent audit trails? What segregation of duties (SOD) controls are 
there to prevent one person from exercising incompatible functions?
There are several subprocesses within the revenue cycle. These include:
▪▪
Customer setup: Preparation or modification of the customer records includes 
such vital information as credit limits, ship‐to addresses and, if applicable, class 
attributes (i.e., customers that share a specific set of attributes such as access to 
special promotional pricing, shipping instructions, or payment terms).
▪▪
Pricing and promotions: Input and modification of pricing‐related information 
requires special attention to access controls.
▪▪
Order entry: This subprocess also requires careful attention to role‐based security, 
in order to ensure that only authorized personnel can input orders. The data fields 
require application controls such as dropdown boxes for customers and pricing 
overrides.
▪▪
Invoicing: This originates in the billing and accounts receivable (A/R) department 
and must reflect both the original sales order and actual shipping quantities. In the 
case of a service company, invoicing must tie back to evidence of service delivery. 
The invoice amount needs to tie to the sales order, and controls should be in place 
to limit overrides.
▪▪
Accounts receivable: This subprocess combines cash receipts and record 
updating. Companies need sound controls to ensure accurate posting of cash 
receipts to a customer’s account.
▪▪
Product shipment: Controls need to ensure accurate fulfillment of customer 
orders and tracking of shortages, back orders, and other exceptions.
▪▪
Returns: This reverse logistics subprocess must ensure appropriate crediting of the 
customer account and inventory record management. Decisions regarding the 
resale value of returned items should have appropriate authorization, including pre-
approval forms and accurate matching of quantities returned and related records.
These risk exposures can affect the financial audit in a number of different ways, 
and each risk exposure relates to one or more cycle subprocesses. (See Table 5.3, later 
in the chapter, which illustrates these links at a high level, showing, for each of several 
illustrative risks, the potential impact on one or more of the assertions underlying the 
financial statements.* Table 5.3 also ties these risks to specific revenue cycle subprocesses.)
Application controls can mitigate these exposures, and it is thus important for the 
auditor to have a working knowledge of what these controls are, how they should func-
tion, and points of vulnerability. The numbered references in Figures 5.1 and 5.2 identify  
* These assertions are discussed from both a financial and IT audit perspective in Chapter 1.

83
FIGURE 5.1 Generic Revenue Cycle
FIGURE 5 1
G
i R
C
l
Sales
Credit
Warehouse
Shipping
Customer
Purchase
Order (PO)
Receive
PO,
Prep
SO
Credit
Copy
SO #2
Stock
Release
SO #3
SO #3 and
#4–6
Pick
Goods
Reconcile
documents and
goods; sign
shipping notice:
prepare BoL
SO #4
BOL #1–2
Carrier
Shipping
Notice
SO #5A, #5B
SO #3 and
#6
#5A AR
#5B Inventory
#5B Inventory
BOL #3
Credit
Copy
SO #2
Approval
SO #1
note #1
SO #1–6
PO
1,2
1,2
7
5, 6, 9
AR
Inventory
3,4
FIGURE 5.2 Generic Cash Receipts Cycle
Mall Room
Customer
Check
RA
Check
A
B
RA
RL #1–3
RL #1
Check
RL #1
RL #2
RL #2
RL #3
Reconcile
Bank
Update
A/R
Ledger
B
B
B
Bank
Deposit
Ticket
A
RA
RA
8,10
Check
Reconcile
Prepare
RL
Record
Cash
Receipt
Deposit
Ticket
#1–2
Cash Receipts
Accounts Receivable
Controller

84 
◾ The Revenue Cycle
locations of specifi c risks discussed in the next section. These fi gures (adapted from material 
found in Hall 2011) illustrate typical revenue and cash receipts cycles for a small goods‐based 
business. The drawings in Figures 5.1 and 5.2 are not intended to be comprehensive or 
applicable to all business models; rather, the intent is to highlight the broad relationships 
between common processes and frequently occurring risks. The use of document output 
in the fl owcharts refl ects the fact that, although the accounting process is computerized, 
paper output is frequently generated (e.g., packing slips, customer invoices). Figures 5.1 
and 5.2 should be read in terms of information fl ows and with the tacit understanding that 
some of these occur with physical paper output and others via screen reading only. Table 
 5.1 provides detail on the information fl ows for the sales order (SO) distribution.
APPLICATION CONTROLS, REVENUE CYCLE RISKS, AND 
RELATED AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 This section begins with a general introduction to application controls. We then consider 
an illustrative set of risks that arise in the revenue cycle. These include operational risks 
(i.e., what could go wrong) and fi nancial statement risks. We examine these risks and the 
controls that should either prevent the problem (preventive controls) or alert personnel to 
the problem so that it can be remediated (detective controls). Within the context of each 
risk exposure and related controls we also discuss appropriate IT audit procedures.  
 TABLE 5.1   Note 1—Sales Order Distribution 
Copy No. Name 
Remarks 
1 
Customer Copy 
Returning a customer copy of the sales order allows the 
customer to follow its own internal processes for reconciling 
the original purchase order to anticipated fulﬁ llment. Note 
the operational importance of providing the customer with 
reasonable assurance that the company will be able to ﬁ ll 
the order. 
2 
Credit Copy 
The credit process should ensure that new orders are 
consistent with the terms of a customer’s account. 
3 
Stock Release 
The stock release (sometimes referred to as a  pick list ) 
authorizes warehouse employees to assemble inventory for 
shipment to a customer. 
4 
Packing Slip 
The packing slip accompanies the bill of lading (BOL) and 
describes the contents of the order. 
5 
Shipping Notice 
The shipping notice provides essential information for the 
A/R‐billing function, including detail on the actual shipment, 
freight charges, and shipping date. Figure 5.1 shows copies 
of the sales order (#5A) going to the A/R department for 
billing and to the inventory department (#5B) for updating 
stock records. 
6 
File Copy 
The shipping department retains ﬁ le copies of the sales order 
(adjusted for actual shipment) and the bill of lading in order 
to process information requests relating to the shipment.  

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    85
 TABLE 5.2  Major Application Control Types 
Edit Checks 
These controls relate to ﬁ eld format. For example, dollar amounts should be 
entered in numeric format. 
 Validations 
Validation controls depend on the conﬁ rmation of a test. Examination of 
veriﬁ ed customer, appropriate credit limit, and/or correct pricing list would 
be examples of validation controls relating to the revenue cycle. 
 Calculations 
Calculations can be used to ensure that a computation is occurring 
accurately. Extensions and footings can be cross‐checked with one another 
in order to address the risk that portions of a customer statement may not be 
included in the totals. 
 Interfaces 
Interfaces can be designed to address risks posed by data transfers from one 
system to another (e.g., counts that verify the number of records uploaded 
from the sales subledger to the general ledger). 
 Authorizations 
Authorizations that limit access to data are a fundamental building block of 
control. Roles should be deﬁ ned within the system and used to restrict the 
ability to modify records. For example, only the purchasing manager should 
have the ability to add vendors to the vendor master. 
 Application Controls 
 Application controls are system‐enabled controls within standard business processes. 
They are designed to enforce specifi c work requirements and, traditionally, are preven-
tive in nature. Examples of application controls include:
 ▪
 Logical access controls (i.e., application security) 
 ▪
 Date entry/fi eld validations (e.g., validation of entered credit card numbers) 
 ▪
 Workfl ow rules (e.g., electronic routing and signoff of purchase requests) 
 ▪
 Field entries being enforced based on predefi ned values (e.g., pricing information) 
 In discussing application controls, it is useful to observe the distinction between inher-
ent and confi gurable controls. The former are programmed to perform the control through 
either custom coding or packaged delivery, while the latter can be modifi ed by the end user. 
 Table  5.2 provides brief defi nitions for major control types. All of these general types of 
control are designed to limit the risk of inappropriate input, processing, or output of data. 
 The level of automation associated with a control provides another set of fundamental 
distinctions. In general, controls can be manual, automated, or IT‐dependent manual. 
This last category refers to controls performed by a person who relies on automated output. 
Most are detective controls that rely on computer‐generated information or computer 
functionality. For example, management reviews a monthly variance report and follows 
up on signifi cant variances. Because management relies on the computer‐produced report 
to identify and generate the variances, the IT auditor needs to determine that there are 
controls in place to ensure that the variance report is complete and accurate.  
 Risks, Processes, and Application Controls 
 Table  5.3 provides an illustrative set of risk exposures and the ways in which these both 
impair the validity of management assertions about the fi nancial statements and involve 

86
 TABLE 5.3  Revenue Cycle Risks 
Illustrative Risks 
Assertions 
Cycle Subprocess 
 
 
Existence/Occurrence 
Completeness 
Rights and Obligations 
Valuation/Allocation 
Accounting Procedures 
 
Customer Setup 
Pricing/Promotions 
Order Entry 
Invoicing 
Accounts Receivable 
Product Shipment 
Returns 
1 
Sales made to customers with bad credit 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X  
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 
Unauthorized changes to customer accounts 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
X  
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
Incorrect prices entered into the system 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X 
 
 X  
X  
 
 
4 
Duplicate sales invoice numbers 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
5 
Incorrect sales posting 
 
X 
 
X 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
6 
Erroneous invoices 
 
 
 
X 
X 
 
 
X  
 
X 
X 
 
 
7 
Shipping errors 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X  
X 
X 
 
8 
No authorization for issuance of credit memos 
X 
X 
 X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
X 
9 
Revenue not recognized in proper period 
 
 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
X 
X 
X 
 
10 Incorrect posting of cash receipts 
X 
X 
 
X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X 
 
 

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    87
specifi c subprocesses. While accounting scholars and practitioners could debate which 
assertions and subcycle processes are affected by each illustrative risk, this book focuses 
on a limited set of the most prominent intersections. 
 Sales Made to Customers with Bad Credit 
 As previously noted, the completeness assertion refers to the integrity of the recording 
process and the ability of the company’s accounting system to ensure that the effects of 
all transactions, balances, accounts, and estimates have been included in the fi nancial 
statements. A process that permits a sales process that runs contrary to credit process 
fails this test. 
 Credit sales to customers with poor credit pose the operational risk of uncollectable 
receivables and the audit risk of overstated revenues. The applicable controls include 
the setting of credit limits for customers, limit checks that ensure that a customer’s 
preapproved credit limit is not exceeded, and credit approval by a credit manager who is 
independent of the sales function. In Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (GPD), the credit 
limits for customers can be confi gured as shown in Figure  5.3 .
 In GPD, once the total order amount exceeds the customer’s credit limit, a window 
opens and prompts for a password in order to override the credit limit. This hard control 
prevents an order from being processed without proper approval. The auditor should 
review the password confi guration setup and related business processes in order to 
understand how overrides occur in practice, as shown in Figure  5.4 .
 Figure  5.5 illustrates a contrasting soft control approach for sales terms found 
in QuickBooks (QB). The fi gure shows initial confi guration, and then a sales order 
that exceeds the credit limit. In order to verify appropriate credit limits the auditor 
should examine a sample of customer setup records. QB can be confi gured to run 
such a report to evaluate compliance with company credit policy. In QB the credit 
limit confi guration setting resides under the payment information tab. If used, QB has 
FIGURE 5.3 GPD Conﬁ guration Control for Customer Credit Limit

88 
◾ The Revenue Cycle
established soft control warnings for the user to help manage a customer’s current 
credit balance.
 If an invoice is created that would cause the customer’s balance to exceed its 
credit limit, a warning box appears, as shown in Figure  5.6 . This is a soft control 
and does not prevent an order from being processed. The auditor should review 
credit limit balances configured in the system to the accounts receivable ledger 
FIGURE 5.4 GPD Hard Control for Customer Credit Limit
FIGURE 5.5 QB Credit Limit Setup
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    89
 FIGURE 5.6  QB Soft Control for Customer Credit Limit—1 
to determine if there is exposure for bad debt that has not been addressed in the 
allowance accounts. 
 The user receives an additional soft control popup box in QB prior to recording the 
transaction. Once again, this is a soft control that does not prevent the transaction from 
being processed, as shown in Figure  5.7 .
 In QB, the auditor could run a report with all customers with credit limits and then 
run a report that compares the A/R aging summary against customer credit limits, as 
shown in Figures  5.8 and  5.9 
 Unauthorized Changes to Customer Accounts 
(Including Prices and Credit Limits) 
 Unauthorized changes to customer accounts could include resetting of sales discounts, 
credit limits, ship‐to addresses, and pricing (e.g., bulk discounts, preferred customer 
pricing, etc.) As previously noted, the IT corollary to the fi nancial statement assertion 
of existence implies that the application controls that support processing integrity 
exist. 
 Software packages that permit soft controls can, as illustrated in Figure  5.10 , allow 
potential unauthorized overrides. The auditor needs to reconcile actual terms provided 
to customers to the terms on customer records in order to determine whether changes 
have been made, and, if so, how they were authorized.

90 
◾ The Revenue Cycle
FIGURE 5.7 QB Soft Control for Customer Credit Limit—2
 FIGURE 5.8  QB Customer Contact List with Credit Limit 
FIGURE 5.9 QB Aging Summary

91
 FIGURE 5.10  QB Controls for Customer Account Details 
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

92	
◾  The Revenue Cycle
Incorrect Prices Entered into the System
The risk exposures in this category include erroneous price cards, incorrect matching 
of price series with customers when more than one pricing or rate schedule exists, and 
incorrect sales discounts. While data entry errors would be caused by human input, the 
system may have price lists where only certain prices can be chosen from a dropdown 
box or only certain discounts or price tolerances can be accepted without having further 
workflow approvals.
Duplicate Sales Invoice Numbers
The risks arising from duplicate estimates, invoice numbers, or credit memos entered 
into the system include lost revenue from one or the other, misapplication of cash to a 
customer account, and related financial statement effects. In QB, a dialogue box opens 
with a warning about a duplicate estimate number. This is a soft control since the user 
can keep the duplicate number, as shown in Figure 5.11. Although QB automatically 
numbers estimates and sales orders after the last completed, the user is still able to keep 
the duplicate number if desired.
In QB, the auditor needs to review the configuration setting within QB. Warn-
ings about duplicate numbers can be turned on and off via the configuration screen, 
as shown in Figure 5.12 (checkbox at the bottom of the Company Preferences tab). 
Although these controls are soft controls, the auditor may be able to rely on the con-
figuration setting and then review the invoice reports for any duplicate numbers. As 
an auditor, you need to review the numbers, if applicable to your audit, to determine 
whether duplicate numbers have been used.
In QB, an error notification (input control) pops up if the user tries to change 
an invoice number to a number that already exists, as shown in Figure 5.13. The 
QB configuration screen lets the user uncheck the warning boxes for duplicate 
invoice numbers and sales order numbers, disabling the soft control, as shown 
in Figure 5.14. The auditor should review the configuration setting to determine 
if the soft control is in place. In addition, if applicable to the audit, the auditor 
should review reports to determine if duplicate invoice numbers and/or sales order 
numbers exist.
Incorrect Sales Posting
Incorrect sales posting refers to unauthorized, misattributed, missing, or otherwise erro-
neous sales information posted to the general ledger (GL). The auditor should determine 
whether a report exists that would reconcile sales activity to the GL posting. To deter-
mine the completeness of sales posting, the total from the sales journal should tie to one 
or more entries in the GL.
In GPD the sales edit list is a control report over posting to the GL, as shown in 
Figure 5.15. The auditor should review it for accuracy and completeness. This is an 
example of an IT‐dependent manual control.

93
FIGURE 5.11 QB Error Notiﬁ cation
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

94
FIGURE 5.12 QB Error Notiﬁ cation
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    95
 Erroneous Invoices 
 Invoice copies were not illustrated in Figure  5.2 for the sound reason that quantities 
sold may vary from quantities shipped. This creates the risk, however, that when 
generated the invoices may be incomplete or otherwise erroneous, or that they may 
fail to be generated by the A/R‐billing department. Figure  5.16 illustrates a control 
in QB that requires an invoice to be generated before the sales order is processed. A 
window double‐checks the quantity of goods to be shipped to those invoiced, as shown 
in Figure  5.17 .
 In GPD, when creating an invoice, the system automatically retrieves the infor-
mation from the inventory master fi le, as shown in Figure  5.18 . This can help prevent 
possible pricing mistakes.
 Shipping Errors 
 When fi lling in the sales transaction entry form, if a customer shipping address is miss-
ing, a message box prompts the user for a shipping address, as shown in Figure  5.19 . 
This is an example of a hard control in GPD relating to a completeness check.
FIGURE 5.13 QB Input Control

96 
◾ The Revenue Cycle
FIGURE 5.14 QB Disabling Soft Control
 No Authorization for Issue of Credit Memos 
 A credit memo enables the company to reduce the accounts receivable that a customer 
owes due to an authorized reason. Credit memos should not be processed within the 
system without proper authorization. While many small and medium‐sized enterprises 
may use manual credit memo processes to approve the accounts receivable reduction, 
the system may have authorization workfl ows set up that require approvals before the 
credit memo can be processed. Initially, security should be set up in the system to ensure 
that only authorized individuals can create credit memos, and then security should be 
set up for the approval process. 
 Revenue Not Recognized in the Proper Period 
 This exposure arises when invoiced products are in transit, loaded on trucks but not 
shipped to customers. Companies need to ensure that proper cutoff occurs at the 
end of the accounting period and only authorized revenue is recorded in the proper 
accounting period. Unfortunately, the system may process transactions that would 
trigger the recognition of revenue, even though the inventory does not leave the ship-
ping docks. This is where the auditor could review revenue recorded near the end of 

97
FIGURE 5.15 GDP Sales Edit List
Source: Adapted from T. Brunsdon, M. Romney, and P. Steinbart (2009).

98
FIGURE 5.16 QB Sales Order Processing
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.
FIGURE 5.17 QB Error Checking

99
FIGURE 5.18 GPD Pricing Data from Inventory Master File

100
 FIGURE 5.19  GPD Completeness Check for Sales Transaction 

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    101
the accounting period to determine if the goods were actually shipped and/or if an 
actual purchase order was received. It is diffi cult for the system to prevent the revenue 
from being recognized in the wrong period when you have the other human factors 
that could prevent the shipment of the goods, for example, but management can use 
reports generated from the system to understand what revenue has been recognized 
for further scrutiny.  
 Incorrect Posting of Cash Receipts 
 When cash is received, the system needs to be updated to the customer’s records. When 
cash receipts are misapplied to customer accounts, companies will affect customer 
accounts and potentially the relationship with that customer. Purposeful misapplication 
of cash receipts could also be indicative of potential fraudulent activity (e.g., covering 
up of a lapping scheme). 
 In QB, invoices are marked  paid after payment is received, as shown in Figure  5.20 . 
This will help prevent the invoice from having multiple cash receipts applied toward it, 
helping to prevent duplicate payments from customers.
 In QB, a hard control strictly limits the accounts to which deposit can be attributed, 
as shown in Figure  5.21 . This helps ensure that cash receipts are properly recorded in 
the correct deposit account.
FIGURE 5.20 QB “Paid” Stamp on Invoice
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

102
FIGURE 5.21 QB Hard Control on Cash Receipts Application
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

Application Controls, Revenue Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures ◾    103
FIGURE 5.22 QB Credit Card Processing
 Interestingly, though, in QB, there are limited controls for credit card payment. 
As Figure  5.22 demonstrates, the credit card payments can be processed against the 
account even though there is no card number or expiration date entered. This is prob-
ably due to the ability to receive the payments through third‐party processors, but this 
does indicate a limitation of the software in allowing payments to be credited without 
verifi cation. Management needs to ensure that credit card payments posted against 
customer accounts are reconciled against the credit card processor’s records.
 In GPD, the cash receipt cannot be less than the amount applied to the invoice, as 
shown in Figure  5.23 . After the A/R clerk has posted the receipt and applies it to an 
invoice, he or she can post the transaction to the proper customer account to complete 
the revenue cycle.

104
FIGURE 5.23 GPD Cash Receipt Posting

Summary ◾    105
SUMMARY 
 Now that we’ve reviewed the revenue cycle you should have a better understanding of 
the IT application and confi guration controls that can affect the accounting for sales 
and collections, and a keener sense of how to ensure that the appropriate controls are 
in place. The specifi c requirements of an IT audit will vary by company and by the par-
ticular accounting software used by the company, but the broad principles discussed in 
this chapter should be applicable to most SME environments. 


107
6
 CHAPTER  SIX 
 The Expenditure Cycle 
 T
HE EXPENDITURE CYCLE ENCOMPASSES ALL processes, personnel, and 
activities that relate to the ordering and receipt of goods and services, and the 
related accounting for payables and payments. These processes include the cre-
ation and management of purchase orders (POs); the matching of goods and services 
received against invoices and POs; and the subsequent cash disbursements. 
 RISK EXPOSURES AND SUBPROCESSES 
 The expenditure cycle contains several risk exposures. These include:
 ▪
 Purchases: Is the order made to a valid vendor? Does the system contain correct 
and up‐to‐date information about that vendor? 
 ▪
 Credit limit issues: Do credit limit issues occur at both the purchasing agent level 
(does the agent have authorization to initiate the PO) and the vendor level (does the 
contemplated purchase exceed the available credit on the account)? 
 ▪
 Receiving: Risks include receipt (does the entity receive the goods that it ordered?), 
variances of type and/or quantity, and pricing. 
 ▪
 Invoicing: Risks include the possibility of invoices for goods and services that were 
not received, and the possibility that invoiced prices exceed previously quoted prices 
beyond some specifi ed tolerance level. 
 ▪
 Cash disbursements: Risk exposures include all possible concerns relating to 
unauthorized or inappropriate distribution of corporate cash. 

108 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 There are a few principal subprocesses within the expenditure cycle as follows:
 ▪
Purchasing: Purchasing refers to all activities and procedures necessary for the 
entity to procure goods or services. Typical activities include selection and/or iden-
tifi cation of a vendor, setup or modifi cation of a vendor account, price scrutiny, 
approval of a new PO, and so on. 
 ▪
 Receiving: Receiving includes both the physical receipt of goods and services and 
all of the information work required to ensure appropriate accounting. 
 ▪
Cash disbursements: Cash disbursements are only authorized disbursements made 
for goods and services actually received (within reasonable tolerance levels). Payment 
approval policies should ensure all disbursements fall within authorized limits. * 
 These risk exposures can affect the fi nancial audit in a number of ways, and each risk 
exposure relates to one or more cycle subprocess. Table  6.4 in the next section illustrates 
these links at a high level, showing, for each of several illustrative risks, the potential 
impact on one or more of the assertions underlying the fi nancial statements. † Table  6.4 
also ties these risks to specifi c expenditure cycle subprocesses.
 Application controls can mitigate these exposures, and it is thus important for 
the auditor to have a working knowledge of what these controls are, how they should 
function, and points of vulnerability. The numbered references on Figures  6.1 and  6.2 
* Some organizations require dual signatures for checks exceeding a prespecifi ed limit. 
 † These assertions are also discussed from both a fi nancial and an IT audit perspective. 
 
Vendor
Purchasing
Department
Receiving
3–5
1,2
5
2, 10
1,2
Purchase
Requistion
Vendor
Master
File
Prepare
PO 1–5
PO 3–5
A
Packing
Slip
C
Invoice
Accounts
Payable
Inventory
Control
Reconcile
File
Open PO
File
Prepare
Receiving
Report
1–5
Receiving
Report 2–5
Receiving
Report 1
Packing
Slip
Packing
Slip
PO 3
PO 3
A
C
RR 3 to
Stores
RR 4 to
Accounts Payable
RR 5 to
Inventory Control
PO 4
RH 2
Purchase
Requistion
Closed PO
File
FIGURE 6.1  Generic Purchasing Cycle 

109
 FIGURE 6.2  Generic Cash Disbursements Cycle 
Accounts Payable
General Ledger
RR from
Receiving
PO from
Purchasing
Invoice from
Vendor
Three-way match
post liability;
authorize cash
disbursement or
return
AP Pending File
Customer
Subledger
Purchases
Journal
Journal
Voucher
Journal
Voucher
Reconcile
From Inventory
Control
Inventory
Control
Report
Inventory
Control
Invoice Copy
Receiving
Report
6–9
11
Purchase
Order
Invoice
Cash
Disbursement
Voucher
Cash
Disbursement
General
Ledger

110 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
TABLE 6.1 Note 1—PO Distribution
Copy No.
To
REM
1, 2
Vendor
Figure 6.1 shows two copies of the PO going to the vendor.
3
Receiving
PO blind copy may be ﬁ led for some period of time between its 
creation and use as reconciling document when goods are received 
(ﬁ ling not shown). Blind copy refers to the fact that quantity and 
pricing information are not provided. This control procedure is 
designed to ensure that receiving personnel perform counts instead 
of relying on information provided by the vendor.
4
Purchasing
The purchasing department traditionally retains a copy for review 
in the Open PO ﬁ le. Copies of the receiving report forwarded to 
purchasing are matched against open POs and then ﬁ led.
5
Inventory 
Control
Data ﬂ ow to inventory department supports updating of key 
inventory records.
 TABLE 6.2  Note 2—Receiving Report Distribution 
Copy No. 
To 
REM 
1 
Receiving 
Copy #1 of the receiving report remains in the Receiving 
department for matching with a copy of the PO (shown as 
copy #3) and the packing slip. 
2 
Purchasing 
Matched with purchase requisition and PO #4 for 
permanent ﬁ ling in Closed PO ﬁ le. * 
3 
Stores (shop‐ﬂ oor 
recordkeeping) 
Records in the Stores department support timely 
reordering of low‐stock items. 
4 
Accounts Payable 
Backup for authorization to issued cash disbursements 
voucher. 
5 
Inventory Control 
Data ﬂ ow to Inventory department supports updating of 
key inventory records. 
identify locations of specifi c risks discussed in the next section. They illustrate typical 
expenditure and cash disbursement cycles for a small goods‐based business. The 
drawings in Figures 6.1 and 6.2 are not intended to be comprehensive or applicable to 
all business models; rather, the intent is to highlight the broad relationships between 
common processes and frequently occurring risks. The use of document output in the 
fl owcharts refl ects the fact that, although the accounting process is computerized, paper 
output is frequently generated (e.g., billing notices). The drawing should be read in terms 
of information fl ows and with the tacit understanding that some of these occur with 
physical paper output and others via screen reading only. Table  6.1 provides detail on the 
information fl ows for the PO distribution. Table  6.2 provides detail on the information 
fl ows of the receiving report distribution.
 * Utilities are available in some general ledger packages and/or through third‐party vendors to manage the 
deletion of old records. Design, implementation, and management of a records retention policy have clear 
implications for the completeness of accounting records. 

Application Controls, Expenditure Cycle Risks, and Audit Procedures  ◾    111
APPLICATION CONTROLS, EXPENDITURE CYCLE RISKS, 
AND RELATED AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 This section begins with a general introduction to application controls. We then con-
sider an illustrative set of risks that arise in the expenditure cycle. These include opera-
tional risks (i.e., what could go wrong) and fi nancial statement risks. We examine these 
risks and the controls that should either prevent the problem (preventive controls) or 
alert personnel to the problem so that it can be remediated (detective controls). Within 
the context of each risk exposure and related controls we also discuss appropriate IT 
audit procedures. 
 Application Controls 
 Application controls are system‐enabled controls within standard business processes. 
They are designed to enforce specifi c work requirements and, traditionally, are preven-
tive in nature. Examples of application controls include:
 ▪
 Logical access controls (i.e., application security) 
 ▪
 Date entry/fi eld validations (e.g., validation of vendor prices) 
 ▪
 Workfl ow rules (e.g., electronic routing and signoff of expenditure requests) 
 ▪
 Field entries being enforced based on predefi ned values (e.g., vendor selection) 
 In discussing application controls, it is useful to observe the distinction between inher-
ent and confi gurable controls. The former are programmed to perform the control through 
either custom coding or packaged delivery, while the latter can be modifi ed by the end user. 
 Table  6.3 provides brief defi nitions for major control types. All of these general types of 
control are designed to limit the risk of inappropriate input, processing, or output of data. 
TABLE 6.3  Major Application Control Types 
 Edit Checks 
These controls relate to ﬁ eld format. For example, dollar amounts should be 
entered in numeric format. 
 Validations 
Validation controls depend on the conﬁ rmation of a test. The well‐known  three‐
way match  in which a check to a vendor cannot be generated without a matched 
PO, receiving report, and invoice can be automated at the application level. In 
the expenditure cycle, the PO and invoice could be matched. 
 Calculations 
Calculations can be used to ensure that a computation is occurring accurately. 
Extensions and footings can be cross‐checked with one another in order to 
address the risk that portions of an invoice may not be included in the totals. 
 Interfaces 
Interfaces can be designed to address risks posed by data transfers from one 
system to another (e.g., counts that verify the number of records uploaded from 
the expenditure subledger to the general ledger). 
 Authorizations 
Authorizations that limit access to data are a fundamental building block of 
control. Roles should be deﬁ ned within the system and used to restrict the 
ability to modify records. For example, only the purchasing manager should 
have the ability to add vendors to the vendor master. 

112	
◾  The Expenditure Cycle
The level of automation associated with a control provides another set of funda-
mental distinctions. In general, controls can be manual, automated, or IT‐dependent 
manual. This last category refers to controls performed by a person who relies on auto-
mated output. Most are detect controls that rely on computer‐generated information or 
computer functionality. For example, management reviews a monthly variance report 
and follows up on significant variances. Because management relies on the computer‐
produced report to identify and generate the variances, the IT auditor needs to deter-
mine that there are controls in place to ensure that the variance report is complete and 
accurate.
Risks, Processes, and Application Controls
Table 6.4 provides an illustrative set of risk exposures and the ways in which these both 
impair the validity of management assertions about the financial statements and involve 
specific subprocesses.
Table 6.4 highlights major intersections between certain identified risks, the asser-
tions, and principal subprocesses. There are many interpretations of these interrelation-
ships, and the absence of an x doesn’t mean that the control doesn’t exist.
Access to Vendor Master File Is Not Restricted
Within the expenditure cycle, logical security access within the computer system is 
important to maintain appropriate segregation of duties. For example, access to the ven-
dor master needs to be restricted to appropriate individuals to ensure that only appro-
priate individuals can add/change/delete vendors. The company may have additional 
controls outside of the system to ensure adequate vendor management, including an 
appropriate vendor selection process.
By having access to the vendor master file, the company could be exposed to poten-
tial fraudulent activity, including:
▪▪
A user could create a fictitious vendor and have goods delivered to an erroneous 
address, whereby the company may lose inventory and not get paid.
▪▪
A user could create a fictitious vendor and send a fake invoice to the company for 
payment (depending on the access levels within the system, the user that created 
the fictitious vendor could approve the payment for processing, which could cir-
cumvent other controls implemented within the company).
▪▪
A user could modify an existing, real vendor and change the address where the 
goods and/or invoice would be sent (this could cause loss of inventory that goes 
unpaid).
There are other potential risks with having inappropriate access to the master 
vendor file; these examples are illustrative in nature and do not cover every possible 
scenario. These risks may also be mitigated or minimized by other controls implemented 
at the company outside of the computer system.

113
 TABLE 6.4  Risks, Assertions, and Subprocesses in the Expenditure Cycle 
Illustrative Risks 
Assertions 
Cycle Subprocess
 
 Existence/Occurrence 
 Completeness 
 Rights and Obligations 
 Valuation/Allocation 
 Accounting Procedures 
 Purchasing 
 Receiving 
 Cash Disbursements 
 1 
Access to vendor master ﬁ le is not restricted 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 2 
System roles not segregated for incompatible duties 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
 3 
PO not approved 
x 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
 
 
 4 
PO altered after being issued to vendor 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
x 
 5 
Duplicate POs generated 
 
 
 
x 
x 
x 
x 
x 
 6 
Discounts differ from authorized amounts 
 
x 
 
x 
x 
 
 
x 
 7 
Duplicate or overpayment for goods or services 
 
x 
 
x 
 
 
 
x 
 8 
Inaccurate processing of purchase credits for returns 
x 
x 
 
x 
 
 
x 
x 
 9 
Check numbers (not generated, not accurate) 
 
x 
 
 
 
 
 
x 
 10 
Goods received do not agree to quantity ordered or authorized 
 
x 
x 
x 
 
x 
x 
 
 11 
Invoices do not match PO and/or receiving reports 
x 
x 
 
 
 
 
x 
x 

114 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 Within the computer system, the auditor can inspect access setups and vendor 
setups to determine if access to master vendor fi les is appropriate. Depending on the 
scope of the audit, the auditor can review the access and vendor setups at different 
levels of detail. Typically, access is reviewed either at a 100 percent sample for com-
pleteness or on a sample basis if a large number of users have access to the vendor 
master fi le. 
 Within QuickBooks (QB), as an example, a user can be assigned access to the ven-
dor master fi le. In order to test who has access, the auditor needs to review appropriate 
access listings. After the auditor has determined who has access to the vendor master 
setup, then the auditor can determine if the access is appropriate based on review of 
that person’s role and responsibilities and discussions with management. Note that 
many organizations, large and small, may grant users access to the vendor master fi le 
and to other access rights that may pose an overall segregation‐of‐duties concern, even 
if access to the vendor master fi le is appropriate and needed for that person’s role and 
responsibility. Given this, the auditor and the company need to ensure that appropriate 
other controls are in place to mitigate or minimize the risk of inappropriate activity. 
(See Figure  6.3 .)
 FIGURE 6.3  QB Sample Vendor File 
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

Application Controls, Expenditure Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        115
In addition, within QB, access to the vendor master needs to be secured to ensure 
that only authorized vendors are set up within the system. The screenshot in Figure 6.3 
shows the various inputs for vendor information within QB. Ensuring appropriate access 
to the vendor master can reduce the risk of fictitious vendors. If fictitious vendors were 
created, this could potentially lead to fraudulent transactions.
Within Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (GPD), access to the vendor master file is 
set up using tasks and roles that are assigned to users. These tasks may vary depending 
on how the system was implemented. The auditor can review the specific tasks within 
the computer system and then identify the tasks that appear to be relevant to the scope 
of the audit being performed as it relates to vendor master file. After the tasks have 
been identified, the auditor should run a report that identifies the roles that have the 
associated tasks. This will enable the auditor to understand the roles that may grant 
access to the vendor master file. Note that the naming of the roles may not be intui-
tive and the auditor is cautioned not to rely only on the naming of the roles without 
truly understanding the tasks associated with that role. For example, there could be a 
role called “Vendor Read Only,” but in fact that role may have add/change/delete rights 
to the vendor master file due to the assignment of a task. During setup, the company 
has the ability to modify which tasks are associated with which roles, and name the 
roles however the company desires for their purposes. Granted, not every company will 
change the vanilla setup that is delivered within the system, but the auditor needs to 
assume that some customization of the role setups has occurred in order to ensure that 
appropriate segregation of duties exists.
After the auditor has identified the roles associated with the tasks deemed to be of 
audit interest, then the auditor needs to identify the users associated with these roles. 
After the auditor has identified the users associated with these roles, then the auditor, 
as in the previous example, needs to ensure that the access is appropriate based on roles 
and responsibilities and discussion with management.
System Roles Not Segregated for Incompatible Duties
As discussed within the access to the vendor master file, ensuring segregation of duties 
is a primary control within and outside the computer system. This risk expands the 
discussion where the auditor and the company need to be concerned with all finan-
cially significant access within the system. Many organizations fail in this area because 
although management may have implemented good processes outside the system that 
ensure appropriate segregation of duties, the company does not ensure that the access 
rights granted within the system are commensurate with the roles and responsibilities 
of the users. This means that the auditor needs to ensure that system rights assigned to 
users are appropriate based on the users’ job responsibilities within the system. Some 
auditors forget to look inside the system to verify the actual capabilities of the user and 
simply rely on an organizational chart. This is not enough testing and the auditor should 
not gain reliance on segregation of duties without analyzing the access rights within 
the system. In addition, the auditor needs to ensure that the system rights granted 
do not create a segregation‐of‐duties (SOD) conflict. Typical SOD conflicts within the 
expenditure cycle include any roles that combine recordkeeping authority with physi-
cal custody of assets.

116 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 Within QB, system rights are confi gured based on activities. For purchases and 
accounts payable, system rights that could be granted include entering and paying bills, 
entering credit card charges, and entering POs. They also include access to the Vendor 
Center and accounts payable reports. 
 When granting these system rights to a user, the administrator will select no access, 
full access, or selective access. Full access will give the user access to all activities within 
the purchases and accounts payable area. Selective access can be specifi c to creating 
transactions only, creating and printing transactions, or creating transactions and cre-
ating reports. (See Figure  6.4 .)
 For checking and credit cards, the activities within this area would include writing 
and printing checks, making deposits, and entering credit card charges. Once again, 
the user can be assigned to no access, full access, or selective access. When the auditor 
reviews the confi guration of access for a sample of users, the auditor needs to not only 
review the individual system rights granted for each area, but take a holistic view of all 
areas to ensure that SOD confl icts do not occur. (See Figure  6.5 .)
 In order to do a full analysis of access rights within QB, the auditor should review 
the specifi c access rights granted to the user within the system. After the auditor has 
this information, the auditor can compare the system rights with the roles and respon-
sibilities of the user and discuss with management the appropriateness of such access. In 
addition, the auditor should ensure that the system access rights within QB and possibly 
other information systems, whether manual or automated, do not create an SOD con-
cern for any particular user. In most organizations, an SOD confl ict will arise. This does 
 
FIGURE 6.4  QB Limiting Access to Accounts Payable 

Application Controls, Expenditure Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    117
not mean that the auditor cannot rely on the system or overall control environment. 
The auditor needs to understand, based on the specifi c situation, what other controls 
exist within the computer system or outside the computer system that may mitigate or 
minimize the associated risks. 
 Within GPD, user security is more granular and specifi c tasks can be assigned to 
users. Within the expenditure cycle, the following tasks could be assigned to a user. 
 In order to review what access has been assigned within GPD, the auditor could 
identify potential SOD confl icts, and, as described in the access to vendor master fi le 
section, go through a process to identify each fi nancially signifi cant task of audit inter-
est and associate the task with the roles and the users in order to have a comprehensive 
analysis of what access rights the users have within the system. These should be evalu-
ated in order to determine if the access is appropriate. (See Figures  6.6 and  6.7 .)
 Purchase Order Not Approved 
 During a fi nancial and/or operational audit, an auditor may be concerned with the PO 
approval process. POs should not be executed unless appropriately approved. Ensuring 
that a PO is approved prior to execution is a good internal control. This approval could 
occur within or outside of the system depending on the overall control environment. 
 Within GPD, the PO approval occurs within the system. There are controls around 
printing the PO prior to approval and ensuring that approval limits are confi gured 
for buyers to reduce the risk of excessive buying beyond predetermined levels. (See
 Figure  6.8 .)
 FIGURE 6.5  QB Limiting Access to Checking 

118 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 Within GPD, the approval status needs to be set to “Approved” before the PO can be 
printed. Some threats involved with this include purchasing goods from unauthorized 
suppliers, ordering unnecessary items, and purchasing goods at infl ated prices or at 
inferior quality. Suppliers included in the master list need to be authorized. If they are 
not and a fake supplier is included on a PO, the approval requirement can still act to 
prevent the PO from being sent out. This process of approving the PO will also prevent 
unnecessary items from being ordered, perhaps because the warehouse manager will 
realize she has more inventories on hand than previously assumed and the PO can be 
canceled instead of approved. Finally, if there are applicable discounts that can be taken 
advantage of, but not provided in the PO, the manager can prevent the PO from being 
approved and modify the PO before it is sent out. (See Figure  6.9 .)
 In this situation within GPD, the buyer is not authorized to issue a PO for the amount 
listed. The buyer’s approval authorization requirements may need to be changed. 
 FIGURE 6.6  GPD System Rights Access 
Source: Brunsdon, Romney, and Steinbart. 2009. This image was taken using the dataset provided 
from this book. Note that the screenshot says “S&S Incorporated,” which is the dataset of these 
authors. 

119
 FIGURE 6.7  GPD System Rights Access, through Sales 

120
 FIGURE 6.8  GPD Unapproved PO 

121
 FIGURE 6.9  GPD Exceeding Purchasing Amount 

122	
◾  The Expenditure Cycle
The administrator of the system sets the buyer’s limit for amounts that can be issued on 
a PO. Only the administrator has the authority to change these limitations. This avoids 
threats such as employees ordering items for their own personal use or over‐ordering 
goods, and inflated prices that were entered in error.
There is a risk that buyers could purchase goods or services beyond their preap-
proved limits and thus cause excess obligations to the business. (See Figure 6.10.)
The buyer ID on the PO links to a user ID. In order to have the PO approved, the 
administrator needs to be given unlimited approval authority. Buyers cannot set the 
limits for themselves or anyone else. Only the administrator has the authority to do so, 
and administrators need to be given unlimited authority to process any modifications. 
(See Figure 6.11.)
This screen output indicates that the PO has been approved. It is important to note 
that a PO has been approved before it is sent to the vendor in order to ensure that a cor-
rect PO is sent. If a PO is not approved and is sent out, the company could risk buying 
unnecessary items, buying goods at inflated costs, buying from false vendors that were 
not in the master list, or not taking advantage of purchase discounts. (See Figure 6.12.)
As indicated on the PO, there is a signature line that requires authorization of the 
PO prior to its being mailed to the vendor. Although the system has approved the PO, it 
must then be authorized by the purchasing manager. Through this example it can be 
seen that the activity of recording a PO is segregated from authorizing or printing the 
PO. Great Plains bases the print approval activity on the user ID that is logged into the 
system and not on the buyer ID that is linked to the transaction.
Purchase Order Altered After Being Issued to the Vendor
The alteration of a PO after issuance could potentially affect items ordered and pricing. 
When an alteration of the PO occurs, the PO should be reapproved.
Within Dynamics, the system will inform the user when a PO has been altered after 
issuance. (See Figure 6.13.)
After printing, or authorizing, the PO, the status at the bottom of the document 
changes to “Released.” Per internal control reasons, Great Plains has restrictions on the 
modification of POs that have already been released. If this restriction were not in place, 
employees could easily go into the PO and modify it by changing the quantity or prices 
listed in the PO. After making these changes, the PO status would still say “Released” 
and it would be close to impossible to detect what changes were made. (See Figure 6.14.)
If any modifications have been made to the released PO, the PO status changes to 
“Change Order,” indicating that modifications have been performed and that the PO 
needs to be reprinted. In the example shown in the screenshot, we increased the quan-
tity ordered as a modification to the original PO. This action of changing the PO status 
is a detective control.
Duplicate Purchase Orders Generated
Duplicate PO numbers could potentially cause issues within the expenditure cycle. When 
goods are received or invoices are received, the incorrect PO may be used to apply the 
goods and invoice. Some threats involved with the numbering of POs include paying the 

123
 FIGURE 6.10  GPD PO Approval 

124
 FIGURE 6.11  GPD PO Approval Audit Report 

125
 FIGURE 6.12  GPD PO Rollup 

126
 FIGURE 6.13  GPD Altering POs 

127
 FIGURE 6.14  GPD Authorized PO 

128 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
same PO twice, missing POs, or paying the wrong PO. It is important to ensure that POs 
are numbered sequentially so as to catch any errors. In certain instances, if a PO number 
is skipped or used twice, the company could believe that a PO is missing or it could wind 
up issuing the same PO twice, which may result in paying that PO twice as well. 
 Within QB, the system warns the user that a duplicate PO is about to be used to 
prevent this from happening. However, this is a soft control and the system does not 
prevent the duplicate PO. Therefore, management should have a process in place to 
review PO numbers to minimize duplicates. (See Figure  6.15 .)
 When we went to save the PO, QB prompted the fi rst soft control we ran into. The 
window informs users that another PO already has the number entered but allows 
the user to keep the number anyway. This creates an issue with duplicate reference 
numbers being used. Auditors will need to be extra careful to ensure that POs are 
numbered correctly. This is a soft control. The risk would exist that, if there are dupli-
cate numbers, the clerk inadvertently marks the wrong PO when making payment. 
 Within GPD, PO numbers are automatically generated to prevent the duplication 
of numbers. (See Figure  6.16 .)
 A PO is a legal commitment from a buyer to a vendor to pay for an item when it is 
received. In Great Plains, POs are not posted. Figure  6.16 shows that Great Plains auto-
matically populates the PO document number. As a preventive control, the PO number 
is automatically calculated because a discrepancy can be easily detected if an error in 
the sequence occurs. Additionally, PO numbers need to be tracked, and having them 
sequenced is a sign of strong internal controls. 
 Discounts Differ from Authorized Amounts 
 Auditors need to ensure that only appropriate and authorized discounts are taken for 
purchases. If an inappropriate discount has been taken, then the company could still 
be liable for a greater amount than what is refl ected on its fi nancial statements. As 
such, this could potentially lead to a material amount owed to a third party that is not 
captured. Within the system, the discounts can be tracked. 
 FIGURE 6.15  QB Duplicate POs 

129
 FIGURE 6.16  GPD PO Number Autoﬁ ll 

130 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 Within QB, the discounts screen shows the suggested discount based on the terms 
with the vendor. However, the suggested discount does not have to be adhered to. 
Instead, the user could input a higher or lower discount amount. The risk we are focused 
on is the input of the higher discount, thus potentially short‐paying the vendor. (See 
Figure  6.17 .)
 Figure  6.18 shows the Discounts screen. You must enter the amount of the dis-
count you wish to use and the account to charge the discount to. You can change these 
preferences located under “Edit” at the top left of the QB window to automatically use 
discounts.
 To see how far QB would let us take a discount, we entered the full value of the 
invoice but were not prompted with a warning. We found this to be a defi ciency 
because simple human error could result in underpaying a vendor and losing poten-
tial discounts. QB also lets you charge the discount to any account under the sun. 
This is unacceptable. 
 A benefi t of this Discount screen is that QB calculates the suggested discount for the 
user. This reduces user error when determining discounts. 
 Duplicate or Overpayment for Goods or Services 
 Management needs to ensure that invoices are paid once, and not more than once. The 
IT auditor should ensure that controls exist that would prevent duplicate payments or 
payments that vary more than a small predetermined amount from that determined 
by the three‐way match. As part of this review, the auditor should determine whether 
the system prevents or at least reports on duplicate versions of an invoice. This situation 
could arise when a clerk inadvertently enters a second (dunning) notice as a distinct 
invoice. 
 FIGURE 6.17  QB Suggested Discounts 

Application Controls, Expenditure Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    131
 Inaccurate Processing of Purchase Credits for Returns 
 When purchased items are returned to the vendor for credit, the auditor needs to ensure 
that the appropriate credits are applied to the fi nancial statements. Within the computer 
system, there may or may not be controls that will prevent the appropriate application 
of the credit. 
 Within QB, you cannot create a credit that receives against a PO. If you try to receive 
the credit against a PO, QB stops you with no other option but to continue without a 
PO. (See Figure  6.19 .)
 Check Numbers (Not Generated, Not Accurate) 
 The preassignment of check numbers within the system could be a good control to help 
prevent duplicate check numbers. (See Figure  6.20 .)
 The last step in the Bill Pay process is assigning the check number. QB can auto-
matically assign check numbers to maintain a sequential line of checks. Note, however, 
that users may enter any check number they care to, even if this is a duplicate check 
number.  
 FIGURE 6.18  QB Assigning Discounts to an Account 
 FIGURE 6.19  QB Error of Credit Receiving against a PO 

132 
◾ The Expenditure Cycle
 Goods Received, but Do Not Agree to Quantity Ordered or Authorized 
 The auditor needs to ensure that only goods ordered and authorized are received. In 
some companies, a vendor may inadvertently send the company a shipment of goods 
when it was not previously ordered. The receiving department may in fact receive 
these goods into the system. The auditor can compare the POs report with the goods 
received report in order to fi nd any discrepancies. Depending on the system, the sys-
tem may have a reconciliation report that identifi es goods received, but not ordered or 
authorized. 
 In both GPD and QB, the auditor can print the POs report and compare it to the 
goods received report. This will enable the auditor to identify these transactions. The 
company needs to ensure that it does not pay the invoice associated with the receipt 
of these goods. In many instances, this process happens outside of the system and the 
goods are not entered into the system. Leading practices would be to return the goods 
to the vendor and not enter into the system, and/or contact the vendor to identify the 
issue prior to entering into the system. 
 Invoices Do Not Match Purchase Order and/or Receiving Reports 
 One of the most well‐known controls in the expenditure cycle is the three‐way match. 
In the three‐way match, the auditor wants to ensure that the PO matches the goods 
received and the invoice within a reasonable tolerance level. 
 Within many systems, the three‐way match can be confi gured to automatically 
process invoices if the quantity billed at a given price is within the tolerance level. The 
tolerance level is also confi gured within the system. 
 If invoices are received that do not match the PO or goods received, then the com-
pany is at risk of being erroneously billed. The payment of invoices for goods not received 
or at the wrong price could adversely affect the profi t of the company. 
 Within GPD, one example of a soft control is where the user gets a warning if the 
invoice cost is different from the PO cost. (See Figure  6.21 .)
 FIGURE 6.20  QB Preassignment of Check Numbers 

Summary ◾    133
 The PO displays $1,800 as the cost for the fi rst item. Javix’s invoice shows a different 
cost. The unit cost on Javix’s invoice states $2,000. As a detective control, GPD issues a 
warning to indicate a cost variance from the receipt. The threat that is prevented by this 
control is failing to catch errors in vendor invoices. Vendor invoices may contain errors 
such as discrepancies between quoted and actual prices charged or miscalculations of 
the total amount due. Consequently, the prices and quantities listed must be verifi ed 
with those indicated on the PO and receiving report. 
SUMMARY 
 Because the expenditure cycle encompasses all processes, personnel, and activities that 
relate to the ordering and receipt of goods and services, the key risk exposures lie in the 
possibility that erroneous or inappropriate transaction processes will result in the unde-
sired outfl ow of corporate cash or the undesired infl ow of goods or services. Application 
controls are a key tool in the mitigation of this exposure. 
 FIGURE 6.21  GPD Matching PO Costs to Invoice Costs 
 Source: Brunsdon, Romney, and Steinbart. 2009. This image was taken using the dataset provided 
from this book. Note that the screenshot says “S&S Incorporated,” which is the dataset of these 
authors. 


135
7
 CHAPTER SEVEN 
 The Inventory Cycle 
 T
HE INVENTORY CYCLE ENCOMPASSES ALL processes, personnel, and 
activities that occur between initial receipt of goods and shipment of fi nished 
goods to the customer. This chapter commences at the point where the pur-
chasing cycle fi nishes. The primary focus of this chapter is on manufacturing‐type 
companies that add value by transforming raw materials into fi nished goods. Due to 
the potentially unlimited complexity and variety of manufacturing processes, we con-
fi ne most of our discussion to a generalized illustration of basic functionality, and omit 
extended detail on features found in specialized manufacturing modules. 
 Third‐Party Inventory and Supply Chain Management Software 
 T
he complexity of inventory tracking and costing that is briefl y described in this 
chapter indicates the need for highly adaptable and specialized software to 
process allocation calculations that can occur in high volume, vary signifi cantly 
across items, and/or require frequent adjustment. While some of these activities 
might be accomplished within the general ledger (GL) package, in many instances 
the number of required exceptions, adjustments, and workarounds would make 
this approach cumbersome if not completely unworkable. One obvious approach 
to this circumstance involves the use of customized Excel worksheets, one of the 
topics that receive extended consideration at other points in this book. (continued )

136 
◾ The Inventory Cycle
RISK EXPOSURES AND SUBPROCESSES 
 The inventory cycle contains several areas of risk exposure. These include:
 ▪
Warehouse: Are item cards set up appropriately? Are processes in place to ensure 
that the company can accurately process orders for replacement inventory? Are 
logical access controls to inventory records set up appropriately? Are the inventory 
records appropriately updated when raw material is received? Do the perpetual 
inventory records represent the actual amount on hand? Will the system support 
possible expansion in the number of types of inventory items? Does the shipping 
information from the inventory cycle accurately transfer to the revenue cycle for 
revenue recognition purposes? 
 ▪
 Manufacturing: If there are multiple stages of manufacturing processes, are 
items of work in process correctly classifi ed, insofar as this information is needed 
for accounting and operational purposes? Are all costs required for external report-
ing processes captured (e.g., in addition to direct material, other full‐absorption 
costs such as direct labor and overhead)? 
 ▪
 Repair: Does the system require return authorization prior to acceptance of an 
item for return, repair, or replacement? Are items transferred to a repair process 
accurately classifi ed and tracked? Does the system alert administrators to potential 
business exposures such as fraudulent or defalcatory misclassifi cation of inventory 
items? Are the inventory records appropriately updated to refl ect the goods received 
as part of the return, repair, or replacement process? 
 These risk exposures can affect the financial audit in a number ways, and 
each risk exposure relates to one or more cycle subprocess. Table  7.4 (later in 
the chapter) illustrates these links at a high level, showing, for each of several 
illustrative risks, the potential impact on one or more of the assertions underlying 
 Several alternatives to this approach have been developed in the last few years 
for both the internal inventory cycle addressed in this chapter and the broader area 
of supply chain management (SCM). Broad areas and desired functionalities within 
SCM include distribution, picking, stock levels on an available‐to‐promise basis, and 
forecasting of demand on both the purchasing and revenue sides. 
 Interfaces between these applications and the accounting software present 
several IT audit risk exposures. The auditor should determine whether the 
application was made specifi cally for the GL package, or a specialized interface had 
to be created. In the latter circumstance, tests should be designed and conducted 
in order to assure the auditor that data passes accurately and reliably between the 
systems. Hash and control totals can help to ensure that correct dollar amounts and 
numbers of accounts have been transferred. The auditor should also evaluate when 
and under what circumstances the data transfer occurs: Is it manual or automated? 
Do transactions cause transfers on a real‐time basis, or are they handled in batches? 

Risk Exposures and Subprocesses  ◾        137
the financial statements.* The table also ties these risks to specific inventory cycle 
subprocesses.
Subprocesses in the inventory cycle include the warehouse storage of goods 
(raw material, finished goods), movement of goods between manufacturing 
stages, and the shipment of finished goods to the customer. There are potentially 
many variations and iterations of basic manufacturing processes, and no set of 
illustrations could capture all of these. Process descriptions of the inventory cycle 
are widely available from various sources. Allowing for differences in processing 
technology (e.g., batch or continuous), specific company policies (e.g., credit‐related, 
exception routines for backorders, etc.), and goods‐based versus services‐based 
business models, the essential features of the inventory cycle are generally similar 
across businesses.
Some of the key subprocesses within the inventory cycle examined or discussed in 
this chapter include:
▪▪
Material item setup: Before the inventory cycle processes can track the flow of 
goods, it is necessary to define the material items set up in the system. Preparation 
or modification of these item records include such vital information as item descrip-
tion, unit(s) of measurement, amounts and methods of costing and pricing, toler-
ances for variances, and vendor(s).
▪▪
Receipt of goods and initial entry into the system: This includes the physi-
cal receipt of goods, the verification of goods that were ordered, and the entry of 
related financial information into the system. This is part of the typical three‐way 
match that links the purchasing, cash disbursement, and inventory cycles. Initial 
entry should reflect the full landed cost of items (e.g., freight and related costs).
▪▪
Initial storage of goods: This stage in the inventory cycle represents the tem-
porary storage of raw materials while waiting for manufacturing processes. It is 
important that the system track physical location (referred to in GPD as “sites,” e.g., 
“Boston facility”) and processing stage (referred to in GPD as “bins,” e.g., “material 
available for issue,” “Work in process [WIP] at stage one of three‐part manufactur-
ing process,” etc.). The design of a company’s manufacturing processes will affect 
the length of time that an item remains in initial storage—from weeks or months 
in some cases to virtually instantaneous movement for a just-in-time (JIT) system.
▪▪
Goods issued to the manufacturing process and work‐in‐process management: 
Depending on the complexity of the manufacturing process, this stage may represent a 
single transaction wherein raw materials are issued to the manufacturing process and 
transformed into WIP, or an iterated sequence of such transactions, as raw materials 
go through an initial process, the resultant WIP is stored for a period of time and then 
modified in a subsequent process, is again stored for a period of time prior to entering 
another subsequent process, and so on. (See Figure 7.3 later in the chapter.)
▪▪
Finished goods received from the manufacturing process and stored in the 
warehouse awaiting final shipment to customer: Inventory recognized as fin-
ished goods (FG) generally connotes an exit stage in the manufacturing process. 
* These assertions are discussed from both a financial and an IT audit perspective in Chapter 1.

138	
◾  The Inventory Cycle
Within the broad FG category it may be important to distinguish between goods 
manufactured for sales fulfillment and buffer stock manufactured for anticipated 
sales. Note also that accounting standards typically require that the account 
balance of FG include full‐absorption costing of direct labor (DL) and allocated 
overhead.
▪▪
Shipment to customers: The terms of shipment link this stage to revenue recogni-
tion issues. This is an important part of the system controls for appropriate revenue 
recognition.
▪▪
Reverse logistics—vendor: Counts and costs need to be adjusted when goods 
are returned to a vendor. The return process may represent the simple cancellation 
of a sale, or the simultaneous return of goods and ordering of new replacement 
goods.
▪▪
Reverse logistics—customer: Customer‐based reverse logistics will generally 
present more issues for a company than vendor‐based returns. These include pro-
cessing of the customer’s requisition request, receipt of the goods, disposition of 
returned items (returned to inventory, sent to repairs, or scrapped) and the related 
effects on customer receivables and enterprise sales.
▪▪
Repairs: FG sent to a repairs department may reflect external (customer warranty 
claim) or internal (quality control inspection) processes.
▪▪
Scrap and obsolescence: Maintaining records of inventory that has been dam-
aged, determined to be obsolete, or scrapped for some other reason allows the com-
pany to calculate net loss after any recovery, update counts, perform efficiency 
analysis, and so on.
Figures 7.1 and 7.2 illustrate a typical inventory cycle for a small goods‐based busi-
ness. The drawings are not intended to be comprehensive or applicable to all business 
models; rather, the intent is to highlight the broad relationships between common pro-
cesses and frequently occurring risks. The use of document output in the flowcharts 
reflects the fact that, although the accounting process is computerized, paper output 
is frequently generated (e.g., receiving records, cycle count reports, shipping records). 
Figures 7.1 and 7.2 should be read in terms of information flows and with the tacit 
understanding that some of these occur with physical paper output and others via 
screen reading only. Table 7.1 provides detail on the physical flow of goods in a generic 
manufacturing system. Table 7.2 provides detail on the information flows in a generic 
manufacturing system.
Application controls can mitigate these exposures, and it is thus important for the 
auditor to have a working knowledge of what these controls are, how they should func-
tion, and points of vulnerability. The numbered references in Figure 7.2 identify loca-
tions of specific risks discussed in the following pages.
Figure 7.1 also identifies some key accounting processes that accompany the physi-
cal flow of goods through the manufacturing process. Heavily weighted lines indicate 
transactions and physical flows that involve external parties: vendors and customers. 
Dashed lines indicate FGs that have been repaired or remanufactured.
On receipt, goods can be assigned to a physical location and logged in as raw materi-
als (RM). Issuing RM to the manufacturing process requires accounting reassignment 

Risk Exposures and Subprocesses ◾    139
from RM to WIP. The drawing omits detail on the many specifi c features of manufactur-
ing processes that involve repetitive or elaborate movement of WIP through different 
processes and between various geographic locations. During the manufacturing pro-
cess, costs are accumulated in the system in order to fully absorb the direct labor and 
overhead costs in addition to the direct material costs that result in the cost of goods 
manufactured (i.e., one wants to ensure that the system shows all the actual and allo-
cated costs in FG so the appropriate amounts will be released to the cost of goods sold 
when revenue is recognized). For many companies, this process may be done offl ine 
via spreadsheets or other third‐party software. While the transaction‐based direct 
labor (DL) and various types of overhead (OH) costs can be readily accumulated within 
the GL package, spreadsheet software is widely used to perform the allocations. Very 
few general ledger packages have the robust fl exibility to handle the numerous and 
somewhat unpredictable variety of calculations required by full‐absorption costing 
 TABLE 7.1  Note 1—Physical Flow of Goods in a Generic Manufacturing System 
n 1 
Inventory cards setup is required before purchase orders can be issued. Note that 
aspects of this process reﬂ ect external concerns (choice of vendors) and other 
aspects are rooted in the physical description of inventory items (units of measure 
and other important descriptors). 
n 2 
Costs of repair are entered into the system and assigned to inventory. For mass 
production these costs may be an item of overhead, and for speciﬁ c identiﬁ cation 
systems they may attach to particular items of inventory (e.g., a job shop utilizing 
construction‐type accounting). Irregular or unusual (and generally immaterial) repair 
costs may be expensed for the period. 
n 3 
Disposition of scrap quantities will generally result in some recovery amounts; the 
net difference between WIP entering repair and related recoveries is recorded as a 
loss for ﬁ nancial reporting purposes. 
n 4 
Repaired warranty goods returned to customer. 
 TABLE 7.2  Note 2—Accounting Information Flows in a Generic Manufacturing System  
n 11 
Initial costing of raw materials (RM) may be at standard or actual pricing. 
n 12 
Issuance of RM may involve transportation, allocated storage, or other additional 
costs. 
n 13 
Full‐absorption costing requires accounting information relating to payroll and 
general overhead costs. There may be additional loops of information ﬂ ows between 
the General Ledger department (GL) and various manufacturing departments. 
n 14 
Cost of good manufactured (COGM) information is added to other accumulated 
costs. 
n 15 
Shipping terms analysis and consideration of multiple elements issues tie into 
revenue cycle. 
n 16 
Accounting treatment of scrap recoveries may result in reduction of COGM, 
complete write‐off, or separate source of revenue. 
n 17 
Potential recoveries from vendors for warranty costs. 
n 4 
Repaired warranty goods returned to customer. 

140
Warehouse
Purchasing
Cycle
Manufacturing
Repair
n 1
RM
WIP
Products
in repair
SCRAP
Repair?
N
Customer
Warranty
goods
Y
Return
Repair?
N
Y
FG
Sales order fulfillment, warranty replacement
Remanufactured goods
n 2
Customer returns
Scrap
dealer
n 3
n 4
 FIGURE  7.1  Physical Flows of Inventory in a Generic Manufacturing Setting 
Source: See Table 7.1 for notes.

141
 FIGURE  7.2  Accounting Information Flows in a Generic Manufacturing Setting 
Source: See Table 7.2 for notes and Table 7.4 for risks, assertions, and subprocesses.
Warehouse
Purchasing
Cycle
Manufacturing
Repair
n 11
RM
WIP
Products
in repair 
SCRAP
Repair?
N
Customer
Warranty
goods
Y
Return
Repair?
N
Y
FG
Revenue
Inventory levels
COGS measurement
Sales R & A
Inventory levels
General 
Ledger
Full Absorption
costing information 
(Direct Labor, Overhead, etc.)
Scrap
dealer
n 13
n 12
n 14
n 15
n 16
Vendor
n 17
5-7
2
5-8
1,3
3
5-7
4
8

142 
◾ The Inventory Cycle
RM
RM
WIP 1
WIP
1
2
n
WIP 2
INTERIM
STORAGE
INTERIM
STORAGE
WIP 3
WIP 3
FG
Customer
(Component sale)
 FIGURE  7.3  Inventory Flows 
without becoming so cumbersome as to be virtually unusable. Other chapters address 
some of the common Excel‐based IT exposures. The inherent complexities of costing 
inventory provide a prime instance of why so many businesses fi nd the awkward process 
of rekeying data between applications less objectionable than attempting to house all 
accounting processes within one massive system. 
 At the conclusion of the manufacturing process WIP becomes FG and moves to a 
warehouse location, which for simplicity we show as the same location where raw mate-
rials were received. The accounting classifi cation of this stock must be updated to FG. 
 Not all WIP emerges from the manufacturing process as merchantable FG. Figure 7.1 
stylizes the repair process with an initial assignment to products‐in‐repair status, from which 
the goods are either scrapped or returned to manufacturing. In the fi rst case, the accounting 
process needs to record the loss, net of any recoveries. In the second case, the additional costs 
need to be recognized in inventory or as a period expense, as appropriate. 
 Customer returns of defective goods for warranty repair go through a similar process. 
In some cases the goods are repairable and shipped back to the customer (heavy dashed 
line in Figure 7.1). For internal accounting purposes the costs and liabilities for parts and 
labor need to be recorded, even though an estimate of these may have been recognized 
at an earlier point in time for external reporting purposes. Assuming the passage of time 
between receipt of returned goods and determination of whether the item was repairable, 
placing the returned goods under accounting control allows the company to accumulate 
a dollar balance for these goods, an amount necessary for the determination of realized 
losses on scrapping unrepairable goods. Customers may also return goods for sales credit. 
 Figure  7.3 is intended to suggest the variety of accounting issues raised by various itera-
tions of the manufacturing process. A relatively straightforward situation exists when raw 
materials enter a process that transforms them into work in process and the FG that are then 
sold to the customer. Depending upon the nature of the process, however, it may be necessary 

Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    143
to identify discrete stages along the way and to prepare reports or record account balances 
for each of them. This would be important for both internal (costing) and external reporting. 
 As examples of alternative paths that materials might take through the production 
cycle, consider:
 ▪
 WIP may be produced in excess of current processing requirements and stored 
offl ine for a period of time before reentering the production fl ow (as shown with 
WIP 1 and an interim storage location). The production accounting system would 
need to maintain accurate counts for planning purposes. 
 ▪
 An entity’s value chain (see Figure 7.4) may be physically dispersed across multiple 
geographic locations. In addition to production accounting system requirements, 
the external reporting may need to report segment or line of business (LOB) 
disclosure (e.g., WIP 1, WIP 2). 
 ▪
 RM may enter the value chain at various stages of production. The production 
accounting system needs to support cost tracing and related reporting. 
 ▪
 Some WIP may be sold as a component. The production accounting system needs 
to support any required adjustments to the allocation process that result from a 
dual‐use model for items of WIP. 
 The lower panel in the drawing in Figure 7.3 describes WIP that goes through an 
iterative succession of processes that are separated by distinct intervals of time. When the 
accumulation of items for batch processing occurs quickly there is seldom a requirement 
for any elaborate accounting treatment, but should this accumulation span two or more 
accounting periods there may well be a need to identify WIP by the stage of a completion. 
A classic example of this process is the aging of whiskey and the identifi cation of fi ve‐year 
stock, six‐year stock, seven‐year stock, and so on.  
APPLICATION CONTROLS, INVENTORY CYCLE RISKS, 
AND RELATED AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 This section begins with a general introduction to application controls. We then consider 
an illustrative set of risks that arise in the inventory cycle. These include operational risks 
(what could go wrong) and fi nancial statement risks. We examine these risks and the con-
trols that should either prevent the problem (preventive controls) or alert personnel to the 
problem so that it can be remediated (detective controls). Within the context of each risk 
exposure and related controls we also discuss appropriate IT audit procedures.  
 Application Controls 
 Application controls are system‐enabled controls within standard business processes. 
They are designed to enforce specifi c work requirements and, traditionally, are preven-
tive in nature. Examples of application controls include:
 ▪
 Logical access controls (i.e., application security) 
 ▪
 Date entry/fi eld validations (e.g., validation of entered raw materials received or 
FG shipped) 

144
 FIGURE  7.4  Accounting for Inventory in the Value Chain 
Receiving
Warehouse
Production
Receive goods from vendor
Accuracy of physical goods & stock (cycle) counts
Cost accumulation through  
Enter goods into system
Inventory adjustments
     stages of manufacturing process
Verification of goods received to goods ordered
Inventory variances
Logical access 
Variance tolerance levels
Picking process (lists)
Reports
Returns from customers
Inventory records updated
Reports (IT-dependent manual control)
Logical access
Logical access to inventory records—permissions
Reports
RM / WIP / FG
LCM, Obsolescence, Reserves, etc.
Shipping
Costs transferred from FG to COGS
Revenue recognition (FOB shipping terms)
Inventory setup
Reports
Selection of costing method
Logical access
Inventory item setup (description, quantity, pricing)
Shipping documents / bill of lading
Overrides (adjustments & variances)
Reports
Logical access
Issuing RM/ 
Store FG

Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    145
 ▪
 Workfl ow rules (e.g., electronic routing and signoff of write‐offs and repairs) 
 ▪
 Field entries being enforced based on predefi ned values (e.g., item card information) 
 In discussing application controls, it is useful to observe the distinction between inher-
ent and confi gurable controls. The former are programmed to perform the control through 
either custom coding or packaged delivery, while the latter can be modifi ed by the end user. 
 Table  7.3 provides brief defi nitions for major control types. All of these general types of 
control are designed to limit the risk of inappropriate input, processing, or output of data.
 The level of automation associated with a control provides another set of fundamen-
tal distinctions. In general, controls can be manual, automated, or IT‐dependent manual. 
This last category refers to controls performed by a person who relies on automated output. 
Most are detective controls that rely on computer‐generated information or computer 
functionality. For example, management reviews a monthly variance report and follows 
up on signifi cant variances. Because management relies on the computer‐produced 
report to identify and generate the variances, the IT auditor needs to determine that 
there are controls in place to ensure that the variance report is complete and accurate.  
 Risks, Processes, and Application Controls 
 Table  7.4 provides an illustrative set of risk exposures and the ways in which these both 
impair the validity of management assertions about the fi nancial statements and involve 
specifi c subprocesses.
 Inappropriate System Access to Inventory Master File and Item Setups 
 Logical security of the inventory master fi les and associated records is one of the most 
important IT controls within the inventory cycle. From a logical security perspective, 
 TABLE 7.3  Major Application Control Types 
 Edit Checks 
These controls relate to ﬁ eld format. For example, inventory amounts 
should be entered in numeric format. 
 Validations 
Validation controls depend on the conﬁ rmation of a test. The well‐known 
 three‐way match in which a check to a vendor cannot be generated 
without a matched purchase order, receiving report, and invoice can be 
automated at the application level. In the inventory cycle, we generate 
the receiving report based on the items received. 
 Calculations 
Calculations can be used to ensure that a computation is occurring 
accurately. Extensions and footings can be cross‐checked with one 
another in order to address the risk that portions of an invoice may not 
be included in the totals. 
 Interfaces 
Interfaces can be designed to address risks posed by data transfers from 
one system to another (e.g., counts that verify the number of records 
uploaded from the inventory subledger to the general ledger). 
 Authorizations 
Authorizations that limit access to data are a fundamental building block 
of control. Roles should be deﬁ ned within the system and used to restrict 
the ability to modify records. For example, only the inventory manager 
should have the ability to add items to the inventory records. 

146
 TABLE 7.4  Risks, Assertions, and Subprocesses in the Inventory Cycle 
Illustrative Risks 
Assertions 
Cycle Subprocess
 
 
Existence/Occurrence 
Completeness 
Rights and Obligations 
Valuation/Allocation 
Accounting Procedures 
Material Item Setup 
Receipt of Goods 
Storage of Goods 
Goods Movement 
Shipping 
Reverse Logistics 
Repairs & Scrap 
 1  
 Inappropriate system access to inventory master ﬁ le and item setups 
 
 x 
 x 
 x  
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 2 
 Inconsistent setup or usage of costing methods, due to inaccurate data entry, 
outdated cost sheets, or other causes 
 
 
 
 x  
 x 
 x 
 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 3 
 Inaccurate calculation, allocation, and recording of variances,  e.g ., those for cost, 
quantities ordered and received, and quantities planned and actually used 
 
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 4 
 Inventory and Cost of Sales not appropriately updated when goods are shipped 
( e.g ., cutoff issues) 
 
 
 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 5 
 Perpetual inventory records do not represent the actual quantity or amount on hand. 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 x 
 x 
 x 
 
 
 
 6 
 Inappropriate access to inventory cycle count adjustments 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 7 
 Inventory adjustments are incorrectly posted. 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 x 
 x 
 8 
 Costs do not accurately ﬂ ow through the system because production activity 
(raw materials to work‐in‐progress to ﬁ nished goods) was not properly recorded. 
 
 x 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 9 
 Inventory subledger does not agree with general ledger. 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 
 
 
 10  Inventory identiﬁ ed as returns, repair, warranty, obsolete, or scrap are not 
appropriately identiﬁ ed and the ﬁ nancial records are not appropriately updated. 
 
 
 
 x  
 x 
 
 
 
 
 
 x 
 x 

Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        147
the company needs to ensure that only appropriate individuals have access to add, 
change, or delete information in the inventory master file. The inventory master file 
includes information such as inventory item, description, and cost. If this data were 
inappropriately entered or modified with inappropriate information, then this infor-
mation could be processed through the system, which could cause costing issues and 
ultimately incorrect financial information.
Inadequate system access could result in inventory master files with incomplete 
data or erroneous information. IT application controls that can help prevent the inaccu-
rate information could include edit checks, reasonableness checks, and validity checks. 
For example, the system could have popup screens that provide a warning (soft or hard) 
if numerical data is being entered in a field that requires alphabetic entry, or vice versa. 
There could be a control that indicates when the item has already been set up in the 
system to avoid duplication.
System controls should be enabled to specify the access of who can enter data, 
change data, or delete data within the system. This would also include who has over-
ride or workflow authority approvals. When we are setting up an inventory master file 
or item card, we need to ensure that only appropriate individuals have this access. This 
control can be reviewed by looking at the access listings to see who has been assigned 
these access rights. Other access considerations could be for overrides when an item card 
or master file is changed. Some systems will generate a report, which we refer to as an 
IT‐dependent manual control that would notify management of when there has been a 
change to the master file. Alternatively, there could be a popup screen that requires an 
authorized approver’s password to enable the change on the master file.
The ability to override the item costs, costing method, and variances could affect 
how the financial information is valued in the system, processed, and allocated. Once 
again, logical security controls and inventory setup security is paramount.
Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (GPD) has robust capabilities around inventory 
management security and item setup. Figure 7.5 demonstrates the screen where one can 
configure the ability to allow for adjustment overrides, variance overrides, and transfer 
overrides. The auditor should note whether overrides are allowed.
Figure 7.6 demonstrates inventory setup in QB. Choosing the dropdown menu 
“Edit” and selecting the last item, “Preferences,” will bring up this screen. Selecting 
“Items & Inventory” on the side blue select menu will show QB’s settings for its hard and 
soft controls. The options include whether to account for inventory. Checking this first 
box will place the purchase orders and receiving icons on the home screen. Again, QB 
uses purchases and sales to track inventory, rather than using a POS system or a manual 
system. This preference screen is a major lack of controls over inventory. QB should use 
hard controls and remove the option to toggle them off in order to strengthen controls 
within the accounting system.
The other preferences on this screen allow for the user to toggle on and off the 
soft controls QB uses for inventory. The first soft control option is for “warnings about 
duplicate purchase order numbers.” The second option deals with the computation 
of quantity available, and whether the user wants to deduct quantity reserved for 
pending builds (manufacturing company) and whether to deduct quantity on sales 
orders. Lastly, there is an option to toggle the warning for not enough inventory to 

148
 FIGURE  7.5  GPD Inventory Control Setup 

Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    149
 FIGURE  7.6  QB Inventory Setup 
sell, when the quantity the user wants to sell exceeds either quantity on hand or 
quantity available.  
 Inconsistent Setup or Usage of Costing Methods Due to Inaccurate 
Data Entry, Outdated Cost Sheets, or Other Causes 
 Incorrect or incomplete costing information could be entered into the system, resulting 
in inaccurate cost processing throughout the system. This could include things such as 
the inappropriate selection of costing methods or inaccurate data entry due to reliance 
on outdated cost sheets. Within the system, there are controls that could help prevent 
inaccurate information from being captured and going undetected. For instance, while 
human error is a major factor in erroneous data entry, system reports can be used to 
review the data entered into the system to validate accuracy. In addition, some systems 
may have a tolerance level setup that prevents inaccurate data entry if the tolerance level 
is exceeded. Some systems may not have all inventory costing methods available for the 
company to choose. For example, QB is limited in the inventory costing methods available 
for use, which sometimes results in companies selecting alternative third‐party software 
packages to manage the manufacturing and cost accumulation processes. 
 The incorrect data entry could result in a system value that provides an erroneous 
inventory value. The erroneous selection of a costing method or inconsistent selection of 
costing method (that is, changing the costing method in the system without considering 
the full impacts to the inventory balances, e.g., do we need to make an adjusting entry?) 
could result in the inaccurate valuation of the inventory balance. 
 Review of security reports and/or analysis of logical access controls indicate 
the existence and/or source of changes to costing information. Ideally, the 

150	
◾  The Inventory Cycle
system should warn the user before costing methods are changed, by either a soft  
control (a warning popup screen) or a hard control that requires an approver’s 
password. If a system does not include these features, the auditor will need to perform 
a manual review of costing changes. Once again, if the inventory system does not 
support the desired costing method, then third‐party software (or an internally 
developed spreadsheet file) will probably be used in order to perform the necessary 
calculations.
Management needs to ensure that the costs that are generated during the 
manufacturing process (e.g., direct labor, overhead, etc.) are appropriately captured 
and transferred to FG. The cost accumulation process affects the cost of goods 
manufactured (COGM) and cost of goods sold (COGS) calculations that ultimately 
are represented on the financial statements. Within the system, the costs should 
transfer during the manufacturing process to the COGM; however, in some systems, 
this may be a manual effort that requires a journal entry to ensure appropriate cost 
accumulation.
It is also important that the auditor ensure appropriate disclosure of any change in 
the company’s costing methods that affects financial statement presentation.
Figure 7.7 is used to set up item classes in GPD. Note that one can select the valua-
tion method. See also Figures 7.8 and 7.9.
It appears that QB has limitations around the number of units of inventory within 
the system (e.g., max of 14,500 units). Also, only the weighted average method can be 
used. If a company wants to use an alternative costing method, then an external process 
outside the system will need to be adopted.
Inaccurate Calculation, Allocation, and Recording of Variances
During the acquisition of raw materials or usage of the raw materials, variances can 
occur for a variety of reasons. Variances include order and receipt quantities, vendor 
prices, usage, and any other deviation from planned, promised, or budgeted quantities. 
Here, again owing to the inherent complexity of possible interrelationships within the 
inventory cycle, many companies perform the calculations in a spreadsheet and input 
adjusting or correcting entries as required. When variances occur, management needs 
to track the variances and apply the appropriate accounting treatment to dispose of the 
variances.
Variances should have tolerance levels set up that require management approvals if 
the configured threshold needs to be exceeded. Some systems will enable the automatic 
processing of activity if the variances are within a tolerable range (i.e., within the range 
of the tolerance setting). However, if the tolerance level needs to be exceeded, this is 
where a workflow rule should be configured that would not allow the further process-
ing of the activity without management approval. This would be a preventive control 
and configured in the system.
Management could also print reports that show variances and their actual 
or planned disposition. This can be a good detective control for management 
to monitor variances and help ensure that approvals are being obtained when 
necessary.

151
 FIGURE  7.7  GPD Item Class Setup 

152
 FIGURE  7.8  GPD Item Maintenance 

153
 FIGURE  7.9  GPD Item Maintenance Options 

154	
◾  The Inventory Cycle
Inventory and Cost of Sales Not Appropriately Updated When  
Goods Are Shipped (e.g., Cutoff Issues)
When goods are shipped out of the warehouse, the system needs to be updated to reflect 
the shipment of goods. The shipment would trigger revenue recognition, which affects 
the revenue cycle. When the goods are shipped, the costs associated with the FG need 
to be transferred to the cost of goods sold. The system should automatically transfer the 
costs, but the company can ensure this happens by looking at system settings or inher-
ent controls built into the system.
Perpetual Inventory Records Do Not Represent the Actual  
Quantity or Amount on Hand
When auditing the inventory records, the auditor needs to ensure that the quantity of goods 
physically on hand is equivalent to the goods in the system. In many businesses, the inven-
tory records do get out of balance between physical and system counts. This may be due to 
the inadvertent movement of physical goods without appropriately updating the system (e.g., 
shipped, but not recorded in the system; loss; theft) or because the incorrect goods record 
was updated in the system.
Variances in physical and system counts are typically identified through cycle 
counting or full inventory counts. The reconciliation process between the physical 
goods and the system goods is necessary to ensure that the books appropriately reflect 
the goods on hand.
Within the computer system, IT‐dependent manual controls that typically exist are 
reports. These reports typically illustrate the quantity on hand per the system. Reports 
can be generated that can help in the reconciliation process. 
In this Edit List menu, one can copy and paste directly from Excel or another spread-
sheet program into QB to update the detail inventory records. This represents a potential 
control deficiency in that the user can quickly and easily import a new inventory listing 
from an Excel file at any time.
One of the few examples of hard controls in QB is in this view: When editing inven-
tory listing, the “Total Value” and “Quantity on Hand” fields are grayed out. One can 
edit the “Cost Per Item” and the “Sales Price” per item, but these columns don’t change 
the “Total Value” column. When goods are shipped out of the warehouse, the system 
needs to be updated to reflect the shipment of goods.
Inappropriate Access to Inventory Cycle Count Adjustments
After the physical counts have been made in the cycle count process, adjustments need 
to be made in the system to get the system up‐to‐date with the actual quantity on hand. 
Management may also want to investigate the variances to understand if theft has 
occurred or there was simple human error in the data entry of goods movement in the 
system. Therefore, logical access in the system to update system records with the revised 
quantity on hand is important.
If access is not appropriately controlled, then a user with access to the cycle count 
adjustments could inappropriately modify the number of goods on hand and then physi-
cally take the goods for inappropriate purposes (i.e., theft).

Application Controls, Inventory Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        155
There are typically reports in systems that enable management to review any 
adjustments to the system quantities. This is a good detective control that will enable 
management to review and determine if system changes to the inventory quantities 
were appropriate or need further investigation. In GPD, one can determine the user 
who has the ability to update the quantity of goods noted in the system based on the 
physical counts.
Inventory Adjustments Are Incorrectly Posted
When inventory adjustments are necessary based on physical counts, management 
needs to ensure that the updated system quantities are posted to the correct account 
and in the correct accounting period. Management can review reports that show the 
updates to the system. This would be a detective control.
Controls around closing the books to prevent the unintentional booking of the 
adjustment in prior accounting periods are discussed further in the financial reporting 
chapter.
Costs Do Not Accurately Flow through the System because  
Production Activity Was Not Properly Recorded
The costs of goods manufactured (COGM) for the FG needs to include the costs associated 
with direct materials, direct labor, and overhead. Therefore, the system needs to provide 
a mechanism to appropriately capture the various costs and transfer to the FG account. 
This is important when the FG are sold, so the appropriate costs can be released to the 
cost of goods sold (COGS).
Depending on the system used, the various costs may be captured within the sys-
tem and the costs would flow to the appropriate accounts based on the movement of 
goods within the system. However, some systems may not have robust capabilities and 
management may have to track costs associated with labor and overhead within the 
system, alternative systems, or spreadsheets, and then the costs have to be calculated 
and a manual journal entry made to the appropriate accounts to transfer the costs 
to the FG account and ultimately to the cost of goods sold when the goods are sold.
From a completeness assertion standpoint, if the system automatically trans-
fers the costs to the FG account (COGM) and then the COGS account, this is typically 
defined in the setup of the inventory module as a configuration setting or is inherently 
configured in the system.
Although QB does not track physical internal control processes like requisi-
tions from the warehouse or transfers between departments, the application does 
have a “Custom Field” option to record the location of inventory for both “Shelf” and 
“Warehouse” categories. 
QB tracks inventory by reconciling the quantity on hand, the amount purchased, 
and the amount on sales order. As you can see, the example purchase order was not 
updated to “inventory on hand”; it was placed in the “on purchase order” field. Although 
the inventory account increased, purchase orders create nonposting entries in QB, 
meaning the net inventory account isn’t updated. The actual inventory on hand is 
updated after the inventory is received and posted in QB.

156	
◾  The Inventory Cycle
This screen pops up after clicking the receive inventory icon on the home page. 
The receiving input screen allows one to click “Select Purchase Order” and choose the 
vendor and the purchase order that matches the good received. This represents a control 
deficiency in that the data provided by the user when inputting the purchase order is 
automatically populated into the receiving screen. This is only an option; however, it 
is much more efficient than entering data off the bill, and it is unlikely the accountant 
will manually enter the data given this option.
Potential issues with QB recording of billings for inventory arise when either the 
goods arrive before the bill, or the bill arrives before the goods. In the case of goods arriv-
ing first, one writer recommends that the user record a “pretend” bill in order to update 
the inventory‐on‐hand quantities.* It is important for the user to remember that the 
pretend bill must be labeled as such in order to avoid misstating the Accounts Payable 
account in the financial statements. This is clearly a control deficiency, where the user 
needs to manipulate the QB options to account for very common business occurrences.
In the case of the bill arriving before the goods, it is proper to record that bill and 
recognize inventory if the terms are “freight on board” shipping point. If they are not, 
the user must again mark the bill “Pretend” and wait for the receipt of goods to fully 
account for that billing. After updating the Receiving Inventory page for the sample 
purchase order created, QB automatically reclassifies the inventory from “On Purchase” 
to “On Hand.”
Inventory Subledger Does Not Agree with General Ledger
The transfer of information between the subledger inventory records and the general 
ledger helps ensure that the books remain in balance and all appropriate data has been 
captured by the general ledger. Depending on the system used, the subledger informa-
tion may be updated to the general ledger in real time (automatically and immediately) 
or via a batch process, which may be initiated automatically based on configuration 
settings, or manually.
The controls are typically built into the system and these inherent controls do not 
need further configuration by the user; however, if management is using a batch system, 
configuration settings are typically set that require management to indicate which 
subledgers update the general ledger and in what order. For example, one may want one 
subledger (xxxx) to update the general ledger before another (yyyy).
Inventory Identified as Returns, Repair, Warranty, Obsolete, or Scrap 
Are Not Appropriately Identified and the Financial Records Are Not 
Appropriately Updated
During the manufacturing process, or storage of goods, or even after the shipment of 
goods and recording of revenue, a company may experience the need to adjust inventory 
records to account  for returns, repairs, warranty, obsolete, or scrap inventory.
After raw materials are received from the vendor, some raw materials may experi-
ence damage during the storage or manufacturing process. This may result in the need 
* Bonnie Biafore, QuickBooks 2011—the Missing Manual (Sebastopol, CA: O’Reilly Media, 2010).

Summary ◾    157
for management to return the goods to the vendor, if able; repair the goods for future 
use; or scrap the goods if not salvageable. Depending on which path is taken, the system 
records need to be appropriately updated to ensure that the fi nancial records are cor-
rect. In addition, goods waiting for use in the manufacturing process or FG waiting to 
be sold may have a shelf‐life. In this case, the goods may have to be identifi ed as obsolete 
and written off the books. 
 After FG are sold to the customer, the customer may experience quality issues, 
which may result in a return from the customer for a refund or for repair, which may 
be covered under warranty. When goods are returned from the customer, appropriate 
return authorization documentation should be completed in the system (or external 
manual process) to ensure the appropriate return of goods. When goods are returned 
and are being worked upon, the accounting records need to be appropriately updated 
to refl ect the costs accumulated with these activities. 
 If goods are returned for a refund, management should ensure that the system does 
not allow for a return to be processed without appropriate workfl ow approval. Most sys-
tems have controls in place that will prevent the return of sold goods without an approver. 
In addition, most systems will enable management to print reports that will show sold 
goods that were returned or had their values adjusted in the system. This is called an 
IT‐dependent manual control and is an effective detective control when utilized. 
 If goods are returned and are repaired, the related costs need to be accumulated. 
The costs either will be charged back to the vendor of the raw materials (if a warranty 
issue can be traced to the vendor), or will be absorbed internally (if the costs are associ-
ated with the quality of the manufactured product). The costs will need to be captured 
and should be either transferred to the FG account to increase the cost of goods manu-
factured, or expensed as a period cost (depending on the value of the repair and internal 
accounting policies). 
 From an accounting procedure assertion standpoint, reports can be generated 
within the system to analyze the impact on the accounting records. 
SUMMARY 
 Now that we have reviewed the inventory cycle, you should have a better understand-
ing of the risks and controls that affect the subcycles. It is important to remember 
that inventory makes up a material value on most fi nancial statements; therefore, it 
is imperative for the inventory cycle to have robust controls built into the fi nancial 
application and monitoring controls outside the application to ensure that inventory 
data is correct.  


159
8
 CHAPTER  EIGHT  
 The Payroll Cycle  
   T
HE PAYROLL CYCLE ENCOMPASSES ALL processes, personnel, and activi-
ties that relate to the acquisition (hiring), maintenance (employee management 
and payroll processing), and termination (fi ring, retiring) of employees and con-
tractors. Note that in some companies, contractors may bypass the payroll process and 
be paid through accounts payable. Additionally, some companies also have a separate 
human resources (HR) cycle that may include some of the payroll cycle activities dis-
cussed in this chapter. We focus our discussion on common‐law employees and leave 
contractors as a special case within the purchasing system. 
 Payroll processes are highly affected by compliance burdens for local, state, and fed-
eral taxation as well as employment laws. Additionally, many small and medium‐sized 
entities outsource payroll and/or associated HR recordkeeping to third‐party providers. 
However, this does not eliminate the organization’s requirement to maintain a strong 
control environment. Regardless of whether the entity performs payroll tasks in‐house, 
it is essential to manage the controls within the process. 
 RISK EXPOSURES AND SUBPROCESSES 
 The payroll cycle contains several risk exposures. These include: 
 ▪
 Setup and maintenance: Are employees set up in the system consistent with their 
pay status, pay rates, and other vital information? Who has access to add, change, 
or delete payroll master fi le information? What prevents ghost employees from being 
set up and subsequently paid? 

160	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
▪▪
Calculations: Are tax tables updated appropriately to ensure tax calculations 
reflect the current tax rates based on jurisdiction? What ensures the time was 
­captured and entered into the system appropriately? Was the time extended to the 
pay rate so the appropriate pay was calculated? Was the third‐party payroll proces-
sor provided with correct payroll information for calculations?
▪▪
Processing: Are there variance tolerance levels set up in the system? What ensures 
that the amounts scheduled to be paid are paid? Does segregation of duties exist in 
the payroll processing process? Are signature approvals captured and are digital 
signatures protected? Is electronic check stock protected? Was the third‐party pay-
roll processor provided with correct payroll information for processing?
▪▪
Disbursements: Are completed checks secured for disbursement? Do controls exist 
that ensure that direct deposits were made to the right account and complete?
▪▪
Reconciliations: Do reports appropriately reflect the payroll that was scheduled 
to be disbursed and that was actually disbursed? What reports exist in the system 
for review?
▪▪
Accruals and adjustments: Are accruals and adjustments to payroll, benefits, 
and taxes calculated so the financial records can be updated? Are payments made 
to the tax authorities for the tax liability? Are benefit accounts updated for the ben-
efits liability?
These risk exposures can affect the financial audit in a number of ways, and each 
risk exposure relates to one or more cycle subprocesses. Table 8.2 in the next section 
illustrates these links at a high level, showing, for each of several illustrative risks, the 
potential impact on one or more of the assertions underlying the financial statements. 
The table also ties these risks to specific revenue cycle subprocesses.
Application controls can mitigate these exposures, and it is thus important for the 
auditor to have a working knowledge of what these controls are, how they should func-
tion, and points of vulnerability. The numbered references in Figure 8.1 identify loca-
tions of specific risks discussed in the next section.
There are several subprocesses within the payroll cycle. These include:
▪▪
Payroll master file maintenance: This subprocess follows the employee life 
cycle from initial hiring to maintenance to termination. Activities include prepa-
ration of employee records (including personal [HR] information, salary, job clas-
sification, exempt/nonexempt status), taxes and other contributions (voluntary 
or imposed, e.g., closed shop union dues); classification as common‐law employee 
or contractor; and other information required by the particular operations of the 
business.
▪▪
Tax records and calculations: This subprocess involves the updating of tax 
information in the system to ensure the appropriate tax rates are being used in the 
payroll processing. Tax tables are obtained from various taxation authorities and 
need to be updated in the payroll system.
▪▪
Time and attendance: This subprocess involves the capture of time and atten-
dance so the appropriate payments can be made to employees. Companies may use 
third‐party software or manual processes to capture time and attendance, and 

161
 FIGURE  8.1  Payroll Cycle 
HR
Tax reporting
Taxrate database(s)
Connectionto payroll
   system (automated, manual)
Time accumulation
Manual? Automated (e.g., Kronos?)
If electronic, what is interface?
Link details to production,
   jobcosting, etc.
Payroll master file
Employee # 1
HR data
Pay rate
Exempt status
Authorized deductions
Job classification
Other
Employee # 2
Employee # n
Payroll processing
Inhouse
Third party
Reports &
Exposures
Processes
Employee register
Check for ghost
employees, proper
classification, etc.
Change in tax rates
Edit validation
checks (e.g. upper
limits)
Disbursement
Direct deposit
Interface controls
ACH reconciliation reports
Manual checks (digital
signature, checkstock)
Accruals & adjustments
Wages / P
Withholding/ P
Taxes / P
Jobcosting
Production
costing

162 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
the payroll module may need to have manual data entry to acknowledge the time 
spent by the employee. Ultimately, access to the entry of time is critical. System 
controls could be in place to prevent or fl ag the unusual documentation of time 
(e.g., working 25 hours in a day, or working on weekends when the company is 
closed). 
 ▪
Payroll preparation and processing: This subprocess involves the preparation 
of payroll registers and cash requirements journals to identify the payroll to be pro-
cessed and the cash requirements. Payroll reports are typically reviewed to ensure 
adequate payments. Payroll needs are then processed in the system or the data 
is given to the third‐party payroll provider for processing. During the processing 
phase, the checks are produced for disbursement. Controls around check stock and 
signature stamps (either manual or electronic signatures) should be safeguarded 
to prevent unauthorized checks. Dual signatures for payroll checks over certain 
dollar amounts may also be utilized. System controls could be in place to prevent 
unauthorized payments. 
 ▪
Payroll disbursement and reconciliation: This subprocess involves the 
disbursement of checks or direct deposits of the payroll. Manual and system controls 
provide management with safeguards to ensure appropriate disbursement of 
payroll. Direct deposit controls could include notifi cation from the bank that the 
dollar amount and number of payroll transactions have occurred. Reconciliation 
reports provide management with an IT‐dependent manual and detective control 
that enables management to reconcile the paid payroll with what was supposed to 
be paid. 
 ▪
 Accruals and adjustments associated with payroll, benefi ts, and tax pay-
ments: This subprocess includes the calculations of payroll accruals associated 
with salaries payable, benefi ts due to the employee, and taxes payable. The company 
needs to ensure adequate calculations and remittance to the appropriate authorities 
to be in compliance with laws and regulations. System controls should be in place 
to provide reporting capabilities and calculations of payments. 
 Figure  8.2 illustrates a typical HR cycle for a small or medium‐sized enterprise. The 
drawings are not intended to be comprehensive or applicable to all business models; 
rather, the intent is to highlight the broad relationships between common processes 
and frequently occurring risks. 
 FIGURE  8.2  HR Cycle 
Hiring
Maintenance
Termination
Initial setup of master file record
Change in records
Rate of pay
Benefits
Promotions
Family life issues
Nature of termination (firing, 
retirement, death)
Records retention policies
Legal requirements
System storage features

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    163
 The initial setup of an employee record through an HR process changes the payroll 
master fi le. For processing to occur, two additional and different sources of information 
are required: current tax rate information for applicable jurisdictions, and some system 
for maintaining time records. This may be done manually by entity personnel, or involve 
an automated system such as Kronos. Whether the processing is done in‐house or by a 
third‐party vendor, the IT auditor needs to concern herself with the accuracy and reli-
ability of data that enters the processing queue. Thus, for example, the system should 
generate an employee register that facilitates review for checks on ghost employees or 
proper job classifi cation. The interface relating to tax rate and tax table information 
needs to be evaluated: Is the data provided by lookup tables or rekeyed data? Similar 
concerns obtain for the timekeeping system: Are the interfaces automated or do they 
rely on a manual process? Does the system contain edit validation checks, such as upper 
limits on the number of hours that an employee works? 
 Processing results in two major outputs: disbursement of wage and tax payments, 
and the accounting information that updates accruals and adjustments. 
 APPLICATION CONTROLS, PAYROLL CYCLE RISKS, 
AND RELATED AUDIT PROCEDURES 
 This section begins with a general introduction to application controls. We then con-
sider an illustrative set of risks that arise in the payroll cycle. These include operational 
risks (what could go wrong) and fi nancial statement risks. We examine these risks 
and the controls that should either prevent the problem (preventive controls) or alert 
personnel to the problem so that it can be remediated (detective controls). Within 
the context of each risk exposure and related controls we also discuss appropriate IT 
audit procedures.  
 Application Controls 
 Application controls are system‐enabled controls within standard business processes. 
They are designed to enforce specifi c work requirements and, traditionally, are  preventive 
in nature. Examples of application controls include: 
 ▪
 Logical access controls (i.e., application security) 
 ▪
 Date entry/fi eld validations (e.g., validation of entered salary or tax information) 
 ▪
 Workfl ow rules (e.g., electronic routing and sign‐off of overtime requests) 
 ▪
 Field entries being enforced based on predefi ned values (e.g., pay rate information) 
 In discussing application controls, it is useful to observe the distinction between 
inherent and confi gurable controls. The former are programmed to perform the control 
through either custom coding or packaged delivery, while the latter can be modifi ed 
by the end user. 
 Table  8.1 provides brief defi nitions for major control types. All of these general types of 
control are designed to limit the risk of inappropriate input, processing, or output of data. 

164 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 The level of automation associated with a control provides another set of fundamental 
distinctions. In general, controls can be manual, automated, or IT‐dependent manual. 
This last category refers to controls performed by a person who relies on automated out-
put. Most are detective controls that rely on computer‐generated information or computer 
functionality. For example, management reviews a monthly variance report and follows 
up on signifi cant variances. Because management relies on the computer‐produced report 
to identify and generate the variances, the IT auditor needs to determine that there are 
controls in place to ensure that the variance report is complete and accurate.  
 Risks, Processes, and Application Controls 
 Table  8.2 provides an illustrative set of risk exposures and the ways in which these both 
impair the validity of management assertions about the fi nancial statements and involve 
specifi c subprocesses. 
 Unauthorized Changes to Payroll Master File 
 Unauthorized changes to the payroll master fi le present a key risk in the payroll cycle. 
Management needs to ensure that access to the payroll master fi le is restricted to appro-
priate personnel. Typically, the human resources manager or payroll manager in a 
small or medium‐sized enterprise will have this type of access right. By having too many 
or the wrong individuals with access to the payroll master fi le, the company increases 
its risk of fraudulent activity. Fraud is not guaranteed to occur, but when individuals 
have access to manipulate data, then the risk probability increases. 
 The IT auditor should ensure that logical access setup is appropriately controlled, 
through either inherent or confi gurable controls. Updating the payroll master fi le to 
 TABLE 8.1  Major Application Control Types 
Edit Checks 
These controls relate to ﬁ eld format. For example, dollar amounts should be 
entered in numeric format. 
 Validations 
Validation controls depend on the conﬁ rmation of a test. This could be the 
validation when payroll is processed that the employee name is compared 
to the database of employees to ensure that only authorized employees are 
being paid. 
 Calculations 
Calculations can be used to ensure that a computation is occurring accurately. 
Extensions and footings can be cross‐checked with one another in order to 
address the risk that portions of a tax calculation may not be included in the 
payroll. 
 Interfaces 
Interfaces can be designed to address risks posed by data transfers from one 
system to another (e.g., counts that verify the number of records uploaded 
from the payroll module to the third‐party payroll processor). 
 Authorizations 
Authorizations that limit access to data are a fundamental building block of 
control. Roles should be deﬁ ned within the system and used to restrict the 
ability to modify records. For example, only the human resources manager 
should have the ability to add employees to the employee master. 

165
 TABLE 8.2  Risks, Assertions, and Subprocesses in the Payroll Cycle 
Illustrative Risks
Assertions
Cycle Subprocess
 
Existence/Occurrence
Completeness
Rights and Obligations
Valuation/Allocation
Accounting Procedures
 
Master File Maintenance
Tax Records 
Time and Attendance
Processing
Disbursements
Accruals and Adjustment
1
Unauthorized changes to payroll master ﬁ le
x
x
x
2
Tax records are not updated or calculated correctly
x
x
x
3
Time and attendance are not correctly captured 
x
x
x
4
Payroll is not prepared or processed correctly
x
x
x
5
Payroll disbursements are unauthorized (fraudulent payments)
x
x
6
Accruals, beneﬁ ts, and taxes are incorrectly calculated or paid
x
x
7
Disbursed payroll, accruals, and adjustments are not reviewed
x
x
x
x

166
 FIGURE  8.3  Security Role Setup (Generalist) in GPD 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        167
reflect any payroll changes drives all subsequent activities. Payroll changes include add-
ing new hires, removing terminated employees, changing pay rates, and/or changing 
discretionary withholdings. Appropriate edit checks to ensure the number of employees 
actually working and the reasonableness test for the changes being made must also 
be applied in this step. It is important that the changes are entered before the next 
pay period because subsequent steps rely on the data provided in the payroll master 
file. Any errors in the inputs will essentially generate outputs that are not accurate or 
appropriate. To ensure that the data is accurate, Microsoft Great Plains Dynamics (GPD) 
consists of many inherent controls as well as configurable controls to help prevent inac-
curate data from being entered into the system.
As noted with respect to other cycles, one of the most important controls that miti-
gate risk of unauthorized changes to the payroll master file is the proper segregation of 
duties. This control is implemented by granting employees specific permissions to certain 
functions. For the HR generalist, his or her access to the payroll system may be limited to 
entering employee information and/or viewing the HR summary. (See Figure 8.3.)
However, a payroll clerk may be granted more access than an HR generalist. These 
functions can include entering or editing employee information and maintaining payroll 
deductions and benefits. Depending on the role of the employee, we can apply different 
levels of security to different positions among payroll personnel to prevent unauthorized 
access to the payroll master files. (See Figure 8.4.)
The employee maintenance record contains the general information about the 
employee, including name, Social Security number, contact information, department, 
and position. In this particular card, the required fields are Employee ID, Last Name, 
First Name, Social Security Number, Department, and Position. In addition, this card 
has many inherent controls to help ensure that the information is properly inputted 
to avoid any problems in subsequent steps. The first control in this particular card is 
the limit to the number of registered employees. Upon creating an employee exceeding 
the number allowed, a message pops up as follows: “You have reached your maximum 
number of registered employees. You cannot add new employees into the system.”
Typically GPD requires the company to acquire a license for a specific number of 
employees. In order to add more employees, the company must purchase another license. 
The employee ID also uses a lookup button for existing employees that need updates. 
Instead of having to type in the employee ID, the lookup button helps ensure that the 
proper employee is selected. The Social Security Number field automatically inserts 
hyphens so that all employee Social Security numbers are consistent. The Hire Date/
Adjusted Hire Date/Last Day Worked must be inputted as DDMMYY or DDMMYYYY. A 
calendar button is available to avoid inputting the wrong date. The Adjusted Hire Date is 
automatically inputted as the Hire Date when the Hire Date is entered. In addition, if the 
Adjusted Hire Date is earlier than the Hire Date, a message pops up stating “The employee’s 
adjusted hire date is earlier than the hire date. Do you want to continue?” Furthermore, 
if the Last Day Worked as entered is earlier than the Hire Date, a message pops up stating 
“An employee’s hire date must be before the last day worked.” This helps prevent human 
errors in entering the wrong date.
The fields listed in Figure 8.5 (such as Employee ID and Class ID) are foreign keys linked 
to other cards. If the inputted code does not currently exist for these fields, a message will 

168
 FIGURE  8.4  Security Role Setup (Payroll Clerk) in GPD 

169
 FIGURE  8.5  Employee Maintenance in GPD 

170 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
prompt, stating that the code is nonexistent and asking whether you would like to add the 
code. Another control would be for the phone number fi elds where it uses a template such as 
(XXX) XXX‐XXXX Ext. XXXX to prevent inconsistency in entering phone numbers. Further-
more, the card links the user to other multiple cards, including additional positions, human 
resources, address, personal information, and vacation and sick days. Within these cards 
are their own separate controls similar to that of this card. Specifi cally for the vacation and 
sick days, the user will be prompted if the allowable days available fall below zero.  
 Auditors should be concerned about the creation, modifi cation, or deletion of 
employee records. Users can review individual employees’ basic information, such as 
date of hire, contact information, position, and department in the employee mainte-
nance screen. The auditor should ensure that adequate controls exist against the cre-
ation of fi ctitious employees. As shown in Figure  8.6 , a GPD screen presents a warning: 
“You have reached your maximum number of registered employees. You cannot add 
new employees into the system.” Figure  8.7 addresses deletion. 
 The employee pay code maintenance card links the employees to their pay codes. 
In this particular card, the required fi elds are Employee ID, Pay Code, and Unit of Pay. 
In addition, there are inherent controls. For the Employee ID fi eld, there is a lookup but-
ton to ensure that the proper ID is used. After selecting the employee ID, the Name fi eld 
automatically populates and the fi eld is not editable. However, the name can be edited 
under the employee maintenance card. 
 Another control in this particular card is apparent in the pay code where a lookup 
button is also used to ensure that the proper, available pay code is used. When selecting 
 FIGURE  8.6  Registered Employee Control in GPD 

171
 FIGURE  8.7  Employee Deletion Control in GPD 

172	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
the pay code, a message pops up asking, “Do you want to use default information from 
the company pay code record?” For salaried and hourly employees, the pay code and pay 
factor are disabled. For overtime employees, the pay code and pay factors are enabled 
because these are used in the calculation of the pay per period. In the Pay Rate field, the 
pay rate must be inputted as $XX.XX automatically. The unit of pay varies for salaried 
employees with choices including weekly, biweekly, semimonthly, monthly, quarterly, 
semiannually, annually, and daily. They are automatically inputted as hourly for hourly 
employees. The Pay Period field is applicable to both salaried and hourly employees 
where the time frame between each pay period is selected. After inputting the Pay Code, 
Pay Factor, Pay Rate, Unit of Pay, and Pay Period, the card will automatically calculate 
the Pay per Period to avoid any human errors. In addition, this ensures the accuracy 
of the amount to be paid to the employee. Regarding the Shift Code, it allows one to 
select among different shifts (these can be established through another set of cards). 
The SUTA State and Worker’s Comp Code fields are linked in that the Worker’s Comp 
Code depends on the state that is selected in the SUTA State field. Depending on the 
state selected, a limited Worker’s Comp Code is available to be selected. Furthermore, 
the card establishes the taxes the employee is subject to using checkboxes. The taxes 
have already been determined in another card based on downloads from GPD based on 
governmental numbers. The taxes include federal, state, FUTA, FICA Social Security, 
local, SUTA, and FICA Medicare. Another control related to the taxes is the input of 
Flat Tax Rates in that the card inputs the percentage rate as X.XX% to make sure 
that the percentage is accurate and the input is consistent throughout. This card also 
links to other cards, including human resources employee pay code, human resources 
maintenance, summary, and history. Furthermore, they provide summaries as to how 
much each individual employee is paid and the history of payments and earnings by the 
employee on a monthly, annually, or period basis. (See Figure 8.8.)
The employee benefit maintenance card links the employee to the applicable ben-
efit codes. Required fields are Employee ID, Benefit Code, and Start Date. As with the 
employee pay code maintenance card, the employee name automatically populates with 
entry of the employee ID code. The benefit code uses a lookup tool that allows the user 
to choose from a predetermined benefits list. When the employee ID and the benefit 
code have been entered, several fields are automatically filled in, including the benefit 
Description, Start Date, End Date, Method, Benefit Tiers, Employer Maximum, Maxi-
mum Benefits, and W‐2. The Start Date and End Date for the benefits use a calendar 
tool to ensure that the proper date has been selected. For the Deductions fields, the user 
selects from predetermined deductions by inserting or removing them for the specified 
employee. In this particular card there is a button that links you to the summary of the 
employee’s benefits, showing the employee’s received benefits on an annual, monthly, 
and quarterly basis. It also states the benefits Year to Date and Life to Date. Further-
more, it allows the user to select from a specific year and displays the results in a clean, 
non‐editable format. Employee benefit maintenance disables certain fields that depend 
on related requirements until those have been met. (See Figure 8.9.)
The employee post‐dated pay rates card is used to update an employee’s pay rate 
when that code becomes effective at a later date. This particular card can be used to enter 
information about the pay change and it can be activated before the new code becomes 

173
 FIGURE  8.8  Employee Pay Code Maintenance in GPD 
l
d

174
 FIGURE  8.9  Employee Beneﬁ t Maintenance in GPD 

175
 FIGURE  8.10  Employee Post‐Dated Pay Rates in GPD 

176	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
effective. The required fields for the employee post‐dated pay rates are Employee ID, Pay 
Code, New Pay Rate, and Effective Date. Similar to other cards, when the employee ID is 
entered, the Name field automatically populates. This is also true for the pay code, where 
the Description field will be entered automatically. Based on the selected employee ID 
and pay code, the Current Pay Rate will be displayed. This field is not editable; however, 
it can be updated using the New Pay Rate field and the Effective Date field for when the 
change should be applied. Furthermore, the card provides a Reason for Change field to 
notify users who review or use the system to understand why specific changes are made 
and whether they have been authorized beforehand. (See Figure 8.10.)
The employee direct deposit maintenance card stores information regarding 
employees’ bank accounts and deposit preferences. Employee ID is the required field for 
this card. After entering the Remainder of Net Line Number several fields are enabled for 
editing. Required inputs include Bank Number (routing information), Account Number, 
Check/Savings, Amount, Deduction, Status, and Number. This card uses buttons to 
add accounts, remove accounts, link predetermined deductions, and undo changes. 
(See Figure 8.11.)
The human resources management department should be the only department 
that has update access to the payroll master files for hiring, firing, pay raises, and pro-
motions. As such, the human resources management department should not directly 
participate in the payroll processing steps or paycheck distribution step. Furthermore, 
payroll personnel should not be permitted to update the payroll master files. If the proper 
access controls are not in place to limit the allowable employees from updating the pay-
roll master files, unauthorized changes can create exposures for falsified wages, salaries, 
commissions, or other base rates used in calculating compensation. In this particular 
cycle, the segregation of duties is vital in ensuring that changes and updates to the pay-
roll master files are performed by authorized personnel. In addition, any changes to the 
payroll master files should be authorized and reviewed by separate employees, typically 
the supervisors of the human resources management department.
The first step of the payroll cycle, updating payroll master files, is subject to threats 
that include unauthorized changes, stolen confidential information, human errors, 
and untimely updates. The biggest threat in this payroll cycle would be the unauthor-
ized changes being made to the payroll master file. Weak internal controls could allow 
unauthorized personnel to gain access rights that might negatively affect the entire 
payroll process. A second threat associated with the payroll master files is the loss and/
or release to unauthorized users of confidential information. As noted above, the master 
file includes Social Security numbers, banking numbers, addresses, and other sensitive 
information that exposes employees to the risk of identity theft and other frauds. This 
is also a potential liability for the company and it is important to ensure that employee 
information gathered by the company remains secure.
The third threat is due to human errors in recording or updating the payroll master 
file. The reliability and accuracy of output information from a system depend on the 
quality and accuracy of the input. Human errors may degrade the quality of input. The 
auditor should look for and inspect an appropriate supervisory review process for input, 
assessing both accuracy (to ensure that information is correct) and authorization (to 
ensure that changes to the payroll master file have been performed by duly authorized 

177
 FIGURE  8.11  Employee Direct Deposit Maintenance in GPD 

178	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
personnel). Untimely updates present a fourth threat: Otherwise accurate information 
may corrupt a file if it is imported on the wrong date.
The final threat is the overriding of controls by management or other personnel. If 
the control environment of the company is weak, unauthorized personnel may be able 
to reconfigure the access rights of certain users and ultimately alter and manipulate 
the data provided in the system. For this reason, it is important to review not only the 
changes to the payroll master file, but also the user access rights to ensure that changes 
to user settings are not made without the proper authorization and controls.
There are several reports that can be used to assess the effectiveness of controls as 
well as provide summaries for review by management and supervisors. These reports 
include the detailed employee list, employees without pay code list, vacation/sick time 
available list, company benefits list, benefit summary, position summary, and detailed 
direct deposit list. The detailed employee list summarizes the pay, deduction, benefit, 
state and local tax codes, and monthly, quarterly, and yearly totals for each employee. 
In addition, it provides wage and withholding information. The employees without pay 
code list displays the names and ID numbers of employees who have not been assigned 
pay codes. This report can help identify employees who will not be paid properly or paid 
at all due to the failure to link the employee with a pay code that will determine his or her 
net pay. The vacation/sick time available list summarizes the number of vacation/sick 
days accumulated or used by an employee. This report can be used to identify employees 
who have not taken any vacation/sick days. This particular report can require employ-
ees to take mandatory vacation/sick days and so prevent or catch frauds such as lapping. 
The benefit summary report lists the totals for each benefit for a specified period. The 
position summary report lists the wages and hours for each position code in a specific 
period. The deposit detail list summarizes the accounts that are involved in payroll direct 
deposit. Overall, the reports related to this particular step review the information put 
into the system to identify that all changes have been authorized and have been entered 
correctly. Furthermore, the reports can quickly identify areas of concern based on what 
is expected and the actual numbers summarized in the reports.
The payroll setup includes several embedded controls. First, the overtime calcu-
lation is done automatically, thus reducing human‐error computational mistakes as 
well as the possibility of employee manipulation. Only authorized users can change 
the number of regular hours required before the overtime calculation kicks in (auto-
matic calculations can be changed during payroll entry to accommodate overtime for 
biweekly employees who work overtime in one week but not in another). There is also 
an option to maintain a history, which serves as a good audit tool. (See Figure 8.12.)
Within the “Options” tab on payroll setup there are options for tracking additional 
information and document control numbers. (See Figure 8.13.)
Figure 8.14 presents an example of a control in the setup for deductions. Family 
Health Insurance is a fixed amount ($98) and an attempted change to $99 prompts a 
warning message directing the user to the human resources department. Note that 
the right to run the update benefit setup would only be permitted to certain employees!
QB prompts for the administrator’s password before any new accounts are created. 
This reduces the likelihood of existing employees simply creating a fake “full‐access” 
account and then tampering with the payroll process. (See Figure 8.15.)

179
 FIGURE  8.12  Payroll Setup in GPD 

180
 FIGURE  8.13  Payroll Setup Options in GPD 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    181
 FIGURE  8.14  Beneﬁ ts and Deductions Control in QB 
 FIGURE  8.15  Admin Login Control in QB 

182 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 An authenticated user with administrator rights can enter basic employee infor-
mation for the account. QB then allows him or her to restrict each individual’s access. 
The administrator can select “all areas of QuickBooks” (creating, in essence, another 
administrator), “selected areas of QuickBooks,” or an “external accountant,” which 
will be utilized when the audit of payroll actually takes place. This will be a full‐access 
account except for certain information regarding customer data. (See Figure  8.16 .) 
 Restricting a general employee’s access to purchases and accounts payable reduces 
the risk of fraudulent payroll entries. It is possible to grant selective access to create 
transactions only, to create and print transactions, or to create transactions and reports. 
(See Figure  8.17 .) 
 This will also help prevent employees from accessing accounts and making trans-
fers to improper accounts or personal accounts and from printing checks or charging 
personal expenses to company credit cards. (See Figure  8.18 .) 
 The screen in Figure  8.19 is a very important payroll cycle control: providing or 
denying access to all payroll functions. The main preventive measure this puts in place 
is preventing employees from tampering with their benefi t plans regarding their pension 
plans or retirement accounts. 
 Restricting users from generating payroll reports helps to maintain custody of sensi-
tive employee information. (See Figure  8.20 .) 
 The restriction shown in Figure  8.21 will prevent employees from cashing their 
paychecks, deleting the transaction, and going to management saying that they were 
not paid for that period. It will also prevent alterations to the amount of time worked 
 FIGURE  8.16  Set Up User Access in QB 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    183
 FIGURE  8.17  Set Up Selective User Access in QB 
 FIGURE  8.18  Security for Checking and Credit Card Access in QB 

184 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.20  Security for Sensitive Payroll Reports Access in QB 
 FIGURE  8.19  Security for Payroll Function Access in QB 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    185
during a pay period or  changing their pay rate. The only way that these individuals 
could override this is with the administrative password. 
 QB provides many prompts to inform the user about setups. The screen in 
Figure  8.22 shows an overview of restrictions to certain areas of QB. It is a good screen 
for an auditor to review for a summary of employee access rights within the system. 
 When creating a company fi le the accountant should be sure to save it to a secure 
drive. This will prevent access to the source fi le so others cannot duplicate, change, 
or delete it. Ensuring that this master fi le is backed up on an additional offsite secure 
server greatly reduces the level of audit risk when assessing a company that uses QB for 
its payroll cycle. The accountant should be sure to back up the fi le after every session. 
(See Figure  8.23 .) 
 QB establishes security protocols after the selection of 1099 or W‐2 employee type. 
The auditor typically would not have to worry about employee tampering for offsite 
1099 contractors. Creating W‐2 employees allows the accountant to set up customized 
access profi les. (See Figure  8.24 .) 
 This screen in Figure  8.25 controls for duplicate vendors. This is important if the 
company sets up employees as vendors for expense reimbursement.  
 The Employee Setup section provides input lines for W‐4 information, pay rate, 
paycheck deductions, sick or vacation hours, direct deposit information, and hire 
date. If applicable, an employee’s termination date could also be entered here as well. 
(See Figure  8.26 .) 
 FIGURE  8.21  Security for Changing or Deleting Transactions in QB 

186 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 Figure 8.27 illustrates an employee summary report. Once the previous infor-
mation has been entered for an employee, QB brings up a review screen that shows a 
summary of each employee’s payroll information. In this particular screenshot, QB is 
missing certain required pieces of information on each employee. By double‐clicking 
on a specifi c employee, you can go through a series of screens and see any information 
that you forgot to add, or edit any information that was entered incorrectly. You can 
also click the “Summary” button to bring up a detailed report, listing all the payroll 
information that was just entered pertaining to an employee, facilitating a fi nal review. 
(See Figure  8.28 .) 
 Tax Records Are Not Updated or Calculated Correctly 
 Another risk in the payroll cycle exists with respect to updating and correcting calcu-
lations for tax records. From a completeness and valuation/allocation assertion stand-
point, within the system, management needs to ensure that tax records are appropriately 
updated in a timely manner. The tax updates typically occur when management gets 
the updated tax fi le from the tax authorities and the data fi le is loaded into the system. 
Management should ensure that the data loaded into the system is the same as the tax fi le 
being loaded. This is typically accomplished through hash and control totals that ensure 
that the total number of records and amounts are appropriately transferred. Within the 
system, management needs to ensure that tax calculations are correct. The calculations 
functionality is typically an inherent control built into the system. Management can test 
this functionality by looking at sample transactions and reviewing reports. 
 FIGURE  8.22  Summary of Access Rights in QB 

187
 FIGURE  8.23  Company Setup on Secure Drive in QB 

188
 FIGURE  8.24  Easy Step Interview—1 in QB 

189
 FIGURE  8.25  Easy Step Interview—2 in QB 

190
 FIGURE  8.26  Easy Step Interview—Payroll 

191
 FIGURE  8.27  Sample Detail Payroll Summary View in QB 

192
 FIGURE  8.28  Payroll Summary View in QB 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        193
Within GPD, the human resources management and payroll cycle requires the 
updating of information about tax rates and other withholdings. Changes occur 
when the payroll department receives notification of changes in tax rates and other 
payroll deductions from various government units and insurance companies. The 
payroll department makes these changes, but the changes should occur infrequently.  
(See Figure 8.29.)
Setting the tax withholding state establishes the state in which the employee is 
taxed. The control is configurable, provided that the proper access has been given. Each 
state has its own rules and therefore has its own separate calculations. (See Figure 8.30.)
Local tax codes must be keyed in and are therefore susceptible to modifications 
(unlike federal and state rates). Within the payroll department there are threats specific 
to all the tax maintenance cards. These include errors to the tax rates that could lead to 
processing errors and, possibly, penalties. In Microsoft Dynamics, the payroll department 
would have to update tax records by downloading federal and state tax law changes 
through Great Plains’ online payroll subscription service. This is an inherent control that 
prevents users from modifying any tax rate. However, as stated before, the local tax rates 
can be changed, which could lead to processing errors in the payroll. (See Figure 8.31.)
The menus in Figures 8.32 and 8.33 features configurable controls with defaults 
on specific employee deductions subject to certain maximum amounts. The controls 
include dates, and there is also the potential to set garnishment deductions.
Deduction cards also have the same types of threats that affect tax maintenance 
cards. Failure to assess accurately garnishments on the employees’ wages and remit 
those funds to the appropriate party can also lead to financial penalties. Take, for exam-
ple, the deduction sequence card. Improper sequencing of the deduction may cause 
employees to take incorrect deductions, maybe causing them to lose out on some of the 
401(k) benefits. Alternatively, expenses can also increase if deduction base rates such 
as 401(k) benefits are incorrectly stated. (See Figure 8.34.)
The Payroll Local Tax Set includes controls for local tax codes. If these don’t exist 
in the system, individuals with appropriate access can add a new local tax code. Entry 
requires a description of the tax code. Without authorized access, selection would be 
limited to codes provided in the lookup tab.
Federal and state income tax codes are not included in this setup because the tax 
rates and tables are downloaded from the online payroll tax service. Downloading tax 
rates directly through the system also controls against manipulations of the rates and 
selection of incorrect tax rates. (See Figure 8.35.)
Unlike the federal and state tax rates, local tax rates are not downloaded from 
the online payroll service. This may indicate a potential risk that changes to local tax 
rates may not be caught by GPD, and thus result in inaccurate local tax withholding.  
(See Figure 8.36.)
The analogous process in QB involves the setup of appropriate payroll taxes for com-
pany employees. QB instructions include a suggested list of information to make setup 
as simple and streamlined as possible. This includes applicable state unemployment 
insurance contribution rate, state agency ID number, tax rates, and the company’s tax 
deposit and filing schedule. This screen also provides a link to the QB Tax Information 
website, which provides FAQ and additional guidance. (See Figure 8.37.)

194
 FIGURE  8.29  Employee Federal Tax Maintenance in GPD 

195
 FIGURE  8.30  Employee State Tax Maintenance in GPD 

196
 FIGURE  8.31  Employee Local Tax Maintenance in GPD 

197
 FIGURE  8.32  Employee Deductions Setup in GPD 

198
 FIGURE  8.33  Employee Deductions Sequence Setup in GPD 

199
 FIGURE  8.34  Employee Deductions Maintenance in GPD 

200
 FIGURE  8.35  Payroll Local Tax Setup—1 in GPD 

201
 FIGURE  8.36  Payroll Local Tax Setup—2 GPD 

202
 FIGURE  8.37  Payroll Tax Setup—1 in QB 

203
 FIGURE  8.38  Payroll Tax Setup—2 in QB 

204
 FIGURE  8.39  Payroll Tax Setup—3 in QB 

205
 FIGURE  8.40  Processing Payroll Tax Forms in QB 

206 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.41  Soft Control for Current Tax Tables and Forms in QB 
 QB provides a list of all the federal taxes that have been set up, including federal 
withholding, federal unemployment, Medicare for both company and employee, and 
Social Security for both company and employee. The “Edit” button provides access for 
review or changes to any of these. (See Figure  8.38 .) 
 QB provides a list of state taxes for review. “Edit” allows the operator to change 
states, but not the tax rates, which (as discussed ahead) should be updated every year. 
(See Figure  8.39 .) 
 The last section of the Payroll Center manages the fi ling of tax forms. Clicking 
the “Process Payroll Forms” button prompts one to download the most current forms. 
(See Figure  8.40 .) 
 When creating payroll forms, QB will provide notifi cation and a prompt if the tax 
tables that the system uses have not been updated. (See Figure  8.41 .) 
 Time and Attendance Not Correctly Captured or Entered into the System 
 The possibility that time and attendance have not been correctly captured or entered 
into the system provides another risk. In many small and medium‐sized businesses, this 
information is captured in third‐party time and attendance software such as Kronos 
and then entered into the payroll system for processing either by an electronic interface 
or through manual rekeying. In some cases the general ledger package may have the 
ability to track time and attendance. Validation of time and attendance is the heartbeat 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures   ◾        207
of the payroll cycle and the IT auditor should verify that the process includes reasonable 
controls for accuracy and completeness. (See Figure 8.42.)
The wage and hour report pulls various items of employee information into one 
location. Reconciling this report to general employee information provides a check on 
unauthorized changes or deletions.
Within QB, entering time for employees for work completed is accessed from the 
home screen via the “Enter Time” icon. (See Figures 8.43, 8.44, and 8.45.)
QB enables the user to pick a specific date and employee for this particular activity, 
enter the customer who was serviced or job that was completed, the rate that will be used 
for payroll (such as Labor, Supervisor, and Overtime), and the duration. (See Figure 8.46.)
When entering the amount of time that an employee has worked, QB will notify you 
if you select a payroll item, or rate, that does not exist for that particular employee. This 
notification serves as a warning if you have accidentally chosen the wrong payroll item 
for an employee, or have purposely chosen a rate with better pay. In this example, we 
tried to choose the “installation labor” rate for the employee, Michael Dee, but he does 
not have a rate set up for installation labor because he works as an assembly supervisor. 
QB has a great control telling you that a $0.00 rate will be used unless you edit this 
employee and assign him the chosen rate. Only an administrator would have the ability 
to do this. (See Figure 8.47.)
In order to change the billing rate for an employee, the administrator would click 
the “Edit Employee” button in the upper‐right of the Employee Center screen. From here 
you have two options. You can choose to make it a fixed hourly rate where the rate you 
assign (in this case $12.50) will be used for all service items performed by people with 
this particular rate. You can also choose to make it a custom hourly rate, where a differ-
ent rate can be used for different service items performed by employees. You can also 
assign the billing rate a name at this time. (See Figure 8.48.)
When you are entering the payroll information for employees, if no withholding 
amount is specified, QB will have a popup that informs you that the amount is zero and 
even offer a possible explanation as to why this could occur. (See Figure 8.49.)
Payroll Is Not Prepared or Processed Correctly
Management can review reports within the system to compare what was prepared or 
processed in the system to the source documents to determine if the payroll is correct.
During the preparation of the payroll, the amounts that get printed on the checks 
need to be compared against the system reports to ensure that the correct amounts were 
processed and printed on the checks.
In some circumstances, management may need to review system reports against 
ACH direct deposits. In this circumstance, management will not have manual checks 
to review, but instead system reports for the planned payroll against the actual payroll 
being processed via direct deposit. Note that the report comparison needs to occur prior 
to the final submission of the payroll.
In other circumstances, management may use a third‐party payroll processor that 
will be responsible for preparing the payroll based on the reported time and attendance. 
Management should utilize control reports (e.g., “Statements on Controls 1 or 2”) to 
verify the controls in place at the payroll processor.

208
 FIGURE  8.42  Payroll Transaction Data Entry in GPD 

209
 FIGURE  8.43  Payroll Transaction Data Entry in QB 

210
 FIGURE  8.44  Payroll Transaction Data Entry—Control in QB 

211
 FIGURE  8.45  Payroll Transaction Data Entry—Entered One at a Time in QB 

212 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.46  Assigning Payroll Costs to Job in QB 
 The prepare payroll activity is the next step in the payroll cycle. It comes after the 
validate time and attendance data activity, but before the disburse payroll cycle activity. 
 The Build Payroll Checks window (see Figure  8.50 ) is used to prepare employees’ 
paychecks. The Build Payroll Checks window contains information about the type of 
pay run, the pay period date, employee class, employee ID, pay periods, deductions, 
benefi ts, days worked, and weeks worked. It also shows the user ID of the preparer and 
the time and date in which the payroll check was prepared. Details regarding these 
fi elds are as follows: 
 ▪
Select Pay Period Date: Great Plains allows the user to build salary payroll checks 
or hourly payroll checks. Furthermore, advance paychecks can be built. GPD has 
an automated inherent control to make sure the date range entered is valid (e.g., 
prohibits user from entering a pay period date from 2/14/XX to 2/13/XX). When 
a user enters an invalid date range and clicks the “Build” button, an automated 
message pops up saying “The date range entered isn’t valid.” The Pay Period Date 
fi eld is a required fi eld in the Build Payroll Checks window. If a user fails to fi ll in 
the Pay Period Date fi eld, an automated message pops up saying: “Not all required 
fi elds have been entered. Required fi elds appear in bold red type.” 
 ▪
Include Pay Periods: Great Plains enables users to choose from various pay peri-
ods (weekly, biweekly, semimonthly, monthly, quarterly, semiannually, annually, 
daily/misc.). Biweekly is the default that is checked when the Build Payroll Checks 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    213
 FIGURE  8.47  Payroll Rate Control in QB 
 FIGURE  8.48  Changed Payroll Billing Rate in QB 

214 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
window is fi rst opened. This is because most employees are paid biweekly. This is 
an automated inherent control within Great Plains that prevents the user from 
selecting a pay type that is not listed here. 
 ▪
User ID, Build Date, Build Time, Description: These fi elds cannot be modifi ed 
by the user while building payroll checks. This is an inherent control in GPD so that 
users do not alter the date or time that the checks are being built. For instance, man-
agement may want to alter the date and time a payroll check is created to pay an 
employee late, but make it appear that the employee was paid on time. This inherent 
control within Great Plains prevents management from doing this. 
 In order to calculate net pay, Great Plains allows the user to include deductions and 
benefi ts when creating paychecks. Examples of payroll check deductions are 401(k), 
Contributions, Health Family, or Health Single. An example of a payroll check benefi t 
is 401(k). Great Plains gives the user the option to include all of the benefi ts/deductions, 
a select few of the benefi ts/deductions, or none of the benefi ts/deductions from the list 
provided. If the user selects Advance Pay for type of pay run in the Build Payroll Checks 
window, GPD has an inherent control available to prohibit the inclusion of deductions 
and benefi ts. The total amount of payroll deductions is subtracted from gross pay to 
calculate net pay. (See Figure  8.51 .) 
 Figure  8.52 is the report that is generated when a salary‐based employee paycheck 
is being built. As we attempted to calculate the paychecks, one of Great Plains’ con-
trols popped up and would not allow payroll calculation while year‐end closing was in 
 FIGURE  8.49  Soft Control for Withholding in QB 

215
 FIGURE  8.50  Build Payroll Checks in GPD 

216
 FIGURE  8.51  Payroll Check Deductions in GPD 

217
 FIGURE  8.52  Payroll Check Report in GPD 

218	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
process. Therefore, the ability to print paychecks is not available until the calculation 
report is compiled.
After building the checks, it is necessary to calculate them. The Calculate Payroll 
Checks window is a report that is generated after the checks are built. It lists the user ID, 
the build status (indicates if any errors are contained in the Build Checks window), the 
type of pay run, the build date, and the build time, and will also indicate if any warn-
ings or errors exist. Great Plains enables users to print this report for documentation 
purposes. This report is used as a control in order to make sure that payroll is properly 
prepared. (See Figure 8.53.)
The HR department can enter employees’ pay rates and hours worked in the payroll 
transaction entry. Batch ID determines whether it is a commission or a regular salary. 
By selecting the range of pay period and days worked, a total pay amount will be auto-
matically generated. (See Figure 8.54.)
Payroll transaction entry also allows payroll personnel to track expenses. Expense 
reimbursements are displayed corresponding to individual employees with different 
codes applied. Most of the reimbursements are related to travels, meals, and entertain-
ments. After inputting all expenses, the payroll transaction entry gives a batch total of 
the number of employees and transactions. (See Figures 8.55, 8.56, and 8.57.)
Changes made to the employee database can be tracked in the payroll transaction audit 
list. The list is organized with different letters indicating different types of changes, as follows:
▪▪
A represents new transactions.
▪▪
D represents deleted transactions.
▪▪
X stands for no transaction created.
This list serves as an audit tool to ensure that the payroll personnel can review the 
changes and make corrections to human errors. (See Figure 8.58.)
In the QB payroll setup, the system asks whether any employee has been paid during 
the year prior to the setup date. If so, the user will be prompted to enter any paychecks, 
payroll taxes, and other payroll deductions and contributions already entered in the 
current year. The purpose of this is to ensure accuracy of future paychecks and payroll 
tax payments. (See Figure 8.59.)
After providing a review screen, QB informs the user that the paychecks have been 
successfully created and permits printing directly from the program. (See Figure 8.60.)
QB provides a prompt if the user has added a paycheck to an employee who has 
already been generated a paycheck for the current pay period. The only negative is that 
an option for “Don’t tell me again” exists, and if it were erroneously selected, it would 
take time to search for the option to undo it and preserve this very helpful and error‐
preventing feature. (See Figure 8.61.)
The option in Figure 8.62 is allowed only to those with the proper access. Voiding a 
paycheck cannot be undone, so it should be done only if absolutely needed. For instance, 
if you mistakenly created a duplicate paycheck as discussed earlier, this is how you 
would delete it. When editing, you can lock the net pay for the employee if the check 
has already been written. This will prevent accidental changes to the total wages or net 
check amount, which could result in discrepancies when reconciling.

219
 FIGURE  8.53  Payroll Check Calculation in GPD 

220
 FIGURE  8.54  Hard Control for Payroll Date Range Validity in GPD 

221
 FIGURE  8.55  Employee Expense Tracking in GPD 

222
 FIGURE  8.56  Employee Pay Code Maintenance in GPD 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    223
 FIGURE  8.57  Earnings History in GPD 
 FIGURE  8.58  Payroll History Audit List in GPD 
 Under the Pay Scheduled Liabilities section, we went through and “checked” each 
payment that we wanted to view. By clicking “View/Pay” we can then review the details 
of each payment and submit a payment if desired. (See Figure  8.63 .) 
 Figure  8.64 is a summary of all the payroll liabilities that we just submitted pay-
ment for. It lists “Payment, Payee, Period, Amount, Method, Status, Withdrawn On, and 
Tracking #.” The total for these payments is also listed at the bottom. 
 When the “Pay Scheduled Liabilities” menu indicates that there are no more sched-
uled payments due at this time, the Total Selected Items will be zero. This is a good 
control for accuracy and completeness. 

224 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.59  Review and Create Paychecks in QB 
 FIGURE  8.60  Print and Distribute Paychecks in QB 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    225
 FIGURE  8.61  Special Paycheck Situation in QB 
 FIGURE  8.62  Void Paycheck in QB 

226
 FIGURE  8.63  View/Pay in QB 

227
 FIGURE  8.64  Payroll Liability Summary in QB 

228	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
Payroll Disbursements Are Unauthorized (Fraudulent Payments)
The authorization of payroll disbursements is an important control within the payroll 
cycle. Security around payroll involves a combination of manual and system controls. 
Manual controls include physical security of check stock and signature stamps. Controls 
should also exist in the system to protect digital signatures. Once checks are printed, 
the paymaster is responsible for disbursing checks to employees.
Manual checks are available for odd situations (e.g., the middle of a pay cycle or cor-
recting errors to an employee’s paycheck). The manual check entry process allows one 
to cancel a lost check and replace it by adding a new check to the batch. There is risk of 
abuse if the manual check is accessed by unauthorized employees.
The manual check adjustment in GPD is used to fix any errors in the payroll 
processing. In addition, manual checks can be built for bonuses or any other neces-
sary adjustments. The required fields include the prenumbered check, check date, and 
employee ID. The payment number, checkbook ID, and account name are automatically 
prompted as a control. The purpose of these prompts is to keep a record and provide an 
audit trail on payroll disbursements. (See Figure 8.65.)
Payroll batch entry posts the payroll checks to the general ledger. Controls are avail-
able to mitigate the risk of theft. These controls include specifying the number of checks 
or a dollar amount before processing each batch. This step can modify existing batches 
and even delete previous batches. This could be a control risk if any employee had the 
ability to delete or modify batches. However, since the payroll batches are processed 
only when approved through password entry, the threat is mitigated. (See Figure 8.66.)
QB can be set up to pay employees regularly by printing checks for you and having 
them presigned. (See Figure 8.67.)
QB has a handy feature if you are trying to reconcile a closed period to prevent tax 
return errors. It will prompt you for a closing date password to protect transactions dated 
on or before the closing date. This will cause them to be locked to even those with admin-
istrative privileges. This will prevent any errors in future reconciliations. (See Figure 8.68.)
The screen in Figure 8.69 shows that in the example company there is no difference 
between the ending balance and cleared balance, proving to the auditor that the payroll 
has been properly reconciled.
After the account has been balanced, QB displays a message asking the user to 
select a type of reconciliation report. There are three options: a summary report, a detail 
report, or you can choose to have both of those previous reports displayed at the same 
time. (See Figure 8.70.)
After selecting which type of report to display, QB has a popup notification inform-
ing the user of transactions that were not cleared and of any new transactions after the 
specified date. (See Figure 8.71.)
The summary report is a brief overview of payroll’s liabilities that only shows 
total amounts. It shows how many items are included in each type of transaction that 
have affected payroll liabilities and the register balance as well as the ending balance 
due to new transactions. The detail report of payroll liabilities displays each of those 
transactions that have not cleared yet, and is much longer than the summary report.  
(See Figure 8.72.)

229
 FIGURE  8.65  Payroll Manual Check Adjustment Entry in GPD 

230
 FIGURE  8.66  Payroll Batch Entry in GPD 

231
 FIGURE  8.67  Add Bank Account in QB 

232 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.68  Reconciliation—1 in QB 
 An important part of auditing payroll is to make sure that no ex‐employees are still 
receiving paychecks. QB lets you see the list of employees that have been released, and 
you can then check through those names to see if any of these individuals are getting 
paychecks. (See Figure  8.73 .) 
 Accruals, Benefits, and Taxes Are Incorrectly Calculated or Paid 
 Management needs to ensure that accruals, benefi ts, and taxes are paid correctly. Most 
of the controls for this step in the payroll activities cycles deal with access controls. Only 
the system administrator or human resources management should have the ability to 
access and update these forms and calculations—a point that merits investigation and 
verifi cation by the IT auditor. 
 The responsibility for payroll taxes carries on even after the checks have been 
printed and distributed to employees. Employers are required to withhold appropriate 
income taxes from employees’ paychecks and then pay these amounts over to the appro-
priate government agencies correctly and on time. Additionally, the employer must pay 
its own portion of taxes. Tax amounts and deductions must be calculated correctly in 
order to avoid penalties and other potential problems. 
 Employers are presently (in 2013) subject to a Social Security matching contribution 
of 6.2 percent on the fi rst $106,800 of an employee’s annual wages and salary, and a Medi-
care matching tax equal to 1.45 percent of every dollar of each employee’s annual wages. 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    233
 For unemployment taxes, the state governments determine the state unemployment 
tax rate for each employer. The percentage is taken from an employee’s annual salary 
and wages. The rate is usually based on an employer’s unemployment history and busi-
ness type and it is usually capped after reaching an annual limit on gross wages. Even 
though it is based on the employee’s wages, this entire tax is paid by the employer. In 
addition, the federal government mandates that employers pay a federal unemployment 
tax of 0.8 percent on each employee’s fi rst $7,000 of annual wages. State law usually 
requires that employers carry Worker’s Compensation insurance for employees who are 
injured on the job. Worker’s Compensation insurance rates are determined from many 
variables. Once a rate is arrived at, it is applied to the wages and salaries of the employees 
to arrive at the worker’s compensation insurance premiums or costs. The employer’s net 
cost for insurance is simply the total amount of premiums paid to the insurance com-
pany minus the portion of the cost the employer collects from its employees. The 401(k), 
savings plans, and profi t sharing plans contributions by the employer should appear as 
an expense in the period when the employee earned the company contribution. 
 Correct calculation of the employer’s taxes and benefi ts starts with the payroll setup 
process and the preferences selected for the company. The card in Figure  8.74 shows the 
 FIGURE  8.69  Reconciliation—2 in QB 

234 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 FIGURE  8.70  Reconciliation Report—1 in QB 
pay code setup for hourly employees. Available options include Commission Payments, 
Hourly Employees, Meal Expense Reimbursement, Overtime Pay, and Salaried Employ-
ees & Travel Expense. These codes can be used as default entries for setting up employee 
pay codes. The pay types that a company decides to assign to a pay code will depend on 
how that specifi c pay code is being used. For example, an overtime pay code would not 
typically be used in connection with a pay code for salaried employees. 
 Other inputs on this card include taxes and pay period. Preferences for these inputs 
are established for the entire company and then modifi ed for each individual employee. 
This reduces the setup time and simplifi es the process. The required fi elds include only 
the pay code (selected from a lookup fi eld) and the unit of pay. Other fi elds on this form 
include taxes that the employees are subject to, and codes for shifts and pay period, all 
of which are set once for the company and then adjusted for specifi c employees. 
 The Unemployment Tax Setup window is used to create, maintain, and delete infor-
mation about state and federal unemployment taxes throughout the payroll module. 
The initial setup is made for the entire company and then modifi ed as needed for indi-
vidual employees. Users can download the latest payroll tax update for current state 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    235
and federal tax rates. The only required fi eld on this form is the Tax Code. Entering 
unemployment tax is via abbreviation for the state and FED for federal unemployment 
tax. This form also provides an option to include previous state wages and tax‐sheltered 
annuities. (See Figure  8.75 .) 
 Required fi elds for the Worker’s Compensation (WC) Setup window include the WC 
code, a job description, the company’s state, and the tax rate percent. GPD allows users 
to determine the calculation method for worker’s compensation insurance, with choices 
that include percent of gross income, fi xed amount, and number of hours or number of 
days worked. If selecting Fixed Amount, enter the tax rate amount. If selecting Number 
of Hours/Units, enter the tax rate per unit. If selecting Days Worked, enter the tax rate 
per day. When a user chooses percent of gross income there is an inherent control that 
allows entry of a maximum wage limit. A soft control exists for the absence of an amount 
entered when Fixed Amount is chosen. (See Figure  8.76 .) 
 The employee benefi t window is used to create, maintain, and delete benefi t infor-
mation for a company. This card is created for the company as a whole and modifi ed 
for individual employees. For each benefi t entered into GPD, the user decides how the 
 FIGURE  8.71  Reconciliation Report—2 in QB 

236 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
benefi t should be calculated, the maximum benefi ts for an employee, and the start and 
end dates. Benefi ts can be calculated as Percent of Gross Wages, Percent of Net Wages 
(gross wage less taxes), Percent of Deduction, Fixed Amount (benefi ts entered as a fi xed 
amount) or Amount per Unit (benefi t based on piecework, hourly, or overtime wages). 
 Controls in the Benefi ts Setup form include start and end date for the benefi t and 
should include the start date taking place before the end date (if this is not true, the 
benefi t won’t be calculated) and the checkbox for Transaction Required. If the dollar 
amount or percentage of the benefi t varies each time it’s calculated, this box should be 
checked. Note that for any benefi t zero is a valid amount. If selected in setup, zero would 
be the default for new employee records. (See Figure  8.77 .) 
 The Payroll Tax Identifi cation Setup window is designed to assign federal and state 
tax identifi cation numbers and thus ensure that these numbers are printed correctly 
on forms such as those generated for the payroll year‐end processes. (See Figure  8.78 .) 
 The Employee Benefi t Maintenance window allows users to select individual 
employee cards and apply benefi ts at the default amount previously set or by entering 
in a specifi c amount for that individual employee. Benefi ts can be based on a variety 
 FIGURE  8.72  Reconciliation Detail in QB 

Application Controls, Payroll Cycle Risks, and Related Audit Procedures  ◾    237
of measurements, including a fi xed amount, net wages, gross wages, a deduction, or 
amount per unit. One common example of an employee benefi t is the 401(k) contribu-
tions made by the company on behalf of an employee. (See Figure  8.79 .) 
 Disbursed Payroll, Accruals, and Adjustments Are Not Reviewed 
 After payroll, accruals, and adjustments are processed, management needs to implement a 
process in which reports are reviewed. This is considered an IT‐dependent manual control. 
 The fi nal activity of the payroll cycle is to disburse payroll taxes and miscellaneous 
deductions. Some examples of these deductions include retirement plans, health insur-
ance, and other savings plans available to employees. The employee federal income tax, 
Social Security, and Medicare withholdings are due three days after issuing payroll 
checks. The employer’s contributions to Social Security and Medicare taxes are also due 
at the same time. Five days after month‐end, employee state and local income tax with-
holdings are due. Five days after the end of a quarter, employer federal and state unem-
ployment taxes are due. Fifteen days after month‐end, employee 401(k) deductions and 
matching employer contributions are due. Fifteen days after June 30 and December 31, 
employer state worker’s compensation taxes are due. Employee health insurance deduc-
tions are due at the time specifi ed in the health insurance contract. It is extremely impor-
tant to keep track of these dates because failure to meet the deadlines could lead to 
penalties and hefty fi nes. This is why GPD has the ability to run reports for different taxes 
and deductions. Also, this is why the period‐end report can cover any length of time. 
 FIGURE  8.73  Searching Released Employees in QB 

238
 FIGURE  8.74  Pay Code Setup in GPD 

239
 FIGURE  8.75  Unemployment Tax Setup in GPD 

240
 FIGURE  8.76  Worker’s Compensation Tax Setup in GPD 

241
 FIGURE  8.77  Beneﬁ t Setup in GPD 

242
 FIGURE  8.78  Payroll Tax ID Setup in GPD 

243
 FIGURE  8.79  Employee Beneﬁ t Maintenance in GPD 

244	
◾  The Payroll Cycle
Figure 8.80 is the screen for running period‐end payroll reports. These can be 
weekly, monthly, quarterly, and yearly reports. Types of reports include payroll sum-
mary, state and local tax summary, FUTA summary, worker’s compensation summary, 
and benefit summary, just to name a few. It allows the company to keep track of its 
payroll liabilities. There is very little input necessary to run these reports. This helps 
minimize the risk of mistakes or errors. In addition, this window allows the company 
to post the FUTA, SUTA, and worker’s compensation liabilities.
Figure 8.81 is the type of report that would be used to summarize payroll deduction 
liabilities. This report is merely a deduction summary and includes the 401(k) and other 
health plan deductions chosen by the employees.
The IRS requires quarterly payments and the filing of Form 941. The 941 prepara-
tion report and the 941 Schedule B preparation report are audit trail reports and should 
be kept on file. The Form 941 and Form 941 Schedule B are sent to the IRS to ensure 
compliance with federal payroll taxes. (See Figure 8.82.)

245
 FIGURE  8.80  Period‐End Payroll Reports 

246
 FIGURE  8.81  Period‐End Payroll Reports—Summary 

247
 FIGURE  8.82  Quarter‐End Payroll Reports 

248 
◾ The Payroll Cycle
 SUMMARY 
 Compliance burdens create a unique set of challenges and issues for the payroll cycle, 
whether the SME performs this work in‐house or contracts it to a payroll specialist. In 
the latter case, even though the processing is done by a third party, the IT auditor should 
consider and evaluate controls that are purely internal to the SME and those that refl ect 
the hand‐off of data and information from the SME to the payroll service provider. If a 
third‐party provider is used, the company should ensure that an appropriate Statements 
on Standards for Attestation Engagements (SSAE) 16 or a Service Organization Control 
(SOC) report is obtained. 

249
9
   I
N THE PAST DECADE, GUIDELINES for IT auditing and controls emerged from 
the Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO), the Public Company Account­
ing Oversight Board (PCAOB), and Information Systems Audit and Control Associa­
tion (ISACA). Given the mission of the organization, ISACA has been involved with IT 
auditing and controls as its primary mission for several decades while IT auditing and 
control is a topic or subtopic within COSO and the PCAOB. COSO has issued guidance 
specifi cally for the public small‐ and mid‐sized enterprise (SME) in its  Internal Control over 
Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies (2007) for fi nancial reporting. 
More recently, COSO has released guidelines in its  2013 Internal Control—Integrated 
Framework (2013). The COSO guidelines reference IT controls as part of a larger discus­
sion on fi nancial controls for the entire enterprise. The question is how to make sense 
of the guidelines from these organizations in the larger context of auditing the fi nancial 
statements for SMEs. 
 This chapter will reconcile the guidelines and emerge with a better understanding 
of the differences a fi nancial auditor can recognize and implement. SMEs are by nature 
higher risk while at the same time the zeal of various regulatory agencies (e.g., the 
PCAOB) appears to be increasing.  Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for 
Smaller Public Companies (COSO 2007) specifi cally mentions fraud as a risk for the public 
SME. Consistent with the theme of higher risk for the SME, the balance sheet and man­
agement maturity are frequently more vulnerable than for a large, mature enterprise. 
Aside from technology, recognizing, assessing, and assimilating risk in the assurance 
process are perhaps the most signifi cant differentiators between an auditor today and 
20 years ago. As such, controls take on an added dimension in the auditor’s assessment 
of the SME. Therefore, whereas this chapter covers considerable ground because it must, 
the reader should fully appreciate the complexity of the environment. 
 Given the advances in technology and its continued expansion, the audit landscape 
will grow more complex. This chapter will touch on history to gain a perspective of 
auditing changes and identify emerging trends to provide reference to emerging 
 CHAPTER  NINE 
 Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, 
and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT 

250 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
frameworks that should assist the fi nancial auditor in his or her understanding of IT 
auditing in the fi nancial audit process. Chapter  10 is an extension of Chapter  9 and 
cross‐references Control Objectives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) to 
COSO and the PCAOB. In particular, Chapter  10 discusses IT audit risk in more depth, 
which is integral to the PCAOB, COSO, and COBIT. 
PCAOB WARNINGS: INSUFFICIENT EVIDENCE
TO SUPPORT OPINIONS 
 Auditors are making too many mistakes in their audits of internal control over fi nancial 
reporting, prompting warnings from the PCAOB (PCAOB 2012; Whitehouse 2012). The 
PCAOB warns that auditors should comply with existing auditing standards and their 
fi rms’ own audit methodologies. While this book addresses SMEs whether they are pub­
lic or private and the PCAOB addresses audit fi rms that audit public companies, there is 
reason to believe that the observations by the PCAOB carry over to all audit fi rms that 
evaluate internal controls. 
 Arguably, it is very probable that audit fi rms not regulated by the PCAOB are likely 
to fail at least at the same rate as fi rms regulated by the PCAOB. It is also indeed likely 
that unregulated audit fi rms are failing at a higher rate with the lack of oversight from a 
regulatory authority. Moreover, SMEs are likely to have more inherent risk for numerous 
reasons, including weaker balance sheets, lower quality of earnings, fewer resources to 
attract qualifi ed staff, and so forth. 
 According to the PCAOB’s inspection fi ndings (PCAOB 2012; Whitehouse 2012), 
the PCAOB found problems with the audit of internal controls for fi nancial reporting in 
15 percent of all audits in its 2010 inspection cycle, which focused on 2009 fi nancial 
statements. The failure rate is even higher in the PCAOB’s 2011 inspection cycle, at 
22 percent. The board noted defi ciencies in six separate areas: (1) identifying and test­
ing controls that address the risk of material misstatement, (2) testing the design and 
operating effectiveness of management review controls, (3) obtaining suffi cient evidence 
to test controls from an interim date to the year‐end date, (4) testing system‐generated 
data and reports that support key controls, (5) performing adequate procedures on the 
work of others, and (6) evaluating identifi ed control defi ciencies to consider what effect 
they might have on the fi nancial statement audit and the audit of internal control. The 
trend in the error rates among these six separate areas suggests numerous defi ciencies 
ranging from inappropriate application of auditing standards to ineffective training 
and guidance. According to the PCAOB (2012), the root causes of defi ciencies include: 
 ▪
 Improper application of the top‐down approach to the audit of internal control as 
required by Auditing Standard (AS) No. 5 
 ▪
 Decreases in audit fi rm staffi ng through attrition or other reductions, and related 
workload pressures 
 ▪
 Insuffi cient fi rm training and guidance, including the application of PCAOB stan­
dards and the audit fi rm’s methodology 
 ▪
 Ineffective communication with the fi rm’s IT specialists on the engagement team 

How We Got Here: A Historical Perspective ◾    251
 Workload staffi ng, attrition, the fi rms’ training and guidance, and ineffective com­
munications are beyond the scope of this text; however, AS No. 5, COSO, and COBIT  are
within the scope of this text. This chapter will address AS No. 5, COSO, and COBIT. In 
particular, this chapter will review COSO for small public companies,  Internal Control 
over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies (2007), cross‐reference 
COBIT 4.1 to COSO, and reference COBIT 5.0 as the next framework of IT governance. 
HOW WE GOT HERE: A HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE 
 It is useful to review audit adjustments of the 1980s and 1990s in connection with fi nan­
cial reporting before COSO was adopted in 1992 and large‐scale IT applications became 
almost ubiquitous by 2000. Though no research is available, the authors believe that 
many audits for SMEs in 2013 are conducted using the framework promulgated by the 
AICPA and other professional standards of the 1980s and 1990s. The audit procedures 
and evidence outlined in Table  9.2 are representative of auditing standards from the 
1980s when the audit process was reasonably simple: (a) plan the audit, (b) review and 
test the internal controls through query and observation, (c) test cash and accounts 
receivables, (d) observe inventory, (e) expand analytical review as necessary depending 
on the quality of the internal controls, and (e) deliver an audit opinion. This simplistic 
process refl ects a  transaction‐based versus a  risk‐based audit approach. 
 During the 1980s, comparatively speaking, IT was in its infancy as it was centered 
in large black‐box mainframe computers with networks of dumb terminals providing 
limited access to the data. Lotus 1‐2‐3 led the way in spreadsheet technology until 1988, 
when Excel became the new leader as Microsoft Windows gained market share. In 1990, 
Tim Berners‐Lee introduced HyperText Markup Language (HTML) and later added the 
World Wide Web (WWW) in August 1991. By the end of 2010, the end user had taken 
control of the once‐impenetrable black box with powerful applications residing on high‐
performance personal computers. The fi nancial audit process has signifi cantly evolved 
to a  risk‐based process to meet the needs of a dramatically different audit environment. 
 Ten years after COSO, the U.S. Congress enacted the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act of 2002 
(SOx) and the 11 sections that defi ne  auditor and  corporate responsibilities ,  expectations of 
fi nancial disclosures , and  strong penalties for white‐collar crimes . Key sections of SOx com­
pliance that directly involve IT include Sections 302, 404, 409, and 802 (Public Law 
107–204, 2002). Section 302 requires offi cers of a company to make representations 
related to the disclosure of internal controls, procedures, and assurance from fraud. 
Section 404 requires an annual assessment of the effectiveness of internal controls. 
Section 409 requires disclosures to the public on a “rapid and current basis” of material 
changes to the fi rm’s fi nancial condition. Section 802 requires authentic and immutable 
record retention. 
 The AICPA played catch‐up to ISACA as it relates to IT and the role IT auditing plays 
in the contemporary fi nancial audit. ISACA released numerous guidelines, including 
COBIT 4, well before the AICPA began an internal initiative for the Certifi ed Informa­
tional Technology Professional (CITP). ISACA was founded in 1967 (ISACA 2012a), 
when a group of individuals with jobs auditing controls in the computer systems, who 

252	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
were becoming increasingly critical to the operations of their organizations, recognized 
the need for a centralized source of information and guidance in the field. In 1976, the 
association formed an education foundation to undertake large‐scale research efforts 
to expand the knowledge and value of the IT governance and control field. Financial 
statement auditing in the 1980s and 1990s mentioned little about IT controls and their 
consequences to the financial statements.
A basic premise of auditing theory and practice in the 1980s was that if prior‐year’s 
audit working papers were a good source of information for planning the current‐year 
audit (Arens and Loebbecke 1980), a presumption was made that key environmen­
tal characteristics of the audit client must be fairly stable over time (Ham, Losell, and 
Smieliauskas 1985). Ham et al. also concluded that audit firms may achieve audit effi­
ciencies by having repeat audit engagements since error rates driving audit adjust­
ments remained relatively stable in their sample data. Consistent with earlier research 
by Arens and Loebbecke, Wright and Ashton (1989) did not mention IT or anything 
related to IT as causes of audit adjustments to the financial statements in their 1989 
report (see Tables 9.1 and 9.2).
The reasons cited in Table 9.1 for financial reporting problems are also critical to IT 
control problems, including underqualified personnel, insufficient knowledge or under­
trained personnel, cutoff or accrual procedures, mechanical, or inadequate control. 
Noticeably absent are references to technology, governance, management, monitoring, 
rapid growth, new technology, new business models, products or activities, expanded 
foreign operations, new accounting pronouncements, or changes in economic condi­
tions, all of which are frequently mentioned by the Financial Accounting Standards 
Board (FASB 2010) as risks in contemporaneous financial reporting.
Though no research is available, the authors believe that many audits for SMEs in 
2013 are conducted using the framework promulgated by the AICPA and other profes­
sional standards of the 1980s and 1990s. The audit procedures and evidence outlined 
in Table 9.2 are representative of auditing standards from the 1980s when the audit 
process was reasonably simple:
▪▪
Plan the audit.
▪▪
Review and test the internal controls through query and observation.
▪▪
Test cash and accounts receivables.
▪▪
Observe inventory.
▪▪
Expand analytical review as necessary, depending on the quality of the internal 
controls.
▪▪
Deliver an audit opinion.
This simplistic process reflects a transaction‐based versus a risk‐based audit 
approach.
It is notable in Table 9.2 that analytical review, analysis and review, and review and 
performing procedures played significant roles in identifying audit adjustments to the 
financial statements. In the contemporary audit, numerous audit tools are avail­
able to expedite and provide more in‐depth coverage of the potential adjustments to  
the financial statements. It is also noteworthy that few adjustments arose from the 

How We Got Here: A Historical Perspective ◾    253
 TABLE 9.1  Causes of Audit Adjustments from Audit Samples in 1984 and 1985 
Adjustments 
 Cause 
Total ( n = 334) Small ( n = 236) 
Medium ( n = 50) 
Large ( n = 48) 
Personnel problems 
6.3 (26.3) 
7.2% 
6.0% 
2.1% 
Insufﬁ cient 
accounting 
knowledge 
28.6 (15.0) 
26.8 
36.0 
31.2 
Judgment 
20.1 (15.3) 
22.9 
10.0 
16.7 
Cutoff or accrual 
18.6 (38.1) 
17.8 
20.0 
20.8 
Mechanical 
12.9 (12.5) 
12.7 
16.0 
10.4 
Inadequate control, 
follow‐up, or review 
12.6 (9.3) 
11.4 
12.0 
18.8 
Other 
0.9 (19.2) 
1.2 
— 
— 
 Source: Wright and Ashton (1989). 
 TABLE 9.2  Procedures and Evidence: Audit Samples in 1984 and 1985 
Procedures and Evidence 
Adjustments 
Form of Evidence: 
 
Prior‐year correspondence ﬁ les 
1.4% 
Prior‐year working paper schedules 
22.5 
Notes for subsequent audit 
0 
Prior audit differences 
71.9 
Prior ﬁ nancial statements 
2.8 
Other 
1.4 
Procedure Originally Signaling the Error in the Prior Year: 
 
Analytical review 
11.6% 
Analysis and review 
40.7 
Mathematical checks 
1.4 
Documentation 
11.6 
Conﬁ rmation 
2.9 
Inventory observation 
7.2 
Client inquiry 
14.5 
Other procedure 
8.7 
Don’t know 
1.4 
Phase of Audit When Error Was Detected: 
 
Initial planning 
20.5% 
Evaluation of internal control 
0 
(continued)

254 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
review of internal control. COSO’s  Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for 
Smaller Public Companies (2007) centers on internal control using a risk assessment 
process. Also noteworthy is the complete absence of any mention of IT controls in con­
nection with fi nancial reporting adjustments. 
 The pervasiveness of IT unfolded rapidly in the 1990s with the widespread adoption 
of Excel and new fi nancial system applications, followed by the widespread adoption of 
enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems in anticipation of Y2K. Fast‐forward with 
new technologies, COSO, and now Sarbanes‐Oxley: What would an auditor discover in 
material weaknesses in connection with the fi nancial reporting? 
 Klamm and Watson (2009) examined 490 fi rms reporting material weaknesses in 
the fi rst year of SOx to evaluate the interrelatedness of weak COSO components and IT 
controls. The COSO framework includes fi ve interrelated components: 
 1.  Control environment 
 2.  Risk assessment 
 3.  Control activities 
 4.  Information and communication 
 5.  Monitoring 
Procedures and Evidence 
Adjustments 
Phase of Audit When Error Was Detected: 
 
Preparing audit program 
1.3 
Performing procedures 
66.7 
Evaluating results of procedures 
5.1 
Review of Fieldwork: 
 
By assistant staff 
0% 
By senior 
1.3 
By manager 
5.1 
By partner or second partner 
0 
Person Initially Detecting Error: 
 
Assistant/staff 
30.8% 
Assistant/staff‐in‐charge 
15.4 
Senior 
42.3 
Manager 
7.7 
Partner 
3.8 
Industry Experience of That Person: 
 
Extensive (more than four prior engagements) 
16.7% 
Moderate (two to four engagements) 
48.7 
Little (one engagement) 
19.2 
No experience 
15.4 
Average experience in public accounting 
3.6 years 
TABLE 9.2 (continued)

How We Got Here: A Historical Perspective  ◾        255
Klamm and Watson (2009) identified relationships between the reported material 
weakness and the five components of COSO, including:
▪▪
A weak control environment has a positive association with the remaining four 
weak COSO components (i.e., COSO components are likely to affect each other).
▪▪
IT‐related weak COSO components frequently spill over to create more non‐IT‐
related material weaknesses and misstatements.
▪▪
IT‐related weak COSO components negatively affect reporting reliability and add to 
the number of non‐IT material weaknesses reported.
Moreover, the conclusion from Klamm and Watson’s research is that the IT domain 
appears to affect overall control effectiveness and, of course, financial reporting. Sev­
eral research reports (Ge and McVacy 2005) reported at least one material weakness 
that was highly correlated to firms that were smaller, younger, riskier, more complex, 
financially weaker, and with poorer accrual earnings quality. Smaller, younger, riskier, 
and financially weaker firms meet the definition of an SME for the purposes of this book.
The PCAOB in Auditing Standard (AS) No. 5 identifies the significance of the risk 
assessment in the audit process that should underlie the entire audit process, includ­
ing the determination of significant accounts, disclosures, and relevant assertions, the 
selection of controls to test, and the determination of the evidence necessary for a given 
control (PCAOB 2013a):
A direct relationship exists between the degree of risk that a material weakness 
could exist in a particular area of the company’s internal control over financial 
reporting and the amount of audit attention that should be devoted to that area. 
In addition, the risk that a company’s internal control over financial reporting 
will fail to prevent or detect misstatement caused by fraud usually is higher than 
the risk of failure to prevent or detect error. The auditor should focus more of his 
or her attention on the areas of highest risk. On the other hand, it is not necessary 
to test controls that, even if deficient, would not present a reasonable possibility 
of material misstatement to the financial statements. 
According to the PCAOB, the complexity of the organization, business unit, or 
process should play an important role in the auditor’s risk assessment and the deter­
mination of the necessary procedures. Per Klamm and Watson (2009), the control envi­
ronment has a positive association with the remaining four weak COSO components and 
thus should play a significant role in the risk assessment process. In addition, according 
to Klamm and Watson, weak IT controls spill over to other COSO components. Using a 
cause‐and‐effect model in the risk assessment process, an auditor should examine the 
control environment and IT controls as leading indicators of risk.
Is there a difference in either quantitative or qualitative financial reporting stan­
dards for large public companies with broad international equity distribution (e.g., 
Apple Inc.) versus a dry cleaning company establishment with one retail location in 
Des Moines, Iowa, with two owners? A clear and concise answer has been a struggle 
for FASB with a long series of committee initiatives to differentiate GAAP for the large 
enterprise and GAAP for the SME (Kamnikar, Kamnikar, and Burrowes 2012). The 

256 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and FASB concluded that the objec­
tive of general‐purpose external fi nancial reporting should be the same irrespective of 
the equity characteristics of the enterprise. The boards also recommended that users 
of the fi nancial reports for smaller, closely held entities may be able to specify and receive 
the information they need versus a request for a general‐purpose external fi nancial 
report.  Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies
(COSO 2007) is relevant for SMEs who are either non‐public or private. 
 Li et al. (2011) found evidence that fi rms with IT material weaknesses in their fi nan­
cial reporting systems had less accurate management forecasts for internal manage­
ment purposes. While the purpose of this chapter is to discuss the implications of IT in 
fi nancial audits, weak IT controls have a pervasive impact on all management reporting. 
The problems related to data processing issues and weak IT controls are directly asso­
ciated with the quality of decision making for anyone involved with management or 
governance. Ineffective IT controls can cause material errors or other signifi cant issues 
in day‐to‐day operations (see Table  9.3 ). 
 TABLE 9.3  Examples of SOx IT Internal Control Weaknesses 
Examples from the SOx 404 Management’s Report on IT Internal Control 
 Data 
Processing 
Integrity 
 ▪
 Reopening or changing closed accounting periods 
 ▪
 Deletion of accounts in the system 
 ▪
 Data or program changes lacking user review/approval/authorization/testing 
 ▪
 Improper maintenance of master ﬁ les (e.g., vendor, price, inventory) 
 ▪
 Inadequate development and maintenance (e.g., new system, updates) 
 ▪
 Inadequate IS/IT support staff 
 ▪
 Inadequate support for business processes (includes manually intense 
processes) 
 ▪
 Integrity of computer data not veriﬁ ed (e.g., accuracy, validity, 
completeness) 
 ▪
 Lack of IT controls 
 ▪
 Lack of IT controls over the subsidiary/foreign operations 
 ▪
 Inadequate IT skills 
 ▪
 Program change controls missing or inadequate 
 ▪
 Programming errors 
 ▪
 Relying on systems of others (outsourcing) where controls not veriﬁ ed 
 ▪
 Spreadsheet(s), lack of controls over input, processing, and outpput 
 ▪
 Functionally complex systems 
 ▪
 Nonexistent or weak application controls 
 ▪
 Nonexistent or weak general controls 
 ▪
 Nonexistent or weak IT control activities 
 ▪
 Weak IT control environment 
 ▪
 Weak IT risk assessment 

How We Got Here: A Historical Perspective ◾    257
 IT Security 
 ▪
 Weak IT monitoring 
 ▪
 Nonexistent or weak implementation of segregation of duties 
 ▪
 Inadequate records and storage retention 
 ▪
 Nonexistent disaster recovery plan for IT 
 ▪
 Improper segregation of IT personnel access 
 ▪
 Logical access issues 
 ▪
 Security issues 
 IT Structure 
 ▪
 Decentralized systems 
 ▪
 Disparate or nonintegrated systems 
 ▪
 Insufﬁ cient IT training 
 ▪
 Lack of system documentation, policies, procedures 
 ▪
 Weak information and communication 
 Source: Adapted from Li, Peters, Richardson, and Watson 2012. 
 As noted earlier, the key sections of SOx compliance that directly involve  external 
reporting include Sections 302, 404, 409, and 802 (107th Congress 2002). Specifi c refer­
ence to the fi nancial reporting in the context of SOx compliance is in the fi rst column of 
Table  9.4 .  Data processing integrity ,  IT security , and  IT structure refer to specifi c business 
processes or the general controls of the business process itself used for the preparation 
of the fi nancial statements. 
 The same control categories of data processing integrity, access and security, and 
structure and usage cited in Tables  9.3 and  9.4 affected both internal and external 
reporting. In many of these companies subsequent to the reported failures of internal 
control in SEC fi lings, management changes were made in both the accounting and 
information technology organizations. For many of the companies cited in Table  9.4 , 
the board of directors replaced the chief fi nancial offi cer and/or the chief information 
offi cer following the announcement of the internal control failures. In some cases, the 
stock price of the company fell precipitously following the external reporting of the 
internal control failures. Comprehensive research on the fallout of reported failures 
of internal controls is not available. It is unlikely that the board of directors of a public 
company will sit idly given the potential for investor lawsuits and punitive measures 
by regulatory authorities. 
 The SME audit environment can present risks that are much higher than for mature 
enterprises with high‐quality balance sheets with predictable earnings. The risks, once 
identifi ed and isolated, can be linked together, forming a triad of linking accounts, risks, 
and assertions. (See Figure  9.1 .) At the bottom of Figure  9.1 , risk assessment documents 
are the ultimate product. (See Figure  9.2 .) 
 The emphasis in this chapter will be the IT control environment, IT controls, and 
IT monitoring for the SME that set the stage for Chapter  10 , which will fully integrate 
the IT audit into the fi nancial audit with a cross‐reference of COBIT to the PCAOB and 
COSO guidelines. 
TABLE 9.3 (continued)

258 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
 TABLE 9.4  Publicly Reported IT Control Issues 
Firm and Year 
Text from SOx 404 Report 
Control Issue 
BioScrip 2005 
“Inadequate system and manual controls to prevent 
the potential overstatement of revenue for canceled 
orders and other nonstandard transactions in our 
community pharmacies.” 
Inadequate 
system to 
support business 
processes 
Flowserve Corp. 
2004 
“. . . not achieving operating effectiveness over 
controls in . . . software change management.” 
Program change 
controls missing 
MGP Ingredients 
2006 
“Management has identiﬁ ed a programming error 
in the software application (CMMS) formerly utilized 
for processing purchasing, receiving, and materials 
maintenance transactions at the Atchison, Kansas 
facility . . .” 
Programming 
errors 
Online 
Resources 
Corporation 
2007 
“The Company’s procedures for the supervisory review 
of the performance by Company personnel of manual 
controls associated with account analysis and the 
veriﬁ cation of the accuracy of electronic spreadsheets 
that support ﬁ nancial reporting were ineffective.” 
Spreadsheet(s), 
lack of controls 
Barrett Business 
Services Inc. 
2008 
“Our Company did not maintain effective controls 
over information technology (IT); speciﬁ cally, general 
IT controls over program changes and program 
development were ineffectively designed and/or 
operating as of December 31, 2008.” 
Program change 
controls missing
  
TRC Companies 
2006 
“The Company did not adequately design controls 
to maintain appropriate segregation of duties in its 
manual and computer‐based business processes which 
could affect the Company’s purchasing controls, the 
limits on the delegation of authority for expenditures, 
and the proper review of manual journal entries.” 
Segregation 
of duties not 
implemented 
in system 
Ceridian Corp. 
2004 
“Security control deﬁ ciencies surrounding the use of 
certain information technology applications.” 
Security issues 
Integra Life‐
Sciences Holding 
Corporation 
2007  
“The Company lacked adequate internal access 
security policies and procedures.” 
Logical access 
and security 
issues 
Digimarc Co. 
2004 
“Implementation of the new accounting system also 
was ﬂ awed because some of our accounting, ﬁ nance, 
and operations employees were not properly trained 
in the use of the new accounting system.” 
Insufﬁ cient 
training on 
system 
Online 
Resources Corp. 
2006 
“While preparing its December 31, 2006, ﬁ nancial 
statements, the Company discovered that it needed 
to correct errors, primarily related to the Princeton 
acquisition and the integration of that company’s 
accounting system and processes.” 
Disparate (non‐
integrated) 
systems 
Federal National 
Mortgage 
Association 2004 
“We did not maintain and clearly communicate 
information technology policies and procedures. 
This weakness contributed to our inadequate internal 
control over ﬁ nancial reporting systems.” 
Weak 
information and 
communication 
Source: Li, Peters, Richardson, and Watson 2012. 

259
 FIGURE  9.1  COSO Guidance for Linking Accounts, Risks, and Assertions 
 Source: Adapted from COSO 2007,  Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies . 

260 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
RISK 
 The Statement on Auditing Standards (SAS No. 122) cites the risks of fi nancial report­
ing to include: 
 ▪
 Changes in operating environment 
 ▪
 New personnel 
 ▪
 New or revamped information systems 
 ▪
 Rapid growth 
 ▪
 New technology 
 ▪
 New business models, products, or activities 
 ▪
 Corporate restructurings 
 ▪
 Expanded foreign operations 
 ▪
 New accounting pronouncements 
 ▪
 Changes in economic conditions 
 Each of these risks directly affects the integrated process of risks, control environ­
ment, control activities, information, and monitoring. 
 COSO ( Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public Companies ) 
identifi ed the risks associated with the SME as: 
 ▪
 Business processes:  Risk identifi cation includes consideration of the business 
processes that affect fi nancial statement accounts and disclosures. 
 ▪
 Personnel: Risk identifi cation and assessment addresses the competency of 
company personnel supporting the fi nancial reporting objectives. 
 FIGURE  9.2  Ultimate Product of Linking Accounts, Risks, and Assertions 
 Source: Adapted from COSO 2007,  Internal Control Over Financial Reporting: Guidance for 
Smaller Public Companies . 
Applications mapped to
underlying systems and
subsystems
Account risk analyses mapped
to business processes
Risk analysis matrix by
financial statement account
and disclosure

Risk and Fraud ◾    261
 ▪
IT: Personnel supporting IT and the information technology infrastructure and 
processes supporting the fi nancial reporting objectives are included in the fi nancial 
reporting risk assessment. 
 ▪
Appropriate levels of management: The organization puts into place effective 
risk assessment mechanisms that involve appropriate levels of management. Risk 
identifi cation considers both internal and external factors and their impacts on the 
achievement of fi nancial reporting objectives. 
 ▪
 Estimates of likelihood and impact: Identifi ed risks are analyzed through a 
process that includes estimating the likelihood of occurrence and potential impact 
of the risk. 
 ▪
Triggers for reassessment: Management establishes triggers for reassessing 
risks as changes occur that may affect fi nancial reporting objectives.  
 While the COSO discussion is helpful, a very small SME may not have layers of 
management to implement risk assessment mechanisms or create estimates of likeli­
hood and impact, nor will it have the systems to trigger reassessments because the 
personnel simply doesn’t exist. For the small SME, the accounting personnel may also 
be the same personnel managing the IT fi nancial reporting application. It is very likely 
that an outside accounting fi rm or senior management has a signifi cant role to play in 
the six attributes described by COSO. An active and meaningful board must play some 
role in the assessment of management, estimates of likelihood and impact, and triggers 
for reassessment. In a small SME, the role must be much more signifi cant. An SME 
with several hundred employees would likely have the opportunity to implement the 
six attributes described by COSO without participation from outside personnel. Given 
the potential that some of the attributes described by COSO are missing or incomplete, 
the fi nancial reporting risks are defi ned accordingly.  So, what is the appropriate level of 
control activities for SMEs? Moreover, where do we go from here? 
 AU‐C Section 315 (SAS No. 122) notes that while information systems in smaller, 
less complex organizations are likely to be less formal than in larger organizations, man­
agement’s or the owner’s role is just as signifi cant as it is in smaller entities with active 
management involvement that may not need extensive descriptions of accounting pro­
cedures, sophisticated accounting records, or written policies. AU‐C Section 315 notes 
that management’s monitoring of controls often is accomplished by management’s or 
the owner‐manager’s close involvement in operations. This involvement often identifi es 
signifi cant variances from expectations and inaccuracies in fi nancial data leading to 
remedial action to the control. For example, smaller, less complex entities may not have 
an independent or outside member on the board of directors. 
RISK AND FRAUD 
 Fraud for the SME is both a serious fi nancial risk and a signifi cant fi nancial reporting 
risk. According to a recent study by the Association of Certifi ed Fraud Examiners (ACFE 
2012), businesses with fewer than 100 employees often lacked formal controls and were 
shown to be three times more likely than their larger counterparts to discover fraud by 

262 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
accident. Smaller businesses were almost twice as likely to discover fraud when police 
were involved and were not nearly as likely to uncover fraud through an internal audit. 
Research by the ACFE concluded that compared to large organizations, small businesses 
(those with fewer than 100 employees) have far fewer antifraud controls in place than 
do larger organizations. Furthermore, small organizations were victimized by fraud 
more frequently than larger organizations and they suffered a disproportionately large 
median loss of $147,000. 
 Research by the ACFE has consistently reinforced the idea that fraud schemes fall 
into three primary categories. The fi rst is asset misappropriation schemes (see Table  9.5 ). 
The second category is corruption schemes (e.g., schemes involving bribery or confl icts 
of interest). The third is fi nancial statement fraud schemes (e.g., recording fi ctitious 
revenues, understating reported expenses, or artifi cially infl ating reported assets). The 
third category directly affects the fi nancial auditor. 
 COSO (2007) recommends several approaches to assessing the fraud risk for the 
SME, including: 
 ▪
 Conduct fraud assessments across the enterprise to evaluate vulnerabilities that are 
unique or typical of that industry. 
 ▪
 Consider approaches to circumvent or override controls in identifying, evaluat­
ing, and testing the design and operating effectiveness of entity‐wide controls that 
address fraud. 
 ▪
 Use IT tools where practical, including security systems, fraud detection, and moni­
toring tools, and incident tracking systems to identify and manage fraud risk. 
 ▪
 Develop Incident Investigation and Remediation Processes Management to enable 
a structured process for incident investigation and remediation. 
 ▪
 Investigate roles and responsibilities with identifi ed processes that include a track­
ing mechanism that allows management to report on material fraud events. 
 The ACFE’s 2012  Report to the Nations (ACFE 2012) recommends relatively low‐cost 
measures such as a code of conduct, employee training programs, and formal manage­
ment review of controls and processes that can signifi cantly increase prevention and 
detection of fraud in SMEs. The cost of instituting codes of conduct and management 
review of controls and processes can be essentially limited to the expenses required for 
the labor to implement them. 
CONTROLS 
 COSO views fi ve internal control components as comprising an integrated process, 
which indeed internal control is (see Figure  9.3 ), and not focused on any one component. 
This process highlights the interrelationship of the components, and recognizes that 
management has fl exibility in choosing controls to achieve its objectives and that an 
organization can adjust and improve its internal control over time. The process cascades 
from fi rst setting the fi nancial reporting objectives, to identifying the risks for those 

263
 TABLE 9.5  Asset Misappropriation and COSO 
Asset Misappropriation by Risk Rating 
Category 
Description 
Examples 
Percentage 
of All 
Cases  
Illustrative Components from COSO 
to Prevent or Detect Misappropriation 
(suggested guidelines from the authors) 
 Billing 
A person causes the employer to issue a payment 
by submitting invoices for ﬁ ctitious goods or 
services, inﬂ ated invoices, or invoices for personal 
purchases. 
An employee creates a 
ﬁ ctitious company and bills 
the employer for services 
not actually rendered.
An employee purchases 
items or services and 
submits an invoice to the 
employer for payment. 
24.9% 
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
 Noncash 
misappropriation 
An employee steals or misuses noncash assets of 
the victim organization. 
An employee steals 
inventory from a 
warehouse or storeroom.
An employee steals or 
misuses conﬁ dential 
customer ﬁ nancial 
information. 
17.2%  
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
 Skimming 
  
Cash is stolen from the enterprise  before it is 
recorded on the enterprise’s ﬁ nancial records. 
An employee deliberately 
avoids recording a sale 
and pockets the customer 
payment. 
14.6%  
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
 Expense 
reimbursement 
  
An employee makes a claim for reimbursement of 
ﬁ ctitious or inﬂ ated business expenses. 
An employee ﬁ les a 
fraudulent expense report, 
claiming personal travel, 
nonexistent meals, etc. 
14.5% 
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
(continued)

264
 Check tampering 
A person intercepts, forges, or alters a check 
drawn on one of the enterprise’s bank accounts. 
An employee steals blank 
company checks and 
makes them out to himself/
herself or an accomplice.
An employee steals an 
outgoing check to a 
vendor and deposits it 
into his or her own bank 
account. 
11.9% 
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
 Misappropriation 
of cash on hand 
The perpetrator misappropriates cash kept on 
hand at the victim organization’s premises. 
An employee steals cash 
from the company’s vault. 
11.8% 
SME higher risk, thus all COSO components 
are important: control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment and monitoring. 
 Cash larceny 
Cash is stolen from the enterprise  after  it has been 
recorded on the enterprise’s ﬁ nancial records. 
An employee steals cash 
and checks from daily 
receipts before the cash is 
deposited in the bank. 
11.0% 
 
 Payroll 
An employee causes his or her employer to issue a 
payment by making false claims for compensation. 
An employee claims 
overtime for hours not 
worked.
An employee adds 
employees to the payroll. 
9.3% 
SME lower risk (below 10% of all reported 
fraud), but control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment remain important. 
Cost beneﬁ t of the controls becomes 
more important. 
 Cash register 
disbursements 
An employee makes false entries on a cash register 
to conceal the fraudulent removal of cash. 
An employee fraudulently 
voids a sale on his or her 
cash register and steals the 
cash. 
3.6% 
SME lower risk (below 5% of all reported 
fraud), but control activities, information 
and communication, control environment, 
and risk assessment remain important. 
Cost beneﬁ t of the controls becomes 
more important. 
 Source: Adapted from ACFE 2012. 
TABLE 9.5 (continued)

Controls ◾    265
fi nancial reporting objectives, assessing the control environment that is shaped by the 
organization’s culture, including the tone at the top, identifying the control activities in 
that control environment and the information and communication from those activi­
ties, and fi nally monitoring activities. 
 All fi ve components of internal control set forth in the framework are important 
to achieving the objective of reliable fi nancial reporting. Determining whether a com­
pany’s internal control system is effective involves a judgment resulting from an assess­
ment of whether the fi ve components are present and functioning effectively without 
material weakness. None of the framework’s fi ve components is an end in itself. Rather 
the components are an integrated system working together to reduce risk to reliable 
fi nancial reporting to an acceptable level. 
 FIGURE  9.3  COSO’s Five Integrated Components of Internal Control 
 Source: Adapted from COSO 2007:  Internal Control Over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller 
Public Companies. 
Risk
Assessment
Monitoring
Control
Environment
Financial
Reporting
Objectives
Information
and
Communication
Control
Activities
Risk Assessment
Control Environment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
• Identify ﬁnancial reporting 
objectives. For the public 
SME, the company must 
establish SEC compliance 
and the necessary GAAP to 
support such compliance
• Identify and analyze ﬁnancial 
reporting risks. Common 
risks for the SME include 
blurred segregation of 
duties, narrow product lines, 
limited geography for sales 
distribution, competent   
accounting and IT 
personnel, and a weak 
balance sheet.
• Identify and assess the risk 
of fraud. SMEs are
  disproportionally the victim 
of fraud. Businesses with 
fewer than 100 employees 
were shown to have 
disproportionately higher
  economic losses from fraud.
• Ethical values on display or 
“tone at the top.”
• Board of directors are 
comperent in ﬁnancial 
reporting, information 
technology, and exercise 
oversight.
• Internal controls are 
supported by management.
• Organization structure 
supports effective internal 
controls.
• The accounting and IT 
organization is competent.
• Human resources standards 
exist to encourage effective 
recruiting, training, and 
retention.
• Approvals, authorizations, 
veriﬁcations, reconcilia-
tions, reviews of operating 
performance, security of 
assets, and segregation of 
duties are in place and 
reﬂect the risks in the SME.
• Preventive, corrective, and 
detective controls are 
developed, implemented, 
and monitored.
• Policies are established and 
communicated, consistent 
with risk assessment.
• IT controls, including 
appropriate general 
controls, application 
controls, and competent IT 
governance, are 
implemented.
• Financial reporting is timely, 
comprehensive, and 
actionable.
• Tax and regulatory reporting 
is timely and competent.
• Internal control effectiveness 
is periodically assessed, 
evaluated, and 
communicated to 
management and the board 
of directors.
• Performance against 
management objectives is 
assessed with adequate 
internal reporting.
• Financial reporting 
addresses potential risks for 
the SME, e.g., weekly cash 
ﬂow reports for an SME with 
a over-leveraged balance 
sheet.
• Management must insist 
on effective and ongoing 
reporting and monitoring.
• Robust risk and internal 
control evaluations from 
the outside auditors serve 
as a source of monitoring. 
The outside auditors can 
assists with key metrics 
and control charts.
• Techniques such as 
self-assessments can track 
internal control activities 
and can be used by 
personnel involved in 
executing controls.
• Open and complete 
communications by 
management with the 
board of directors is 
essential.

266	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
A weak control environment has a pervasive negative influence on all parts of the 
COSO internal control process, including risk assessment, control activities, information 
and communication, and monitoring. As cited earlier, Klamm and Watson (2009) iden­
tified relationships between the reported material weaknesses and the five components 
of COSO, identifying that a weak control environment has a positive association with 
the remaining four weak COSO components.
The control environment is a pervasive structure that affects many business pro­
cesses, including management’s integrity and ethical values, operating philosophy, and 
commitment to organizational competence (Ramos 2004). Tests of the control environment 
consist of a combination of procedures, including a review of relevant documentation 
of the design, inquiries of management and employees, and direct observation. COSO 
identifies seven principles to develop a robust control environment (COSO 2007):
	 1.	 Integrity and ethical values
	 2.	 Board of directors
	 3.	 Management’s philosophy and operating style over financial reporting
	 4.	 Organizational structure
	 5.	 Financial reporting competencies
	 6.	 Authority and responsibility
	 7.	 Human resources
Integrity and ethical values: COSO suggests three principles for integrity and 
ethical values:
	 1.	 An articulation of the values of senior management espoused throughout the 
organization
	 2.	 Processes in place to monitor adherence to articulated values
	 3.	 Variances from integrity and values appropriately addressed and remedied at appro­
priate levels within the company
In simple terms, management must set the tone for behavior in the enterprise. Man­
agement must communicate this tone (e.g., a newsletter) and act upon it in terms and 
behavior that are consistent with the newsletter and articulated values. If suspected 
fraud or misbehavior occurs, management should act upon it immediately via the appro­
priate level of authority, including outside law enforcement.
Board of directors: A meaningful, active, and independent board is essential for 
a robust control environment in an SME. That board should have a sufficient number 
of members who are independent and actively evaluate and monitor risks of manage­
ment override of internal control and consider risks affecting the reliability of finan­
cial reporting. The board should retain financial reporting expertise within its ranks, 
including oversight of the quality and reliability. The board should provide oversight 
of financial reporting and financial statement preparation. A significant departure 
from past practice with the passage of SOx and COSO is the oversight of the audit com­
mittee and/or board, including the authority to engage, replace, and determine the 

Controls  ◾        267
compensation of the external audit firm. Before SOx, the senior financial staff, including 
the CFO, typically had the authority to hire and fire the external audit firm.
Management’s philosophy and operating style: This practice emphasizes the 
importance of minimizing risks related to financial reporting and through its deal­
ings with customers, suppliers or distributors, and employees. Documentation and 
authorizations support all journal entries. Employees recognize the importance of 
applying appropriate diligence and business judgment in the performance of assigned 
job responsibilities.
Organizational structure: An organizational chart sets forth roles and respective 
reporting lines for all employees, including those involved in financial reporting. Man­
agement maintains job descriptions for key positions and updates them as conditions 
and circumstances warrant. Management adopts a structure whereby only three staff 
layers exist between the CFO and personnel directly involved in the financial reporting 
process. An internal audit function reports directly to the CEO, with direct access to the 
audit committee, to maintain independence over financial reporting.
Financial reporting competencies: Management employs or retains individu­
als who possess the required competencies to support and execute financial reporting. 
Those same competencies are regularly evaluated and maintained.
Authority and responsibility: The functions of the audit committee and the 
internal audit function (if one exists) are robust and maintained through defined levels 
of responsibility and authority. The audit committee oversees management’s process 
for defining responsibilities for key financial reporting roles. The CEO and top man­
agement are responsible for internal control over financial reporting, including both 
initiating and maintaining the internal control system. Senior and functional manage­
ment are responsible for ensuring all employees understand their responsibilities for 
achieving financial reporting objectives through adherence to internal control policies 
and procedures.
Human resources practices: Management establishes practices that maintain 
a commitment to integrity, ethical behavior, and competence. Those practices support 
employees by providing tools and training needed to perform their financial report­
ing roles. Management supports employee performance evaluations and compensation 
practices that align to the achievement of financial reporting objectives (i.e., manage­
ment walks the talk and does what it must to maintain the commitment).
Auditors must probe to understand the company’s attitude toward internal control 
over financial reporting. As part of that probe, the auditors should ask management 
for a self‐assessment. Tests that auditors are accustomed to performing, such as walk­
throughs, reperformance of the control using a sample, and focusing solely on activ­
ity‐level controls, are inappropriate.
Under SOx reporting, management is responsible for evaluating and reporting 
on a company’s controls. The external auditors are responsible for auditing man­
agement’s assertion and independently coming to their own conclusions about the 
company’s internal control effectiveness. They must evaluate management’s assess­
ment and perform their own independent tests in many areas, including the control 
environment.

268	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
Control Activities
Control activities include a range of activities that vary in terms of cost and effectiveness, 
depending on the circumstances.
▪▪
These include approvals, authorizations, verifications, reconciliations, reviews of 
operating performance, security of assets, and segregation of duties.
▪▪
Management uses an appropriate balance of preventive and detective controls, and 
an appropriate balance of manual and automated controls, to mitigate risks to the 
achievement of financial reporting objectives.
▪▪
Duties divide processes to mitigate risks and meet financial reporting objectives.
▪▪
When selecting among alternative control options, management considers the cost 
of control activities in relation to expected benefits of improved control.
Communication and Monitoring
COSO (2007) emphasizes three major points regarding information and communication 
and all focus on transparency, timeliness, and redundancy. In an SME these attributes 
may be much more difficult to achieve than in a larger company where resources are 
more abundant, competencies are established, and roles are well defined. In an SME 
where staffing is more limited and roles are more fluid, information and communica­
tion are more important than they are in a public enterprise where previously published 
public information is available and competitive information is widespread and easily 
accessible.
The first emphasis by COSO is quite simple; if management does not ask for a deliver­
able, the deliverable will not appear or may never exist. Management must communicate 
and emphasize that internal control over financial reporting must be taken seriously. 
Without an emphasis on and commitment to reporting on internal controls, finan­
cial management can easily mislead or fail to connect the dots and provide less than 
a complete picture of internal controls in the SME. A variety of reporting resources 
are available for even a very small enterprise. With the help of the accounting firm or 
other outside consultants, control charts and key metrics help track internal control 
activities. Control charts can track first‐level accountability for processes and activi­
ties to use in considering whether control performance is on track with deviations and 
these are being investigated and resolved. Simple techniques such as self‐assessments 
can track internal control activities and can be used by personnel involved in executing 
controls. Management can periodically test its computer network by performing a pen­
etration test to identify weaknesses in internal controls for both internal and external 
connectivity. Identified security issues concerning access to financial data are addressed 
and resolved in a timely manner. Internal audit is a resource that many SMEs cannot 
afford, but if it is available, the role can provide an objective perspective regarding key 
elements of the internal control system. Internal audit reports are distributed to senior 
management and the audit committee.
The second emphasis by COSO is that communication between management and the 
board of directors must be sufficient so each may fulfil their roles with respect to financial 

Financial Reporting ◾    269
reporting objectives. Board members with experience will know what to expect in infor­
mation fl ows in board reporting while newer board members will not have a sense of 
expectations. Board members being recruited to an SME may not have the depth of expe­
rience of a larger enterprise and thus may not be fully aware of what to expect. Particu­
larly relevant to IT, one or more board members should have experience in sophisticated 
technology installations if the SME is using or attempting to use sophisticated technology. 
 The board should also have access to the information sources outside of manage­
ment, including access to the external auditors, the internal auditors, and other relevant 
parties such as regulatory authorities. If the board does not have regular access to quali­
fi ed resources, the board members should be able to invite outside resources to board 
meetings to evaluate certain topics. 
 Ultimately, control defi ciencies should be identifi ed and communicated in a timely 
manner to those parties responsible for taking corrective action, and to management 
and the board as appropriate. Outsides resources may be needed for guidance useful in 
implementing or assessing the application of internal control guidelines. 
FINANCIAL REPORTING 
 Whether or not GAAP compliance occurs for the SME, there is one overriding objective: 
to create useful information for those who make fi nancial decisions about the enterprise. 
The balance sheet must report obligations that will be due in the near term and the 
nature of assets available to satisfy those claims. The income statement must identify 
income and expenses for the reported period. The cash fl ow statements must identify the 
sources of cash and how the cash was used. The disclosures identify pertinent material, 
qualitative and quantitative information that infl uences the income statement, balance 
sheet, and cash fl ows. Said another way, the fi nancial statements should make it possible 
for investors and creditors to (FASB 2010): 
 ▪
 Make informed investment, credit, and similar resource allocation decisions. 
 ▪
 Assess the amounts, timing, and uncertainty of the entity’s future cash infl ows and 
outfl ows (the entity’s future cash fl ows). This information is essential in assessing 
an entity’s ability to generate net cash infl ows and thus to provide returns to inves­
tors and creditors. 
 ▪
 Assess the economic resources of the entity (its assets) and the claims to those 
resources (its liabilities and equity). Information about the effects of transactions 
and other events and circumstances that change resources and claims to them is 
also essential. 
 COSO describes the fi nancial reporting characteristics associated with the SME: 
 ▪
 Management specifi es fi nancial reporting objectives with suffi cient clarity and cri­
teria to enable the identifi cation of risks to reliable fi nancial reporting. 
 ▪
 Financial reporting objectives are consistent with GAAP and are appropriate in the 
circumstances of the SME. 

270	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
▪▪
Financial statements are informative for end users and are classified and summa­
rized in a reasonable manner, neither too detailed nor too condensed.
▪▪
The financial statements reflect the underlying transactions and events in a manner 
that presents the financial position, results of operations, and cash flows within a 
range of acceptable limits.
The FASB (2010) cites several qualitative characteristics that are integral to the 
general‐purpose financial report:
▪▪
Relevance: If information is relevant, it is capable of influencing the decisions to 
evaluate the potential effects of past, present, or future transactions or other events 
on future cash flows (predictive value) to confirm or correct their previous evalua­
tions (confirmatory value).
▪▪
Timeliness: Timeliness is making information available to decision makers before 
it loses its capacity to influence decisions.
▪▪
Faithful representation: For information to be faithful, it must be verifiable, neu­
tral, and complete. Information is not neutral when it makes a company’s position 
look better or worse under a set of circumstances.
▪▪
Consistency: Consistency refers to use of the same accounting policies and pro­
cedures, either from period to period within an entity or in a single period across 
entities. Consistency enables comparability of financial statements.
▪▪
Understandability: Financial reporting must be understandable and comprehen­
sible for those who are willing to spend reasonable time to understand the reports.
▪▪
Conservatism: Conservatism is the practice of using the least optimistic estimate 
when two or more estimates are equally likely.
▪▪
Materiality: Materiality is an amount that affects a decision. Adding immaterial 
information to a financial report can mask, reduce, or hide the impact of material 
information.
Management is ultimately responsible for the fair presentation of financial state­
ments that reflect the nature and operations of the entity. In the case of an SME, it is 
very likely that management and significant equity holders of the enterprise are the 
same individuals. As such, it is common that the personality of the manager is often 
inseparable from the operations of the business and thus is a motivating factor for an 
outcome that favorably represents the business.
Financial Reporting Assertions
Figure 9.3, COSO’s guidance for linking accounts, risks, and assertions, maps the rela­
tionship between financial accounts, risks, and assertions, and defines the process 
from financial reporting requirements (e.g., the 10‐K) and walks through the financial 
accounts and nonfinancial disclosures to define audit risks. Inherent in that diagram 
are both the financial audit and IT audit risks. So, what are the IT audit risks?
To answer that question, we must understand the control objectives for each of the 
major account and subaccount groups and the assertions made. Financial assertions of 
completeness, existence, and/or valuation are made for each of the major subaccounts 
in the normal course of the financial reporting. Table 9.6 defines the objectives and 

Financial Reporting ◾    271
 TABLE 9.6  Control Objectives and Financial Assertions of the Financial Close Cycle 
Illustrative Control Objectives from COBIT 4.1 
Financial Assertions 
Entries booked in the close process are complete and accurate. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Automated amortization timing, periods, and methods are 
appropriate and accurately entered. 
Valuation 
Existence 
Variance reports identify posting errors/out‐of‐balance conditions. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
Standard, recurring period‐end journal entries submitted from 
subsidiary ledger systems are automated, appropriately approved, 
and entered accurately. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
Systems generate reports of all recurring and nonrecurring journal 
entries. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Track all nonstandard journal entries. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Account codes and transaction amounts are accurate and complete, 
with exceptions reported. 
Completeness 
Existence 
General ledger balances reconcile to subledger balances. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Recorded amounts undergo an automated comparison to predicted 
amounts. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Prohibit out‐of‐balance entries. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Enterprise‐wide consolidation, including standard intercompany 
eliminations, is automated/performed using a third‐party software 
product. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
System functionality supports the segregation of the posting and 
approval functions. 
Existence 
Access to general ledger records is appropriate and authorized. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
Recording of transactions outside of ﬁ nancial close cutoff 
requirements is prohibited. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
Annually approved recurring accruals are accurately booked in the 
appropriate periods. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Valuation 
System controls are in place for appropriate approval of write‐offs. 
Existence 
Interrelated balance sheets and income statement accounts undergo 
automated reconciliation. 
Completeness 
Existence 
The sources of all entries are readily identiﬁ able. 
Existence 
In the event of data exceptions, rejections and exceptions occur. 
Completeness 
Existence 
Account mappings are up to date. 
Existence 
Source:  COBIT 4.1 © 2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission. 

272 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
assertions for the fi nancial close cycle; the control objectives defi ne major subaccounts 
in the next section, control objectives for applications. With a clear understanding of the 
control objectives, the audit IT audit plan includes the appropriate control objectives. 
Moreover, by mapping the control objectives by subaccounts, the IT auditor creates the 
control requirements for each major IT application (e.g., Payroll, Inventory, etc.). 
 Control Objectives for Applications 
 Six different transaction errors can occur in fi nancial assertions: 
 1.  Recorded transaction(s) are not real. 
 2.  Transaction(s) are real but not recorded. 
 3.  Transaction(s) are posted in the wrong amount. 
 4.  Transaction(s) are posted to the wrong account. 
 5.  Transaction(s) are posted to the wrong period. 
 6.  Unauthorized transaction(s) occur. 
 Control objectives and the supporting actions manage the various types of transac­
tion errors. (See Figure  9.4 .) 
 Application control objectives 1 through 6 as described for the general ledger in 
Chapter  4 are appropriate for revenue, purchasing, inventory, fi xed assets, human 
resources, payroll, and taxes. 
 1.  COBIT 4.1 Application Control:  Source Data Preparation and Authorization: 
This application control ensures that source documents for journal entries or 
other changes and entries to revenue, purchasing, inventory, fi xed assets, human 
resources, payroll, and taxes are prepared by authorized and qualifi ed person­
nel, following established procedures, taking into account adequate segregation 
 FIGURE  9.4  Relationships of Transaction Errors to Assertions 
Control
Objectives
Assertions
Error Types
Recorded, but not real
Existence
Completeness
Valuation or allocation
Rights and obligations
Real, but not recorded
Wrong amount
Wrong account
Wrong period
Not authorized

Financial Reporting  ◾        273
of duties regarding the origination and approval of these documents. Input and 
design reduce errors and omissions. A more complete description is in Chapter 4.
	 2.	 COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Source Data Collection and Entry: This applica­
tion control ensures that data input for revenue, purchasing, inventory, fixed assets, 
human resources, payroll, and taxes is performed in a timely manner by authorized 
and qualified staff. Correction and resubmission of data should be performed without 
compromising original transaction authorization levels. Original source documents 
are retained for the appropriate amount of time. A more complete description is in  
Chapter 4.
	 3.	 COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Accuracy, Completeness, and Authenticity 
Checks: Revenue, purchasing, inventory, fixed assets, human resources, payroll, 
and tax transactions should be accurate, complete, and valid. Data corrections 
occur next to the point of origination. A more complete description is in Chapter 4.
	 4.	 COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Processing Integrity and Validity: This applica­
tion control maintains the integrity and validity of data for revenue, purchasing, inven­
tory, fixed assets, human resources, payroll, and taxes throughout the processing cycle. 
Application controls ensure that detection of erroneous transactions does not disrupt 
the processing of valid transactions. A more complete description is in Chapter 4.
	 5.	 COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Output Review, Reconciliation, and Error 
Handling: Procedures and associated responsibilities for revenue, purchasing, 
inventory, fixed assets, human resources, payroll, and taxes, including financial state­
ments, are handled in an authorized manner, delivered to the appropriate recipient, 
and protected during transmission. A more complete description is in Chapter 4.
	 6.	 COBIT 4.1 Application Control: Transaction Authentication and Integrity: 
Before passing transaction data between internal applications and business opera­
tional functions (in or outside the enterprise), check the data for proper authentic­
ity of origin and integrity of content. Maintain authenticity and integrity during 
transmission or transport. A more complete description is in Chapter 4.
For revenue, the application controls (adapted from COBIT 4.1) should ensure that:
▪▪
Orders are processed only within approved customer credit limits. [Threat: Orders 
are processed with more generous credit terms than approved by management.]
▪▪
Orders are approved by management as to prices and terms of sale. [Threat: Orders 
are processed but prices and terms of sale are not approved by management, lead­
ing to lost revenue.]
▪▪
Orders and cancellations of orders are input accurately. [Threat: Orders and cancel­
lations are inaccurately input, leading to adverse customer relations and potentially 
lost revenue.]
▪▪
Order entry data is transferred completely and accurately to the shipping and invoic­
ing activities. [Threat: Orders are received and processed accurately but shipped and 
invoiced inaccurately, leading to lost revenues and potentially higher cost of sales.]
▪▪
All orders received from customers are input and processed. [Threat: Orders are lost 
or input into the order processing system inaccurately, leading to misstated revenue 
and adverse customer relationships.]

274	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
▪▪
Only valid orders are input and processed. [Threat: Invalid orders are input, leading 
to invalid shipments and potentially unrecoverable product shipments.]
▪▪
Invoices are generated using authorized terms and prices. [Threat: Invoices are 
generated using unauthorized terms and prices, leading to potentially lost revenues, 
higher cost of sales, and receivables.]
▪▪
Invoices are accurately calculated and recorded. [Threat: Inaccurate invoices are 
generated and recorded, leading to inaccurate revenues, cost of sales, and receivables.]
▪▪
Credit notes and adjustments to accounts receivable are accurately calculated and 
recorded. [Threat: Credit notes are calculated inaccurately, leading to inaccurate 
credit notes receivables and potentially lost interest revenues.]
▪▪
All goods shipped are invoiced. [Threat: Product is shipped but revenue is not rec­
ognized and revenue is ultimately lost.]
▪▪
Credit notes for all goods returned and adjustments to accounts receivable are 
issued in accordance with organization policy and in the appropriate reporting 
period. [Threat: Credit note receivables do not reflect organizational policy, leading 
to misstated balances in any one particular period.]
▪▪
Invoices relate to valid shipments. [Threat: Revenue is not supported by valid  
shipments.]
▪▪
All credit notes relate to a return of goods or other valid adjustments. [Threat: 
Revenue credits are not supported by valid returns.]
▪▪
All invoices issued are recorded. [Threat: Revenue is understated.]
▪▪
All credit notes issued are recorded. [Threat: Credit notes are not recorded, leading 
to receivable balances that are understated.]
▪▪
Invoices are recorded in the appropriate period. [Threat: Revenue is misstated in a 
particular reporting period.]
▪▪
Cash receipts are recorded in the period in which they are received. [Threat:  
Revenue is misstated in a particular reporting period.]
▪▪
Cash receipts data is entered for processing accurately. [Threat: Cash is misstated 
in a particular reporting period.]
▪▪
All cash receipts data is entered for processing. [Threat: An incomplete audit trail 
is created and revenue is misstated.]
▪▪
Cash receipts data is valid and entered for processing only once. [Threat: Cash 
receipts data is not valid and revenue is misstated.]
▪▪
Cash discounts are accurately calculated and recorded. [Threat: Cash discounts 
are inaccurate, leading to potentially misstated net revenue, margins, and lost 
revenues.]
▪▪
Timely collection of accounts receivable is monitored. [Threat: Receivables are 
not monitored, leading to aged and uncollected receivables and ultimately lost 
revenue.]
▪▪
The customer master file is maintained. [Threat: Master file is inaccurate, leading 
to inaccurate shipping, invoicing, credit terms, and potentially lost or misstated 
revenue.]
▪▪
Only valid changes are made to the customer master file. [Threat: Invalid changes 
are made to master file, leading to inaccurate shipping, invoicing, credit terms, and 
potentially misstated revenue.]

Financial Reporting  ◾        275
▪▪
Changes to the customer master file are processed in a timely manner. [Threat: 
Delays in maintenance lead to inaccurate shipping, invoicing, credit terms, and 
potentially misstated revenue.]
For purchasing, the application control objectives (adapted from COBIT 4.1) should 
ensure that:
▪▪
Purchase orders are placed only for approved requisitions. [Threat: Unauthorized 
requisitions lead to unauthorized expenses and capital acquisitions.]
▪▪
Purchase orders are accurately entered. [Threat: Poorly executed purchase orders 
lead to unauthorized expenses and capital acquisitions.]
▪▪
All purchase orders issued are input and processed. [Threat: Lost or poorly executed pur­
chase orders lead to delays in products and services and ultimately additional expenses.]
▪▪
Amounts posted to accounts payable represent goods or services received. [Threat: 
Postings to accounts payable do not have an adequate audit trail and cannot be 
supported.]
▪▪
Accounts payable amounts are accurately calculated and recorded. [Threat: Postings 
to accounts payable are inaccurate, leading to under‐ or overpayment to vendors.]
▪▪
All amounts for goods or services received are input and processed to accounts pay­
able, [Threat: Amounts for goods and services are not input or processed, leading 
to underpayment to vendors.]
▪▪
Amounts for goods or services received are recorded in the appropriate period. 
[Threat: Amounts for goods and services are not posted to the appropriate period, 
leading to misstated payables for any particular reporting period.]
▪▪
Accounts payable are adjusted only for valid reasons. [Threat: Amounts are posted 
for invalid reasons, leading to misstated payments, unauthorized expenses, and 
potentially misstated payables.]
▪▪
Credit notes and other adjustments are accurately calculated and recorded. [Threat: 
Amounts are posted for invalid reasons, leading to misstated payments and credit 
notes payables.]
▪▪
All valid credit notes and other adjustments related to accounts payable are input 
and processed. [Threat: Credit notes are not appropriately posted to accounts pay­
able, leading to potential underpayment.]
▪▪
Credit notes and other adjustments are recorded in the appropriate period. [Threat: 
Credit notes are not appropriately posted to the correct periods, leading to an under‐ 
or overstatement of credit note balances for any particular period.]
▪▪
Disbursements are made only for goods and services received. [Threat: Disburse­
ments are made for goods and services that have not been received.]
▪▪
Disbursements are distributed to the appropriate suppliers. [Threat: Disbursements 
are made to inappropriate suppliers, leading to purchases that do not meet specifica­
tions and potentially unauthorized expenses.]
▪▪
Disbursements are accurately calculated and recorded. [Threat: Disbursements are 
inaccurately calculated and recorded, leading to under‐ or overstated expenses.]
▪▪
All disbursements are recorded. [Threat: Disbursements are not recorded with the 
potential that expenses will not be recognized.]

276	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
▪▪
Disbursements are recorded in the period in which they are issued. [Threat: 
Disbursements are not recorded in the appropriate period, leading to over‐ or 
understated expenses in any particular period.]
▪▪
Only valid changes are made to the supplier master file. [Threat: Invalid changes 
are made to supplier master list, potentially leading to unauthorized expenses, mis­
stated payables, and misstated expenses.]
For inventory, the application control objectives (adapted from COBIT 4.1) should 
ensure that:
▪▪
Adjustments to inventory prices or quantities are recorded promptly and in the 
appropriate period. [Threat: Delayed postings for prices or quantities may lead to 
poorly executed inventory and product planning.]
▪▪
Adjustments to inventory prices or quantities are recorded accurately. [Threat: 
Inaccurate adjustments to prices and quantities may lead to poorly executed inven­
tory and product planning, leading to lower gross margins and delayed production.]
▪▪
Raw materials are received and accepted only if they have valid purchase orders. 
[Threat: Materials may be received without purchase orders, leading to poorly exe­
cuted inventory and product planning and in turn leading to lower gross margins, 
potentially delayed production, and poor use of cash resources.]
▪▪
Raw materials received are recorded accurately. [Threat: Raw materials being 
recorded inaccurately may lead to poorly executed inventory and product plan­
ning, leading to lower gross margins and delayed production.]
▪▪
All raw materials received are recorded. [Threat: Raw materials being received inac­
curately may lead to poorly executed inventory and product planning, leading to 
lower gross margins and delayed production.]
▪▪
Receipts of raw materials are recorded promptly and in the appropriate period. 
[Threat: Raw materials being delayed may lead to poorly executed inventory and 
product planning, in turn leading to lower gross margins and delayed production.]
▪▪
Defective raw materials are returned promptly to suppliers. [Threat: Defective raw 
materials not being returned on a timely basis may lead to cash being committed 
to unproductive resources and ultimately lower gross margins.]
▪▪
All transfers of raw materials to production are recorded accurately and in the appropri­
ate period. [Threat: Transfers of materials not being recorded accurately or in the correct 
period may lead to misstated product costs and misstated margins in particular periods.]
▪▪
All direct and indirect expenses associated with production are recorded accurately 
and in the appropriate period. [Threat: Direct and indirect expenses are recorded 
inaccurately and in the wrong period, leading to misstated financial statements.]
▪▪
All transfers of completed units of production to finished goods inventory are 
recorded completely and accurately in the appropriate period. [Threat: Transfers 
are not stated accurately, leading to poor production planning and potentially lost 
sales opportunities.]
▪▪
Finished goods returned by customers are recorded completely and accurately 
in the appropriate period. [Threat: Returns are not stated accurately, leading to 
misstated sales and finished goods inventory balances.]

Financial Reporting  ◾        277
▪▪
Finished goods received from production are recorded completely and accurately in 
the appropriate period. [Threat: Finished goods are not recorded accurately, leading 
to poor production planning and inaccurate inventory balances.]
▪▪
All shipments are recorded. [Threat: Shipments not recorded lead to poor produc­
tion planning, inaccurate inventory balances, and inaccurate sales.]
▪▪
Shipments are recorded accurately. [Threat: Shipments are recorded inaccurately, lead­
ing to poor production planning, inaccurate inventory balances, and inaccurate sales.]
▪▪
Costs of shipped inventory are transferred from inventory to cost of sales. [Threat: Costs 
of shipped inventory are not transferred to cost of sales, leading to poor production plan­
ning, inaccurate inventory balances, inaccurate cost of sales, and inaccurate margins.]
▪▪
Costs of shipped inventory are accurately recorded. [Threat: Costs of shipped inventory 
are not transferred accurately to cost of sales, leading to poor production planning, 
inaccurate inventory balances, inaccurate cost of sales, and inaccurate margins.]
▪▪
Costs of shipped inventory are transferred from inventory to cost of sales promptly 
and in the appropriate period. [Threat: Costs of shipped inventory are not trans­
ferred accurately to cost of sales in the appropriate period, leading to poor pro­
duction planning, inaccurate inventory balances, inaccurate cost of sales, and 
inaccurate margins in any one particular period.]
For payroll and human resources, the application control objectives (adapted from 
COBIT 4.1) should ensure that:
▪▪
Additions to the payroll master files represent valid employees. [Threat: Fraudulent 
additions to the payroll master file.]
▪▪
All new employees are added to the payroll master files, [Threat: New employees are 
not added to the payroll master, leading to understated payroll expense.]
▪▪
Terminated employees are removed from the payroll master files. [Threat: Termi­
nated employees are not removed from the payroll master, leading to unauthorized 
expense.]
▪▪
Time worked is accurately input and processed. [Threat: Inaccurate time is input, 
leading to misstated payroll expense and potential litigation.]
▪▪
Payroll is recorded in the appropriate period. [Threat: Payroll is recorded in  
the wrong period, leading to over‐ or understated payroll liabilities for any parti­
cular period.]
▪▪
Payroll (including compensation and withholdings) is accurately calculated and 
recorded. [Threat: Payroll is not accurately calculated, leading to an over‐ or under­
stated payroll expense.]
▪▪
Payroll is disbursed to appropriate employees. [Threat: Payroll is disbursed to inappro­
priate employees, leading to overstated and potentially fraudulent payroll expense.]
▪▪
Only valid changes are made to the payroll master files. [Threat: Invalid changes 
are made to payroll master files, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll 
expenses.]
▪▪
All valid changes to the payroll master files are input and processed. [Threat: 
Invalid changes are made to payroll, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll 
expenses.]

278	
◾  Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
▪▪
Changes to the payroll master files are accurate. [Threat: Invalid changes are made 
to payroll master, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll expenses.]
▪▪
Changes to the payroll master files are processed in a timely manner. [Threat: 
Changes made to payroll master files are untimely, creating the potential of unau­
thorized payroll expenses.]
▪▪
Payroll master file data remains up to date. [Threat: Untimely changes are made to 
payroll master file, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll expenses.]
▪▪
Only valid changes are made to the payroll withholding tables. [Threat: Invalid 
changes are made to payroll, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll 
expenses.]
▪▪
All valid changes to the payroll withholding tables are input and processed. [Threat: 
Invalid changes are made to payroll withholding files, creating the potential of 
unauthorized payroll expenses or payroll expenses that do meet legal requirements.]
▪▪
Changes to the payroll withholding tables are accurate. [Threat: Invalid changes 
are made to payroll, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll expenses.]
▪▪
Changes to the payroll withholding tables are promptly processed. [Threat: Invalid 
changes are made to payroll, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll expenses.]
▪▪
Payroll withholding table data remains up to date. [Threat: Invalid changes are 
made to payroll, creating the potential of unauthorized payroll expenses.]
For taxes, the application control objectives (Adapted from COBIT 4.1) should 
ensure that:
▪▪
Tax payments are correctly calculated and recorded to the general ledger. [Threat: 
Tax payments are inaccurately calculated and recorded, leading to misstated tax 
expense and tax liabilities on the financial statements.]
▪▪
Tax exposures and valuation allowances are correctly calculated and recorded. 
[Threat: Tax exposures and valuation allowances are inaccurately calculated 
and recorded, leading to misstated tax expense and tax liabilities on the financial 
statements.]
▪▪
Tax expenses are recorded in the correct periods. [Threat: Tax expenses are recorded 
in inaccurate periods, leading to an under‐ or overstatement of tax expense in any 
particular period.]
▪▪
Permanent and temporary differences are identified and recorded accurately. 
[Threat: Permanent and temporary differences are inaccurately recognized, lead­
ing to misstatements in tax expense in the current period and corrections in future 
periods.]
▪▪
Correct book income is used in the tax accrual. [Threat: Inaccurate book income 
is used in the tax accrual, leading to a misstated tax rate and inaccurate financial 
statements.]
▪▪
Tax assets, liabilities, and expenses are complete and correctly calculated and 
reported. [Threat: Assets, liabilities, and expenses are misstated, leading to inac­
curate financial statements.]
▪▪
Depreciation is calculated using appropriate bases, resulting in correct charges 
and tax ramifications. [Threat: Inappropriate bases are used in the depreciation 

PCAOB Guidance on IT Controls ◾    279
calculation, leading to misstated depreciation and in turn leading to misstated 
fi nancial statements in the current period and future periods.] 
 ▪
 Sales and use tax are calculated appropriately, correctly, and in a timely manner. 
[Threat: Inappropriate sales and use tax are calculated, leading to misstated sales 
taxes and use tax accruals.] 
 ▪
 Transfer pricing policies are up to date and accurately represented in the systems. 
[Threat: Transfer pricing is not up to date, leading to under‐ or overstatement of 
product costs, leading to inaccurate fi nancial statements.] 
 ▪
 All tax payments are accurately refl ected in the general ledger. [Threat: Tax pay­
ments are not accurately refl ected in the general ledger, leading to misstated tax 
payments and potentially inaccurate tax expense on the fi nancial statements.] 
 ▪
 Property tax fi lings are timely and accurate. [Threat: Tax payments are not made 
on a timely and accurate basis, ultimately leading to tax penalties associated with 
those payments.] 
PCAOB GUIDANCE ON IT CONTROLS 
 While COBIT remains  the most comprehensive benchmark for IT audit compliance, guidance 
from the PCAOB remains a meaningful reference and discusses IT controls for fi nancial 
reporting in Paragraphs 50 and 53 in PCAOB’s AS No. 2 (now superseded by AS No. 5). 
The PCAOB’s AS No. 2,  An Audit of Internal Control over Financial Reporting Performed in 
Conjunction with an Audit of Financial Statements , cites the following references: 
 50. Some controls (such as company‐level controls, described in paragraph 53) 
might have a pervasive effect on the achievement of many overall objectives 
of the control criteria. For example, information technology general controls 
over program development, program changes, computer operations, and access 
to programs and data help ensure that specifi c controls over the processing of 
transactions are operating effectively. In contrast, other controls are designed 
to achieve specifi c objectives of the control criteria. For example, management 
generally establishes specifi c controls, such as accounting for all shipping docu­
ments, to ensure that all valid revenue is recorded. 
 53. Company‐level controls are controls such as the following: 
 ▪
 Controls within the control environment, including tone at the top, the assign­
ment of authority and responsibility, consistent policies and procedures, and 
company‐wide programs, such as codes of conduct and fraud prevention, that 
apply to all locations and business units (see paragraphs 113 through 115 for 
further discussion); 
 ▪
 Management’s risk assessment process; 
 ▪
 Centralized processing and controls, including shared service environments; 
 ▪
 Controls to monitor results of operations; 
 ▪
 Controls to monitor other controls, including activities of the internal audit func­
tion, the audit committee, and self‐assessment programs; 

280 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
 ▪
 The period‐end fi nancial reporting process; and 
 ▪
 Board‐approved policies that address signifi cant business control and risk man­
agement practices. 
 Particularly noteworthy is the PCAOB’s heavy emphasis on entity controls or gen­
eral controls in Paragraph 53. The PCAOB specifi cally mentions monitoring, fraud pre­
vention, clear assignment of responsibility and authority, tone at the top, the period‐end 
fi nancial closing process, and board‐approved policies. PCAOB references program 
development but does not provide depth beyond the statements referenced in Paragraph 
50. The PCAOB also expects management to complete a risk assessment process such 
as that discussed in Chapter  10 . 
INTEGRATING COSO, COBIT, AND THE PCAOB 
 Why are COBIT 4.0, 4.1, or 5.0 relevant to fi nancial reporting and COSO? While COSO 
establishes an internal control framework for fi nancial reporting, COBIT establishes an 
IT governance and assurance framework for control and security and links the require­
ments, policies, and standards to support a common standard. For that reason, many 
companies use COBIT to supplement COSO when evaluating IT controls. Its fourth edi­
tion (COBIT 4.0) was released in December 2005 and includes important updates for 
Section 404 and strengthens links to frameworks such as COSO. An updated edition 
4.1 was released in May 2007 with the COBIT 4.1 release. COBIT 5.0 was released in 
2012 and is considered the next‐generation IT framework. So, although COBIT 5.0 was 
released in 2012, COBIT 4.0 and 4.1 have been widely used for audit frameworks and 
remain very relevant. For this chapter and the following chapter, COBIT 4.1 identifi es 
audit plans and procedures. 
 Practitioners describe PCAOB and COSO as high‐level concepts that in many 
instances lack specifi city about IT controls and business processes. Despite the lack of 
specifi city, IT audit assessments must comply with the PCAOB, SOx, or any other audit 
standards. PCAOB AS No. 2 recommends the COSO model for auditing SOx Section 404. 
An overlay of COSO to COBIT is useful to IT auditors and managers alike in complying 
with SOx.  IT Control Objectives for Sarbanes‐Oxley (ITGI 2013) maps COSO to COBIT. 
The authors of this book recommend COBIT as an effective IT audit approach for PCAOB 
and COSO compliance. 
 Table  9.7 overlays the COSO framework against COBIT 4.1. The COBIT 4.1 uses four 
defi nitions in its framework: (1) Plan and Organize, (2) Acquire and Implement, (3) Deliv­
ery and Support, and (4) Monitor and Evaluate. Chapter  10 uses the same defi nitions. 
For the presentation in Table  9.7 , the fi ve components of COSO, Control Environment, 
Risk Assessment, Control Activities, Information and Communication, and Monitoring, 
are used. The presentation illustrates how COBIT fi lls in the blanks as a supplementary 
and meaningful framework to create a robust IT auditing approach for either the SME 
or large enterprise. Chapter  10 builds out the intersections of COSO and COBIT with a 
suggested audit plan. 

Integrating COSO, COBIT, and the PCAOB ◾    281
 TABLE 9.7  Overlay of COSO to COBIT 4.1 
 
 
COBIT 4.1 and COSO Frameworks 
 
 COSO Components 
 Entity Level 
 Activity Level 
 
 Control 
Environment 
 Risk Assessment 
 Control Activities 
 Information and 
Communication 
 Monitoring 
 
 
 COBIT IT Processes 
 
 
 
 
 
 * 
 
 Plan and Organize (IT Environment) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Deﬁ ne IT strategic planning 
* 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
Deﬁ ne the information architecture 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Determine the technological direction 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
Deﬁ ne the IT processes, organization, 
and relationship 
* 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
Manage the IT investment 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
Communicate management aims and 
direction 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
Management of IT human resources 
* 
 
 
* 
 
* 
 
Management quality 
* 
 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
Assess and manage IT risks 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
 
Manage projects 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Acquire and Implement (Program 
Development and Program Change) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Identify automated solutions 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
Acquire and maintain application 
software 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
Acquire and maintain technology 
infrastructure 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
* 
Enable operation and use 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
Procure IT resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
Management changes 
 
* 
* 
 
* 
 
* 
Install and accredit solutions and 
changes 
 
 
* 
 
 
 
 
 Delivery and Support (Computer 
Operations and Access to 
Programs and Data) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
Deﬁ ne and manage service levels 
* 
 
* 
* 
* 
 
* 
Manage third‐party services 
* 
* 
* 
 
* 
 
 
Manage performance and capacity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ensure continuous service 
 
 
 
 
 
(continued)

282 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
 Entity Level 
 Activity Level 
 
 Control 
Environment 
 Risk Assessment 
 Control Activities 
 Information and 
Communication 
 Monitoring 
 
* 
Ensure systems security 
 
 
* 
* 
* 
 
 
Identify and allocate costs 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
Educate and train users 
* 
 
 
* 
 
 
* 
Manage service desk and incidents 
 
 
* 
* 
* 
 
* 
Manage the conﬁ guration 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
Manage problems 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
Manage data 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
Manage the physical environment 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
* 
Manage operations 
 
 
* 
* 
 
 
 
 Monitor and Evaluate (IT Environment) 
 
 
 
 
 
* 
 
Monitor and evaluate IT performance 
 
 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
Monitor and evaluate internal control 
* 
 
 
 
* 
* 
 
Ensure regulatory compliance 
 
 
* 
* 
* 
* 
 
Provide IT governance 
* 
 
 
 
* 
Source: COBIT 4.1 © 2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission. 
TABLE 9.7 (continued)
 As cited earlier, Klamm and Watson (2009) examined 490 fi rms reporting material 
weaknesses in the fi rst year of SOx compliance to evaluate the interrelatedness of weak 
COSO components and IT controls. Their research also examined compliance against 
COBIT 4.1 as a framework (see Table  9.8 ). The research cited by Klamm and Watson 
strongly suggests that a combined approach (i.e., using COBIT in combination with 
COSO) to evaluate internal controls is an effective approach. 
 The next step in the risk assessment is to integrate the IT audit risks into the fi nan­
cial audit plan after a comprehensive IT risk assessment. Chapter  10 completes the 
integration of the IT audit with a discussion of PCAOB IT guidance as well as an in‐depth 
evaluation of COBIT 4.1 as it applies to COSO. 
 How does the new release of COBIT 5.0 affect the IT audit of the SME? COBIT 5.0 
was released in 2012 to provide a combined governance and management framework 
for enterprise information and related technology, a framework that has evolved from 
COBIT 1.0, which focused almost entirely on the IT audit released in 1996 (Vander Wal, 
Lainhart, and Tessin 2012). The goal of COBIT 5.0 is to integrate all other major ISACA 
frameworks and guidance. COBIT 5.0 provides a comprehensive framework that assists 

Integrating COSO, COBIT, and the PCAOB ◾    283
 TABLE 9.8  Comparing SOx Weaknesses to COSO to COBIT 4.1 
Examples of SOx 404 Weaknesses Classifi ed by COSO and/or COBIT Component 
COSO Component 
SOx 404 Internal  Control 
Weakness 
COSO or COBIT Classifi cation 
Control environment 
Ineffective or understaffed 
audit committee members 
who likely lack the prerequisite 
qualiﬁ cations to be 
on the audit committee 
COSO Framework: Board of 
directors and audit committee 
identiﬁ ed as relevant to control 
environment effectiveness. 
Inadequate IT training 
COBIT 4.1: Educate and train 
users on the system on the control 
environment. 
Risk assessment 
Foreign, subsidiary, acquisition, 
merger, disposal, or 
reorganization issues 
COSO Evaluation Tools, 
pp. 26–27: Managing change 
includes handling foreign 
operations, corporate restructuring 
as well as new lines, products, 
activities, and acquisitions. 
Weak or nonexistent (IT) risk 
assessment 
Identiﬁ ed as weak by the ﬁ rm. 
Control activities 
Inadequate account 
reconciliations and segregation 
of duties 
COSO Executive Summary: Control 
activities include approvals, 
authorizations, veriﬁ cations, 
reconciliations, reviews of operating 
performance, security of assets, and 
segregation of duties. 
Logical access and security 
issues 
COBIT 4.1: Identiﬁ es ensured IT 
security, including access rights, as 
primarily a control activity. 
COSO Framework: Identiﬁ es access 
to data as a control activity. 
Information and 
communication 
Lack of communication 
COSO Executive Summary: 
Effective communication is essential 
to control objectives. 
Inadequate information ﬂ ow 
COSO Framework: Information 
should be appropriate, timely, 
current, accurate, and accessible. 
Weak (IT) information and 
communication 
Identiﬁ ed as weak by the ﬁ rm. 
Monitoring 
Lack of supervision or oversight 
COSO Executive Summary: 
Monitoring includes supervisory 
activities. 
COSO Framework: “Supervisory 
activities provide oversight of 
control functions.” 
Weak (IT) monitoring 
Identiﬁ ed as weak by the ﬁ rm. 
Source: Adapted from Klamm and Watson 2009. 

284 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
enterprises to achieve their goals and deliver value through effective governance and 
management of enterprise IT. (See Figure  9.5 .) 
 COBIT 5.0 reaches beyond a framework for the IT function and treats information 
and related technologies as core assets to the enterprise in one single integrated frame­
work starting with “meeting shareholder needs” in Step 1 and ending with “separat­
ing governance from management” in Step 5 in Figure  9.6 . An integrated framework 
considers all IT‐related governance and management enablers to be enterprise‐wide and 
end‐to‐end, and resembles the same footprint as the fi nancial reporting assertions, as 
those assertions are enterprise‐wide and end‐to‐end. Effi cient and effective governance 
and management of enterprise IT require a holistic approach, taking into account sev­
eral interacting components. 
 COBIT 5 defi nes a set of enablers to support the implementation of a comprehensive 
governance and management system for enterprise IT. Enablers are broadly defi ned as 
anything that can help to achieve the objectives of the enterprise. The COBIT 5 frame­
work defi nes seven categories of enablers (see Figure  9.7 ): 
 1.  Principles, policies, and frameworks 
 2.  Processes 
 3.  Organizational structures 
 4.  Culture, ethics, and behavior 
 5.  Information 
 FIGURE  9.5  Evolution of COBIT 
Source: Vander Wal, Lainhart, and Tessin 2012. 
Audit
COBIT 1
1996
1998
2000
Year
Evolution
2012
2005/2007
Controls
COBIT 2
Management
COBIT 3
IT Governance
COBIT 4
Governance of
Enterprise IT
COBIT 5

Integrating COSO, COBIT, and the PCAOB ◾    285
 6.  Services, infrastructure, and applications 
 7.  People, skills, and competencies 
 The COBIT 5.0 framework makes a clear distinction between governance 
and management. These two disciplines encompass different types of activities, 
require different organizational structures, and serve different purposes. According 
to COBIT 5.0 (2012b): 
 Governance ensures that stakeholder needs, conditions and options are 
evaluated to determine balanced, agreed‐on enterprise objectives to be 
achieved; setting direction through prioritization and decision making; and 
monitoring performance and compliance against agreed‐on direction and 
objectives.  
 And according to COBIT 5.0: “Management plans, builds, runs and monitors 
activities in alignment with the direction set by the governance body to achieve the 
enterprise objectives.” COBIT 5.0 emphasizes an end‐to‐end approach using a holistic 
framework. An in‐depth comparison between COSO and COBIT 5.0 is beyond the 
scope of this text.  
 FIGURE  9.6  COBIT 5.0 Principles 
 Source: ISACA 2012b. 
1. Meeting
Stakeholder
Needs
5. Separating
Governance
From
Management
4. Enabling a
Holistic
Approach
3. Applying a
Single
Integrated
Framework
COBIT 5
Principles
2. Covering the
Enterprise
End-to-end

286 
◾ Risk, Controls, Financial Reporting, and an Overlay of COSO on COBIT
SUMMARY 
 According to the PCAOB’s inspection fi ndings, the PCAOB found problems with the audit 
of internal controls for fi nancial reporting in 15 percent of all audits in its 2010 inspec­
tion cycle and 22 percent of all audits in its 2011 inspection cycle. Workload staffi ng, 
attrition, the fi rms’ training and guidance, ineffective communications, and AS No. 5, 
COSO, and COBIT are contributing factors to the trend. Firms are creating more audit 
risks for themselves. In combination with SMEs that by their nature have weaker bal­
ance sheets, income statements that are more fragile, and management teams that are 
less seasoned, the SME client base remains in a high‐risk environment. As if that were 
not enough, the expectations for government oversight, globalization of the markets 
COBIT 5 Enablers
2. Processes
5. Information
6. Services,
Infrastructure, and
Applications
COBIT 5: Does it fit the SME ?
Premise: SMEs are frequently
dominated by strong personalities
and executives at the senior level.
Premise: SMEs are higher risk by
nature given personnel, the balance
sheet, market position, other
factors discussed in COSO, and
other frameworks.
Premise: SMEs are an unlikely
candidate for 37 processes within
COBIT 5.0.
COBIT 5.0 fit: The principles,
practices, analytical tools, and
models are designed for business
leaders versus having an
emphasis on IT leaders. COBIT
5.0 provides a framework for
governance and management of
IT and should be compatible with
a top-down focus.
COBIT 5.0 fit: Value and risk
governance are both significant to
COBIT 5.0. Business risks are IT risks
in COBIT 5.0. Risk identification and
assessment, risk management, and
risk monitoring are integral to SME
risk governance.
COBIT 5.0 fit: COBIT 5.0 should be
implemented on a piecemeal basis
with a focus on high value where
immediate gains can be harvested.
COBIT 5.0 should prioritize on SME
weaknesses, e.g., security, and the
organization should respond with
appropriate pieces.
7. People, Skills,
and Competencies
3. Organizational
Structures
1.  Principles, Policies, and Frameworks
3. Culture, Ethics,
and Behavior
 FIGURE  9.7  COBIT 5.0 Enablers 
Source: Adapted from ISACA 2012b. 

Summary  ◾        287
and operations, and rapidly evolving technologies are adding to the complexities and 
ultimately the audit risks.
While COSO establishes an internal control framework for financial reporting, 
COBIT establishes an IT framework for control and security and links the requirements, 
policies, and standards to support a common standard. For that reason, many compa­
nies use COBIT to supplement COSO when evaluating IT controls. COSO released an 
updated Internal Control—Integrated Framework in 2013 (COSO 2013). This release for­
malizes many of the fundamental concepts introduced in the original COSO framework. 
The five principles of internal control in 2013 were the five concepts of internal control 
in the previous COSO release. Consistent with earlier frameworks, the internal control 
principles provide the user assistance in designing and implement­ing systems of inter­
nal control and in understanding requirements for effective internal control. The COSO 
framework has expanded its discussion of technology but consistent with past releases 
has declined to address risk associated with specific technologies.


289
10
 CHAPTER  TEN 
 Integrating the IT Audit 
into the Financial Audit 
 W
HAT IS THE SCOPE OF the IT audit? How does it relate to Control Objec-
tives for Information and related Technology (COBIT) and the guidelines 
published by Committee of Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Com-
mission (COSO) as discussed in Chapter  9 ? Moreover, why does it matter, and what is the 
impact of  IT material weaknesses (MWs)? The footprint of the IT MWs may be larger than 
it appears. The audit scope is extremely important to fi nancial reporting. 
 A risk analysis provides a steering mechanism or direction for the audit while an 
overlay of COSO against COBIT maps the traversable and relevant audit paths. Like a 
cross‐country trip in an automobile, knowing the path is extremely important. Not all 
roads on the map are signifi cant and material to the objective. Only roads that are rel-
evant to the material assertions of the fi nancial statements are signifi cant to the auditor. 
 Research strongly suggests that MWs in IT controls spill over to other areas of the enter-
prise and may be a harbinger of additional internal control problems in other areas of the 
enterprise. As earlier chapters cite, Klamm and Watson (2009) identifi ed several relation-
ships between the reported MWs and the fi ve components of COSO, including these three:
 1.  A weak control environment has a positive association with the remaining four 
weak COSO components (i.e., COSO components are likely to affect each other). 
 2.  IT‐related weak COSO components frequently spill over to create more non‐
IT‐related material weaknesses and misstatements. 
 3.  IT‐related weak COSO components negatively affect reporting reliability and add to 
the number of non‐IT MWs reported. 
 While this chapter provides a structured comparison of COBIT, COSO, and the 
PCAOB, a handful of questions and simple observations can provide strong clues about 

290 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
the SME IT risk profi le at either the entity level or the account or transaction level 
(Helms 2012; Singleton 2009), including:
 ▪
 A critical measure of IT risk is the competency of the IT staff; the more competent 
the IT staff, the lower the risks associated with all elements of IT. [general controls] 
 ▪
 Policies and procedures, IT governance, and project management practices directly 
affect risk. A brief interview addressing recent projects, key aspects of IT gover-
nance, and various policies and procedures can provide considerable insight into 
IT risk. [general controls] 
 ▪
 Does the IT infrastructure itself present risks to achieving the business goals and 
objectives? Does the company use the latest versions of software or is it committed 
to previous releases that may be very outdated and that use custom‐coded software? 
Does the company use software whose resources are readily available to maintain, 
program, and support in the region? [both general controls and application controls] 
 ▪
 If the IT function writes or modifi es code, the degree to which the staff uses best 
practices of the systems development life cycle (SDLC) reduces risks in the outcomes 
of the staff and IT. [both general controls and application controls] 
 ▪
 Do access controls suffi ciently limit access to systems and information assets by 
effective authorization and authentication controls? [both general controls and 
application controls] 
 ▪
 Does the IT management test new systems and applications thoroughly before 
deployment? Does the enterprise test applications on a standalone basis and subse-
quently test on interfaces with other applications and whole systems? [both general 
controls and application controls] 
 ▪
 Does new hardware go through the same process of testing in a staging area? [gen-
eral controls] 
 ▪
 Can the entity recover from a business interruption or disaster without signifi cant 
losses? Business continuity, or disaster recovery, is a key aspect of general controls. 
[general controls] 
RISKS, MATURITY, AND ASSESSMENTS 
 ISACA summarizes inherent risk around the technology, the qualifi cations and prac-
tices of the IT staff, the business processes, and the signifi cance to the fi nancial reports 
(see Table  10.1 ). If the technology is complex or unique, then the staff supporting the 
software should be qualifi ed accordingly. Qualifi ed staff should support complex busi-
ness processes as some business processes are materially more complex than others. 
Other factors such as prior experience and the nature of the fi nancial accounts sup-
ported by the business process will infl uence the risk assessment.
 Another approach in assessing the qualifi cations of the IT organization support-
ing material fi nancial accounts is to develop a  maturity model (MM). The IT Gover-
nance Institute (2007) suggests MM levels of 0 through 5 (see Table  10.2 ) to outline 
the relationship of internal controls to the qualifi cations of the IT personnel supporting 

Risks, Maturity, and Assessments ◾    291
 TABLE 10.1  Inherent Risk Considerations 
Example Risk Factors 
Considerations for Higher Risk Considerations for Lower Risk 
Nature of technology 
Complex, unique, customized, 
developed in‐house 
Simple, commonly used, not 
customized, off‐the‐shelf 
Nature of people 
Inexperienced, lack of training, 
limited number of people, high 
turnover 
Experienced, trained, and specialized, 
sufﬁ cient resources, low turnover  
Nature of processes 
Decentralized, multilocation, 
ad hoc 
Centralized, formalized, consistent 
Past experience 
History of problems, including 
processing errors, system 
outages, data corruption 
No history of problems 
Signiﬁ cance to the 
ﬁ nancial reports 
Directly used for initiating and 
recording amounts into the 
ﬁ nancial reports 
Indirectly used for analytical purposes 
but does not initiate or record 
amounts into the ﬁ nancial reports 
 Source:  COBIT 4.1 © 2007 IT Governance Institute. All rights reserved. Used by permission. 
the business process. The underlying premise of the MM is that if an organization 
does not have defi ned and standardized software development processes, it could be 
unable to provide consistent and reliable controls. The information technology, busi-
ness operations, and accounting organization must be able to support the internal 
controls of the organization on a systematic and repeatable level—the controls are 
integral to the operation of the enterprise. That underlying premise is also applicable 
to the change management processes to support SOx compliance. An organization 
with a consistent and reliable development and change management process in IT 
applications will enable compliant IT implementations and contribute to the com-
pany’s competitive and strategic advantages.
 The MM Levels 0, 1, or 2 for internal controls would not be acceptable for an audit 
committee, the chief fi nancial offi cer (CFO), the vice president of internal audit, or the 
chief executive offi cer (Table  10.2 ). An MM Level 1 defi nition that includes an ad‐hoc 
reaction to control issues and high‐level review of internal controls would not meet 
SOx requirements. Using the guidelines at MM Level 2 (Table  10.2 ), that “assessment 
of control needs occurs only when needed for selected IT processes to determine the 
current level of control maturity” and uses an “informal workshop approach,” would 
not be acceptable by most CFOs and external auditors for SOx compliance. With an 
emphasis on value and risk drivers, detailed analyses, tools and workshops, full support 
from business process owners, and accountability, COBIT’s MM Levels 3 or 4 for internal 
controls would be acceptable for an audit committee as an intermediate target if MM 
Level 5 were the ultimate target. An audit committee or CFO would prefer an MM Level 
4 that is reasonably close to an MM Level 5. 
 After interviewing several organizations that implemented SOx, Ho and Oddo (2007) 
identifi ed several factors that appeared common to successful SOx implementations. 
Among the most important, senior management must drive, encourage, and 

292 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
 TABLE 10.2  Maturity Model (MM) for Internal Control 
Maturity Level 
Status of the Internal Control Environment 
Level 0, Nonexistent 
 ▪
 There is no recognition of the need for internal control. 
 ▪
 Control is not part of the organization’s culture or mission. 
Level 1, Ad hoc 
 ▪
 There is some recognition of the need for internal control. 
 ▪
 The approach to risk and control is ad hoc. 
 ▪
 There is no communication or monitoring of risks or controls. 
Level 2, Repeatable but 
intuitive 
 ▪
 Controls are in place but are not documented. 
 ▪
 Operation is dependent on the knowledge and motivation of 
individuals. 
Level 3, Deﬁ ned 
controls are in place 
and adequately 
documented. 
 ▪
 Controls are in place and adequately documented. 
 ▪
 Operating effectiveness is evaluated on a periodic basis. 
 ▪
 An average number of issues is outstanding. 
Level 4, Managed and 
measurable 
 ▪
 A formal, documented evaluation of controls occurs frequently. 
 ▪
 Many controls are automated and regularly reviewed. 
 ▪
 Management is likely to detect most but not all control issues. 
Level 5, Optimized 
 ▪
 Enterprise-wide risk and control program provides continuous and 
effective control. 
 ▪
 Internal control and risk management are integrated with 
enterprise practices. 
 ▪
 Controls are automated using real‐time monitoring with full 
accountability for control monitoring, risk management, and 
compliance enforcement. 
 Source:  Adapted from IT Governance Institute 2007. 
if necessary mandate SOx ownership throughout the organization. Additional factors 
common to successful SOx implementations described by Ho and Oddo include:
 1.  Effective documentation with specifi c emphasis on the documentation of testing 
guidelines. 
 2.  Maintenance of cost‐effectiveness of the SOx implementation. 
 3.  Effective project designs, staffi ng, and support. 
 Common to the three factors just cited, effective execution at Level 3 or above (Table 
 10.2 ) is essential to support change management and IT controls for SOx compliance. 
Through a handful of meaningful questions, an auditor can quickly assess whether those 
factors are in place in a particular enterprise. If those factors are not in place, the enter-
prise is probably at MM Level 2 or lower and is at higher risk of failed internal controls. 
 As earlier citations demonstrate, Steps 1 through 7 in Figure  10.1 describe a sys-
tematic examination of the fi nancial statements and a risk assessment for fi nancial 
reporting.

Risks, Maturity, and Assessments ◾    293
 FIGURE 10.1  Scoping the IT Audit Plan for Signiﬁ cant Accounts, Disclosures, and 
Business Process/Cycles 
 Source: Adapted from PricewaterhouseCoopers 2004a. 
Determine Multiple-Location Coverage of Related Entities
Step 1
Identify significant IT audit risks by considering
• Items separately disclosed in the consolidated financial statements
• Qualitative and quantitative factors
• Materiality at the consolidated financial statement level
Identify business processes/cycles and subprocesses/cycles and
map to material accounts and disclosures
Identify the relevant financial statement assertions for each significant
account and disclosure
Perform a risk assessment of the business subprocesses/subcycles
using a comparision of COBIT versus COSO and PCAOB for guidance
on control objectives
Steps 1 through 7 are consistent with COSO Internal Control over
Financial Reporting discussed in Chapter 9
Obtain a complete listing of locations or business units
Identify locations subject to testing and assess coverage
Map locations to the business process/cycles and subprocesses/
subcycles identified previously
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 5
Step 6
Step 7
 A dashboard for a risk assessment (see Table  10.3 ) using factors discussed in 
Tables  10.1 ,  10.2 ., and Figure  10.1 can identify the next steps in the risk assessment 
process. Factors including self‐assessment input from management, prior unmediated 
IT audit issues, and the last year in which an IT audit was conducted can be mapped 
against material fi nancial accounts and business processes in the enterprise. The column 
(in Table  10.3 ) labeled “Self‐Assessment” is management’s feedback, created through 
interviews and potentially with the help of the internal audit function, if an internal 
audit function exists. The nature and qualifi cations of the support staff can be derived 
from the MM analysis from Table  10.2 . The overall level of the MM can be posted under 
the column “Maturity Level of Processes.” While the grid columns suggest an even 
weighting between the columns, a history of prior problems, inexperienced or poorly 
qualifi ed staff, complex systems, or how application data is being used in the fi nancial 
statements may drive an overweighting of one column versus another.
 Ultimately, a decision must be made as to whether the fi nancial audit requires an IT 
audit as part of its scope given the risk assessments identifi ed in this grid. The column 
in Table  10.3 labeled “Overall IT Risk Score” is a mathematical accumulation of the 
weightings used in the prior columns. Scores indicating “low risk” or an average close to 
“1” should be a low priority for an IT audit. Scores with a “medium” or “high” are high 

294 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
 TABLE 10.3  Sample Risk Assessment Grid for an SME: Luther Sound Exploration Inc. 
LSE, Inc. Risk Assessment 
Self‐assessment 
Unremediated Issues 
Last Year Audited 
Nature of Technology 
Nature of Support Staff 
Nature of Processes 
Signifi cance to Financial 
Reports 
Overall IT Risk Score 
Combined Financial and
 IT Audit 
Rating Score, High = 3, Medium = 2, Low = 1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Report Writers 
Crystal Reports 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Excel 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Data Base 
MS SQL 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Access 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Operating System  
Win Server 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Windows Vista 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Windows XP 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Software—Applications 
Payroll 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Human Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts Payable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
General Ledger 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fixed Assets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Accounts Receivable 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Hardware  
Workstations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Servers 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Networking 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Firewalls 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
WAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
LAN 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Wireless Devices 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
All Other 
Data Center Operations/Computer Rooms 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Help Desk Function 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E‐commerce 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
E‐mail/Encryption 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Backup/Disaster Recovery Plan 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Virus Protection 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Cross‐Referencing COBIT to the PCAOB and COSO ◾    295
on the priority list for an IT audit. After the risk score is calculated, another column (not 
shown in Table  10.3 ) should identify application controls and general controls. 
CROSS‐REFERENCING COBIT TO THE PCAOB AND COSO 
 Tables  10.4 ,  10.5 ,  10.6 , and  10.7 cross‐reference COBIT to PCAOB and COSO in the 
categories of Plan and Organize, Program Development and Change, Computer Opera-
tions, and Monitor and Evaluate. The analysis in Table  10.3 should point the way for 
evaluations in the following tables. Financial accounts and nonfi nancial disclosures 
that are material to the fi nancial reporting and are “medium” or “high” risk in Table 
 10.3 are candidates for active scrutiny by the IT auditor.
 IT auditors authored COBIT while fi nancial auditors and regulators authored the 
COSO and PCAOB guidelines, whose objectives are to maintain the integrity of fi nancial 
reporting. A visual comparison across the various columns in Table 10.3 will help you 
to identify different emphases. The information in Tables 10.4 to 10.7 helps the fi nancial 
auditor to examine COBIT, COSO, and PCAOB guidance simultaneously. The purpose of 
the comparisons is to identify signifi cant areas within the COBIT framework that could 
affect fi nancial reporting. The last column summarizes the potential impact to the enter-
prise reporting a descriptive of either “high” or “medium.” The suggested ratings used 
in the last column are just that; the auditor has the fi nal judgment as to whether a par-
ticular rating should be higher or lower than the guidelines suggested in this chapter. 
 Beyond the guidance provided in the following tables, an in‐depth framework for 
the evaluation and testing of internal controls is provided in a discussion following the 
tables irrespective of whether the applications are Oracle, Microsoft Dynamics, IBM, 
QuickBooks, or a custom‐written application. A challenging question is: How does an 
auditor scale the discussions included in the following tables to an SME? The IT audit 
guidelines support more complex IT environments than QuickBooks, Microsoft Dynam-
ics, or Microsoft Excel. For an SME with 10 employees (e.g., the retail dry cleaner in Des 
Moines, IA, that uses QuickBooks), can the auditor expect a strategic IT plan with a com-
prehensive risk assessment? Not likely! While several of the items referenced in COBIT 
are not scalable in a very small SME, an assessment of the IT personnel and general IT 
controls remains very relevant. If the general controls have material weaknesses with-
out compensating controls, it is very diffi cult to maintain the integrity of the application 
controls. The auditor will rely on very high levels of general controls and application 
control testing listed in each of these tables for a very small SME. For many companies 
with 500 or fewer employees, the IT environments can be very complex and, as such, 
the content in the following tables may all be applicable and material. 
 The framework in Figure  10.2 walks through the steps of evaluating IT control 
exceptions or failures in IT control objectives. Assuming a control failure is not iso-
lated, the fi nancial controls team evaluates whether the control is an application con-
trol or a general control (ITGC). The fi nancial controls team should assess all material 
weaknesses in application controls. If an ITGC failure does not have a compensating 
control(s), the fi nancial controls team should assess whether it affects an application 
control for fi nancial reporting.  

296
 TABLE 10.4  Plan and Organize 
Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.
PCAOB References
COSO Reference
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
IT strategic 
planning 
What controls ensure that IT strategies are aligned with business 
objectives?
PO 01
 
 
 
 
X
X
 
X
X
High
Information 
architecture 
What controls ensure that the information architecture has been 
deﬁ ned and executed to ensure quality and integrity?
PO 02
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
X
 
Medium
IT organization and 
relationships 
What controls for IT roles, responsibilities, and data ownership have 
been deﬁ ned and appropriately segregated?
PO 04
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
X
 
Medium
Communication of 
management aims 
and direction 
What controls for IT governance policies and procedures ensure 
that appropriate personnel receive communications and directives 
for compliance?
PO 06
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
X
X
Medium

297
Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.
PCAOB References
COSO Reference
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
Management of 
human resources
What controls ensure appropriate response to job terminations and 
that the IT organization has adopted and promoted the company’s 
culture of integrity and ethical business practices?
PO 07
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
X
 
Medium
Compliance 
with external 
requirements
What controls ensure that the organization monitors changes in 
external legal and regulatory requirements?
PO 08
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
X
Medium
Assessment of risks 
What controls ensure that a comprehensive IT entity- and activity- 
level risk assessment framework is used to periodically assess risks?
PO 09
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
Medium
Management of 
quality 
What controls ensure that documentation of all signiﬁ cant IT 
processes, controls, and activities exist and are maintained in 
connection with a quality assurance plan for all major IT functions?
PO 11
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
X
X
Medium
 Source: Adapted from COBIT 4.1 2007. 

298
 TABLE 10.5  Program Development and Program Change 
Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.: Acquire and Implement
PCAOB References
COSO Reference
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
Acquire or develop application 
software 
What controls assure that application and system 
software is developed to support ﬁ nancial reporting 
requirements?
AO 02
X
X
X
X
 
 
X
 
 
High
Acquire or develop technology 
infrastructure
What controls assure that technology infrastructure, 
application and system software are developed to 
support ﬁ nancial reporting requirements?
AO 03
X
X
X
X
 
 
X
 
 
High
Develop and maintain policies 
and procedures
What controls assure that policies and procedures exist 
to deﬁ ne acquisition and maintenance processes?
AO 04
X
X
X
X
 
 
X
X
 
High
Install and test application 
software and technology 
infrastructure
What controls assure that the systems are tested 
and validated prior to being placed into production 
processes?
AO 05
X
X
X
X
 
 
X
 
 
High
Manage changes
What controls assure that system changes for ﬁ nancial 
reporting signiﬁ cance are authorized before being 
moved to production?
AO 06
 
X
 
X
 
 
X
 
X
High
 Source: Adapted from COBIT 4.1 2007. 

299
 TABLE 10.6  Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data 
Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.
PCAOB References
COSO Reference
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
Deﬁ ne and manage 
service levels
What controls ensure that speciﬁ ed service levels exist and key 
performance indicators are monitored and evaluated?
DS 01 
X
X
X
X
X
 
X
 
X
High 
Manage third-party 
service 
What controls exist to ensure that qualiﬁ ed third-party providers 
are selected and that security, availability, and processing integrity 
are reported systematically?
DS 02 
X
X
X
X
X
X
X
 
X
High
Manage performance 
and capacity 
What controls ensure that IT management monitors system 
capacity and performance?
DS 03 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
X
Out of 
Scope
Ensure systems 
security 
What controls ensure that ﬁ nancial systems and subsystems are 
secured?
DS 05 
 
 
X
X
 
 
X
X
X
High
Educate and train 
users 
What controls provide for identifying and documenting the training 
needs of personnel?
DS 07
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
X
 
Out of 
Scope 
(continued)

300
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
Manage the 
conﬁ guration
What controls ensure security, processing and availability for the IT 
conﬁ guration?
DS 09 
 
 
X
X
 
 
X
X
 
High
Manage problems 
and incidents 
What controls ensure that incidents are properly resolved and 
investigated?
DS 10 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
X
X
Medium
Manage data 
What controls ensure that data remain complete, accurate and 
valid in the update, storage, and back-up process?
DS 11 
 
 
X
X
 
 
X
X
 
High
Manage facilities 
What controls ensure that facilities are equipped with 
environmental controls?
DS 12
 
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
Medium
Manage operations 
What controls ensure that programs are executed as planned and 
deviations are identiﬁ ed and investigated?
DS 13 
 
 
X
X
 
 
X
X
 
Medium
 Source: Adapted from COBIT 4.1 2007. 
TABLE 10.6 (continued)

301
 TABLE 10.7  Monitor and Evaluate 
Luther Sound Exploration, Inc.
PCAOB References
COSO Reference
COBIT Objective
Control Objective
COBIT Reference
Access to Programs and Data
Computer Operations
Program Development
Program Change
Control Environment
Risk Assessment
Control Activities
Information and Communication
Monitoring
Impact to LSE Financial 
Reporting? (High, Medium, Low)
Monitoring 
What controls ensure that performance indicators 
have been deﬁ ned and progress is monitored by 
management?
MO 01
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
X
High
Adequacy of internal 
controls 
What controls ensure that IT management monitors 
the design and operating effectiveness of internal 
controls?
MO 02
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
High
Independent 
assurance 
What controls ensure that independent control reviews 
are conducted and documented of 3-rd party providers 
and major IT systems before implementation?
MO 03
 
 
 
 
X
 
 
 
X
High
Internal audit 
What controls ensure that the internal audit plan is based 
on a risk assessment including IT and covers the full 
range of IT audit activities?
MO 04  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
X
High
 Source: Adapted from COBIT 4.1 2007. 

302 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
 Not discussed in these tables is how the fi nancial auditor or IT auditor accumulates 
the appropriate information for the evaluation or testing. The fi nancial auditor or the 
IT audit team will interview various levels of management, accumulate reports and 
documentation, and test applications to build understanding of the audit environment. 
A comprehensive discussion of how the auditor accumulates evidence for evaluating 
internal controls for IT control objectives is beyond the scope of this text. 
 FIGURE  10.2  Framework for Evaluating IT Controls 
 Source: Adapted from COBIT 4.1 2007. 
Identify IT control
exception
Design issue?
Isolated
incidence?
Y
Y
Y
Y
N
N
N
N
N
ITGC
1
2
Y
Application control
Control deficiency—only
consider for aggregation
Control exception only;
no further work required.
Next steps are determined by
the materiality of the accounts
involved.
COSO guidance is required.
Please reference Internal Control
over Financial Reporting,
Guidance for Smaller Public
Companies in Chapter 9.
Control is minimally a
significant deficiency; evaluate
as a potential material
weakness. Please reference
Internal Control over Financial
Reporting, Guidance for Smaller
Public Companies in Chapter 9.
Application
control or
ITGC?
Compensating
controls?
Caused
application
control failure?
Pervasive;
undermining
control
environment?
Previously
reported and not
remediated?

Plan and Organize ◾    303
PLAN AND ORGANIZE 
 This section will walk through eight control objectives and their signifi cance to the 
PCAOB and COSO guidelines. Table  10.4 provides a roadmap for the auditor to deter-
mine relevant control objectives in the Plan and Organize section of COBIT. The 
discussion including the control objective, evaluation, and testing was adapted from 
ISACA’S COBIT 4.1 audit guidelines (ISACA 2007). This discussion format helps the 
reader create an audit plan to follow in the course of the IT audit. 
 It is important to note that several control objectives from the Plan and Organize 
section of COBIT were not included in Table  10.4 because they were considered less 
material to the guidelines of the PCAOB or COSO for fi nancial reporting purposes. The 
signifi cance of COBIT to the PCAOB and COSO guidelines is in the view of the authors 
and not ISACA; they are included in this book as suggested guidelines. 
 Luther Sound Exploration Inc.: Plan and Organize*  
 Control Objective: IT Strategic Planning 
 What controls and activities ensure that IT management aligns strategies with business 
objectives using input from senior management, user management, and the IT function? 
Evaluating Internal Controls: Structured IT planning process is in place including:
 ▪
 Support for the organization’s mission and goals with IT initiatives. 
 ▪
 Feasibility studies of IT initiatives. 
 ▪
 Risk assessments of all signifi cant IT initiatives. 
 ▪
 Reengineering of IT initiatives to refl ect changes in the enterprise’s mission and 
goals. 
 ▪
 Alternative strategies for data applications, technology, and organization. 
Testing Controls: Evaluate and test: 
 ▪
 Whether minutes from IT planning/steering committee meetings are consistent 
with control objectives. 
 ▪
 Whether planning methodology deliverables exist and are as prescribed. 
 ▪
 Whether relevant IT initiatives are included in the IT long‐ and short‐range plans. 
 ▪
 Whether IT long‐ and short‐range plans are consistent with long‐ and short‐range 
plans and the organization’s requirements. 
 ▪
 Whether IT long‐range plans are systematically translated into short‐range plans. 
 ▪
 Whether plans are actionable in an SDLC format. 
 Control Objective: Information Architecture 
 What controls and activities ensure the information architecture maintains the quality 
and integrity of information used for fi nancial and disclosure purposes? 
* COBIT objectives are adapted from COBIT 4.1 (ISACA 2007).

304	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
Evaluating Internal Controls: A structured process maintains the enterprise 
data dictionary and data syntax rules:
▪▪
Classification of data, including security categories and data ownership, and access 
rules are appropriately defined.
▪▪
Standards define the default classification for data assets that do not contain a data 
classification identifier.
Determine whether IT policies and procedures address that:
▪▪
Authorization process is in place requiring the owner of the data, and access to that 
data and to the security attributes of the data.
▪▪
Security levels define each data classification.
▪▪
Access levels define each data classification.
▪▪
Access to sensitive data requires explicit access levels and data is provided only on 
a need‐to‐know basis.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Existing applications and pending projects use a common enterprise data dictionary.
▪▪
Data dictionary documentation adequately defines data attributes and security 
levels for each data item.
▪▪
Data classifications, security levels, access levels, and defaults are appropriate.
Test that each data classification clearly defines:
▪▪
Who has access.
▪▪
Who determines the level of access.
▪▪
Specific approval steps needed for access.
▪▪
Special requirements for access (i.e., nondisclosure or confidentiality agreement).
Control Objective: IT Organization and Relationships
What controls and activities for IT roles, responsibilities, and data ownership ensure IT 
personnel’s execution of the defined roles, responsibilities, and data ownership?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Membership and functions of the IT planning/steering committee exist and 
responsibilities are identified.
▪▪
Policies exist outlining roles and responsibilities for all personnel within the 
organization for information systems, internal control, and security.
▪▪
Regular campaigns exist to enhance internal control, security awareness, and 
discipline.

Plan and Organize  ◾        305
▪▪
Processes exist within quality assurance to schedule resources and ensure comple-
tion of quality assurance testing and signoff before systems or system changes are 
implemented.
▪▪
Management assigns organization‐wide responsibility for formulation of internal 
control and security (both logical and physical) policies.
▪▪
Organization’s security policy defines responsibilities for information security for 
each information asset owner.
▪▪
Policies and procedures cover data and system ownership for all major data sources 
and systems.
▪▪
Procedures systematically define changes in data and system ownership on a regu-
lar basis.
▪▪
Policies and procedures describe supervisory practices, and all personnel have suf-
ficient authority and the resources to perform their roles and responsibilities.
▪▪
Ensure that segregation of duties maintain the separation of authorization, record 
keeping, and custody of assets or the equivalent while maintaining an effective 
technology solution.
▪▪
Policies and procedures exist for the evaluation and reevaluation of IT position (job) 
descriptions.
▪▪
Appropriate roles and responsibilities exist for key processes, including SDLC, infor-
mation security, acquisition, and capacity planning.
▪▪
Appropriate and key performance indicators and/or critical success factors are 
defined.
▪▪
IT policies and procedures control the activities of consultants and other contract 
personnel to ensure the protection of the organization’s assets.
▪▪
Procedures applicable to contracted IT services for adequacy and consistency with 
organization acquisition policies are monitored.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
The IT planning/steering committee oversees the IT function.
▪▪
The reporting hierarchy for the IT function is appropriate.
▪▪
IT function’s location in the organization is effective to provide a partnership with 
senior management.
▪▪
Senior IT management monitors, measures, and reports on the IT function’s 
performance.
▪▪
There is a process for analyzing actual results against target levels to determine the 
corrective actions taken.
▪▪
Users’/owners’ management assesses the IT function’s responsiveness and ability 
to provide timely and substantive IT information technology solutions that meet 
users’/owners’ needs.
▪▪
IT management is aware of its roles and responsibilities.
▪▪
Sufficient awareness of consistent application of security policies and procedures exist.
▪▪
Personnel attend information security and internal control training.
▪▪
Data and system ownership exists for all information assets.
▪▪
Data and system owners approve changes made to data and systems.

306	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Ownership exists for all data and systems.
▪▪
Asset’s owners approve access to all data and the asset.
▪▪
Job descriptions delineate authority and responsibility
▪▪
Job descriptions describe the required business, relational, and technical 
competencies.
▪▪
Individuals understand their job descriptions.
Control Objective: Communication of Management Aims and Direction
What controls and activities for IT governance policies and procedures ensure that 
appropriate personnel receive communications and directives for compliance with 
governing policies and procedures?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether organization policies and 
procedures create a framework and awareness program, giving specific attention to:
▪▪
Integrity.
▪▪
Ethical values.
▪▪
Code of conduct.
▪▪
Security and internal controls.
▪▪
Competence of personnel.
▪▪
Management philosophy and operating style.
▪▪
Accountability, attention, and direction provided by the board of directors or its 
equivalent.
Management has accepted full responsibility for formulating, developing, docu-
menting, promulgating, controlling, and regularly reviewing policies governing general 
aims and directives:
▪▪
Formal awareness program exists to provide ongoing communication and training 
related to management’s positive control environment.
▪▪
Organization policies and procedures ensure that appropriate and adequate 
resources are assigned to implement the organization’s policies in a timely manner.
▪▪
Appropriate procedures ensure that personnel understand the implemented policies 
and procedures, and that the policies and procedures are being followed.
▪▪
IT policies and procedures define, document, and maintain formal policies and 
objectives governing quality of systems and services produced, which are consis-
tent with the organization’s policies and objectives.
▪▪
Procedures address the need to periodically review and reapprove key standards, 
directives, policies, and procedures relating to IT.
Senior management accepts full responsibility for developing a framework for the 
overall approach to security and internal control. Security and internal control frame-
work specifies the security and internal control policy, purpose and objectives, man-
agement structure, scope within the organization, assignment of responsibilities, and 

Plan and Organize  ◾        307
definition of penalties and disciplinary actions associated with failing to comply with 
security and internal control policies.
Formal security and internal control policies identify the organization’s internal 
control process and include control components such as:
▪▪
Control environment
▪▪
Risk assessment
▪▪
Control activities
▪▪
Information and communication
▪▪
Monitoring
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Management fosters a positive control cover the key aspects, such as integrity, ethi-
cal values, code of conduct, security and internal controls, competence of the per-
sonnel, management philosophy and operating style, accountability, and attention.
▪▪
Employees understand the code of conduct and apply it.
▪▪
Management addresses the organization’s internal control environment on a regu-
lar basis.
▪▪
Management formulates, develops, documents, promulgates, and controls policies 
covering the internal control environment.
▪▪
Management conducts regular reviews of standards, directives, policies, and proce-
dures for continued appropriateness and its ability to adapt to changing conditions.
▪▪
Management monitors efforts to ensure that appropriate and adequate resources 
are assigned to implement the organization’s policies in a timely manner.
▪▪
Management enforces standards, directives, policies, and procedures concerning 
the internal control environment.
▪▪
Selected members of management are involved and understand the contents for 
security and internal control activities (i.e., exception reports, reconciliations, com-
parisons, etc.).
▪▪
Selected management have individual roles, responsibilities, and authorities that 
are clearly communicated and understood at all levels of the organization.
▪▪
Selected departments assess procedures for routinely monitoring security and inter-
nal control activities (i.e., exception reports, reconciliations, comparisons, etc.) and 
the process for providing feedback to management is occurring.
▪▪
Selected system documentation confirms that system‐specific management deci-
sions have been documented and approved in compliance with the SDLC.
▪▪
Management signs off on activities, applications systems, or technologies.
Control Objective: Management of Human Resources
What controls and activities ensure that the processes exist to support timely and appro-
priate response to job terminations and job changes, and that the IT organization has 
adopted and promoted the company’s culture of integrity and ethical business practices?

308	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Criteria ensure effective processes exist for recruiting and selecting personnel to 
fill open positions.
▪▪
Specifications of required qualifications take into account relevant requirements of 
professional bodies where appropriate.
▪▪
Training programs ensure organization’s minimum requirements concerning edu-
cation and general awareness covering security issues.
▪▪
Management ensures adequate personnel training and career development.
▪▪
Appropriate actions ensure technical and management skills gaps are filled.
▪▪
Ongoing cross‐training and backup of staff for critical job functions occurs.
▪▪
Enforcement of uninterrupted holiday policy occurs.
▪▪
Organization’s security clearance process is adequate.
▪▪
Employees are evaluated using competency profiles for the position and evaluations.
▪▪
Job change and termination processes ensure the protection of the organization’s 
resources.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Recruiting and/or promotion ensure objectiveness and relevancy to the require-
ments of the position.
▪▪
Personnel have adequate knowledge for their job function or areas of responsibility.
▪▪
Position descriptions exist, are reviewed, and are kept up to date.
▪▪
Personnel files contain employee acknowledgments of the organization’s overall 
education and general awareness program.
▪▪
Ongoing training and education occurs for appropriate personnel assigned to criti-
cal functions.
▪▪
IT personnel receive proper training in security procedures and techniques.
▪▪
IT management and staff are aware of and understand organizational policies and 
procedures.
▪▪
Personnel assigned to critical IT functions understand internal systems security 
and controls.
Control Objective: Compliance with External Requirements
What controls and activities ensure that the organization monitors changes in 
external legal and regulatory requirements and processes to support continuous 
compliance?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Policies and procedures ensure appropriate corrective action is undertaken on a 
timely basis and procedures are in place to ensure continuous compliance.
▪▪
Insurers are kept aware of all material changes to the IT environment.

Plan and Organize  ◾        309
Determine whether security procedures are in accordance with all requirements 
and are adequately addressed, including:
▪▪
Password protection and software to limit access
▪▪
Authorization procedures
▪▪
Terminal security measures
▪▪
Data encryption measures
▪▪
Firewall controls
▪▪
Virus protection
▪▪
Timely follow‐up
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
External requirements reviews are current, complete, and comprehensive with 
respect to legal, government, and regulatory issues and result in prompt correc-
tive action.
▪▪
IT complies with the documented privacy and security policies and procedures.
▪▪
Data transmitted across international borders does not violate export laws.
▪▪
Existing contracts with electronic commerce trading partners adequately address 
the requirements specified in organizational policies and procedures.
▪▪
Existing insurance contracts adequately address the requirements specified in orga-
nizational policies and procedures.
▪▪
Encryption conforms to length of key and other regulatory requirements.
▪▪
Where regulations or internal procedures require certain data items to be protected 
and/or encrypted (e.g., bank PINs, Social Security numbers, tax file numbers, pass-
words, military intelligence), such protection/encryption is in place.
Control Objective: Assessment of Risks
What controls and activities ensure that a comprehensive IT entity and activity level 
risk assessment framework is used to periodically assess information risk, including risk 
assessments, acceptance, and related strategies?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
A systematic risk assessment framework exists for all financially relevant systems 
incorporating relevant information risks to the achievement of the organization’s 
objectives and forming a basis for determining how the risks should be managed 
to an acceptable level.
▪▪
The risk assessment approach provides for updated risk assessments.
▪▪
Risk assessment procedures ensure that identified risks take into consideration the 
results of audits, inspections, and identified incidents.
▪▪
Procedures for monitoring changes in systems processing activity determine that 
system risks and exposures are adjusted in a timely manner.
▪▪
Procedures exist for monitoring and improving the risk assessment.

310	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
Determine whether the risk assessment documentation includes:
▪▪
A description of the risk assessment methodology, an identification of significant 
exposures, the corresponding risks, and corresponding exposures.
▪▪
Probability, frequency, and threat analysis definitions and techniques are included 
in the identification of risks.
▪▪
A formal or informal quantitative and/or qualitative (or combined) approach for 
identifying and measuring risks, threats, and exposures.
▪▪
Acceptance of residual risk takes into account: organizational policy risk identifica-
tion and measurement uncertainty incorporated in the risk assessment approach 
itself; cost and effectiveness of implementing safeguards and controls.
▪▪
Insurance coverage that offsets the residual risk.
▪▪
Formal quantitative and/or qualitative approaches to select control measures that 
maximize return on investment.
▪▪
That there is a balance among the detective, preventive, and corrective  
measures used.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Risk assessment framework reflects that the risk assessments are regularly updated.
▪▪
IT management and staff are aware of and involved in the risk assessment process.
▪▪
Management understands risk‐related factors and threat probabilities.
▪▪
Reports are issued to senior management for review and its concurrence of identi-
fied risks.
Priorities from highest to lowest exist, and, for each risk, an appropriate response 
exists, including:
▪▪
Preventive controls
▪▪
Detective controls
▪▪
Corrective controls
Adequate insurance coverage exists for accepted residual risk and is considered 
against various threat scenarios, including:
▪▪
Fire, flood, earthquake, tornadoes, terrorism, other unforeseeable natural disasters
▪▪
Breach of employee responsibilities
▪▪
Business interruption—lost revenues, lost customers, etc.
▪▪
Other risks not generally covered by insurance
Control Objective: Management of Quality
What controls and activities ensure that documentation of all significant IT processes, 
controls, and activities exists (and is maintained) in connection with a quality assurance 
plan for all major IT functions?

Program Development and Change ◾    311
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether the quality plan is based on 
the organization’s long‐ and short‐range plans promoting the continuous improvement 
philosophy and answers the basic questions of  what, who, and how , and that a standard 
approach to quality assurance exists, and the approach is: 
 ▪
 Applicable to both general and project‐specifi c quality assurance activities. 
 ▪
 Saleable and applicable to all projects. 
 ▪
 Understood by all individuals involved in a project and quality assurance activities. 
 ▪
 Applied throughout all phases of a project. 
 Senior management supports IT standards, policies, and procedures, including a 
formal or appropriately sized SDLC methodology.
 The SDLC: 
 ▪
 Governs the process of developing, acquiring, implementing, and maintaining com-
puterized IT, and encourages development/modifi cation efforts that comply with 
the organization’s and IT’s long‐ and short‐range plans. 
 ▪
 Requires checkpoints at key decisions. 
 ▪
 Requires authorization to proceed with the project at each checkpoint. 
 ▪
 Is capable of being tailored/scaled to accommodate all types of development occur-
ring within the organization. 
 ▪
 Is applicable to both in‐house and purchased software creation and maintenance. 
 Testing Controls: Test that procedures for developing the IT quality plan include: 
 ▪
 Organization’s long‐ and short‐range plans 
 ▪
 IT long‐ and short‐range plans for organization quality policy 
 ▪
 IT organization’s quality plan 
 ▪
 IT confi guration’s management plan 
 The IT quality plan includes IT long‐ and short‐range plans that defi ne: 
 ▪
 Application systems development efforts and/or acquisitions 
 ▪
 Interfaces with other systems (internal and external) 
 ▪
 IT platform/infrastructure required to support the systems and interfaces 
 ▪
 Resources (both financial and human) to develop/support the targeted IT 
environment 
 ▪
 Training required to develop and support the targeted IT environment 
 PROGRAM DEVELOPMENT AND CHANGE 
 This section walks through fi ve control objectives and their signifi cance to the PCAOB 
and COSO guidelines. It provides a roadmap for the auditor to determine relevant control 

312	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
objectives in the Program and Development and Change section of COBIT. The discus-
sion including the control objective, evaluation, and testing was adapted from ISACA’S 
COBIT 4.1 audit guidelines (ISACA 2007). This discussion format literally creates a work 
paper for the auditor to follow in the course of the IT audit.
It is important to note that several control objectives from the Program and Devel-
opment and Change section of COBIT were not included in Table 10.5 because they are 
considered less material to the guidelines of the PCAOB or COSO for financial reporting 
purposes. The significance of COBIT to the PCAOB and COSO guidelines is in the view 
of the authors and not ISACA; they are included in this book as suggested guidelines.
Luther Sound Exploration Inc.: Acquire and Implement  
(Program Development and Program Change)*
Control Objective: Acquire or Develop Acquisition Software
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that application and system 
software effectively support financial reporting requirements?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Requirements must exist before development, implementation, or modification is 
approved.
▪▪
Approved user requirements in writing must exist prior to the development, imple-
mentation, or modification.
▪▪
A cost/benefit analysis ensures a sound economic outcome before programming begins.
▪▪
An acceptance plan for specific technology is agreed on with the supplier in the 
contract and this plan defines the acceptance procedures and criteria.
▪▪
Mechanisms exist to assign or maintain security attributes to exported and 
imported data.
▪▪
Testing requires system testing, integration testing, hardware and component test-
ing, procedure testing, load and stress testing, tuning and performance testing, 
regression testing, user acceptance testing, and, finally, pilot testing of the total 
system to avoid any unexpected system failure.
▪▪
Facilities’ acceptance tests guarantee that the requirements specified in the contract.
▪▪
Specific technology acceptance tests include inspection and functionality tests that 
demonstrate sound economic outcomes as well as functional IT controls.
▪▪
Software product acquisitions follow the organization’s procurement policies, 
including the request for proposal, the selection of the software product supplier, 
and the negotiation of the contract.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
The new or modified system satisfies user requirements.
▪▪
Solution’s functional and operational requirements are met, including performance, 
reliability, compatibility, and security.
* COBIT objectives are adapted from COBIT 4.1 (ISACA 2007).

Program Development and Change  ◾        313
▪▪
System weakness and processing deficiencies are identified, addressed, and resolved 
by the proposed new or modified system.
▪▪
Alternative solutions to satisfy the user requirements have been analyzed.
▪▪
Commercial software packages to satisfy the needs of a particular project have been 
identified and considered.
▪▪
All identifiable costs and benefits for each alternative exist and are included as part 
of the feasibility study.
▪▪
A risk analysis report of the security threats, potential vulnerabilities and impacts, 
and feasible security and internal control safeguards for reducing or eliminating 
the identified risk is accurate and comprehensive.
▪▪
Security and internal control issues are appropriately addressed in the system 
design documentation.
▪▪
Management gives approval that the controls planned and in place are sufficient, 
with appropriate benefits.
▪▪
Adequate mechanisms for audit trails exist or can be developed for the solution 
identified and selected.
▪▪
System design and development of screen layouts, report formats, and online help 
facilities integrate user‐friendly designs to enhance end‐user skills.
▪▪
IT adheres to common procedures and standards in the procurement of IT-related 
hardware, software, and services.
▪▪
A software purchase agreement allows the user to have a copy of the program 
source code, if applicable.
▪▪
Third‐party software maintenance includes requirements for the validation, pro-
tection, and maintenance of the software product’s technology acceptance plan, 
including inspections, functionality tests, and workload trials.
Control Objective: Acquire or Develop Technology Infrastructure
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that technology infrastruc-
ture and application and system software are acquired or developed to support financial 
reporting requirements?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Policies and procedures ensure that the organization’s SDLC applies to both the 
development of new systems and major changes to existing systems, and account-
ing user participation is required for development.
▪▪
Management, user departments, and senior management sign off on design.
▪▪
Written program specifications exist for each information development or mod-
ification project and these program specifications agree with the system design 
specifications.
▪▪
Adequate mechanisms for ensuring internal control and security requirements 
exist for each new systems development or modification project.
▪▪
The internal control and security requirements include application controls, and 
guarantee accuracy, completeness, timeliness, and authorization of inputs and 
outputs.

314	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Applications program contains provisions that routinely verify the tasks performed 
by the software and provide the restoration of the integrity through rollback or 
other means.
▪▪
User approves application software after it is tested according to the project test plan 
using standards adapted before user testing approval.
▪▪
Adequate user reference and support manuals exist as part of every systems devel-
opment or modification process.
▪▪
The system design is reassessed whenever significant, technological, and/or logical 
discrepancies occur during systems development or maintenance.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
The organization’s SDLC ensures that all system design issues are addressed.
▪▪
System users are involved in the systems design process, design review, and approval 
process to ensure that all issues have been resolved prior to beginning work on the 
next phase of the project.
▪▪
Major changes to existing systems ensure the SDLC is comparable to the SDLC for 
the development of new systems.
▪▪
Appropriate sign‐offs exist before programming starts.
▪▪
System file requirements and documentation, as well as the data dictionary, are 
consistent with standards.
▪▪
User sign-off on final file specifications occurs.
▪▪
Program specifications agree with systems design specifications.
▪▪
Data collection and data entry design specifications match.
▪▪
Application control design specifications ensure accuracy, completeness, timeli-
ness, and authorization of inputs and outputs.
▪▪
Adequate internal control and security requirements exist in the conceptual design 
of the system.
▪▪
User reference and support materials and an online help facility exists.
▪▪
Help desk function assists users with more complex issues.
Control Objective: Develop and Maintain Policies and Procedures
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance of the existence of policies 
and procedures that define acquisition and maintenance processes?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Evaluation plans exist to assess new hardware and software for impact on the over-
all performance of the system.
▪▪
Thorough testing of system software reflects the SDLC before it is introduced into 
the production environment.
▪▪
Software changes are consistent with the organization’s change management 
procedures.
▪▪
Policies and procedures exist for the preventive maintenance of hardware to reduce 
the frequency and impact of performance failures.

Program Development and Change  ◾        315
▪▪
It adheres to vendor‐prescribed preventive maintenance steps and frequency for 
each hardware device operated.
▪▪
Policies and techniques exist for using and monitoring the use of system utilities.
▪▪
Programmer responsibilities, including monitoring and logging exist for sensitive 
software utilities.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Performance assessment results are compared to system requirements.
▪▪
Preventive maintenance schedule ensures that scheduled hardware maintenance 
will not have a negative impact upon critical or sensitive applications.
▪▪
Scheduled maintenance ensures that no conflicts exist with peak workload  
periods.
▪▪
IT operating schedules ensure that there are adequate preparations to accommo-
date anticipated hardware downtime for unscheduled maintenance.
▪▪
System software parameters ensure that the correct ones were chosen by appropri-
ate IT personnel to ensure the integrity of the data and program being stored on 
the system.
▪▪
System software is in accordance with the acquisition and maintenance framework 
for the technology infrastructure.
▪▪
Thorough testing using SDLC occurs for all system software before it’s introduced 
into the production environment.
▪▪
All vendor system software installation passwords are changed during installation.
▪▪
All system software changes ensure accordance with the organization’s change 
management procedures.
▪▪
The addition of new users to the system and networks; database creation and 
backup; space allocation for data storage; system priorities, and so on are restricted 
to a limited number of systems operators within the IT organization.
Control Objective: Install and Test Application Software and  
Technology Infrastructure
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that the systems are tested 
and validated prior to implementation of production processes and the associated con-
trols operate as intended to support financial reporting requirements?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
An SDLC exists for system installation and accreditation, including a phased 
approach of training, performance sizing, conversion plan, testing of program, 
groups of programs and the total system, a parallel or prototype test plan, accep-
tance testing, security testing and accreditation, operational testing, change con-
trols, implementation and post‐implementation review, and modification.
▪▪
User training is part of each developmental effort.
▪▪
Program/system controls ensure security standards of the organization and IT 
policies, procedures, and standards.

316	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Predetermined criteria exist for testing success, failure, and termination of further 
efforts.
▪▪
Quality assurance process includes independent migration of development into 
production libraries and completeness of required user and operations groups’ 
acceptance.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
A formal training plan supports all new systems development efforts.
▪▪
Staff is aware and understands need for SDLC controls and user training.
▪▪
Selected users’ awareness and understanding of their responsibilities in the system’s 
design, approval, testing, training, conversion, and implementation processes is 
known and acknowledged.
▪▪
Actual costs versus estimated costs and actual performance versus expected per-
formance of new or modified systems are tracked.
▪▪
A test plan covering all areas of IT exists—application software, facilities, 
technology, and users.
Users understand all phases and responsibilities in the SDLC, including:
▪▪
Design specifications, including iterations during development
▪▪
Cost/benefit analysis and feasibility study
▪▪
Approval at each step of the SDLC
▪▪
Involvement and assessment of test plan and test results as they occur
▪▪
Approval and acceptance of system as it moves through development cycle
▪▪
Final approval and acceptance of system
▪▪
Assessment of training received for recently delivered systems for sufficiency
Control Objective: Manage Changes
What controls and activities authorize system changes of financial reporting 
significance before production?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether:
▪▪
Methodology for prioritizing system change requests exists and is in use.
▪▪
Emergency change procedures exist and are in use.
▪▪
Change control is a formal procedure for both user and development groups.
▪▪
Change control logs ensure all changes shown were resolved.
▪▪
User is satisfied with turnaround of change requests.
Changes on the change control log ensure that:
▪▪
A change that normally should create a new entry in the program and operations 
log actually occurred.
▪▪
Changes were made as documented.

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data  ◾    317
 ▪
 Current documentation refl ects changed environment. 
 ▪
 Change process monitors improvements in acknowledgment, response time, 
response effectiveness, and user satisfaction. 
Testing Controls: Test a sample of changes to ensure that management approves: 
 ▪
 Request for change 
 ▪
 Specifi cation of change 
 ▪
 Access to source program 
 ▪
 Programmer completion of change 
 ▪
 Request to move source into test environment 
 ▪
 Completion of acceptance testing 
 ▪
 Request for compilation and move into production 
 ▪
 Overall and specifi c security has been determined and accepted 
 ▪
 Existence and deployment of distribution process 
 Review change control documentation for inclusion of: 
 ▪
 Date of requested change 
 ▪
 Person(s) requesting 
 ▪
 Approval of change request 
 ▪
 Approval of changes made to IT functions 
 ▪
 Approval of changes made originating from users 
 ▪
 Date of documentation update 
 ▪
 Move date into production 
 ▪
 Quality assurance signoff of change 
 ▪
 Acceptance by operations 
 Analyze types of changes made to system for identifi cation of trends: 
 ▪
 Code check‐in and checkout procedures for changes exist. 
 ▪
 Change control log ensures all changes on log were resolved to user satisfaction and 
that there were no changes made that are not on log. 
 ▪
 Users are aware of and understand need for formal change control procedures. 
 ▪
 Staff enforcement process ensures compliance with change control procedures. 
 COMPUTER OPERATIONS AND ACCESS TO 
PROGRAMS AND DATA 
 This section walks through 10 control objectives and their significance to the PCAOB 
and COSO guidelines. Table  10.6 provides a road map for the auditor to determine 
relevant control objectives in the Computer Operations and Access to Programs 
section of COBIT. The discussion including the control objective, evaluation, and 

318	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
testing was adapted from ISACA’S COBIT audit guidelines (ISACA 2007). This dis-
cussion format literally creates a work paper for the auditor to follow in the course 
of the IT audit.
It is important to note that several control objectives from the Computer Operations 
and Access to Programs to Programs and Data section of COBIT were not included in 
Table 10.6 because they were considered less material to the guidelines of the PCAOB 
or COSO for financial reporting purposes. The significance of COBIT to the PCAOB and 
COSO guidelines is in the view of the authors and not ISACA; they are included in this 
book as suggested guidelines.
Luther Sound Exploration Inc.: Computer Operations  
and Access to Programs and Data*
Control Objective: Define and Manage Service Levels
What controls and activities ensure that specified internal and external service levels 
exist and key performance indicators are monitored and evaluated regularly?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine whether a written service level agree-
ment (SLA) supports an IT service with a third party:
▪▪
User participation ensures adequate creation and modification of agreements.
▪▪
Responsibilities of users and providers are defined.
▪▪
Management monitors and reports on the achievement of the specified service 
performance criteria and all problems encountered.
▪▪
Management reviews all changes.
▪▪
Recourse process is identified for nonperformance.
SLAs include but are not limited to:
▪▪
Definition of service
▪▪
Cost of service
▪▪
Quantifiable minimum service level
▪▪
Level of IT support
▪▪
Availability, reliability, capacity for growth
▪▪
Continuity planning
▪▪
Security requirements
▪▪
Change procedure for any portion of the agreement
▪▪
Written and formally approved agreement between provider and user of service
▪▪
Effective period and new period review/renewal/nonrenewal
▪▪
Content and frequency of performance reporting and payment for services
▪▪
Realistic charges compared to history, industry, best practices
▪▪
Calculation for services charged
▪▪
Service improvement commitment
* COBIT objectives are adapted from COBIT 4.1 (ISACA 2007).

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        319
Testing Controls: Test for a sample of past and in‐person SLAs includes:
▪▪
Definition of service
▪▪
Cost of service
▪▪
Quantifiable minimum service level
▪▪
Level of support from the IT function
▪▪
Availability, reliability, capacity for growth
▪▪
Change procedure for any portion of agreement
▪▪
Continuity planning
▪▪
Security requirements
▪▪
Written and formally approved agreement between provider and user of service
▪▪
Effective period and new period review/renewal/nonrenewal
▪▪
Content and frequency of performance reporting and payment for services
▪▪
Charges that are realistic compared to history, industry, and best practices
▪▪
Calculation for SLA charges
▪▪
Service improvement commitment
▪▪
Both user and provider formal approval
▪▪
Appropriate users’ are aware and understand SLA processes and procedures
▪▪
Users’ sufficient level of satisfaction with current service level process and actual 
agreements
Control Objective: Manage Third‐Party Service
What controls and activities exist to ensure that IT management selects qualified third‐
party service providers? The IT organization has a defined vendor selection policy and 
reports security, availability, and processing integrity for SLAs on a systematic basis.
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that IT policies and procedures relat-
ing to third‐party relationships exist and are consistent with organizational directives 
and objectives. Management specifically addresses contracts the definition of what is 
included in the contracts, and identifies parties to the relationship:
▪▪
Contracts represent a full and complete record of third‐party supplier relationships.
▪▪
Contracts are established for continuity of services specifically, and these contracts 
include contingency planning by the vendor to ensure continuous service to user 
of services.
Contract contents include at least the following:
▪▪
Formal management and legal approval
▪▪
Legal entity providing services
▪▪
Services provided
▪▪
SLAs, both qualitative and quantitative
▪▪
Cost of services and frequency of payment for services
▪▪
Resolution of problem process
▪▪
Penalties for nonperformance

320	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Dissolution process
▪▪
Modification process
▪▪
Reporting of service—content, frequency, and distribution
▪▪
Roles between contracting parties during life of contract
▪▪
Continuity assurances that services will be provided by vendor
▪▪
User of services and provider communications process and frequency
▪▪
Duration of contract
▪▪
Level of access provided to vendor
▪▪
Security requirements
▪▪
Nondisclosure guarantees
▪▪
Right to access and right to audit
IT management implements escrow agreements where appropriate.
Third parties are properly qualified through an assessment of their capabilities to 
deliver the required services.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
The list of contracts and the actual contracts in place is accurate and complete.
▪▪
No services are being provided by vendors not on the contract list.
▪▪
Contract providers actually perform services defined.
▪▪
Provider management/owners understand their responsibilities in contracts.
▪▪
IT policies and procedures relating to third‐party relationships exist and are con-
sistent with organizational directives and policies.
▪▪
Policies specifically address need for contracts, definition of content of contracts, 
owner, or relationship.
▪▪
Responsibility is defined as to who is responsible for ensuring contracts are created, 
maintained, monitored, and renegotiated as required.
▪▪
Contracts represent a full and complete record of third‐party supplier relationships.
Contracts include at least the following:
▪▪
Formal management and legal approval
▪▪
Legal entity providing services provided
▪▪
SLAs, both qualitative and quantitative
▪▪
Cost of services and frequency of payment for services
▪▪
Resolution of problem process
▪▪
Penalties for nonperformance
▪▪
Dissolution process
▪▪
Modification process
▪▪
Reporting of service
▪▪
Roles during life of contract
▪▪
Continuity assurances
▪▪
User of services and provider communications process and frequency
▪▪
Duration of contract
▪▪
Level of access provided to vendor

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        321
▪▪
Security requirements
▪▪
Nondisclosure guarantees
▪▪
Right to access and right to audit
▪▪
Users’ awareness and understanding of the need for contract policies and contracts 
to provide services
Appropriate independence between vendor and organization exists:
▪▪
Independence of vendor sourcing and selection processes is occurring.
▪▪
Security access lists include only the minimum number of vendor staff based on 
the least needed.
▪▪
Access hardware and software to organization resources are managed and con-
trolled to minimize vendor use.
▪▪
Actual level of service performed compares highly to contractual obligations.
▪▪
Outsourcing facilities, staff, operations, and controls ensure required level of 
performance comparable to expectation.
▪▪
Continuous monitoring of service delivery by third parties exists.
▪▪
Independent audits of contractor operations occur.
Control Objective: Manage Performance and Capacity
What controls and activities ensure that IT management monitors system capacity and 
performance? IT management should take appropriate corrective action according to 
specified benchmarks within the SDLC.
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Time frames and levels of service are defined for all services provided by the IT 
function.
▪▪
Time frames and service levels reflect user requirements.
▪▪
Time frames and service levels ensure performance expectations of the equipment 
potentials.
▪▪
An availability plan exists, is current, and reflects user requirements.
▪▪
Management monitors ongoing performance of all equipment and capacity and 
lack of performance is addressed.
▪▪
Both users and IT review capacity and performance.
▪▪
Workload forecasting includes user input on changing demands and from vendors 
on new technology or current product enhancements.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Statistics on performance, capacity, and availability reports are accurate, including 
historical versus forecast performance variance explanation.
▪▪
Change process for modifying availability, capacity, workload planning documents 
reflects changing technology or user requirements.

322	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Workflow analysis reports address opportunities of additional process efficiencies.
▪▪
Performance reporting to users for usage and availability exists, including capacity, 
workload scheduling, and trends.
▪▪
Escalation procedures exist, are being followed, and are appropriate in resolving 
problems.
▪▪
SDLC postimplementation phase includes criteria for determining future growth 
and changes to performance expectations.
▪▪
Levels of support supplied by the IT function are sufficient to support the goals of 
the organization.
Control Objective: Ensure Systems Security
What controls and activities ensure that IT management secures financial reporting 
systems and subsystems to prevent unauthorized use, disclosure, modification, dam-
age, or loss of data?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that a security plan is in place provid-
ing centralized direction and control over financial information system and subsystem 
security, along with user security requirements:
▪▪
Clear responsibility ensures only appropriate access to system resources.
▪▪
Data classification schema is in place and being used, and all system resources have 
an owner responsible for security and content.
▪▪
User security profiles are in place, representing “least access as required,” and pro-
files are regularly reviewed by management for currency.
▪▪
Employee training ensures security awareness, ownership responsibility, and virus 
protection requirements.
Reporting exists for security breaches and formal problem resolution procedures 
are in place, including:
▪▪
Unauthorized attempts to access system
▪▪
Unauthorized attempts to access system resources
▪▪
Unauthorized attempts to view or change security definitions and rules
▪▪
Resource access privileges by user ID
▪▪
Authorized security definitions and rule changes
▪▪
Authorized access to resources
▪▪
Status change of the system security
▪▪
Accesses to operating system security parameter tables
▪▪
Cryptographic modules and key maintenance procedures, administered centrally 
and used for all external access and transmission activity
▪▪
Cryptographic key management standards for both centralized and user activity
▪▪
Formal change control over security software consistent with normal standards 
of the SDLC

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        323
The authentication mechanisms in use provide one or more of the following features:
▪▪
Passwords are not reusable.
▪▪
Multiple authentication is available.
▪▪
Ability exists to specify separate authentication procedures for specific events.
▪▪
On‐demand authentication is used.
▪▪
Limitation set on the number of concurrent sessions belonging to the same user.
▪▪
At log‐on, an advisory warning message appears to users regarding the appropriate 
use of the hardware, software, or connection.
Password policy includes:
▪▪
Enforced change on first use of password
▪▪
A minimum password length
▪▪
An appropriate and enforced frequency of password changes
▪▪
Password checking against list of not‐allowed values exists
▪▪
Protection of emergency passwords
▪▪
User ID suspended after five unsuccessful log‐on attempts
▪▪
Date, time of last access, and number of unsuccessful attempts displayed to autho-
rized user at log‐on
▪▪
Authentication time limited to 5 minutes, after which the session is terminated
Testing Controls: Test that IT function complies with security standards 
relating to:
▪▪
Authentication and access
▪▪
Managing user profiles and data security classifications
▪▪
Violation and security incident reporting and management review
▪▪
Cryptographic key management standards
▪▪
Virus detection, resolution, and communication
▪▪
Data classification and ownership
Procedures for requesting, establishing, and maintaining user access to system include:
▪▪
Procedures for external access to system resources exist (i.e., log‐on, ID, password, 
dial‐back).
▪▪
Inventory of access devices for completeness is maintained.
▪▪
Operating system security parameters are based on vendor/local standards.
▪▪
Network security management practices are communicated, understood, and 
enforced.
▪▪
External access provider contracts include consideration of security responsibilities 
and procedures.
▪▪
Actual log‐on procedures exist for systems, users, and external vendor access.

324	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
Security reporting occurs for timeliness, accuracy, and management response to 
incidents.
▪▪
Secret keys exist for transmission utilization.
Procedures for protection from malicious software include:
▪▪
IT tests all software for viruses prior to installation and use.
▪▪
A written policy ensures that guidelines exist for downloading, acceptance, and 
use of freeware and shareware.
▪▪
Users have instructions on the detection and reporting of viruses.
▪▪
A policy ensures that diskettes or USB drives brought in from outside the organiza-
tion are checked.
Firewalls have the following properties:
▪▪
All traffic from inside to outside, and vice versa, must pass through the firewall.
▪▪
Only authorized traffic, as defined by local security policy, will be allowed to pass.
▪▪
The firewall is immune to penetration.
▪▪
Traffic is exchanged through the firewall at the application layer only.
▪▪
The firewall architecture combines control measures at both the application and 
network level.
▪▪
The firewall architecture enforces a protocol discontinuity at the transportation layer.
▪▪
The firewall architecture is configured according to the “minimal art philosophy.”
▪▪
The firewall architecture deploys strong authentication for management of its 
components.
▪▪
The firewall architecture hides the structure of the internal network.
▪▪
The firewall architecture provides an audit trail of all communications to or through 
the firewall system and generates alarms when suspicious activity is detected.
▪▪
Organization’s hosts are sitting outside the firewall.
Control Objective: Educate and Train Users
What controls and activities provide for identifying and documenting the training needs 
of personnel using IT to support business long‐term goals and objectives?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Policies and procedures exist for ongoing security and controls awareness.
▪▪
Education/training program focus on information systems security and control 
principles.
▪▪
New employees are aware of security and control responsibilities with respect to 
using and having custody of IT resources.
There are policies and procedures in effect relating to training and they are current 
with respect to:
▪▪
Technical configuration of IT resources
▪▪
In‐house training opportunities and frequency of employee attendance [less likely 
for the SME]

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        325
▪▪
External technical training opportunities and frequency of employee attendance 
[more likely for the SME]
▪▪
A training function assessment of training needs of IT and user personnel with 
respect to security and controls, and translating those needs into in‐house or exter-
nal training opportunities
All employees attend security and control awareness training on an ongoing basis, 
including:
▪▪
General system security principles
▪▪
Ethical conduct related to IT
▪▪
Security practices to protect against harm from failures affecting availability, con-
fidentiality, integrity, and performance of duties in a secure manner
▪▪
Responsibilities associated with custody and use of IT resources
▪▪
Security of information and information systems when used offsite
Testing Controls: Test to ensure that starting on the first day of employment, 
new employees have awareness and understanding of security, controls, and fiduciary 
responsibilities of owning and using IT resources:
▪▪
Employee responsibilities exist for confidentiality, integrity, availability, reliability, 
and security of all IT resources is communicated on an ongoing basis.
▪▪
A manager within the IT function has part or all of his or her responsibility for IT 
training, security and controls awareness, and maintaining continuing education 
program for professional certifications.
▪▪
Ongoing assessment of employee training needs is systematic.
Development or participation in training programs relating to security and controls 
is part of training requirements:
▪▪
Training programs for new and long‐term employee security awareness exist.
▪▪
Appropriate employees sign confidentiality and conflict‐of‐interest statements.
Control Objective: Manage the Configuration
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance of security, processing, and 
availability for the IT configuration and would prevent any unauthorized changes?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that for configuration 
inventory—hardware, operating system software, applications software, facilities, and 
data files—onsite and off‐site:
▪▪
Organizational policies and procedures exist relating to the acquisition, inventory, 
and disposition of purchased, rented, and leased computer‐related equipment and 
software.
▪▪
Organization policies relate to use of unauthorized software or equipment.
▪▪
IT policies and procedures relate specifically to acquisition, disposition, and main-
tenance of configuration resources.

326	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
▪▪
IT policies and procedures for the quality assurance and change control functions 
exist for moving and recording migration of new and modified software develop-
ment into production status and files.
▪▪
Accounting records exist for fixed assets and leases relating to systems resources.
▪▪
Reports relate to additions, deletions, and changes to systems configuration.
▪▪
Listings exist of various library contents—test, development, and production.
▪▪
Inventory exists of offsite storage contents—equipment, files, manuals, and 
forms—including materials in the possession of vendors.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Process for creating and controlling configuration baselines exists and is reason-
ably appropriate.
▪▪
Process exists for controlling status accounting of purchased and leased resources.
▪▪
Individuals responsible for reviewing configuration control have the appropriate 
knowledge, skills, and abilities.
Control Objective: Manage Problems and Incidents
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that IT management 
responds to, records, resolves, or investigates for proper resolution problems and/or 
incidents?
Evaluating Internal Control: Determine that problem management procedures 
exist for defining and implementing a problem management system and recording, 
analyzing, and resolving in a timely manner all nonstandard events. In the SME, one 
individual is typically responsible for problem management and includes:
▪▪
Establishing incident reports that are appropriate for the size and scale of the SME.
▪▪
Identifying problem types and prioritization methodology allowing for varying 
resolution efforts based on risk.
▪▪
Defining logical and physical control of problem management information.
▪▪
Distributing outputs on a need‐to‐know basis.
▪▪
Tracking of problem trends to maximize resources and reduce turnaround.
▪▪
Collecting accurate, current, consistent, and usable data inputs to reporting.
▪▪
Notifying appropriate level of management for escalation and awareness.
▪▪
Determining if management periodically evaluates the problem management pro-
cess for increased effectiveness and efficiency.
▪▪
Existing audit trail for system problems.
▪▪
Integration with change, availability, configuration management systems, and 
personnel.
▪▪
Establishing that emergency processing priorities exist, are documented, and 
require approval by appropriate program and IT management.
Testing Controls: Test that for a selection of problems reported, problem manage-
ment procedures follow for all nonstandard activities, including:
▪▪
Recording of all nonstandard events by process
▪▪
Tracking and resolution of each and all events

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        327
▪▪
Appropriate level of response based on priority of event
▪▪
Escalation of problem for critical events
▪▪
Appropriate reporting within the IT function and user groups
▪▪
Regular review of process effectiveness and efficiency for improvements
▪▪
Performance improvement program expectations and success
Control Objective: Manage Data
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that data recorded, pro-
cessed, and reported remain complete, accurate, and valid throughout the update, 
storage, and backup process?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that:
For data preparation:
▪▪
Data preparation procedures ensure completeness, accuracy, and validity.
▪▪
Appropriate authorization procedures for all source documents exist.
▪▪
Separation of duties between origination, approval, and conversion of source docu-
ments into data occurs.
▪▪
Authorized data remains complete, accurate, and valid through source document 
origination.
▪▪
Data is transmitted in a timely manner.
▪▪
Periodic review of source documents for proper completion and approvals occurs.
▪▪
Erroneous source documents are appropriately handled.
▪▪
Adequate control over sensitive information exists on source documents for protec-
tion from compromise.
▪▪
Procedures ensure completeness and accuracy of source documents, proper 
accounting for source documents, and timely conversion.
▪▪
Source document retention ensures reconstruction in event of loss, availability for 
review and audit, litigation inquiries, or regulatory requirements.
For data input:
▪▪
Appropriate source document control ensures appropriate routing for approval 
prior to entry.
▪▪
Proper separation of duties among submission, approval, authorization, and data 
entry functions.
▪▪
Audit trail exists to ensure input.
▪▪
Edit checks of inputted data occurs as close as possible to the point of origination.
▪▪
Erroneously input data is handled appropriately.
▪▪
Responsibility for enforcing authorization over data is clearly delineated.
For data processing:
▪▪
Programs contain error prevention, detection, correction routines for all financial 
and financial subsystems (e.g. revenue, expense, inventory, etc.) in the enterprise.
▪▪
Programs must test input for errors (i.e., validation and editing).
▪▪
Programs must validate all transactions against a master list of same.
▪▪
Programs must disallow override of error conditions.

328	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
For error handling:
▪▪
Approval for correction and resubmission of errors.
▪▪
Individual responsibility for suspense files exists.
▪▪
Logs of programs executed and transactions processed/rejected for audit trail exist.
▪▪
A control group exists for monitoring entry activity and investigating nonstandard 
events.
▪▪
Counts and control totals exist for all data processed.
▪▪
All fields are edited appropriately, even if one field has an error.
▪▪
Tables used in validation are reviewed on a frequent basis.
▪▪
Written procedures exist for correcting and resubmitting data in error, including 
a nondisruptive solution to reprocessing.
▪▪
Resubmitted transactions are processed exactly as originally processed.
Testing Controls: Test that:
For data preparation:
▪▪
For a sample of source documents consistency is evident with respect to stated pro-
cedures relating to authorization, approval, accuracy, completeness, and receipt by 
data entry, and data entry is timely.
▪▪
Source, input, and conversion staff are aware of and understand data preparation 
control requirements.
For data input:
▪▪
Submit test data to ensure accuracy, completeness, and authorization‐checks are 
performed.
▪▪
For selected transactions, compare master files before and after input.
▪▪
Error handling retention, resolution, and appropriate review integrity exists.
▪▪
Error handling procedures and actions comply with established policies and controls.
For data processing:
▪▪
Run‐to‐run control totals and master file update controls are effective.
▪▪
Test data ensures that data processing validation, authentication, and editing per-
forms as close to the point of origination as possible.
▪▪
Error handling process conforms to established procedures and controls.
▪▪
Error handling retention, resolution, and appropriate review integrity exist and 
function appropriately.
▪▪
Error handling procedures and actions comply with established procedures and 
controls.
For data output, interfacing, and distribution:
▪▪
Audit trails facilitate the tracing of transaction processing and the reconciliation 
of disrupted data.
▪▪
Report output reviews by the provider and by the user ensure accuracy.

Computer Operations and Access to Programs and Data   ◾        329
▪▪
Error handling procedures comply with established policies and controls.
▪▪
Procedures ensure that output reports are secure and awaiting distribution.
▪▪
Protection ensures sensitive information during transmission and transport.
▪▪
Disposed sensitive information procedures comply with established policies and 
controls.
Control Objective: Manage Operations
What controls and activities provide reasonable assurance that IT management exe-
cutes program testing as planned, and identifies and investigates deviations from sched-
uled processing, including controls over job scheduling, processing, error monitoring, 
and system availability?
Evaluating Internal Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Completion statistics confirm successful completion of all requirements.
▪▪
There are physical and logical separation of source and object, test/development/
production libraries, and change control procedures for moving programs among 
libraries.
Performance statistics for operational activities include but are not limited to:
▪▪
Hardware and peripheral capacity, utilization, and performance
▪▪
Memory utilization and performance
▪▪
Telecommunications utilization and performance
▪▪
Extent that performance is matching product performance norms, internally 
defined performance standards
In addition, user SLA to:
▪▪
Maintain and review logs on an ongoing basis.
▪▪
Perform maintenance on all equipment in a timely manner.
▪▪
Ensure operators are rotating shifts, taking holidays and vacations, and 
maintaining competencies.
Testing Controls: Test that operations staff members are aware and understand:
▪▪
Operating procedures where they are responsible for performance expectations 
within the IT function
▪▪
Emergency program fix, along with restart/recovery procedures
▪▪
Operations logging requirements and management review
▪▪
Problem escalation procedures
▪▪
Turnover procedures for moving development programs into production
▪▪
Interaction with remote processing facilities and central processing facilities
▪▪
Responsibility for communicating productivity improvement opportunities to 
management

330 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
MONITOR AND EVALUATE 
 This section walks through four control objectives and their signifi cance to the PCAOB 
and COSO guidelines. Table  10.7 provides a roadmap for the auditor to determine rel-
evant control objectives in the Monitor and Evaluate section of COBIT. The discussion 
including the control objective, evaluation, and testing was adapted from ISACA’S 
COBIT audit guidelines (ISACA 2007). This discussion format literally creates a work 
paper for the auditor to follow in the course of the IT audit. 
 It is important to note that several control objectives from the Monitor and Evaluate 
section of COBIT were not included in Table  10.7 because they were considered less 
material to the guidelines of the PCAOB or COSO for fi nancial reporting purposes. The 
signifi cance of COBIT to the PCAOB and COSO guidelines is in the view of the authors 
and not ISACA; they are included in this book as suggested guidelines. 
 Luther Sound Exploration Inc.: Plan and Organize*  
 Control Objective: Monitoring 
 What controls and activities ensure that IT management defi nes performance indicators 
(benchmarks) and reports progress against those benchmarks frequently? 
Evaluating Controls: Determine that: 
 ▪
 Data identifi ed for monitoring fi nancial and IT resources is appropriate. 
 ▪
 Key performance indicators and/or critical success factors measure fi nancial and 
IT performance against predetermined levels. 
 ▪
 Internal reporting of fi nancial and IT resource utilization (people, facilities, applica-
tions, technology, and data) is adequate. 
 ▪
 Managerial review of IT resource performance exists. 
 ▪
 Monitoring controls provide reliable and useful feedback in a timely manner. 
 ▪
 Response of organization to quality control, internal audit, and external audit 
improvement recommendations is appropriate. 
 ▪
 Target performance improvement initiatives and results exist. 
 ▪
 Organizational performance against stated goals of all groups within the organiza-
tion is occurring. 
 ▪
 User satisfaction analysis exists. 
 ▪
 Reliability and usability of performance reporting for nonusers such as external 
auditor, audit committee, and senior management of the whole organization are 
suffi cient. 
 ▪
 Timeliness of reporting allows for rapid response to identifi ed performance short-
comings or exceptions. 
 ▪
 Reporting against policies and procedures established for the performance of activi-
ties (i.e., performance reporting) is suffi cient. 
* The evaluation and testing controls are adapted from ISACA’s COBIT Audit Guidelines (ISACA 2000).

Monitor and Evaluate  ◾        331
Testing Controls: Test that data performance monitoring reports exist:
▪▪
Managerial review of performance monitoring reports and corrective action initia-
tives is occurring.
▪▪
Employees are aware of and understand policies and procedures relating to perfor-
mance monitoring.
Quality and content of internal reporting relates to:
▪▪
Collection of performance monitoring data
▪▪
Analysis of performance monitoring data
▪▪
Analysis of resource performance data
▪▪
Management actions on performance issues
▪▪
Analysis of user satisfaction surveys
▪▪
Senior management satisfaction with reporting on performance monitoring
Control Objective: Adequacy of Internal Controls
What controls and activities ensure that IT management monitors the design and 
operating effectiveness of internal controls? This control objective is very relevant to 
the SME.
Evaluating Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Data identified for monitoring for financial and IT internal controls is  
appropriate.
▪▪
Internal reporting of financial and IT internal control data is adequate.
▪▪
Managerial review of financial and IT internal controls exists.
▪▪
Monitoring controls exist to provide reliable and useful feedback in a timely  
manner.
▪▪
Response of organization to quality control, internal audit, and external audit 
improvement recommendations is appropriate.
▪▪
Target internal control improvement initiatives and results exist.
▪▪
Organizational performance against stated goals of financial and IT internal con-
trols is occurring.
▪▪
Information regarding internal control errors, inconsistencies, and exceptions is 
systematically kept and reported to management.
▪▪
Reliability and usability of internal control reporting for nonusers such as external 
auditor, audit committee, and senior management of the whole organization are 
sufficient.
▪▪
Timeliness of reporting allows for rapid response to identified internal control 
shortcomings or exceptions.
▪▪
Internal control reporting against policies and procedures established for the 
performance of activities (i.e., internal control reporting) is sufficient.

332	
◾  Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Internal control monitoring reports exist.
▪▪
Managerial review of internal control reports and corrective action initiatives 
occurs.
▪▪
Employees understand policies and procedures relating to internal control 
monitoring.
Quality and content of internal reporting relates to:
▪▪
Collection of internal control monitoring data
▪▪
Internal control compliance performance
▪▪
Management actions on internal control issues
▪▪
Operational security and internal control assurance
▪▪
Senior management satisfaction with reporting on security and internal control 
monitoring
Performing:
▪▪
Benchmarking of internal control assessment against similar organizations or 
appropriate international standards/recognized industry best practices
▪▪
Review of relevancy of data within processes being monitored and in internal con-
trols reporting
▪▪
Actual to planned internal control review in all IT areas
▪▪
Analysis of extent of accomplishment of internal control goals improvement 
initiatives
▪▪
Review of audit committee’s satisfaction with reporting on internal controls
▪▪
Analysis of level of implementation of managerial recommendations
Control Objective: Independent Assurance
What controls and activities ensure that appropriate parties conduct and document 
independent control reviews of third‐party service providers and major IT systems 
before implementation?
Evaluating Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Independent assurance contracts are appropriately executed to ensure adequate 
review.
▪▪
Independent certification/accreditation exists or occurs prior to implementing criti-
cal new IT services.
▪▪
Independent recertification/reaccreditation of IT services is obtained on a routine 
cycle after implementation.
▪▪
Independent certification/accreditation is obtained prior to using IT service 
providers.
▪▪
Independent recertification/reaccreditation occurs on a routine cycle.
▪▪
Independent evaluation of the effectiveness of IT services occurs on a routine cycle.

Monitor and Evaluate  ◾        333
▪▪
Independent evaluation of the effectiveness of IT service providers occurs on a rou-
tine cycle.
▪▪
Independent reviews of IT compliance with legal and regulatory requirements and 
contractual commitments occurs on a routine cycle.
▪▪
Independent reviews of third‐party service providers’ compliance with legal and 
regulatory requirements and contractual commitments occur on a routine cycle.
▪▪
Appropriate professional standards provide some level of assurance that the inde-
pendent assurance staff is competent.
▪▪
Management proactively seeks out audit (including the outside financial audit team) 
involvement prior to finalizing IT service solutions.
Testing Controls: Test that:
▪▪
Senior management approves performance of independent assurance entity.
▪▪
Independent certification/accreditation occurs prior to implementation of critical 
new IT services.
▪▪
Appropriate to the size and scale of the SME’s IT operations, independent recertifica-
tion/reaccreditation of IT services occurs on a routine cycle after implementation.
▪▪
Appropriate to the size and scale of the SME’s IT operations, independent certifica-
tion/accreditation occurs prior to using IT service providers.
▪▪
Appropriate to the size and scale of the SME’s IT operations, independent recertifica-
tion/reaccreditation occurs on a routine cycle.
▪▪
Appropriate to the size and scale of the SME’s IT operations, independent evaluation 
of the effectiveness of IT services occurs on a routine cycle.
▪▪
Independent reviews of third‐party service providers’ compliance with legal and 
regulatory requirements and contractual commitments are performed on a routine 
cycle and are comprehensive, complete, and timely.
▪▪
Independent assurance including that of the outside financial auditors are relevant 
with respect to findings, conclusions, and recommendations.
▪▪
Independent assurance function including the outside financial auditors possess 
the necessary skills and knowledge to perform competent work.
Control Objective: Internal Audit
What controls and activities ensure that the internal audit plan includes a risk assess-
ment including IT and covers the full range of IT audit activities?
Evaluating Controls: Determine that:
▪▪
Audit committee exists with qualified personnel who understand financial, IT, and 
other matters pertinent to the SME.
▪▪
Internal audit organization is appropriately established with professional 
qualifications.
▪▪
External audits contribute to the accomplishment of the audit plan.
▪▪
Audit plan conforms to a risk assessment methodology.

334 
◾ Integrating the IT Audit into the Financial Audit
 ▪
 Audits are planned and supervised. 
 ▪
 Evidence is commensurate with fi ndings and conclusions. 
 ▪
 Audit staff is competent and performing per the professional background of the 
auditor and professional fi nancial and IT auditing standards. 
 ▪
 An adequate reporting process exists. 
 ▪
 Follow‐up of all control issues is occurring in a timely manner. 
 ▪
 Audit coverage includes the full range of information systems and fi nancial audits 
including COSO and COBIT. 
Testing Controls: Test that: 
 ▪
 Senior management approves the performance of an ongoing independent fi nancial 
and IT audit function. 
 ▪
 Senior management attitudes are consistent with fi nancial and IT audit charter. 
 ▪
 Internal audit benchmarks against professional fi nancial and IT standards. 
 ▪
 Assignment of auditors assures independence and suffi cient skills. 
 ▪
 Ongoing improvements in fi nancial and IT audit staff professional credentials is 
occurring. 
 ▪
 Audit report content is relevant to the recommendations. 
 ▪
 Follow‐up reports summarizing timeliness of implementation exist. 
 SUMMARY 
 In the last decade, the use of IT in enterprises has evolved rapidly from incidental use to 
pervasive use throughout the enterprise. Instead of a benign mainframe environment, 
IT now has to support a user‐centered environment with multiple devices with access 
to server‐based storage and processing. New development methodologies, integrated 
package suites, and new technologies create a situation in which IT units may have to 
interface with over 100 vendors (Rockart, Earl, and Ross 1996). COBIT 5.0 leads the 
governance discussion about how the successful enterprise must operate with IT lead-
ership at the most senior levels of the enterprise. Effective IT leadership should reside at 
all levels of the enterprise and not just at the CIO level or lower. 
 Competent IT staff is essential to the health and well-being of the enterprise. Early 
in this chapter, the question “What is the competency of the IT staff?” was mentioned as 
being one of the most relevant questions the fi nancial auditor should ask when discuss-
ing IT controls for fi nancial reporting. The topic of IT “competency” has few benchmarks 
that are either widely accepted in the literature or widely understood. Few research 
papers exist on the competency of IT staff for the SME. The MM is one of those bench-
marks describing business processes and competency and is among the most meaning-
ful. Competency of the IT staff is the  starting point for the evaluation of internal controls. 
 For the IT organization to be effective, Rockart et al. (1996) defi ned eight impera-
tives for the new IT organization. While an in‐depth discussion of the eight imperatives 
is beyond the scope of this text, these imperatives are essential for an IT organization 
to be effective. If some or all of these imperatives do not exist or are impaired, it is very 

Summary  ◾        335
likely the internal controls for financial reporting do not exist or are only partially  
effective. The eight imperatives are:
	 1.	 Achieving two‐way strategic alignment (i.e., IT strategy and execution aligns with 
the business strategy)
	 2.	 Developing effective relationships with line management
	 3.	 Delivering and implementing new systems
	 4.	 Building and managing infrastructure
	 5.	 Reskilling the IT organization
	 6.	 Managing vendor partnerships
	 7.	 Building high performance
	 8.	 Redesigning and managing the IT organization
Effective IT requires the complete integration and support of senior management 
as well as working relationships with line management. Without support from senior 
management, line management, and IT, it is very possible and even likely that the eight 
imperatives will not be accomplished. As referenced earlier, IT requires leadership at 
the governance level of the enterprise. Without effective governance, material internal 
control problems for financial reporting likely exist.


337
11
 CHAPTER  ELEVEN 
 Spreadsheet and Desktop 
Tool Risk exposures 
   S
PREADSHEETS ARE USED BY MOST companies, regardless of size, industry, 
geography, or the complexity of an entity’s business model. While several different 
spreadsheet programs have been developed and remain in use around the world, 
Microsoft Excel stands as the dominant package in use as this book goes to press. The 
control procedures discussed in this chapter are suffi ciently general, however, so as to 
apply to other spreadsheet applications. 
 While most of this chapter addresses spreadsheet application, we note that the con-
trol issues surrounding the development of applications by end users extend to other 
types of software platforms, such as, end‐user databases (EUD) or specialized report writ-
ers (collectively referred to as  desktop tools ). In some instances these fi les have become so 
large and complex in an organization as to mirror a traditionally developed application. 
 Spreadsheets are used in everyday business to manage operations, create internal 
reports, and create primary and secondary external fi nancial reports. Operations per-
sonnel use spreadsheets for tasks that might range from quality control, to managing 
research and development activity, to stochastic modeling, to compliance activities. 
Financial reporting personnel use spreadsheets to reconcile accounts, create or validate 
key fi nancial calculations, or perform consolidation activities. Spreadsheet information is 
frequently uploaded to or downloaded from accounting information systems. Disclosures, 
footnotes, and supporting journal entries are typically created within spreadsheets. The 
information that resides within the spreadsheets is typically sensitive, confi dential, or 
proprietary in nature. In addition, the fi nancial information is frequently material in 
nature, which means that the values created or analyzed are of a signifi cant fi nancial 
amount that could lead to material misstatement in the event of an error. Thus, companies 
typically have a signifi cant interest in ensuring the protection and reliability of sensitive 
spreadsheets.  

338 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 SPeCIFIC TYPeS OF RISKS aND eXPOSUReS 
 Spreadsheets create several types of challenges for management and auditors. Spreadsheets 
are typically user‐driven, stored locally, and/or are outside of the control of the information 
technology (IT) department. This results in an “application” (spreadsheet) that is diffi cult 
to secure, audit, and maintain as opposed to a full‐fl edged software application that may 
have inherent or confi gurable controls around security and change management. While 
there are several frameworks and guidelines relating to spreadsheet use, most of these 
revolve around a handful of key risk exposures, identifi ed and briefl y defi ned in Table  11.1 .
 Although spreadsheets are not a risk exposure per se, management should main-
tain an inventory of spreadsheets that are risk‐ranked on the basis of magnitude, mate-
riality, and complexity. The spreadsheet inventory should identify the owner, purpose, 
location, and other characteristics. 
 Occasionally problems result from the migration of a fi le from one spreadsheet 
package to another (e.g., Lotus or Quattro to Excel). While many of these problems are 
 Table 11.1  Illustrative Spreadsheet Risk Exposures
Risk exposure Sample Problems 
Logic and 
formula 
accuracy 
Logic errors in formula construction may result in misleading or erroneous 
calculated values. Input, logic, and usage errors affect the ability for reliance 
on the data within the spreadsheet. Logic errors could result from incorrect 
formulas. The formula may have been incorrect from the beginning or 
inadvertently altered during a formatting change of the spreadsheet. Usage 
errors could include the misapplication of the spreadsheet functionality. 
Data integrity 
Input errors could include excessive manual entries; incorrect links from external 
sources, pivot tables, or other internal/external spreadsheets; importing incorrect 
data or wrong parameters; copy‐and‐paste errors; or unintended changes.
Data may contain clerical errors. Imported text fi les may have been imperfectly 
converted to columns of data. Some numeric values may have been 
inadvertently formatted as text.
Values that have been hardcoded into formula expressions (e.g., an embedded 
tax rate) can easily be overlooked when the spreadsheet is updated. 
Versioning 
Version control is essential to ensure that the current spreadsheet is updated 
with the correct information, and to prevent multiple copies of the same 
spreadsheet from being updated simultaneously, resulting in ambiguity with 
respect to the question of which version is the current “master” spreadsheet. 
Poor versioning could result in the use of outdated calculations or stale data. 
Fraud 
Spreadsheets can be easily manipulated if not protected. If a spreadsheet is not 
properly controlled, then a fraudster could potentially manipulate and affect 
the fi nancial reporting process. The changes made by the fraudster may not be 
detected if spreadsheet changes are not logged or controlled. Note that the 
separation of data and operating instructions is far less formally defi ned and 
controlled in a spreadsheet than in traditional software applications. 
Unauthorized 
users 
Access to the spreadsheet needs to be protected to ensure that unauthorized 
users do not inadvertently change data within the spreadsheets or view the 
sensitive data within the spreadsheet. Access can be controlled by passwords to 
ensure that the location of the spreadsheet is protected.

Research on Errors in Spreadsheets ◾    339
limited to formatting and display issues, the IT auditor should be especially alert to the 
potential for integrity issues in fi les of mixed parentage. 
 ReSeaRCH ON eRRORS IN SPReaDSHeeTS 
 On an anecdotal basis, most spreadsheet users are familiar with the variety of spreadsheet 
errors and the frequency with which they are encountered in practice. Most of these typi-
cally arise from human sources, ranging from clerical miskeying to fundamental errors in 
logical thinking. As noted the following sidebar, “Material Defi ciencies in Internal Control 
Related to the Use of Spreadsheets,” a growing body of literature addresses the prevalence of 
spreadsheet errors. Groups such as the European Spreadsheet Risks Interest Group * main-
tain a list of horror stories that include items such as the following: 
 ▪
 “Britain’s second largest drug maker AstraZeneca (AZN.L) was forced to reiterate 
its 2011 and midterm fi nancial forecasts on Monday after inadvertently releasing 
confi dential company information to analysts.” 
 ▪
 “The London 2012 [Olympic Games] organizing committee (Locog) . . . [oversold 
four synchronized swimming sessions by 10,000 tickets] . . . when a member of staff 
made a single keystroke mistake and entered ‘20,000’ into a spreadsheet rather 
than the correct fi gure of 10,000 remaining tickets.” 
 ▪
 Other stories include a $6 million misstatement of cash because of a faulty link, 
underestimation of county tax in Kern County, California, because of “an experi-
enced staffer who used the wrong spreadsheet to calculate Occidental Petroleum 
Corp.’s tax bill for property it owns in Elk Hills, California,” and a $300,000 settle-
ment of a pollution case that was “sparked by a math error” in a spreadsheet.   
 * www.eusprig.org . 
Material Defi ciencies in Internal Control Related to 
the Use of Spreadsheets
T
here are material defi ciencies in internal control related to the use of spread-
sheets. A survey of public domain disclosures suggests the range of potential 
risk exposures related to the use of spreadsheets in various applications:
 ▪
Based on this evaluation under the COSO Framework, management con-
cluded that our internal control over fi nancial reporting was not effective as 
of December 31, 2007, because of the presence of material weakness. The 
material weakness relates to a misclassifi cation of cash fl ows from operating 
activities, with a corresponding offset to cash fl ows from investing activities, in 
the statement of cash fl ows. The controls over the entry of data into a spread-
sheet used in the preparation of the statement of cash fl ows and the monitor-
ing thereof was not suffi ciently precise to prevent the misclassifi cation from 
occurring.—Gran Tierra Energy, from Form 10K‐A, dated 12/31/2007, Item 9A, 
Controls and Procedures.
(continued)

340 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 ▪
The Company’s monitoring activities were not effective at identifying, on a 
timely basis, defi ciencies in the operation of controls in the fi nancial statement 
close process. Specifi cally, the Company’s procedures for the supervisory review 
of the performance by Company personnel of manual controls associated with 
account analysis and the verifi cation of the accuracy of electronic spreadsheets 
that support fi nancial reporting were ineffective. —Online Resources, from Form 
10Q, dated 9/30/2008, Part 1, Item 4, Control and Procedures
 ▪
We failed to maintain proper spreadsheet controls at our Gavitec location. Spe-
cifi cally, critical spreadsheets are password protected and reside on a protected 
drive, but additional controls, such as critical cell formula testing and locking, 
logic testing, and input control are missing. Additionally, the Gavitec location did 
not have the Excel policy adopted last year at our headquarters. —Neogenomics 
Inc., from 2007 10‐K, dated 12/31/2007, Item 9a, Controls and Procedures
 ▪
We did not maintain effective controls over the determination and reporting 
of the provision for income taxes and related income tax balances. Specifi -
cally, the requisite level of skills and resources in accounting for income taxes 
was inadequate and our procedures for preparing, analyzing, reconciling, and 
reviewing our income tax provision and income tax balance sheet accounts did 
not provide effective internal control. Spreadsheets supporting the calculation 
of income tax balances were inadequately controlled and were susceptible 
to manual input errors. —Neenah Paper Inc., Internal Controls over Financial 
Reporting, from Form 10Q, dated 9/30/2008, Item 4, Controls and Procedures
Spreadsheet Risk Vectors
 The ease with which spreadsheet information can be manipulated or compromised makes 
it relatively easy for fraudsters to abuse spreadsheets and potentially remain undetected. 
Figure  11.1 presents three relatively distinct risk vectors that trail through different types 
of tasks typically performed through the use of spreadsheets. Spreadsheet risk exposures 
increase principally because of data features (quantity of data, number of links and references, 
likelihood of clerical input errors, missing data, etc.) or logical complexity (presence of com-
plex formulas, esoteric functions, VBA code, etc.). Thus, simple invoicing or customer man-
agement fi les ( α ) require a different IT audit approach (e.g., cross‐checks, additional footings, 
 FIGURe  11.1  Spreadsheet Risk Vectors  
H
Invoicing
Detailed forecasting
Detailed budgeting
Consolidated reporting
L
Fixed assets
Models
Accrual analysis
L
α
β
γ
H
Quantity exposures
Logical complexity 

Research on Errors in Spreadsheets ◾    341
Factors affecting the ability to Detect Spreadsheet errors*
A
n extensive body of literature now documents the high likelihood of mate-
rial errors in end-user spreadsheet models. Experts estimate that as many as 
one in every three spreadsheets have a major error in them (Creeth 1985). In one 
case, a Houston consultant found 128 errors in four of his client’s multibillion-dollar 
spreadsheets (Simkin 1987). In another, a clothing manufacturer was lucky enough 
to discover a mix-up in formulas that resulted in a $1.5 million error (Ditlea 1987). In 
a third case, an error in a spreadsheet at Fidelity Investments resulted in a multibil-
lion-dollar reporting error (Godfrey 1995). In a fourth case, the spreadsheet error 
in a Dallas oil and gas company’s spreadsheet resulted in million-dollar losses and 
several executive dismissals (Hayen and Peters 1989).  
These are not isolated incidents. In a study of large companies using large 
spreadsheets, for example, the researchers found that 90 percent of the models 
contained at least one calculation error (adapted from Freeman, 1996). Similarly, 
in a study by Galletta, Hartzel, Johnson, and Joseph (1996), 30 CPAs and 30 MBAs 
collectively missed 35 percent of the mechanical errors and 54 percent of the logi-
cal errors built into the six experimental spreadsheets. Summarizing nine studies 
involving spreadsheet modeling in the past 10 years, Panko (2005) computed an 
average error rate of 94 percent—that is, 94 percent of the corporate spreadsheet 
models included in these studies contained one or more material errors in them.
Ironically, the substantive likelihood of errors in spreadsheets is often matched 
by equally high user confi dence that their models are error-free. In one study 
of 19 commercial spreadsheets, for example, Davis and Ikin (1987) found 4 that 
contained material errors, even though their developers were “very confi dent” 
that their spreadsheets did not contain any. In a second study by Panko (1999), 
subjects estimated that, on average, there was an 18 percent chance that spread-
sheets contained an error, when in fact 86 percent of them contained errors. In a 
third study by Reithel, Nichols, and Robinson (1996), subjects expressed greater 
confi dence in the accuracy of large, well-formatted spreadsheets over poorly for-
matted or smaller spreadsheets, despite the intuitive fact that larger spreadsheets 
are more likely to have errors in them. Finally, when 113 MBA students audited a 
spreadsheet known to contain exactly eight errors, Galletta et al. (1996) found that 
on average the subjects were only able to detect half of the mistakes.
The inexorable conclusions to be drawn from these observations are as 
troubling as they are self-evident: (1) many large spreadsheets are likely to have 
major errors in them; (2) most spreadsheet users express unfounded confi dence in 
well-formatted spreadsheet models, even if they are seriously fl awed; and (3) many 
spreadsheet users base major decisions on spreadsheet models, regardless of the 
models’ accuracy. These risks are not likely to diminish in the future because the 
trend is for users to develop larger and more complex spreadsheets (Shaw 2004).
A study by PricewaterhouseCoopers suggests that corporate spreadsheet 
models are doubling in size and formula content every three years (Whittaker 
1999). Although a growing body of research now documents the high incidence of 
mistakes in even the most critical spreadsheet models, little is known about what 
types of errors are most common or which individuals are most likely to either 
discover or overlook them. For example, although formula errors are likely to be 
the most important in spreadsheets (because they are often copied and therefore 
systemic), data-entry mistakes, clerical errors, or violations of corporate rules or 
policies are other examples of problems that can also produce fl awed spread-
sheet results. Similarly, although it is easy to suspect that novices are more likely 
to commit or miss errors than veteran users, it has been our experience that the 
(continued )

342 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 Table 11.2  Sampling of Internal Control Defi ciencies Relating to Spreadsheets 
Defect 
Company/ 
Source 
Comment (text from 10Q or 10K) 
Inadequate 
staffi ng and 
supervision 
Global Immune 
Technologies 
10Q 12/31/2008 
 Lack of review over the fi nancial reporting process that 
may result in a  failure to detect errors in spreadsheets , 
calculations, or assumptions used to compile the fi nancial 
statements and related disclosures as fi led with the SEC. 
Change 
management 
Eastman Kodak 
10K 12/31/2005 
 The company also reported that it has fully remediated two of the 
three previously disclosed material weaknesses, namely, the material 
weakness relating to the company’s internal controls surrounding 
the accounting for pension and other post‐retirement benefi t plans 
and the  material weakness relating to the preparation and 
review of spreadsheets that include new or changed formulas . 
The company also reported signifi cant progress in remediating the 
previously disclosed material weakness surrounding the accounting 
for income taxes. The company continues to focus on improving its 
internal controls in this area and will continue to report a material 
weakness until it is fully remediated.  
Ineffective 
supervisory 
review 
Online 
Resources 
10Q 9/30/2008 
 The Company’s monitoring activities were not effective at 
identifying, on a timely basis, defi ciencies in the operation of 
controls in the fi nancial statement close process. Specifi cally, 
the Company’s procedures for the supervisory review of the 
performance by Company personnel of manual controls 
associated with account analysis and the  veriﬁ cation of the 
accuracy of electronic spreadsheets that support fi nancial 
reporting were ineffective. 
reverse is often true. This is because novices are often more distrustful of spread-
sheet results, and their very lack of confi dence causes them to be more critical—
and therefore more careful—in building or using spreadsheet models.
* H. Howe and M. Simkin. 2006. “Factors Affecting the Ability to Detect Spreadsheet Errors.” Decision 
Sciences Journal of Innovative Education 4(1).
test decks) than that demanded by proprietary models or highly technical accrual analysis 
( γ ) (e.g., independent verifi cation of model logic by subject matter experts, stress testing, 
etc.). Some combination of both types of IT audit techniques is required when applications 
combine large quantities of data (e.g., GL balances from multiple subsidiaries) with logically 
complex instructions (e.g., VBA code to manage a rollup) ( β ). 
 Researchers have developed various taxonomies of spreadsheet errors* but there 
does not at present appear to be one dominant paradigm for categorizing errors. 
 Table  11.2 presents several real‐world spreadsheet errors documented in public 
fi lings by a variety of companies. The defects highlight the intersection of technical 
and staffi ng issues.  
 * See, e.g., S. Powell, B. Lawson, and K. R. Baker. 2009. “Impact of Errors in Operational Spreadsheets,”  Deci-
sion Support Systems 47(2): 126–132, and S. Powell, B. Lawson, and K. R. Baker. 2008. “A Critical Review of 
the Literature on Spreadsheets,”  Decision Support Systems 46(1): 128–138. 

Research on Errors in Spreadsheets ◾    343
Disclosure 
controls 
Carmike 
Cinemas, Inc. 
10Q 9/30/2008 
We did not maintain effective internal control over fi nancial 
reporting with respect to the application of GAAP as it relates 
to unusual and non‐routine events or transactions such as 
long‐lived asset impairment and GAAP disclosures; had 
inadequate processes to identify changes in GAAP and the 
business practices that may affect the method or processes of 
recording transactions; and had ineffective controls  over critical 
spreadsheets used in the preparation of accounting and 
ﬁ nancial information.  
Accounting 
process 
Ceco 
Environmental 
10Q 9/30/2008 
 Based on this evaluation, such offi cers have concluded that 
these controls and procedures are not effective as of the end 
of the period covered by this quarterly report on Form 10‐Q 
in ensuring that the information we are required to disclose 
in reports that we fi le or submit under the Exchange Act is 
 recorded, processed, summarized and reported within the 
time periods speciﬁ ed in [SEC] rules and forms. 
Remediation 
via reduced 
spreadsheet 
use 
Ceco 
Environmental 
10Q 9/30/2008  
 The Company has purchased and is in the process of 
implementing an integrated software system which includes 
industry standard and current best practice inherent controls. The 
new system is expected to address and remediate defi ciencies 
including segregation of duties, security (through access restriction 
limited to job responsibilities), change control procedures, and 
 reduced use of spreadsheets in preparing ﬁ nancials.  
Disclosure 
controls 
Neogenomics 
Inc. 10Q 
9/30/2008 
. . . concluded that our disclosure controls and procedures were 
not effective . . . due to the material weaknesses . . . relating to . . . 
(iii)  failure to maintain proper spreadsheet controls.  
Controls over 
access and 
change 
Canargo Energy 
10Q 9/30/2008  
 The Company did not adequately implement certain controls 
over information technology, including  certain spreadsheets, 
used in its core business and ﬁ nancial reporting . These 
areas included logical access security controls to fi nancial 
applications, segregation of duties and backup and recovery 
procedures. signed appropriately. This material weakness 
affects the Company’s ability to prevent improper access 
and changes to its accounting records and misstatements in 
the fi nancial statements could occur and not be prevented 
or detected by the Company’s controls in a timely manner. 
As a result, misappropriation of assets and misstatements in 
the fi nancial statements could occur and not be prevented or 
detected by the Company’s controls in a timely manner. 
Spreadsheet‐
based 
consolidated 
reporting 
Rock of Ages 
Corporation 
10Q 11/7/2008 
 Additionally, the Company does not utilize integrated fi nancial 
reporting software to prepare consolidated period‐end results 
which requires management to rely on  manual spreadsheets , 
which are subject to error. 
Synergistic 
inadequacies 
in staff skill 
level and 
spreadsheet 
control relating 
to a specifi c 
account 
Neenah Paper 
Inc. 
10Q 9/30/2008  
 We did not maintain effective controls over the determination and 
reporting of the provision for income taxes and related income tax 
balances. Specifi cally, the  requisite level of skills and resources 
in accounting for income taxes was inadequate and our 
procedures for preparing, analyzing, reconciling and reviewing our 
income tax provision and income tax balance sheet accounts did 
not provide effective internal control.  Spreadsheets supporting 
the calculation of income tax balances were inadequately 
controlled and were susceptible to manual input errors .  
Table 11.2  (Continued) 

344 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 COMPlIaNCe DIMeNSIONS OF SPReaDSHeeT 
RISK eXPOSUReS 
 Spreadsheet management is imperative for companies to comply with external 
regulations, minimize risk, and maintain effi cient operations. This section briefl y 
reviews some of the major compliance initiatives that a company probably has to 
consider.  
 Sarbanes Oxley 
 Section 404 of the Sarbanes Oxley Act (SOx) requires management to create, docu-
ment, test, and maintain a system of internal controls for fi nancial reporting. The 
intent behind this requirement is to reduce the incidence of fraudulent fi nancial 
reporting. The SEC has encouraged a top‐down, risk‐based approach. A May 16, 2005, 
SEC staff paper, the  Statement on Management’s Report on Internal Control over Financial 
Reporting , states: 
 An overall purpose of internal control over fi nancial reporting is to foster the 
preparation of reliable fi nancial statements. Reliable fi nancial statements 
must be materially accurate. Therefore, a central purpose of the assessment 
of internal control over fi nancial reporting is to identify material weaknesses 
that have, as indicated by their very defi nition, more than a remote likelihood 
of leading to a material misstatement in the fi nancial statements. While iden-
tifying control defi ciencies and signifi cant defi ciencies represents an important 
component of management’s assessment, the overall focus of internal control 
reporting should be on those items that could result in material errors in the 
fi nancial statements. 
 Data Privacy 
 There are several areas of data privacy that potentially interact with the many uses of 
spreadsheet software. These include the following: 
 Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act* 
 While principally addressed to health plan administrators, health information clear-
inghouses, and healthcare providers that transmit information electronically, Health 
Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) “affects all businesses to some 
degree.” “Under the Privacy Rule, covered entities and business associates are required 
to ensure adequate protection of all [sensitive healthcare] information. Specifi cally, 
HIPAA requires these organizations to . . . identify and protect such information 
*Material in this section is based on M. Simkin and J. H. Yamamura. 2003. “What Businesses Should Know 
About HIPAA,”  CPA Journal. 

Compliance Dimensions of Spreadsheet Risk Exposures   ◾        345
[and to] establish policies and procedures to ensure that such information is disclosed 
only for authorized purposes.”
Payment Cards
The Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS) is an industry‐developed 
standard designed to provide information security for businesses and other entities 
that process payment cards. Requirements include the use of firewalls, passwords, 
encryption, and restricted access. While many of these techniques and processes would 
be applied to customized software systems, the IT auditor should be alert to the role of 
spreadsheets as a potential weak link in a payment system.
Social Security Numbers
Entities collect Social Security data for purposes that include all aspects of employment 
(background checks, verification of eligibility), tax compliance, and any company 
benefit plans. Due to the increased levels of concern over identity theft, many orga-
nizations have substantially strengthened policies designed to protect this sensitive 
information.
While the development of tools that can search drives for potentially sensitive 
information is beyond the scope of this book, the following quote from a University of 
Michigan document* throws an interesting light on the challenges of designing and 
employing such tools:
The use of tools that recursively traverse file trees, like many of the tools 
mentioned here, will destroy valuable evidence (file access times, at the very 
least) if special measures are not taken to protect it. Also, be aware that all of 
these (and similar) tools are not always accurate. They could find information 
that is not being sought (false positive), and they could fail to discover 
information that is being sought (false negative). It is extremely important to 
understand that simply because a tool appears to have found nothing, it does not  
mean that the intended information is not present. Additionally, none of these 
tools are designed to find information that has been obfuscated, encrypted, or 
intentionally hidden in any manner.
Sensitive Data and Password Protection
Any sensitive data can potentially be used in ways that have a variety of legal and/
or compliance implications—from misappropriated R&D information to earnings 
projections that might figure in an insider‐trading scandal. While protection commands 
can reduce some of the inherent risks of storing sensitive data in a spreadsheet, they 
cannot entirely mitigate the exposure. (See Figures 11.2 and 11.3.)
* See http://safecomputing.umich.edu/tools/download/ccn‐ssn_discovery_tools.pdf.

346
 FIGURe  11.2  Applying a Password  
 FIGURe  11.3  Breaking Passwords  

Compliance Dimensions of Spreadsheet Risk Exposures  ◾    347
 Spreadsheet engineering  
 T
he auditor should acquire an understanding of how important spreadsheets 
are developed within an organization. A framework for researching quality 
issues in spreadsheet design * suggests an auditing and review protocol for 
the portfolio of spreadsheets encountered in the fi eld. This sidebar summarizes 
the major elements of the framework and relates these to audit questions. The 
framework elements from Grossman’s paper are shown in bold type; the IT audit 
questions are provided in regular type. 
 ▪
Principle 1: Best practices can have large impact. What best practices in 
spreadsheet development are particularly relevant to fi les created for the 
organization, and how widely are they followed? 
 ▪
Principle 2: Life‐cycle planning is important. Grossman observes that 
“every piece of software goes through a life cycle, starting with the 
conception of the software and ending the last time the software is used.” 
Has management chosen a life‐cycle model for spreadsheet applications? If 
not, “failure to choose a life‐cycle model is itself a choice, often leading to 
de facto use of the undesirable ‘code‐and‐fi x’ model with unfortunate and 
predictable consequences.” 
 ▪
Principle 3: A priori requirements speciﬁ cation is beneﬁ cial. Are there 
mismatches between the requirements put forth by users and the degree of 
fl exibility afforded by the organization’s life‐cycle model? 
 ▪
Principle 4: Predicting future use is important. Who is going to be 
using the model? Will it be used a few times only, by (an) individual(s) with 
expertise, or repeatedly, by a range of individuals with varying levels of 
knowledge and skill? 
 ▪
Principle 5: Design matters. What design principles are employed by 
individuals who create spreadsheets within the organization? Is there any 
attempt to design the application before attempting to code it? Is there a 
review process? What standard protocols are there for naming, use of color, 
structure, and so on? 
 ▪
Principle 6: Best practices are situation‐dependent. How do specifi c 
circumstances within the organization affect best practices? 
 ▪
Principle 7: Programming is a social, not an individual activity. 
 ▪
Principle 8: Deployment of best practices is difﬁ cult and consumes 
resources. Grossman cites research supporting the view that “adoption 
of proven software engineering practices varies widely within and across 
fi rms.” Does the entity evince a commitment at the managerial level to 
support a culture of best practices? The IT auditor should evaluate the 
entity’s social environment and factors such as motivation, teamwork, 
selection, and training.  
 * T. A. Grossman, “Spreadsheet Engineering: A Research Framework,” Proceedings of the European 
Spreadsheet Risks Interest Group Symposium , Cardiff, Wales, 2006. 

348 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 SPReaDSHeeT aUDITING TOOlS 
 Many desktop applications include tools usable by the IT auditor for evaluating the 
logic and structure of an application. In Excel, the Formula tab provides a “Trace Prec-
edents” function that when activated shows the cells referenced in a formula, as shown 
in Figure  11.5 . The “Show Formulas” function facilitates a quick scan of a worksheet 
in order to determine which cells or ranges contain data or labels, and which contain 
formulas, as shown in Figure  11.6 . Note that the spreadsheet adheres to a color‐coding 
protocol for data and formulas.  
 Data cells can be analyzed for dependents with the “Trace Dependent” function, as 
shown in Figure  11.7 . 
 The judicious use of range names for key cells makes it signifi cantly easier to grasp 
the logic of a calculation, as suggested by Figure  11.8 . Also illustrated in that graphic is 
the Name Manager, which provides a listing of all named ranges and the option to fi lter 
the list by various criteria, as shown in Figure  11.9 . 
 Setting a watch window on a formula in one sheet that depends on inputs from 
another sheet provides the IT auditor with a tool that may be more effi cient than open-
ing multiple windows in order to view different tabs, or working against hard copy, as 
shown in Figures  11.10 and  11.11 
 FIGURe  11.4  Sample Worksheet  

349
 FIGURe  11.5  Show Precedents  
 FIGURe  11.6  Show Formulas  

350
 FIGURe  11.7  Show Dependents  
 FIGURe  11.8  Name Manager  

Spreadsheet Auditing Tools ◾    351
FIGURe  11.9 Filtering Names in Name Manager
 FIGURe  11.10  Watch Window  

352 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 GOVeRNaNCe OF SPReaDSHeeTS aND DeSKTOP TOOlS 
 Management of spreadsheet and desktop tools (e.g., Access databases, Crystal 
Reports, queries) can be a difficult process. In many organizations, management is 
challenged in identifying all the relevant and critical spreadsheets and desktop tools 
that support the financial cycles. In some cases, this is because management does 
not realize that the spreadsheet is being used—for example, an ad hoc spreadsheet 
could be similar to the old fashion tape register. Management should also consider 
drafting a policy that specifically discusses the importance of spreadsheet and 
desktop tools governance. 
 To begin the process of identifying the spreadsheets and desktop tools that should 
be considered in‐scope, management must fi rst have a good defi nition of critical spread-
sheets and desktop tools. One could defi ne a tool that helps determine transaction 
amounts on the fi nancial statements or amounts that affect management’s decisions 
and analysis. 
 When management, the internal auditor, or the external auditor is identify-
ing the scope of the audit, the financial cycles that are considered significant to 
the materiality of the financials are identified. During this process, management 
will identify manual controls and information technology controls that support the 
financial cycle. Just like management needs to identify the relevant information 
 FIGURe  11.11  Watch Window with New Input  

Governance of Spreadsheets and Desktop Tools  ◾        353
systems that support the financial cycles, management needs to identify the rel-
evant spreadsheets and desktop tools that support the financial cycles. Management 
can ask the owners of the financial information how the financial information was 
calculated—that is, manually, via a spreadsheet, or via an application system. For 
example, in the financial reporting cycle, management may identify spreadsheets 
that are used to calculate amounts for footnote disclosures or complicated spread-
sheets that are used in consolidations.
Management could identify critical spreadsheets and desktop tools that support 
internal or external financial reporting and safeguarding of assets.
Management would consider the following four questions:
	 1.	 Does the output impact financial reporting, budgeting, pricing, or payments?
	 2.	 Is the spreadsheet or desktop tool complex in nature?
	 3.	 Is the potential size of any error material to the financial statements, budget analy-
sis, or pricing calculation?
	 4.	 Does the output have other downstream controls that adequately mitigate the risk 
of material misstatements?
Providing high‐level scrutiny, maintaining logs and versioning records, storage 
on a separate drive, and other security measures are costly in ways that include direct 
outlay, use of company resources, and reduced employee productivity. Entities should 
reserve the high‐risk protocols for applications that truly present a high risk, and not 
burden the security system with excessive procedural requirements. Figure 11.12 
shows the decision logic for a sample application control policy for spreadsheets used 
in financial reporting or planning. While this drawing and the associated commen-
tary focus on Excel files, the general policy could be readily adapted to other desktop 
applications, such as access interfaces or standalone databases, customized reports, 
and so forth.
The policy focuses on applications that are used for external reporting or 
sensitive internal planning processes (first decision node, “FS, B, P?”) for financial 
statements, budgeting, pricing, or calculation support for any process that results 
in payments, whether these be to external parties (vendors, lenders, etc.) or entity 
employees. For applications that do not involve the previously mentioned processes, 
the policies described in Figure 11.12 are not applicable (NA).
The control policy contemplates a “medium” and “high” risk set of protocols. All 
payment‐related processes are defined as high risk without exception or qualification. 
For the reporting and planning processes, subsequent decision screens evaluate whether 
the application is complex, whether potential misstatements could be material, and 
whether downstream controls exist that would detect potential errors. (These decisions 
might be based on other decision trees, or an overall scoring system, or expert judg-
ment, or some other protocol.) Non complex applications, or those that would not pro-
duce material misstatements, or those subject to approved downstream controls would 
be assigned to the medium‐risk category. Complex applications capable of producing 
material misstatements and not mitigated by approved downstream controls would be 
assigned to the high‐risk category.

354 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 FIGURe  11.12  Sample Spreadsheet Applications Control Policy  
 The high‐risk protocol might include the entire gamut of procedures available 
to mitigate application risks. A medium‐ or low‐risk protocol would include some 
subset of these procedures. Not illustrated in Figure  11.12 is the potential use of 
risk‐exposure subcategories. For example, within the medium‐risk band there may 
be some applications that should be subject to segregation and access controls, 
and other applications where these restrictions would be superfluous or fail a cost/
benefit analysis. Likewise, some of the procedures discussed earlier might apply 
differently for high‐ and medium‐risk exposures. For example, change control for 
a high‐risk application should generally include documentation, extensive testing, 
protection of sensitive formulas, and password restriction. Some of these procedures 
might reasonably be handled in a more relaxed manner for lower‐risk applications. 
The IT auditor should assess the overall degree of security required for spreadsheet 
control policies and the entity resources devoted to these practices. A company 
policy that sets unrealistically high security levels for all spreadsheet applications 
may be exposing itself to the risk that not all stipulated policies will be followed 
because of limited time and staffing. 

Control Considerations ◾    355
 After management goes through the process of identifying the critical spreadsheets 
and desktop tools, management can capture the information in a data repository. 
Within the data repository, example information that should be captured could 
include: 
 ▪
 Name of spreadsheet or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Specifi c location of spreadsheet or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Last revision date and history of all changes 
 ▪
 Password used (indicate if a password exists—the actual password does not need 
to be recorded unless management needs a record of passwords in case personnel 
change) 
 ▪
 Risk level, including criticality and complexity of spreadsheet or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Purpose of spreadsheet or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Owner of the spreadsheet or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Location of source documents that support the information within the spreadsheet 
or desktop tool 
 ▪
 Frequency of use (e.g., daily, monthly, quarterly, annually) 
 After management has identifi ed the spreadsheets and desktop tools, a process 
needs to be set up to manage the addition or discontinuance of spreadsheets and desk-
top tools within the organization. Some organizations have used quarterly or annual 
questionnaire updates to determine whether spreadsheets or desktop tools have been 
added or discontinued in the fi nancial process. Whichever way management decides 
to manage this process, it needs to be well controlled, lest critical spreadsheets come to 
life after the initial inventory, without documented controls. 
 In addition, management should ensure that each spreadsheet and desktop 
tool has an owner with defined roles and responsibilities for the management of 
the spreadsheet or desktop tool. Too often, “applications” come to life without 
accountability.  
 CONTROl CONSIDeRaTIONS 
 Various organizations have provided thought leadership on risks and controls for 
spreadsheets and desktop tools. Example risk management guidance and frameworks 
have been provided by organizations such as: 
 ▪
 PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), “The Use of Spreadsheets: Considerations for Sec-
tion 404 of the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act” (2004b) 
 ▪
 Deloitte, “Spreadsheet Management, Not What You Figured” (2008) 
 ▪
 Protiviti, “Spreadsheet Risk Management” (2009) 
 ▪
 Microsoft, “Spreadsheet Compliance in the 2007 Microsoft Office System” 
(April 2006) 
 ▪
 Panko, “Spreadsheets and Sarbanes‐Oxley: Regulations, Risks, and Control Frame-
works” (2006) 

356 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
 Even though the guidance previously mentioned primarily focuses on spread-
sheets, the same methodology could be extended to desktop tools such as databases. 
Therefore, the discussion in this chapter takes the generalized approach of using the 
spreadsheet guidance to apply to spreadsheets and desktop tools. Each of these pro-
vides guidance to management in how to govern risk and controls for spreadsheets 
and desktop tools. By comparing each of the guidance documents, the following con-
trol considerations should be evaluated for each critical spreadsheet and desktop tool. 
These include: 
 ▪
Logical security: What prevents unauthorized access to the spreadsheets? Are 
passwords used? Is the spreadsheet located in a secure directory? 
 ▪
Change management: What prevents unauthorized changes to spreadsheets? Are 
changes logged and monitored? How are errors prevented or detected? 
 ▪
Operational: What ensures that the spreadsheets are backed up so they are 
available? Are spreadsheets appropriately archived in accordance with laws and 
regulations? 
 ▪
 Business: Does adequate documentation exist to support the spreadsheet? Does 
the spreadsheet support the needs of the business? 
 The control considerations can be further analyzed to illustrate what management 
could do to prevent, detect, or minimize the risks. With any risk within an organization, 
management has to decide if the cost associated with preventing, detecting, or minimiz-
ing the risk is in line with the fi nancial wherewithal of the organization or within its 
risk tolerance levels. Financial information that cannot be secured runs the risk of being 
unusable to internal or external users without costly auditing and supporting evidence 
to validate that the data has integrity. 
 Organizations have also identifi ed and used third‐party software to manage spread-
sheets and desktop tools. For example, CIMCON Software Inc. has a web‐based solution 
called “SOx‐XL” that manages the internal controls for spreadsheets. The software helps 
implement security and change controls to protect the spreadsheet. Workfl ow rules and 
tracking changes help manage the integrity of the spreadsheet. Depending on the third‐
party solution used by management, management needs to continue to be responsible 
for the controls around the spreadsheets. 
 Figure  11.13 depicts how the SOx‐XL product manages the spreadsheet controls. 
 There are also software solutions that help manage desktop tools such as access 
databases. For example, SOx‐XS is a web‐based solution for access database controls. 
Security controls such as role‐based signatures enable workfl ow security and track 
changes to help manage changes.  
 aUDITING CONTROlS aND CReaTING a baSelINe 
 After the inventories of spreadsheets and desktop tools have been risk‐ranked, man-
agement needs to perform audit procedures to validate the logic and controls within 
the spreadsheet or desktop tool. Depending on the risk ranking, different procedures 

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline ◾    357
may need to be performed. For high‐risk spreadsheets or desktop tools, management 
will apply the maximum procedures to gain assurance that controls are in place. For 
medium‐risk‐ranked spreadsheets or desktop tools, fewer procedures will be performed. 
For low‐ranked ones, management may elect not to test, or to perform a basic set of 
procedures. 
 Table  11.3 highlights proposed audit tests that could be done based on the risk 
ranking (the terms are further defi ned within the sections).
 Table  11.3 illustrates the suggested controls and audit tests that should be 
performed depending on the risk ranking of the spreadsheet. If the spreadsheet (or 
desktop tool) is ranked as “low,” management may decide to do no testing, from a 
risk acceptance standpoint, but management should consider implementing controls 
1 through 5 in the table. If the spreadsheet is ranked as “medium,” management 
should consider implementing controls 1 through 10. If the spreadsheet is ranked as 
“high,” management should consider implementing controls 1 through 13. There may 
be other controls or tests that management may elect to perform based on internal 
situations, but these 13 suggested controls provide a baseline to get reasonable comfort 
with the spreadsheet.  
 logical Security 
 Just like application‐level security, security within spreadsheets is critically important 
to ensure that only authorized individuals have access to view, add, change, or delete 
data. Controls could include access control, security and integrity of data, segregation 
of duties, and password protection. The illustrated audit tests in the following include a 
sampling of potential audit steps that could be performed based on analyzing the vari-
ous guidance previously mentioned. Management could elect to perform other logical 
security testing, depending on the overall environment. 
 As illustrated in Table  11.3 , the following logical security controls should be put 
in place by management depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or desktop tool: 
 FIGURe  11.13  Web‐Based SOx Tool for Spreadsheet Internal Controls 
Source: www.sarbox‐solutions.com. 
Noncompliant
Excel
Wrokbook
SOx-compliant
Excel
Workbook
SOx-compliant
Excel
Workbook
Administrator Workstation
(Web browser)
User Workstation
Request
SOx-XL Controls
Client
Controls
SOx-XL Enterprise
Application (Web Services)
Internet/Intranet
Application Server

358
Table 11.3  Audit Tests for Spreadsheet Applications
Base 
(Low)
Increased 
(Medium)
Maximum 
(High)
Logical 
Security
Change 
Management
Operational 
Controls
Business 
Controls
1
Password protection
X
X
X
X
2
Spreadsheet backup and storage
X
X
X
X
X
3
Spreadsheet access
X
X
X
X
4
Change approval and documentation
X
X
X
X
5
Testing of changes
X
X
X
X
6
Spreadsheet access review
X
X
X
7
Spreadsheet logic review
X
X
X
8
Cell protection
X
X
X
X
9
Historical files
X
X
X
10
Naming conventions
X
X
X
11
Input fields and formulas
X
X
X
X
12
Access administration
X
X
13
Testing signoff
X
X
Counts
7
6
2
2
Source: Adapted from material from Tom Poe, Hudson Consulting Services, 2009.

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline  ◾        359
▪▪
Password protection: This is defined as “Files are password protected (modify) 
to prevent unauthorized changes.” This definition could be extended to mean that 
the spreadsheet or desktop tool needs to have adequate password security with rea-
sonable password configuration settings to ensure authorized access to the specific 
file and to key cells or data points within the file. Regardless of the risk ranking 
of the spreadsheet, passwords should exist to protect the spreadsheet or desktop 
tool. Many times, passwords in spreadsheets are simple and could be hacked. Man-
agement could consider using operating system or windows directory controls to 
prevent unauthorized access by controlling read/write privileges. Management 
should also reinforce policies and procedures that underscore the importance of 
not sharing passwords.
▪▪
Spreadsheet backup and storage: This is defined as “Store spreadsheets in a 
network folder that is backed up daily.” This definition could be extended to mean, 
from a logical security perspective, that the spreadsheet should be stored in a secure 
location that can be accessed only by authorized personnel. Some companies have 
accomplished this by using a common server to house the critical spreadsheets and 
restricting access rights to that server.
▪▪
Spreadsheet access: This is defined as “Store spreadsheets on limited‐access 
shared drive.” This definition could be extended to mean that windows directories 
could be used to store the spreadsheet and the access to the folders can be restricted 
to authorized personnel.
▪▪
Spreadsheet access review: This is defined as “Periodically review spreadsheet 
access.” This definition could be extended to mean that management on a quar-
terly, semiannual, or annual basis should get a listing of the individuals that have 
system access rights to the spreadsheets to determine if the access is appropriate. 
To have good segregation of duties to begin with, management needs to ensure that 
the spreadsheet creators/owners, supervisor reviews, and users of the spreadsheets 
each have a segregated role. These roles would be reviewed during the periodic 
review.
▪▪
Cell protection: This is defined as “Maintain cell protection to prevent formula 
overrides.” This definition could be extended to mean the cells need to be protected 
so inadvertent or purposeful changes are not made. By locking the cells, manage-
ment can ensure that certain cells cannot be altered without a password. This can 
help protect sensitive data, formulas, and calculations.
▪▪
Input fields and formulas: This is defined as “Separate and color code input fields 
and formulas—Break complex calculations into smaller pieces.” This definition 
could be extended to mean that we need to control logical access to who can input 
data into the fields and alter the formulas.
▪▪
Access administration: This is defined as “Require documented management 
approval to add/delete/change user access.” This definition could be extended to 
mean that management needs to have a robust process to who has access to the 
spreadsheets, a robust process for granting initial access to the spreadsheet and 
removing individuals who no longer need the access. In systems, forms are usually 
completed with data owners signing off on the access to the data.

360	
◾  Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
The following pages present select security subtopics identified within some of 
the spreadsheet guidance documents from PwC and Deloitte for further review. The 
selection of these subtopics does not indicate that these are the only security control 
considerations, but provides an illustration of security controls that management 
should consider for further analysis, depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet 
or desktop tool.
Access Control (PwC, Deloitte)
Access control is simply how a company protects access to the spreadsheet or desk-
top tool. PwC defines it as “Limiting access at the file level to spreadsheets on a cen-
tral server and assigning appropriate rights” (e.g., Create, Read, Update, and Delete). 
Spreadsheets can also be password protected to restrict access. Deloitte defines it as 
“Spreadsheet files should be protected with some form of access control.” Users without 
a business need to open the spreadsheet should be prevented from doing so. This can 
be done by restricting access to the file itself, or the folder in which the spreadsheet 
is stored.
When testing for access control, management should ask:
▪▪
Who has access to this spreadsheet?
▪▪
Is the spreadsheet stored on someone’s computer or on the network?
▪▪
How is access managed?
▪▪
Do you have to know a password to access the spreadsheet? If so, how often is the 
password changed? Who knows the password?
When testing for access control, management could identify the users that have 
access to where the spreadsheet resides, and determine if the access is appropriate. For 
example, some clients will store the spreadsheet on a network folder that is accessible 
by all employees. When this happens, control is potentially compromised. Management 
could also attempt to open the spreadsheet without a password. It may be possible to 
open the file in read‐only, save it to a hard‐drive, make changes, and then save the file 
back to the network folder. This circumvents the use of passwords.
Security and Integrity of Data (PwC)
Security and integrity of data is simply the protection of data within a spreadsheet. PwC 
defines it as “Implementing a process to ensure that data embedded in spreadsheets is 
current and secure. This can be done by ‘locking’ or protecting cells to prevent inadver-
tent or intentional changes to standing data. In addition, the spreadsheets themselves 
should be stored in protected directories.”
When testing for security and integrity of data, management should ask:
▪▪
Are cells in the spreadsheets protected?
▪▪
Are passwords used to protect the cell?
▪▪
Does each person who has access to the spreadsheet know the password for each 
cell protection, or is this on a need‐to‐know‐basis?

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline  ◾        361
When testing for security and integrity of data, management could identify cells 
that are cell protected, or attempt to change the cell to see if a password is required.
Segregation of Duties/Roles and Procedures (PwC)
Segregation of duties (SOD) is simply ensuring that only appropriate individuals have 
access to the spreadsheets or desktop tools. PwC defines it as “Defining and implement-
ing roles, authorities, responsibilities and procedures for issues such as ownership, 
signoff, segregation of duties and usage.”
When testing for segregation of duties/roles and procedures, management should ask:
▪▪
Who manages the process to grant access to this spreadsheet?
▪▪
What roles and procedures have been defined for the use of the spreadsheet?
When testing for segregation of duties/roles and procedures, management could 
obtain the documentation showing that roles and responsibilities around the spread-
sheet have been defined to determine if SOD conflicts exist.
Noninput‐Related Spreadsheet Fields Are Password Protected (Deloitte)
Noninput‐related spreadsheet fields refers to the protection of cells that perform calculations 
but do not need to be routinely updated. Deloitte says, “All fields, such as formulas, that do 
not need to be edited by the end user, but are necessary for the accurate employment of the 
spreadsheet, should be password protected to prevent unauthorized changes.”
When testing for noninput‐related spreadsheet fields protection, management 
should ask:
▪▪
Are cells that do not need editing protected from accidental changes?
▪▪
How does management ensure that cells are protected from accidental changes?
When testing for noninput‐related spreadsheet fields protection, management 
should review the spreadsheet and identify cells that do not need editing and determine 
whether they are protected from accidental changes.
Change Management
Spreadsheets and desktop tools do not typically have automated mechanisms to control 
and log changes made. Changes are typically manually recorded. This is where manage-
ment may elect to use third‐party software to manage the changes. If a third‐party tool 
is not used, management needs to implement a process to ensure that only appropriate 
changes are made and are well‐controlled.
As illustrated in Table 11.3, the following change management controls should be put 
in place by management, depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or desktop tool:
▪▪
Change approval and documentation: This is defined as “Change require-
ments are formally requested, documented, and approved.” This definition could 
be extended to mean that management needs to ensure that a clear process is 

362	
◾  Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
documented where any change goes through formal documentation, which 
requires approval. This is important to ensure an independent approval is obtained 
to validate the need for changes to high‐risk spreadsheets that may contain mate-
rial formulas or logic.
▪▪
Testing of changes: This is defined as “Changes are independently tested and 
the test results are documented.” This definition could be extended to mean that 
management should have a process in place to ensure adequate testing of changes 
made to a spreadsheet prior to the official change. Management could take a copy 
of the spreadsheet and make the change to see if the change was successful. Then 
the change could be redone in the production version of the spreadsheet or the test 
spreadsheet could be copied into production as the new master, assuming no other 
changes occurred. Management should ensure that adequate testing of changes 
has occurred in a secured, nonproduction environment, with the changes docu-
mented. This means that management should make the changes outside the master 
spreadsheet first to ensure the changes do not affect the integrity of the spreadsheet 
or desktop tool. When changes are made, management should update a manual log 
or automated system log if using third‐party software. The log should include the 
name, date, testing method, and description of the change. This log becomes the his-
tory of the spreadsheet or desktop tool. Unfortunately, changes could be made that 
are not logged and this needs to be mitigated by good review processes of comparing 
prior spreadsheet or desktop tool versions to current versions for deltas.
▪▪
Spreadsheet logic review: This is defined as “Periodically review spreadsheet 
calculations to ensure logic is correct.” This definition could be extended to mean 
management should turn on auditing to track changes that could reduce the 
accidental copy‐and‐paste errors and enable the reverting back to earlier versions. 
Auditing could be enabled in some third‐party software. For logic inspection con-
trol, periodic reviews of the logic should be performed by an independent party to 
ensure no unauthorized changes have occurred.
▪▪
Cell protection: This is defined as “Maintain cell protection to prevent formula 
overrides.” This definition could be extended to mean that management should 
ensure the specific protection of specific cells within a spreadsheet. Cell protection 
is typically seen as a security control, but it could be a change management con-
trol in the sense that cells and worksheets on templates that are not to be modi-
fied should be locked and only authorized individuals (e.g., spreadsheet creators) 
should know passwords that could unlock cells.
▪▪
Input fields and formulas: This is defined as “Separate and color code input fields 
and formulas—Break complex calculations into smaller pieces.” This definition could 
be extended to mean that management should control how data is entered into a 
spreadsheet to reduce the likelihood of error. Management could consider having 
standardized templates with formatting, formulas, and logic in place. There could 
be a tab for all inputs and the following tabs could be the results that are formula 
driven. This could make data entry simpler, and reduce the risk of error. To validate 
input control, management should perform reconciliations of data back to source 
documents. Management needs to ensure that any data transferred between systems 
is accurate and complete.

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline  ◾        363
▪▪
Testing signoff: This is defined as “Formal sign‐off on testing and results by manage-
ment prior to implementation.” This definition could be extended to mean that testing 
needs to be signed‐off on by the tester and by the end user to ensure that the change 
meets the need. Sometimes, this may be the same person in small environments.
Next, select change management subtopics were identified within some of the 
spreadsheet guidance documents from PwC and Deloitte for further review. The selec-
tion of these subtopics does not indicate that these are the only change management 
control considerations, but provides an illustration of the change management controls 
that management should consider for further analysis, depending on the risk level of 
the spreadsheet or desktop tool.
Change Control (PwC, Deloitte)
Change control is simply ensuring that only authorized changes have been made to 
the spreadsheet or desktop tool. PwC defines it as “Maintaining a controlled process for 
requesting changes to a spreadsheet, making changes and then testing the spreadsheet 
and obtaining formal signoff from an independent individual that the change is func-
tioning as intended.” Deloitte defines it as “All changes to a spreadsheet are reviewed 
and approved. Someone other than the party making the change should perform this. 
The review process should guide the reviewer to confirm that the changes are function-
ing in accordance with management’s intentions, and the integrity of the spreadsheet’s 
formulas, data, and results have not been compromised.”
When testing for change control, management should ask:
▪▪
How are changes to the spreadsheet managed?
▪▪
Are only certain people able to make changes?
When changes need to occur, how does management ensure that the changes did 
not affect the integrity of the spreadsheet? When testing for change control, manage-
ment could determine:
▪▪
Whether management has a listing of changes made to spreadsheets to determine 
if a change control process was followed
▪▪
Whether a listing of changes exists, and obtain support that shows a change process 
was followed
▪▪
Whether a listing is not available, as there will be a need to focus more on analyzing 
the data within the spreadsheet as if no change controls existed
Version Control (PwC, Deloitte)
Version control is simply ensuring that the master spreadsheet or desktop tool is updated 
and copies of spreadsheets or desktop tools are not inadvertently updated, resulting in 
an incomplete master copy. PwC defines it as “Ensuring only current and approved 
versions of spreadsheets are being used by creating naming conventions and directory 

364	
◾  Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
structures.” Deloitte defines it as “Versioning should be employed in all spreadsheet 
changes. Changes to a spreadsheet should include some form of unique identifier that 
can be used by parties to differentiate versions of the spreadsheet.”
When testing for version control, management should ask:
▪▪
How does management differentiate between versions of the spreadsheets?
▪▪
Does management save multiple copies during the creation process?
▪▪
If a spreadsheet were to become corrupt, would management have a prior version 
to rely on?
When testing for version control, management could identify spreadsheets and deter-
mine if multiple versions are being used, or identify how management names the various 
versions. Note that if management does not maintain multiple versions, this does not affect 
the integrity of the spreadsheet, but poses a risk in case of spreadsheet loss or corruption.
Input Control (PwC, Deloitte)
Input control is simply ensuring that data is input completely and accurately. PwC 
defines it as “Ensuring that reconciliations occur to make sure that data is inputted 
completely and accurately. Data may be inputted into spreadsheets manually or system-
atically through downloads.” Deloitte defines it as “The validity of spreadsheet inputs 
should be ascertained. Whether input data is manually keyed or imported, steps should 
be taken to confirm input data being imported into the spreadsheet is complete and 
accurate.” Management needs to validate inputs. This involves comparing the input 
data in the file to the actual source where the data came from to verify that the data 
made the transition completely and accurately.
When testing for input control, management should ask:
▪▪
How does management ensure the integrity of the data being input?
▪▪
Are there reviews of data input into spreadsheets for completeness and accuracy?
▪▪
If inputs are coming from a system, what does management do to verify that the 
information coming from the system download was complete and accurate?
When testing for input control, management could review its process for controlling 
inputs; review reconciliations, if available; or review the controls around any interfaces 
if the data is input from a non‐manual source. Determine the security and change con-
trol processes around the interface or system download.
Development Life Cycle (PwC)
Development life cycle is simply ensuring that management has a process to create new 
spreadsheets or desktop tools to further ensure that they follow a common process. 
PwC defines it as “Applying a standard software development life cycle to the develop-
ment process of the more critical and complex spreadsheets covering standard phases: 
requirements, specification, design, building, testing, and maintenance. Testing is a crit-
ical control to ensure that the spreadsheet is producing accurate and complete results.”

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline  ◾        365
When testing for software development life cycle, management should ask:
▪▪
Does management have a process in place that governs the creation of new spread-
sheets to ensure that adequate controls are installed from the beginning?
When testing for software development life cycle, management could review the 
policies and procedures regarding new spreadsheet development, or review new spread-
sheets to determine if the process was followed.
Logic Inspection (PwC)
Logic inspection is simply ensuring that the formulas and calculations in the spread-
sheet are set up correctly. PwC defines it as “Inspecting the logic in critical spreadsheets 
by someone other than the user or developer of the spreadsheet. This review should be 
formally documented.” Management should verify formulas are functioning in accor-
dance with management’s intentions: This is accomplished by first gaining an under-
standing of the purpose of the various formulas found throughout the spreadsheet, and 
then examining them to verify that they were configured accurately.
When testing for logic inspection, management should ask:
▪▪
Does management have a process in place that ensures that the formulas, the pivot 
tables, and so on are correct? That is, was the function used correctly?
When testing for logic inspection, management could review a sample of formulas 
to determine if the calculation is correct.
Operational Controls
Operational controls are typically in place to support the primary accounting 
information systems. However, some organizations fail to specifically ensure that the 
operational controls cover the critical spreadsheets and desktop tools. The operational 
controls discussed next need to be put in place to protect the spreadsheets and desktop 
tools.
As illustrated in Table 11.3, the following operational controls should be put in place 
by management depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or desktop tool:
▪▪
Spreadsheet backup and storage: This is defined as “Store spreadsheets in a 
network folder that is backed up daily.” This definition could be extended to mean, 
from an operations standpoint, ensuring the continual backup of the spreadsheets 
so that they are available when needed. Therefore, management should check that 
backups are performed frequently. Depending on the use of the spreadsheet, man-
agement may have various data retention policies to follow (internal or external 
regulatory). Management can identify the location of the spreadsheet data and 
ensure that that folder is captured in the backup process. Backups should be done 
(ideally) on a daily basis.

366	
◾  Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
▪▪
Historical files: This is defined as “Maintain and segregate historical files from 
those currently in use.” This definition could be extended to mean management 
needs to have a robust process to segregate retired or previous copies of spread-
sheets in a secure location for a designated period of time to meet historical needs 
or regulatory data retention requirements. The spreadsheets should be maintained 
in a read‐only state so they cannot be manipulated.
In the following pages, select operational controls subtopics were identified within 
some of the spreadsheet guidance documents from PwC and Deloitte for further review. 
The selection of these subtopics does not indicate that these are the only operational control 
considerations, but provides an illustration of operational controls that management should 
consider for further analysis, depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or desktop tool.
Backups (PwC, Deloitte)
Backups are a critical operational control. A backup guarantees that the current 
copy of the data is safeguarded in case of loss or inadvertent change, which results 
in the need of recovering a copy of the spreadsheet or desktop tool. Backups may be 
performed for the accounting system, but what happens if a spreadsheet is lost? Does 
management know which backup tape has the spreadsheet so it can be recovered 
(assuming it was ever backed up)? PwC defines it as “Implementing a process to back 
up spreadsheets on a regular basis so that complete and accurate information is avail-
able for financial reporting.” Deloitte defines it as “Spreadsheet files are backed up 
to external media. The frequency of the file backups should be sufficient to support 
business data recovery needs.”
When testing for backups, management should ask:
▪▪
Where does management back up the spreadsheet?
▪▪
Is the backup part of the normal backup procedures?
▪▪
Could management easily recover a prior spreadsheet version from a backup if 
needed?
When testing for backups, management could identify the specific file path where 
the spreadsheet is located and determine if that particular file path is included in a 
backup.
Archiving (PwC)
Archiving is the process of keeping historical copies (snapshots) of the spreadsheets 
or desktop tool data at specified points in time (e.g., monthly, annually) for historical 
purposes. PwC defines it as “Maintaining historical files no longer available for update 
in a segregated drive and locking them as read only.”
When testing for archiving, management should ask:
▪▪
Does management archive old spreadsheets?
▪▪
How does management archive old spreadsheets?

Auditing Controls and Creating a Baseline  ◾        367
When testing for archiving, management could obtain a listing of archived spread-
sheets to see if process is followed. Note that even if old spreadsheets are not archived, 
this does not affect the reliability of current‐year spreadsheets.
Spreadsheets Should Reside on File Servers (Deloitte)
The location of the spreadsheet is critical to how it can be managed. Spreadsheets that 
are located on local hard drives or thumb drives may not have the ability to be secured 
or backed up in the same manner as a spreadsheet that resides on the server. Deloitte 
defines it as “Spreadsheets should reside on file servers. The primary copies of criti-
cal spreadsheets should not reside on portable or end‐user computers.” However, the 
primary purpose here is that the spreadsheet is accessible by those who need it, and is 
properly backed up.
When testing for file servers, management should ask whether or not:
▪▪
Management allows spreadsheets to be stored on personal hard drives, or on mobile 
media.
Note that even if spreadsheets are stored on portable media, the policy should 
ensure that the spreadsheet is accessible and safe.
Business Controls
Beyond typical information technology (IT) controls of logical security, change control, 
and operational controls, management needs to ensure that adequate business controls 
are in place to protect the spreadsheets and desktop tools.
As illustrated in Table 11.3, the following business controls should be put in place 
by management, depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or desktop tool:
▪▪
Naming conventions: This is defined as “Implement and maintain spreadsheet 
naming conventions.” This definition could be extended to mean that manage-
ment needs to enforce common protocols and standards for spreadsheet names 
to ensure that the titles are easily understood. Some companies use a format 
that denotes the fiscal year‐end at the end of the name. Also to ensure version 
control, management could use some versioning software or have the naming 
convention specify the version of the spreadsheet.
▪▪
Input fields and formulas: This is defined as “Separate and color code input 
fields and formulas—Break complex calculations into smaller pieces.” This defi-
nition could be extended to mean management could code certain input fields to 
help with the data entry process. This could help with easier review to identify 
errors in formulas, logic, or data. This could also help with data analytics in rec-
onciling the data back to source documentation.
In the following sections, select business control subtopics were identified within 
some of the spreadsheet guidance documents from PwC for further review. The selec-
tion of these subtopics does not indicate that these are the only business control 

368 
◾ Spreadsheet and Desktop Tool Risk Exposures
considerations, but provides an illustration of business controls that management 
should consider for further analysis, depending on the risk level of the spreadsheet or 
desktop tool. 
 Documentation (PwC) 
 Documentation is a key part in maintaining the integrity of a spreadsheet or desktop tool. 
Personnel may change overtime, but the spreadsheet may outlive the creator. Therefore, 
having adequate documentation is critical during its life cycle. PwC defi nes it as “Ensuring 
that the appropriate level of spreadsheet documentation is maintained and kept up‐to‐date 
to understand the business objective and specifi c functions of the spreadsheet.” 
 When testing for documentation, management should ask: 
 ▪
 How does management document the life of the spreadsheet? 
 ▪
 Are there version control logs within the spreadsheet? 
 ▪
 Are inputs color‐coded or cell protected? (That is, how does management document 
the spreadsheets and keep the life cycle of the spreadsheet documented?) 
 When testing for documentation, management could review the documentation 
practices and determine if the spreadsheets follow the practice. 
 Overall Analytics (PwC) 
 Even if IT controls appear to be effective, management should still continue to perform 
analytics on the integrity of the spreadsheets and desktop tools. These are referred to 
as  detective controls. This provides further assurance that the calculations, footing, and 
cross‐footing are correct. PwC defi nes it as “Implementing analytics as a detective con-
trol to fi nd errors in spreadsheets used for calculations. However, analytics alone are 
not a suffi cient control to completely address the inherent risk of fi nancial amounts 
generated using spreadsheets.” This is where fi nancial auditors get to do what they 
do best. This is the opportunity to perform analytical procedures to determine if the 
spreadsheet data is reliable. For example, management can foot, cross‐foot, recalculate, 
or trace numbers back to source documents. 
 lIFe aFTeR THe baSelINe: MaINTaINING SPReaDSHeeTS 
aND DeSKTOP TOOlS 
 After management has assessed the spreadsheet and desktop tools for the controls 
previously described, management will have created a baseline test. The baseline test 
will give management assurance that the spreadsheet or desktop tool can be relied on, 
assuming that the controls remain intact. On a periodic basis, management should 
revisit the controls for each spreadsheet or desktop tool to ensure that the controls are 
still in place. Organizations typically perform this review on an annual basis; how-
ever, management should consider performing the reassessment on a quarterly basis 
for high‐risk spreadsheets or desktop tools. Eventually, management should attempt 

Summary ◾    369
to move away from spreadsheets and desktop tools into full‐fl edged IT systems, when 
appropriate. However, even if management moves into an application, the IT controls 
still need to be managed and monitored to ensure the integrity of the data. 
 Downstream Controls and the Risk acceptance Process 
 As with any business or fi nancial process that involves risk, management has the 
responsibility to mitigate, minimize, or accept the risk. The spreadsheet and desktop 
tools controls discussed could help management mitigate or minimize risks. However, 
management may decide to rely on downstream controls or accept the risk without 
any further mitigation or minimization. Downstream controls would refer to other 
application controls or manual controls that may mitigate or minimize the risk of lack 
of controls within the spreadsheet or desktop tools. These downstream controls may be 
in the form of reconciliations, manual review of all journal entries, or other substan-
tive control procedure. As long as the risks are managed somewhere in the overall 
process, the control does not have to specifi cally be addressed at the spreadsheet or 
desktop tool level; however, management that elects to go this route typically spends 
more time trying to prove negatives (that is, How do we know something did not go 
wrong?). This approach may indeed prove to be more costly and ineffi cient; however, 
the implementation of controls at the spreadsheet or desktop tools level also could 
prove to be costly and time consuming. Management must make the decision that is 
the best for the risk environment and company culture. Some companies may elect 
to accept the risks identifi ed within spreadsheets or desktop tools and opt to not have 
mitigating or other controls that minimize the overall risk. This approach should be 
used rarely because management will not be able to gain any comfort that the risks 
have not negatively impacted internal or external fi nancial reporting or enabled the 
opportunity for misappropriation of assets.  
 SUMMaRY 
 The use of spreadsheets is ubiquitous in businesses. Common application areas include 
operations management, internal reporting, and schedules for primary and secondary 
external fi nancial reporting. Many exposures arise from two pervasive circumstances: 
applications created by end users who operate outside a regular system of controls, 
and applications that contain sensitive data that may not be adequately secured or 
protected. The IT auditor should obtain a thorough understanding of critical spreadsheet 
applications and integrate this knowledge with the other aspects of the IT audit. 
 Just as is the case for a fi nancial application, spreadsheet controls are critical. Many 
companies, whether SME or Fortune 500, use spreadsheets to manage day‐to‐day opera-
tions. The company does not always know when a spreadsheet is created or used in its 
organization, or know about the subsequent use of the spreadsheet to make a fi nancial 
decision or provide data for the fi nancial statements. Given this, spreadsheets should be 
identifi ed and reviewed for appropriate IT controls. 


371
12
 CHAPTER  TWELVE 
 Key Reports and Report 
Writers Risk Exposures 
   K
EY REPORTS AND REPORT WRITERS facilitate the ﬂ ow of information that 
internal management and external stakeholders rely on to make critical busi-
ness or investment decisions. Reports can be created as an integrated part of the 
accounting information system or may be generated through the use of a third‐party 
report writer tool. 
 HOW REPORTS ARE USED 
 While accounting information systems such as QuickBooks (QB) or Microsoft Great 
Plains Dynamics (GPD) come with prebuilt reports that can be useful in making deci-
sions or reporting to external stakeholders, management may also want to create 
customized or ad hoc reports to facilitate decision making. Reports are used to: 
 ▪
 Display the information from the subledgers and general ledger. 
 ▪
 Display the trial balance information. 
 ▪
 Ultimately display the ﬁ nancial results that help create the internal management 
reports and/or external ﬁ nancial statements. 
 Reports are also used in the consolidation process and/or to help create footnotes 
and disclosures within the ﬁ nancial statements. Management also relies on reports to 
monitor ﬁ nancial cycle transactions, operational performance, and security settings. 
 Reports can be broken down into three categories: 
  1.  Original reports: Vanilla reports that came with the accounting information sys-
tem and have not been modiﬁ ed. 

372 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
  2.  Modiﬁ ed reports: Vanilla reports that came with the accounting information 
system and have been modiﬁ ed within the application. 
  3.  New, customized reports: New reports that have been created either from an origi-
nal report as the base or a brand‐new report created from scratch. Customized reports 
may originate from within the accounting package or from a separate report writer. 
 Reports have inherent and conﬁ gurable control risks similar to those discussed with 
spreadsheets, and management needs to review reports for potential errors or defects. 
Audit considerations in reports include: 
 ▪
Logical security: Who can access reports for view, add, modify, and delete func-
tionality? What prevents unauthorized changes to reports? Management and audi-
tors need to ensure that only authorized users have access to reports to prevent 
unauthorized changes. 
 ▪
Change management: Does management follow a robust change management 
methodology when creating or modifying reports? Are changes documented in a 
change log with appropriate approvals? Are changes tested by end users to validate 
the modiﬁ cation or customization of the report? How does management ensure 
that reports are modiﬁ ed to reﬂ ect changes made to the chart of accounts? How 
does management validate that all appropriate data sources are being pulled to the 
right line item within a report? How does management validate the calculations, 
summations, and other mathematical analysis of a report? 
 ▪
Operations: How does management ensure that the report dictionary is backed up 
so reports that are customized or modiﬁ ed are not lost in case of a system failure? 
How does management ensure that reports are available for use after a system fail-
ure without having to recreate the report from scratch? For third‐party reporting 
packages, how does management ensure that all data is appropriately transferred 
between the report writer software and the accounting information system? 
 Reports are typically user‐driven and outside of the control of the information 
technology (IT) department. The beneﬁ ts of streamlined and directed information ﬂ ow 
provided by report writers are accompanied by several types of potential risk. These are 
summarized in Table  12.1 . 
 Although doing so is not a risk exposure per se, management should maintain an 
inventory of key reports that are risk‐ranked on the basis of magnitude, materiality, and 
complexity. The report inventory should identify the owner, purpose, location, and other 
characteristics.  
 ORIGINAL REPORTS WITHIN THE APPLICATION 
 Access to reports can be controlled within the application. 
 GPD Report Security 
 Report access controlled in the application is important so only the authorized users have 
the ability to view, modify, delete, or print the reports. Note that printing reports requires 

Original Reports within the Application ◾    373
 TABLE 12.1  Key Reports and Report Writer Risk Exposures 
Risk Exposure 
Sample Problems 
Errors in prebuilt 
and preconﬁ gured 
reports 
Prebuilt and preconﬁ gured reports that come with prepackaged 
software may not completely and accurately pull information from 
accounting records if management has modiﬁ ed or customized the chart 
of accounts. The assumption is that prebuilt and preconﬁ gured reports 
are free of error, but it is still management’s responsibility to perform 
tests of controls on these reports. However, prebuilt and preconﬁ gured 
reports can be modiﬁ ed, which could affect the integrity of the report. 
Errors in customized 
reporting 
Reports may be designed with ﬂ aws that result in incomplete data 
being pulled to the correct line item, incorrect calculations, or incorrect 
balancing. The design and construction of reports are typically created 
by end users who may not fully understand the intricacies of how data is 
pulled into the reports. 
Errors in interfaces 
and data 
connections 
Some reports may obtain data from other reports or other data sources 
that may reside in internal data warehouses, internal spreadsheets, 
or third‐party data subscription services. The interfaces or data 
connections transmit the data via a manual initiation process or have 
automatic settings where data is transmitted on a periodic basis. The 
interfaces and data connections could potentially fail to fully transmit all 
data records, which could result in incomplete and inaccurate data. 
Errors in logic and 
formula accuracy 
Logic errors in formula construction may result in misleading or 
erroneous calculated values. Input, logic, and usage errors affect the 
ability for reliance on the data within the report. Logic errors could result 
from incorrect formulas. The formula may have been incorrect from the 
beginning or inadvertently altered during a design change of the report. 
Usage errors could include the misapplication of the report functionality. 
Lack of data integrity Input errors could include excessive manual entries; incorrect links from 
external sources, or other internal/external sources; importing incorrect 
data or wrong parameters; or unintended changes. Values that have 
been hardcoded into formula expressions (e.g., an embedded tax rate) 
can be easily overlooked when the report is updated. 
Unauthorized users 
Access to the reports needs to be protected to ensure that unauthorized 
users do not inadvertently change the design of the report. Access can 
be controlled by passwords and ensuring that the location of the report 
is protected. 
access privileges and these should be assigned to users consistent with the company’s 
overall security policy and assignments. Management or the auditor should review report 
access in order to ensure compliance with appropriate policies. (See Figure 12.1.)  
 Accessing Reports in GPD 
 Access to the report writer in GPD is available via the predeﬁ ned security task ADMIN_
SYSTEM_008, which can be assigned to an existing role or to a new role designed espe-
cially for report writers, as shown in Figure 12.2. * 
*  From the Microsoft GPD reports writer manual.

374 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
 QB provides similar internal reports, via the Reports tab and “Reports Center” menu 
option. There are reports relating to all major transaction cycles (Revenue, Purchasing, 
Inventory, and Payroll) as well as ﬁ nancial statements for external reporting or inter-
nal reconciliations (e.g., checking account records). QB supports reports on a yearly, 
year‐to‐date, or customized‐period basis. 
 The reports center provides the ability to create graphical presentation of com-
pany data. There are set options that allow a user to create accounts receivable graphs, 
accounts payable graphs, sales graphs, income‐and‐expense graphs, net‐worth graphs, 
and budget‐versus‐actual graphs, as shown in Figure  12.2 . 
 Audit Trail Reports 
 Audit trails can be conﬁ gured to provide information about changes to any aspects 
of a company’s data, such as amounts, account titling, dates, transactions, adjusting 
entries, voided or deleted transactions, and so on, along with the identiﬁ cation of the 
individual who made the change. Activating the QB audit trail feature is accomplished 
by selecting Edit>Edit Preferences>Accounting>Preferences>Company Preferences and 
 FIGURE  12.1  Accessing Reports in GPD 

Original Reports within the Application ◾    375
then checking the “use audit trail” box. Figure  12.3 shows a general audit trail report. 
At the transaction detail level, a report on voided or deleted transactions that identiﬁ es 
the affected accounts, dates of the transaction and voiding, the individual performing 
the deletion, explanation of the action, and so on all provide management with a power-
ful investigative tool. 
 FIGURE  12.2  Net‐Worth Presentation 
Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.
$ in 1,000s
As of October 15, 2015
Jan 31, 2015
Mar 31, 2015
May 31, 2015
Jul 31, 2015
Aug 31, 2015
Oct 31, 2015
Dec 31, 2015
Apr 30, 2015
Jun 30, 2015
Sep 30, 2015
Nov 30, 2015
Feb 28, 2015
800
600
400
200
0
–200
–400
–600
Assets
Liabites
Net Worth
 FIGURE  12.3  Audit Trail Report
 Source: Intuit, Rock Castle.

376 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
 MODIFIED OR CUSTOMIZED REPORTS WITHIN 
THE APPLICATION 
 GPD report writer functionality enables the user to use existing reports, modify reports, 
or create new, customized reports. (See Figure  12.4 .) 
 Changes or modiﬁ cations to a report can affect its format, overall layout, data trans-
mission, and calculation logic. Report writers are engineered to perform functions that 
differ in several key respects from those typically accomplished in spreadsheets, and 
the powerful data‐handling capabilities come at a cost to transparency and ﬂ exibility. 
Thus, changes that affect calculations require special attention. Simple misplacement of 
a parenthesis or arithmetic symbol can affect the calculation of ﬁ nancial results. Careful 
design and rigorous testing is required to ensure the integrity of the report. 
 Modifying Reports in GPD 
 Original reports within GPD can be modiﬁ ed. The user should ﬁ rst create a copy of 
the original report prior to modifying the report. The user would select the report and 
navigate to modify current report. Changes could be made to a speciﬁ c report or to the 
global settings that affect all reports. (See Figure  12.5 .) 
 FIGURE  12.4  GPD Report Deﬁ nition Screen 

Modiﬁ ed or Customized Reports within the Application  ◾    377
 When modifying reports, users may want to, for example, alter the layout of the 
report or the source from which certain line items pull information. If a new ﬁ eld is 
added to the report, the user will need to ensure that the appropriate linkages to the data 
tables are created. If this does not happen, then the user may invalidate the integrity of 
the report. Any modiﬁ cation of a report should be investigated by management or the 
auditor to ensure that the report integrity has not been compromised. 
 Customized Reports in GPD 
 When management creates new, customized reports, good design protocols need to be 
in place. Management needs to ensure that the appropriate name is given to the report. 
Management also has to consider the layout of the report and how data is pulled into 
the report and calculated (footing, cross‐footing, calculations). 
 Reports, whether modiﬁ ed or custom, are stored in the “reports.dic” ﬁ le. This is a 
dictionary ﬁ le that contains the reports. Management needs to ensure that this ﬁ le is 
appropriately backed up to prevent loss of the report designs. In GPD the sequence Tools
>Setup>System>Alternate>Modiﬁ ed Forms and Reports brings a window that provides 
access to all modiﬁ ed reports. (See Figure  12.6 .) 
 The GPD security for customized reports can be accessed via Tools>Setup>System
>Security Tasks. The new security task must be named and assigned to appropriate 
personnel. (See Figure  12.7 .) 
 Aggregating Accounting Data 
 A commonly desired report modification involves the summary presentation of 
related account balances. For example, “payroll taxes” may include state and fed-
eral unemployment, employer’s FICA share, and so on. Rather than presenting each 
of these as a separate line item on the income statement, management may wish to 
present one line item balance for all of these related amounts. In QB, the “collapse” 
 FIGURE  12.5  Modifying Reports 

378 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
option on the report screen allows the report writer to accomplish this. Custom 
report writers such as Microsoft’s FRX have more sophisticated tools, as discussed 
in the following pages. In all instances of a modification that involved aggregating 
data, there is a risk exposure regarding completeness should the intended accounts 
not be included.  
 REPORTS USING THIRD‐PARTY PACKAGES 
 Third‐party report‐writing packages have been developed for many widely used middle‐
market accounting packages and embody a wide range of functionalities. These applica-
tions generally include a population of predesigned standard reports and the capability 
to produce a range of custom reports. Microsoft’s FRX classiﬁ es reports as detail: account 
 FIGURE  12.6  Reports Dictionary 
 Source: Microsoft GPD report writer manual. 

Reports Using Third‐Party Packages ◾    379
focused, detail: transaction focused, and ﬁ nancial. FRX and many other report writers 
can produce pure or mixed versions of these reports. 
 Two key IT controls relating to reports are the interrelated topics of security and 
change management. Read access should be consistent with other security assignments 
throughout the organization. For instance, in FRX, an optional security system allows 
the system administrator to limit access to reports and features on an individual or 
group basis. Change management should follow the same general procedures discussed 
in Chapter  11 for spreadsheets. 
 The ability of a report writer to facilitate data export to Excel has two distinct 
implications. From an IT audit perspective, the accuracy and completeness of data 
transfer needs to be assured. From a process integrity perspective, the use of Excel as an 
analytic tool may help management or the external auditor detect unusual or fraudulent 
behavior through detail analysis of transaction detail. For example, Table  12.2 presents 
data from a check register. The same data, sorted on payment amounts and supplied 
with a formula that evaluates whether the amounts in two adjacent rows are identical, 
readily highlights a potential duplicate payment. The example in Table  12.3 is very 
simple, but the fact pattern is based on a real fraud. 
 Figure  12.8 provides a home‐page view of a sample third‐party package, QReport-
Builder, designed expressly for QB. 
 FIGURE  12.7  Security Task Assignment for Customized Reports 
 Source: Microsoft GPD report writer manual. 

380 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
 TABLE 12.2  Check Register Data 
3212 
Thorpe Supply 
16,024.02 
3213 
Avon First Funding 
2,206.50 
3214 
Park Avenue Microﬁ ber 
965.02 
3215 
J. Wood, LLC 
3,500.00 
3216 
Fitzpatrick Realty 
1,820.00 
3217 
Raspail & Lecter 
165.21 
3218 
Exxon 
451.14 
3219 
Simpson Nuclear Services 
4,115.00 
3220 
Park Avenue Microﬁ ber 
965.02 
3221 
Stevenson Carbonic 
311.45 
3222 
National Helium 
197.23 
3223 
Town of Leicester 
1,941.02 
3224 
Lomborg Sharpening 
225.65 
3225 
Fishman Steel Supply 
10,000.00 
3226 
Schiffman 
3,400.00 
 TABLE 12.3  Check Register Data—Resorted 
3217 
Raspail & Lecter
165.21 
FALSE 
3222 
National Helium 
197.23 
FALSE 
3224 
Lomborg Sharpening 
225.65 
FALSE 
3221 
Stevenson Carbonic 
311.45 
FALSE 
3218 
Exxon 
451.14 
FALSE 
3214 
Park Avenue Microﬁ ber 
965.02 
FALSE 
3220 
Park Avenue Microﬁ ber 
965.02 
TRUE 
3216 
Fitzpatrick Realty 
1,820.00 
FALSE 
3223 
Town of Leicester 
1,941.02 
FALSE 
3213 
Avon First Funding 
2,206.50 
FALSE 
3226 
Schiffman 
3,400.00 
FALSE 
3215 
J. Wood, LLC 
3,500.00 
FALSE 
3219 
Simpson Nuclear Services 
4,115.00 
FALSE 
3225 
Fishman Steel Supply 
10,000.00 
FALSE 
3212 
Thorpe Supply 
16,024.02 
FALSE 

381
 FIGURE  12.8  Third‐Party Report Writer for QB 

382 
◾ Key Reports and Report Writers Risk Exposures
 ANALYZING AND VALIDATING REPORTS 
 Reports are useful only if properly conﬁ gured and the design of the report is validated. 
 The “reporting tree” concept in FRX allows users to combine natural account 
classiﬁ cations with responsibility centers, for example, 1210‐6540‐002 as a code for 
Accounts Receivable (1210) associated with the Buffalo, New York (6540), location for 
wholesale customers (002). Reports can thus address highly speciﬁ c detail or roll up 
data at the location (i.e., all receivables generated by the Buffalo ofﬁ ce) or division (i.e., 
all receivables generated by wholesale operations) levels. The power and ﬂ exibility of 
this reporting capability arrives with the potential risk exposure of misidentifying the 
sources for data feeds. 
 Report writers such as FRX allow the use of formulas, including mathematical and 
IF‐THEN‐ELSE statements. The IT auditor should evaluate footing and cross‐footing 
totals and evaluate logical formulas for correct implementation. It may be particularly 
useful to review formulas that control the reporting of normal balances (e.g., positive 
amounts for income statement credit items and negative amounts for income statement 
debit items). Inconsistent formulas or balances that swing between debit and credit, for 
example, “Income Expense (Income)” or “Tax Expense (Beneﬁ t),” should be carefully 
scrutinized. 
 Report writers such as FRX typically allow the user/designer to link a cell in the 
report to a range of accounts in the general ledger (GL) package. This can be done in a 
number of ways: by specifying the full account codes for each account, by specifying 
ranges, or by using wildcards. However this is done, ensuring that the report draws data 
from all of the relevant accounts is clearly a key factor in evaluating the completeness 
of the report. Where speciﬁ cation of a range has been combined with an expression 
that subtracts references for some part of the range, checking the logic and accuracy 
of the references is clearly essential. Figure  12.9 (from the FRX report designer/users 
guide) shows a formula in the formula bar and the choices made by the report writer 
that generated the formula. 
 FIGURE  12.9  Formula Bar in FRX Report Writer 

Summary ◾    383
 Modiﬁ ers allow the report user/designer to specify the time period for a report—
typically described as  n number of periods before the current period or year‐to‐date. 
These modiﬁ ers can be combined into more complex formulas. As with account ranges, 
the logic and accuracy of these designations should be checked in order to assure that 
the reports do in fact report the information they purport to provide. 
 Rounding capabilities in report writers may result in reports that do not foot or 
cross‐foot. The FRX guide previously cited shows an example of the amounts $3,600 and 
$3,700 each automatically rounded to the nearest thousand: 4. This results in the total 
of these balances being reported at the anomalous 8. The IT auditor should be aware of 
rounding protocols used in a particular report. 
 The power and ﬂ exibility of importing data from spreadsheet ﬁ les along with GL bal-
ances come with the potential exposure of misidentifying the ﬁ les. The IT auditor should 
review links to ensure not only that the intended ﬁ les, pages, and ranges have been 
correctly speciﬁ ed, but also that they tie this work to the review of spreadsheet controls. 
 Reporting trees can inadvertently lead to incorrect values appearing in a report. 
The FRX report writer’s guide suggests two distinct possibilities: 
  1.  Some rows may have used the full account code and thus pull in every reporting 
unit with a similar account mask. 
  2.  Use of a GL account mask by the summary units of a reporting tree can result in 
data being duplicated. 
 SUMMARY 
 Report writers are the ﬁ nal mile between transaction processing and the information 
product delivered to managers, investors, and other statement users. IT audit concerns 
include access and permissions relating to change management, backups, interfaces, 
and logic errors that may result in correct data being incorrectly summarized or 
presented. The IT auditor should be familiar with the scope and variety of available 
audit trail reports. 
 Financial reporting drives the organization to demonstrate its performance. 
Controls around the key reports and report writers are critical to ensure the integrity 
of ﬁ nancial data being reported. 


385
13
 CHAPTER  THIRTEEN 
 IT Audit Defi ciencies 
 Deﬁ ning and Evaluating IT Audit Deﬁ ciencies 
 J
UST AS RISK IS INEVITABLE in an organization, management is bound to identify 
opportunities for improvement during routine audits or self‐assessments. 
Organizations typically refer to audit deficiencies as “opportunities for 
improvement,” “audit findings,” or “audit issues.” Some organizations try to 
minimize the number of audit findings to prevent possible backlash or repercussions 
from senior management. This is often where management will water down any 
audit findings to a degree where the findings become meaningless or are dropped. 
Other organizations try to maximize the benefits of receiving audit findings to learn 
from what‐went‐wrong or what‐could‐go‐wrong scenarios in order to improve the 
processes and become best‐in‐class. Most organizations fall in the middle, where 
they neither seek nor reject audit findings and appreciate the learning opportunity. 
The auditor needs to be aware of the various dynamics that could be faced when 
presenting audit findings to management because the company culture will dictate 
how well received the audit feedback is and what type of corrective action will be 
taken.  
 A FRAMEWORK FOR AUDIT DEFICIENCIES 
 As management or auditors identify IT audit defi ciencies, a process needs to be followed 
to determine the signifi cance of the fi ndings. Even though each organization may have 
its own defi nitions for identifying the signifi cance of a particular audit defi ciency, such as 
high, medium, low, verbal, weakness, signifi cant, material, or many other possibilities, 
the following defi nitions are based on the defi nitions used during Sarbanes‐Oxley 
internal control engagements. A framework developed by representatives of the four 

386	
◾  IT Audit Deficiencies
global firms and several national firms classifies audit deficiencies into one of three 
categories:
	 1.	 A control deficiency
	 2.	 A significant deficiency
	 3.	 A material weakness
The definitions of these three categories are as follows:*
Control Deficiency
▪▪
A deficiency in the design or operation of a control that does not allow manage-
ment or employees, in the normal course of performing their assigned functions, 
to prevent or detect misstatements on a timely basis.
▪▪
A deficiency in design exists when:
▪▪
A control necessary to meet the control objective is missing, or
▪▪
An existing control is not properly designed so that, even if it operates as 
designed, the control objective is not always met.
▪▪
A deficiency in operation exists when a properly designed control does not 
operate as designed, or when the person performing the control does not 
possess the necessary authority or qualifications to perform the control 
effectively.
Significant Deficiency
▪▪
A control deficiency, or combination of control deficiencies, that adversely affects the 
company’s ability to initiate, authorize, record, process, or report external financial 
data reliably in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles such 
that there is more than a remote likelihood that a misstatement of the company’s 
annual or interim financial statements that is more than inconsequential will not 
be prevented or detected.
Material Weakness
▪▪
A significant deficiency, or combination of significant deficiencies, that results 
in more than a remote likelihood that a material misstatement of the annual or 
interim financial statements will not be prevented or detected.
Management and auditors have been challenged to determine the materiality and 
impact of IT audit deficiencies since many of the deficiencies typically involve more risk 
management topics and do not tie to specific numbers. With that said, management 
and auditors can link the IT audit deficiencies with the associated financial processes 
in order to infer that the financial process would be put at a higher level of risk given 
the IT audit deficiency.
* A Framework for Evaluating Process/Transaction‐Level and Information Technology General Control Exceptions and 
Deficiencies (2004). Participating firms were BDO Seidman LLP; Crowe Chizek and Company LLC; Deloitte & 
Touche LLP; Ernst & Young LLP; Grant Thornton LLP; Harbinger PLC; KPMG LLP; McGladrey & Pullen LLP; 
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP; and Professor William F. Messier, Jr., Georgia State University.

A Framework for Audit Defi ciencies ◾    387
 Figure  13.1 is adapted from material in the framework report and illustrates a 
process that management or the auditor could go through when analyzing IT audit 
defi ciencies.
 The decision process starts with a noted defi ciency and a review that determines 
whether additional IT general controls (ITGC) exist that achieve the same control objec-
tive (decision node 1). If they do and additional evaluation concludes that the defi ciencies 
are not signifi cant, then the defi ciencies are categorized at the lowest level of concern, 
“defi ciency.” If additional evaluation concludes that the defi ciencies are signifi cant, they 
are classifi ed at the next higher level of concern, “signifi cant defi ciency.” A further layer 
of judgment is required when multiple instances of a defi ciency type raise the prospect 
that the quantity of these related defi ciencies exercises a qualitative effect. The drawing 
in Figure  13.1 shows, in dashed lines, the possible judgment that multiple instances 
result in an upward revision of the weakness, from defi ciency to signifi cant defi ciency, 
or from signifi cant defi ciency to material weakness. 
 FIGURE 13.1  Classiﬁ cation Analysis of IT Deﬁ ciencies 
[1]
Complementary
or redundant
ITGC
tested?
[2]
IC deficiencies
at application
level related to
ITGC deficiency?
N
[5]
Does
additional evaluation
result in judgment
that deficiency is
significant?
[3]
Application
control deficiencies
related to/caused by ITGC
classified only as
“deficiency”?
Y
[4]
Are items in
[3] classified as
“significant
deficiency”?
N
Material
Weakness
N
Deficiency
Significant
Deficiency
Y
Y
N
Y
[6a]
Multiple instances?
[6b]
Multiple instances?
N
N
Y
N
Y

388 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
 In the absence of additional ITGC, the auditor considers controls at the application 
level (decision node 2). In their absence, the defi ciencies are classifi ed as per the node 
5 decision rule. If the application level controls are caused by or related to ITGC defi cien-
cies, the next step in the review process is to determine the classifi cation of the defi ciency 
(decision node 3). A “yes” determination leads to the node 5 decision rule, and a “no” 
decision leads to the evaluation of whether the defi ciency is “signifi cant” or refl ects a 
“material weakness” (decision node 4). 
TYPES OF IT AUDIT FAILURES AND ILLUSTRATIVE CASES 
 Notwithstanding the number of methodologies for evaluating IT controls, many com-
panies still exhibit various defi ciencies in this area. Table  13.1 uses publicly available 
10‐K disclosures to map illustrative examples to an error typology.
 Each of the defi ciencies in Table  13.2 was classifi ed as a material weakness in a 
published 10‐K report.
USE OF COMPENSATORY CONTROLS 
 When primary controls fail to achieve the control objective, alternative compensatory 
controls need to be reviewed to minimize or mitigate the risks associated with not hav-
ing the primary control operating effectively. Table  13.3 illustrates compensatory con-
trols that could be utilized to minimize or mitigate risk exposures that occur when the 
primary controls fail. The listing of compensatory controls is illustrative rather than 
exhaustive. We also reference suggested strategies advocated in Julie Harrer’s  Internal 
Control Strategies: A Mid‐ to Small Business Guide. 
IDEAS FOR ADDRESSING SEGREGATION‐OF‐DUTIES ISSUES 
 Segregation of duties is one of the biggest control problems that small companies face. 
How can a company have adequate segregation of duties with three people in the 
accounting department? A few ideas for compensating controls to address limited seg-
regation of duties issues follow:
 ▪
Increase detection controls and monitoring: Management may consider 
reviewing reports of detailed transactions that are recorded by staff who perform 
key activities with limited segregation of duties. The reviews should occur regu-
larly on a timely basis, and questionable transactions should be investigated and 
corrected. If the accounts payable clerk sets up and maintains all vendor master 
fi les, a manager could review a report of all changes and additions made to the 
master fi les monthly. The report could be electronic or a hardcopy, signed off and 
retained for evidence of review. 

Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues ◾    389
 TABLE 13.1  Illustrative IT Audit Deﬁ ciencies and Potential Financial Audit Impact 
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Potential Financial Audit Impact 
 Access rights 
 ▪
Three users have inappropriate 
access to post entries to the general 
ledger. Management does not have 
an audit trail in‐place to determine 
who made the entries to the general 
ledger or if entries were deleted. 
 ▪
The deﬁ ciency could enable 
unauthorized addition or deletion 
of entries that impair the integrity 
of the general ledger.
 ▪
Management could review a 
large sample of the entries 
made to the general ledger 
and trace back to the source 
documentation to ensure that 
unauthorized entries have not 
been performed. 
 Segregation of 
duties 
 ▪
Although management has 
adequately segregated duties 
for accounting and ﬁ nance 
personnel from a business process 
perspective, the access rights 
within the accounting information 
system have not been adequately 
assigned to the users. Users have 
more access within the system 
than necessary to perform their 
job responsibilities, and some of 
the access rights conﬂ ict with one 
another. In addition, management 
has not implemented an annual 
review process to analyze the 
access rights assigned to users to 
ensure that segregation of duties 
is maintained and access rights are 
appropriately assigned based on job 
responsibilities.  
 ▪
For the ﬁ nancial cycle that 
has been impacted by the 
segregation of duties concern, 
transactions within that cycle 
may not be authorized or 
appropriate.
 ▪
Management could review 
transactions within the cycle 
and compare back to source 
documentation to determine 
if inappropriate transactions 
exist. Management could 
enforce system access rights to 
align with the business process 
practices. 
 User 
management 
 ▪
Management does not have a 
deﬁ ned process to manage new 
hires, transfers, or terminations. 
This has resulted in access being 
inappropriately granted to new 
users; access not being appropriately 
modiﬁ ed for transferred users; 
and/or access not being removed 
in a timely manner. In one case, it 
was noted that a user transferred 
departments and the previous access 
was not removed, thus creating a 
risk that unauthorized entries could 
be performed with the unnecessary 
access. 
 ▪
When users have inappropriate 
access within the system, the 
ﬁ nancial cycle aligned with 
the inappropriate access right 
should be further examined to 
ensure that no unauthorized 
transactions have occurred.
 ▪
Management or auditors should 
consider increasing the sample 
size of substantive testing if 
management or auditors cannot 
determine if unauthorized 
activity occurred. 
(continued)

390 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Potential Financial Audit Impact 
 Password 
management 
 ▪
Password management is ineffective. 
Passwords are not conﬁ gured with a 
minimum length or required change 
interval. Speciﬁ cally, password length 
is set at 1 character and passwords 
are not required to change. 
 ▪
Inadequate password management 
could result in unauthorized 
usage of a user’s account.
 ▪
Manage ment should enforce 
strong password conﬁ guration 
controls. In absence of effective 
passwords, management should 
review the failed login attempt 
logs to see if any unauthorized 
attempts to access accounts have 
occurred. If management or the 
auditors cannot get comfortable 
with user accounts due to the 
password sett ings, the ﬁ nancial 
cycles could be reviewed with 
larger sample sizes.  
 Administrative 
users 
 ▪
Administrative and power users 
associated with the ﬁ nancial 
application were not limited to 
authorized personnel. 
 ▪
Multiple personnel had access 
to all transactions within the 
system.
 ▪
Management should review 
the users to determine if 
any transactions occurred 
that were not appropriate or 
authorized. If inappropriate 
or unauthorized transactions 
occurred, management should 
review the associated ﬁ nancial 
cycle transactions and make the 
appropriate adjusting entries.  
 Change 
management 
documentation 
and approvals 
 ▪
Changes were not documented or 
approved. 
 ▪
Potentially inappro priate 
transactions posted through 
system. 
 ▪
Management should determine 
what ﬁ nancial cycles the changes 
affected and substantively test the 
transactions at a higher sample 
size to ensure the appropriateness 
of the cycle transactions.  
 Change 
management 
testing 
 ▪
Changes are not tested in a 
test environment, testing is not 
performed, or testing is not signed 
off by end users. 
 ▪
Changes may corrupt 
the data processing of 
accounting transactions.
 ▪
Manage ment should review 
transactions affected by the 
change and determine if 
transactions are processed 
correctly.  
TABLE 13.1  (continued)

Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues ◾    391
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Potential Financial Audit Impact 
 Segregation 
of duties for 
promote to 
production 
 ▪
The programmer made changes 
and promoted the changes 
into production. There was no 
segregation of duties between 
programming and operations. 
 ▪
This means that inappropriate 
or unauthorized code may 
have been introduced into 
production. This is similar to 
fraud schemes where fractions 
of pennies were skimmed off 
accounts by an unauthorized 
system code that was inserted 
into production.  
 ▪
Management should do a 
complete review of all 
changes implemented into 
production and increase the 
sample size of substantive 
ﬁ nancial testing.  
 Postchange 
review 
 ▪
Management does not perform a 
review of all changes after they have 
been implemented into production. 
 ▪
This process is not 
necessary unless other 
change management controls 
are not working properly. 
This control is meant to 
help catch any unauthorized 
changes implemented into 
production.
 ▪
If this control is not in place, 
management should rely on 
the other change management 
controls, if effective, or perform 
additional ﬁ nancial substantive 
tests. 
 Backups 
 ▪
Backups are not performed on a 
daily basis and/or backup tapes are 
not taken offsite. 
 ▪
Backups should be performed 
daily to prevent the risk of loss 
and the backup tapes should be 
kept offsite in a secure location. 
If this control is not effective, 
management can still rely on 
the ﬁ nancials, but needs to 
understand that data could be 
lost in the event of a system 
failure.  
 Contingency 
and disaster 
recovery 
planning 
 ▪
Management does not have a 
disaster recovery plan developed. 
 ▪
While this does not directly 
affect the reliability of the 
ﬁ nancial statements, in the 
event of a disaster or 
signiﬁ cant system outage, 
data could be lost or 
misprocessed. 
TABLE 13.1  (continued)
(continued)

392 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Potential Financial Audit Impact 
 Data center 
 ▪
Within the data center, the 
environmental controls and physical 
security controls were not adequate. 
No ﬁ re suppression system existed. 
Programmers had access to the 
data center and the terminal for the 
production system. 
 ▪
While the environmental controls 
do not directly affect the ﬁ nancial 
statements, inadequate ﬁ re 
suppression could prevent the 
safeguarding of the production 
system. The inadequate physical 
access to the data center could 
enable the programmer to access 
the live production system.
 ▪
Management should ensure that 
the ﬁ nancial cycles associated 
with the production system 
have appropriate transactions to 
ensure that the programmer did 
not alter the production system. 
 IT entity level 
 ▪
Management does not have well‐
documented IT policies, strategies, 
or organizational structure 
to adequately manage the IT 
environment. 
 ▪
While this does not directly 
affect the ﬁ nancial statements, 
inadequate processes could 
lead to an IT organization that 
is prone to error, which could 
cause production issues. 
 Application 
controls 
 ▪
Conﬁ guration settings are not set up 
correctly, which prevents accurate 
processing of data. 
 ▪
Management should review 
all application controls and 
do a test of one to ensure 
that the controls are working 
appropriately. 
 Spreadsheet 
management 
 ▪
Spreadsheets are not well‐controlled 
to prevent unauthorized access or 
changes that may result in inaccurate 
calculations. 
 ▪
Management should review all 
spreadsheets to ensure that 
the spreadsheet controls are 
working as intended. 
 Report writers 
 ▪
Reports are not designed or 
managed to prevent unauthorized 
access or changes that may result in 
erroneous reporting. 
 ▪
Management should perform 
sample calculations, footing, 
and cross‐footing of reports and 
trace select numbers back to 
source documents. 
 SSAE 16 (SOC 1)  ▪
The statement of controls (SOC) 
report for the payroll processor 
was not adequately reviewed and 
the user control considerations 
were not considered to determine 
which controls management was 
responsible for versus the third‐party 
service provider. This resulted in the 
identiﬁ cation of missing controls that 
were not being performed internally 
or at the third‐party service provider. 
 ▪
This affects the payroll process 
and the missed controls affected 
the reliability of the payroll 
reports. Therefore, management 
needs to perform additional 
substantive review of the payroll 
information to validate the 
payroll calculations. 
TABLE 13.1  (continued)

Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues ◾    393
 TABLE 13.2  Illustrative Case Studies of IT Audit Deﬁ ciencies 
Company 
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Reported in Financial Statements 
 Rockwell 
Medical 
Technologies, 
Inc. 
 ▪
Segregation 
of duties and 
application 
access 
 ▪
As discussed in the Company’s Annual Report on 
Form‐10‐K for the year ended December 31, 2008, 
there were two material weaknesses in internal control 
over financial reporting identified by management 
relating to (i) inadequate segregation of duties 
pertaining to access to information technology 
applications used in our business operations and 
(ii) inventory.
 ▪
During 2008, we implemented a new inventory control 
and enterprise resource planning information system. The 
two weaknesses we identiﬁ ed pertain to the changes we 
made in 2008 related to this new information technology 
platform and operating environment. We determined that 
we do not have adequate segregation of duties pertaining 
to access to information technology applications used in 
our business operations. 
 Mechanical 
Technology, 
Inc. 
 ▪
IT resources 
and turnover 
 ▪
As of December 31, 2008, management determined the 
turnover of its accounting and Information Technology 
staff and resulting lack of resources is a material 
weakness.  
 Porta 
Systems CP 
 ▪
Change 
management 
 ▪
Based on this assessment and those criteria, our 
management concluded that the Company did not 
maintain effective internal control over ﬁ nancial 
reporting as of December 31, 2007 as a result of a 
material weakness relating to Information Technology, as 
described below.
 ▪
Management identiﬁ ed the following signiﬁ cant 
deﬁ ciencies that when aggregated may give rise to a 
material weakness. Management identiﬁ ed certain control 
procedures that were not sufﬁ ciently documented relating 
to a) program change management in the Company’s 
PROCOMM system, b) lack of integrated modules with the 
general ledger and c) excessive manual adjustments to the 
inventory module are required.
 ▪
Management is continuing to investigate new 
integrated ERP systems that will include complete 
general ledger and reporting which will eliminate the 
need for manual updates and significantly reduce 
the need for journal entries in the financial reporting 
process. Our inability to finance this major capital 
expenditure has significantly limited the ERP systems 
available for us to evaluate.  
(continued)

394 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
Company 
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Reported in Financial Statements 
 Patriot 
Scientifi c 
 ▪
Logical 
security, 
change 
management, 
and 
operations 
 ▪
In connection with our assessment of internal control over 
ﬁ nancial reporting, we identiﬁ ed the following material 
weakness in our internal control over ﬁ nancial reporting: 
As of May 31, 2008, a material weakness existed relating 
to SSDI’s information technology . . . including ineffective 
controls relating to following:
 ▪
There is no IT security policy,
 ▪
There is no change management policy,
 ▪
There is no evidence of changes that have been 
performed,
 ▪
There is no physical security over servers, ﬁ rewall, 
router, and switches,
 ▪
There is no documentation of the granting of user 
access rights process,
 ▪
There is no documentation of the user access 
termination process,
 ▪
The ﬁ rewall conﬁ guration does not reﬂ ect SSDI’s 
current usage,
 ▪
Remote access is not well controlled,
 ▪
Two of ﬁ ve systems did not have recent antivirus 
signature ﬁ les,
 ▪
The antivirus software is not installed on the server,
 ▪
All named users, plus the CIO using the administrator 
account, have full access to all areas of QuickBooks,
 ▪
All authenticated users are allowed full access to the 
ﬁ les in the Finance directory,
 ▪
The domain administrator list is not limited to the 
minimum appropriate personnel,
 ▪
Passwords are only required to be ﬁ ve characters, 
which is deemed insufﬁ cient for good security,
 ▪
There is no evidence of the CIO’s weekly backup review 
occurring, and management is not being notiﬁ ed of 
failures,
 ▪
There are no stored backup tapes off‐site or in a media 
safe, and
 ▪
There are no regularly run test restorations. 
 Endeavor 
Acquisition 
Corp. 
 ▪
Logical 
Security, 
Change 
Management, 
and End‐User 
Computing 
 ▪
The Company has also identiﬁ ed information technology 
control weaknesses in the areas of information security, end‐
user computing, systems program development and change 
controls. . . . The Company has adopted an Information 
Technology framework. . . .
 ▪
The Company’s world‐wide ﬁ nancial information 
systems were not integrated and contained many 
manual processes that may prevent the Company from 
meeting regulatory ﬁ ling requirements on a timely 
and accurate basis. The Company has also identiﬁ ed 
information technology control weaknesses in the areas 
of information security, end‐user computing, systems 
program development and change controls.
TABLE 13.2  (continued)

Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues ◾    395
Company 
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Reported in Financial Statements 
 ▪
Inadequate Financial Information Systems: The Company 
has identiﬁ ed systems and applications that impact 
ﬁ nancial reporting and is taking actions to safeguard 
ﬁ nancial reporting information assets as well as to help 
ensure the integrity of ﬁ nancial information used in the 
preparation of ﬁ nancial reports. The Company has adopted 
an Information Technology framework, is documenting 
key information technology controls and is addressing 
control weaknesses that could potentially impact ﬁ nancial 
reporting.
 ▪
In addition, the Company has implemented a number of new 
policies, procedures, and controls in the areas of information 
security, change management, operations and end‐user 
computing. The Company is in the process of implementing 
an integrated ERP system for its U.S. operations. It has 
reviewed its personnel and information systems for foreign 
operations and has added professional staff resources for 
review and control over ﬁ nancial reporting by the foreign 
operations.
 ▪
The Company has placed substantial mitigating controls 
around its heretofore manual consolidation process, and is 
in the process of implementing a high‐level replacement 
system for those manual processes to further improve 
controls and to reduce the time required to produce its 
ﬁ nancial statements and regulatory ﬁ lings. In addition, the 
Company has identiﬁ ed and implemented additional review 
controls over ﬁ nancial reporting to validate information 
derived from its information systems and ultimately reported 
in our ﬁ nancial statements. As the Company continues to 
upgrade various systems, controls and procedures, it is 
continuing to make substantial progress and is continuing its 
efforts toward remediation of this material weakness.  
 Power 3 
Medical 
Products 
Inc. 
 ▪
Logical 
security 
 ▪
. . . security over information technology; and (iv) lack of 
evidence to document compliance with the operation of 
internal accounting controls in accordance with our policies 
and procedures . . . These control deﬁ ciencies could result 
in a material misstatement.
 ▪
The material weaknesses identiﬁ ed during the pre paration of 
this report were . . . (iii) inadequate security over information 
technology; and (iv) lack of evidence to document compliance 
with the operation of internal accounting controls in accordance 
with our policies and procedures. These control deﬁ ciencies 
could result in a material misstatem ent of signiﬁ cant accounts 
or disclosures that would result in a material misstatement 
to our interim or annual ﬁ nancial statements that would not 
be prevented or detected  Accordingly, management has 
determined that these control deﬁ ciencies constitute material 
weaknesses.  
TABLE 13.2  (continued)
(continued)

396 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
Company 
IT Audit Area 
Illustrative IT Audit Defi ciency 
Reported in Financial Statements 
 Tower Tech 
Holdings 
Inc. 
 ▪
IT environment  ▪
. . . acquisition through our ﬁ scal year end, we have 
identiﬁ ed several items that represent material 
weaknesses or signiﬁ cant deﬁ ciencies in the internal 
control over ﬁ nancial reporting at Badger. . . . These 
material weaknesses are related to internal ﬁ nancial 
expertise, accounting policies and procedures, 
information technology environment and segregation of 
duties. . . . The Company has begun remediation efforts 
to mitigate the effects of these deﬁ ciencies.  
 Natures 
Sunshine 
Products 
Inc. 
 ▪
Access control, 
change 
management, 
and 
spreadsheets 
 ▪
Information Technology Systems . . . reporting related to 
certain information technology applications and general 
computer controls which are considered to have an impact 
on ﬁ nancial reporting and which resulted in a more than 
reasonable. . . .
 ▪
Information Technology Systems
 ▪
Description of Material Weakness as of December 31, 2008
 ▪
The Company did not maintain effective internal control 
over ﬁ nancial reporting related to certain information 
technology applications and general computer controls 
which are considered to have an impact on ﬁ nancial 
reporting and which resulted in a more than reasonable 
possibility that material misstatements in our ﬁ nancial 
statements would not be prevented or detected. 
Speciﬁ cally, we lacked effective controls in the following 
areas:
 ▪
Access Control—the Company did not maintain 
effectively designed controls to prevent unauthorized 
access to certain programs and data, and provide for 
periodic review and monitoring of access including 
reviews of security logs and analysis of segregation of 
duties conﬂ icts.
 ▪
Change Management—the Company did not maintain 
effectively designed controls to ensure that all information 
technology program and data changes were authorized, 
developer access to the production environment 
was limited, and that all program and data changes 
were adequately tested for accuracy and appropriate 
implementation.
 ▪
Spreadsheets—the Company did not maintain effectively 
designed controls to ensure that critical spreadsheets 
were identiﬁ ed, access to these spreadsheets was 
restricted to appropriate personnel, changes to data or 
formulas were authorized and appropriate, or that the 
spreadsheets were adequately reviewed by someone 
other than the preparer.  
TABLE 13.2  (continued)

Ideas for Addressing Segregation‐of‐Duties Issues ◾    397
 TABLE 13.3  Illustrative Compensatory Controls 
Illustrative Compensatory 
Control 
Description 
Substantive IT audit 
procedures 
Where possible, management could perform additional IT 
substantive audit procedures to minimize or mitigate the risk of IT 
exceptions. For example, if a user had inappropriate access to post 
adjusting journal entries, then management could review all posted 
journal entries for appropriateness. Another example would be 
reviewing all terminated user accounts to ensure that the account 
has not been used since the termination date. 
Audit trails 
Management could review audit trails to determine what access 
users have attempted to use, or what transaction activity occurred 
for the user account. This could be useful in detective situations 
where management needs to determine what activity occurred. 
Risk acceptance 
documentation 
For situations where mitigating controls are not available, 
management could consider documenting the risk acceptance. If 
this is done, management or the auditor should perform additional 
ﬁ nancial substantive testing. 
Supervision 
Management should implement additional supervision or workﬂ ow 
approvals for IT areas with known deﬁ ciencies to ensure that 
appropriate monitoring is in place. 
Additional ﬁ nancial cycle 
transaction testing 
Management or the auditor could perform additional testing of 
transactions if IT controls cannot be identiﬁ ed. 
 ▪
Examine random transactions: A manager could review a small sample of 
supporting documents daily for a few select transactions. The sample could be 
generated with a listing of all transactions during the day. Transactions reviewed 
could be noted on the report and initialed by the manager as evidence. 
 ▪
 Outsource activities when possible: Using a third‐party provider, such as a 
payroll service or lockbox bank account, can reduce the number of confl icting 
activities performed by one employee. 
 ▪
 Use nonaccounting personnel when possible: Transactions can be initiated 
or processed by employees who do not have a traditional accounting function. For 
example, a receptionist can open and log incoming customer checks, an offi ce 
manager can manage petty cash, and an operational department head such as the 
vice president of research and development or operations manager can act as an 
additional check signer. 
 ▪
 Take periodic counts of assets and compare them with accounting records:
When there is limited segregation of duties over transactions involving inventory, 
equipment, or other tangible assets, periodic counts and the comparison to the 
inventory records ensures assets recorded in the books are on hand. 
 ▪
Review analytics: Although less effective, the review of budget and trend analyses 
of costs can be another compensating control. While this does not provide a detailed 
review, it can be a way to identify problem areas where further investigation is 
needed. 

398 
◾ IT Audit Defi ciencies
 While application controls and their relationship to fi nancial auditing issues 
constitute the primary focus of this book, consideration of fraud arises in the conduct 
of the fi nancial audit and needs to be considered from an IT perspective. Julie Harrer, 
in  Internal Control Strategies: A Mid‐ to Small Business Guide (Wiley 2008), discusses 
the diffi culty that SMEs experience putting in place traditional segregation‐of‐duties 
controls. The following paraphrases some of her suggestions and briefl y comments 
on relevant IT auditing procedures that can provide evidence that the control 
has been put in place. 
 Internal Controls and Fraud 
 ▪
 Ensure your system will not allow the same person to enter and post journal entries. 
Even if you have a manual requirement for a second approver on all journal entries, 
restrict your system so the independent postings are not a possibility. 
 ▪
 Do not allow executives system access to post journal entries. In most companies, 
the chief fi nancial offi cer has no business recording journal entries. 
 ▪
 Make sure the disclosure and/or audit committee is aware of all related parties and 
the type of transactions they are involved in with the company. 
 ▪
 Make sure the audit committee reviews the methodology of all reserves or other 
management estimates at least annually and any time there is a change. 
 ▪
 Have the controller send the fi nancial package to the audit committee directly. This 
procedure may limit the opportunity for management override by executives after 
the accounting department has compiled the fi nancial data. 
 ▪
 Ensure that incentives are not linked solely to earnings or revenue growth. Mix in 
other indicators, such as low employee turnover, community service, compliance, 
or ethics programs. 
 Although management may utilize compensatory controls to minimize or miti-
gate risks, these controls should be used minimally, and the primary controls should 
be implemented to operate effectively. Management’s overreliance on compensatory 
controls could lead to a breakdown in the overall control environment, thus bringing 
additional risk into the organization. 
 SUMMARY 
 Defi ciencies exist in every company. Companies are not perfect, but they try to 
minimize their risks. When companies identify defi ciencies in their processes, the 
defi ciencies need to be evaluated to determine their importance and impact on the 
organization. Companies  do not have to eliminate all defi ciencies. This would be costly 
and impractical. Companies need to manage their risks with the limited resources at 
hand.  

399
 References 
 107th Congress .  2002 . Sarbanes‐Oxley Act of 2002. www.pcaobus.org. 
 ACL .  2013 . ACL Services Ltd. www.acl.com. 
 AICPA .  2013 . AU Section 329. www.aicpa.org/Research/Standards. 
 Apple 1 .  2013 . www.apple‐history.com. 
 Arens ,  A. , and  J.  Loebbecke .  1980 .  Auditing, an Integrated Approach .  Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ :  Prentice Hall . 
 Association of Certifi ed Fraud Examiners .  2012 .  The 2012 Report to the Nations . www
.acfe.com/rttn.aspx. 
 Benford ,  F.  1938 . “ The Law of Anomalous Numbers .”  Proceedings of the American Phi-
losophy Society  78 : 551 – 572 . 
 Biafore ,  B.  2010 .  QuickBooks 2011: The Missing Manual .  Sebastopol, CA :  O’Reilly Media . 
 Brunsdon ,  T. ,  Romney ,  M. , and  Steinbart ,  P. 2009 .  Introduction to Microsoft Dynamics GP 
10.0 Focus on Internal Controls .  Upper Saddle River, NJ :  Prentice Hall . 
 CaseWare .  2013 . IDEA Data Analysis Software. www.caseware.com. 
 Collins ,  C.  2011 . “ A Quick Guide to QuickBooks .”  Journal of Accountancy . www
.journalofaccountancy.com/Issues/2011/Dec/20114555. 
 COSO .  1992 .  1992 Internal Control—Integrated Framework . Treadway Commission. 
www.coso.org. 
 COSO .  2007 .  Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance for Smaller Public 
Companies . www.coso.org. 
 COSO. 2013a.  History of COSO . www.coso.org. 
 COSO .  2013b .  2013 Internal Control—Integrated Framework . www.coso.org. 
 Creeth, R.  1985 . “Micro-Computer Spreadsheets: Their Uses and Abuses.”  Journal of 
Accountancy  159(6): 90–93. 
 Davies, N., and C. Ikin.  1987 . “Auditing Spreadsheets.”  Australian Account  54–56. 
 Deloitte & Touche LLP .  2009 . “Spreadsheet Management: Not What You Figured.” 
www.deloitte.com/assets/Dcom‐UnitedStates/Local%20Assets/Documents/
AERS/us_aers_Spreadsheet_eBrochure_070710.pdf. 
 Ditlea, S.  1987 . “Spreadsheets Can Be Hazardous to Your Health.”  Personal Computing
11(1): 60–69. 
 FASB  2010 . Conceptual Framework. Statement of Financial Accounting Concepts No. 
8. www.fasb.org. 
 Fogarty ,  J. ,  L.  Graham , and  D.  Schubert .  2007 . “ Assessing and Responding to Risks in 
a Financial Statement Audit: Part II. Guidance for Audit Standards for Nonissuers 
That Took Effect on or After December 15, 2006 .”  Journal of Accountancy . www
.journalofaccountancy.com/Issues/2007/Jan/AssessingAndRespondingToRisks
InAFinancialStatementAuditPartIi. 

400	
◾  References
Fowler, G., and B. Worthen. 2011. “Hackers Shift Attacks to Small Firms.” Wall Street 
Journal. http://online.wsj.com.
Freeman, D. 1996. “How to Make Spreadsheets Error-Proof.” Journal of Accountancy 
181(5): 75–77.
Galletta, D., K. Hartzel, S. Johnson, J. Joseph, S. Rustag. 1997. “Spreadsheet Presentation 
and Error Detection: An Experimental Study.” Journal of Management Information 
Systems 13(3): 45–63.
GAO. 2006. Report to the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship. www.gao.gov.
Ge, W., and S. McVacy. 2005. “The Disclosure of Material Weaknesses in Internal  
Control after the Sarbanes/Oxley Act.” Accounting Horizons. http://aaajournals.org/
doi/abs/10.2308/acch.2005.19.3.137.
Godfrey, K. 1995. “Computing Error at Fidelity’s Magellan Fund.” Risk Digest 16(72).
Hall, J. 2011. Accounting Information Systems. Independence, KY: South‐Western 
Publications.
Ham, J., D. Losell, and W. Smieliauskas. 1985. “An Empirical Study of Error Character-
istics in Accounting Populations. Accounting Review (July):387–406.
Hayen, R., and R. Peters. 1989. “How to Ensure Spreadsheet Integrity.” Management 
Accounting 70(10): 30–33.
Helms, G. 2012. “IT Risks and Controls in Traditional and Emerging Environments.” 
AICPA Learning. http://aicpalearning.org.
Herrer, J. 2008. Internal Control Strategies: A Mid‐To Small Business Guide.Hoboken, NJ: 
John Wiley & Sons.
Ho., S., and A. Oddo. 2007. “Lessons Learned from Section 404 of the Sarbanes‐Oxley 
Act: A Conversation with Compliance Officers. www.nysscpa.org/cpajournal/ 
2007/607/essentials/p28.htm.
Huxley, S. 2013. Why Benford’s Law Works and How to Do Digit Analysis on Spread-
sheets.” www.usfca.edu/fac‐staff/huxleys/Benford.html.
InformationActive. 2013. ActiveData for Excel. www.informationactive.com.
Institute for Internal Auditors. Guide to the Assessment of IT Risk (GAIT), USA, 2007. 
www.theiia.org.
Intuit. n.d. Castle Rock Construction (QuickBooks Dataset). QuickBooks Software  
Sample Company.
ISACA. 2007. COBIT 4.1. IT Governance Institute. ISACA. www.isaca.org.
ISACA. 2012a. “History of ISACA.” www.isaca.org/About‐ISACA/History/Pages/
default.aspx.
ISACA. 2012b. “COBIT 5.0.” COBIT. ISACA. www.isaca.org/COBIT/Pages/default.aspx.
ISACA. 2012c. “COBI 4.1: Framework for IT Governance and Control.” www.isaca.org/
knowledge‐center/COBIT/pages/overview.aspx.
ISACA. 2013. ITAF: A Professional Practices Framework for IT Assurance. 
www.isaca.org/bookstore/extras/Pages/ITAF‐A‐Professional‐Practices‐Framework‐
for‐IT‐Assurance‐(e‐book).aspx.
IT Governance Institute. 2005. “IT Alignment: Who Is in Charge?” www
.governanceinstitute.com.
IT Governance Institute. 2012. The Governance Institute home page. www 
.governanceinstitute.com.

References  ◾        401
IT Governance Institute. 2013. “About ITGI.” www.itgi.org/template_ITGI923a 
.html?Section=About_ITGI&Template=/ContentManagement/HTMLDisplay 
.cfm&ContentID=57434.
Kamnikar, J., E. Kamnikar, and A. Burrowes. 2012. “One Size Does Not Fit All.” Journal 
of Accountancy. www.journalofaccountancy.com/Issues/2012/Jan/20114757.
Kelso, K. 2011. “Building Blocks of a Successful Financial Close Process. Journal of 
Accountancy. www.journalofaccountancy.com/Issues/2011/Dec/20114327.
Klamm, B., and M. Watson. 2009. “SOX 404 Reported Internal Control Weak-
nesses: A Test of COSO Framework Components and Information Technology.” 
Journal of Information Systems 23(2):1–23.
Li, C., G. Peters, V. Richardson, and M. Watson. 2012. “The Consequences of Information 
Technology Control Weaknesses on Management Information Systems: The Case of 
Sarbanes–Oxley Internal Control Reports.” MIS Quarterly 36(1):179–203. http://misq
.org/the‐consequences‐of‐information‐technology‐control‐weaknesses‐on‐ 
management‐information‐systems‐the‐case‐of‐sarbanes‐oxley‐internal‐control‐
reports.html.
Metz, R. 2011. “Apple Co‐Founder Wozniak Says He’ll Miss Jobs.” USA Today. www
.usatoday.com.
Nigrini, M. 2011. Mark Nigrin’s Forensic Analytics: Methods and Techniques for Forensic 
Accounting Investigations. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Palmas, E. 2011. “IT General and Application Controls: The Model of Internalization.” 
ISACA Journal vol. 5. www.isaca.org/Journal/Past‐Issues/2011/Volume‐5/Pages/
IT‐General‐and‐Application‐Controls‐The‐Model‐of‐Internalization.aspx.
Panko, R. 1999. “Applying Code Inspection to Spreadsheet Testing.” Journal of Manage-
ment Information Systems 16(2): 159–176.
Panko, R.  2005. Spreadsheet Research (SSR). University of Hawaii, Honolulu. www 
.cba.hawaii.edu/panko/ssr/.
PCAOB. 2012. “Observations from 2010 Inspections of Domestic Annually Inspected 
Firms Regarding Deficiencies in Audits of Internal Control over Financial Reporting.” 
http://pcaobus.org/Inspections/Documents/12102012_Release_2012_06.pdf.
PCAOB. 2013a. “Auditing Standard No. 5.” http://pcaobus.org/Standards/Auditing/
Pages/Auditing_Standard_5.aspx.
PCAOB. 2013b. “AU Section 329.” http://pcaobus.org/Standards/Auditing/Pages/AU329 
.aspx.
Poe, T. 2009. Spreadsheet Controls in the Real World. A Practical Approach under SOX 404. 
Hudson Consulting Services.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2004a. “Sarbanes‐Oxley Act: Section 404.” www.pwc.fr/fr/
pwc_pdf/pwc_soa_guide.pdfwww.pwc.com.
PricewaterhouseCoopers. 2004b. “The Use of Spreadsheets: Considerations for Section 404  
of the Sarbanes‐Oxley Act.” www.clusterseven.com/external‐research/2010/5/3/
pwc‐the‐use‐of‐spreadsheets‐considerations‐for‐section‐404‐o.html.
Raimondi, M. 2011. “Internal Controls for Small Businesses Using QuickBooks.” Tax 11 
Conference. www.mncpa.org/taxconference/materials.
Ramos, M. 2004. How to Comply with Sarbanes‐Oxley Section 404. Hoboken, 
NJ: John Wiley & Sons.

402	
◾  References
Ramos, M. 2009. “Risk‐Based Audit Best Practices.” Journal of Accountancy. 
www.journalofaccountancy.com/Issues/2009/Dec/20091789.
Ratcliffe, T., and C. Landes. 2009. “Understanding Internal Control and Internal Con-
trol Services.” Journal of Accountancy. AICPA. www.journalofaccountancy.com/
Issues/2009/Sep/White%20Paper%20Understanding%20Internal%20Control%20
and%20Internal%20Control%20Services.
Reithel, B., D. Nichols, and R. Robinson. 1996. “Spreadsheet Reliability Perceptions: An 
Investigation of the Effects of Size, Format, and Errors.” Journal of Computer Informa-
tion Systems 36(3): 54–62.
Rockart, J., M. Earl, and J. Ross. 1996. “The New IT Organization: Eight Imperatives.” 
Center for Information Systems Research. Sloan School of Management. Massachu-
setts Institute of Technology. http://dspace.mit.edu/bitstream/handle/1721.1/2623/
SWP‐3902‐40987801‐CISR‐292.pdf.
Romney, M., and P. Steinbart. 2009. Accounting Information Systems, 11th ed. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Romney, M., and P. Steinbart. 2011. Accounting Information Systems, 12th ed. Englewood 
Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.
SEC. 2007a. “SEC Approves PCAOB Auditing Standard No. 5 Regarding Audits of  
Internal Control Over Financial Reporting; Adopts Definition of ‘Significant 
Deficiency.’ ” www.sec.gov/news/press/2007/2007-144.htm.
SEC. 2007b. “Commission Guidance Regarding Management’s Report on Internal 
Control Over Financial Reporting Under Section 13(a) or 15(d) of the Securities 
Exchange Act of 1934.” www.sec.gov/rules/interp/2007/33-8810.pdf.
Shaw, M. 2004. “Avoiding Costly Errors in Your Spreadsheets. Contractor’s Management 
Report 11: 2–4.
Shein, M., and R. Lanza. 2009. “Fraud Detection with ActiveData for Excel eBook.” 
Information Active Inc. www.informationactive.com.
Shimamoto, D. 2011. “IT Governance for Small Business and CPA Firms.” AICPA Prac-
titioners Symposium and AICPA TECH +Information Technology Conference, 
June 2011. www.aicpaconferencematerials.com/techpractitioners/?select=session 
&sessionID=283.
Simkin, M. 1987. “Micros in Accounting: How to Validate Spreadsheets.” Journal of 
Accountancy 130–138.
Singleton, T. 2011. “IT Risks—Present and Future.” ISACA Journal vol. 4. www
.isaca.org/Journal/Past‐Issues/2011/Volume‐4/Pages/IT‐Risks‐Present‐and‐
Future.aspx.
Singleton, T. 2013. “Auditing the IT Auditors.” ISACA Journal vol. 3. www.isaca
.org/Journal/Past‐Issues/2013/Volume‐3/Pages/Auditing‐the‐IT‐Auditors.aspx.
Turner, L., and A. Weickgenannt. 2008. Accounting Information Systems: Controls and 
Processes. Hoboken, NJ: John Wiley & Sons.
Vander Wal, K., J. Lainhart, and P. Tessin. 2012. “A COBIT 5 Overview.” ISACA. 
www.isaca.org.
Vasa Museum. 2012. “From Wreck to State of the Art.” www.vasamuseet.se/en.
Weill, P., and J. Ross. 2004. IT Governance. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School 
Press.

References  ◾        403
Whitehouse, T. 2012. “Internal Control Audit Failures Too High, PCAOB Says.” 
Compliance Week. www.complianceweek.com/internal‐control‐audit‐failures‐too‐
high‐pcaob‐says/article/271992.
Whittaker, D. 1999. “Spreadsheet Errors and Techniques for Finding Them.” Manage-
ment Accounting 77: 50–51.
Wright, A., and R. Ashton. 1989. “Identifying Audit Adjustments with Attention‐ 
Directing Procedures.” Accounting Review (October): 710–728.


405
 About the Authors  
Jason Wood, CPA, CITP, CISA, CIA, CFF, MBA,  is the president of WoodCPAPlus 
PC, a certiﬁ ed public accounting ﬁ rm that focuses on information technology auditing, 
consulting, and training. Mr. Wood has over 17 years of international business experi-
ence in information technology auditing helping middle‐market and global Fortune 500 
companies. He is an alumnus of the Big Four accounting ﬁ rms and teaches advanced 
courses in accounting information systems and auditing at leading Rochester, New 
York, area colleges. 
William C. Brown, PhD, CPA, CISA, CITP, is chair and assistant professor in 
accounting and business law for both graduate and undergraduate programs at Min-
nesota State University, Mankato. Dr. Brown has served as corporate ﬁ nancial ofﬁ cer 
in several high‐growth small and medium‐sized enterprises, including several Security 
and Exchange Commission registrants. He has also served as chief information ofﬁ cer 
in a large information technology organization following a merger and accelerating 
growth. Dr. Brown teaches ﬁ nancial accounting and accounting information systems. 
Harry Howe, PhD, is professor of accounting and director of the graduate and under-
graduate accounting programs at State University of New York–Geneseo. Dr. Howe has 
coauthored two volumes in the BNA Practice and Policy Series and published numerous 
articles in scholarly and practitioner journals. His primary teaching areas are ﬁ nancial 
accounting and accounting information series. 


407
Acceptance plan, 312, 313
Acceptance testing, 312, 315, 317
Access (Microsoft database application), 75, 
294t, 352
Access administration, in spreadsheet management, 
358, 358t
Access controls, 2
application controls with, 11
attempted access to unauthorized functions 
prevented by, 53, 56f
backups and, 7, 7t, 8
confi dentiality of data and, 7
customization of, 11
data availability and, 5
IT audit defi ciencies in, 390t, 396t, 397t
operations and, 7, 7t
payment card processing and, 345
payroll cycle with, 164, 182, 218, 232
read-only, 26t, 48, 115, 357, 359, 360, 
366, 379
reports and, 372–373, 373t, 379
physical, for computer rooms, 28t
spreadsheet management with, 356, 358, 358t, 
359, 367
view-only, 11
Accessibility
information fl ow and, 283t
responsibility and accountability for, 30
spreadsheet management and, 360, 367
Access reviews
spreadsheet management with, 358t, 359
of users, 39, 56
Access rights
accumulation of, 39, 56–57
auditor’s review of, 4
confi dentiality of data and, 5
confi guration of, 26t, 300t, 325–326
at document level, 48, 49
general controls for, 25, 26t
HR data and, 57, 164, 164t, 167, 176, 232
human error in setting up, 39, 58
initial setup in, 38, 40, 40f, 41f, 42f
IT audit defi ciencies in, 389t
management reviews of, 39, 56, 56f, 57f
password confi guration in, 38–47, 45f–48f
printing reports and, 373
to prior periods, 11
removal of, 39, 57
security role design in, 38, 42, 43f
segregation of duties in, 7, 39, 48–53, 50f
selective access by modules within, 53
soft control related to, 53, 54f
system administrator’s assignment of, 116, 
182, 379
vendors and, 320, 321, 323
Accountability
application controls and, 69
control charts showing, 268
internal controls and, 291, 292t, 306, 307
IT governance with, 29, 30
spreadsheet management with, 355
Account balances
fi nancial statements with, 17, 66
valuation assertion on, 3
Accounting information, rights and obligations 
assertion on, 3
Accounting information system (AIS), 37, 49, 337, 
365, 371–372, 389t
Accounting procedures
assertions with, 86t, 113t, 146t, 157, 165t
data integrity and, 5
management assertions addressed in, 4
Accounting standards, 4, 138
Accounts, completeness assertion on, 3
Accounts payable (A/P), 11, 61t, 65, 75, 108f, 109f, 
110t, 116, 156, 159, 182, 275, 294t, 374
Accounts receivable (A/R), 11, 19, 25, 50, 51t, 60, 
61t, 62, 65, 75, 79, 82, 83f, 86t, 88, 96, 251, 
252, 274, 294t, 374
Accruals
fi nancial close cycle with, 271t
fi nancial reporting of, 252, 253t
IT controls for, 71, 278, 279
payroll cycle with, 160, 161f, 162, 163, 165t, 
233, 237
spreadsheets with, 340, 342t
Index
Page numbers followed by an f or a t refer to fi gures and tables, respectively.

408	
◾  Index
Accuracy
application controls for, 13, 19, 21, 273–279, 
283t, 300t, 313, 373, 392t
of arithmetic processes, 4
change management and, 396t
data management and, 327, 328
expenditure cycle and, 131
financial closing process and, 69, 70–71, 72, 73
financial reporting and, 3–4, 19, 256, 256t, 
258t, 261, 271t, 344, 366
of financial statements, 66, 67, 68
inventory cycle and, 136, 143, 144f, 145, 145t, 
146t, 147, 149, 150, 155
payroll cycle and, 163, 164, 164t, 167, 172, 
176–178, 193, 207, 218, 223
problem management and, 326
report writers and, 373t, 379, 382
resource limitations affecting, 49
responsibility and accountability for, 30
revenue cycle and, 81, 82, 85t, 92, 111t, 
112, 113t
spreadsheet management and, 338t, 340, 341, 
342t, 344, 345, 361, 362, 364, 365, 366, 
392t
system performance and capacity and, 321
system security and, 324
third-party service and, 29, 320
transaction processing and, 77, 79
Accuracy (valuation/allocation) assertion, 3–4, 7t, 
21, 22f, 86t, 113t, 146t, 165t, 186, 270, 271t, 
272f
ACL, 75
Acquire and Implement section. See Program 
Development and Change section of COBIT 4.1
ActiveData, 75
Adjusting entries
auditor’s review of, 4
audit trail reports with, 374
inventory cycle with, 149
IT audit deficiencies with, 390t
valuation assertion on, 4
Adjustments
accounts payable and, 275
accounts receivable and, 19, 50, 274
applications controls for, 71, 72, 274, 275, 276
audit, 251, 252–254, 253t–254t
audit trail report on, 374
general ledger and, 62, 71, 72, 77, 135
to internal controls, 262
inventory cycle with, 135, 138, 143, 144f, 150, 
154–155, 156–157, 276, 393t
payroll cycle with, 159, 160, 161f, 165t, 228, 
234, 237
system processing changes resulting in, 309
Administrators, health plan, 344
Administrators, system
access rights granted by, 116, 182, 379
accounts for, 37, 49, 394t
expenditure cycle limits set by, 122
failed login attempts and, 44
IDs for, 37
IT audit deficiencies and, 390t
new account setup and, 178
passwords for, 39, 40, 41f, 44, 49, 64f, 178
payroll cycle and, 182, 207, 232
report access granted by, 379
risk exposure alerts for, 136
roles and tasks assigned by, 50, 53, 56
system access monitoring by, 44, 46
Aging process, 79, 89, 90f
AICPA, 15, 31, 251, 252
Allocation (accuracy, valuation/allocation) 
assertion, 3–4, 7t, 21, 22f, 86t, 113t, 146t, 
165t, 186, 270, 271t, 272f
American Accounting Association, 6
American Institute of CPAs (AICPA), 6, 15, 31,  
251, 252
Analytical reviews
auditing theory and practice in the 1980s and, 
251, 252, 253t
financial closing process and, 67
general ledger and subsidiary data and, 74–75, 
79
report writer audits using, 379
segregation-of-duties issues and, 397
spreadsheet management with, 368
Apple Computer, 9
Application controls
auditing standards using, 31
business process specificity of, 21
COBIT 4.1 objectives for, 272–273
control objectives for, 372–379
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for 
evaluating, 295, 296t–301t, 302t
definition of, 23
expenditure cycle with, 111–112, 111t
framework for evaluating, 295, 302f
general ledger with, 68–75
integrated view of IT environment and, 22, 22f, 
25
inventory cycle with, 11, 143–145, 145t, 
276–277
IT audit deficiencies in, 392t
management review of, 392t
payroll cycle with, 11, 159, 160, 163–164, 164t, 
167, 170–172, 176, 178, 182, 185, 186, 193, 
207, 212, 214, 218, 223, 228, 232, 235, 236, 
248, 277–278
purchasing and, 275–276
revenue cycle with, 82, 85–87, 85t, 273–275
spreadsheet management with, 352, 353, 369
taxes and, 278–279
types of controls coexisting with, 25
See also Controls
Application-level security. See Security, 
application-level

Index  ◾        409
Applications
control objectives for, 372–379
interfaces between, 23, 59, 71, 85t, 111t, 136, 
145t, 163, 164t, 206, 290, 311, 364, 373t, 
383
Application system development and maintenance 
controls, 23, 66. See also Systems development 
life cycle (SDLC) methodology
Archiving, in spreadsheet management, 356, 
366–367
Arithmetic processes, accuracy of, 4, 376
Assertions
accounting procedures used with, 4, 86t, 113t, 
146t, 157, 165t
classification and understandability assertion 
and, 21, 22f
completeness assertion and, 3, 21, 22f, 86t, 87, 
113t, 146t, 155, 165t, 186, 270, 271t, 272f
control objectives and, 272, 272f
COSO process and, 32f, 270–272, 271t
cut-off assertion and, 21, 22f
data integrity and, 5
errors in, 272
existence (occurrence) assertion and, 2–3,  
21, 22f, 86t, 89, 113t, 146t, 165t, 270, 
271t, 272f
financial statements and, 66, 67, 82, 85–87, 86t, 
89, 108, 112, 113t, 136–137, 145, 146t, 160, 
164, 165t, 259f, 270–272, 284
integrated view of IT environment and business 
processes and, 21, 22, 22f, 31, 284
IT audit plan and, 293t
responsibility for auditing, 267
rights and obligations assertion and, 3, 21, 22f, 
86t, 113t, 146t, 165t, 272f
risk assessment and, 257, 259f, 260f
transaction errors and, 272, 272f
valuation (accuracy, valuation/allocation) 
assertion and, 3–4, 7t, 21, 22f, 86t, 113t, 
146t, 165t, 186, 270, 271t, 272f
Asset misappropriation, 262, 263t–264t, 343t, 369
Assets and liabilities, rights and obligations assertion 
on, 3
Association of Certified Fraud Examiners (ACFE), 
10, 12, 13, 20, 261–262
Attendance
payroll cycle with, 160–162, 165t, 206–207, 
212
policies on, 324, 325
Audit committees, 12, 266, 267, 268, 279, 283t, 
291, 330, 331, 332, 333, 398
Audit firms
auditing theory and practice in the 1980s and, 
251
PCAOB warnings on insufficient evidence to 
support opinions of, 255–256
Auditing. See IT auditing
Auditing Standard (AS) No. 2 (PCAOB), 279, 280
Auditing Standard (AS) No. 5 (PCAOB), 250, 251, 
255, 279, 286
Auditing Standards Board, 31
Auditors. See IT auditors
Audits
auditing theory and practice in the 1980s and, 
251
categories of, 1
causes of audit adjustments from samples (1984, 
1985), 251, 252–254, 253t–254t
external. See External audits
historical perspective on, 251–257
internal. See Internal audits
risk-based approach to, 18, 251, 252
risk exposure to fraud and abuse in SMEs and, 
14–15, 20
simpler approach of 1980s to, 252–254, 
253t–254t
standards of the 1980s and 1990s on, 252, 254
transaction-based approach to, 251, 252
Audit tests, and spreadsheet risk, 356–357, 358t
Audit trail
cash receipts with, 82, 274
firewall with, 324
internal control evaluation of, 326, 327, 328
payroll processing and, 228, 244
program development with, 313
purchasing and, 274, 275
QuickBooks function for, 20, 374–375, 375f
reports for, 11, 20, 39, 374–375, 375f, 383
security, 38, 39, 56
transaction processing and, 56, 72, 73, 79, 328
Authentication
application control for, 26t, 68, 74, 290
users and, 25, 26t, 27t
Authenticity checks, in financial closing process, 68, 
70–71, 273
Authority
application control for, 386
control environment and, 266, 267, 279
Authority tables, in logon process, 26t
Authorizations 
in application controls, 23, 68–69, 72, 85t, 111t, 
145t, 164t, 265t, 268
credit memos with, 96, 107
payroll processing and, 176, 178, 228
purchase orders and, 122
returns and repairs and, 136
Availability
of data, 5, 5f, 7, 7t, 8, 24, 30, 37, 39, 327
IT configuration and, 300t, 325
managing capacity and, 321, 322
operations management and, 329
problem management and, 326
responsibility and accountability for, 30, 325
security practices ensuring, 325
service-level agreements (SLAs) on, 318, 319
third-party service and, 299t, 318, 319

410	
◾  Index
Backup employees, 52, 110t, 308
Backups (files, servers, and tapes)
application controls for, 13
availability of, 8
confidentiality of data and, 7t
controls for, 23, 28t, 327, 358t, 359, 365, 366
documentation of, 19
integrity of, 7, 7t
IT audits for, 391t, 394t
planning and strategy for, 28t, 343t, 358t
restoring or recovering, 8, 28t, 343t, 366
risk assessment of, 294t
scheduling of, 23, 28t, 366, 301t
security for, 11, 26t
software for, 13
spreadsheet management with, 358t, 359, 
365, 366
storage of, 7, 9, 11, 28t, 315, 359, 365, 391t, 
394t
testing, 8, 366
Balances
completeness assertion on, 3
existence assertion on, 2–3, 22
Balance sheet, 79
controls for, 271t
in financial reporting, 265f, 269
risk involving, 249, 250, 257, 265f, 286f
Balance sheet accounts, 31
Bank reporting, and general ledger, 59
Benford, Frank, 76
Benford’s Law, 75, 76
Bank accounts
check tampering and, 264t
employee direct deposit for, 160, 161f, 162, 176, 
178, 185, 207
lockboxes with, 82, 397
in QuickBooks, 11, 231f
Barrett Business Services Inc., 258t
Benefits, in payroll cycle, 160, 162f, 167, 172, 178, 
193, 214, 232–237, 244, 259f, 345
Best practices
COBIT 4.1 with, 5
COSO process as, 22, 31
internal controls and, 332, 343t
spreadsheet design and, 347
service-level agreements with, 319, 320
systems development life cycle and, 290
Billing
controls for, 82
erroneous invoices in, 95
fraud involving, 10, 75, 263t
general ledger system for, 60, 60f
QuickBooks functions for, 116, 131, 132, 156, 
156
revenue cycle risk exposure and, 82
shipping notice and, 84t
Billing notices, printing of, 110
Billing rates, in payroll cycle, 207
Billing schemes, in fraud, 10, 75, 263t
Bill of lading (BOL), 84t
BioScrip, 258t
Blank checks, 11, 264t
Boards of directors
communication between management and, 261, 
268–269
control environment and, 9, 10, 12, 13–14, 15, 
20, 25, 30, 265f, 266–267, 280
information sources available to, 261, 269
internal controls and, 12, 257, 283t, 306
recruiting, 12
Bookkeeping records, and segregation of duties, 
10–11
Bribery, 262
Budget 
application controls with, 11, 19, 23, 24
reports on, 374
review of, as compensatory control, 397
spreadsheets and desktop tools for, 353
Business continuity planning (BCP), 23, 25, 28t, 
290, 318, 319, 320, 391t
Business controls 
PCAOB guidelines on, 280
in spreadsheet management, 356, 358t, 
367–368
Business processes
access rights and, 389t
application controls specific to, 21, 22, 22f, 23, 
85, 87, 111, 143, 163
business units supported by, 21, 22f
control environment and, 257, 259t, 266, 280, 
389t
integrated view of IT environment and, 21, 22f
IT audit plan for, 293, 293f
IT’s role in, 30
IT’s support for, 256t, 257, 258t, 291, 334
risks associated with, 259f, 260, 260f, 290–291
segregation of duties and, 389t
Business units
auditor’s risk assessment for, 255
business process support for, 21, 22f
company-level controls and, 259f, 279
IT audit plan for, 293f
IT environment separate from, 29
Calculations
application controls with, 85t, 111t, 128, 133, 
135, 145t, 146t, 164t
data integrity and, 5
inventory cycle and, 150, 155
as payroll cycle risk exposure, 160, 162
segregation of duties and, 49
Canargo Energy, 343t
Carmike Cinemas, Inc., 343t
Cash and cash-related accounts, fraud in, 75
Cash disbursements
expenditure cycle with, 107, 108, 109f, 110, 110t

Index  ◾        411
general ledger and, 60f, 62
segregation of duties and, 11
specialized journal for, 62
Cash discounts, 274
Cash flow statement, 79, 265f, 269
Cash larceny, 10, 264t
Cash on hand, misappropriation of, 264t 
Cash receipts
general ledger and, 60f, 62
incorrect posting of, 92, 101–103, 101f–103f
revenue cycle and, 82, 83, 83f, 86t
Cash register controls, 11, 264t
Ceco Environmental, 343t
Cell protection, in spreadsheet management, 358t, 
359, 360, 361, 362, 368
Ceridian Corp., 258t
Certified Informational Technology Professional 
(CITP), 251
Certified Internal Auditor(CIA), 2
Certified Public Accountants (CPAs), 2, 9, 13, 342
Challenge (security) questions, during logon, 47, 47f
Change control
application software testing with, 315, 322
change management using, 316–317
configuration management with, 326
documentation of, 317, 322, 326
IT audit deficiencies in, 394t
IT auditors’ review of forms in, 2–3
IT internal control with, 256t, 258t, 326, 394t
internal controls over, 315, 316
operations management with, 329
spreadsheet management with, 343t, 354, 356, 
363, 364, 367
Change management
approvals in, 390t
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data and, 5, 7, 7t, 8
documentation on, 2, 390t
existence assertion, 2–3
finance reporting changes and, 316–317
IT audit deficiencies in, 390t, 391t, 393t, 394t, 
396t
IT control weaknesses and, 258t
maturity model (MM) of internal controls  
and, 292
reports and, 372, 379, 383
review of changes for, 391t
spreadsheet management with, 356, 358t, 
361–365
testing in, 390t
version control (versioning) in, 68, 338t, 353, 
362, 363–364, 366, 367, 368
Changing passwords, 47, 48f
Chart of accounts
account number usage in, 60–62
activity by user account summary for, 78
adequate granularity needed in, 59, 79
audit trail for, 72, 73, 79
COBIT 4.1 application controls for, 68–75
completeness assertion on, 3
deleting accounts from, 65
descriptive statistics for, 74–75
duplicate payment testing for, 77
example of, 60–62, 61f
financial reporting and, 59, 77, 79
internal controls and, 66–67
journal entry gap test in, 77
nature and purpose of organization reflected in, 
60–62
overview description of, 59
payments made after period-end in, 77
QuickBooks functions for, 62–65, 63f, 64f
risks specific to, 65–66
standard and nonstandard journal entries after 
year-end in, 77
subsidiary ledger accounts in, 62
vendor evaluation and, 76
weekend journal entries in, 78
Chart of responsibilities, 4
Checks, disbursements
check numbers in, 131, 132f
expenditure cycle and, 131, 132f
fraud involving tampering with, 264t
Checks, payroll. See Payroll cycle
Check signing, 11, 397
Check stock and printing, 160, 162, 228
Chief executive officers (CEOs), 24, 25, 29, 30, 33, 
267, 291
Chief financial officers (CFOs), 24, 25, 29, 30, 33, 
257, 267, 291
Chief information officers (CIOs), 29, 257, 334, 
394t
CIMCON Software Inc., 356
Classification and understandability assertion, 
21, 22f
Closed transactions, application controls for, 11
Closing calendar, 67, 70
Closing dates
application controls for, 11, 228
exception reports on, 11
password for, 11, 228
report on, 11
Closing process. See Financial closing process
Cloud applications, 10
COBIT 1.0, 282, 284f
COBIT 4.0, 280, 284f
COBIT 4.1
Computer Operations and Access to Programs and 
Data (Delivery and Support) section of, 280, 
281t, 295, 299t–300t, 317–329 
cross-referencing to PCAOB with COSO and, 295, 
296t–301t, 302t
evolution of COBIT with, 282–284, 284f
financial close cycle and control objectives of, 
271t
four definitions used in framework of, 280

412	
◾  Index
COBIT (continued )
integrating COSO, PCAOB, and, 280–282
Monitor and Evaluate section of, 280, 282t, 295, 
301t, 330–334
overlay of COSO framework against, 6, 280–282, 
281t–282t, 289
Plan and Organize section of, 280, 281t–282t, 
295, 296t–297t, 303–311
Program Development and Change (Acquire and 
Implement) section of, 280, 281t, 295, 298t, 
299t–300t, 311–317
Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 weaknesses classified 
by COSO and CORBIT components, 254, 282, 
283t
COBIT 4.1 application controls
general ledger and, 68–75
inventory cycle and, 276–277
objectives of, 271t, 272–273, 272f
payroll cycle and human resources and,  
277–278
purchasing cycle and, 275–276
revenue cycle and, 273–275
SME implementation of, 20
taxes and, 278–279
COBIT 5.0, 6, 251
distinction between governance and management 
in, 285
effective IT leadership and, 334
enablers in, 284–285, 286f
end-to-end approach using a holistic framework 
in, 285
evolution of COBIT with, 282–284, 284f
integration with ISACA framework, 282
IT audit and, 282–284
steps (principles) of, 285, 285f
release of, 280
Codes of conduct, 262, 279, 306
Commissions, in payroll cycle, 61t, 176, 218, 234
Committee of Sponsoring Organizations (COSO)
background of, 6
cross-referencing to PCAOB to COBIT and, 295, 
296t–301t, 302t
Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework 
(ERM) from, 14, 15
general controls definition of, 12, 22–23
financial reporting assertions and, 270
goal of, 6
guidance for linking accounts, risks, and 
assertions from, 259f, 260f
guidelines for IT auditing from, 249
integrating COBIT, PCAOB, and, 280–282
internal control components and, 6, 262–267, 
265f
Internal Control—Integrated Framework from, 6, 
20, 249, 287
Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance 
for Smaller Public Companies from, 249, 251, 
254, 256, 260, 293f, 302f
need for systematic and repeatable support for 
controls from, 20
organizations comprising, 6
overlay of COBIT 4.1 and, 6, 280–282, 
281t–282t, 289
Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 weaknesses classified 
by COSO and CORBIT components, 254, 282, 
283t
systematic examination of steps in audit plan 
scope and, 293t
weak control environment and, 14, 289
See also COSO process
Communication
application controls and, 69, 70, 73, 74
change management with, 30
COSO framework for, 265
enterprise complexity and, 67
financial closing process and, 67
financial reporting and, 268–269
internal controls and, 15, 57, 250, 251, 257t, 
263t, 264t, 265, 265f, 281t–282t, 283t, 286, 
292t, 296t, 298t, 299t, 301t, 306
IT governance with, 29, 34, 258t, 296t
of management aims and direction, 266, 306
performance statistics with, 329
security standards with, 323, 324, 325
See also Information and communication
Company-level controls, 279
Compensatory controls
audit trail in QuickBooks as example of, 16
impact of material weaknesses without, 295
IT audit deficiencies and, 388, 397, 397t, 398
IT control evaluation and, 302f
SEC definition of, 16
segregation of duties issues and, 388, 398
selective redundancy using, 25
Completeness, 
application control for, 313, 314, 316, 373
data input and, 328, 364
data preparation and, 327, 328
report writer and, 378, 379, 382
Completeness assertion, 3, 21, 22f, 86t, 87, 113t, 
146t, 155, 165t, 186, 270, 271t, 272f
Compliance
chart of accounts and, 59, 65, 67, 71
COBIT 4.1 and COSO frameworks for, 280, 282, 
281t, 285
data privacy and, 344–345
external requirement changes and, 297t, 308–
309, 333
financial reporting and, 265f, 269, 332
independent reviews of, 333
internal controls for, 13–14, 20, 265f, 296t
IT audit and, 279, 280, 373
IT governance for, 292t, 296t, 306
maturity model for internal controls and,  
292t, 292
payment cards and, 345

Index  ◾        413
payroll burdens and, 159, 162, 244, 248
report access and, 373
Sarbanes-Oxley and, 14, 15, 20, 251, 257, 282, 
291, 292, 357f
sensitive data and password protection and, 44, 
345, 346f
Social Security data and, 345
spreadsheet management and, 337, 344, 355, 
357f
Compliance reporting, in general ledger, 59, 67
Computer-assisted audit techniques (CAATs), 75
Computer logs, 26t
Computer Operations and Access to Programs and 
Data (Delivery and Support) section of COBIT 
4.1, 280
control objectives of, 317–329
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t, 302t
overlay of COSO framework against, 281t
Computer systems
auditor’s check of configuration settings in, 4
availability of, 8
disaster recovery planning (DRP) for, 24, 28t, 
391t
emergency power supply for, 28t
maintenance of, 19
power supplies for, 28t
preventive controls for physical environment and 
security of, 25, 28t
risk mitigation by controls outside, 112, 117
segregation of duties and logical security access 
within, 112, 115
uninterruptible power supply for, 28t
Concurrency issues
authentication mechanisms and, 323
data availability and, 5
Confidentiality of data, 5, 5f, 7, 7t
Confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data, 5–8, 5f, 7t
Configuration settings
auditor’s review of, 4
authorized access using, 26t
firewalls and, 324
inventory cycle and, 3, 147, 150
IT resources and, 324, 325–326
logic inspection and, 365
passwords and, 38–39, 44–47, 45f, 46f, 47f, 
48f, 359
payroll cycle and, 167, 178, 193
revenue cycle and, 87, 87f, 88, 92
rights and obligations assertion and, 3
Configuration tables, 26t
Conflicts of interest, 262
Conservatism of financial reports, 270
Consistency of financial reports, 270
Contingency planning, 319, 391t
Continuity planning, 23, 25, 28t, 290, 318, 319, 
320, 391t
Control activities
Computer Operations category and, 295, 
299t–300t
COSO framework for, 254, 262, 280
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t, 302t
internal controls and, 262–267, 265f
Monitor and Evaluation category and, 295, 301t
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for, 
280–282, 281t–282t
Plan and Organize category and, 295, 296t–297t
Program Development and Change category and, 
295, 298t
range of activities included in, 268
Sarbanes-Oxley weakness and, 283t
Control environment
board’s role in, 12, 20
business continuity planning and, 28t
business processes and, 266, 280
company-level controls and, 279
Computer Operations category and, 295, 
299t–300t
control procedures in, 19
COSO framework for, 254, 262, 280
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t, 302t
framework for evaluating risks and, 16–18
internal controls and, 262–267, 265f
management’s role in, 12–13, 15, 261
material weakness in, 16
Monitor and Evaluation category and, 295, 301t
need for systematic and repeatable support for, 20
ongoing evaluations of, 14, 15
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for, 
280–282, 281t–282t
in payroll cycle, 159, 160, 176, 178, 248
periodic assessment of, 12
Plan and Organize category and, 295, 296t–297t
Program Development and Change category and, 
295, 298t
resource limitations and, 15
risk-based auditing approach to, 18
Sarbanes-Oxley weakness and, 283t
significant deficiency in, 16
system review of, 19
tests of controls in, 19
types of errors and fraud in, 18–19
Control Objectives for Information and Related 
Technology (COBIT), 30. See also COBIT 
headings
Controls, 21–36
applications with. See Application controls
checks and, 11
completeness assertion on, 3
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data and, 5–7, 5f, 8
COSO process on, 30–33, 32f
as critical success factor, 13

414	
◾  Index
Controls (continued )
customization of, 11
existence assertion and, 2, 3
fair presentation of financial statements and, 21
general. See General controls
hard vs. soft, 8
integrated view of IT environment and, 21,  
22, 22f
IT audit of, 35–37
IT controls within, 10, 13, 14, 15
management’s monitoring of, 261, 262
override of, 12
risk assessment and, 15
risks associated with SMEs and, 13–15
segregation of duties and, 10–11
selective redundancy using, 25
SMEs and environment for, 10–11
software applications with, 11, 12
spreadsheet audit tests for, 356–357, 358t
spreadsheet management with, 352–353, 
355–356
standards for, 19
tests of, 19
training on, 13
types of, 24–25
See also Application controls; Compensatory 
controls; Corrective controls; Detective controls; 
General controls; IT controls; IT general 
controls (ITGCs); Preventive controls
Corrective controls
application controls and general controls 
coexisting with, 25
authentication of users in access control  
with, 26t
business or disaster recovery plan as, 25, 28t
combination use of, 25
definition of, 24–25
hacking and network break-ins and, 27t
internal controls with, 265t
IT governance using, 25, 30
risk assessment using, 310
understanding of day-to-day operations needed 
for, 29
Vasa illustration of, 35
Corruption schemes, 262
COSO. See Committee of Sponsoring Organizations
COSO process
as best practice, 22, 31
components of, 254–255
integrated view of IT environment and, 22, 22f
overview of, 30–34, 32f
Vasa illustration of, 33–35
weak IT controls and, 254
Costing methods, in inventory cycle, 135, 137, 
138, 139, 139t, 144f, 146t, 147, 149–150, 
151f–153f 
Cost of goods manufactured (COGM), 139t, 
150, 155
Cost of goods sold (COGS), 150, 155
Costs, valuation assertion on, 3–4
Credit approval
accounts receivable and, 51, 51f, 52
credit sales to customers with poor credit, 87–89, 
87f–89f
revenue cycle risk exposure and, 81
Credit cards
application controls for, 11, 19, 85
data breaches involving, 10
employee, 182, 183f
QuickBooks functions for, 53, 53f, 103, 103f, 
116, 182, 183f
revenue cycle and, 85, 103, 103f
segregation of duties for, 11
Credit memos, 11, 19, 86t, 92, 95
Credit terms, and customer master file errors, 273
Cross-footing, 3, 368, 377, 382, 392t
Cross-functional roles, 62
Cross-training, 308
Crystal Reports, 294t
Custody roles, 49
Customer complaints, 11
Customer receipts, 11, 107
Customization
of application controls, 11
of reports, 353, 371, 372, 374, 377
Custom roles, 50, 56, 115
Cutoff assertion, 21, 22f
Cutoffs
auditor’s review of, 4
controls for, 67, 71, 96
financial close cycle with, 271t
financial reporting of, 252, 253t
inventory cycle and, 154
Data access controls
application controls for, 13
documentation of, 7
security and, 7
Data availability, 5, 5f, 7, 7t, 8, 24, 30, 37, 39, 327
Database management and controls, 21, 24, 46, 72, 
353, 356
Data breaches, 10, 44, 58, 322
Data centers, 23, 294t, 392t
Data collection
application control for, 373
financial reporting and, 273
forensic analytics on, 75
general ledger and, 69–70
internal controls for, 314
Data entry. See Data input
Data export function
from reports to Excel, 379, 380f
internal controls for, 312
Data import function
chart of accounts into QuickBooks, 62
internal controls on, 312

Index  ◾        415
in inventory cycle, 154–155
in report writers, 373t, 382, 383
risk exposure in spreadsheets with, 338t, 364
Data input (data entry)
application control for, 373
field entries with predefined values in, 85, 111, 
145, 163
field validation in, 85, 111, 143, 163
financial closing process and, 67
hard controls on, 8
internal controls for, 327, 328
spreadsheet management and controls for, 340, 
358t, 359, 362, 364, 367, 368
Data output, internal controls for, 328–329
Data preparation
application control for, 373
financial reporting and, 273
forensic analytics on, 75
general ledger and, 68–69
internal controls for, 327, 328
Data privacy
rights and obligations assertion on, 3
spreadsheet risk exposure and, 344–345
Data processing
application controls for, 13, 23
change management and, 390t
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of, 
5–8, 5f, 7t
error handling and, 328
general ledger and, 77
impact of weak IT controls on, 256, 256t
integrity of, 256t, 257
internal controls for, 256–257, 327, 328
recovery from interruptions in, 72
testing for gaps in, 77
Data repository, in spreadsheet management, 355
Data sources, valuation assertion on, 4
Data storage, redundant, 28t
Data validation
application controls for, 11, 70, 71, 85, 85t, 111t, 
145t, 164t
completeness and accuracy of processing in, 73
costing information and, 149
entered information and, 85, 111, 143, 149, 
163, 327, 328, 362, 364
financial statements and, 395t
follow-up and remediation of errors in, 69–70
management’s role in, 372
payroll process with, 163, 164t, 212, 392t
periodic reviews and confirmation of, 71
reports on failures of, 71, 72, 149
risk exposure and, 39, 356
segregation of duties for, 71
time and attendance and, 206, 212
See also Validation process
Data warehouses, 373t
Deductions
expenses as, 62–65
in payroll cycle, 161f, 167, 172, 176, 178, 185, 
193, 212, 214, 218, 232–237, 244
Deficiencies in IT audits
company’s reaction to, 385, 398
compensatory controls in, 388, 397t, 398
framework for, 385–388, 387t
illustrative case studies of material weaknesses in, 
388, 393t–396t
illustrative examples mapped to error typology in, 
388, 389t–392t
management and, 385
segregation-of-duties issues in, 388, 397–398
types of, 388
Deletions
of accounts from chart of accounts, 65
application controls for, 11
audit trail report on, 20
IT audit deficiencies on, 389t
reports on, 11
of vendors, 112
Delivery and Support section. See Computer 
Operations and Access to Programs and Data 
section of COBIT 4.1
Delivery of goods, 81, 82, 85, 111, 112, 273
Deloitte, 355, 360, 361, 363–364, 366, 367
Deposits, and segregation of duties, 10
Descriptive statistics, 74–75
Design principles, 347
Desktop tools. See Report writers; Spreadsheets and 
desktop tools
Detective controls
application controls and general controls 
coexisting with, 25
application-level security with, 37
authentication of users in access control with, 26t
combination use of, 25
definition of, 24
expenditure cycle and, 111, 122, 133
financial closing process with, 67
financial reporting with, 268
hacking and network break-ins and, 27t
internal controls with, 265f, 268
inventory control and, 81, 143, 150, 154–155, 
157
IT governance using, 25, 30
payroll cycle and, 162, 163
preventive control failure and need for, 24
revenue cycle and, 84
risk assessment using, 310
security and, 7
segregation of duties and, 49, 52, 57, 388
spreadsheet management with, 368
understanding of day-to-day operations needed 
for, 29
Digital (electronic) signatures, 162, 228
Digimarc Co., 258t
Direct deposit of paychecks, 160, 161f, 162, 176, 
178, 185, 207

416	
◾  Index
Direct labor (DL) costs, 136, 138, 139, 150, 155
Directors. See Board of directors
Disaster recovery planning (DRP), 24, 28t, 391t
Disbursements
application controls for, 275–276, 277
cash, 11, 107, 108, 109f, 110, 110t, 264t
expenditure cycle with, 107, 108, 109f, 110, 
110t
general ledger and, 60f, 62
inventory cycle with, 137
payroll cycle with, 160, 161f, 165t, 228–232, 
237–238, 277
purchasing cycle and, 275–276
Disclosure
financial statements with, 66
reports used for, 371
Sarbanes-Oxley on, 6
Discounts
expenditure cycle and, 128–130, 130f, 131f
financial reporting of, 274
incorrect prices for, 92
revenue cycle with, 89, 92
unauthorized charges in revenue cycle from, 89
Discrepancy report, 11
Documentation
application controls for, 13
of data access protocols, 7
financial statement assertions with, 67
of internal controls, 13, 17
inventory cycle with, 138
IT audit and, 35
review of, in audit procedures, 19
spreadsheet management with, 368
Documents
access rights and use of, 48, 49
See also Source documents
Duplicate payments, 77, 130
Duplicate purchase orders, 122–128, 128f
Duplicate sales invoice numbers, 92, 93f–95f
Dynamics. See Microsoft Dynamics
Eastman Kodak, 342t
Edit checks, 85t, 111t, 145t, 147, 164t, 167, 327
Electronic (digital) signatures, 162, 228
Emergency power supply (EPS), 28t
Employee data. See Human resources (HR)
Enablers in COBIT 5.0, 284–285, 286f
Encryption, 6, 11, 24, 27t, 294t, 309, 345
Endeavor Acquisition Corp., 394t–395t
End-user databases (EUD), 337
End-user testing, for integrity of data, 8
Enron, 6, 14
Enterprise resource planning (ERP) systems, 23, 24, 
254, 393t, 395t
Enterprise Risk Management—Integrated Framework 
(ERM), COSO, 6, 14, 15
Entities, controls for, 280
Error flags, as soft control, 8
Error handling
application control for, 373
financial closing process and, 68–69, 73
forensic analytics and, 75
internal controls for, 328
Errors
correction procedures for, 19
financial assertions and, 272, 272f
risk-based audit approach to, 18
spreadsheets with, 339–342, 342t–343t
Estimates, completeness assertion on, 3
Ethical business practices, 9, 266, 307
Excel. See Microsoft Excel
Exception reports
application controls for, 11, 13
closing dates on, 11
internal controls for, 307
management and, 307
Existence (occurrence) assertion, 2–3, 21, 22f, 86t, 
89, 113t, 146t, 165t, 270, 271t, 272f
Expenditure cycle, 107–133
application controls in, 111–112, 111t
cash disbursements in, 109f
check numbers not generated or not accurate in, 
131, 132f
discounts differ from authorized amounts in, 
128–130, 130f, 131ff
duplicate or overpayment for goods or services 
in, 130
duplicate purchase orders in, 122–128, 128f
generic cycle in, 108f
goods received but not quantity ordered or 
authorized in, 132
inaccurate processing of purchase credits for 
returns in, 131, 131f
invoices not matching purchase orders or 
receiving reports in, 132–133, 133f
Microsoft Dynamics functions in, 115,  
118–122, 118f–120f, 123f–127f, 132–133, 
133f
processes in, 107
purchase order distribution in, 110, 110t
purchase orders altered after being issued and, 
122, 126f, 127f
purchase orders not approved in, 117–118, 120f, 
123f, 124f, 125f
QuickBooks functions in, 114–115, 114f, 116, 
116f, 117f, 128, 128f, 120, 130f–132f, 131, 
132
receiving report in, 110, 110t
risk exposures in, 107–110, 113t
subprocesses in, 108
vendor master file not restricted in, 112–114, 
114f
system roles not segregated for incompatible 
duties in, 115–117, 115f–119f
Expense reimbursements
fraud using, 263t

Index  ◾        417
payroll cycle and, 218, 234
travel, 61t, 65, 218, 234, 263t
Exported data
from reports to Excel, 379, 380f
internal controls for, 312
External audits, 1
board members and, 269
electronic records supporting, 75, 379
financial close calendar for, 70
IT requirements on internal controls and, 12, 30
requirements for, 10, 267, 291
response of organization to, 330, 331, 333
risk management and, 20
Failures in IT audits. See Deficiencies in IT audits
Fair value estimates, 3
Federal National Mortgage Association, 258t
Federal taxes
rates for, 159, 193
See also Tax headings
FICA Social Security taxes, 61t, 172, 377
Fidelity Investments, 341
Fields
non-input-related, 361
predefined values in, 85, 111, 145, 163
Field validation, 85, 111, 143, 163
File cabinets, 11
Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), 252, 
255, 256, 269, 270
Financial assertions. See Assertions
Financial auditing
as category of auditing, 1
decision to use IT audit as part of, 293–295
financial statement fraud schemes and, 262
IT Audit deficiencies’ potential impact on, 388, 
389t–393t
IT auditing integrated with, 2, 289–335
IT environment complexity and, 1
management’s work with, 333
responsibilities of, 22–24
risk exposures and, 82, 160
risks of, 270–272
Financial closing process
calendar used in, 67, 70
control objectives and financial assertions of, 
270–272, 271t
financial statement assertions and, 66
general ledger and subsidiary ledgers in, 71, 78, 
79
internal controls surrounding, 67
reports for, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73
Financial Executives International, 6
Financial information systems, 322, 395t
Financial reporting
application controls for, 11
audit scope and, 289
characteristics of, 269, 270
company-level controls and, 279
competencies in, 266, 267
COSO’s Internal Control over Financial Reporting on 
risks of, 260–261
fraud in, 6, 12, 14, 15, 338t, 344
general ledger and, 59, 66, 79
historical perspective on audits of, 251–257
impact of weak IT controls on, 257, 289
internal controls over, 12, 15, 16–18, 17f, 
262–265, 394t
IT audit deficiencies in, 394t, 395t, 396t
IT controls for, 279
management’s role in, 12, 15
objectives of, 262, 269
PCAOB warnings on audits of internal controls 
in, 250
resource limitations and, 15
SEC on, 344
Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS No. 122) 
on risks of, 260, 261
Financial statements
assertions and, 66, 67, 82, 85–87, 86t, 108, 112, 
113t, 137, 145, 146t, 160, 164, 165t, 284, 
289
auditing standards on, 30–33
auditor’s review of accounting procedures 
involving, 4
audits in the 1980s and 1990s on, 252
characteristics of, 270
chart of accounts account numbering and, 62
controls and fair presentation of, 21
COSO process on, 30–33, 32f
disaster recovery plans and, 391t, 392t
existence assertion on, 2
completeness assertion on, 3
fraud involving, 262
general ledger and, 59, 62, 66
internal controls for assessing, 16, 17
reports used for, 371
risks of misstatement in, 16
systematic examination of steps in, 292, 293t
tiebacks between ledgers and, 4
Finished goods (FG), 137–138, 142, 155, 276–277
Fire protection (suppression) systems, 28t, 392t
Firewalls
confidentiality of data and, 5
controls for, 309
data security and, 27t, 314, 345
file backups and, 11
properties of, 314
risk assessment of, 294t
Flowserve Corp., 258t
Footing, 85t, 111t, 145t, 164t, 368, 377, 382, 
392t
Footnote disclosure, 59, 337, 353, 371
Foreign operations, 66, 252, 256t, 260, 283t, 395t
Forensic analytics, 75
Form 941 (IRS), 244
Form 941 Schedule B (IRS), 244

418	
◾  Index
Formulas
audit deficiencies with, 396t
report writers and, 379, 382
risk exposure from, 338t, 340, 341, 342t, 373t
spreadsheet management and, 340, 348, 354, 
358t, 359, 361, 362, 363, 365, 367
401(k) deductions, in payroll cycle, 193, 214, 233, 
237, 244
Fraud
above-average vendor payments and, 76
access level beyond responsibility and, 78, 112, 
115, 164, 176, 182, 279, 391t
approaches to assessing risk for, 262
asset misappropriation in, 262, 263t–264t
cash receipt posting errors and, 82
categories of, 262
control environment and, 280, 398
corruption schemes in, 262
COSO recommendations on, 262, 263t
expenditure cycle and, 112, 115
financial reporting process and, 6, 12, 14, 15, 
338t, 344
financial statements and, 262
forensic analytics and, 75
fraudulent legal entity in purchasing cycle and, 76
general ledger cycle and, 76, 78
inventory cycle and, 136
management’s role in identifying, 67, 266, 280, 
398
nonstandard journal entries and, 77
payroll cycle and, 164, 165t, 176, 178, 182, 228, 
279
payroll master file and, 164, 176, 277–278
PCAOB on prevention of, 255, 279, 280
preventive controls for, 24
return, repair, or replacement authorizations and, 
136
revenue cycle and, 101
risk assessment for potential, 14, 15, 261–262, 
263t–264t, 263t
risk-based audit approach to, 18
Sarbanes-Oxley on, 251, 344
SEC on, 344
segregation of duties and, 48, 51, 52, 391t
SMEs’ vulnerability to, 10, 13, 20, 75, 249, 
261–262
spreadsheet management and, 338t, 340, 379
types of, 18–19
vendor master file access and, 112, 115
Fraud audits, 1
Free-on-board (FOB) terms, 3, 144f, 156
Freeware, 324
FRx, 378–379, 380–381, 382–383, 382f
Functionality
acceptance testing on, 312, 313
controls for ensuring, 85, 112, 145, 164
responsibility and accountability for, 30
FUTA, 172, 244. See also Unemployment insurance
Gap test, in data processing, 77
GDP. See Microsoft Dynamics
General Accountability Office (GAO), 13, 14, 15, 20
General controls
definitions of, 22–23
examples of, 25, 26t–28t
general ledger and, 31
integrated view of, 21, 22f, 23
ISACA focus on, 252
IT assessments of, 23–24
IT audit of, 35–36
IT general controls (ITGCs), 21–24, 295, 302f, 
387–388, 387f
IT governance and, 25–30
PCAOB focus on, 279–280
types of controls coexisting with, 25
understanding of day-to-day operations needed 
for, 29
See also Controls
General journal, 62
General ledger (GL), 59–79
access rights for, 78
activity by user account summary for, 78
analytical reviews of, 74–76
auditing standards on, 31
auditor’s review of accounting procedures with, 
4, 5
audit trail for, 79
chart of accounts example and, 60–62, 61f
chart of accounts structure and, 59, 62
as clearinghouse of financial information, 60–62, 
61f
COBIT 4.1 application controls for, 68–75
computer-assisted audit tools (CAATs) and, 75
descriptive statistics for, 74–75
duplicate payment testing for, 77
financial reporting and, 59, 66, 79
inventory subledger not in agreement with, 156
IT audit deficiencies in, 389t, 393t
IT controls at transaction level in, 66–68
journal entry gap test in, 77
overview description of, 59
paycheck processing and, 228
payments made after period-end in, 77
QuickBooks functions for, 62–65, 63f, 64f
reports on, 371
report writers linked to, 382, 383
risks specific to, 65–66
standard and nonstandard journal entries after 
year-end in, 77
subaccounts in, 62–65
subsidiary ledger accounts and, 60, 62, 74–75, 
78, 79, 271t
supply chain management and, 135
tiebacks between financial statements and, 4
valuation assertion on, 4
vendor evaluation and, 76
weekend journal entries in, 78

Index  ◾        419
Generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP), 9, 
77, 255, 269, 343t
GL. See General ledger
Global Immune Technologies, 342t
Google Apps for Business, 10
Great Plains Dynamics. See Microsoft Dynamics
Guide to the Assessment of IT Risk (GAIT), 5
Hacking attacks, 10, 25, 27t, 359
Hard controls, 8
Harrer, Julie, 388, 398
Health insurance, 193, 237
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), 344
Hewitt, Conrad, 16
Hidden accounts, in QuickBooks, 65
Historical files and data
disabling access rights for, 57
general ledger and chart of accounts and, 59, 65
performance and capacity management and, 321
spreadsheet management and, 358t, 366
Historical reports, 73
Human resources (HR)
access rights for changes to, 57, 164, 164t, 167, 
176, 232
application controls for, 11, 164t, 273, 277–278, 
281t
control environment and practices in, 266, 267
COSO internal controls for, 265f, 266, 267
general controls for, 23
IT functions and, 23, 24, 29, 31
limited resources in, 10
management of, 307–308
Microsoft Dynamics functions for, 193
payroll cycle and, 159, 160, 161f, 162–163, 
162f, 164, 164t, 167, 170, 172, 176, 193, 
218, 232
risk assessment for, 294t, 297t
Hybertsson, Henrik, 33–34
IDEA, 75
Identity theft, 176, 345
Imported data
chart of accounts into QuickBooks, 62
internal controls on, 312
in inventory cycle, 154–155
in report writers, 373t, 382, 383
risk exposure in spreadsheets with, 338t, 364
Incident Investigation and Remediation Processes 
Management, 262
Income statement
aggregated account data on, 377–378
chart of accounts account numbering and, 62
COBIT 4.1 control objectives and, 271t, 286
general ledger output to, 79
income and expenses for the reported period on, 269
objective of, 269
report writer formulas and, 382
Incorrect sales posting, 92, 97f
Information and communication
asset misappropriation and, 263t–264t
Computer Operations category and, 295, 
299t–300t
COSO framework for, 254, 262, 265, 265f
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t, 302t
internal controls and, 262, 265f
IT internal control weaknesses and, 257t, 258t, 
266
Monitor and Evaluation category and, 295, 301t
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for, 
280–282, 281t–282t
Plan and Organize category and, 295, 296t–297t
Program Development and Change category and, 
295, 298t
Sarbanes-Oxley weakness and, 283t
Information Systems Audit and Control Association 
(ISACA), 68
background to founding of, 251–252
COBIT 4.1 audit guidelines of, 312, 318, 330
COBIT 5.0 and, 282
general controls definition of, 13
guidelines for IT auditing from, 249, 251, 303
inherent risk considerations from, 290, 291t
IT Assurance Framework (ITAF) of, 23
Information technology auditing. See IT auditing
Information technology auditors. See IT auditors
Information technology environment. See IT 
environment
Input control
revenue cycle with, 92, 95f
spreadsheet management and, 340, 358t, 359, 
362, 364, 367, 368
Institute of Internal Auditors, 6
Institute of Management Accountants, 6
Insurance contracts, 309, 310
Insurance deductions, in payroll cycle
health, 193, 237
unemployment, 61t, 193, 206, 233, 234–235, 
237, 377
Worker’s Compensation, 172, 233, 235, 244
Integra Life-Sciences Holding Corporation, 258t
Integrity
access rights and, 389t
application controls for, 7t, 11, 23, 72, 89, 92, 
273, 295, 314, 315, 372
application-level security and, 37, 58
change management and, 7t, 8, 362, 363
completeness assertion on, 3, 4, 87
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data in, 5–8, 5f, 7t
data transfer and, 379
employee responsibilities for, 325
ethical business practices and, 9, 266, 307
financial closing process and, 68, 72, 74
of financial reporting, 2, 16, 17, 295, 395t

420	
◾  Index
Integrity (continued )
of information architecture, 296t, 303
internal controls and, 306, 307
migration of files and, 339
outside auditor’s focus on, 30
report writers and, 373t, 376, 377, 383
responsibility and accountability for, 30
restorability of, 8, 28t, 343t, 366
risk exposure and, 39, 65, 338t
Sarbanes-Oxley implementation and, 256t, 257
security practices for, 8, 325
spreadsheet management and, 4, 338t, 339, 356, 
359, 360–361, 362, 363, 364, 368, 369
testing for, 8, 307, 328, 362
of third-party service, 299t, 319, 356
of transaction processing, 65, 68, 74, 273
Interfaces, 23, 59, 71, 85t, 111t, 136, 145t, 163, 
164t, 206, 290, 311, 364, 373t, 383
Internal audits, 1
electronic records supporting, 75
fraud uncovered through, 10, 262
internal controls for, 279, 291, 301t, 330, 331, 
333–334
organization structure for functions of, 267
review of reports from, 268, 269
risk assessment and, 293
SMEs lacking, 9, 10, 15, 20, 268
Internal Control—Integrated Framework (COSO), 6, 
20, 249, 287
Internal Control over Financial Reporting: Guidance 
for Smaller Public Companies (COSO), 249, 251, 
254, 256, 260, 293f, 302f
Internal controls
components of, 262–267, 265f
COSO’s focus on, 6, 254, 287
definition of, 13–14
five principles of, 6
impact of ineffective, 256, 256t–257t
maturity model (MM) of, 290–291, 292t
payroll cycle with, 176, 218
PCAOB warnings on audits of, 250
Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 weaknesses classified 
by COSO and CORBIT components for, 254, 
282, 283t
Internal Control Strategies: A Mid- to Small Business 
Guide (Harrer), 388, 398
Internal Revenue Service (IRS), 62, 65, 244
International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), 
256
Intrusion detection systems, 27t
Intuit QuickBooks. See QuickBooks
Inventory control, 60f, 108f, 109f, 110t, 148f, 
149f, 393t
Inventory cycle, 135–157
accounting issues from manufacturing iterations 
and, 142–143
application controls in, 11, 143–145, 145t, 
276–277
chart of accounts and, 62
costs flow inaccurate in, 155–156
count adjustments in, 154–155
inappropriate system access to inventory master 
files and item setups in, 145–149, 148f, 149f
inconsistent setup or usage of costing methods in, 
149–150, 151f–153f
inventory adjustments posting in, 155
inventory and costs of sales not updated in, 154
inventory not properly identified in, 156–157
inventory subledger not in agreement with 
general ledger in, 156
IT audit deficiencies in, 393t
key accounting processes in, 138, 139t
management’s overseeing of, 13
Microsoft Dynamics functions in, 147, 148f, 150, 
151f–153f, 154–155
perpetual inventory records incorrect in, 154
physical flow of goods in, 138, 139t
processes included in, 135
purchase orders and, 110t
QuickBooks functions in, 147–149, 149f, 150, 
154, 155–156
reports for, 374
rights and obligations assertion on, 3
risk exposures in, 136–137, 141f, 146t
segregation of duties and, 11
subprocesses of, 137–138
supply chain management software and,  
135–136
typical cycle in, 138–142, 140f, 141f
variances incorrectly calculated, allocated, or 
recorded in, 150
WIP by stage of a completion in, 143, 144f
Invoices
customer master file errors and, 274
erroneous, in revenue cycle, 95, 98f, 99f
expenditure cycle risk exposure and, 107
purchase orders mismatch with, 132–133, 133f
revenue cycle risk exposure and, 81
IRS, 62, 65, 244
IT Assurance Framework (ITAF), 23
IT auditing
as category of auditing, 1
COBIT framework to supplement, 280
COBIT 5.0’s end-to-end approach using a holistic 
framework for, 282–284
company’s reaction to, 385, 398
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data in, 5–8, 5f, 7t
COSO process in, 30–33, 32f
decision to use with financial auditing, 293–295
deficiencies in, 385–398
financial auditing integrated with, 2, 289–335
importance of, 1–2
IT risk assessment in, 280
management assertions and, 2
segregation of duties issues in, 388, 397–398

Index  ◾        421
systematic examination of steps in scoping, 292, 
293t
IT auditors
access rights and logon records and, 4, 7,  
164–165
audit trail reports and, 383
change management and, 7, 85, 383
completeness assertion and, 3
computer configuration settings and, 4–5
COSO process and, 30–33, 32f
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO 
and, 295
expenditure cycle controls and, 112, 130, 145
impact of IT requirements on control 
environment and, 12
IT controls and, 272, 302
IT environment and, 12, 21
likelihood that problems or defects in design or 
operation could lead to misstatements and, 2
operations and, 8
overlay of COSO to COBIT and, 280
payroll cycle controls and, 163, 164–165, 207, 
232, 248
report writers and, 382, 383
roles and tasks and, 50, 51, 52, 58
Sarbanes-Oxley on responsibilities of, 6, 251
security and, 8, 354
segregation of duties and, 52
spreadsheet design evaluation and, 4, 339, 345, 
347, 348, 354, 368
variance reports and, 85, 112, 145, 164
IT Control Objectives for Sarbanes-Oxley (ITGI), 280
IT controls
company-level, 279
COSO framework for, 287
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for 
evaluating, 295, 296t–301t, 302t
failures of, 295
financial auditors and, 1
framework for evaluating, 295, 302f
impact of material weaknesses (MWs) in, 256, 
256t–257t, 257, 258t, 289
imperatives for effective IT organization with, 
334–335
ISACA focus on, 252
IT audit deficiencies and, 388, 397t
maturity model (MM) of, 290–281, 292t, 334
PCAOB guidance on, 279–280
reports and, 379
Sarbanes-Oxley Section 404 weaknesses classified 
by COSO and CORBIT components for, 254, 
282, 283t
spreadsheet management with, 367, 368, 369
See also IT general controls (ITGCs)
IT environment
control environment and strength of, 14
impact of weak IT controls on, 256, 256t–257t, 
257
importance of general controls for, 10, 21
integrated view of general controls and,  
21, 22f
IT audit deficiencies on, 396t
need for understanding of day-to-day operations 
of, 29
risks in financial reporting linked to, 260, 261
upgrades and transitions in, 65–66
IT general controls (ITGCs), 21–24, 295, 302f, 
387–388, 387f. See also Controls; IT 
controls
IT governance
COBIT framework for, 6, 280, 281t, 282, 284f
COBIT 5.0 distinction between management and, 
284–285
COBIT 5.0 enablers to support, 282–284, 285f
definitions of, 25, 29
general controls and, 25–30
internal control and, 265f
ISACA focus on, 252
IT audit and, 296t, 306
IT auditor and, 21
IT risk and, 290
research on, 252
SMEs and, 29
IT Governance Institute, 290
IT security, impact of weak IT controls on, 256, 
256t–257t, 257
Job descriptions, 13, 267, 305, 306
Jobs, Steve, 8–9, 12
Journal entries
spreadsheet management and, 337, 369
valuation assertion on, 4
Key, encryption, 27t
Kickbacks, 76
Kronos, 163, 206
Landes, Charles, 31
Lapping scheme, 101, 178
Larceny, 10, 264t
Legal rights and obligations, and data integrity, 5
Licenses
for Microsoft Dynamics, 167
for servers, 7t, 8
Life-cycle planning, in spreadsheet design, 347
Local taxes
rates for, 159, 178, 193
summary report on, 244
See also Tax headings
Lockboxes, 82, 397
Locks
computer or screen access with, 8, 39, 44, 228
doors with, 11, 24, 25
server cabinets with, 19, 26t
spreadsheet cell or template protection with, 340, 
359, 360, 362, 366

422	
◾  Index
Logical security
application-level security and, 58
expenditure cycle and, 112
inventory master files and, 145, 147
IT audit deficiencies on, 394t, 395t
reports and, 372
spreadsheet management and, 341, 356, 358t, 
359–360
Logic review, in spreadsheet management, 358t, 
362
Login/logon histories, 7, 7t, 26t
Login/logon process
authorized access and, 26t
Microsoft Dynamics functions for, 40f, 44, 
45f, 46
QuickBooks functions for, 178, 181f
security and, 7, 7t
system administrator’s control of, 178, 181f
termination after failure in, 26t
tracking, 46
user failures in, 26t, 38, 39, 44, 390t
user profiles in, 26t
Login/logon records
authorized access and, 26t
auditor’s review of, 4
Logout attempts, tracking, 44, 46
Logs
authorized access, 26t
computer room access, 28t
security, 396t
Luther Sound Exploration Inc. (LSE), 60, 61t, 
62, 294t, 296t–301t, 303–317, 318–319, 
330–334
Maintenance 
of computer facility, 19
controls for, 23, 24, 298t, 311, 313, 314
data processing integrity and, 256t
development life cycle for, 364–365
employee tax data and, 193, 194f–196f
HR cycle with, 162f, 172
Microsoft Dynamics functions for, 152f, 169f, 
170, 173f, 174f, 194f–196f, 199f, 222f, 243f
payroll cycle with, 159, 160, 162f, 163, 165t, 
167, 169f, 170, 172, 173f, 174f, 176, 177f, 
182, 193, 194f–196f, 199f, 222f, 234–235, 
235f, 236, 243f
policies and procedures for, 314, 315, 325
purchasing cycle and, 275
QuickBooks functions for, 237f
reporting on, 322
risk assessment by, 261
risk exposures during, 159
subsystems for, 71
Sarbanes-Oxley implementation and, 292
testing of, 315
third-party (vendor) software and, 13, 313
user SLA for, 329
Management
access rights reviews by, 39, 56, 56f, 57f
audit deficiencies and, 385
audit trail reviews by, 397t
audit tests of spreadsheets and, 356–357, 359
COBIT framework for, 282–284, 284f
COBIT 5.0 distinction between governance and, 
284–285
COBIT 5.0 enablers to support, 282–284, 285f
communication between board and, 265f, 266
compensatory controls from IT audit deficiencies 
and, 398
control activities and, 268
control environment and, 12–13, 15
control reviews by, 261, 262
customer complaints and, 11
effective IT organization with, 335
ethical business practices and, 9, 266, 307
financial reporting and, 269, 344
financial statement presentation and, 270
grid for risk assessment with self-assessment by, 
293, 294t
internal controls and, 13, 67, 266, 267
list of vendors and, 11
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for,  
280
override by, 9, 12, 15, 17, 18, 77, 178, 266, 398
reports and, 371, 372
risk assessment and, 279
roles and tasks review by, 42
Sarbanes-Oxley implementation and, 291–304
segregation of duties and, 11, 49, 388, 397
spreadsheet management and, 344, 352–355, 
367
spreadsheet risk and audit tests by, 356, 359, 367
Management assertions. See Assertions
Management reporting, 59, 60, 60f, 256, 371
Manual controls
inventory cycle with, 144f, 147, 154, 157
IT control issues and, 258t
payroll cycle with, 228, 237
revenue cycle with, 85, 92
spreadsheet management with, 340, 342t, 352, 
369
Manufacturing
inventory cycle and, 136, 139, 142–143
work-in-process (WIP) management during, 137
Master files
customer, 274
data processing updates to, 328
expenditure cycle with, 108f, 112
HR, 162f
inventory, 95, 99f, 145–150
payroll, 159, 161f, 164–186, 165t, 277–278
reconciling totals in, 72
supplier, 276
vendors, 11, 85t, 108f, 111t, 112, 113t, 114, 
115, 116, 117, 256t, 320, 388

Index  ◾        423
Materiality of financial reports, 270
Material weakness, SEC clarification of, 16
Meals, reimbursements for, 65, 218, 234, 263t
Mechanical Technology, Inc., 393t
Maturity model (MM), for internal controls,  
290–291, 292t, 293, 334
Medicare deductions, in payroll cycle, 172, 206, 
232, 237
Medium-sized enterprises. See Small and medium-
sized enterprises
MGP Ingredients, 258t
Microsoft, spreadsheet guidelines from, 355
Microsoft Access, 75, 294t, 352
Microsoft Dynamics (earlier Great Plains Dynamics, 
GPD)
application-level security functions in, 40, 40f, 
41f, 42, 43f, 44–46, 45f, 52, 53f, 56, 56f, 57, 
79
control environment with, 10, 12, 16
controls in, 11
expenditure cycle functions in, 115, 117,  
118–122, 118f–120f, 123f–127f, 132–133, 
133f
inventory cycle functions in, 147, 148f, 150, 
151f–153f, 154–155
payroll cycle functions in, 166f, 167–178, 
168f–171f, 173f–175f, 177f, 179f, 180f, 
193, 194f–201f, 208f, 212–218, 215f–217f, 
219f–223f, 228, 229f, 230f, 235–244, 
238f–243f, 245f–247f
periodic assessment of, 12
reports in, 371, 372–379, 374f–379f
revenue cycle functions in, 87, 87f, 88f, 92, 95, 
97f, 103, 104f, 109f
Microsoft Excel
auditing tool in, 348, 349f–352f
control environment with, 10, 12, 16
controls in, 12
data exported from report writers to, 379, 380f
general ledger and, 75
hard and soft controls in, 8
passwords and data privacy in, 345, 346f
periodic assessment of, 12
See also Spreadsheets and desktop tools
Microsoft FRx, 378–379, 380–381, 382–383, 382f
Misappropriation, in fraud, 262, 263t–264t
Monitoring
Computer Operations category and, 295, 
299t–300t
COSO framework for, 254, 265, 265f, 266, 280
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t
internal controls and, 262–267, 265f
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for, 
280–282, 281t–282t
Plan and Organize category and, 295, 296t–297t
Program Development and Change category and, 
295, 298t
Sarbanes-Oxley weakness and, 283t
segregation-of-duties issues and, 388
Monitor and Evaluate section of COBIT 4.1, 280
control objectives of, 330–334
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 301t
overlay of COSO framework against, 282t
Month-end journal entry checklist, 67, 71
Naming conventions
spreadsheet management with, 347, 358t, 363, 
367
security roles and, 38, 42, 115
user IDs and, 38, 45
National Commission on Fraudulent Financial 
Reporting, 6
Nature Sunshine Products Inc., 396t
Neenah Paper Inc., 343t
Neogenomics Inc., 343t
Networks
controls and, 21, 24, 251, 268
encryption for, 11, 27t
firewalls and, 27t, 324
hacking and break-ins and, 25, 27t
risk assessment of, 294t
spreadsheet management using, 359, 360, 365
testing of, 268, 360
virtual private (VPNs), 27t
Non-input-related fields, 361
Nonrepudiation of users, 26t
Obligations (rights and obligations) assertion, 3, 21, 
22f, 86t, 113t, 146t, 165t, 272f
Obsolete goods, 138, 144f, 156–157
Occurrence (existence) assertion, 2–3, 21, 22f, 
86t, 89, 113t, 146t, 165t, 270, 271t, 
272f
Offshoring, 23
Offsite storage
backups and data, 9, 28t, 185, 391t
inventory, 326
Online Resources Corporation, 258t, 342t
Operational controls, in spreadsheet management, 
356, 358t, 365–366
Operations
company-level controls and, 279
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data and, 5, 7, 7t, 8
IT audit on, 2, 391t, 393t, 394t, 395t
monitoring controls and involvement in, 261
reports for, 372, 382
segregation-of-duties issues and, 397
Order entry, in revenue cycle, 81
Organizational structure, and control environment, 
266, 267
Output review
application control for, 373
financial closing process and, 68, 73

424	
◾  Index
Outsourcing, 23, 29, 159, 256t, 321, 397
Overhead (OH) costs, 136, 139, 139t, 150, 155
Overpayment for goods or services, 130
Override functions
controls for, 72, 87, 89, 147, 178, 398
customer’s credit limit and, 87
inventory and, 144f
invoicing and, 82
journal entries and, 77
management and, 9, 12, 15, 17, 18, 77, 178, 
266, 398
order entry and, 82
password for, 87, 185
personnel roles and, 51, 69, 147
procedures for, 69, 70
programs disallowing, 327
report on, 147
risk assessment of, 12, 262
security function and, 8
spreadsheet cell formulas and, 359, 362
Overtime pay, 163, 172, 178, 207, 234, 236, 264t, 
368
Panko, 341, 355
Passwords
activity report on, 78
application-level security and setup of, 11, 38–47, 
45f–48f
audit deficiencies with, 390t, 394t
authorized access using, 26t
challenge questions with, 47, 47f
change intervals for, 38, 40, 44
change process for users with, 47, 48f
characters used in, 26t, 38, 44, 78
for closing dates, 11, 228
configuration of, 38–39, 44–47, 45f, 46f, 47f, 
48f, 359
data privacy and, 345, 346f
failed login attempts and, 44
generic, 78
IT audit deficiencies in, 390t, 394t
length of, 26t, 38, 44
lost or forgotten, 8
new personnel and, 65
override function with, 87, 185
payment card processing and, 345
reports with, 373
reuse of, 44
risk exposure and, 345, 346f
security and, 7, 7t, 8
sensitive data and, 44, 345, 346f
spreadsheet management with, 338, 340, 345, 
346f, 354, 355, 356, 358t, 359, 360–361, 
362
system administrators and, 39, 40, 41f, 44, 49, 
64f, 178
Patriot Scientific, 394t
Paycheck generation. See Payroll cycle
Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI 
DSS), 345
Payment card processing, and privacy, 345
Payroll cycle, 159–248
application controls for, 11, 159, 160, 163–164, 
164t, 167, 170–172, 176, 178, 182, 185, 
186, 193, 207, 212, 214, 218, 223, 228, 232, 
235, 236, 248
authorization of payroll disbursements in, 
228–232
benefits included in, 214, 232–237
control environment for, 159, 160, 176, 178, 
248
correct amount in, 207
data input during preparation in, 212–218
deductions included in, 185, 214, 218,  
232–237
direct deposit in, 160, 161f, 162, 176, 178, 185, 
207
employee database changes in, 218
ex-employees and, 232
expense reimbursements in, 218, 234, 263t
fraud involving, 264t
HR cycle with, 159, 160, 161f, 162–163, 162f, 
164, 164t, 167, 170, 172, 176, 193, 218, 232
internal controls in, 176, 218
IT audit deficiencies in, 392t
major outputs in, 163
manual checks in, 228
manual controls in, 162, 164, 228, 237
Microsoft Dynamics functions in, 166f, 167–178, 
168f–171f, 173f–175f, 177f, 179f, 180f, 
193, 194f–201f, 208f, 212–218, 215f–217f, 
219f–223f, 228, 229f, 230f, 235–244, 
238f–243f, 245f–247f
outsourcing of, 159
payroll disbursements authorization in,  
228–232
payroll master file changes in, 164–186
payroll preparation and processing in, 207–223
printing checks in, 182, 207, 218, 228
processes in, 159
QuickBooks functions in, 178–186, 181f–192f, 
193, 202f–206f, 206, 207, 209f–214f, 
218–223, 224f–227f, 228–232, 231f–237f
reports in, 160, 161f, 162, 164, 178, 182, 186, 
207, 214–218, 228, 237, 244
restricted access to, 164, 182, 218, 232
review of disbursed payroll, accruals, and 
adjustments in, 237–244
risk exposures in, 159–160, 162
subprocesses in, 160–162, 165t
segregation of duties in, 11, 176
tax records in, 160, 186–206
third-party processing of, 160, 162, 163, 206, 
207, 248
time and attendance in, 206–207
voiding paychecks in, 218

Index  ◾        425
Payroll fraud, 10, 264t
PCAOB. See Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board
Penetration testing, 7, 27t, 268, 324
Pension plans, 182, 342t
Period-end
financial reporting process and, 279, 343t
payments made after, 77
payroll cycle reports and, 237, 244
Permissions
chart of accounts risk and, 65
confidentiality of data and, 5, 7, 7t
journal entry user accounts and, 78
payroll master file and, 167
report writers and, 383
security and, 7, 7t
Perpetual inventory records, 154
Physical environment
disaster recovery planning (DRP) for, 24, 28t, 
391t
preventive controls for security of, 25, 28t
Physical security
check stock and signature stamps and, 228
door locks for, 11, 24, 25
IT audit of, 392t, 394t
preventive controls for, 25, 28t
server cabinet locks for, 19, 26t
Plan and Organize section of COBIT 4.1, 280
control objectives of, 303–311
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–297t
overlay of COSO framework against, 281t–282t
Policies and procedures 
IT audit deficiencies on, 392t, 395t
IT risk and, 290
for maintenance, 314, 315, 325
for printer access, 372
for spreadsheet management, 352
Porta Systems CP, 393t
Power supplies, 28t
Power 3 Medical Products Inc., 395t
Preferences
audit trail, 374
discounts, 130
employee direct deposit, 176
inventory, 147
payroll taxes and benefits, 233–234
user, 11, 44
Preventive controls
application controls and general controls 
coexisting with, 25
application controls as, 84, 85, 111
application-level security with, 37
authentication of users in access control with, 
26t
combination use of, 25
definition of, 24
expenditure cycle and, 128
financial closing process with, 67
financial reporting with, 268
hacking and network break-ins and, 27t
internal controls with, 265t
inventory cycle and, 143, 150
IT governance using, 25, 30
payroll cycle and, 163, 182
physical environment and business continuity 
using, 28t
resource limitations and, 49
risk assessment using, 310
risk exposure and, 39, 84
understanding of day-to-day operations needed 
for, 29
Vasa illustration of, 33
Preventive maintenance, 314–315
Prices
incorrect, in revenue cycle, 92
revenue cycle risk exposure and, 82
PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC), 341, 355, 360, 
361, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368
Printing
access rights needed for, 11, 118, 122, 182
of billing notices, 110
of checks, 116, 182, 207, 218, 228, 232
expenditure cycle and, 110, 116, 117, 118, 122, 
132
of forms, 236
inventory cycle and, 150, 157
payroll cycle and, 182, 207, 218, 228, 232,  
236
of purchase orders, 117, 118, 122, 132
of reports, 150, 157, 218, 372–373
Privacy
rights and obligations assertion on, 3
spreadsheet risk exposure and, 344–345
Processing
application controls for, 2, 17, 72, 73, 74, 89, 92, 
111, 273, 274
audit procedures for, 19
backups for, 28t
company-level controls and, 279, 279, 300t
data and. See Data processing
expenditure cycle and, 111, 131
general ledger with, 60, 68, 70, 72, 73, 74, 78
internal controls for, 15, 309, 313, 325, 326, 
329
inventory cycle and, 136, 137, 143, 145, 150
operations management and, 329
payroll cycle with, 160, 161f, 162, 163, 165t, 
176, 193, 206, 228, 248
QuickBooks controls over, 18
reprocessing after errors in, 328
revenue cycle with, 81, 85, 89
risk considerations concerning, 291t
segregation of duties in, 51, 52
standards for, 19
third-party service for, 248, 299t, 319

426	
◾  Index
Profit sharing plans, 233
Program Development and Change (Acquire and 
Implement) section of COBIT 4.1, 280
control objectives of, 311–317
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 298t
overlay of COSO framework against, 281t
Progammers and programming
IT control weaknesses and, 258t, 391t
segregation and, 7
spreadsheet design and, 347
Project management, 12, 29, 290
Promotions
HR cycle and, 162f, 176, 308
pricing and, 50, 51f, 82, 86t
Protiviti, 355
Public Company Accounting Oversight Board 
(PCAOB)
Auditing Standard (AS) No. 2 of, 279, 280
Auditing Standard (AS) No. 5 of, 250, 251, 255, 
279, 286
creation of, 6
cross-referencing to COBIT to COSO and, 295, 
296t–301t
integrating COSO, COBIT, and, 280–282
IT auditing guidelines from, 249, 280
IT control guidelines from, 279–280
warnings from, on insufficient evidence to 
support opinions, 250–251
Publicly traded companies, 10, 12, 17, 35
Purchase credits for returns, 131, 131f
Purchase orders (POs)
altering of, 122, 126f, 127f
controls for, 18, 145t, 275
distribution of, 110, 110t
duplicate, 122–128, 128f
expenditure cycle with, 107, 109f
inventory and, 139t, 276
invoices not matching, 132, 133f
manufacturing system flow of goods and, 139t
not approved in expenditures cycle, 117–122, 
124f, 123f, 124f, 125f
QuickBooks functions for, 147, 155–156
revenue cycle with, 81, 83f
sales orders with, 84t, 101
segregation of duties and, 11
Purchases
application controls for, 11
expenditure cycle risk exposure and, 107
segregation of duties by, 49
Purchasing subprocess
application controls for, 275–276
in expenditure cycle, 108, 108f
reports for, 374
QB. See QuickBooks
Questions, during logon process, 47, 47f
QReportBuilder, 380, 381f
QuickBooks (QB)
application-level security functions in, 41f, 42, 
42f, 46f, 47, 47f, 48f, 53, 54f–56f, 56, 57, 57f, 
78, 394t
audit trail function in, 20, 374–375, 375f
chart of accounts in, 62–65, 63f, 64f
control environment with, 10, 12, 16, 20
controls in, 11
credit cards in, 53, 103, 103f, 116, 182, 183f
expenditure cycle in, 114–115, 114f, 116, 116f, 
117f, 128, 128f, 130, 130f–132f, 131, 132
hidden accounts in, 65
inventory cycle functions in, 147–149, 149f, 
150, 154, 155–156
payroll cycle functions in, 178–186, 181f–192f, 
193, 202f–206f, 206, 207, 209f–214f, 218–
223, 224f–227f, 228–232, 231f–237f
periodic assessment of, 12
reports in, 371, 374–375, 375f, 377–378
revenue cycle functions in, 87–89, 88f–91f, 92, 
93f–95f, 95, 96f, 98f, 101–103, 101f–103f
risk-based audit approach to, 18
third-party report writer package for, 380, 381f
Raw materials (RM), in inventory cycle, 137,  
138–139, 142, 143, 150, 155, 157, 157, 276
Read-only user access, 26t, 48, 115, 359, 360, 366, 
379
Receipt of goods, in inventory cycle, 137
Receipts, customer, 11, 107
Receivables, rights and obligations assertion on, 3
Receiving
expenditure cycle and, 107, 108f
purchase orders and, 110t
Receiving reports, 110, 110t, 132–133 
Reconciliation
application controls for, 13, 383
audit trails and, 328
control procedures for, 19, 265f, 268, 271t, 273, 
283t, 340, 364, 369
financial closing process and, 68, 73
goods received but not authorized and, 132
inventory control and, 81, 83f, 154, 155
management’s role in, 13, 70, 307
payroll cycle and, 160, 161f, 162, 207, 218, 228, 
232f–235f
purchases and, 103, 108f, 110t
QuickBooks functions for, 11, 374
reports in, 11, 132, 160, 162, 228, 234f, 235f, 
307
sales orders and, 84t, 87, 92
spreadsheets for, 337, 343t, 362
standards for, 74
Recording roles, 49
Recovery. See Restoration
Redundancy
in control environment, 25
in information and communication, 268

Index  ◾        427
Redundant arrays of independent disks (RAIDs), 28t
Redundant data storage, 28t
Redundant servers, 28t
Reimbursements
fraud using, 263t
payroll cycle and, 218, 234
travel, 61t, 65, 218, 234, 263t
Released employees, 232, 237f. See also Termination 
of employees
Relevance, of financial reports, 270
Repairs, in inventory cycle, 136, 138, 139t, 140f, 
141f, 142, 145, 156–157
Reports, 371–383
access rights on, 39, 56, 57f
aggregating account data in, 377–378
analyzing and validating, 380–383
application controls with, 11
categories of, 371–372
customized, 371, 372, 374, 377–378
data exported to Excel from, 379, 380f
data imported into, 373t, 382, 383
financial closing process and, 67, 70, 71, 72, 73
forensic analytics with, 75
graphical presentation of data on, 374
maintaining inventory of, 372
management review of, 12
modification of, 372, 376–377
Microsoft Dynamics functions for, 372–375, 
374f–379f
payroll cycle with, 160, 161f, 162, 164, 178, 
182, 186, 207, 214–218, 228, 237, 244
prebuilt and preconfigured, 371, 373t
printing, 150, 157, 218, 372–373
QuickBooks functions for, 374–375, 375f, 377–378
risk-based auditing approach to detecting errors 
in, 18
risk exposure with, 372, 373t
third-party packages for, 378–380, 381f
ways of using, 371–372
Reports by content or title
accounts payable, 116
audit trail, 11, 20, 374–375, 375f
benefit summary, 178, 244
calculation (payroll), 218
closing date, 11
closing date exception, 11
compliance, 65
controls, 207
customer credit limit, 87, 89, 90f
cycle count, 138
discrepancy, 11
employee summary, 186
error, 70
exception, 11, 271t, 307
expense, 263t
failed validation, 72
Form 941, 244
Form 941 Schedule B, 244
FUTA summary, 244
goods received (expenditure cycle), 132
historical, 73
incident, 324, 326
inventory control, 109f
out-of-balance controls, 70, 72, 73
payroll, 160, 161f, 162, 164, 178, 182, 184f, 
186, 207, 228, 237, 244, 374
payroll check, 214–218, 217f
payroll liabilities, 228
payroll summary, 244
performance, 330
period-end payroll, 237, 244, 245f, 246f
position summary, 178
previous reconciliation, 11
purchase order approved audit, 124f
purchase orders, 132, 133
quarterly-end payroll, 247f
receiving (expenditure cycle), 132, 133
receiving (inventory cycle), 145
receiving (purchasing cycle), 108f, 109f, 110, 
110t, 111t
reconciliation, 11, 132, 160, 161f, 162, 228, 
234f, 235f, 307
security, 149, 323, 324
state and local tax summary, 244
tax, 65, 161f
transaction history, 56
user security, 56, 56f, 57f
variance, 73, 85, 112, 145, 164, 271t
voided/deleted transactions, 11
wage and hour, 207
worker’s compensation summary, 244
workflow analysis, 322
Report to the Committee on Small Business and 
Entrepreneurship (GAO), 14
Report writers, 337
completeness assertion on, 3
customized reports in, 371, 372, 374, 377–378
data exported to Excel in, 379, 380f
data imported in, 373t, 382, 383
IT audit deficiencies in, 392t
modifying reports in, 372, 376–377
risk exposure with, 372, 373t
third-party packages for, 378–380
Responsibility, and control environment, 266, 267, 279
Responsiveness
of IT function, 305
responsibility and accountability for, 30
Representational faithfulness of data, 5
Restoration
applications programs and, 314
of backup files and tapes, 8, 28t, 343t, 366
business continuity planning for, 28t
corrective control for, 25
disaster recovery plan, 28t
as IT audit deficiency, 394t
integrity of operations and, 7t, 8

428	
◾  Index
Restricted access. See Access controls
Restructuring of SMEs, 66, 260, 283t
Retirement
access rights removal after, 57
HR cycle and, 162f
Retirement plans
deductions for, 237
internal control deficiencies for, 342t
payroll cycle and, 182, 237
preventive controls for tampering with, 182
Returns, 50, 51, 51f, 82, 113t, 131, 132, 136, 138, 
142, 144f, 146t, 156–157, 274, 276
Revenue cycle, 81–105
application controls in, 85–87, 85t, 373–375
credit card payment in, 103, 103f
credit sales to customers with poor credit and, 
87–89, 87f–90f
customer master file errors and, 274
duplicate sales invoice numbers and, 92,  
93f–95f
erroneous invoices and, 95, 98f, 99f
incorrect posting of cash receipts in, 101–103, 
101f–104f
incorrect prices in system and, 92
incorrect sales posting and, 92, 97f
Microsoft Dynamics functions in, 87, 87f, 88f, 92, 
95, 97f, 103, 104f, 109f
no authorization for issue of credit memos in, 96
processes included in, 81
QuickBooks functions in, 87–89, 88f–91f, 92, 
93f–95f, 95, 96f, 98f, 101–103, 101f–103f
reports for, 374
revenue not recognized in proper period in, 
96–101
risk exposures in, 81–82, 83f, 84t, 86t
shipping errors and, 95, 273, 274
subprocesses in, 82, 83f
unauthorized changes to customer accounts and, 
89, 91f
Reverse logistics, 82, 138
Rights and obligations assertion, 3, 21, 22f, 86t, 
113t, 146t, 165t, 272f
Rights, and confidentiality of data, 5
Risk
auditing standards on, 31–33
COSO process on, 30–33
COSO’s Internal Control over Financial Reporting on, 
260–261
framework for evaluating controls and reporting 
deficiencies and, 16–18
fraud and, 261–262, 263t–264t
general ledger and chart of accounts and, 65–66
high exposure by SMEs to, 249, 250
override of controls and, 12, 16
research on SME exposure to, 13–15
self-assessment in, 293, 294t
SME responses to, 20
spreadsheet management and, 353–354
Statements on Auditing Standards (SAS No. 122) 
on risks of, 260, 261
Risk acceptance process, 316, 369, 397t
Risk assessment
approaches to, 262
company-level controls and, 279
Computer Operations category and, 295, 
299t–300t
control environment and, 14, 15
COSO framework for, 254, 280
cross-referencing COBIT to PCAOB and COSO for, 
295, 296t–301t
internal controls and, 262–267, 265f
IT audit risks integrated into, 280
IT staff competence and, 290
management and, 261, 279
Monitor and Evaluation category and, 295, 301t
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for, 
280–282, 281t–282t
PCAOB on, 255, 279–280
Plan and Organize category and, 295, 296t–297t
Program Development and Change category and, 
295, 298t
sample grid for, 293, 294t
spreadsheet management and, 353–354, 367
systematic examination of steps in, 292, 293t
triggers for reassessment in, 261
Risk-based audit approach
description of steps in, 18
QuickBooks example of application of, 18–20
Sarbanes-Oxley weakness and, 283t
transaction-based approach versus, 251, 252
Risk exposures
application-level security and, 39
expenditure cycle and, 107–110, 113t
foreign operations and, 66, 252, 256t, 260, 283t, 
395t
inventory cycle and, 136–137, 141f, 146t
payroll cycle and, 159–160
reports and report writers and, 372, 373t
revenue cycle and, 81–82, 83f, 84t, 86t, 92
spreadsheets and, 338–339, 338t
supply chain management and, 136
Risk management, and financial closing process, 
67, 68
Rock of Ages Corporation, 343t
Rockwell Medical Technologies, Inc., 393t
Roles
access rights related to, 38, 42
access rights removal due to change in, 38, 39, 
57, 394t, 397t
annual review of, 42
application-level security and, 38, 42, 43f
attempted access to unauthorized functions and, 
53, 56f
control environment and, 267
cross-functional, 52
custody roles in, 49

Index  ◾        429
custom, 50
expenditure cycle and, 111t
general authorization and specific authorization 
related to, 49–50
IT auditor’s check of, 50
management review of, 42, 56
potentially incompatible duties in, 50–52, 51f
recording roles in, 49
resource limitations affecting, 48, 49
risk assessment for fraud investigation and, 262
segregation of duties related to, 48, 49–52, 50f
selective access by modules related to, 53
soft control related to, 53, 54f
spreadsheet management and, 355, 359, 361
system administrator’s assignment of, 50, 53, 56
Rollback procedures
availability of data and, 7t, 8
data integrity and, 314
Root cause analysis, 69, 71, 72, 250
Sales
application controls for, 11
incorrect posting of, 92, 97f
inventory cycle not updated for, 154
purchase orders and, 110t
revenue cycle risk exposure and, 81
rights and obligations assertion on, 3
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (SOx)
audit committee and board oversight under, 
266–267
auditing sections of, 251
auditor and corporate responsibilities summarized 
in, 6
background to, 6
external reporting sections in, 251, 257
factors common to successful implementation of, 
291–292
integrated view of IT environment and business 
processes and, 21, 22f
internal controls and, 14
IT audit assessments and, 280
IT control issues and, 256t–257t, 257, 258t
IT sections in, 251
management reporting under, 267
maturity model (MM) of internal controls and, 
291, 292
overlay of COSO framework to COBIT 4.1 for,  
280
purpose of, 6
scope of audit and, 1
Section 404 compliance in, 15, 16, 17, 19, 251, 
257, 280, 283t, 344, 355
Section 404 Management’s Report on IT Internal 
Control from, 256t–257t, 258t
Section 404 weaknesses classified by COSO and 
CORBIT components, 254, 282, 283t
SME compliance with, 5, 13, 14, 15, 20
spreadsheet risk exposure and, 344
SAS (Statement on Auditing Standards)
No. 104, Amendment to Statement on Auditing 
Standards No. 1, Codification of Auditing, 1, 31
No. 105, Amendment to Statement on Auditing 
Standards No. 95, Generally Accepted Auditing 
Standards, 1, 31
No. 106, Audit Evidence, 1, 31
No. 107, Audit Risk and Materiality in 
Conducting an Audit, 1, 31
No. 108, Planning and Supervision, 1, 31
No. 109, Understanding the Entity and Its 
Environment, and Assessing the Risks of 
Material Misstatement, 1, 31
No. 110, Performing Audit Procedures in 
Response to Assessed Risks and Evaluating the 
Audit Evidence Obtained, 1, 31
No. 111, Amendment to Statement on Auditing 
Standards No. 39, Audit Sampling, 1, 31
No. 122, Statements on Auditing Standards: 
Clarification and Recodification, 260, 261
Savings plans, 176, 233, 237
Schedules 
auditor’s review of, 4
for backups, 23, 28t, 366, 301t
Scrap, 138, 139t, 140f, 141f, 142, 156–157
Section 404 compliance (Sarbanes-Oxley Act), 15, 
16, 17, 19, 251, 257, 280, 283t, 344, 355
Section 404 Management’s Report on IT Internal 
Control (Sarbanes-Oxley Act), 256t–257t, 258t
Secure sockets layer (SSL), 27t
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
internal control over financial report and 
spreadsheet risk exposure and, 344
Office of Economic Analysis of, 12
Security, application-level, 37–61
access reviews in, 39, 56, 56f, 57f
accumulation of access rights and, 39, 56–57
configuration and, 26t, 300t, 325–326
definition of, 37
expenditure cycle and, 111
financial reporting internal controls for, 322
general ledger and, 67
human error in, 39, 58
internal controls and, 283t
initial security setup in, 38, 40, 40f, 41f, 42f
inventory cycle and, 143
IT audit on, 323, 389t, 391t, 393t
IT control weaknesses and, 258t
key considerations in, 37–39
Microsoft Dynamics functions in, 40, 40f, 41f, 42, 
43f, 44–46, 45f, 52, 53f, 56, 57
password configuration in, 38–47, 45f–48f
payroll cycle and, 163
preventive controls for, 24, 26t, 27t
QuickBooks functions in, 41f, 42, 42f, 46f, 47, 
47f, 48f, 53, 54f–56f, 56, 56f, 57, 57f
removal of access rights in, 39, 57
reports and, 39, 372–373

430	
◾  Index
security role design in, 38, 42, 43f
segregation of duties in, 39, 48–53, 50f
spreadsheet management and, 343t, 357–358
third-party service and, 321
Security, data and files
breaches in, 322
confidentiality, integrity, and availability (CIA) of 
data and, 5, 7, 7t, 8
controls for, 7t, 8
expenditure cycle and, 111, 112, 115, 117
financial reporting internal controls for, 257, 
257t, 258t, 265f, 268, 280, 281t, 283t, 286f, 
287, 299t, 322–323
general ledger and, 59, 67, 73
human error and leaks of, 39, 58
inventory cycle and, 143, 145, 146
IT audit internal controls and, 304, 305, 306–
307, 308, 309, 312, 313, 314, 315, 317, 318, 
319, 322–324, 394t, 395t
IT environment and, 21, 23
payroll cycle and, 160, 163, 167, 167f, 168f, 
172, 176, 183f–184f, 185, 187f, 228
reports and, 329, 332, 371, 372–373, 377, 379, 
379f
responsibility and accountability for, 30, 323, 324
revenue cycle and, 82, 85, 96
spreadsheet management and, 338, 343t, 345, 
353, 354, 356, 357–359t, 358t, 360–361, 
362, 364, 366, 367, 369
third-party service and, 299t, 318, 319, 320, 
321
training on, 324, 325
Security, physical
check stock and signature stamps and, 228
data center and, 392t
door locks for, 11, 24, 25
IT audit of, 392t, 394t
IT equipment and networks and, 24, 25, 27t
offsite backups and, 11, 185, 391t
preventive controls for, 25, 28t
report storage and, 329
server cabinet locks for, 19, 26t
spreadsheet file storage and, 366
Security breaches, 44, 58, 322
Security logs, 396t
Security plan, 322
Security policies, 258t, 305, 309, 324, 325, 373, 
394t
Security procedures and techniques, 307, 323–324
Security questions, during logon, 47, 47f
Security standards, 315, 323, 345
Security systems, 27t, 262, 353, 379
Security testing, 315, 359
Security tokens, 26t
Segregation of duties (SOD), 2
adequate staffing and, 10–11
application-level security and, 13, 39, 48–53, 
50f, 78
attempted access to unauthorized functions 
prevented by, 53, 56f
cash disbursements and, 11
confidentiality of data and, 5, 7, 7t
controls and, 10, 11, 388, 397–398
fraud and, 52
general authorization and specific authorization 
related to, 49–50
IT audits and issues in, 388, 397–398
IT control weaknesses and, 258t, 389t
potentially incompatible duties in, 50–52, 51f
resource limitations and, 15, 48, 49
restructuring of SMEs and, 66
roles and tasks in, 48, 49–52, 50f
selective access by modules related to, 53
soft control related to, 53, 54f
spreadsheet management with, 354, 359, 359, 
361
system roles not segregated for incompatible 
duties in revenue cycle, 115–117, 116f, 117f, 
118f, 119f
vendor file access and, 112
Sensitive data, 11, 19, 44, 72, 176, 182, 184f, 304, 
327, 329, 337, 338t, 344, 345, 346f, 359, 
369
Sensitive output, 73
Servers
auditing standards for, 31
capacity of, 7t, 8
data availability and reliability of, 5, 7t
IT audit deficiencies for, 394t
redundant, 28t
spreadsheet management using, 357f, 359, 360, 
367
Service-level agreements (SLAs), 23, 318–319, 320, 
329
Service Organization Control report 1 (SOC 1), 248, 
392t
Service set identifier (SSID), 27t
Shareholder needs, and COBIT 5.0, 284, 285f
Shareware, 324
Shipping 
bill arriving before goods in, 156
customer records and, 82, 273, 274–275
free-on-board (FOB) destination and, 156
inventory and, 136, 138, 144f, 146t
invoicing and, 82
multiple ship-to addresses in, 82
order entry data errors and, 274–275
revenue cycle and, 82, 83f, 95, 273, 274
Shipping notices, 84t
Sick time, in payroll cycle, 170, 178, 185
Signatures
approvals with, 122, 160
checks and, 11, 161f, 162, 397
digital, 228
electronic, 162
payroll cycle and, 160, 161t, 162

Index  ◾        431
purchase orders with, 122
segregation of duties for, 356
Signature stamps, 162, 228
Significant deficiency, SEC clarification of, 16
Skimming, 10, 263t, 391t
Small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs)
audit environment in, 257
chart of accounts reflecting nature and purpose 
of, 62
complexity of, 67, 255
control environment for, 10–13
evolution of a business and, 8–10
financial reporting objectives and, 269
fraud risk for, 10, 261–262, 263t–264t
higher risk exposures for, 249, 250
IT governance for, 29
need for systematic and repeatable support for 
COSO controls by, 20
research on risks associated with, 13–15, 20
resource limitations affecting, 15, 48, 49
restructuring of, 66, 260, 283t
Sarbanes-Oxley compliance and, 4
special challenges facing, 8–10
Small businesses
evolution of, 8–9
fraud and loss vulnerability of, 10
Smart cards, 26t
SMEs. See Small and medium-sized enterprises
Social Security numbers, 167, 176, 309, 345
Social Security taxes
employer matching contribution for, 232
payroll deductions for, 172, 206, 232, 237, 345
SOD. See Segregation of duties
Soft controls, 8
Software
controls within, 13
periodic assessment of, 12
risk-based audit approach to, 18
systems development life cycle (SDLC) for, 23, 66, 
290, 303, 305, 307, 311, 313, 314, 315, 316, 
321–322
training in using, 13, 16
See also Microsoft Dynamics; Microsoft Excel; 
QuickBooks; Spreadsheets and desktop tools
Source code
rollback procedures and location of, 8
software purchase agreement on copies of, 313
Source data
application control for, 373
financial closing process with, 67, 68–70
Source documents
IT audit deficiencies on, 389t
segregation of duties and, 49, 56
Sox. See Sarbanes-Oxley Act
SOx-XL, 356, 357f
Specialized journal, 62
Spreadsheet models, valuation assertion on, 4
Spreadsheets and desktop tools, 337–369
accuracy of, 341
application controls with, 352, 353
audit tests for, 356–357, 358t
auditing tools overview in, 348, 349t–352f
compliance dimensions of risk exposure with, 
344–345
control considerations for, 355–356
data repository for, 355
design issues in, 347
errors in, 339–342, 342t–343t
IT audit deficiencies in, 392t, 396t
IT control weaknesses and, 258t
management of, 352–353
migration of files with, 339
moving into full-fledged IT systems from, 368–
369
non-input-related fields on, 361
periodic review of controls in, 368, 392t
risk exposures with, 338–339, 338t
risk management guidance documents for, 
355–356, 360
uses within organization, 337
See also Microsoft Excel
Staffing. See Human resources (HR)
Standards, industry
accounting, 1, 138, 252
auditing, 1, 31–32, 250, 251, 252, 255, 280, 
334
financial reporting, 255–256, 260, 287
general ledger processing, 74
human resource, 265f
internal controls and, 332
IT assessment, 23
IT delivery, 23
IT governance, 280
PCAOB, 250, 280
processing control, 19
security, 323, 324, 325, 345
user ID naming convention, 40
Standards, organizational
cryptographic key management and, 322, 323
IT policies and, 315, 323
management review of, 306, 307
performance, 329
procurement of IT-related hardware and services 
and, 313
spreadsheet naming using, 367
systems development methodology and, 23, 66, 
290, 311, 322, 364–365
user testing with, 314
Statement on Management’s Report on Internal Control 
over Financial Reporting (SEC), 344
Statement on Standards for Attestation 
Engagements (SSAE) No. 16, 248, 392t
State taxes
rates for, 159, 178, 193
summary report on, 244
See also Tax headings

432	
◾  Index
Statistics, 74–75, 321, 329
Storage
backup tapes and files and, 7, 9, 11, 28t, 315, 
359, 365, 391t, 394t
data management and, 300t, 315, 326, 327, 
353, 358t
inventory cycle and, 137, 139t, 142f, 143, 
156–157
records retention and, 257t
spreadsheet management and, 359, 366–367
Stores, and purchase orders, 110t
Strategic planning, 29, 66, 281t, 295, 296t, 303, 
335
Strategy council, 29
Subaccounts, 62–65, 270–272
Subledgers, 4, 7, 67, 85t, 111t, 145t, 146t, 
156–157, 271t, 371
Subprocesses
in expenditure cycle, 108, 108f
in inventory cycle, 137–138
in payroll cycle, 160–162, 165t
in revenue cycle, 82, 83f
Subsidiary ledger accounts, 60, 62, 74–75, 78, 271t
Subsidiary operations, 256t, 283t
Summary accounts
chart of accounts account numbering and, 62
LSE chart of accounts example of, 61t
Super-user accounts, 37, 57
Supplier master file, 276
Supply chain management (SCM), 135–136
SUTA, 172, 244. See also Unemployment insurance
Symantec, 10
Symmetric encryption, 27t
System administrators (SAs)
access rights granted by, 116, 182, 379
accounts for, 37, 49, 394t
expenditure cycle limits set by, 122
failed login attempts and, 44
IDs for, 37
IT audit deficiencies and, 394t
new account setup and, 178
passwords for, 39, 40, 41f, 44, 49, 64f, 178
payroll cycle and, 182, 207, 232
report access granted by, 379
risk exposure alerts for, 136
roles and tasks assigned by, 50, 53, 56
system access monitoring by, 44, 46
System controls. See Application controls
Systems development controls, 22, 23, 311, 313, 
314, 316
System review, in audit procedures, 19
Systems, interfaces between, 23, 59, 71, 85t, 111t, 
136, 145t, 163, 164t, 206, 290, 311, 364, 
373t, 383
Systems development life cycle (SDLC) methodology, 
23, 66, 290, 303, 305, 307, 311, 313, 314, 
315, 316, 321–322
Systems software controls, 23, 24
Tasks
access rights removal due to change in, 38, 39, 
57, 394t, 397t
custody roles and, 49
management review of, 56
recording roles and, 49
security role design and, 38, 42, 43f
segregation of duties and, 48–53, 50f, 51f
selective access by modules related to, 53
Taxes, application control objectives for, 278–279
Tax forms, 206
Tax rates
calculations using, 159–160
IT controls for, 71, 277–278
payroll cycle with, 159–160, 161f, 163, 172, 
193, 233, 234–235
report writers with, 373t
spreadsheet risk with, 338t
Tax records, in payroll cycle, 160, 165t, 186–206
Templates
for journal entries, 67, 68, 69–70
payroll cycle data entry using, 170
spreadsheet management using, 8, 353, 362
1099 employees, in payroll cycle, 185
Termination of accounts, 255
Termination of employees
access reviews and, 56
access rights removal and, 38, 39, 57, 394t, 
397t
HR cycle and, 162f, 297t, 307
internal controls for, 307–308, 316, 397t
IT auditing deficiencies and, 389t, 394t, 397t
payroll cycle and, 159, 160, 162f, 167, 185, 232, 
277
testing for, 78
Termination of service, 65
Testing signoff, in spreadsheet management, 358t, 
363
Tests of controls in audit procedures, 19
Third-party report writer packages, 378–380,  
381f
Third-party service providers
financial close calendar for, 70
HR recordkeeping and, 159, 160, 162
internal controls over, 23, 319–320, 332, 333
inventory and supply chain management by, 135, 
139, 149, 150
outsourcing to, 23, 29, 159, 256t, 321, 397
payment processing by, 103
payroll processing by, 159, 160, 162, 206, 207, 
248
report writers and, 371, 372, 378–380, 379f, 
381f
software maintenance by, 313, 318, 319–320
spreadsheet management and, 356, 361, 362
Tie-back, auditor’s review of, 4
Time and attendance, in payroll cycle, 160–162, 
163, 165t, 206–207, 212

Index  ◾        433
Timelines
of financial reports, 270
in information and communication, 268
Time tracking, application controls for, 11
Tokens, 26t, 44
Tower Tech Holdings Inc., 396t
Training
of employees in using applications, 13, 16, 29, 
39, 70, 250, 258t, 281t, 287, 300t, 316, 322, 
347
HR function and, 23, 65, 267
internal controls on, 265f, 267, 281t, 283t, 305, 
306, 308, 315, 324–325
IT control weaknesses and, 258t
IT function and, 252, 257t, 308, 311, 325
recommendations on, 262
risk considerations involving, 291t
Transaction-based audit approach, 251, 252
Transaction processing subsystems, general ledger 
and, 60
Transactions
application controls for changing or deleting, 11
audit trail report on, 20
completeness assertion on, 3
existence assertion on, 2–3
management review of supporting documents 
for, 12
segregation of duties by, 49
valuation assertion on, 4
Transparency, in information and communication, 
268
Travel expenses, 61t, 65, 218, 234, 263t
TRC Companies, 258t
Trend analysis, 76, 397
2012 Report to the Nations on Occupational Fraud and 
Abuse (ACFE), 10, 13, 262
Unauthorized changes to customer accounts, 89, 
91f
Unauthorized payments, 107, 162, 228
Understandability assertion, 21, 22f
Understandability of financial reports, 270
Unemployment insurance, 61t, 193, 206, 233, 
234–235, 237, 377
Uninterruptible power supply (UPS), 28t
U.S. Secret Service, 10, 20
User access. See Access controls
User IDs, controls for, 26t
User management, 38, 303, 389t
User names, application-level security for, 11, 40
User preferences, 11, 44
User profiles, logon process using, 26t
Vacations, on financial close calendar, 70
Vacation time, in payroll cycle, 170, 178, 185, 329
Validation process
application controls using, 85, 85t, 111, 111t, 
143, 145t, 161f, 163, 164t, 206, 327, 328
of application software and systems, 315
change approval and, 362, 372
periodic review of, 71
processing and, 73
reporting failures of, 72
of reports and report writers, 380–383
of spreadsheets, 337, 356, 362, 364
tables used in, 328
testing of, 328
transactions against a master list in, 327
third-party software maintenance with, 313
See also Data validation
Validity 
application control for, 373
checks for, 3, 147
financial closing process and, 68, 72
Valuation (accuracy, valuation/allocation) assertion, 
3–4, 7t, 21, 22f, 86t, 113t, 146t, 165t, 186, 
270, 271t, 272f
Value chain, 143, 144f
Variance reports, 73, 85, 112, 145, 164, 271t
Variances
inventory cycle with, 147, 150, 154–155
management’s role in identifying, 261
material item setup and, 137
payroll cycle with, 160
in performance and capacity, 321
Vasa (Swedish warship), 33–35
Vendor master list, 11, 85t, 108f, 111t, 112, 113t, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 256t, 320, 388
Vendors
above-average payments (kickbacks) to, 76, 79
access levels for, 320, 321, 323
cash disbursements to, 109f, 110, 111, 114
checking accuracy of data involving, 19
check tampering and, 264t
contingency planning and, 319, 320
controls involving, 111, 111t, 112, 113t, 115, 
116, 145t, 315, 388
evaluation of, 76, 77, 79
financial close and, 70
goods received but not ordered from, 132
HR systems from, 163
inventory cycles and, 137, 138, 144f, 326
invoices from, 133
list of approved, 11, 85t, 108f, 111t, 112, 113t, 
114, 115, 116, 117, 256t, 320, 388
managing, 319, 320, 321, 323, 335, 388
manufacturing system with, 139t, 141f
Microsoft Dynamics functions for, 115, 117, 122
payments to, 264t, 275, 353
purchase orders and, 110t, 122, 128, 132, 155
purchasing cycle and, 108, 108f, 122
QuickBooks function for, 114–115, 114f, 116, 
130, 131, 150, 155, 156–157
returns to, 131, 132, 138, 156–157
risk exposure involving, 107
software development and maintenance by, 13, 50

434	
◾  Index
Verizon Communications Inc., 10, 20
Version control (versioning), 
in spreadsheet management, 68, 338t, 353, 362, 
363–364, 366, 367, 368
in systems software support, 24
View-only user access, 11
Viruses, 27t
Virtual private networks (VPNs), 27t
Visa Inc., 10
Voided paychecks, 218, 225f
Voided transactions, 11, 19, 264t, 374, 375
Vulnerability assessments, 27t
W-2 employees, in payroll cycle, 185
W-4 employees, in payroll cycle, 185
Warehouse
inventory cycle and, 136, 137
revenue cycle and, 81
Warranties, vendor, 157
Warranty goods, 138, 139t, 140f, 141f, 142, 
156–157
Weekend
journal entries during, 74, 78
working during, 162
Whistleblowers, 6
White-collar crimes, 6, 251
Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP), 27t
Wireless networks, 11, 27t, 294t
Wireless Protected Access (WPA), 27t
Withholding data, 161f, 178, 193, 206, 207, 237, 
278
Worker’s Compensation insurance, 172, 233, 235, 
244
Workflow analysis reports, 322
Workflow rules, 69, 85, 92, 111, 145, 147, 150, 
157, 163, 356
Work-in-process (WIP) management, 137, 139, 
140f, 141f, 142, 142f, 143
Worms, 27t
Wozniak, Steve, 8–9, 12
Write-offs, 11, 19, 145
Year-end
financial close calendar with, 70
financial reporting and, 250
payroll cycle processing and, 214–218, 236
spreadsheet management and, 367
standard and nonstandard journal entries after, 
77
weekend journal entries and, 78

