Northwood University had built 
up a diverse fleet of printers 
that were unreliable and a 
drain on IT staff time and 
resources. IT workers spent 
as much as 40 percent of their 
time responding to calls from 
across the college’s campus, 
as well as from satellite 
locations, requesting help for 
malfunctioning printers.
Northwood worked with 
Staples Business Advantage 
to implement the Staples 
Management Print Services 
offering to handle printer 
service calls, review its printer 
fleet use and replace inefficient 
models, and automate the 
printer management processes.
Since starting with Staples 
Business Advantage, printer 
downtime has been significantly 
reduced and frontline IT staff 
are able to focus on more 
value-added services.
Northwood University’s 25-person IT team takes pride in their ability to help 
students, faculty and staff manage and maintain their IT equipment, including laptop 
and desktop computer software updates and repairs. The IT help desk is the place 
to call for help with any and all computing needs—including printers serving offices 
and centers of student activity. Printer malfunction? Out of paper or toner? Call, or 
email, or send a message via Twitter to the help desk. A staff member will field the 
request, visit the location and determine a solution. 
As Northwood’s printer fleet grew and aged over the years, however, it became 
more challenging for the IT team to maintain its traditional service levels. Eventually, 
printer-related calls climbed to a level where front-line IT staffers were spending 
as much as 40 percent of their time responding to them. The burden meant 
there was less time for IT staff to devote to its mission of helping colleagues and 
students make the most of their computing resources. As the customer complaints 
continued, it became clear to the IT customer service team that the burden of 
managing the printing function was hurting its ability to provide quality customer 
service for computer users. It was time for a new approach. 
Then the Northwood IT team met the Staples Business Advantage account 
managers Mike Zinn and Joyce Duzan.
Making the Move
The university’s IT department was very familiar with Staples as a retailer of office 
supplies, and had purchased numerous items at the store for a variety of needs 
over the years. The IT professionals went into this meeting room with a positive 
impression of the company. But this conference room gathering was different than  
a trip to the store to pick up office supplies. 
Continued on back
CHALLENGE
SOLUTION
RESULT
IT Efficiency 
How Northwood University freed up their resources.
50236

50236
Continued from front
After months of frustration and fielding customer 
complaints, Eric Dinnan, a computer technologist at 
Northwood’s Midland campus and a point person for 
printer maintenance, recalls feeling like he discovered 
something important during that first meeting.
“It was pretty clear even in the hour or so meeting that 
we had, that Staples Business Advantage offered a 
lot of benefits and a lot of features that we had never 
even seen before,” he says. 
The Staples Business Advantage team outlined a 
program that would enable Northwood to evaluate its 
entire print function, identify opportunities to provide 
the same services for less cost. By rethinking the 
university’s print function, and by taking advantage of 
newer equipment that is less costly to run and simpler 
to maintain, Northwood could work with Staples 
Business Advantage Managed Print Services to print 
the equivalent number of pages at a higher quality 
and for less money. Northwood decided to go ahead 
and sign on during the summer of 2014. 
Reaping the Benefits of Managed Print
Staples Business Advantage worked with Northwood 
to replace some of the older printers in its fleet with 
new more efficient models from HP. Print experts 
helped identify optimal sites within office buildings 
and other campus locations for printers by analyzing 
staff and student workflows. Northwood and Staples 
Business Advantage connected the university’s 132 
Internet-enabled machines to the Staples Business 
Advantage Printuition system for monitoring printer 
status, including toner levels, that triggers automatic 
shipment of replacement ink packages when levels in 
a machine get low.
Today, Northwood uses fewer printers at both its main 
Midland campus as well as at its satellite locations. 
And while demand for printed pages has remained 
constant, the university’s cost per page has declined. 
Among the long list of improvements since the 
university began working with Staples Business 
Advantage:
•	 Printer service downtime has been dramatically 
reduced.
•	 With improved service levels and a refreshed 
printer fleet, customer calls to the help desk for 
printer problems have decreased.
•	
Founded in 1959
•	
Main campus in Midland, Michigan
•	
22 satellite locations in Michigan and five other states 
•	
6,800 students, including undergraduate and graduate, 
from 74 countries
•	
1,000 faculty and staff
•	
35,000 alumni
•	
25 member IT staff
Northwood University
At a Glance
•	 A streamlined printer maintenance process has lifted the 
customer service burden for the university’s IT team. Toner 
levels of 20 percent on a networked printer triggers an 
automatic replacement order. The IT team receives an alert 
that toner has been ordered. Delivery occurs within 24 hours. 
•	 The automated delivery of toner enables faculty and staff to 
replace toner themselves. (Help desk staff can tend to printers 
if needed.)
•	 The quality of printing has improved with the use of new 
models.
• Instead of spending more than a third of their time handling printer 
service requests, IT workers at the help desk can focus on keeping 
users’ computers running well and updated with the latest software.
“The whole Staples Business Advantage team has been 
unbelievably gracious and helpful,” says Dinnan. “We have had a 
number of problems getting our printer system up and running in 
the past. But never once have I had a bad experience with Staples 
Business Advantage. They were always there to help. And the 
response time is unbelievable.” 
147,488
132 
40% 
Average number of pages the 
university prints per month.
Total number of networked 
printers. on its campuses.
Amount of time some IT staff 
was spending addressing 
printer issues at Northwood.

