
THE FUSION OF 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
AND SOFT COMPUTING 
TECHNIQUES FOR 
CYBERSECURITY 


AAP Advances in Artifcial Intelligence and Robotics 
THE FUSION OF 
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
AND SOFT COMPUTING 
TECHNIQUES FOR 
CYBERSECURITY 
Edited 
M. A. Jabbar, PhD 
Sanju Tiwari, PhD 
Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD 
Stephen Huang, PhD 

 
 
 
 
 
 
  
First edition published 2024 
Apple Academic Press Inc.  
1265 Goldenrod Circle, NE, 
Palm Bay, FL 32905 USA  
760 Laurentian Drive, Unit 19,  
Burlington, ON L7N 0A4, CANADA  
CRC Press 
2385 NW Executive Center Drive, 
Suite 320, Boca Raton FL 33431 
4 Park Square, Milton Park, 
Abingdon, Oxon, OX14 4RN UK 
© 2024 by Apple Academic Press, Inc. 
Apple Academic Press exclusively co-publishes with CRC Press, an imprint of Taylor & Francis Group, LLC 
Reasonable efforts have been made to publish reliable data and information, but the authors, editors, and publisher cannot 
assume responsibility for the validity of all materials or the consequences of their use. The authors are solely responsible for 
all the chapter content, figures, tables, data etc. provided by them. The authors, editors, and publishers have attempted to trace 
the copyright holders of all material reproduced in this publication and apologize to copyright holders if permission to publish 
in this form has not been obtained. If any copyright material has not been acknowledged, please write and let us know so we 
may rectify in any future reprint. 
Except as permitted under U.S. Copyright Law, no part of this book may be reprinted, reproduced, transmitted, or utilized 
in any form by any electronic, mechanical, or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including photocopying, 
microfilming, and recording, or in any information storage or retrieval system, without written permission from the publishers. 
For permission to photocopy or use material electronically from this work, access www.copyright.com or contact the Copyright 
Clearance Center, Inc. (CCC), 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, 978-750-8400. For works that are not available on 
CCC please contact mpkbookspermissions@tandf.co.uk 
Trademark notice: Product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks and are used only for identification 
and explanation without intent to infringe. 
Library and Archives Canada Cataloguing in Publication 
Title: The fusion of artificial intelligence and soft computing techniques for cybersecurity / edited by M.A. Jabbar, PhD, 
Sanju Tiwari, PhD, Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD, Stephen Huang, PhD. 
Names: Jabbar, M. A. (PhD), editor. | Tiwari, Sanju, 1979- editor. | Pani, Subhendu Kumar, 1980-editor. | Huang, Stephen 
(Lecturer in computer science), editor. 
Description: First edition. | Series statement: AAP advances in artificial intelligence and robotics | Includes 
bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: Canadiana (print) 20230587801 | Canadiana (ebook) 20230587828 | ISBN 9781774914809 (hardcover) 
| ISBN 9781774914816 (softcover) | ISBN 9781003428503 (ebook) 
Subjects: LCSH: Computer security. | LCSH: Cyberterrorism—Prevention. | LCSH: Artificial intelligence. | LCSH: 
Soft computing. | LCSH: COVID-19 Pandemic, 2020­
Classification: LCC QA76.9.A25 F87 2024 | DDC 005.8—dc23 
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
CIP data on file with US Library of Congress 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-480-9 (hbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-77491-481-6 (pbk) 
ISBN: 978-1-00342-850-3 (ebk) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
AAP ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE AND ROBOTICS 
The new book series AAP Advances in Artificial Intelligence & Robotics 
will provide detailed coverage of innovations in artificial life, computa­
tional intelligence, evolutionary computing, machine learning, robotics, 
and applications. The list of topics covers all the application areas of artifi­
cial intelligence and robotics such as: computational neuroscience, social 
intelligence, ambient intelligence, artificial life, virtual worlds and society, 
cognitive science and systems, computational intelligence, human-
centered and human-centric computing, intelligent decision making and 
support, intelligent network security. 
With this innovative era of simulated and artificial intelligence, much 
research is required in order to advance the field and also to estimate 
the societal and ethical concerns of the existence robotics and scientific 
computing. The series also aims that books in this series will be practically 
relevant, so that the results will be useful for managers in leadership roles 
related to AI and robotics, researchers, data analysts, project managers, 
and others. Therefore, both theoretical and managerial implications of the 
research need to be considered. 
The book series will broadly consider the contributions from the 
following fields: 
• Artificial Intelligence Applications in Security 
• Artificial Intelligence in Bioinformatics 
• Robot Structure Design and Control 
• Artificial Intelligence in Biomedical and Healthcare 
• Multi-Robot Intelligent Aggregation Mechanisms and Operation 
Platforms 
• Artificial Intelligence and Learning Environments 
• Advances in AI-Driven Smart System Designs 
• Robot Navigation, Positioning, and Autonomous Control 
• Robot Perception and Data Fusion 
• Advances in Artificial Intelligence research 
• Advances in AI-Driven Data Analytics and Innovation 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
vi 
AAP Advances in Artificial Intelligence and Robotics 
• Application of Intelligent Systems for Solving Real-World Problems 
• Hybrid Systems Design and Applications Using AI 
• Robot Grabbing and Operation 
• Robot Behavior Decision and Control 
• Robot Motion and Path Planning 
• Applications of Intelligent Systems and Computer Vision 
For additional information, contact: 
Book Series Editor: Subhendu Kumar Pani 
Professor & Research Co-ordinator 
Dept. of Computer Science and Engineering 
Orissa Engineering College, Bhubaneswar, India 
Email: pani.subhendu@gmail.com 

 
 
 
 
  
AAP ADVANCES IN ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE AND ROBOTICS 
Advancements in Artificial Intelligence, Blockchain Technology, and 
IoT in Higher Education: Mitigating the Impact of COVID-19 
Editors: Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD, Kamalakanta Muduli, PhD, 
Sujoy Kumar Jana, PhD, Srikanth Bathula, PhD, and 
Golam Sarwar Khan, PhD 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques 
for Cybersecurity 
Editors: M. Ajabbar, PhD, Sanju Tiwari, PhD,  
Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD, and Stephen Huang, PhD 
Incorporating AI Technology in the Service Sector: Innovations in 
Creating Knowledge, Improving Efficiency, and Elevating  
Quality of Life 
Editors: Maria Jose Sousa, PhD, Subhendu Pani, PhD, 
Francesca dal Mas, PhD, and Sergio Sousa, PhD 
Handbook of Research on Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing 
Techniques in Personalized Healthcare Services 
Editors: Uma N. Dulhare, PhD, A. V. Senthil Kumar, Amit Dutta, PhD, 
Seddik Bri, PhD, and Ibrahiem M. M. EI Emary, PhD 
Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Advanced 
Image Processing 
Editors: Arun Rana, PhD, Rashmi Gupta, PhD, Sharad Sharma, PhD, 
Ahmad A. Elngar, PhD, , and Sachin Dhawan, PhD 
Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning for Business 
Editors: Namita Mishra, PhD, and A. V. Senthil Kumar, PhD, DSc 
Advances in Autonomous Navigation through Intelligent 
Technologies 
Editors: Niharika Singh, PhD, Thipendra P. Singh, PhD, and  
Brian Azzopardi, PhD 


 
ABOUT THE EDITORS 
M. A. Jabbar, PhD 
Professor and Head, Department CSE (AI and ML), Vardhaman College 
of Engineering, Hyderabad, Telangana, India 
M. A. Jabbar, PhD, is a professor and Head of the Department CSE (AI 
and ML), Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, Telangana, 
India. He obtained his PhD in the year 2015 from JNTUH, Hyderabad, 
and Telangana, India. He has been teaching for more than 20 years. His 
research interests include artificial intelligence, big data analytics, bio-
informatics, cyber security, machine learning, attack graphs, and intrusion 
detection systems. 
He has published 62 papers in various journals and conferences. He has 
served as a technical committee member for more than 70 international 
conferences. He has been the editor for 1st ICMLSC 2018, SOCPAR 2019, 
and ICMLSC 2020. He also has been involved in organizing international 
conferences as an organizing chair, program committee chair, publica­
tion chair and reviewer for SoCPaR, HIS, ISDA, IAS, WICT, NABIC, 
and others. He is the Guest Editor for The Fusion of Internet of Things, 
AI, and Cloud Computing in Health Care: Opportunities and Challenges 
(Springer) series, and Deep Learning in Biomedical and Health Infor­
matics: Current Applications and Possibilities—CRC Press, Guest Editor 
for Emerging Technologies and Applications for a Smart and Sustainable 
World—Bentham Science, Guest Editor for Machine Learning Methods 
for Signal, Image, and Speech Processing—River Publisher. 
Sanju Tiwari, PhD 
Senior Researcher, Universidad Autonoma de Tamaulipas, Mexico 
Sanju Tiwari, PhD, is a Senior Researcher at Universidad Autonoma de 
Tamaulipas (70 years old University), Mexico. She worked as a postdoc­
toral researcher in Ontology Engineering Group, Universidad Polytecnica 
De Madrid, Spain. Prior to this, she has worked as a research associate 
for a sponsored research project, Intelligent Real Time Situation Aware­
ness and Decision Support System for Indian Defence, funded by DRDO, 

 
 
 
 
x 
About the Editors 
New Delhi in Department of Computer Applications, National Institute of 
Technology, Kurukshetra. In this project, she has developed and evaluated 
a Decision Support System for Indian Defence. Her current research inter­
ests include, ontology engineering, knowledge graphs, linked data genera­
tion and publication, semantic web, reasoning with SPARQL and machine 
intelligence. 
Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD 
Professor, Department of CSE, OEC, Bhubaneswar under BPUT, India 
Subhendu Kumar Pani, PhD, is currently working as a Professor in the 
Department of CSE, OEC, Bhubaneswar under BPUT. He has more than 
15 research articles published along with six authored books, 15 edited 
books and 30 book chapters to his credit. He has over 16 years of teaching 
and research experience. His research interests include data mining, big 
data analysis, web data analytics, fuzzy decision making, and computa­
tional intelligence. He is the recipient of five researcher awards. In addi­
tion to research, he has guided two PhD students and 31 MTech students. 
He is the (founding) series Editor of CRC Press (Taylor Francis Group) 
book series on Emerging Trends in Biomedical Technologies and Health 
Informatics. He is a fellow in Scientific Society of Advanced Research 
and Social Change and life member in IE, ISTE, SCA, OBA, OMS, 
SMIACSIT, SMUACEE, CSI. He also regularly serves as a program 
committee member for numerous national and international conferences. 
Stephen Huang, PhD 
Professor of Computer Science, University of Houston, Texas, USA 
Stephen Huang, PhD, is a Professor of Computer Science, with more 
than 30 years of experience in teaching, research, and administration in 
Computer Science. His research interests include cybersecurity, intrusion 
detection, bioinformatics, data science, and algorithms. He has published 
many journal and conference papers, and supervised and assisted over 30 
M.S. and eight PhD students. Dr. Huang has served in several administra­
tive positions at UH including Director of Graduate Studies, Associate 
Chairman, and Department Chairman. Dr. Huang received his PhD degree 
in Computer Science from the University of Texas-Austin in 1981. He was 
a National Research Council-NASA Senior Research Associate at NASA 
Goddard Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland from 1989–1990. 

 
Contributors....................................................................................................... xiii 
 
Abbreviations .......................................................................................................xv 
 
Preface ............................................................................................................... xix 
 
PART I: Cybersecurity During COVID-19 Pandemic .................................... 1 
 
1. 
 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic .......... 3 
 
Rayeesa Tasneem and M.A. Jabbar 
 
2. 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario: 
 
Reasons and Consequences ...................................................................... 27 
 
Neeranjan Chitare, Maitreyee Ghosh, Shankru Guggari, and M.A. Jabbar 
 
3. 
 
IoT in Security: Impact and Challenges During the Pandemic............ 39 
 
Sonia Sharma 
 
4. 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist  
 
During COVID-19..................................................................................... 57 
 
Hena Iqbal, TanjinSikder, Yasmin Alhayek, Noora Alfurais, and Nujuom Assar 
 
PART II: Cybersecurity for Cloud Intelligent Systems................................. 77 
5.  
 
Cloud 
 
and 
 
Edge 
 
Computing 
 
Security 
 
Using 
 
Artificial  
 
Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques......................................... 79 
 
N. S. Gowri Ganesh, R. Roopa Chandrika, and A. Mummoorthy 
6.  
 
Security 
 
in 
 
IoT 
 
Using 
 
Artificial 
 
Intelligence ......................................... 107 
 
Sanchari Saha 
 
7. 
 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems ................................................. 133 
 
Abinaya Inbamani, N. Divya, R. R. Rubia Gandhi, M. Karthik, and  
M. Sivaram Kumar 
CONTENTS 

  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
PART III: Applications of Cybersecurity Techniques for 
Web Applications .................................................................................... 151 
8. 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention  
of Cross-Site Scripting in Web-based Services..................................... 153 
Smit Sawant, Gaurav Choudhary, Shishir Kumar Shandilya,  
Lokesh Giripunje, and Vikas Sihag 
9. 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems ................... 169 
R.R. Rubia Gandhi, Abinaya Inbamani, N. Divya, M. Karthik, and E. Ramya 
10. Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches:  
A Systematic Review............................................................................... 195 
Mohan Kumar K N and Pavan Kumar E 
PART IV: Cybersecurity for Cyber-Physical Systems................................. 209 
11.  Efficient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffic to 
Enhance Security .................................................................................... 211 
Bharathi S., Amisha R. Naik, and Piyush Kumar Pareek 
12. Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic Attacks Using an 
Enhanced Growing Neural Gas (GNG) Clustering Technique........... 227 
A. Dhanu Saswanth, V. Kavitha, B. Sundaravadivazhagan, and R. Karthikeyan 
13. Security in IoT: Systematic Review.......................................................243 
K. Tejasvi, Ruqqaiya Begum, and M. A. Jabbar 
Index................................................................................................................. 265 
 
xii 
Contents 

 
CONTRIBUTORS 
Noora Alfurais 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 
Yasmin Alhayek 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 
Nujuom Assar 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 
Ruqqaiya Begum 
Vardhman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
R. Roopa Chandrika 
Malla Reddy College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India 
Neeranjan Chitare 
Northumbria University, Newcastle, UK 
Gaurav Choudhary 
Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, Technical University of Denmark 
(DTU), Denmark 
N. Divya 
Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Pavan Kumar E. 
Department of ECE, Saividya Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 
R. R. Rubia Gandhi 
Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
N. S. Gowri Ganesh 
Malla Reddy College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India 
Maitreyee Ghosh 
Chubb UK Services Limited, London, UK 
Lokesh Giripunje 
School of Computer Science and Engineering (SCSE), VIT Bhopal University, Bhopal, 
Madhya Pradesh, India 
Shankru Guggari 
Machine Intelligence Research Labs, USA 
M. A. Jabbar 
Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
Abinaya Inbamani 
Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
Hena Iqbal 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 
M. Karthik 
Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 

 
 
xiv 
Contributors 
R Karthikeyan 
Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
V. Kavitha 
Department of Computer Applications, Hindusthan College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, India 
M. Sivaram Kumar 
Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, India 
A. Mummoorthy 
Malla Reddy College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad, India 
Amisha R. Naik 
Department of MCA, Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, India 
Mohan Kumar K. N. 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Saividya Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka, India 
Piyush Kumar Pareek 
Department of CSE, Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, India 
E. Ramya 
Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Sathyamangalam, India 
Bharathi S. 
Department of MCA, Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, India 
Sanchari Saha 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, CMR Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka, India 
A. Dhanu Saswanth 
Dept of Computer Science with Cognitive Systems Sri Ramakrishna college of Arts and Science 
Coimbatore, India 
Smit Sawant 
School of Computer Science and Engineering (SCSE), VIT Bhopal University, Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh, India 
Shishir Kumar Shandilya 
School of Computer Science and Engineering (SCSE), VIT Bhopal University, Bhopal, Madhya 
Pradesh, India 
Sonia Sharma 
Department of C.Sc. and Applications, Hindu Girls College, Jagadhri, Haryana, India 
Vikas Sihag 
Department of Cyber Security, Sardar Patel University of Police, Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India 
Tanjin Sikder 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University, Ajman, UAE 
B. Sundaravadivazhagan 
Department of Information and Technology, University of Technology and Applied Science, AI 
Mussanah, Oman 
Rayeesa Tasneem 
Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
K. Tejasvi 
Vardhman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ABBREVIATIONS 
ABAC 
ABE 
ACO 
AI 
AMOP 
ANN 
APT 
BDD 
BDD-ML-ELM 
BEC 
BN 
BW 
CISA 
CMS 
CNN 
CoAP 
CSP 
DAC 
DCS 
DD 
DDS 
DHS 
DDoS 
DL 
DLP 
DML-DIV 
DoS 
DP 
DQN 
DT 
EC 
attribute-based access control 
attribute-based encryption 
ant colony optimization 
artificial intelligence 
advanced message queuing protocol 
artificial neural networks 
advanced persistent threat 
binary decision diagram 
binary decision diagram multi-layer extreme learning 
machine 
business email compromise 
Bayesian networks 
bandwidth 
Cyber Security and Infrastructure Security Agency 
content management system 
convolution neural network 
Constrained Application Protocol 
content security policy 
discretionary access control 
distributed control systems 
dependence diagram 
Data Distribution Service 
Department of Homeland Security 
distributed denial-of-service 
deep learning 
discrete logarithm problem 
distributed machine learning oriented data integrity 
verification 
denial-of-service 
differential privacy 
deep Q-network 
decision tree 
equal coefficient 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xvi 
Abbreviations 
EC 
evolutionary computation 
ECC 
elliptic curve cryptography 
ETSI 
European Telecommunications Standards Institute 
eHIPF 
environments using history-based IP filtering 
FNLP 
fuzzy nonlinear programming 
FL 
fuzzy logic 
FT 
fault tree 
GA 
genetic algorithm 
GAAC 
genetic ant colony algorithm 
GRC 
governance, risk, and compliance 
HE 
homomorphic encryption 
HIPAA 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
IaaS 
infrastructure as a service 
ICT 
information and communication technologies 
IDS 
intrusion detection system 
IEC 
International Electro Specialized Commission 
IoHT 
Internet of Health Technology 
IOT 
Internet of Things 
IPS 
intrusion prevention system 
ISO 
International Standards Organization 
KNNs 
K-nearest neighbors 
LM 
Levenberg–Marquardt 
LSTM 
long short-term memory 
MAC 
mandatory access control 
MAPE 
mean absolute percentage error 
MARE 
mean absolute relative error 
MC 
Markov Chains 
MDP 
Markov decision mechanism 
MEC 
mobile edge computing 
MFA 
multi-factor authentication 
MFCC 
mail-frequency spectral coefficient 
MitM 
man-in-the-middle 
ML 
machine learning 
MLP 
multi-layer perceptron 
MQTT 
Message Queue Telemetry Transport Protocol 
MRE 
mean relative error 
MSE 
mean square error 
MSPs 
managed service providers 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Abbreviations 
xvii 
NB 
Naïve Bayes 
NCS 
networked control systems 
NCSC 
National Cyber Security Center 
NFV 
network function virtualization 
NID 
network intrusion detection 
NIDS 
network intrusion detection system 
NNs 
neural networks 
NRMSE 
normalized RMSE 
OCR 
office of civil right 
OWASP 
Open Web Application Security Project 
PaaS 
platform as a service 
PDP 
provable data possession 
PHI 
protected health information 
PII 
personally identifiable information 
PNs 
Petri nets 
PR 
probabilistic reasoning 
PRE 
proxy re-encryption 
RBAC 
role-based access control 
RBD 
reliability block diagram 
RCE 
remote execution code 
RF 
random forest 
RMAC 
reference monitoring access control 
RMSE 
root mean square error 
RMSEC 
RMSE with cost 
RS 
rough sets 
RSA 
Rivest–Shamir–Adleman 
SAN 
sensor actuator networks 
SaaS 
software as a service 
SCACO 
security and cost-aware computation offloading 
SCM 
supply chain management 
SDN 
software-defined networking 
SGD 
stochastic gradient descent 
SHFRS 
soft hesitant fuzzy rough collection 
SOM 
self organizing maps 
SPN 
stochastic Petri nets 
SQL 
structural query language 
SSO 
single sign-on 
SVM 
support vector machine 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
xviii 
Abbreviations 
UCOM 
usage-control-based access control 
VAPE 
variance absolute percentage error 
VM 
virtual machines 
VMM 
virtual machine monitor 
VPN 
virtual private network 
WFH 
work from home 
WHO 
World Health Organization 
WIA 
windows integrated authentication 
WISN 
wireless industrial sensor networks 
WSAN 
wireless sensor and actuator networks 
XMPP 
extensible messaging and presence protocol 
XSS 
cross-site scripting 

PREFACE 
Cyber security plays a vital role and has always been indispensable for 
secure communication. Cyber attacks are becoming a danger to organiza­
tions, their employees, and individuals. As the world becomes more ICT-
enabled, cyber threats are also on the rise. Cyber security is thus becoming 
increasingly challenging as well. Organizations need to keep security as 
a top priority and have to assure confidentiality, authenticity, and avail­
ability of customers’ information. Due to increasing incidents of cyber 
attacks, artificial intelligence and soft computing techniques have been 
developed for a decision support system in cyber security. These tech­
niques have been widely used to solve problems that are difficult to solve 
using conventional algorithms. The main objective of this book is to create 
a volume of recent works on advances in artificial intelligence and soft 
computing techniques in cyber security. 
Section 1 comprises four chapters. Chapter 1 explains An Insight into 
Cyber Security During the COVID-19 Pandemic. This chapter draws 
special attention to the role of cyber security in COVID-19 pandemic, 
important cyber attacks, and impacts on healthcare and business organi­
zations. Additionally, emerging cybersecurity technologies are discussed 
which are useful to reduce cyber risks and finally few mitigation steps are 
drawn. 
Chapter 2: Cyber-Attack Surge in Covid Scenario—Reasons and 
Consequences explains the relationship between emotions and logical 
thinking in order to help avoid anxiety and to choose the most logical 
(safe) decision. It also introduces a brief description of cyber attacks 
during the COVID-19 period and focuses on effects of cyber attack on 
various environments. 
Chapter 3 discusses the impact and challenges IoT in security during 
the pandemic. 
Chapter 4: Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist 
During Covid-19 is a study based on the role of the mobile phone applica­
tions in individual life and the privacy predictor of those applications. 
Section 2 comprises three chapters. Chapter 5: Cloud and Edge 
Computing Security Using Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing 

 
 
xx 
Preface 
Techniques deals with the security of edge computing and its associated 
environment by the application of artificial intelligence and soft computing 
techniques. 
Chapter 6: Security in IoT Using Artificial Intelligence allows readers 
to be able to visualize the role of AI in correctly analyzing and preventing 
harmful attacks with greater efficiency. 
Chapter 7 on cyber security for intelligent systems is an audit chapter 
that aggregates data from a few other overviews and exploration papers 
in regard to IoT, AI, and assaults and investigates the connection between 
these three subjects. 
Section 3 consists of three chapters. Chapter 8: Analysis of Advance 
Manual Detection and Robust Prevention of Cross-Site Scripting in 
Web-based Services explores techniques to discover reflected cross-site 
scripting (XSS) attacks in URL paths and the use of XSS hunter, an online 
platform, to find blind cross-site scripting attacks while also boosting web 
applications against all types of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. 
Chapter 9: Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber Physical Systems 
describes the soft computing taxonomy with special inclusion of fuzzy 
logic, artificial neural network, and genetic algorithm. Various integration 
technologies with regards to cyber physical systems are also described. 
Chapter 10 explores the applications of Cyber Security Using Machine 
Learning Approaches. 
Section 4 consists of three chapters. Chapter 11: Efficient Vehicle 
Tracking System in Dense Traffic to Enhance the Security discusses this 
kind of technique that is extensively applied in heavy traffic and high-speed 
vehicle-moving zones, like tolling, no parking zones, etc. The primary 
objective of this algorithm is designed to improve security systems. 
Chapter 12 proposes Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic Attacks 
Using Enhanced Growing Neural Gas (GNG) Clustering Technique. 
Chapter 13 talks about Security in IoT. 

PART I 
Cybersecurity During 
COVID-19 Pandemic 


CHAPTER 1
AN INSIGHT INTO CYBERSECURITY 
DURING THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
RAYEESA TASNEEM and M.A. JABBAR 
Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
ABSTRACT 
As the worldwide lockdown was the only solution for controlling the 
coronavirus disease, social distancing caused a massive dependency on 
online and other alternatives of cyberspace and shifted the entire world 
to a digital platform. The increase in anxiety, stress, and fear among indi­
viduals because of the pandemic has given malicious hackers a chance to 
misuse the confidential information of users by launching cyberattacks 
against unsuspected victims. Though online interactions, transactions, and 
remote work are done effectively, alternatives of cyberspace have given 
rise to various cybersecurity challenges. The cyberattacks exploited the 
vulnerabilities of a normal user as well as the system and have greatly 
affected data privacy, integrity, and digital behavior. This chapter draws 
special attention to the role of cybersecurity in the COVID-19 pandemic, 
important cyberattacks, and their impacts on healthcare and business orga­
nizations. Additionally, emerging cybersecurity technologies are discussed 
that are useful to reduce cyber risks, and finally, a few mitigation steps are 
drawn. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
1.1 INTRODUCTION 
In March 2020, the coronavirus disease had infected more than 100 coun­
tries and was officially declared a pandemic by the WHO. The entire world 
has now been combating this disease for more than a year. Some symptoms 
of this infection include fever, breathing difficulty, cough, fatigue, and loss 
of smell or taste.37 The fatality rate of coronavirus disease is 2–5%.36 Addi­
tionally, it is very obvious that it has greatly impacted the health of every 
individual and the economy of the entire world. The spread of virus has 
created a lot of anxiety, uncertainty, and a sudden change in the perspec­
tive of our lives. Most companies and organizations have started imple­
menting WFH (Work-From-Home); people choose telemedicine due to 
the fear of virus infection; online schools and distance learning are imple­
mented. The basic requirements for all these sectors include the internet, 
computers, cameras, firewall software, etc. Meetings are carried out via 
videoconferences.1 Though the calls are encrypted for the sake of secu­
rity, this pandemic has created new cybersecurity concerns. As everything 
is performed online, the cyberattacks are increasing in number. A few of 
the deadly threats to cybersecurity are spam email, ransomware, malware, 
malicious domains and websites, DDoS attacks, malicious messages via 
social media, etc.1
 In this pandemic, healthcare systems have also become major targets 
for cyberattacks. Most of the patients can be recovered through the use of 
telemedicine, as personal visits to the doctor turned out to be very difficult 
in this ongoing pandemic. Access to a patient record is like a treasury for 
cybercriminals as it comprises the major data such as date of birth, infor­
mation about the healthcare provider, insurance-related data, and genetic 
information—data that are impossible to change, unlike cases of credit 
cards being stolen.3 These cases are specifically profitable for cybercrimi­
nals as they can sell the data of a patient multiple times, which is more 
than the amount a particular credit holds.3 On the other hand, millions 
of fake COVID-19-related websites are designed by cyberattackers under 
newly registered domains for the distribution of malware.16 Though they 
are removed quickly, they are again registered instantly so as to circulate 
misinformation and confuse users with updated news.16 
The framework of NIST cybersecurity (CSF) includes five functions: 
identify, protect, detect, respond, and recover, as presented in Figure 1.1.2 
This framework is helpful for organizations and companies to overcome 

 
 
 
 
 
5 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
new cyberattacks. Though many threats are being identified by the industry 
of cybersecurity, it is the major challenge in this pandemic to fight, which 
puts people and organizations in a helpless situation globally. This chapter 
emphasizes the issues of cybersecurity, cyberattacks amid COVID-19, and 
the impacts on healthcare and business organizations. 
FIGURE 1.1 The framework of NIST cybersecurity. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [2] 
1.2 LITERATURE SURVEY 
As digital technologies are adopted throughout the world, various facets 
of society have shifted online, such as shopping, industries, online busi­
ness interactions, and tragically, crime. Because of its lucrative nature 
and even lower risk levels (cyberattacks can be launched from anywhere 
throughout the world), it is crystal clear that cybercrime is here to stay.26 
For the occurrence of a cybercrime, there must be three factors: motive, 
victim, and opportunity. The victim is targeted for an attack; motive refers 
to the purpose for committing an attack; and finally, opportunity refers to 
the chance for launching the attack. For example, an opportunity can be 
the vulnerability of a system or even a device that is unprotected.26 While 
cyberattacks nowadays are becoming more advanced, particular victims 
are targeted based on the motivation of the cybercriminals, for example, for 

 
 
 
 
6 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
the sake of financial profits, revenge, or espionage. Opportunistic cyber­
criminals always strive for the maximum profits and hence will be waiting 
for the perfect situations like medical issues, work pressure, mental stress, 
public incidents, natural disasters, and the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic, 
which leave the whole world disturbed and stressed. Cybercriminals take 
great advantage of these situations and launch various cyberattacks. In 
previous years, many opportunistic attacks were reported; a few of the 
attacks are explained below: 
• Natural disasters: In the US, because of hurricane Katrina (2005), 
there was a huge amount of destruction in New Orleans and nearby 
areas. After a short time, multiple fake websites were created to 
appeal for donations, and many local residents received scam 
emails requesting to fill out personal data to get government relief 
funds, etc. Similar attacks and scams were observed in many natural 
disasters, like bush fires (2020) in Australia,27 hurricane Harvey 
(2017),29 and the Japan earthquakes.28 
• Notable events or incidents: The heartbreaking death of Michael 
Jackson on June 25, 2009, left  the world in a huge shock. Just after 8 
h of his death, various spam emails were circulated online claiming 
the reason behind the death.30 During public events or matches, for 
example, amid the FIFA  World Cup (2018), many attempts were 
made by cybercriminals to launch various scams to attract people 
for free tickets.31 
By considering the various types of scams mentioned above that are 
taking place throughout the world, it is so predictable that similar types of 
attacks with more advanced technologies will be launched in the current 
COVID-19 pandemic. The outbreak of COVID-19 has caused complete 
damage to the whole world. The daily routines are changed, and people 
have to adapt to a new reality like working from home, a lack of physical 
activities and social communications, and the stress of not being ready to 
face the pandemic. Due to these situations, many people are overwhelmed 
and stressed, which can also cause anxiety attacks, which increase the 
probability of becoming victims of cyberattacks. 
According to reports, there has been a significant rise in malware attacks 
and scams since the pandemic started.32 In April 2020, Google blocked 18 
million phishing emails and malware that were related to COVID-19.33 
To increase the success rates of cybercriminals, they target goods in high 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
7 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
demand like PPE kits, drugs, and testing kits for coronavirus and sell them 
by impersonating representatives of public organizations, for example, the 
WHO.26 A group of hackers from China known as Hafnium discovered 
vulnerabilities in Microsoft Exchange that gave them access to the email 
accounts of at least 30,000 organizations in the US and 250,000 globally 
in 2021.34 In response to this attack, after a month, the FBI hacked several 
computer systems in the US that run compromised versions of Microsoft 
Exchange software and eradicated malicious web shells.34 In the month 
of April 2021, the REvil (Ransomware-as-a-service) gang demanded a 
ransom of $50 million from Apple supplier Quanta.34 According to the 
estimation of IBM X-Force, REvil made a profit of at least $123 million 
in 2020, and 21.6 terabytes of data were stolen.34 Just after a few months, 
REvil demanded a ransom of $70 million from Kaseya, striking the largest 
ransom to date. The attack was accomplished in two parts. Firstly, cyber­
criminals exploited a zero-day vulnerability in Kaseya VSA software, 
due to which privileged access was provided to VSA servers, and then 
they deployed REvil ransomware across various MSPs (Managed Service 
Providers).34 
According to reports of an IBM survey, in 2021, the average total cost 
of a data breach is 16.50 crore rupees. This was increased by 17.85% 
compared to the previous year. The cost per stolen or lost record was 5900 
Rupees, increased by 6.85% over 2020.35 Cybercriminals broke into Solar-
Winds by inserting malware into the Orion software update of a vendor, 
which was pushed to nearly 18,000 customers in March 2019.34 This 
permitted them to stay in organizations for months, and they were not 
even detected. Researchers of the threat now believe that cybercriminals 
from Russia compromised nearly 100 private corporations in the US and 
nine federal agencies’ networks.35 A criminal group known as Darkside 
breached the pipeline of colonial systems, and a major fuel supply was 
shut down for the east coast.34 
In July 2021, Microsoft revealed a crucial Windows bug dubbed Print 
Nightmare that affects the Print Spooler of Windows and permits many 
users to access a connected printer.34 After the successful exploitation of 
this vulnerability, cybercriminals were allowed to create new user accounts, 
delete or modify the existing data, and install programs.34 This bug has an 
equal impact on both Windows 7 and Windows 10, and Microsoft recom­
mends installing an out-of-band security update to avoid attacks.34 It is 
evident that cybercriminals are ready to disrupt almost everything in the 

 
 
 
 
 
8 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
pandemic by targeting critical systems like healthcare and the supply 
chain of vaccines.35 Hence, various guidelines and suggestions are also 
published to fight against these cyberattacks. These guidelines are crucial 
for controlling the increase in threats.26 
1.3 ROLE OF CYBERSECURITY AMID COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
As the entire world deals with the widespread coronavirus disease, a few 
longstanding challenges have become more prevalent. Cybersecurity is 
one such challenge that is more concentrated in this pandemic. This situ­
ation is an excellent opportunity for data breaches. When people are more 
desperate to get updates on virus spread, it becomes easier for cybercrimi­
nals to get confidential data by creating malicious links. The number of 
fake emails about coronavirus has increased since January 2020. One 
cybersecurity company in Russia discovered 500 instances of these 
types of scams, which were spread to 403 of its customers. Ever since 
the coronavirus pandemic started, the number of cyberattacks has also 
been increasing continuously.1 Most of the cyber risks in the pandemic 
are due to the actions of people along with the failures of technology 
and systems.1 The root causes of operational risks include the actions of 
people, for instance, intentional (theft, vandalism, and frauds), uninten­
tional (mistakes, omissions, and errors), and inaction (knowledge, guid­
ance, skills, and availability).1 System failure and technology failure are 
caused by software (coding, setting of security, testing, configuration 
management, compatibility, etc.), hardware (capacity, maintenance, and 
performance), and failure of systems (design, complexity, integration, and 
specifications).1 In light of these increasing cyber risks, greater care must 
be taken regarding cybersecurity by implementing the necessary steps, 
which are discussed in the following sections of this chapter. 
1.3.1 CYBERATTACKS AMID COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
During the COVID-19 pandemic period, cyberattacks can be classified into 
various categories, such as phishing, MitM attacks (Man-in-the-Middle), 
malware, ransomware, DoS (Denial of Service), and DDoS (Distributed 
Denial of Service) attacks. These types of attacks are briefly described 
below, and a few examples are shown in Table 1.1. Various advanced 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
9 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
cyberattacks like phishing and scams related to the COVID-19 pandemic 
are launched by APT (Advanced Persistent Threat) groups and cybercrim­
inals on organizations and unsuspected victims.13,40 The whole pandemic 
is being exploited by them for their different motives, like malware and 
ransomware.13 
• Online scams and phishing: Phishing is the most popular and effec­
tive type of attack in this pandemic and is done using various kinds 
of scams.13 The success rate of this type of attack is nearly 30% and 
even higher sometimes. It is very easy to trigger a user to click on 
malicious or phishing links to open an attachment in the network 
of an organization. Phishing attackers achieve various goals, which 
include the delivery of malware, stealing of credentials and sensi­
tive information, and financial fraud. This pandemic increased the 
effect of very common phishing traps. A few examples include 
cybercriminals making perfect use of Cyber Monday and Black 
Friday to exploit users, and the increase in online shopping during 
the pandemic made it especially effective in 2020. Therefore, there 
is a 600% increase in the number of phishing emails in Q1 2020.13 
Cybercriminals often use more advanced techniques to attract 
victims, like encryption protocols of HTTPS in their phishing links; 
nearly 75% of phishing links were prepared using SSL.13 In addi­
tion, SaaS (Software as a Service) and webmail users are highly 
targeted phishing areas. 
•
 Disruptive malware and ransomware: Malware attacks can take 
various forms, including computer system viruses, Trojan horses, 
worms, and spyware, and are used to achieve different goals. 
Different variants of malware are developed to do anything from 
stealing and collecting confidential data to displaying unnecessary 
ads to permanently damage an infected system. The most widely 
used malwares during the COVID-19 outbreak were cryptominers, 
botnets, info stealers, banking Trojans, ransomware, and mobile 
malwares. Ransomware is a malware that is designed to use 
encryption to force the target of the attack to pay a ransom demand. 
Once it is present on the system, the user files are encrypted, and 
payment demands are made for exchanging the decryption key. As 
the latest encryption algorithms are unbreakable with the available 
technology, the only possible method for recovering the encrypted 
files is to restore the data if backup is available or to pay the ransom 

 
 
 
 
10 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
demand. In the COVID-19 pandemic, some of the ransomware 
variants have evolved to perform “double extortion” attacks. 
DoppelPaymer, Maze, REvil/Sodinokibi, Nemty, etc. are a few 
variants that steal the file copies prior to encryption and threaten to 
breach them if the organization or user refuses to pay the ransom 
demand. Though this trend was started with Maze in late 2019, it 
has been growing continuously as more groups follow and adopt it 
throughout 2020. 
• DoS and DDoS attacks: The IT services and infrastructure, such as 
email, web applications, etc., of an organization are very critical to 
run a business. DoS attacks are developed to deny access to critical 
resources. This is accomplished by damaging the vulnerability in 
an application (causing it to crash) or by flooding a system with 
such large data or requests that the user will not be able to use the 
application (interpreting legitimate requests such that they can’t be 
handled). Unlike a DoS attack, a DDoS attack damages multiple 
attack sources, spreads with the help of many hosts, and launches 
a coordinated DoS attack on a target that intensifies the power of 
the attack effectively, making the defense more complicated for 
users.13,39 During the remote learning and work led by the COVID-19 
epidemic, remote access solutions were major targets of DoS and 
DDoS attacks. During the academic year of 2020–2021, DDoS 
attacks on the education areas increased rapidly. In universities in 
the UK, the service provider of the internet, JISC, experienced a 
DDoS attack in the pandemic, which disrupted staff and students to 
access the IT services and the internet at the University.13 
• MitM (Man-in-the-Middle) attacks: Various network protocols are 
safeguarded against eavesdroppers using encryption that makes 
the traffic impossible to read. A MitM attack circumvents these 
protections by breaking the connection into two pieces. An attacker 
creates a separate encrypted connection between a client and the 
server so that it can read or modify the data accordingly over the 
connection prior to forwarding it to the destination. These types 
of attacks can be defeated by using HTTPS protocols. Anyway, 
the increase in mobile usage makes these attacks more dangerous. 
Mobile apps offer less or no visibility to users about their network 
connections and the use of protocols that are insecure for the sake 
of communication and are prone to MitM attacks. 

 
 
S. 
Type of 
Country 
Security incident 
Impact 
No 
attack 
1 
Ransomware 
Czech 
The Brno University Hospital 
Entire IT network 
Republic 
is a testing laboratory 
was shut down 
of coronavirus disease 
and surgeries were 
experienced a cyberattack8 
postponed 
2 
Ransomware 
The US 
In Los Angeles, the 
It lost the revenue of 
Hollywood Prebsyterian 
10 days and affected 
Medical Center had paid the 
the reputation 
ransom amount of $17,000 to 
of the hospital 
obtain a decryption key for 
regaining the access of their 
hospital records3 
management 
3 
Phishing 
Germany 
Phishing emails were sent 
False information 
to senior officials of the 
and defacement 
company that provide PPE. 
The phishing websites were 
developed to control officials 
by forcing them to create fake 
login pages of Microsoft so 
 
that they can steal credentials1 
11 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
• Malicious apps: Mostly, all organizations concentrate their cyberse­
curity efforts on computer systems, but mobile devices are a great 
threat to the cybersecurity of an organization. The increase in the 
usage of mobile devices by employees for their work and the access 
to confidential information of the company make malicious mobile 
applications more dangerous. These malicious mobile applications 
have the equal capability to exploit everything that desktop malware 
can do, for example, stealing sensitive information, encrypting files 
with ransomware, etc. In 2020, the second most common type of 
malware used worldwide was mobile malware. The variants of 
mobile malware include Necro, PreAMo, and xHelper, which are all 
Trojans with advanced functionalities, including click and ad fraud. 
Malware of mobiles generally takes advantage of vulnerabilities 
of operating systems; for example, the RCE (Remote Execution 
Code) vulnerability, which is present in the batch of 43 Android 
security patches in January 2021. 
TABLE 1.1  Cyberattacks During the COVID-19 Pandemic. 

 
S. 
Type of 
Country 
Security incident 
Impact 
No 
attack 
4 
Phishing 
Taiwan 
Phishing emails included 
Defacement and 
a hacking tool that can be 
unnecessary panic 
accessed remotely. They 
created by recipients 
impersonate the official of 
Taiwan’s top contagious 
disease by urging users to get 
the coronavirus test9 
of email 
5 
DDoS 
The US 
The US Health and Human 
Interruption of 
Services Department that 
responses related to 
heavily deals with issues 
related to coronavirus was the 
COVID-19 issues 
major target of DDoS attacks10 
6 
DDoS 
France 
In Paris, group of some 
Disruption of 
hospitals that play a major 
access to emails and 
role in fighting against the 
servers 
COVID-19 pandemic was 
 
targeted by DDoS attacks10 
7 
Ransomware 
The UK 
The ransomware group 
A major threat to the 
named as Maze had published safety of a patient 
medical and personal details 
and also reputation 
of several former patients 
belonging to medical research 
company of London that 
of company 
provides tests of COVID-1911  
8 
Ransomware 
The US 
The cybercrime named 
“Netwalker” hacked the 
Loss of revenue 
University of California, San 
Francisco (UCSF), which 
was working on the vaccine 
of coronavirus disease and 
was forced to pay the ransom 
amount of $1.1412 
9 
Phishing/ 
Romania 
In Romania, many hospitals 
Exfiltration 
Ransomware 
had experienced ransomware 
and disruption 
attacks by sending phishing 
of hospital 
emails related to COVID-19 
management 
to damage computer systems, 
intervene hospital activities, 
and to encrypt files7 
12 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 1.1  (Continued) 

 
S. 
Type of 
Country 
Security incident 
Impact 
No 
attack 
10 
Phishing 
The US 
COVID-19 vaccine 
Exfiltration and 
manufacturing company 
Gilead Sciences, Inc. was a 
impersonation 
target of cybercriminals. Staff 
of this company was forced 
to create a fake login page 
of email for stealing their 
 
passwords6 
11 
Malware 
The US, 
Malware named “Kwampirs” 
Disruption in the 
Europe, 
is a remote accessible Trojan 
supply of healthcare 
Middle 
that exploits vulnerabilities 
components 
East, and 
in a network of targeted 
Asia 
companies in various 
 
countries4,5 
 
 
 
13 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
TABLE 1.1  (Continued) 
1.3.2 IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HEALTHCARE 
CYBERSECURITY 
The impact of the COVID-19 pandemic has phenomenally changed the 
functioning of healthcare sectors with the rapid increase in the implemen­
tation of remote patient monitoring and telehealth services. The threat in 
the field of healthcare too has become a source for ransomware, malware, 
phishing campaigns, breached medical records of patients, and various 
other cyberattacks in the field of healthcare with undesirable consequences. 
Most cyberattacks are successful when a healthcare company/organiza­
tion uses outdated software or operating systems such as Windows XP 
or Windows 7 for monitoring medical devices throughout a hospital.13 In 
fact, Interpol has stated that due to the COVID-19 pandemic, cybercrimi­
nals have shifted their targets from individuals and startup businesses to 
the government and critical health sectors. Security agencies in the US and 
UK were highly targeted in the healthcare sector, academic, pharmaceu­
tical industries, and research companies, along with the task of providing 
uninterrupted patient care to virus-infected people.15 
In the unprecedented COVID-19 circumstances, the Office of Civil 
Rights (OCR) released a notification that enforcement discretion will be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
exercised and penalties will not be imposed for not meeting the HIPAA 
(Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act) regulations against 
providers of healthcare leveraging platforms of telehealth, which may not 
satisfy the privacy rules of HIPAA.15 This is giving cybercriminals a favor­
able opportunity for the deployment of data breaches, EHR snooping, 
ransomware, phishing attacks, and many more.15 Additionally, for the 
accommodation of a rapidly increasing number of infected people and 
the support of existing infrastructure of healthcare, most countries world­
wide had to temporarily establish COVID-19 facilities for house-infected 
patients. As these facilities were created in a hurry, the priority is given to 
the patient’s healthcare than security, and in this way, security becomes 
the least priority.15 As a result, this leads to a vulnerability in the network 
that can be exploited easily by various malicious attacks. According to 
the reports of the Department of Health and Human Services, between 
February and May of 2021, there have been around 132 data breaches.15 
This is an almost 50% increase in reported breaches compared to the 
previous year.15 
Tracking and contact tracing apps are other sources of privacy concerns. 
In some cases, the medical history of the patient needs to be referred for 
further treatment, and these patient records should be transferred to health­
care facilities created temporarily from regular hospitals using less secure 
technology.15 This puts the healthcare sector at risk of “spray and pray” 
attacks by cybercrime groups. According to reports from Fortified, 60% of 
breaches in the healthcare sector in the first 6 months of 2020 were mali­
cious attacks or IT incidents, apart from insiders.15 Email compromises 
are also the most common attacks for getting access to the healthcare 
network and stealing patient records in the COVID-19 pandemic.15 Forti­
fied described that these cyberattacks are successfully executed with the 
help of phishing campaigns by dropping malware or ransomware, which 
are prevalent throughout the pandemic. 
1.3.3 IMPACT OF CYBERSECURITY ON BUSINESS 
ORGANIZATIONS IN THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC 
The pandemic of COVID-19 has introduced new challenges for business 
organizations as they switch to an operating model in which WFH has 
become the new normal these days. Business organizations are advancing 
their digital transformations, and cybersecurity is a major threat.14 In 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
spite of the fact that technology has been advancing every day, it is worth 
noticing that the majority of companies are still not providing a “cyber­
safe” remote working environment for employees. In April 2020, according 
to the reports of the National Cyber Security Center (NCSC), Switzerland 
had experienced 350 various cyberattacks (fake websites, phishing, direct 
attacks on organizations, etc.), compared to the normal cases of 100–150.14 
The major increase in cyberattacks was due to insecure working envi­
ronments (e.g., internet security). Cybercriminals take the pandemic as 
an advantage and launch their cyberattacks by exploiting the weakness of 
employees who WFH and capitalizing on individual’s strong interest in 
COVID-19-related news (malicious COVID-19 websites). Around 47% of 
individuals fall for phishing scams while working from home14 (see Fig. 
1.2). Another important thing to consider is that the average total cost of a 
data breach due to working remotely can be up to $137,000.14 On July 8, 
2020, according to the reports of the police from the city of London, more 
than GBP 11 million had been lost since January because of COVID-19-re­
lated scams.14 In Switzerland, when a survey was conducted during the 
pandemic, one of the seven respondents had experienced a cyberattack.14 
FIGURE 1.2 Phishing scams for employees at WFH. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [14] 
Cybercriminals also use techniques of credential stuffing to get access 
to the credentials of an employee, and the stolen data are sold to other 
cybercriminals.14 The major consequence of this is a serious or complete 
disruption to businesses which rely on platforms of videoconferencing.14 
Credential stuffing refers to the type of cyberattack where cybercriminals 

 
 
 
 
 
16 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
use stolen combinations of usernames and passwords that were stolen in 
the past to get access to other accounts because most individuals use the 
same combinations for various accounts.14 
One of the major reasons for the increase in cyberattacks in COVID-19 
is also that small, medium-sized, and startup companies do not provide 
computers or laptops; instead, employees use their own systems for 
accessing corporate data. Working remotely doesn’t provide a similar 
level of cybersecurity compared to an office environment.14 Employees 
working from home may not possibly run antimalware or antivirus scans 
regularly. In addition to this, home networks of Wi-Fi are easily attacked. 
Apart from all these attacks, the natural error committed by human is also 
a major area of concern. A few of the attacks are using machine learning 
methods, depending on the environment, and are left undetected. For 
example, phishing attacks have become more sophisticated via various 
channels like voice (vishing) and SMS. Ransomware attacks have also 
become more sophisticated. For example, cybercriminals are integrating 
data breaches with ransomware to convince targeted victims to pay the 
ransom amount. 
1.3.4 GOVERNMENT AND OTHER MEDIA OUTLETS 
The present COVID-19 pandemic is a very difficult challenge for not 
only healthcare and financial services but also for the government and 
other media resources for providing exact and immediate information to 
the general public and global organizations. A bit of delay or misleading 
information may result in unpleasant circumstances. Cyberattacks are 
launched on government and other media resources for spreading false 
updates related to coronavirus and the generation of vaccines in public.17 
For instance, though it is not a cyberattack but just fake news (see Fig. 
1.3), it can also create hype and tension among people, due to which ques­
tions can be raised about governments.17 
When the Parliament of South Africa was closed because of the restric­
tions of strict lockdown, all meetings were carried out using videocon­
ferencing calls. Cybercriminals interrupted a meeting by sharing some 
abhorrent materials on the platform of Zoom amid the virtual meeting.19,38 
Additionally, as Zoom gained a lot of popularity amid COVID-19, it is 
considered unsafe in several countries and has been banned in Taiwan and 
the US for the sake of communication.17 

 
 
 
 
 
17 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
FIGURE 1.3 Fake news related to COVID-19 vaccine. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [17] 
Interpol 2020 stated that the focus of cyberattackers is on government 
departments and large organizations for causing unrecoverable damage 
to the infrastructure of information systems.18 Due to the pandemic, the 
dependency on digital platforms has increased, which puts additional stress 
on law enforcement agencies worldwide.18 In addition to this, most people 
are implementing teleconferencing tools in the space of virtual offices, 
and hence, hackers know the security vulnerabilities lying in these tools.18 
1.4 COVID-19 CONSEQUENCES FOR CYBERSECURITY 
The issues of cybersecurity are classified into two categories: direct and 
indirect consequences of the coronavirus pandemic, as shown in Table 
1.2. Direct consequences include theft or fraud, data sharing, and attacks 
on vulnerable systems. Indirect consequences include the management 
of other treatments or conditions, emergency situations, and impacts on 
privacy and physical integrity.20 
TABLE 1.2 Direct and Indirect Consequences of COVID-19 for Cybersecurity. 
Direct consequences 
Indirect consequences 
Theft and fraud: Cybercriminals take 
advantage of people by spreading false 
information to create tension and stress 
among them so that they can easily get 
access to personal information (e.g., fake 
campaigns, ransomware, and phishing).20 
Security data breaches will be continued 
for a long time even after the pandemic. 
Management of other treatments or 
conditions: Though the pandemic is a 
serious challenge throughout the world 
with an increased threat of disruption of 
healthcare organizations, it is impossible to 
delay treatments of other ongoing diseases. 
Patients suffering from oncological, 
obstetrical, chronic, mental, and various 
other conditions of healthcare must get 
treatment.20 

 
Direct consequences 
Indirect consequences 
Data sharing: The current issues of 
Emergency situations: Cybercriminals 
contact tracing apps mainly concentrate 
take advantage of people in emergency 
on data sharing and privacy maintenance 
situations by sending them fraud messages 
of personal information.20 The security 
or emails so that they can react to them 
vulnerabilities of these apps allow hackers immediately by providing personal data to 
to get personal data. So, contact tracing 
cybercriminals. 
apps must be available for suitable 
risk evaluation and verification of data 
 20 
integrity.
Vulnerable systems: Most healthcare 
Impact on privacy and physical integrity: 
organizations are using outdated 
Advice such as consultation on web-based 
technology due to budget issues because 
applications is available, but at what 
of which systems become interoperable, 
price for the privacy of a patient? Most 
and they also lack the latest patches and 
home infrastructures are not integrated 
 
suitable configurations.20 There’s a huge 
with security systems for controlling and 
risk and stress on these systems that gives 
protecting sensitive information.20 
a great advantage to cybercriminals to 
attack. 
 
 
 
 
 
18 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 1.2 (Continued) 
1.5 TECHNOLOGIES USED FOR FIGHTING COVID-19 
The threat of cyberattacks has been increasing continuously for the last 2 
years. In the past, various cyberattacks were launched, but the impact in 
the present situation is very severe and worse than ever before. The recent 
sighting of cyberattacks like NotPetya and WannaCry diverted the global 
focus on cybercrimes.22 Recognition and deployment of smart cybersecu­
rity techniques for decreasing security gaps are an absolute necessity. 
• Edge computing: The focus of edge technology is on 5G or B5G 
(Beyond 5G), which helps to control coronavirus disease and is 
considered to be more powerful compared to 4G technology.1 
The edge computation integrated with the wireless network of 5G 
helps control the pandemic. There are various advantages of edge 
computing, such as low latency, protection of the training data 
model, and scalability.1 A healthcare framework based on B5G 
technology is designed to combat COVID-19. The framework 
consists of three layers: cloud, edge, and stakeholder layer.1 It is 
capable of integrating with the surveillance system for wearing 

 
19 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
masks, maintaining social distancing, and testing body tempera-
ture. The designed diagnostic of COVID-19 can be useful for 
identifying patients not suffering from coronavirus disease so that 
hospitals are not overcrowded and sensitive personal information is 
not processed.21  
•  Potential of AI (artificial intelligence) and ML (machine learning):  
As AI is being introduced in every segment of the market, this  
technology integrated with ML has brought massive changes in  
cybersecurity.23  AI has been paramount in designing automated  
security systems and automated threat detection, face detection,  
and natural language processing.23  Technologies of AI are helpful  
for protecting data against increasingly sophisticated attacks like  
ransomware, malicious malware, and various social engineering  
attacks. AI-enabled threat detection systems are helpful in  
detecting and predicting new attacks so that administrators can be  
notified of any data breach immediately. ML and AI go hand in  
hand in all aspects. The integration of these emerging technolo-
gies gives rise to the rapid automation of predictive analytics.25  
ML is useful in providing the fastest ways for the identification of  
new cyberattacks, draws statistical information, and then pushes  
that information to endpoint security platforms.25 Threat intel-
ligence is a special case where ML and AI can work tremendously  
to combat cyberattacks.  
•  Behavioral analytics: This technique is mostly used for targeting 
social networking sites and online advertisements to a suitable 
audience.22 Excitingly, behavior analytics is being explored 
continuously for developing the newest cybersecurity technologies. 
Behavior analytics is useful in determining patterns present on a 
system and network activities for detecting potential and real-time 
threats of cyberattacks.22 For example, if the data transmission rate 
increases abnormally from a particular user device, it may be an 
indication of a cybersecurity issue. Additionally, this technique is 
mostly useful for networks, and its application in user devices and 
systems has seen rapid growth.22  
•  Blockchain cybersecurity: It is one of the current cybersecurity 
technologies that is gaining recognition and momentum. The 
workings of blockchain technology are based on the identification 
of two transaction parties.22 In a similar way, it also works based 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
20 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
on the peer-to-peer network fundamentals of this technology.22 In 
a blockchain, every member is equally responsible for verifying 
the reliability of the data added. Additionally, blockchains develop 
a near-impenetrable network for cybercriminals, and the data are 
safeguarded from compromise. Hence, with the help of blockchain 
technology, AI can build a robust verification system for keeping 
cyberattack threats at bay.22 
• Embedded hardware authentication: Just a PIN and a password are 
not enough for the protection of hardware. Embedded authentica­
tors are the latest technologies for verifying the identity of a user. 
A major breakthrough was initiated by Intel in this domain by 
establishing sixth-generation vPro chips.22 These user authentica­
tion chips are very powerful and are embedded into the hardware 
itself. They are developed to modernize “authentication security,” 
and multiple levels and strategies of authentication are employed.22 
• Virtual dispersive networking (VDN): This technique overcomes 
MitM attacks where the messages of the sender and receiver are 
controlled by a third party, though encryption is provided. VDN 
has a vital role in these types of attacks by following the rule of 
divide and encrypt. The messages are divided into multiple regions, 
and then they are individually encrypted.24 The programming of 
individually encrypted messages is done on various devices like 
laptops, PCs, servers, and even mobile phones.24 By using VDN, 
MitM attack is surpassed successfully. Cybercriminals get baffled 
by this technique as information is accessed in bits and pieces, which 
make it incomprehensible for them. VDN also increases speed and 
performance as soon as the traffic is dispersed independently on 
different paths.24 
• Zero trust model: As the name indicates, this cybersecurity model 
is based on the belief that the network is already compromised.22 
By believing that the network is not trustworthy, it is obvious 
that both internal and external securities are to be enhanced. The 
main idea here is that both internal and external networks are 
vulnerable to compromise and need equal security.22 It includes 
the identification of business-sensitive data, mapping the flow 
of this data, segmentation logically and physically, and then 
policy enforcement and control through automation and constant 
monitoring.22 

 
21 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
1.6 MITIGATION 
Mitigation and prevention of cyberattacks are quite inevitable tasks during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. There are a few practical ways that can be imple-
mented for reducing the risk of cyberattacks. They are discussed below: 
• Cybersecurity awareness: Awareness regarding cybersecurity must 
be created among users by providing constant training, which is 
very important to reduce the risks of cyberattacks against organiza-
tions. In a recent survey, it is clear that only 11% of businesses have 
trained their employees on cybersecurity for non-cybersecurity.13 
• VPN usage: Virtual private network (VPN) is referred to as a 
secured encrypted channel for the transmission of data between a 
sender and a receiver over the internet. A  VPN can be an effective 
barrier against cyberattacks. It offers two security aspects, integ-
rity and confidentiality, and allows companies or organizations to 
extend security policies to remote employees. 
• Antivirus protection: Employees of organizations must be provided 
with a license to malware and antivirus software so that they can 
use them on their personal computer systems. Also, ensure that the 
latest antivirus software is installed on systems and mobile devices 
that are running constantly. 
• Phishing awareness: Employees must be very alert while receiving 
emails and must check the authenticity of the sender’s address.14  
• Enable MFA (Multifactor authentication): Security is strengthened 
by MFA as it requires a one-time code along with a username and 
password to get access to an account.13  An SMS is received on a 
mobile device whenever anyone tries to login with a username or 
password. MFA is a crucial factor in reducing the risks of theft 
and guessing of passwords, like brute force cyberattacks.13 An 
employee working from home must provide a username, password, 
and one-time code, which is received on his/her mobile, for the 
verification of his/her identity prior to accessing the company’s 
internal network. 
•  Identification of weak spots: Every IT system has a weakness. 
Organizations should perform tests to identify them and patch the 
most crucial vulnerabilities without delay. The scanning of vulner-
abilities in a system and various other types of penetration testing 
exercises must be performed on a regular basis. 

 
 
22 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
• Frequent backups: Backups of important files should be performed 
frequently and stored independently from your system (e.g., on 
external drives or in the Cloud). 
• Application of new tools and technology: Organizations can use the 
latest tools, like the host checking tool, which is used for checking 
the security posture of an endpoint before approving access to 
corporate data systems. This reinforces the security of employees 
working remotely. 
• Physical security while working from home: It is very essential 
to safeguard the devices of a home office. Some of the practical 
ways are to ensure that work devices are not left unattended, using 
a lock screen for devices, setting a password for the laptop, and also 
making sure to log off all devices after the completion of work, etc. 
• Risk management: Organizations can apply for GRC (Governance, 
Risk, and Compliance) solutions to enhance risk management. 
Solutions of GRC provide a detailed review of a company’s risk 
exposure and help to interlink various disciplines of risk (opera-
tional risks, cybersecurity, business continuity, etc.). 
• Network segmentation: Segmentation of a network is another way 
to reduce cyberattack risks. The network can be segmented into 
various trusted zones: the network of the home office (high level of 
trust), the network of the home entertainment (low level of trust), 
and the internet zone (distrusted). IoT devices must be isolated on 
another Wi-Fi network. So by doing this segmentation, if any of 
the IoT devices are compromised, it will not have any effect on a 
corporate laptop. 
• Hospital systems should carefully monitor administrative authori-
ties because in most cases, attacks start with compromised accounts 
of third party providers.3 Regional Hospital of Hancock experienced 
a similar attack in January 2018.3  
1.7 CONCLUSION 
The pandemic of COVID-19 has turned the lives of every individual upside 
down; it is like a wakeup call for everyone. It has given many challenges 
to mankind, and cybersecurity is also one major challenge thrown by the 
pandemic that needs to be addressed very carefully to reduce cyberattacks 

 
23 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
on individuals, IT organizations, healthcare industries, etc. This chapter has 
reviewed the role of cybersecurity and its issues in COVID-19, outlined 
important cyberattacks amid the pandemic, discussed the impact of the 
pandemic on healthcare and business organizations, and finally noted a 
few mitigation steps to reduce cyber risks in the pandemic. The current 
situation is unchangeable, but we can try to make it better by protecting 
confidential information from cyberattacks. 
KEYWORDS 
•  pandemic 
•  malicious 
•  cyberattacks 
•  cybersecurity 
•  integrity 
•  coronavirus 
REFERENCES 
1. Wang, L.; Alexander, C. A. Cyber Security during the COVID-19 Pandemic.  AIMS 
Electron. Electr. Eng.  2021, 5 (2), 146–157. 
2. Weil, T.; San Murugesan, S. IT  Risk and Resilience—Cybersecurity Response to 
COVID-19. IT Professional  2020, 22 (3), 4–10. 
3. Williams, C. M.; Chaturvedi, R.; Chakravarthy, K. Cybersecurity Risks in a 
Pandemic.  J. Med. Int. Res.  2020, 22 (9), e23692. 
4. Ying, H.; et al. Health Care Cybersecurity Challenges and Solutions Under the 
Climate of COVID-19: Scoping Review. J. Med. Int. Res.  2021, 23 (4), e21747. 
5. Cimpanu, C. FBI Re-sends Alert about Supply Chain Attacks for the Third Time in 
Three Months. ZDNet, Mar 31, 2020.  https://www.zdnet.com/article/fbi-re-sends-
alert-about-supply-chain-attacks-for-the-third-time-in-three-months/ (accessed Mar 
2021, 05) 
6. Stubbs, J.; Bing, C. Exclusive: Iran-linked Hackers Recently Targeted Coronavirus 
Drugmaker Gilead - Sources.  Reuters,   May 8, 2020. https://www.reuters.com/ 
article/us-healthcare-coronavirus-gilead-iran-ex-idUSKBN22K2EV  (accessed Apr 
2021, 05]. 
7. Cimpanu, C. Hackers Preparing to Launch Ransomware Attacks Against Hospitals 
Arrested in Romania. ZDNet, May 15, 2020.  https://www.zdnet.com/article/ 

 
24 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
hackers-preparing-to-launch-ransomware-attacks-against-hospitals-arrested-in-
romania/ (accessed Apr 2021, 05]. 
8. Cimpanu, C. Czech Hospital Hit by Cyberattack while in the Midst 
of 
a 
COVID-19 
Outbreak 
[Online]. 
https://www.zdnet.com/article/ 
czech-hospitalhit-by-cyber-attack-while-in-the-midst-of-a-covid-19-outbreak/. 
9. Lyngaas, S. ‘Vendetta’  Hackers are Posing as Taiwan’s CDC in Data-theft Campaign 
[Online]. https://www.cyberscoop.com/vendetta-taiwancoronavirus- telefonica/. 
10. Hale, G. DDoS Attacks on Rise due to COVID-19 [Online]. https://www.controleng. 
com/articles/ddos-attacks-on-rise-due-to-covid-19/. 
11. Goodwin, B. Cyber Gangsters Hit UK Medical Firm Poised for Work 
on 
Coronavirus 
with 
Maze 
Ransomware Attack 
[Online]. 
https://www  
computerweekly.com/news/252480425/Cyber-gangsters-hit-UK-medical-research  
lorganisation-poised-for-work-on-Coronavirus. 
12. Tidy, J. How Hackers Extorted $1.14m from University of California, San Francisco 
[Online]. https://www.bbc.com/news/technology-53214783. 
13. Pranggono, B.; Arabo, A. COVID-19 Pandemic Cybersecurity Issues.  Int. Technol. 
Lett. 2021, 4 (2), e247. 
14. Impact of COVID-19 on Cybersecurity [Online]. https://www2.deloitte.com/ch/en/ 
pages/risk/articles/impact covid-cybersecurity.html 
15.  The Impact of COVID-19 on Healthcare Cybersecurity [Online]. https://news. 
sophos.com/en us/2020/10/07/the-impact-of-covid-19-on-healthcare-cybersecurity/ 
16. Mohsin, K. Cybersecurity in Corona Virus (Covid-19) Age, 2020 [Online].  Available 
at SSRN 3669810. 
17. Khan, N. A.; Sarfraz, N. B.; Noor, Z. Ten Deadly Cyber Security Threats Amid 
COVID-19 Pandemic, 2020. 
18. Chigada, J.; Madzinga, R. Cyber-Attacks and Threats during COVID-19: A  
Systematic Literature Review. South Afr. J. Inf. Manag. 2021, 23 (1), 1–11. 
19. Magome, M. South Africa Sees Sharp Rise in Virus, Part of African Wave. 
Associated Press, 2020. https://www.usnews.com/news/world/ articles/2020-12-10/ 
south-africa-sees-sharp-rise-in-virus-part-of-african-wave. 
20. Ferreira, A.; Cruz-Correia, R. COVID-19 and Cybersecurity: Finally, an Opportunity 
to Disrupt?. JMIRx Med.  2021, 2 (2), e21069. 
21. Zahra, M.; Mouseli, A. Technology and its Solutions in the Era of COVID-19 Crisis: 
A Review of Literature. Evid. Based Health Policy Manag. Eco.  2020. 
22. The 5 Latest Cyber Security Technologies for Your Business [Online]. https://ifflab. 
org/the-5-latest-cyber-security-technologies-for-your-business/ 
23. Top 10 Cybersecurity Tends to Watch Out For in 2022 [Online]. https://www. 
simplilearn.com/top-cybersecurity-trends-article. 
24. Cybersecurity Technologies You Should Be A  ware of in 2020 [Online]. https:// 
dzone.com/articles/cybersecurity-technologies-you-should-be-aware-of. 
25. Top 5 Technologies That Can Change The Future Of Cybersecurity [Online]. https:// 
startuptalky.com/technologies-future-cybersecurity/ 
26. Lallie, H. S.; et al. Cyber Security in the Age of COVID-19: A  Timeline and Analysis 
of Cyber-Crime and Cyber-Attacks during the Pandemic.  Comput. Secur.  2021, 105, 
102248. 

 
25 
An Insight into Cybersecurity During the COVID-19 Pandemic 
27. Elsworthy, 
E. 
Hundreds 
of 
Bushfire 
Donation 
Scams 
Circulating, 
2020 
[Online]. 
https://www.abc.net.au/news/2020-
02-
07/ 
australia- fires- sees- spike- in- fraudster- behaviour/11923174. 
28. FTC. How to Help the Earthquake  Victims in Ecuador and Japan, 2016 [Online]. 
https://www.consumer.ftc.gov/blog/2016/04/ how-
help-
earthquake-
victims-
ecuador- and- japan (accessed June 15, 2020). 
29.  CNET. Watch Out For Hurricane Harvey Phishing Scams, 2017 [Online]. https:// 
www.cnet.com/news/ hurricane- harvey- charity- donations- scam- phishing -attack/ 
30. Naked Security. Michael Jackson’s Death Sparks Off Spam [Online]. https:// 
nakedsecurity.sophos.com/2009/06/26/ michael-jackson-harvesting-email-addresses. 
31. ESET. You Have NOT  Won! A Look at Fake FIFA  World Cup-themed Lotteries 
and Giveaways, 2018 [Online]. https://www.welivesecurity.com/2018/06/06/ 
fake- fifa- world- cup- themed- lotteries- giveaways/ 
32. Gallagher, S.; Brandt, A. Facing Down the Myriad Threats Tied to COVID-19, 2020 
[Online]. https://news.sophos.com/en-us/2020/04/14/covidmalware 
33. Kumaran, N.; Lugani, S. Protecting Businesses Against Cyber Threats during 
COVID-19 and Beyond, 2020 [Online]. https://cloud.google.com/blog/products/ 
identity-security/ protecting-against-cyber-threats-during-covid 
34. Worst Cyber-Attacks of 2021 (So Far), 2021 [Online]. https://www.sdxcentral.com/ 
articles/news/worst-cyber-attacks-of-2021-so-far/2021/12/ 
35. Beware! 2022 May see Cyber Attacks Evolve to New Levels, 2022 [Online]. https:// 
www.thehindubusinessline.com/info-tech/beware-2022-may-see-cyber-attacks-
evolve-to-new-levels/article38094515.ece 
36. Zhang, J.; Wu, M. Blockchain use in IoT  for Privacy-Preserving Anti-Pandemic 
Home Quarantine.  Electronics  2020, 9 (10), 1746. 
37. Mohamed, Y.; Hewage, C.; Nawaf, N. IoT  Technologies During and Beyond COVID-
19: A Comprehensive Review.  Future Internet  2021, 13 (5), 105. 
38. Andrade, R. O.; Ortiz-Garcés, I.; Cazares, M. In Cybersecurity Attacks on Smart 
Home during Covid-19 Pandemic, 2020 Fourth 
 
World Conference on Smart Trends 
in Systems, Security and Sustainability (WorldS4); IEEE, 2020. 
39. Asri, S.; Pranggono, B. Impact of Distributed Denial-of-Service Attack on Advanced 
Metering Infrastructure. Wirel. Pers. Commun.  2015, 83 (3), 2211–2223. 
40. Alshamrani, A.; et al. A Survey on Advanced Persistent Threats: Techniques, 
Solutions, Challenges, and Research Opportunities.  IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.  2019, 
21 (2), 1851–1877. 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 2 
CYBERATTACK SURGES IN THE 
COVID-19 SCENARIO: REASONS 
AND CONSEQUENCES 
NEERANJAN CHITARE1, MAITREYEE GHOSH2, 
SHANKRU GUGGARI3, and M.A. JABBAR4 
1Northumbria University, Newcastle, UK 
2Chubb UK Services Limited, London, UK 
3Machine Intelligence Research Labs, USA 
4Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
ABSTRACT 
Cybersecurity is an essential component in reducing the effects of 
cyberattacks. The COVID-19 pandemic pushes for the restructuring 
of security strategies throughout the globe. Cybercriminals and some 
Advanced Persistent Threat groups use this period to attack in cyber­
space. This chapter provides a relationship between emotions and 
logical thinking to avoid anxiety and make the most logical (safe) 
decision. It also introduces a brief description of cyberattacks during 
the COVID-19 period and focuses on the effects of cyberattacks on 
various environments. 

 
 
 
 
 
28 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
2.1 INTRODUCTION 
The COVID-19 pandemic has created uncertainty and anxiety and 
enhanced drastic changes with respect to life. Most organizations adopt 
remote working at high speed and scale. According to the World Economic 
Forum, hacking and phishing are new norms. During this period, cyber­
criminals increase their phishing attacks. Work-From-Home (WFH) is a 
new business model in this situation. Various challenges are being accom­
plished in 2020. Companies are building remote workforces to face the 
challenges by providing cloud-based platforms. 5G devices are widely 
used to connect various devices.1 
During the COVID-19 pandemic period, almost all businesses adapted 
new operating prototypes, such as working from home. With the digital 
transformation, most businesses are coming across different challenges in 
cybersecurity. If these concerns are ignored, the organization could face 
severe challenges regarding operations, legality, and compliance. Almost 
all companies urged their employees to work from home and asked them 
to “stay at home” during the pandemic. This results in a crucial component 
for both professional and personal life. Despite the demand for technology, 
most companies are still not providing safe remote working environments 
for their staff. Before COVID-19, most business meetings were held in 
person, but after this pandemic, all meetings are conducted online.2 
The organization of the chapter is as follows: Description of human 
errors as the source of cybersecurity breaches in Section 2; a brief explana­
tion of the growth of the information security in Section 3; and the usage 
of artificial intelligence in COVID-19 is discussed in Section 4. Psycho­
logical impacts on cyberattacks are introduced in Section 5. A short note 
on cybersecurity issues with practical strategies to avoid cyberattacks 
is mentioned in Section 6. Finally, concluding remarks are presented in 
Section 7. 
2.2 HUMAN ERROR AS THE SOURCE OF CYBERSECURITY 
BREACHES 
Human factors in information security have remained understudied 
and undervalued. Human-enabled errors are to blame for the rising 
number of data breaches, ransomware, and cyberattacks; in fact, 95% of 

 
 
 
 
29 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario 
human-enabled errors lead to cyberattacks.3 According to a few studies, 
human elements are not accounted in risk management or auditing. Tech­
nology is a key thing to handle this; most corporate executives, cyberse­
curity specialists, and managers depend on it. According to a few studies, 
some managers mistakenly believe that technology is the key to security 
defences.4 
Mobile device management systems and spam filters are crucial to 
preserve the end-users’ data. A unique risk factor, such as human error, 
needs to be addressed for the improvement of security. Human error is 
a common factor in almost all successful cyber breaches.5 These are in 
various forms, such as the timely installation of security software updates, 
weak passwords, and disclosure of critical information in response to 
phishing emails. 
Antimalware and threat detection softwares are developed to under­
stand the efficiency of technical security measures and how well humans 
use them.6 Generally, technical solutions halt cybercriminal activity like 
guessing a password to access an online company site. Human error plays 
a crucial role in cyberattacks. It also helps reduce a company’s risk and 
allows you to protect your company from a much broader spectrum of 
risks than any single technical solution. It is very important to empower 
employees to deal with the new cyberattacks. Human errors are a higher 
priority for cyber enterprise security in 2021.7 
2.3 THE GROWTH OF INFORMATION SECURITY BUSINESS 
It is estimated that the global information security market is expected to 
grow at an 8.5% compound annual growth rate in the upcoming 5 years 
and may cross $170.4 billion during the 2022 period. It is very important 
to take action to understand and increase awareness about the complex 
challenges and technologies in this domain.8 
Due to the growth of the digital landscape around the world, organiza­
tions need to rely on huge amounts of data. Hacktivists and cybercriminals 
acquire networks with the help of sharing information through the digital 
interface, which enables corporations to prioritize cyber defense. Further­
more, with the development of high vulnerabilities, threats, frauds, and 
hazards, it is very essential to design a strategy to fight against cyberat­
tacks and help the market expand.1 

 
 
30 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
During the COVID-19 epidemic, more cybercrime incidents were 
reported across different industries. More incidents happened by using 
malicious domain names such as COVID-19 or coronavirus. Cyberthreat 
actors used cybercrime as a service and targeted each demography. Simi­
larly, fraudsters are increasingly using the same business email addresses 
to carry out attacks. Furthermore, the transition to a remote working model 
has increased the risk of cyberattacks on businesses. Organizations are 
urged to implement solutions for malware protection and detection. These 
also want to reduce growing concern about cyberthreats, which has fueled 
market expansion. 
It is believed that the global cybersecurity market is predicted to grow 
at a CAGR of 10.9% during 2021–2028. It leads to cyberattacks and is 
responsible for the market’s growth. The number of cyber frauds and 
crimes has increased in the last few decades, which has led to high losses 
for corporations. Management of the business organization is spending 
a huge amount on information security solutions and improving their 
in-house security infrastructure to combat cybercrime incidences. All over 
the world, most governments are giving more priority to cybersecurity 
plans. This is also creating high opportunities for industry players.9 
2.3.1 INCREASE IN THE SPEAR PHISHING ATTACKS AT THE 
GLOBAL LEVEL 
Based on the Barracuda networks, phishing emails have increased by 
approximately 600%. Cybercriminals try to profit from the fear and uncer­
tainty created by the COVID-19 outbreak. Security providers reported 137, 
1188, and 9116 instances in January, February, and March, respectively. 
COVID-19-themed emails are used for email attacks; approximately 
2% is reported (i.e., 468,000 global email threats detected by the orga­
nization). The assaults took advantage of broad awareness of the matter 
to deceive people into passing over their logins and financial informa­
tion and/or unknowingly downloading malware to their machines, as is 
normally the case. Here, phishing assaults are grouped as frauds (54%), 
blackmail (11%), brand impersonation attacks (34%), and corporate email 
breaches (1%). Along with the normal enticements to click through for 
additional information on the epidemic, some fraudsters are claiming to 
provide treatments or face masks, while others are attempting to obtain 

 
 
 
31 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario 
investment in vaccine firms or donations to combat the virus and assist 
the needy.10 
In the COVID-19 epidemic, several organizations and businesses have 
experienced changes in their working environments. Due to the pandemic, 
teleworking and other distant activities have expanded. In communication, 
teleworking increases people’s reliance on email. It is ideal for email fraud 
schemes. Cybercriminals have used this pandemic by exploiting broad 
knowledge of the issue to deceive people into giving personal information 
or accidentally downloading malware to their machines by clicking on 
harmful links or attachments. To disguise themselves as reputable sources, 
they may imitate government organizations, public health centers, minis­
tries of health, or prominent figures in a relevant country. The emails 
appear to be genuine, as does the inclusion of the logos.11 
2.3.2 MONETARY VALUE AND THE CYBER RISK 
According to Accenture research on “Securing the Digital Economy,” 
businesses are never more reliant on the digital economy and internet for 
growth. Before 10 years, one out of four relied on the internet for commer­
cial aspects, but nowadays, without it nothing is possible. A trustworthy 
digital economy is very essential as well as crucial for the organization’s 
future growth. Due to the cyberattacks, digital innovation is facing new 
hazards. According to the source, the United States of America expects 
$5.2 trillion risks in upcoming 5 years (Cumulative 2019–2023). Very huge 
amount of money will be lost if the investments in security are not made 
properly. The risk varies from industry to industry such as $753 billion 
for Tech, $642 billion for life sciences, and $505 billion for automotive.12 
Due to internet dependency, the digital economy is raised. Business 
leaders (68%) believe that cybersecurity threats are grown tremendously. 
Currently, 80% of businesses are using digitally powered innovation and 
it is very essential to protect them from cyberattacks. According to WEF 
Global Risks Report 2019, cyberattacks and data fraud or theft are two 
venues of hazards that CEOs are most likely to challenge.13 
In today’s world, cybercrime is no more entirely the domain of rogue 
hackers working alone; instead, cybercriminals are forming institution­
alized and organized groups. Cyber methods, crimes, and tricks make 
it difficult for businesses to become immune to it. New approaches for 

 
 
 
 
32 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
masking attacks have also been discovered, particularly with the usage of 
encryption protocols to conceal exploits. Malicious code identification is 
more challenging. Cybercriminals are increasingly employing Bitcoin to 
conduct transactions in order to conceal their identities. That financial gain 
is the driving force behind cybercrime, demonstrating how valuable this 
industry is. As a result, it is growing at such a quick rate. The entry fee is 
quite low and inexpensive. It has been noticed that cyber thieves seek a 
higher return on investment by employing more cost-cutting approaches, 
which is why complicated harmful programs, such as rootkits and boot-
kits, are rarely employed due to their high cost. This large investment 
may yield a lower return if the desired outcome is not achieved. As a 
result, organized hacker groups are focusing on mass-produced software 
that is specifically designed for cybercrime. Small businesses that have 
large businesses as clients are at a higher risk of being attacked because 
large businesses have easy access to a lot of information. Due to budget 
constraints, small businesses invest less in security. This is why hackers 
are fully aware that while their actual target may have strengthened their 
security, the vendors and service providers who assist them may not have. 
They use this as an opportunity to lapse as their entry point.14 
During the COVID-19 period, most popular IT companies adopted 
various strategies for their daily operations, such as disaster recovery strat­
egies, personal management, etc. This period also allowed understanding 
the weaknesses in the planning and implementation of the IT systems.19 
2.4 AI AS A WEAPON FOR CYBERATTACK 
Machine learning has previously been used to identify and fix secu­
rity flaws, but can it go much further? Humans have been the exclusive 
authors of malicious software up until now. However, malicious software 
capable of changing, concealing, replicating, and reasoning on its own 
has proved challenging to anticipate. Humans, on the other hand, can now 
create programs that can “think” autonomously and attack hundreds of 
targets at once. The unthinkable has become unavoidable. Now that we 
know that expert systems are technically possible, we must prepare for a 
future software program capable of analyzing all possible attack vectors, 
selecting the best one, successfully executing it, and remaining undiscov­
ered. These campaigns could potentially be targeted at your company. An 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
33 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario 
algorithm-driven cyberattack program will operate nonstop, 24 hours a day, 
7 days a week, critically “thinking” about how to attack. Most crucially, it 
can adapt to avoid detection. For example, these systems could be sophis­
ticated enough to figure out every single individual who works or has ever 
worked for your organization, perhaps by sifting through LinkedIn data. 
It may then launch an assault on each of their home networks, waiting for 
one to connect to the corporate network. The planted malware just rides 
into the network and extends its wings to reach its target data, regardless 
of what authentication, virtual private networks (VPNs), or firewalls are 
in place. Disrupt, steal, or destroy; whatever the goal, it has a chance of 
succeeding.15 
A few of the largest global and most reputable companies have already 
been harmed by cyberattacks, jeopardizing their capacity to protect sensi­
tive data. With aggressive AI on the horizon, businesses must develop 
new defenses to combat it. In collaboration with AI cybersecurity firm 
Darktrace, MIT Technology Review Insights polled more than 300 C-level 
executives, directors, and managers around the world to learn how they’re 
dealing with cyberthreats and how AI can help them combat them. 
It is a known fact that human-driven reactions to cyberattacks are 
now not able to address the automated attacks, according to 60% of 
respondents, and as firms prepare for a greater challenge, more advanced 
technologies are necessary. In fact, a whopping 96% of respondents said 
they’ve already started guarding against AI-powered attacks, with some 
even enabling AI defenses. The FBI warned in January 2020 that deep-
fake technology had already advanced to the point where artificial iden­
tities might pass biometric tests. National security might be jeopardized 
by high-definition, phony videos constructed to impersonate public 
personalities so that they appear to be uttering whatever words the video 
designers put in their modified mouths, according to an FBI official at 
the time. 
As they battle to defend data and other assets, cyberattacks are already 
proving to be too quick and furious for humans, and first-generation 
tools to keep up with traditional security tools were exposed once again 
in December 2020, when an operation attributed to Russian intelligence 
groups invaded the software supply chains of several of the world’s 
most famous institutions, including sections of the United States govern­
ment and Fortune 500 firms. Hackers recently attempted to interrupt the 
delivery of coronavirus vaccines, putting public health and safety at risk. 

 
 
34 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
In February 2021, hackers broke into the systems of a water treatment 
facility in Oldsmar, Florida, to raise the quantities of pollutants in the 
water supply to dangerous levels. Companies are concerned that they do 
not have enough resources to combat such dangers. 
The growing digital complexity exacerbates the IT skills gap; 60% of 
respondents are unable to keep up with automated attacks. AI is increas­
ingly being used by cybersecurity teams to prevent risks from escalating at 
the first symptoms of compromise, allowing them to contain attacks even 
when they occur late at night or on weekends. When asked how concerned 
they are that future cyberattacks on their companies will use AI, 97% 
of respondents said future AI-enhanced attacks are alarming, with 58% 
saying such cyberattacks are extremely concerning. When asked which 
assaults are most concerning, the majority of respondents (68%) said 
impersonation and spear phishing are the most concerning. Humans are 
unable to keep up with the rate of AI invention, let alone respond quickly 
enough, necessitating new technical solutions. Thousands of businesses 
rely on artificial intelligence (AI) to respond to a rapidly evolving cyber­
security crisis, whether or not their security teams are present.16 Some 
popular available cyber intrusion detection datasets that are available in 
the literature are indicated in Figure 2.1. 
FIGURE 2.1 Public datasets for cyber intrusion detection. 

 
 
 
35 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario 
2.5 PSYCHOLOGICAL EFFECTS IN COVID-19 PERIOD 
During this period, most people searched for information regarding the 
guidelines to maintain their emotions and behaviors in this situation. At 
the individual level, it has impacts like social isolation enabling intro­
spective reflection and improving one’s evaluation of oneself and society. 
Similarly, there is an increase in predictive thinking to resolve problems 
and develop strategies to adopt a new balance in life at the cognitive level. 
This period also forced people to choose new habits for their daily lives. 
Curiosity among the people increases during this time if there is a failure 
in communication regarding official media updates, and they try to access 
the information from all possible authentic sources.17 
2.6 CYBERSECURITY ISSUES IN THE ERA OF COVID-19 
Cyberattacks are categorized into scams, phishing, and Distributed Denial­
of-Service (DDoS). Ransomware, DDoS, and phishing are some examples 
of cyberattacks. Cybercriminals use this time for more commercial gain or 
to collect information regarding COVID-19 vaccines by adopting various 
approaches. Hades, patchwork, etc. are the examples adopted by the APT. 
The healthcare sector is the most targeted domain in this period. 
Healthcare bodies, research organizations, and pharmaceutical companies 
are highly vulnerable to cyberattacks. Limited budgets and the usage of 
outdated softwares are the main reasons for these attacks. Various agencies 
around the globe, such as the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security 
Agency (CISA), the United Kingdom’s National Cyber Security Center 
(NCSC), and the United States Department of Homeland Security (DHS), 
are working to understand cyberattacks. “WellMess” and “WellMail” are 
well-known custom malware used to cause damage.18 
Practical techniques to avoid cyberattacks are as follows: 
1.  Need to provide constant training regarding the cybersecurity to 
minimize the risks. 
2.  Usage of VPN to communicate between two points. This provides 
high security in terms of integrity and confidentiality. 
3.  Multifactor authentication, such as username and password, and a 
one-time security code sent to the registered mobile phone through 
the message. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
4.  Keep all devices on the latest firmware. 
5.  Provide the latest antimalware software to reduce cyberattacks. 
6.  Divide the networks into various trusted zones. 
Figure 2.2 shows a few examples of cyberattacks during the COVID-19 
pandemic period. 
FIGURE 2.2 Cyberattacks during the COVID-19 period. 
2.7 CONCLUSIONS 
An increase in curiosity among the people gives cybercriminals the oppor­
tunity to develop more attacks related to the COVID-19 pandemic, such as 
treatment, vaccination, or methods to protect them. In this chapter, issues 
related to cyberattacks and how technology can help restrict these attacks 
are discussed. It also gives brief information regarding psychological 
aspects among the people. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
cybersecurity 
• 
cyberattacks 
• 
advanced persistent threat 
• 
emotions, logical thinking 

 
37 
Cyberattack Surges in the COVID-19 Scenario 
REFERENCES 
1. Sobers, R. 134 Cybersecurity Statistics and Trends for 2021 | Varonis. Varonis, Mar. 
16, 2021 [Online]. https://www.varonis.com/blog/cybersecurity-statistics/ (accessed 
Sep 05, 2021). 
2. Nabe, C. Impact of COVID-19 on Cybersecurity. Deloitte, 2021 [Online]. https:// 
www2.deloitte.com/ch/en/pages/risk/articles/impact-covid-cybersecurity.html  
(accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
3. Devon, “15 Alarming Cyber Security Facts and Stats | Cybint,” Cybint, Dec. 23, 2020 
[Online]. https://www.cybintsolutions.com/cyber-security-facts-stats/ (accessed Sep 
05, 2021). 
4. Nobles, C. Botching Human Factors in Cybersecurity in Business Organizations. 
HOLISTICA – J. Bus. Public Adm. 2018, 9 (3), 71–88. DOI: 10.2478/hjbpa-2018-0024. 
5. Chanti, S.; Chithralekha, T. Classification of Anti-phishing Solutions. SN Comput. 
Sci. 2020, 1 (1). DOI: 10.1007/s42979-019-0011-2. 
6. Neupane, A.; Saxena, N.; Maximo, J. O.; Kana, R. In: Neural Markers of 
Cybersecurity: An fMRI Study of Phishing and Malware Warnings, IEEE Transactions 
on Information Forensics and Security, 2016; 11 (9), 1970–1983. DOI: 10.1109/ 
TIFS.2016.2566265. 
7. Why Human Error is #1 Cyber Security Threat to Businesses in 2021, The Hacker 
News, 2021 [Online]. https://thehackernews.com/2021/02/why-human-error-is-1-
cyber-security.html (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
8. Contu, R. Forecast Analysis: Information Security, Worldwide, 2Q18 Update. 
Gartner,  2018 [Online]. https://www.gartner.com/en/documents/3889055 (accessed 
Sep 05, 2021). 
9. Cyber Security Market Trends & Growth Report, 2021-2028. Grand View Research, 
2021 
[Online]. 
https://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/cyber-
security-market (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
10. Muncaster, P. COVID19 Fears Drive Phishing Emails Up 667% in Under a Month 
- Infosecurity Magazine. Inforsecurity, 2020 [Online]. https://www.infosecurity-
magazine.com/news/covid19-drive-phishing-emails-667/ (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
11. Understanding and Dealing with Phishing During the COVID-19 Pandemic — 
ENISA. European Union Agency for Cyber Security, 2020 [Online]. https://www. 
enisa.europa.eu/news/enisa-news/understanding-and-dealing-with-phishing-during-
the-covid-19-pandemic (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
12. Abbosh, O.; Bissell, K. Securing the Digital Economy: Reinventing the Internet | 
Accenture. Accenture, 2021 [Online]. https://www.accenture.com/us-en/insights/ 
cybersecurity/reinventing-the-internet-digital-economy (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
13.  Global Risks 2019 : Insight Report by World Economic Forum, 2019 [Online]. http:// 
wef.ch/risks2019 (accessed Sep 05, 2021) 
14. Dalyalan, M. Cyber Risks, the Growing Threat. Researchgate, Nov. 2017 [Online]. 
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/320753018_Cyber_Risks_the_Growing_ 
Threat (accessed Sep 05, 2021). 

 
38 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
15. Miley, K. AI-powered Cyber Attacks. F5 Labs- Application Threat Intelligence, 
2020 [Online]. https://www.f5.com/labs/articles/cisotociso/ai-powered-cyber-attacks 
(accessed Sep 05, 2021). 
16. Preparing for AI-Enabled Cyberattacks. MIT  Technology Review, 2021 [Online]. 
https://www.technologyreview.com/2021/04/08/1021696/preparing-for-ai-enabled-
cyberattacks/ (accessed Sep. 05, 2021). 
17. Andrade, R. O.; Ortiz-Garcés, I.; Cazares, M. In Cybersecurity Attacks on Smart 
Home During Covid-19 Pandemic, 2020 Fourth World Conference on Smart Trends 
in Systems, Security and Sustainability (WorldS4), 2020; pp 398–404. 
18. Pranggono, B.; Arabo, A. COVID-19 Pandemic Cybersecurity Issues. Int. Technol. 
Lett. 2021, 4, e247. 
19. Weil, T.; Murugesan, S. IT  Risk and Resilience—Cybersecurity Response to COVID-
19. IT Professional 2020,  22 (3), 4–10. 

The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 3 
IOT IN SECURITY: IMPACT AND 
CHALLENGES DURING THE 
PANDEMIC 
SONIA SHARMA 
Department of C.Sc. & Applications, Hindu Girls College, Jagadhri, 
Haryana, India 
ABSTRACT 
This chapter explores the impact and challenges of security in imple­
menting the IoT. For this chapter, we led a study on the new proposed 
IoT gadgets expecting to help medical care laborers and specialists during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. We looked into the IOT-related innovations and 
their executions in three stages, including “Early Diagnosis,” “Quarantine 
Time,” and “After Recovery.”  IoT innovation can be very effective for 
this pandemic; however, it is likewise basic to think about the security of 
information. This chapter will suggest solutions to face various challenges 
in securing the IoT. 
3.1 INTRODUCTION 
We have to put in considerable effort to get information needed from the 
world that we are living in. A number of examples may come to our mind. 
We need to send a packet to someone we knew and for this we might 
access a diary where the addresses are written. For this we need to locate 
our diary or carry it with us. When we are in a new town or city and we 

 
 
 
 
40 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
need to find out a good doctor or a hospital and how do we find it out? 
Probably we will ask someone or look at telephone yellow pages. Often 
when we ask someone we might not get the correct information and we 
then may have to ask many others either to get complete information or 
even to get confirmation of the needed information. Similarly, we would 
like to reach a place and we will ask one or even many persons for guid­
ance and then we receive a number of instructions on how to reach the 
place such as—go straight for 200 m, then take a left turn, go on straight 
till you find petro pump, then take the next  right turn. It is difficult to 
remember all this information and often we are not sure about the instruc­
tions when the road has a Y junction, etc. We wish that we could get our 
information in a much smarter way. Yes, we have some of those smart 
devices already around us like our mobile phone with all the telephone 
numbers and addresses that we have stored. Then we have to carry our 
mobile phone with us. What would happen if we need information that is 
not stored on the mobile phone? Yes, we have a way—go to computer and 
search on the web. Is that easy? We need to access the Internet (luckily 
we can access it from our mobile, but then we have to carry our mobile!) 
and information gathering on the net is not very easy—our web usage is 
not smart enough. What we need is a smarter world that supports us with 
all our needs as we think of them or express them and preferably does not 
expect us not to carry anything and instead all the devices needed to help us 
are in the environment. That is our dream of our brave new world, indeed a 
smart world. Let us look at this world a little bit more closely. Let us take 
an example of our home. When I reach home, the home identifies me and 
opens the door, switches on the lights or opens the window curtains. At 
the right time (when I normally watch TV), it switches on the TV and the 
desired channel. It switches off the lights when I leave a room, warms the 
room or cools the room depending upon the time of the year/environment 
temperature, places order to a shop for the exhausted items in the store/ 
refrigerator, etc. When I wanted to access the computer or web, it provides 
the access through the TV monitor or through mobile so that I can browse 
or do computation. When I leave the house it switches off the lights, locks 
the doors. This is a smart home. What do we need to build such a home? 
The door probably has a mini camera and a tiny computational device with 
some memory and application embedded in it. It senses the visitor at the 
door and runs the application. The application matches the image of the 
visitor with that of the stored data and would take appropriate action. The 

 
 
 
 
 
41 
IoT in Security 
house has sensors embedded in the rooms, which detect the presence of 
person and identify the person and will take actions that are preferred by 
that person. Typically in the above description the persons concerned carry 
no other equipment or sensors. The sensors and processors are embedded 
into the environment and these devices monitor the environment or person 
continuously and take appropriate actions. 
We can think of other example applications: 
Application 1: A person with a cardiac problem wears an under 
garment that has a set of sensors, mote (a processor and communication 
device), and a tiny speaker. The sensors continuously monitor the person 
and the processor looks for the signals for heart attack, and when the event 
occurs, the processor gets in touch with the nearest hospital and gives 
information about the case, provides all the information of the patient 
records, warns the patient of the problem, advises him to go to the speci­
fied hospital, informs the nearby persons to help the patient to reach the 
specified hospital, tells the persons of what other actions to be taken, etc. 
Here the person wears his sensors, processor, and communication devices, 
they draw energy from body heat, the city has the infrastructure to receive 
messages from the patient, it has embedded processors to search for the 
desired hospital, inform hospital, retrieve patient records that are available 
on the net somewhere (in the cloud), provide access of the records to the 
hospital, advise the patient, etc. 
Application 2: Aperson visits a museum, the person’s profile (preferred 
language, interests) is accessed by the museum, visitor  is provided with a 
WiFi hearing device and when the person walks near any exhibit, he can 
hear the explanation about the exhibit (with the amount of explanation 
suiting the interest of the visitor), etc. 
Application 3: When a disaster like train accident occurs, the sensors 
on the train determine the nature of the accident and location, inform the 
railways of the accident, inform the nearest police station of the accident 
and advise what action is to be taken, inform the nearest hospitals, and 
prepare them to receive the victims. Here again the sensors, processors, 
and the applications are deployed in the environment, and take the desired 
actions when needed. Sometimes, human beings in and around the train 
also could inform one or more of the above groups. 
The core technological ingredients of the above-mentioned systems 
include low-cost sensors (hard sensors) embedded in the environment 
and human sensors acting through different social networks or mobile 

 
 
 
 
 
42 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
networks (soft sensors) that enable pervasive sensing and information 
or data gathering, decision making, and taking appropriate actions in a 
distributed manner. The characteristics of the smart infrastructure are that 
the data is obtained by various sensors, owned by different interest groups 
and different applications, use data in different formats, use different tech­
nologies for collection and interpretation of data, use different ontologies, 
and use solutions in different contexts. It is a dream that exists partly today 
and is also distant. It offers a new world that is full of promises and pitfalls. 
We can think of many more applications such as medical care from 
remote location, protection of property or space from intruders, and smart 
supermarkets which access our list of purchases and our history and guide 
us through purchases by telling us shelf details or describe the product, or 
even suggest alternative products. In all above applications, a smart world 
is presenting where each and every device is able to communicate and 
understand human interest. The basis of all this is a new computing para­
digm, which names as Internet of things (IOT) where linking of objects is 
possible without interference of human being1 and the devices which are 
used for investigation and exchange of data can be termed IOT devices.2 
The concept IOT first given by Kevin Ashton while implementing RFID 
concept in SCM (Supply Chain Management)3 has given a novel research 
idea in the field of Internet of Things (IOT). It has acquired persuading 
research ground as another exploration theme in almost all the areas such 
as smart home, smart space, but it plays a very important role particu­
larly in medical services. It not only reshapes the present medical field via 
fusing mechanical, monetary, and social possibilities, but also it develops 
medical care frameworks in a different way for analyzing, checking, and 
proper treatment of patients from traditional to more customized form. 
IOT is progressively turning into a crucial innovation in medical care 
frameworks where it can convey lower expenses, a superior nature of 
administrations, and progressed client encounters.4–7 Because of its wide 
abilities including following, distinguishing proof and verification, and 
information assortment, the outstanding development of IOT in medical 
services is relied upon to ascend from USD 72 billion out of 2020 to USD 
188 billion out of 2025.1,8 
The current worldwide test of the pandemic brought about by the orig­
inal extreme respiratory disorder COVID-2 presents the best worldwide 
general wellbeing emergency since the pandemic flu episode of 1918.9 As 
indicated by the last report of the World Health Organization (WHO), as 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
43 
IoT in Security 
of September 2020, the quantity of affirmed COVID-19 cases passed 31 
million individuals with a rough enormous loss of life of 960,000 indi­
viduals.10 This sickness has comparable manifestations as seasonal influ­
enza like fever, hack, and weariness, which are fundamental to perceive 
for early determination.11 The hatching time of COVID-19 takes from 1 
to 14 days. Shockingly, a patient with no indications might potentially 
be a transmitter of the COVID-19 infection to other people. This is while 
isolating such individuals is essential.12 In addition, the recuperation time 
of this sickness differs and relies upon the patient’s age, basic circum­
stances, and so forth, yet overall it can take between 6 and 41 days.13 While 
this sickness has a high potential to be spread effectively in correlation 
with comparable illnesses inside the COVID family, there are numerous 
continuous endeavors and much exploration to moderate the spread of 
this infection. In this specific circumstance, IOT innovation has been 
demonstrated to be a protected and effective approach to managing the 
COVID-19 pandemic.14,15 
3.2 IMPACT OF IOT DURING COVID 
In all over the world the actual importance of IOT was observed by the 
scientist during the three major stages of COVID-19 such as early detec­
tion, quarantine period, and recovery period17 because at that time infec­
tion of COVID-19 was spreading at increasing rate and there was necessity 
of such devices which can diagnose the patients in quick manner. As soon 
as the analysis of patients done with IOT devices, patients get better treat­
ment and controlling of infection can be possible. Various IOT devices not 
only helped to detect the patients but also collect the required information 
by taking temperature of body during early stage of COVID-19 and moni­
toring of patients remotely in the second phase, that is, quarantine period.18 
These devices are capable of cleaning the areas without interference of 
human being and can note the activity of patients. The devices which are 
approved by scientists during COVID include wearable devices drones, 
robots IOT buttons, and various smartphone applications. 
During pandemic the development of wearable devices18 has a 
wonderful brunt for the detection of COVID and use of wearable devices 
is considered as best way to diagnose the infection in early stage. There 
are so many wearable devices such as smart thermometer, smart helmets, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
  
 
 
 
 
 
44 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
glasses, Easy-Band, and Q-Band which accept input and process it; it is 
either worn or attached to the body of the patient. Smart thermometers 
have the capability to monitor the temperature rate and it increases the 
rate of diagnosis.20,21 Capturing of location, image of face and monitoring 
of temperature can be done by Smart Helmet22 and with Smart Glasses.23 
These devices also have the capability to make interaction of human very 
less. Electronic ankle bracelet is the example of Q-Band24 which was used 
in USA for monitoring quarantine cases and it is very cost effective. For 
monitoring social distance by the people, EasyBand25 play an important 
role during COVID. Instant Trace is one of the types of proximity Trace26 
device which is used for tracing the acquaintances of infected person in an 
organization device. 
Drones also play a vital role during pandemic. These are just like aero­
plane which consists of GPS, cameras, and sensors and where human 
activity is very less.27 To capture the temperature in crowd and to reduce 
human interaction warm imaging drone is used.28 To sanitize infected 
areas and to avert the health workers from infection sanitizer drone29 plays 
an effective role in pandemic. Clinical robot30 reduces the visit of person 
in hospitals and it helped to increase the convenience of treatment. For 
monitoring of crowd, infected areas, multipurpose drone, and observation 
drones are used.31,33 To broadcast the COVID-related information declare­
ment drone32 is used in pandemic. 
In Pandemic the real worth of various applications of smartphone was 
utilized by the people in year 2020. This year shows that almost 3.5 billion 
smartphones are active and the peoples are utilizing various apps to know 
more about pandemic.34,35 Retail, farming, medical filed, etc. are various 
fields where smartphone applications work exceptionally in a proficient 
manner.36,37 Various applications such as nCapp, Stop Corona, Aarogya 
Setu, etc. are utilized by the governments, organizations, and people all 
over the world. To control the health of patients in long term nCapp38 is 
used and in USA for COVID test at low cost various people used a kit 
which was connected to smartphone application Detecta Chem39 and to 
get daily reports of patients such as location, symptoms and to build a 
record of high-risk spots Stop Corona40 apps is utilized. AargoyaSetu app 
connects the people and health sector in an efficient manner45 and is widely 
used in India. Russia developed Social Monitoring application to diag­
nose the COVID-19 patients and assess their information,41 Selfie appli­
cation42 was developed by Poland for monitoring the patients. Civitas,43 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
45 
IoT in Security 
StayHomeSafe,44  TraceTogether46 are used by the government in Singa­
pore to notify the people which were very close to the infected person. 
Similarly, Hamagen,47 Coalition,48 BeAware Bahrain,49 and eRouska50 are 
the various applications which were utilized for providing best services to 
the patients and governments all over the world. Whatsapp51 is one of the 
wonderful applications which was widely used by many countries during 
pandemic for providing health care support. 
The major requirement of IOT devices in these crucial periods will 
definitely unwrap the vision of trailblazers, scientists, and designers to 
IOT innovation, which brings noteworthy development in this era after 
COVID. IOT was recognized chiefly for a lot more extensive scale idea, 
like savvy urban areas, shrewd vehicles, and so forth. This article featured 
how various ventures, which were never matured pre-COVID-19, would 
be benefitted from IOT after COVID. The utilization of IOT enjoys its 
benefits and impediments. A huge improvement might be seen soon with 
perceptible development in IOT research, development, and application in 
2020. A portion of the IOT use cases will be exclusively motivated because 
of the necessity to oversee and adjust to the COVID-19 pandemic, for 
example, get in touch with following and self-teaching. In the year 202038 
the use of 20 billion gadgets and web-associated things was normal and 
after COVID period IOT has rapidly become one of the most recognizable 
articulations across business and innovation and the innovation worldwide 
market is relied upon to develop to around 1.6 trillion dollars in market 
income.39 Coordination of IOT with various advancements, for example, 
distributed computing and implanting actuators and shrewd sensors work 
with cooperation with savvy things, permitting simple entry in various 
areas, upgrading information trade productivity, and further developing 
stockpiling and processing power.40 There is an increment toward IOT 
because of COVID and the recent pandemic that influences the anticipated 
evaluations of IOT development. The effect of change welcomed in 2020 
is driving associations to progressively involve IOT advances for func­
tional versatility.45 Soon, we figure we will see a greater amount of IOT 
and its ability as it plays a significant variable during this pandemic. With 
developing advancements, for example, 5G that Future Internet 2021, 13, 
105 15 of 24 can expand the capacities of IOT much more with quicker 
organizations and information. 

 
 
 
46 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
3.3 CHALLENGES TO DEPLOY IOT 
Practical implementation of Internet of Things (IOT) presents various 
challenges and these are discussed in this section. 
Implementation of IOT needs consumption of huge amount of sensors, 
actuators, and processors in the space of interest, in order to monitor the 
events of interest and take appropriate actions.  Further, these must be 
able to communicate among them and with a centralized system through a 
wireless network. The integrated devices, consisting of computing devices 
(processors and memory) wireless communication devices (Radio), and 
I/O interfaces for connecting needed sensors and actuators, are called 
motes and the wireless network of these devices is called wireless sensor 
and actuator networks (WSAN). These networks of unprecedented quality 
and scale monitor the space all the 24 h.  The deployed devices called 
nodes are battery powered, small in size, and unobtrusive. Often a network 
may need to have hundreds to thousands  of nodes deployed. to perform 
its function. The main challenges in building these networks are as under: 
• We do not have experience of deploying more than a hundred nodes 
at this time. The performance of the system when it is scaled up 
is to be studied. Often the battery lives are small (a few months) 
and maintenance of batteries in a large network, often in difficult 
terrain, is going to be a difficult task. Most deployments tend to be 
in the harsh environments (the devices are exposed to sun, wind, 
rain, vandalism, etc.) and the devices and networks are to be main-
tained in those environments. 
• Present Motes are large in size and are expensive for ubiquitous 
deployment. The deployments are to be handcrafted today and we 
need to automate the process of deployment. 
• Mote radio ranges are limited and we need more energy efficient 
radio for larger range. Further we need better protocols and algo-
rithms for more efficient network operation.  
• To diminish the obstruction between the human’s cognitive model 
of what they crave to achieve and the computer’s understanding 
of the user’s task, a systems is required. So the systems we design 
need to mimic human–human interactions—spoken and written 
words, visual detection and identifying objects, visual communi-
cation, gestures, capacity,  smell, and taste. Can we communicate 

 
47 
IoT in Security 
through our thoughts (Brainwaves)? We have to go a long way to 
seamlessly integrate the networks into the human activities. 
• The systems that we are visualizing must exhibit adequate intel-
ligence and we have to incorporate this artificial (non-natural, 
manufactured) intelligence into them.  The intelligent behavior is 
computation intensive and so we need more powerful and smaller 
computing systems to implement intelligent behavior.  
• To build smart spaces, we need to embed computing infrastructure 
extensively in our physical infrastructure—objects around us, 
buildings and roads so that the smart space brings together  the two 
worlds (computing and physical worlds) that have been disjoint 
till now. For this we need smaller and more powerful computing 
infrastructure. 
• Extensive and context sensitive profiling of human beings is needed, 
and this information is to be provided to the system for intelligent 
decisions and treating the system as an extension of human being. 
In this venture we have to preserve the privacy of people and that 
needs a delicate balance between what profile of the human being 
is to be provided to the system and what should not be provided. 
• Complete vision of IOT is achieved when computing technology is 
embedded into objects that we deal with and does not stand out. In 
such a case we interact with objects in a normal way and we do not 
see computers but only objects around us and that is the idea from a 
user’s view and consciousness leading to minimal distraction of the 
user—no surprises for us. 
• The intensity of interactions between a user’s invisible personal 
computing space and his/her environment increases when the smart 
spaces grow in sophistication. This has severe communication 
bandwidth, energy consumption of the systems, and distraction 
implications for a user using wireless communication systems.  The 
presence of multiple users will further complicate this problem. 
This is to be addressed by limiting interactions with unwanted 
(logically distant) entities. 
• In the society the smartness of the objects varies over a wide range 
and depends upon the context. The large dynamic range of “smart-
ness” can be a problem in making this technology invisible and 
also it is an implementation challenge. The level of “smartness” we 
can build into space around us differs. The smartness of conference 

 
48 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
room or office may be different from that of average home and that 
of a city road would differ from a village road. We need to address 
the problem. We also see more smartness close to us and it goes on 
decreasing with distance. Can we hide the smartness as the object is 
far and bring it into focus only when it is close to us? 
• All the systems under IOT need to know the user intent in order to 
respond to him/her in a meaningful manner.  To know the user’s 
intent one may require user profile. For example when the user is 
to be hospitalized, the user may have his own choice of the hospital 
depending upon his/her preferences which might change with time, 
type of emergency, type of the health problem, cost level of the 
hospital, etc. Pervasive systems need to consider all these factors 
and take a decision. 
• IOT systems need to know the user profile, intent, and behavior to 
provide proactive services. This means that it anticipates and knows 
all needed information about the user. Does this not lead to loss 
of privacy of the user as the system knows all information of the 
user? It knows our likes, dislikes, our preferences, out intentions, 
our behavior, etc. How do we protect this information from being 
exploited by others? How do we provide security to the user data? 
• If IOT  systems are to be used by all the population, society would 
have to provide extensive IOT computing resources as it provides 
electricity and water at all the places! When there are inadequate 
resources the human being and the pervasive system must adapt 
to the situation. IOT system may allocate resources as it perceives 
the priority of the problem, or the user may request the system for 
a certain level of resources. So dynamic resource management 
would be a major challenge. Memory management, efficient use 
of battery, controlling the level of accuracy, slower delivery, and 
amount of resource allocated for the service are some techniques 
that could be used for IOT. 
• Capabilities such as proactivity and self-tuning would lead to incre-
ased energy demand  for the pervasive systems. 
• Context awareness (human and environmental contexts) needs 
capturing the contexts. The question is how do we capture rich 
contexts such as emotions, physiological conditions and how are 
they represented in the system? How does this system retain and 
update this info? How does it use the info? 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
49 
IoT in Security 
3.3.1 SECURITY AND IOT 
Tragically, most of these gadgets and applications are not intended to deal 
with the security and protection assaults and it builds a great deal of safety 
and protection issues in the IOT organizations, for example, privacy, 
confirmation, information trustworthiness, access control, mystery, and so 
forth.53 In IOT, every one of the gadgets and individuals are associated 
with one another to offer types of assistance whenever needed and at any 
spot. For the IOT, some security necessities should be satisfied to keep the 
organization from vindictive assaults.52–55 
Here, probably the most required capacities of a solid organization are 
momentarily examined. 
• Versatility to assaults: The framework should be sufficiently 
able to recuperate itself on the off chance that assuming it crashes 
during information transmission. For a model, a server working in a 
multiuser climate, it should be astute and sufficiently able to shield 
itself from gatecrashers or a busybody. For the situation, on the off 
chance that it is down it would recuperate itself without suggestion 
of the clients of its down status. 
• Client protection: The information and data should be in safe 
hands. Individual information ought to just be gotten by approved 
individuals to keep up with the client protection. It implies that no 
insignificant confirmed client from the framework or some other 
sort of client cannot approach the private data of the client. 
3.3.2 ANALYSIS OF THREAT IN IOT 
As per the situation of IOT, various security threats which include domain 
name system security threats, HTTPs threats are analyzed. In this section, 
various security threats are discussed which occur by using IOT system. 
• Directing assault: Routing data in IOT can be satirized, changed, 
or replayed, to make steering circles, assaults, and so forth. 
• Forswearing of service assault: Typically, things have tight memory 
and restricted calculation; they are along these lines defenseless 
against asset depletion assault. Aggressors can consistently send 
solicitations to be handled by explicit things to exhaust their assets. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
50 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
This is particularly hazardous in the IOTs since an assailant may be 
situated in the backend and target resource-constrained gadgets in an 
LLN. Furthermore, DoS assault can be sent off by actually sticking 
the correspondence channel, subsequently separating the T2T corre­
spondence channel. Network accessibility can likewise be upset by 
flooding the organization with an enormous number of bundles. 
3.4 SECURITY SYSTEM 
The term security subsumes a wide scope of various ideas. In any case, it 
alludes to the essential arrangement of safety administrations including 
privacy, confirmation, uprightness, approval, non-renouncement, and 
accessibility. These security administrations can be carried out through 
various cryptographic instruments, for example, block figures, hash 
capacities, or mark calculations. For every one of these instruments, a 
strong key administration foundation is essential to dealing with the neces-
sary cryptographic keys. This segment gives a security way to deal with 
an IP-based network. We utilize the accompanying wording to investigate 
and arrange security perspectives in the IOT.56–58 
• Bootstrapping incorporates the validation and approval of a gadget 
as well as the exchange of safety boundaries taking into consider-
ation confided in activity. 
• Network security depicts the components applied inside an organi-
zation to guarantee confided in activity of the IOT. Network security 
can incorporate various components going from secure steering to 
information connect layer and organization layer security. 
3.4.1 CUTTING EDGE OF IOT SECURITY 
•  Establishment of reliance: In most IOT situations trust should be laid  
out impromptu with beforehand unregistered and obscure compan-
ions, and lacking of user communication. There is a requirement  
of novel methodology which can establish the foundation of trust. 
Present Trust programmes are not satisfying the requirement of user. 
• Blockchain and IOT: The conventions depending upon block 
chain strategy are acquiring prevalence which can deal with the 

 
 
51 
IoT in Security 
test of laying out reliance. The most significant structural squares  
of the future are that blockchain-based smart contracts can be  
used for IOT-based foundations. Because they play a vital role for  
business-basic collaboration linking gadgets without direct human  
association. In any case, blockchains require computational assets  
and have high data transfer capacity upward. 
•  Trust in Platforms: Two methodologies on computerized foundation  
of confidence in distant stages exist: equipment and programming  
far off confirmation. Extra asset utilization by such equipment is  
not satisfactory for some battery-controlled gadgets. Programming  
far off verification can give an OK security level to most applica-
tions, yet it cannot thoughtfully ensure reliance in the general stage.  
The auxiliary advancement of system obscurity, cryptography of  
white-box, and control-stream uprightness innovations can give  
comprehensive programming just remote attestation. Additionally  
equipment is not OK for some battery-controlled gadgets. Program-
ming far off confirmation can give a satisfactory assurance level  
to most applications yet it cannot theoretically ensure trust in the  
general stage. Further improvement of code confusion, white-box  
cryptography, and control-stream honesty advances can give  
comprehensive programming just distant validations from now on. 
• Personality Management: Later on, independent information trades 
among various substances are relied upon to be controlled in light 
of cutting edge security and trust the executives advancements, for 
example use control. 
•  Security: Data use control is an expansion of conventional right to  
use control ideas. Future developments in information usage control  
will expand on traditional access control concepts to track and mark  
information as it is handled by various systems. It will characterize  
fine-granular utilization limitations to implement security properties  
over huge informational indexes while as yet taking into consider-
ation running learning calculations and investigation over them. 
3.5 CONCLUSION 
While the world is battling with the COVID-19 pandemic, numerous inno­
vations have been carried out to battle against this sickness. One of these 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
52 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
advancements is the Internet of Things (IOT), which has been generally 
utilized in the medical care industry. During the COVID-19 pandemic, 
this innovation has shown exceptionally uplifting results managing this 
sickness. For this chapter, we led a study on the new proposed IOT 
gadgets expecting to help medical care laborers and specialists during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. We looked into the IOT-related innovations and 
their executions in three stages, including “Early Diagnosis,” “Quarantine 
Time,” and “After Recovery.” For each stage, we assessed the job of IOT-
empowered/connected in battling COVID-19. IOT innovation can be very 
effective for this pandemic; however, it is likewise basic to think about 
the security of information. By carrying out IOT innovation appropriately 
in a solid manner, more patients, with inner serenity, can partake in their 
treatment utilizing IOT gadgets. Accordingly, specialists and medical care 
laborers can all the more likely answer to pandemics. Therefore, the effect 
of these kinds of illnesses, including contaminations, hospitalizations, and 
passing rate, can be fundamentally diminished. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
pandemic 
• 
COVID-19 
• 
security 
• 
IoT 
• 
security systems 
REFERENCES 
1. Z. H.; Ali, H. A.; Badawy, M. M. Internet of Things (IOT): Definitions, Challenges 
and Recent Research Directions. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2015, 128 (1), 37–47. 
2. HaddadPajouh, H.; Dehghantanha, A.; Parizi, R. M.; Aledhari, M.; Karimipour, H. 
A Survey on Internet of Things Security: Requirements, Challenges, and Solutions. 
Internet of Things 2019, 3, 100–129. 
3. Ashton, K.; et al. That ‘Internet of Things’ Thing. RFID J. 2009, 22 (7), 97–114. 
4. da Costa, C. A.; Pasluosta, C.F.; Eskofier, B.; da Silva, D. B, da Rosa Righi, R. 
Internet of Health Things: Toward Intelligent Vital Signs Monitoring in Hospital 
Wards. Artif. Intell. Med. 2018, 89, 61–69. 

 
53 
IoT in Security 
5. Islam, S. M. R.; Kwak, D.; Kabir, M. D.H.; Hossain, M.; Kwak, K. S. The Internet 
of Things for Health Care: A Comprehensive Survey. IEEE Access 2015, 3, 678–708. 
6. Hu, F.; Xie, D.; Shen, S. In On the Application of the Internet of Things in the Field of 
Medical and Health Care, 2013 IEEE International Conference on Green Computing 
and Communications an IEEE Internet of Things and IEEE Cyber, Physical and 
Social Computing. IEEE, 2013; pp 2053–2058. 
7. Qi, J.; Yang, P.; Min, G.; Amft, O.; Dong, F.; Xu, L. Advanced Internet of Things 
for Personalised Healthcare Systems: A Survey. Pervasive Mob. Comput. 2017, 41, 
132–149. 
8. IOT  in Healthcare Market. [Online] 2020. https://www.marketsandmarkets.com/ 
Market-Reports/IOT-healthcaremarket-160082804.html. 
9. Lovelace, Jr B. Scientists say the Coronavirus is at Least as Deadly as the 1918 
Flu Pandemic 2020 [Online]. https://www.cnbc.com/berkeley-lovelace-jr/. (accessed 
Sept 5, 2020) 
10. WHO (2020) Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) [Online]. https://bit.ly/2ZU5x08 
(accessed July 2020, 09) 
11.  Symptoms of Coronavirus 2020 [Online]. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-
ncov/symptoms-testing/ symptoms.html. CDC (2020) Quarantine if you might be 
sick. https://www.cdc.gov/coronavirus/2019-ncov/ if-you-are-sick/quarantine.html. 
12. Wang, W.; Tang, J.; Wei, F. Updated Understanding of the Outbreak of 2019 Novel 
Coronavirus (2019-nCoV) in Wuhan, China. J. Med. Virol. 2020, 92 (4), 441–447. 
13. Peeri, N. C.; Shrestha, N.; Rahman, M. S.; Zaki, R.; Tan, Z.; Bibi, S.; Baghbanzadeh, 
M.; Aghamohammadi, N.; Zhang, W.; Haque, U. The SARS, MERS and Novel 
Coronavirus (COVID-19) Epidemics, the Newest and Biggest Global Health Threats: 
What Lessons have we Learned? Int. J. Epidemiol.   2020. 
14. Singh, R. P.; Javaid, M.; Haleem, A.; Suman, R. Internet of things (IOT) Applications 
to Fight Against COVID-19 Pandemic, Diabetes & Metabolic Syndrome: Clinical 
Research & Reviews, 2020. 
15. Ting, D. S. W.; Carin, L.; Dzau, V.; Wong, T. Y. Digital Technology and COVID-19. 
Nat. Med.  2020, 26 (4), 459–461. 
16. Hameed, S.; Khan, F. I.; Hameed, B. Understanding Security Requirements and 
Challenges in Internet of Things (IOT): A Review. J. Comput. Netw. Commun.  2019, 
2019, 1–14. 
17. Rahmani, A. M.; Mirmahaleh, S. Y. H. Coronavirus Disease (COVID-19) Prevention 
and Treatment Methods and Effective Parameters: A Systematic Literature Review. 
Sustain. Cities Soc.  2021, 64, 102568. [CrossRef] 
18. Talavera, J. M.; Tobón, L. E.; Gómez, J. A.; Culman, M. A.; Aranda, J. M.; Parra, 
D. T.; Quiroz, L. A.; Hoyos, A.; Garreta, L. E. Review of IOT  Applications in Agro-
industrial and Environmental Fields. Comput. Electron. Agric. 2017, 142, 283–297. 
19. Chamola, V.; Hassija, V.; Gupta, V.; Guizani, M. A  Comprehensive Review of the 
COVID-19 Pandemic and the Role of IOT, Drones, AI, Blockchain, and 5G in 
Managing its Impact. IEEE Access  2020, 8, 90225–90265. 
20. Suleman, H. How to Use the IOT to Keep Your Restaurant Clean and Safe. 
FoodSafetyTech [Online]. https:// foodsafetytech.com/column/how-to-use-the-IOT-
to-keep-your-restaurant-clean-and-safe/ (accessed Apr 15, 2021). 

 
54 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
21. Singh, S.; Hamidon, N.; Zuber, M.; Kamarul, A. Wireless Sensing Technology with 
IoMT  Approach for Continuous Monitoring of Breathing Rate and Volume During 
COVID-19. Front. Sustain. Cities  2021, 3, 6. 
22. Uday, S.; Jyotsna, C.; Amudha, J. In Detection of Stress using Wearable Sensors 
in IOT Platform, Proceedings of the International Conference on Inventive 
Communication and Computational  Technologies, ICICCT 2018, Coimbatore, India, 
20–21 April 2018. 
23. ABTraceTogether. Alberta.ca. [Online]. https://www.alberta.ca/ab-trace-together. 
aspx (accessed Mar 3, 2021). 
24. Stanford Children’s Health. About Telehealth Services (Virtual Visits)—Stanford 
Children’s Health [Online]. https: //www.stanfordchildrens.org/en/telehealth/about-
virtual-visits (accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
25. Kinsa Health. Kinsa Smart Thermometers; Kinsa Inc. Future Int. 2021, 13, 105.  
https://www.kinsahealth.co/products/ (accessed on Feb 26, 2021). 
26. Isabella, M. A.; Seetha Lekshmi, K.; Thamizhvaani, E. P.; Vishali, S. IOT  Based 
Emergency Medical Services. Int. J. Eng. Tech. 2018, 4, 1–4. 
27. Gupta, N.; Jilla, S. In Digital Fitness Connector: Smart Wearable System. Proceedings 
of the 1st International Conference on Informatics and Computational Intelligence, 
ICI 2011, Bandung, Indonesia, Dec 12–14, 2011. 
28.  Munawar, H.; Khan, S.; Qadir, Z.; Kouzani, A.; Mahmud, M. Insight into the Impact 
of COVID-19 on Australian Transportation Sector: An Economic and Community-
Based Perspective. Sustainability  2021, 13, 1276. 
29. Gray, R. S. Agriculture, Transportation, and the COVID-19 Crisis. Can. J. Agric. 
Econ. 2020, 68, 239–243. 
30. Muthuramalingam, S.; Bharathi, A.; Kumar, S. R.; Gayathri, N.; Sathiyaraj, R.; 
Balamurugan, B. In IOT Based Intelligent Transportation System (IOT-its) for Global 
Perspective: A Case Study, Intelligent Systems Reference Library; Springer Science 
and Business Media LLC: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2019; vol 154. 
31. Darsena, D.; Gelli, G.; Iudice, I.; Verde, F. Safe and Reliable Public Transportation 
Systems (SALUTARY) in the COVID-19 Pandemic. arXiv 2020. 
32. Sutar, S.; Koul, R.; Suryavanshi, R. In Integration of Smart Phone and IOT for 
Development of Smart Public Transportation System, Proceedings of the 2016 
International Conference on Internet of Things and Applications (IOTA), Pune, India, 
Jan 22–24, 2016; pp 73–78. 
33. Al-Dweik, A.; Muresan, R.; Mayhew, M.; Lieberman, M. In IOT-Based Multifunctional 
Scalable Real-Time Enhanced Road Side Unit for Intelligent Transportation Systems, 
Proceedings of 30th Annual IEEE Canadian Conference on Electrical and Computer 
Engineering (IEEE 2017 CCECE), Windsor, ON, Canada, May 30–Apr 3, 2017 
34. Gregory, J. The Internet of Things: Revolutionizing the Retail Industry [Online]. 
https://www.accenture.com/ 
_acnmedia/Accenture/ConversionAssets/DotCom/ 
Documents/Global/PDF/Dualpub_14/AccentureTheInternetOfThings. pdf (accessed 
Apr 21, 2021). 
35. De Vass, T.; Shee, H.; Miah, S. J. IOT  in Supply Chain Management: A  Narrative on 
Retail Sector Sustainability. Int. J. Logist. Res. Appl. 2020, 1–20. 

 
55 
IoT in Security 
36. Bashir, A.; Izhar, U.; Jones, C. IOT  Based COVID-19 SOP  Compliance Monitoring 
and Assisting System for Businesses and Public Offices [Online]. https://ecsa-7. 
sciforum.net/ (accessed Apr 22, 2021). 
37. Petrovic, N.; Kocic, D. IOT-based System for COVID-19 Indoor Safety Monitoring. 
IcETRAN 2020, 2020, 1–6. 
38. Statista Research Department. IOT Market Size Worldwide 2017–2025; Statista, 
Jan 22, 2021. https: //www.statista.com/statistics/976313/global-IOT-market-size/ 
(accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
39. Hung, M. Leading the IOT—Gartner Insights on How to Lead in a Connected World. 
Gart. Res. 2017, 1, 1–5. 
40. Domb, M. Smart Home Systems Based on Internet of Things. In IOT  and Smart 
Home Automation [Working Title]; IntechOpen: London, UK, 2019; pp 25–37. 
41. HTF Market Intelligence Consulting. IOT In Logistics Market May See a Big Move; 
Cisco Systems, IBM. https://www.openpr.com/news/2134501/IOT-in-logistics-
market-may-see-a-big-move-cisco-systems-ibm (accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
42. IOT  Business News. IOT  News—Cisco Predicts Rapid Growth in The IOT  
Logistics Market—IOT  Business News [Online]. https://IOTbusinessnews. 
com/2020/08/19/06126-cisco-predicts-rapid-growth-in-the-IOT-logistics-market/  
(accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
43. Morrish, J. Global IOT  Market to Grow to $1.5trn Annual Revenue by 2030— 
IOT  Now News, How to Run an IOT  Enabled Business [Online]. https://www. 
IOT-now.com/2020/05/20/102937-global-IOT-market-to-grow-to-1-5trn-annual-
revenue-by-20 30/ (accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
44. Horwitz, L. Internet of Things (IOT)—The Future of IOT  Miniguide: The Burgeoning 
IOT  Market Continues, Cisco [Online]. https://www.cisco.com/c/en/us/solutions/ 
internet-of-things/future-of-IOT.html (accessed Feb 26, 2021). 
45. Medberry, P. Industrial IOT: Top 3 Trends for 2021, Cisco Blogs [Online]. https:// 
blogs.cisco.com/internet-of-things/ industrial-IOT-top-3-trends-for-2021 (accessed  
Feb 26, 2021). 
46. Uma, M.; Padmavathi, G. A  Survey on Various Cyber Attacks and their Classification. 
Int. J. Netw. Secur. 2013, 15, 5. 
47. Abomhara, M.; Køien, G. M. Cyber Security and the Internet of Things: Vulnerabilities, 
Threats, Intruders and Attacks. J. Cyber Secur. Mobil. 2015, 4, 65–88. [CrossRef] 
48. Hoque, N.; Bhuyan, M. H.; Baishya, R.; Bhattacharyya, D.; Kalita, J. Network 
Attacks: Taxonomy, Tools and Systems. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2014, 40, 307–324. 
[CrossRef] 
49. Canongia, C.; Mandarino, R. Cybersecurity: The New Challenge of the Information 
Society. In Crisis Management: Concepts, Methodologies, Tools, and Applications; 
IGI Global: Hershey, PA, USA, 2013; vol 1–3. 
50. Injac, O.; Šendelj, R. National Security Policy and Strategy and Cyber Security Risks. 
In Identity Theft: Breakthroughs in Research and Practice; IGI Global: Hershey, PA, 
USA, 2016. 
51. What Is Cyberspace? Definition from WhatIs.com. [Online]. https://whatis.techtarget. 
com/definition/cyberspace (accessed Mar 4, 2021). 
52. Miorandi, D.; Sicari, S.; Pellegrini,  F. D.; Chlamtac, I. Internet of Things: Vision, 
Applications and Research Challenges. Ad Hoc Networks  2012, 10, 1497. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
56 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
53. Schukat, M.; Castilla, P. C.; Melvin, H. In Trust and Trust Models for the IOT, Security 
and Privacy in Internet of Things (IOTs): Models, Algorithms, and Implementations; 
Hu, F., Ed.; CRC Press, 2016. 
54. IOT 2020: Smart and Secure IOT Platform. IEC White Paper [Online]. http://www. 
iec.ch/whitepaper/IOTplatform 
55. Lu, X.; Qu, Z.; Li, Q.; Hui, P. Privacy Information Security Classification for Internet 
of Things Based on Internet Data. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw. 2015, 11 (8), 932941. 
56. Kanniappan, J.; Rajendiran, B. Privacy in the Internet of Things. In The Internet of 
Things in the Modern Business Environment; Lee, Ed.; IGI Global, 2017. 
57. Practical BLE Throughput. Rigado LLC, 2016 [Online]. www.rigado.com/modules. 
58. http://atmosphere.anaren.com/wiki/Data_rates_using_BLE. 
59. Anitta, V.; Fincy, F.; Ayyappadas, P. S. Security Aspects in 6lowpan Networks. IOSR 
J. Electron. Commun. Eng. 2015, 10, 8. 

The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 4 
MOBILE APP DEVELOPMENT 
PRIVACY AND SECURITY CHECKLIST 
DURING COVID-19 
HENA IQBAL, TANJINSIKDER, YASMIN ALHAYEK,  
NOORA ALFURAIS, and NUJUOM ASSAR 
Department of Information Technology, Ajman University,  
Ajman, UAE 
ABSTRACT 
Apps for mobile devices have become an inextricable element of daily 
life. Because of the advancement of mobile technology, mobile access to 
high-speed internet, and the interactivity of mobile phone interfaces, they 
have dominated users’ digital habits. Modern mobile phones include a 
wide range of potent essential sensors and attributes, such as a low-power 
Bluetooth sensor, special embedded sensors such as a digital naviga­
tion system, motion sensor, GPS module, wireless internet capabilities, 
recording device, humidity sensors, health-tracking sensors, and a camera, 
among other things. These value-added sensors have transformed people’s 
lives in many ways. Such applications and features are proven effective 
from time to time for humans. Apart from being merit, this feature was 
put in the question of security they provide to the user. With time several 
applications were questioning their tracking policy. This study is based on 
the role of the mobile phone application in individual life and the privacy 
predictor of those applications. This study is conducted with the help of 
356 responses being collected via in-person interactions with the mobile 

 
 
 
 
 
 
58 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
users in UAE (all seven Emirates). From the study, it has emerged that 
there is significant association between the demographic factors, age, 
gender, occupation, income, and educational qualification, with respect 
to three different variables, concerning the security and privacy of mobile 
apps during COVID-19. 
4.1 INTRODUCTION 
Mobile phones have become a central part of our day-to-day life.8 In 
recent years, mobile phones have seen an upsurge in their usage. With time 
mobile phone companies are updating and modifying themselves to meet 
the changing demands of their user for improved performance in everyday 
lifestyle. The first-ever mobile phone was introduced back in 1973 by 
Martin Cooper, an engineer for Motorola. In the earlier stage of the mobile 
phones, it was used to place calls, texts, and other minor stuff. In 2007, 
Steve Jobs brought a revolution in the mobile industry by showcasing the 
first-ever smart mobile device popularized as iPhone. At that time, this 
smartphone allows its user to use numerous applications with supportable 
multitasking. The entire mobile phone industry felt the need to modify 
themselves to survive in the market by fulfilling customer’s requirements 
and they started enrolling more smartphone devices. Currently, these 
devices have evolved so much that it has become a part of daily life. Apart 
from basic tasks, these devices have become a medium of entertainment 
and distance communication. Application developers have molded such 
applications frequently to make their users stick to them in a long run.7,41 
As per Statista, 2018, on an average 6100 applications were being 
uploaded by the google play store for the users to make use of, between 
2016 and 2018. However, the usage rate of these applications is negligible 
and most of the applications are left unused or uninstalled after a short 
span of use, while many applications are used for not more than 3 to 4 
months on an average.21,36 With rising concerns regarding these applica­
tions, it was found in further research that the threat to the privacy and the 
security of confidential data of the users were the pivotal reason behind 
such usage behavior among mobile users.19,32,42  Usage of newly uploaded 
applications for the users depends on their concerns related to that applica­
tion.19 Users hesitate to make use of any unsecured application as they fear 
that these apps may hold malicious cryptography which can cause harm to 

 
  
 
 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
59 
their confidential data, can track their activities, and can hack their infor­
mation.30 It highlights the need for improved security along with timely 
modifications to keep a check on the possible vulnerabilities. However, 
the security of the users cannot be maintained only by improved security 
but also by time-to-time scrutinization of malicious activities of different 
users, restricted release and usage of unsecured applications, and so on.37,38 
The rise in usage behavior of any application by a user is directly 
dependent on their perception of that application. If a user possesses a 
positive perception of that application, then they are more likely to down­
load and use that application for a long and vice versa.19 In 2015, Star­
bucks admitted that a hacker has hacked the details of their customers 
via their official application which resulted in fear among users or the 
customers reading their data and they end up uninstalling the application 
of Starbucks to safeguard their data. Similarly, in 2019 and again in 2021, 
Facebook (now Meta) faced the same when the personal information of 
millions of users was exposed; as a result, it lost its number of users at 
the threat to their data.18,33,46 Hence, mobile application developers must 
understand and build a safe and secured application for their users, thereby 
gaining their trust in it.9 Studying the perception and usage behavior of the 
users will help the developers to understand the concerns of their users 
well and provide them with the best and most secure applications and 
solutions. 
4.2 REVIEW OF LITERATURE 
Information and Communication Technologies (ICT) are a blessing to 
humans. They eased the exchange of words, information, and data than 
before. One of its biggest applications was seen during the pandemic 
COVID-19, which made people worldwide rely on ICT, AI, machine 
learning, and other technological gifts. The entire world was shifted to 
virtual platforms and started working remotely. It made government as 
well as various technological developers come up with more innovative 
and secure ways to tackle such a situation.45 Innovative methods and tools 
were developed to make life smoother during the pandemic, that is many 
mobile-based applications were developed to keep people aware of the 
going scenario around the world, to track the spread of the virus around 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
60 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
the world, and so on, to help them to take timely measures and required 
precautions to keep themselves safe and secured. 
With time, this became the topic of research for scholars and researchers 
around the world. Besides this, one of the critical aspects which was the 
crux of all the debate was the security and privacy of the mobile applica­
tions being released and used during the pandemic COVID-19. Various 
scholars highlighted the need for safe and secured measures to keep the 
users at bay from any vulnerability and malicious applications.10,44,50 
Literature comprises studies based on the operations of mobile applica­
tions and their associated threats and vulnerabilities to them.4,16,47 During 
COVID-19, many launched applications were based on contact-tracing 
features which included GPS, Bluetooth, and other wireless technologies, 
as used in maps and social networking sites.3,14,39,40,43,52 This in turn made 
regulators like technological developers, governmental bodies, Federal 
Trade Commission, European Union Commission, and others inspect and 
explore various ways and methodologies to improve and develop the oper­
ations and security of various mobile applications.5,20 Additionally, prefer­
ence, perception, and usage behavior of the mobile users were also studied 
to understand the threats they faced to provide them with the best security 
and privacy protocols, thereby creating a safe and secure technology plat­
form and environment for the users to use confidently.26,48 Users’ behavior 
was researched in various aspects concerning mobile applications19,24 and 
the security provided by them, which ranges from computer security,25 
online security,11 online purchase, and transactions.12,28,34 
Mobile-based apps require various permissions and access to certain 
data to operate properly, like permission and access to use storage, gallery, 
microphone, camera location, and so on.17 This, in turn, exposes the 
personal and confidential data to such mobile-based applications which 
can be misused or hacked by any malicious or vulnerable activities.5 When 
a user grants permission of personal data to any application it becomes 
available to different insurance and advertisement companies, the public, 
and other unauthorized entities, which pose a threat to the personal and 
confidential data of the users.1,2,29,53  In most cases, apps ask for permis­
sions that are not required or not related to their basic operations, which are 
mostly unsecured apps or malicious dealers.27,35  Many researchers study 
various aspects of mobile-based applications, the method of their opera­
tion, and the permissions that they ask for from their users.6,13,16,22,23,31,51 
These studies act as an aid for the applications developers to analyze and 

 
 
 
 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
61 
understand the needs of their users, possible threats and insecurities faced 
by them, and possible course of action or solutions that they can make use 
of to provide their users with safe and secured applications to make use of. 
4.3 OBJECTIVE 
To understand the association between the demographic factors of 
the mobile users to the privacy and security of mobile apps during the 
COVID-19. 
4.4 RESEARCH METHODOLOGY 
Structured questionnaire was incorporated to collect the responses for the 
study and casual face-to-face interactions were held with the mobile users 
in various parts of UAE. Samples were collected from Ajman, Dubai, 
Sharjah, Abu Dhabi, Fujairah, Ras Al Khaimah, and Umm Al Quwain. 
The data were collected from the mobile users of different age group, 
gender, occupation, income, and educational qualification. A total of 
356 responses were collected for the study via various parameters. Each 
parameter studied for the survey was calculated using a five-point like a 
scale (from 1-strongly disagree, to 5-strongly agree). 
A Chi-Square test is conducted to make a comparison between the 
expected output and the actual output. It helps to understand that whether 
the difference between the expected output and the actual output is by 
a fluke or is there any relationship between the variables to be studied. 
Hence, we used the chi-square test to find out the significant association 
between the demographic factors of the mobile users with respect to the 
security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
Motivating Variables: 
• V1—Downloading an app from the web causes more security 
issues than websites. 
• V2—Unsecured mobile apps provide bad authorization and authen-
tication of the sensitive data which allows hackers to steal it. 
• V3—One should avoid saving confidential credentials while using 
a mobile application. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
62 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
4.5 FINDINGS AND ANALYSIS 
4.5.1 GENDER 
H0—There is no significant association between the gender of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
H1—There is no significant association between the gender of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
TABLE 4.1 Chi-Square Tests. 
Value 
Df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
71.700 
3 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
71.500 
3 
.003 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
38.270 
1 
.002 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
56.700 
4 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
65.390 
4 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
0.860 
1 
.440 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V3) 
65.015 
4 
.003 
Likelihood ratio (V3) 
73.350 
4 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V3) 
0.025 
1 
.890 
N of valid cases (V3) 
356 
Table 4.1, of Chi-Square, represents that the chi-square value of 
the factor V1 is 71.700 and the significant value is .002 which is less 
than 0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 56.700 and 
the significant value is 0.002 which is less than 0.05; similarly, the 
chi-square value of the factor V3 is 65.015 and the significant value 
is 0.003 which is less than 0.05. This implies that the null hypothesis 
(H0) is rejected and the alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted, that is 
gender of the mobile users has a significant association with the secu­
rity and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19, for variables V1, 
V2, and V3. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
63 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
Females were found to be agreeing more with the possible threats 
to their confidential data while using a mobile app. They believe that 
downloading mobile apps from the web causes greater security threats 
than websites. This is as a result of mobile applications gathering and 
accessing their users’ personal data to store and use for the future 
references, which resulted in women being more cautious about these 
mobile apps. Similarly, illegal authorization and hacking are also a 
huge threat to users’ personal information. Women are also seen to 
have lesser trust in saving confidential data on a mobile phone, to avoid 
unlawful activities with their data, or their personal photos, contacts, 
emails, etc. 
TABLE 4.2 Symmetric Measures. 
Value 
Approx. sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.415 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.400 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V3) 
0.407 
.003 
N of valid cases 
356 
Table 4.2 of Symmetric Measure, represents that the Contingency 
Coefficient value of the factor V1 is 0.415, for the factor V2 it is 0.400, 
while for the factor V3 it is 0.407 which implies that the association 
between gender of the mobile users and the security and privacy of 
mobile apps during COVID-19 is medium with the variables V1, V2, 
and V3. 
4.5.2 AGE 
H0—There is no significant association between the age of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
H1—There is a significant association between the age of the mobile users 
and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
64 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 4.3 Chi-Square Tests. 
Value 
Df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
65.223 
9 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
55.609 
9 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
0.108 
1 
.750 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
26.558 
12 
.007 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
37.244 
12 
.003 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
0.002 
1 
.980 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V3) 
39.670 
12 
.001 
Likelihood ratio (V3) 
46.862 
12 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V3) 
0.055 
1 
.820 
N of valid cases (V3) 
356 
Table 4.3, of Chi-Square, represents that the chi-square value of the 
factor V1 is 65.223 and the significant value is 0.002 which is less than 
0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 26.558 and the signifi­
cant value is 0.007 which is less than 0.05; similarly, the chi-square value 
of the factor V3 is 39.670 and the significant value is 0.001 which is less 
than 0.05. This implies that the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected and the 
alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted, that is the age of mobile users has a 
significant association with the security and privacy of mobile apps during 
COVID-19, for variables V1, V2, and V3. 
Threats related to privacy and safety of the data have caught the atten­
tion of people in recent times since the current generation is more aware 
of the possible threats to their data; therefore, they were found to be 
agreeing more with the possible threats to their confidential data while 
using a mobile app. Users aged 18–25 were found to trust websites more 
than applications because they are quite aware of the security threats 
arising out of them as these apps seek permissions and access to personal 
data of the users to start using it. They are also found to avoid unsecured 
applications because they can access private information, and can hack 
their important data. The younger generation also tend to not to save 
their private information on their mobile phones, to avoid the misuse of 
their confidential data. 

 
 
Value 
Approx. sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.400 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.300 
.007 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V3) 
0.350 
.001 
N of valid cases 
356 
 
 
Value 
Df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
35.208 
6 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
32.915 
6 
.003 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
8.415 
1 
.003 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
110.886 
8 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
97.735 
8 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
3.839 
1 
.058 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V3) 
141.175 
8 
.003 
65 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
TABLE 4.4  Symmetric Measures. 
Table 4.4 of Symmetric Measure, represents that the contingency coef­
ficient value of the factor V1 is 0.400, for the factor V2 it is 0.300, while 
for the factor V3 it is 0.350 which implies that the association between the 
age of the mobile users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during 
COVID-19 is medium with the variable V1, while low with the variables 
V2 and V3. 
4.5.3 OCCUPATION 
H0 —There is no significant association between occupation of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
H1 —There is a significant association between occupation of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
TABLE 4.5  Chi-Square Tests. 

 
 
Value 
Df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Likelihood ratio (V3) 
158.605 
8 
.004 
Linear-by-linear association (V3) 
0.859 
1 
.360 
N of valid cases (V3) 
356 
 
 
Value 
Approx. 
sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.315 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.499 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V3) 
0.546 
.003 
N of valid cases 
356 
66 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 4.5  (Continued) 
Table 4.5 of Chi-Square represents that the chi-square value of the 
factor V1 is 35.208 and the significant value is 0.002 which is less than 
0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 110.886 and the signifi­
cant value is 0.002 which is less than 0.05; similarly, the chi-square value 
of the factor V3 is 141.175 and the significant value is 0.003 which is less 
than 0.05. This implies that the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected and the 
alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted, that is occupation has a significant 
association with the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID­
19, for variables V1, V2, and V3. 
Users from various occupations, except service and business sector, 
were found to be more careful about security interference to their confi­
dential datavia apps on their mobile phones. The “Other” category of occu­
pation includes students, small business owners, etc., and since it mostly 
consists of the younger generation, they are reportedly found to be more 
aware of the possible threats to their confidential data, being imposed by 
unsecure mobile applications. Hence, they believe websites are safer than 
unsecured mobile applications. Students keep various personal data on 
their mobile phones, which can be illegally accessed by hackers through 
unsecure applications. And thus, they avoid storing their private data on 
their cell phones in most of the cases. 
TABLE 4.6  Symmetric Measures. 

 
 
 
 
67 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
Table 4.6 of Symmetric Measure represents that the contingency coef­
ficient value of the factor V1 is 0.315, for the factor V2 it is 0.499, while 
for the factor V3 it is 0.546 which implies that the association between 
gender of the mobile users and the security and privacy of mobile apps 
during COVID-19 is low with the variable V1 while it is medium with the 
variables V2 and V3. 
4.5.4 EDUCATIONAL QUALIFICATION 
H0 —There is no significant association between educational qualification 
of the mobile users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during 
COVID-19. 
H1 —There is a significant association between educational qualification 
of the mobile users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during 
COVID-19. 
TABLE 4.7 Chi-Square Tests. 
Value 
df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
131.215 
9 
.003 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
108.689 
9 
.005 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
2.755 
1 
.095 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
191.720 
12 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
123.565 
12 
.004 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
4.155 
1 
.049 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V3) 
153.957 
12 
.004 
Likelihood ratio (V3) 
159.815 
12 
.006 
Linear-by-linear association (V3) 
9.087 
1 
.007 
N of valid cases (V3) 
356 
Table 4.7 of Chi-Square represents that the chi-square value of the  
factor V1 is 131.215 and the significant value is 0.003 which is less than  
0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 191.720 and the signif-
icant value is 0.002 which is less than 0.05; similarly, the chi-square  
value of the factor V3 is 153.957 and the significant value is 0.004 which  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
68 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
is less than 0.05. This implies that the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected and 
the alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted, that is educational qualifica­
tion of the mobile users has a significant association with the security 
and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19, for the variables V1, V2, 
and V3. 
Majority of the population in our country is graduated; therefore, most 
of our citizens are aware enough to care about their personal data. Gradu­
ates are more cautious about using unauthorized and unsecure applica­
tions, to avoid unlawful hacking of their data. They also elude loading 
all their private data on their cell phones for long or giving any access to 
these apps. 
TABLE 4.8 Symmetric Measures. 
Value 
Approx. sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.525 
.003 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.598 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V3) 
0.557 
.004 
N of valid cases 
356 
Table 4.8 of symmetric measure represents that the contingency coef­
ficient value of the factor V1 is 0.525, for the factor V2 it is 0.598, while 
for the factor V3 it is 0.557 which implies that the association between 
educational qualification of the mobile users and the security and privacy 
of mobile apps during COVID-19 is medium with the variables V1, V2, 
and V3. 
4.5.5 INCOME 
H0 —There is no significant association between income of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
H1 —There is a significant association between income of the mobile users 
and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
69 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
TABLE 4.9 Chi-Square Tests. 
Value 
df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
77.324 
12 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
75.227 
12 
.001 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
0.927 
1 
.349 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
166.128 
16 
.001 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
146.827 
16 
.003 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
31.329 
1 
.004 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V3) 
137.974 
16 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V3) 
150.817 
16 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V3) 
5.125 
1 
.027 
N of valid cases (V3) 
356 
Table 4.9, of Chi-Square, represents that the chi-square value of the 
factor V1 is 77.324 and the significant value is 0.002 which is less than 
0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 166.128 and the signifi­
cant value is 0.001 which is less than 0.05; similarly, the chi-square value 
of the factor V3 is 137.974 and the significant value is 0.002 which is less 
than 0.05. This implies that the null hypothesis (H0) is rejected and the 
alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted, that is income has a significant 
association with Mobile App Privacy and Security during COVID-19, for 
variables V1, V2, and V3. 
Users from lower income group were found to be agreeing to the 
possible threats to their private data while using any unsecured apps in 
their mobile. Lower income users lack the privilege or they avoid to use 
premium services of any application, thereby restricting them to free 
application and their free services which can most of the time possess 
threat to the confidential data stored in the mobile of the users. As a 
result, lower income users were found to be more careful and protective 
toward their personal data and avoid using unsecured applications; they 
also keep limited personal data in their mobiles and avoid saving pass­
words and other such details in such apps in their mobiles. 

 
 
 
 
 
Value 
df 
Asymp. sig. (2-sided) 
Pearson chi-square (V1) 
14.447 
3 
.003 
Likelihood ratio (V1) 
19.115 
3 
.002 
Linear-by-linear association (V1) 
0.737 
1 
.385 
N of valid cases (V1) 
356 
Pearson chi-square (V2) 
26.545 
4 
.002 
Likelihood ratio (V2) 
37.254 
4 
.004 
Linear-by-linear association (V2) 
0.003 
1 
.989 
N of valid cases (V2) 
356 
70 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 4.10 Symmetric Measures. 
Value 
Approx. sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.435 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.570 
.001 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V3) 
0.536 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Table 4.10 of Symmetric Measure represents that the Contingency 
Coefficient value of the factor V1 is 0.435, for the factor V2 it is 0.570, 
while for the factor V3 it is 0.536 which implies that the association 
between the income of the mobile users and the security and privacy of 
mobile apps during COVID-19 is medium with the variables, V1, V2, and 
V3. 
4.5.6 MARITAL STATUS 
H0 —There is no significant association between marital status of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
H1 —There is a significant association between marital status of the mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19. 
TABLE 4.11  Chi-Square Tests. 

 
 
 
 
71 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
Table 4.11, of Chi-Square, represents that the chi-square value of the 
factor V1 is 14.447 and the significant value is 0.003 which is less than 
0.05, whereas the chi-sq. value of the factor V2 is 26.545 and the signif­
icant value is 0.002 which is less than 0.05. This implies that the null 
hypothesis (H0) is rejected and the alternative hypothesis (H1) is accepted; 
that is the marital status of the mobile users has a significant association 
with the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19, for vari­
ables V1 and V2. 
Unmarried individuals are seen to be more aware of their data privacy. 
These individuals were found to keep range personal data in their mobiles, 
that they fear would get hacked easily causing huge loss to them. There­
fore, they avoid using applications, and choose websites instead and they 
avoid keeping and saving any confidential data in their mobile phones or 
in the apps they use to keep their data safe and secure. 
TABLE 4.12 Symmetric Measures. 
Value 
Approx. sig. 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V1) 
0.201 
.003 
N of valid cases 
356 
Nominal by nominal 
Contingency coefficient (V2) 
0.278 
.002 
N of valid cases 
356 
Table 4.12 of Symmetric Measure represents that the contingency coef­
ficient value of the factor V1 is 0.201, while for the factor V2 it is 0.278, 
which implies that the association between the marital status of mobile 
users and the security and privacy of mobile apps during COVID-19 is low 
with the variables V1 and V2. 
4.6 CONCLUSION 
In our networked world, the rise of mobile devices has resulted in a 
plethora of applications that serve a variety of objectives. Today’s modern 
lifestyle is increasingly dependent on mobile apps that provide a variety 
of services, including military applications, critical business services, 
banking, entertainment, and other diverse tasks. During the COVID-19 
epidemic, this technology played a vital role in assisting individuals. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
72 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Several programs that allow the user to locate any infected individual 
nearby have been launched. Although digital technologies can play a big 
role in addressing current pandemic concerns and limiting viral propaga­
tion, the usefulness and accuracy of these systems, however, are depen­
dent on application design and user engagement. Therefore, mobile phone 
users are becoming more aware of protecting their data, and are taking the 
necessary steps to avoid misuse and spread of their data. It has been found 
that the female users are more concerned toward their confidential data as 
compared to the men; however, the younger generation like students are 
more alert about safeguarding their information, and follow secure steps 
to avoid it. Unmarried individuals are also more watchful about their data 
getting spread. This brings to light the inattentiveness individuals with 
occupations like business and service possess with their information secu­
rity. More awareness among the developer as well the users should be 
raised to make use of secured platforms and to avoid any loss of their 
important financial or personal data. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
mobile 
• 
sensors 
• 
applications 
• 
security 
• 
privacy 
• 
COVID-19 
REFERENCES 
1. Many Popular Android Apps Leak Sensitive Data, Leaving Millions of Consumers at 
Risk, 2017a [Online]. https://tinyurl.com/yb7hfjxr 
2. Researchers Spot Thousands of Android Apps Leaking user Data through 
Misconfigured Firebase Databases, 2017b [Online]. https://tinyurl.com/ybjdrcth 
3. Altuwaiyan, T.; Hadian, M.; Liang, X. In EPIC: Efficient Privacy-Preserving 
Contact Tracing for Infection Detection, 2018 IEEE International Conference on 
Communications (ICC); IEEE, May 2018; pp 1–6. 

 
73 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
4. Au, K. W. Y.; Zhou, Y. F.; Huang, Z.; Lie, D. In Pscout: Analyzing the Android 
Permission Specification, Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Computer 
and Communications Security, Oct 2012; pp 217–228. 
 
5. Azad, M. A.; Arshad, J.; Akmal, S. M. A.; Riaz, F.; Abdullah, S.; Imran, M.; 
Ahmad, F. A  First Look at Privacy Analysis of COVID-19 Contact-Tracing Mobile 
Applications. IEEE Int. Things J.  2020, 8 (21), 15796–15806. 
6. Barrera, D.; Kayacik, H. G.; Van Oorschot, P. C.; Somayaji, A. In A Methodology 
for Empirical Analysis of Permission-Based Security Models and its Application to 
Android, Proceedings of the 17th ACM Conference on Computer and Communications 
security, Oct 2010;  pp. 73–84. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/1866307.1866317 
7. Balapour, A.; Sabherwal, R. Usability of Apps and Websites: A Meta-regression 
Study, 2017. 
8.  Balapour, A.; Reychav, I.; Sabherwal, R.; Azuri, J. Mobile Technology Identity 
and Self-efficacy: Implications for the Adoption of Clinically Supported Mobile 
Health Apps.  Int. J. Inf. Manag.   2019, 49, 58–68. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j. 
ijinfomgt.2019.03.005 
9. Balapour, A.; Nikkhah, H. R.; Sabherwal, R. Mobile Application Security: Role of 
Perceived Privacy as the Predictor of Security Perceptions.  Int. J. Inf. Manag.  2020, 
52, 102063. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2019.102063 
10. Chan, J.; et al. Pact: Privacy Sensitive Protocols and Mechanisms for Mobile Contact 
Tracing, 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2004.03544. 
 
11. Chen, Y.; Zahedi, F. M. Individuals’ Internet Security Perceptions and Behaviors: 
Polycontextual Contrasts between the United States and China. MIS Q. 2016, 40 (1), 
205–222. https://doi.org/10.25300/misq/2016/40.1.09 
12. Chellappa, R. K. Consumers’ Trust in Electronic Commerce Transactions: The Role of 
Perceived Privacy and Perceived Security; Unpublished Paper; July 5, 2018; Emory 
University: Atlanta, GA, 2008. http://www.bus.emory.edu/ram/papers/secpriv.pd 
13. Chia, P. H.; Yamamoto, Y.; Asokan, N. In Is this App Safe? A Large Scale Study 
on Application Permissions and Risk Signals, Proceedings of the 21st International 
Conference on World Wide Web, Apr 2012; pp 311–320. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1145/2187836.2187879 
14. Danquah, L. O.; Hasham, N.; MacFarlane, M.; Conteh, F. E.; Momoh, F.; Tedesco, 
A. A.; Jambai, A.; Ross, D. A.; Weiss, H. A. Use of a Mobile Application for Ebola 
Contact Tracing and Monitoring in Northern Sierra Leone: A Proof-of-Concept 
Study.  BMC Infect. Dis.   2019, 19 (1), 1–12. 
15. Enck, W.; Gilbert, P.; Han, S.; Tendulkar, V.; Chun, B. G.; Cox, L. P.; Jung, J.; 
McDaniel, P.; Sheth, A. N. Taintdroid: An Information-Flow Tracking System for 
Realtime Privacy Monitoring on Smartphones.  ACM Trans. Comput. Syst.  2014, 32 
(2), 1–29. 
16. Enck, W.; Ongtang, M.; McDaniel, P. In On Lightweight Mobile Phone 
Application Certification, Proceedings of the 16th ACM Conference on Computer 
and Communications Security, Nov 2009;  pp 235–245. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1145/1653662.1653691 
17. Felt, A. P.; Greenwood, K.; Wagner, D. In The Effectiveness of Application 
Permissions, 2nd USENIX Conference on Web Application Development (WebApps 
11), 2011. 

 
74 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
18. Gross, 
A. 
Starbucks 
Data 
Breach 
Shows 
the 
Real 
Damage 
of 
a 
Breach, 
May 
14, 
2015. 
https://www.hipaasecurenow.com/index.php/ 
starbucks-data-breachshows-real-damage-breach/. 
19. Harris, M. A.; Brookshire, R.; Chin, A. G. Identifying Factors Influencing Consumers’  
Intent to Install Mobile Applications. Int. J. Inf. Manag.  2016, 36 (3), 441–450. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2016.02.004 
20. Hekmati, A.; Ramachandran, G.; Krishnamachari, B. In CONTAIN: Privacy-Oriented 
Contact Tracing Protocols for Epidemics, 2021 IFIP/IEEE International Symposium 
on Integrated Network Management (IM); IEEE, May
 
, 2021; pp 872–877. 
21. Hopwood, S. How many Mobile Apps are Actually Used? June 22, 2017. https:// 
www.apptentive.com/blog/2017/06/22/how-many-mobileapps-are-actually-used/ 
22. Ikram, M.; Kaafar, M. A. In A First Look at Mobile ad-Blocking Apps, 2017 IEEE 16th 
International Symposium on Network Computing and Applications (NCA); IEEE, 
 
Oct 2017; pp 1–8. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987471 
23. Ikram, M.; Vallina-Rodriguez, N.; Seneviratne, S.; Kaafar, M. A.; Paxson, V. In An 
Analysis of the Privacy and Security Risks of Android vpn Permission-Enabled Apps, 
Proceedings of the 2016 Internet Measurement Conference; Nov 2016; pp 349–364. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/2987443.2987471 
24. Johnson, V. L.; Kiser, A.; Washington, R.; Torres, R. Limitations to the Rapid 
Adoption of M-payment Services: Understanding the Impact of Privacy Risk on 
M-payment Services. Comput. Hum. Behav.  2018, 79, 111–122. https://doi.org/10. 
1016/j.chb.2017.10.035. 
25. Johnston, A. C.; Warkentin, M. Fear Appeals and Information Security Behaviors: An 
Empirical Study. MIS Q. 2010, 34 (3), 549–566. https://doi.org/10.2307/ 25750691 
26. Kaptchuk, G.; Goldstein, D. G.; Hargittai, E.; Hofman, J.; Redmiles, E. M. How 
Good is Good Enough for COVID19 Apps? The Influence of Benefits, Accuracy, and 
Privacy on Willingness to Adopt, 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.04343. 
 
27. Kang, J.; Kim, D.; Kim, H.; Huh, J. H. In Analyzing Unnecessary Permissions 
Requested by Android Apps Based on Users’ Opinions, International Workshop on 
Information Security Applications; Springer, Cham; Aug 2014; pp 68–79. 
28. Kim, D. J. Self-perception-Based Versus Transference-Based Trust Determinants in 
Computer-Mediated Transactions: A Cross-Cultural Comparison Study. J. Manag. 
Inf. Syst. 2008, 24 (4), 13–45. https://doi.org/10.2753/mis0742- 1222240401 
29. Krishnamurthy, B.; Wills, C. E. In On the Leakage of Personally Identifiable 
Information Via Online Social Networks, Proceedings of the 2nd 
 
ACM 
Workshop on Online Social Networks; Aug 2009;  pp 7–12. DOI: https://doi. 
org/10.1145/1592665.1592668 
30. Kumar, A. Risk of Mobile Threats and Privacy Concerns Grow; June 3, 2016. CSO 
Online. https://www.csoonline.com/article/3078815/security/risk-ofmobile-threats-
and-privacy-concerns-grow.html. 
31. Liccardi, I.; Pato, J.; Weitzner, D. J. Improving User Choice through Better Mobile 
Apps Transparency and Permissions Analysis.  J. Priv. Confidentiality 2014, 5 (2). 
DOI: https://journalprivacyconfidentiality.org/index.php/jpc/article/view/630 
32. Levenson, H. 7 Common Reasons users are Abandoning your App; Aug 2, 2016 
[Online]. Web Analytics World, https://www.webanalyticsworld.net/2016/08/ 
why-usersare-abandoning-your-mobile-app.html. 

 
75 
Mobile App Development Privacy and Security Checklist During COVID-19 
33. Pagliery, J. Hackers are Draining Bank Accounts Via the Starbucks App.; May 14, 
2015; CNN Business. https://money.cnn.com/2015/05/13/technology/ hackers-
starbucks-app/index.html. 
34. Pavlou, P. A.; Liang, H.; Xue, Y. Understanding and Mitigating Uncertainty in 
Online Exchange Relationships: A Principal-agent Perspective. MIS Q. 2007, 31 (1), 
105–136. https://doi.org/10.2307/25148783 
35. Peddinti, S. T.; Bilogrevic, I.; Taft, N.; Pelikan, M.; Erlingsson, Ú.; Anthonysamy, 
P.; Hogben, G. In Reducing Permission Requests in Mobile Apps, Proceedings of 
the Internet Measurement Conference, Oct 2019; pp 259–266. DOI: 
 
https://doi. 
org/10.1145/3355369.3355584 
36. Perez, S. Majority of U.S. Consumers Still Download Zero Apps per 
Month, 
Says 
comScore, 
2017. 
https://techcrunch.com/2017/08/25/ 
majority-of-u-s?consumers-still-download-zero-apps-per-month-says-comscore/. 
37. Posey, C.; Roberts, T. L.; Lowry, P. B.; Bennett, R. J.; Courtney, J. F. Insiders' 
Protection of Organizational Information Assets: Development of a Systematics-
Based Taxonomy and Theory of Diversity for Protection-Motivated Behaviors.  Mis. 
Q. 2013, 1189–1210. 
38. Posey, C.; Roberts, T. L.; Lowry, P. B.; Hightower, R. T. Bridging the Divide: A  
Qualitative Comparison of Information Security thought Patterns between Information 
Security Professionals and Ordinary Organizational Insiders.  Inf. Manag. 2014, 51 
(5), 551–567. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.im.2014.03.009 
39. Prasad, A.; Kotz, D. In ENACT: Encounter-Based Architecture for Contact 
Tracing, Proceedings of the 4th International on Workshop on Physical Analytics; 
June 2017; pp 37–42. 
40. Reddy, E.; Kumar, S.; Rollings, N.; Chandra, R. Mobile Application for Dengue 
Fever Monitoring  and Tracking Via GPS: Case Study for Fiji, 2015.  arXiv preprint 
arXiv:1503.00814. 
41. Reychav, I.; Beeri, R.; Balapour, A.; Raban, D. R.; Sabherwal, R.; Azuri, J. How 
Reliable are Self-assessments using Mobile Technology in Healthcare?  The Effects 
of Technology Identity and Self-efficacy.  Comput. Hum. Behav.  2019, 91, 52–61. 
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2018.09.024 
42. Shah, M. H.; Peikari, H. R.; Yasin, N. M. The Determinants of Individuals’ Perceived 
e-Security: Evidence from Malaysia. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2014, 34 (1), 48–57. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2013.10.001. 
43. Shahabi, C.; Fan, L.; Nocera, L.; Xiong, L.; Li, M. In Privacy-Preserving Inference 
of Social Relationships from Location Data: A  Vision Paper, Proceedings of the 23rd 
SIGSPATIAL International Conference on Advances in Geographic Information 
Systems, Nov 2015; pp 1–4. 
 
44. Sharma, T.; Bambenek, J. C.; Bashir, M. Preserving Privacy in Cyber-Physical-Social 
Systems: An Anonymity and Access Control Approach, 2020. 
45. Sharma, T.; Dyer, H. A.; Bashir, M. Enabling User-Centered Privacy Controls for 
Mobile Applications: Covid-19 Perspective.  ACM Trans. Int. Technol.  2021, 21 (1), 
1–24. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3434777 
46. Shaw, N.; Sergueeva, K. The Non-monetary Benefits of Mobile Commerce: 
Extending UTAUT2 with Perceived Value. Int. J. Inf. Manag. 2019, 45, 44–55. DOI: 
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijinfomgt.2018.10.024. 

 
76 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
47. Shi, L.; Fu, J.; Guo, Z.; Ming, J. In "Jekyll and Hyde" is Risky: Shared-Everything 
Threat Mitigation in Dual-Instance Apps, Proceedings of the 17th Annual International 
Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and Services, June 2019;   pp 222–235. 
48. Simko, L.; Calo, R.; Roesner, F.; Kohno, T. COVID-19 Contact Tracing and Privacy: 
Studying Opinion and Preferences, 2020. arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.06056. 
 
49. Statista. Average Number of New Android App Releases per day from 3rd Quarter 
2016 to 1st quarter 2018, 2018. https://www.statista.com/statistics/276703/ 
android-app-releases-worldwide/ 
50. Troncoso, C.; et al. Decentralized Privacy-Preserving Proximity Tracing, 2020. arXiv 
 
preprint arXiv:2005.12273. 
51. Van Kleek, M.; Liccardi, I.; Binns, R.; Zhao, J.; Weitzner, D. J.; Shadbolt, N. In 
Better the Devil you Know: Exposing the Data Sharing Practices of Smartphone 
Apps, Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, May 2017; pp 5208–5220. DOI: https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025556 
52. Yoneki, E.; Crowcroft, J. Epimap: Towards Quantifying Contact Networks for 
Understanding Epidemiology in Developing Countries.  Ad Hoc Netw.   2014, 13, 
83–93. 
53. Zuo, C.; Lin, Z.; Zhang, Y. In Why does your Data Leak? Uncovering the Data 
Leakage in Cloud from Mobile Apps, 2019 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy 
(SP); IEEE, May 2019; pp 1296–1310. 
 

PART II 
Cybersecurity for Cloud Intelligent Systems 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 5 
CLOUD AND EDGE COMPUTING 
SECURITY USING ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE AND SOFT 
COMPUTING TECHNIQUES 
N. S. GOWRI GANESH, R. ROOPA CHANDRIKA, and  
A. MUMMOORTHY 
MallaReddy College of Engineering and Technology, Hyderabad 
ABSTRACT 
Cloud computing extends its capabilities to the Internet of Things (IoT) 
devices at the endpoint by handling and processing user-centric data, apart 
from providing services for infrastructure, platform, and software. Edge 
computing is the technology extended to cloud computing for reducing the 
load in the cloud by processing the data at the endpoint of the networks. 
In Edge computing, cloudlets are placed at the edge of the network or in 
proximity to the end users/devices/applications. The major benefits are a 
reduction in bandwidth demands and roundtrip latency between end-user 
device and resource in the cloud. There are many assets such as routers, 
relays, and sensors participating in these environments. For cloud service 
providers, governance for security is a major concern to tackle threats and 
vulnerability. Artificial intelligence is an emerging field that has showcased 
its use in various applications like autonomous cars, speech recognition, 
automatic planning, scheduling, etc. Artificial intelligence (AI) applied to 
edge computing/fog computing shortly called Edge AI nowadays gains 
capabilities and features to provide decision-making to establish smart 

 
 
80 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
devices connected to the cloud. These smart devices adapt to the envi­
ronment dynamically by making intelligent decisions. The autonomous 
vehicle that uses Edge AI could adapt to the different environment condi­
tions and the behaviors of drivers dynamically. Similarly, AI in edge 
computing also can be applied to control the movement of data within 
the cloud, IoT devices, and also users dynamically by making intelligent 
decisions. This feature could establish the security in the cloud and edge 
computing. This chapter deals about the security of edge computing and 
its associated environment by the application of AI and soft computing 
techniques. 
5.1 INTRODUCTION 
Cloud computing is the preferred environment for the deployment of soft­
ware applications by the IT managers as it provides the benefits of infra­
structure, a platform for development, and software in the form of services 
that are comfortable and easy to use. The users can utilize in their own pace 
of requirement of consumption by renting out the computing resources. 
The major benefits of cloud computing are elasticity, resource pooling, 
cost-effectiveness, adaptability, and measured services. Internet of Things 
(IoT) are devices having computational and communication capabilities 
which are distributed in large numbers with less processing and storage 
capacities that are seamlessly connected to the Internet. These limitations 
are balanced when IoT is integrated with cloud computing which provides 
the large storage capacity to store the data and computing power for data 
processing. However, all the data generated the IoT devices are not useful 
for processing. To process the required and desired data, edge computing 
bridges the appropriate devices at the endpoint and cloud computing. In 
Edge computing, devices are placed at the closeness to the instances of the 
event and sources of data. The locations of the devices are decided based 
on the decision for the immediate processing of the data which will offload 
the burden of the cloud infrastructure. The ideology of fog computing is 
closer to that Edge computing as the former deals with the software and 
platform as a service (SaaS/PaaS) for enterprise architecture above the 
Edge computing layer, whereas the latter deals with the services-related 
infrastructure ability (IaaS). Fog computing is a concept that is being in 
development in parallel to the Edge computing. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
81 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
Soft computing approaches generally deal with approximate models 
comprised of approximate reasoning and approximate modeling. The soft 
computing methods such as fuzzy logic, neural networks, genetic algorithms, 
and expert systems are used to solve complex problems like speech recogni­
tion and pattern recognition. In the Edge/Fog systems, the soft computing 
approaches are confined to artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning 
(ML) algorithms implemented in the cloud and Edge devices. 
Context-aware applications are capable of obtaining, deciphering, and 
utilizing context information and complying with the current context. Intel­
ligent agents in AI perform this perception of environment with the help of 
sensors and act accordingly with the support of actuators. These intelligent 
agents take decision like human agents with the help of necessary devices 
and can learn from the previous experience. The context-aware applica­
tions can be anything like speech recognition, workout tracking, and user 
activity recognition. Edge computing acts as the aid for the stationing of 
intelligent agents in proximity to the location of data source, which can 
collect information and acknowledge this flow of data. The edge devices 
are furnished with sensing devices that can track the environment. The 
intelligent agent housed in the edge devices can act independently or in 
combination with the other agent in the same devices or other devices to 
produce a meaningful action. When multiple autonomous agents work in 
tandem with each other to solve a comprehensive problem they are termed 
as multi-agent system. 
Security at the IoT/edge nodes is the utilization of security practices 
at the nodes of the network outside the core network. Generally, network 
attacks are the activity that breaches the privacy rules, changes processed 
data, modify a certain instance to make all or any of the network devices/ 
software inaccessible and/or unreliable compromising on confidentiality, 
data integrity, and exposes denial of service (DOS) attack, respectively. The 
software using AI for security learns about the past behavior and makes 
quick decisions for appropriate action if new/unknown behaviors/informa­
tion is submitted. ML algorithms and deep learning (DL) techniques play a 
vital role in the development of AI. These AI modules also provide logical 
inferences on the incomplete data and different alternate solutions to a 
known problem to assist the security team to select the way for tackling 
the security issues. The implementations of AI/ML at the edge devices 
referred to as Edge AI have the potential to enhance the data privacy and 
impede the challenges that arise due to threats at multiple endpoints. 

 
 
 
 
82 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
5.2 IOT AND CLOUD COMPUTING 
The IoT devices have sensors and mini-processors which can process the 
sensors data and can be transmitted to the cloud via internet for further 
processing and storage. It interacts with the billions of devices that 
exchange data within the things or real-world objects. The objective of the 
IoT is to empower things/objects to be linked to each other at any point 
of time pervasively using any route/network and any service. Generally, 
it uses constrained application protocol (CoAP), message queue telemetry 
transport protocol (MQTT), extensible messaging and presence protocol 
(XMPP), advanced message queuing protocol (AMQP), and data distribu­
tion service (DDS). The data generated by the IoT devices are processed 
at the cloud computers. The five layers of IoT28 architecture are percep­
tion layer, transport layer, processing layer, application layer, and business 
layer as shown in Fig. 5.1. 
FIGURE 5.1 Five layers of IoT. 
The IoT devices are categorized6 as class 0 or low-end devices, class 
1 or middle-end devices, and class 2 or high-end IoT devices. The exam­
ples for class 0 are openmote, waspmote, sensor, and actuator; for class 
1 are Arduino, Netduino, and Gateways; for class 2 are Rasperry pie and 

 
 
83 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
Beagleboard. The operating systems available for IoT devices are low-end 
Linux-based like ARM Mbed and LiteOS and high-end Linux-based like 
Raspbian and Android Things. Non-Linux OS like TinyOS and free RTOS 
are also available. 
Cloud computing is a great innovation in distributed technology in 
pursuit to the development of virtualization techniques and improvement 
in web services to enable any application in the form of services. It is a 
boon to startups that in the short period large numbers of new ventures 
are being coming to the Industry. It reduced the infrastructure set up cost 
by providing computing, storage, platform, development, and software 
in the form of services such as Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Plat­
form as a Service (PaaS), and Software as a Service (SaaS). The organiza­
tions can create their own private cloud or attach themselves to the public 
cloud or have hybrid cloud in combination of both their organization’s 
private and public cloud. Due to the interesting and important property of 
elasticity, the services can be utilized by the organization attaching to the 
cloud to consume huge computing power and large storage space during 
the peak demand and can be diminished according to their requirement. 
Even though cloud and IoT evolved independently, IoT gets assistance 
from cloud8 which offers many services as described in Fig. 5.2. There are 
many IoT cloud platforms26 discussed for the purpose of application devel­
opment, device management, heterogeneity management, and monitoring 
management such as Echelon, Carriots, Oracle IoT cloud, and Exosite. 
FIGURE 5.2 Services offered by the cloud integrated to IoT. 

 
 
 
 
 
84 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
The integration of IoT and cloud provides a lot of benefits such as 
capturing of real-time data, decision-making, analysis of data, and manage­
ment of devices. There are many applications of IoT combined with cloud. 
They are smart health management, smart agriculture, smart logistics, 
accidental management, smart city, etc., as indicated in Figure 5.3 . 
FIGURE 5.3 Applications of IoT and cloud computing. 
5.3 EDGE COMPUTING AND ITS SOLUTIONS 
Applications that involve IoT devices such as augmented reality, e-health­
care, and gaming are sensitive to network latency and jitter. These applica­
tions are sensitive to network delays when connected to cloud even though 
it assists in processing the data. Edge computing is introduced to solve 
the above issues in the IoT and cloud computing integrated environment. 
Edge devices have the facilities to have computation, storage, and commu­
nication with limited capacity. Edge computing is to use the edge devices 
located nearer to the context environment to process the large amount of 
data generated by the IoT devices instead of sending them to cloud infra­
structure to reduce the network latency, jitter. Edge computing in addi­
tion to save the network bandwidth (BW) and energy produces quicker 
response with better quality. 

 
 
 
85 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
The core concept of cloud computing is virtualization. The motive of 
virtualization is that the individual robust set of hardware needs to achieve 
the function of several sets of hardware. The same virtualization tech­
nology influences the capacities of Edge devices as well. There are a few 
variations in the type of virtualization that depends on the system that 
participates in the Edge computing environment. Multitenancy, scaling 
with elastic approach and tight resource management are the characteris­
tics that best describes hardware virtualization. Wireless sensor network 
virtualization17 allows multiple wsn applications/services to exist side-by­
side against a single application which leads to the development of innova­
tive wsn applications. In OS-level virtualization, Linux containers (LXC) 
are adopted to execute the services at the edge devices. Further, Docker-
based containers are applied in the Edge devices to improve performance 
and interoperability among the Edge nodes. Edge hardware10 is basically 
categorized as Edge devices and Edge/Fog Servers. There are three types 
of Edge devices that are categorized into devices that support virtualiza­
tion and vice versa. (1) Constrained devices are any IoT devices which do 
not support virtualization. (2) Embedded computer controllers or single-
board computers like Intel NUC or Raspberry Pi supports both software 
and hardware virtualization. (3) Mobile devices such as smartphones act 
at the edge of the networks support to full virtualization. Edge/Fog servers 
offer services to these Edge devices. 
Three edge computing solutions for IoT are namely cloudlet, mobile 
edge computing (MEC), and Fog computing. 
Cloudlets are small scale of clouds located nearer to the Edge devices. 
The cloudlet is a high-end computer or computers connected in clusters 
that are connected to the internet. The general arrangement architecture 
for cloudlet is three-tier architecture having one end the mobile device 
layer, middle cloudlet layer, and the other end is the cloud layer. The 
cloudlets use virtual machines (VM) technology for the purpose of rapid 
provisioning. 
Mobile edge computing24 standardized by the European Telecom­
munications Standards Institute (ETSI) offers the capabilities of cloud 
computing environment and IT services management at the edge of the 
mobile network and in the vicinity to mobile users. The purpose is mini­
mizing latency, better service delivery, and mobile subscriber experience. 
The concept of MEC also works based on the virtualization infrastructure 

 
 
 
 
86 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
where the MEC applications live. ETSI standards had issued the reference 
architecture that describes the working principle of MEC. 
The notion of the existence of Fog computing is that the enablement of 
the computation available in the cloud to be also made available in the IoT 
Sensors and Actuators. So Fog computing is defined by openconsortium 
as openfog reference architecture that distributes resources and services of 
computing, storage, control, and networking anywhere in continuity from 
the cloud to things. It describes three views namely, software view for 
application services, application support and software backplane, system 
view to describe about hardware virtualization and Node view to deal 
about the protocol abstraction layer and sensors, actuators, and control. 
The main factors considered in the reference architecture are referred to 
as key pillars. They are security, scalability, openness, autonomy, RAS, 
agility, hierarchy, and programmability. 
The Edge computing resource management approaches are many due 
to the variety of devices, usage of assortment of different networks, and 
ubiquitous in nature. Three resource management levels are categorized 
for this purpose; they are back-end infrastructure, edge systems, and front-
end smart devices. The resource management approaches for (1) back-end 
infrastructure are task placement and hybrid provisioning. (2) Edge-
system levels are adaptive provisioning, load coordination, service migra­
tion, data preprocessing, computation offloading, and distributed caching. 
(3) Front-end smart device is resource pooling/sharing. 
5.4 SECURITY IN EDGE COMPUTING 
The objective of managing the security in a system or system that is 
offering services is to manage the integrity, confidentiality, and avail­
ability of the data/services. The security is dealt (Fig. 5.4) in sequence 
of computer security, data center security, cloud computing security, and 
Edge computing security. 
FIGURE 5.4 Security. 

 
 
 
87 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
The exposure of a system to attacks is possible for various reasons. The 
external entity attempt for getting entry or spoil the system either to gain 
from the resources available in the system or to destroy the available data. 
Such kinds of external entities are vulnerable to the system. The security 
architecture in every system needs to take two primary steps: (1) Preven­
tion by early identification: to expect these external vulnerable entities and 
actions to prevent their entry to be taken at the early stage. (2) Counter the 
attacks: actions that need to be taken when vulnerable entity attacks the 
system. Risk management supports the first primary activity which iden­
tifies the risks and assists to prevent the same. Security algorithms such 
as symmetric, asymmetric and NP-hard algorithms support the system to 
counter the attacks. Generally, attacks can be classified into the external 
attacks and internal attacks. System attack is a type of internal attack 
where in which the files are deleted or modified, password will be stolen 
for an entry without the knowledge of the owner. Network attack and web 
attack are external attacks. These attacks try to alter the data exchanged 
in the network or monitor the flow of data or trap the data to make use 
of it. Backdoor method, DOS attack, Eavesdropping, Phishing, Privilege 
escalation, Tampering, Malware, IP spoofing, ICMP flooding, and Traffic 
analyses are some of the examples of attacks. To prevent attacks, user 
account controls, cryptography, firewalls, and network intrusion detection 
(NID) are few among the security techniques used. 
An organization running web applications like e-commerce, gener­
ally will be having a secured data center which acts as a centralized or 
distributed server. A data center in an organization has IT infrastructure 
comprising of network of computers, storage systems for the purpose of 
organizing, processing, and storing huge amount of data. Security at the 
data center level refers to the set of practices and implementation of physical 
and virtual technologies to prevent the data center from possible internal 
and external attacks. Data center ranges from simple setup to higher tier 
facilities (Tier 3 or Tier 4) which are larger and more complex environ­
ments. Generally, security for data center is classified as physical security 
and software security. Physical security deals with the location of the data-
center, access to the datacenter, cooling arrangements, etc. Creating secure 
zones for having layers of network security, installing necessary software 
for detecting and monitoring vulnerabilities, and tools like security infor­
mation and management tools to have real-time view of the data center 
security posture are some of the Software security arrangements in the 

 
 
88 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
datacenter. Normally, practitioners will implement the data center security 
which refers to the precautionary measures as defined in the various stan­
dards. The notable data security standards are ISO/IEC 27001:2005 and 
27001:2013 Information Security Management System Standards, NIST 
800-53 – Security and Privacy Controls for Federal Information Systems 
and Organizations. The methodology21 to inspect and verify the security 
aspects from different dimensions are required which may include security 
control analysis, maturity evaluation, and result analysis. The information 
technology management systems2 are developed in the data center that can 
support to find, maintain, and curtail information security threats. 
Cloud computing is highly acknowledged by organizations that are 
required to host the infrastructure and software setup at lightning speed 
and less cost per usage. Due to its popularity, the cloud is increasingly used 
by many in spite of its security challenges. Among the various deployment 
models such as private cloud, public cloud, and hybrid cloud, the exposure 
to the attacks is more for the public cloud and less prone for the private 
cloud. 
There are various security concerns with respect to the cloud delivery 
models30 for SaaS, PaaS, and IaaS. SaaS application vendors provide the 
application in the cloud computing environment for the enterprises readily 
without or with the little configuration without the need of the installation 
in their premises. This is a great attraction for the software customers so 
that if they are interested in the application they can continue with that 
or else they drop it and they are expected to pay only for the services 
they consumed as per the service level agreements. The data in the SaaS 
environment are the focus of subject regarding the security. As the SaaS 
is offered for multiple enterprises, the management of data by the SaaS 
providers of various customers will be stored in the same storage loca­
tion. As per the high availability policy, the data of the SaaS applications 
may be stored in multiple locations. PaaS allows the developers to build 
the applications in the cloud without the need to set up the development 
environment in their system rapidly. The main concept of PaaS relies 
on the web services. The problem is that when the service of PaaS fails 
suddenly what will happen to the applications and the data running on it 
will become a major issue. Ws-security at the cloud security gateways 
needs to be strengthened for the protection of data. IaaS offers the devel­
opers to set up the necessary infrastructure quickly. When the data get 
stored and moved to other devices there is a possibility that these data can 

 
89 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
move across the devices of the intruders. In addition to strong encryption 
and protocols, strong policy for cloud environment is essential to keep the 
data secured. 
All the above models depend on the virtualization technology imple­
mented in cloud computing. In the virtualization, there will be an admin­
istrator that controls host and guest operating systems. The features of 
virtualization software are sharing, aggregation, emulation, and isola­
tion. Isolation refers to the characteristics that a virtual machine (VM) is 
completely separated from its host system and other VMs such that it acts 
independently. Even though one VM fails it will not affect the other one 
or the host system. Though the virtualization softwares are required to 
have the property of isolation, it is yet to be implemented in full consid­
ering such security issues. The virtual machine monitor (VMM) does not 
offer perfect isolation. Vulnerabilities are detected such that users with the 
wrong intent can use malicious code in the virtualized guest environment 
can gain access to the host environment. 
Edge computing is the environment to process the data with less 
network latency and better quality output, where data are the core part that 
is vulnerable to external attacks. As the Edge nodes are available at the 
close proximity to the environment where data acquisition and computing 
are required, it obviously lacks the physical security that is available in the 
secured data center. 
Security in Edge computing is dealt with in terms of securing the data 
and privacy protection9 as follows: 
(1) Secure data sharing: 
 
Secure data sharing main purpose is to ensure confidentiality 
which is implemented with encryption techniques like attribute-
based encryption, homomorphic encryption, etc. 
(2) Integrity of the outsourced data in the cloud: 
 
Integrity of the data stored in the edge or cloud data center is 
established by dynamic and batch audit. 
(3) Search on the cipher text: 
 
This feature19 enables the query of cipher text data and their 
retrieval. Searchable keywords and its related data are encrypted. 
As IoT  devices do not have the capability to perform encryption/ 
decryption, the process will be administered by EdgeServer/ 
FogServer/Cloud. 

 
 
 
 
90 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
(4) Authentication in single domain, multiple domain, and in handover. 
To access computing and storage services, each entity must 
pass authentication. Same is the case for multiple domains. For 
example, Microsoft Edge11 allows the entities to authorize access 
to the resources with the help of single windows integrated 
authentication (WIA) in single domain and seamless single sign on 
(SSO) access in multiple domains. Table 5.1 describes some of the 
authentication standards available for cloud and Edge computing. 
TABLE 5.1 Authentication Standards. 
OAuth2.0 
It is security standard designed for authorization that is to grant access 
from one to another application. 
OpenID 
Open standard which allows users to be authenticated by relying 
parties. Auth0, Okta are some of the authentication provider 
Identity 
Provider(IdP) 
It is the entity that creates and manages identity information for 
principles and provides authentication services for applications 
created by relying parties, e.g., Azure AD, Google, Salesforce 
JSON Web 
Token (JWT) 
It creates access tokens with JSON based open standard 
(5)  Data, identity, and location privacy. 
 
The fetching, processing of data in edge computing happens across 
various devices such as IoT, Edge Node, Edge Server, and cloud. 
The data and identity of the users need to be available securely 
across all the environments. The location of usage of mobile in 
the edge varies depending upon the movement of the user. The 
information about this needs to be protected and there is a possible 
use of this information in malicious intent which may result in 
harmful consequences. Chaff control strategies14 are developed to 
control location privacy. 
(6)  Access control for system security and privacy of the user 
 
To protect system security and user privacy, the access control system  
is the technique used in Edge systems. There are many advantages  
of access control mechanisms3 which helps (1) only authorized  
users to access the sensitive data and others with wrong intent to  
be curbed in accessing these data. (2) to avoid the hackers to access  
the physical part of the system. (3) to secure the cyber infrastructure  
and protect from attacks. While designing access control mecha-
nisms in Edge/Fog following requirements38  need to be considered:  

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
91 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
(1) To gain access to the computing and storage of cloud/Edge 
access control policies need to be in place. (2) Access controls are 
required to both the directions of access from Fog/Edge to cloud 
and vice-versa. (3) Access control mechanisms are to be adapted 
to virtual machines (VM) to prohibit any attacks. There are various 
models available for designing access control mechanisms. They 
are role-based access control (RBAC) model, discretionary access 
control (DAC) model, mandatory access control (MAC) model, 
attribute-based access control (ABAC) model, usage-control-based 
access control (UCON) model, reference monitoring access control 
(RMAC), and proxy re-encryption (PRE) model. In ABAC model, 
attribute-based encryption (ABE) is used by the data owner who 
decides and frame policies on who can access which data. In spite 
of some of the challenges like managing access policies, ABE-based 
access model is considered to the suitable technique for the edge 
computing environment by many researchers. 
Edge computing environment faces many challenges in ensuring 
security. Smart devices have some constraints typically in its 
computational, power, and storage capabilities. Further these 
devices are heterogeneous in nature. So the security solutions such 
as installation of antivirus software on these devices and conven­
tional asymmetric key encryptions algorithms cannot be used. 
5.5 SOFT COMPUTING AND ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE 
Zadeh27  had classified machine intelligence into hard computing based 
on artificial intelligence and soft computing based on computational 
intelligence. 
Soft computing16 accords solutions to complex real-world problems 
which is based on approximate models and is tolerant of approximations, 
imprecision, partial truth, and uncertainty to accomplish tractability, low 
solution cost, and robustness. It has the characteristics of qualitative, 
dispositionality, and approximation. Fuzzy logic, genetic algorithms, 
expert systems, and artificial neural networks (ANN) are some of the soft 
computing methods. 
Artificial intelligence34 is coined in the year 1956 after the World War 
II in the 2-month workshop held at Dartmouth. It deals with perception, 

 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
92 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
understanding, predication, and manipulating which can build intelligent 
machines. An AI system can be described essentially as a knowledge-
based agent comprising of the components—perceptors and actuators 
to sense and act back with the external environment. Also the internal 
components would be a problem-solving engine and learning engine using 
knowledge base system which is useful to draw inferences, solve prob­
lems, and decide on actions upon receiving inputs from the sensors or 
other perceiving devices. 
Early methods of AI when applied to real-world problems lead to fail­
ures. The researchers were able to understand that building an intelligent 
agent is very hard because the cognitive functions used for automation 
are not understood clearly in depth. As a result, in order to understand 
the concepts deeply, AI is split into knowledge representation, learning, 
probabilistic reasoning, neural networks, and many other areas. 
5.6 MACHINE LEARNING TECHNIQUES 
The literature22 has focused that learning and adaptation are the most 
important aspects of intelligence to be modeled in a computer for a 
machine to mimic a human. Modeling is to train machines to teach and 
adapt to the environment from the data it has acquired. Machines are 
taught to efficiently handle data to choose the actions to perform on the 
environment appropriately, like controlling a robot or making future 
predictions. The idea of ML is that the actions performed need not be 
explicitly programmed in a dynamically changing environment but learn 
from its history of sequences. ML techniques and ideas are exploited from 
biological objects, mathematics, statistics, and neuroscience. 
The techniques try to automatically identify patterns of data to predict 
the future outcomes. ML algorithms are categorized based on the outcomes 
of the algorithm. 
The learning algorithms4 are : 
• Supervised learning 
• Unsupervised learning 
• Semi-supervised learning 
• Reinforcement learning 
• Learning to learn 

 
 
93 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
Supervised or predictive learning is to map the inputs to desired outputs 
given a labeled set of data. It is also called as learning from exemplars. 
The labeled set of data is the training set that consists of input features 
or attributes or covariates. The desired outcomes are the output variables 
called as a response or target variables. There are two types of supervised 
learning namely, classification and regression. In classification problems, 
the target variables are categorical type, and in regression, the variables 
are continuous values. The performance of a supervised algorithm is how 
well it generalizes, in cases with an unexpected input; the algorithm will 
give a desired sensible output. The different algorithm types are linear 
classifiers, k-means clustering, Bayes classification, neural networks, and 
decision trees. 
Unsupervised learning is also called as descriptive learning. The algo­
rithm tries to discover new patterns from the given input set. This approach 
is also called as knowledge discovery. Compared to the supervised 
learning, unsupervised learning does not have a well-defined problem. The 
algorithm fits into decision framework problems. 
Semi-supervised learning is between supervised and unsupervised 
learning. This approach analyzes a large amount of unlabeled datasets in 
combination with a few labeled dataset. 
Reinforcement learning is an approach that learns its actions from 
trial and error interactions with the environment. The agent’s action set 
an impact on the environment and in return receives a feedback from the 
environment that helps the learning algorithm to improvise its behavior. 
FIGURE 5.5 Subset of AI. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
94 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Learning to learn techniques is based on previous experience. A recent 
study involves DL that extracts raw data from sensor/IoT devices. This 
type of learning is challenging because the environment is complex and 
the data received may not be accurate. Figure 5.5 shows the relationship 
between AI and its subsets. 
5.7 APPLICATIONS OF AI AND SOFT COMPUTING 
TECHNIQUES TO IMPLEMENT SECURITY IN CLOUD AND EDGE 
COMPUTING 
Security in the edge computing environment is essential and need the 
assistance of other technologies. Due to the low computing power and less 
storage characteristics of IoT and Edge devices, the data need to be sent to 
edge servers/Fog servers/cloud computing. The data may be intruded by 
the hackers. Application of the encryption algorithms at the IoT devices is 
of less feasibility as it requires large 
computing power. Figure 5.6  illustrates a generic ecosystem that 
demonstrates the need of security in IoT, Edge, Cloud, and application 
layers. Many researchers’ implemented security using soft computing and 
AI, particularly ML algorithms are applied by at various levels of the edge 
computing environment. 
FIGURE 5.6 Ecosystem of IoT, edge, cloud, and security. 
Table 5.2 indicates the list of work discussed about the implementa­
tion of security in the Edge/Fog computing environment using AI and soft 
computing techniques. 

 
 
95 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
TABLE 5.2 List of Implementation of Security in Edge Computing using AI/Soft Computing. 
Type of soft computing/ Technique 
Security aspect 
AI 
Soft 
Fuzziness-based semi 
Ensemble learning 
Network intrusion 
computing 
supervised learning 
detection 
Fuzzy inference system 
MEC with security 
To find the proper 
service chaining 
order of required 
security functions 
Soft hesitant fuzzy rough Multi-criteria 
To handle several 
set 
decision-making 
dynamically varying 
security services with 
the mobile user’s 
requirements 
Artificial 
Deep learning 
Fog learn 
Data privacy 
intelligence 
AI agent 
Self-mediating agent Trustless protection 
framework 
CNN model 
DeepNFV 
Network traffic 
analysis 
CNN model 
IoT guard 
Real-time security 
management system 
Deep neural network 
CryptoNets 
Encryption of data 
Decision tree approach 
Cyber attacks on 
Intrusion detection 
robots operation 
Deep learning-based 
Finger-vein 
Data privacy 
binary decision diagram 
recognition systems preservation of finger-
multi-layer extreme 
learning 
vein biometric data 
J48, Byes Net, 
AI-based reaction 
Anomaly-based 
RandomForest, 
agent 
intrusion detection 
Hoeffding, support vector 
machine 
system 
(SVM) and deep learning 
Support vector machines 
Data analytics on 
Intrusion detection 
(SVM), clustering, 
the block chain-
system 
bagging, and deep 
based security 
learning (DL) algorithms 
such as convolution 
problems 
neural network (CNN) 
and long short-term 
memory (LSTM) applied 
on blockchain-based data 

 
 
96 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 5.2  (Continued) 
Type of soft computing/ Technique 
Security aspect 
AI 
MapReduce-based 
Distributed machine Data integrity 
system, the graph model-
learning-oriented 
verification 
based abstraction system, data integrity 
and the parameter server 
verification scheme 
system 
(DML-DIV) 
Deep reinforcement 
Deep Q-network 
Data snooping and 
learning approach 
alteration reduction 
Neural network 
Para-cloud in edge 
Data privacy and 
nodes 
protection 
AI- Local Binary Pattern AI edge and 
Human identification 
– Face Recognition 
cloud computing 
(AE-FRS) 
system 
Despite the fact that the cloud-based robotic system12 has provided 
services in a variety of industries, its data protection is constantly threat­
ened, and the network intrusion detection system (NIDS) is regarded as 
a critical component to ensure its security. Many ML techniques have 
been used to create a more intelligent NIDS in recent years. The majority 
of NIDSs focused on ML and AI are either supervised or unsupervised. 
However, supervised learning for NIDS is heavily reliant on labeled data. 
This flaw makes it more difficult to identify the most recent attack patterns. 
Unsupervised learning for NIDS, on the other hand, often fails to produce 
adequate results. As a result, this paper presents a new fuzziness-based 
semi-supervised learning approach for network intrusion detection on a 
cloud-based robotic system through ensemble learning, which can resolve 
the aforementioned issues. First, we build an ensemble system trained on 
labeled data due to ensemble learning’s strong generalization capability. 
Furthermore, a fuzziness-based approach for data processing is used to 
better use the unlabeled data. In this way, the dataset’s noisy and redundant 
examples are omitted. Finally, it integrates both supervised and unsuper­
vised pieces using the same ensemble approach. The proposed solution is 
checked on the NSL-KDD dataset to check the efficacy and robustness of 
the NIDS. 
Starting with static vulnerability analysis, framework36 is built that 
implements zero confidence. “Zero trust” is a model, and there are three 

 
 
 
 
 
97 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
main concepts that must be followed in order for any network in modern 
computing to be safe across boundaries. These principles are: (1) ensure 
that all services, regardless of location, are accessed securely; (2) use a 
strict least privilege approach; and (3) inspect and document all traffic. 
The AI’s position as a selfless mediating agent is investigated in order to 
address some issues in the implementation of a trustless protection frame­
work, as well as the challenges that this poses. Time, expense, resource 
consumption, and degrees of freedom in the logical subsystem will be the 
most important control factors for a self-regulating trustless agent. These 
are important considerations for any mediator. In order to account for 
consumption trends and underlying dynamics, an AI agent may be a very 
useful regulatory agent. 
One of the ML algorithms, such as CNNs form the next generation 
of cloud security31 because CNN can provide automated and sensitive 
approaches to improving cloud security. ML may include solutions that 
implement comprehensive algorithms for stable enterprise data across all 
cloud applications, rather than concentrating solely on detecting and iden­
tifying sensitive data patterns. 
A novel distributed DL scheme1 is recommended for cyber-attack 
detection in fog-to-things computing. The master fog node sets the DL 
parameters and sends them to the worker nodes, but training data and 
hyper-parameter optimization are done locally on the worker nodes. On 
each worker node, parameter updates are made using optimizers and DL 
gradients, which are then aggregated on the master fog node. The master 
node receives asynchronously the updates of parameters from each node 
when the workers are ready to submit them. When a worker has several 
threads to run, it averages each thread’s update and sends it back to the 
master node. The model is important for a number of reasons: worker 
intrusion detection systems (IDSs) detect malicious events locally, while 
the master IDS is responsible for updating the parameters using gradient 
descent training attack detection systems employing DL models on distrib­
uted IoT networks backed by fog nodes could improve the accuracy and 
efficiency of cyber-attack detection by sharing the parameter. 
The main goal of this paper31 is to use network traffic data to recog­
nize and detect suspicious activities. For experimenting and performance 
evaluation on the CNN-MSVM process, two separate sets of data were 
used: TOR and UNSW and ISOT. All of the input data (network traffic 
data) are fed into the CNN model’s input layer during the experiment. The 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
98 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
main goal of this project is to develop a better learning method for data 
analytics in the context of cloud protection. It is also focused on putting a 
lot of investigative work into practice by combining CNN with the MSVM 
approach. The extended supervised ML methods are highly suitable and 
applicable in real-time cloud applications, according to the experimental 
results and output comparison. 
DeepNFV20, a lightweight network function virtualization (NFV) 
architecture based on the Docker container running on the network edge 
that combines state-of-the-art DL models with NFV containers to solve 
some complex issues, such as network traffic classification and connec­
tion analysis. Since this container is part of an NFV chain that the system 
chooses for a particular user, its input may be the user device or the output 
from other NFV containers. To process raw network traffic, the first step 
is to divide it into discrete units, or network packets. The packet capture 
(pcap) file, which is the universal file format in traffic analysis and can 
be used with the libpcap library in Unix-like systems, is used to record 
these units. Second, the packet headers should be changed to eliminate 
any unwanted or interfering data. The created images will be labeled with 
different labels during the training process of the proposed deep model, 
according to the specific protocols of their raw packets. The videos, as 
well as the labels that go with them, will then be imported into the CNN 
model for fine-tuning. The image generation module will directly pass the 
created images to the well-trained CNN model, which can provide deep 
insight into the pattern information, using the stochastic gradient descent 
(SGD) method. 
For an intelligent, resource-efficient, and real-time security manage­
ment system, develop32 and implement IoT-guard, a distributed IoT archi­
tecture. In a smart home setting, the device, which consists of edge–fog 
computational layers, can help in crime prevention and predict crime 
events. The IoT guard can identify and confirm crime incidents in real time, 
using AI and an event-driven approach to send crime data to protective 
services and police units, allowing for rapid intervention while conserving 
resources including electricity, BW, memory, and CPU use. In this report, 
we construct a prototype of an IoT-guard laboratory testbed and assess its 
efficacy for real-time protection applications. A CNN model operating on 
a fog node identifies and saves images labeled with the names of the crime 
objects with the highest likelihood. After that, the fog node compiles and 
sends crime info. 

 
 
 
 
99 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
Although an edge server23 can speed up DNN processing, it is not 
always sufficient for edge devices to run DNNs on servers. There are three 
offloading scenarios: (1) partial offloading of partitioned DNN, (2) hierar­
chical architectures (offloading is done through a mix of edge computers, 
edge servers, and cloud), and (3) distributed computing approaches—the 
DNN computation is distributed across multiple peer devices. To compute 
the inference with a high degree of secrecy, cryptographic techniques can 
be used. Secure computation aims to ensure that an inference result is sent 
to the end system without the edge server knowing anything about the 
DNN model, and vice versa. Homomorphic encryption, which encrypts 
exchanged data and allows computation on the encrypted data, is one 
type of protected computation used in CryptoNets. The DNN is translated 
into CryptoNets, which are low-degree polynomials that approximate the 
common activation functions and operations in DNN, ensuring homomor­
phic encryption. The compute times of homomorphic encryption, on the 
other hand, appear to be a bottleneck. Another method for stable compu­
tation is multiparty computation. Multiple machines collaborate and 
interact in multiple rounds to jointly compute a result in safe multiparty 
computation. 
Cyber-physical device intrusion detection is a relatively recent field 
of research. It has been studied to some degree in the context of indus­
trial control systems, but it is still in its infancy in the context of mobile 
cyber-physical systems like robotic vehicles. It is discovered in the experi­
mentation35 that different attacks have different effects on the robot’s oper­
ation, including both its cyber (network, CPU, and disk data) and physical 
behavior (speed, vibration, and power consumption). This provides an 
advantage since combining the two types of features will increase the 
accuracy of attack detection. This has been checked with a decision tree-
based intrusion detection approach. 
A privacy-preserving edge finger-vein biometric system37 based on 
DL has been developed. Raw finger-vein templates are protected by the 
binary decision diagram (BDD), built and incorporated with the function 
permutation technique to make the transformation non-invertible and the 
transformed template revocable in the proposed finger-vein recognition 
scheme, that is, binary decision diagram multi-layer extreme learning 
machine (BDD-ML-ELM). The proposed system improves on existing 
permutation-based cancelable biometrics and ML-based finger-vein 
recognition systems, both of which lack template security. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
100 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
A new ML-based security architecture that automatically addresses the 
growing security concerns in the IoT domain is suggested5 in a work. For 
threat mitigation, this architecture uses both software defined networking 
(SDN) and NFV enablers. This AI platform incorporates a monitoring 
agent and AI-based reaction agent, both of which use ML models to 
analyze network patterns and identify anomalies in IoT systems. To 
achieve its objectives, the architecture makes use of supervised learning, a 
distributed data mining method, and a neural network. The distribution of 
attacks using the data mining technique, in particular, is extremely effec­
tive at detecting attacks with high performance and low cost. The test is 
conducted with the experiment in a real smart building scenario using a 
one-class support vector machine (SVM) for the anomaly based IDS for 
IoT. 
Machine learning33 is being used to improve the security of blockchain­
based smart applications. Blockchain technology’s consensus process 
ensures that data are safe and legitimate. New security problems, such 
as majority attack and double-spending, arise as a result of blockchain. 
Data analytics on blockchain-based encrypted data is suggested to fix the 
above-mentioned issues. ML is a method of making specific decisions 
using a logical amount of data. Both technologies can be used together 
in a variety of smart applications which utilized the edge computing and 
cloud computing environment. 
In distributed machine learning (DML) like MapReduce-based system, 
the graph model-based abstraction system, and the parameter server 
system, ensuring data integrity is critical. If network attackers forge, alter, 
or destroy data, the DML system’s training model will be severely harmed, 
and the training results will be incorrect. To ensure the integrity of training 
data,39 a DML-oriented data integrity verification scheme (DML-DIV) is 
suggested. To achieve data integrity verification, the provable data posses­
sion (PDP) sampling auditing algorithm is used. This allows the referred 
scheme to withstand forgery and tampering attacks. Second, in the TPA 
verification process, random number is generated, the blinding factor, and 
discrete logarithm problem (DLP) is used to establish proof and ensure 
privacy security. Finally, we use identity-based cryptography and two-step 
key generation technology to produce the public/private key pair for the 
data owner so that this scheme can solve the key escrow problem and 
lower the cost of certificate management. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
101 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
With cloud storage and network service offloading at the edge of mobile 
cellular networks, MEC enables energy conservation. However, a critical 
problem impeding potential MEC growth is how to effectively handle 
various real-time evolving security functions. A fuzzy security service 
chaining approach18 for MEC is proposed to address this problem. A new 
architecture, in particular, is being developed to decouple the necessary 
security functions from the physical resources. A security proxy based on 
this is devised to enable compatibility with conventional security func­
tions. A fuzzy ranking system to determine the best order for the appro­
priate security functions. 
Tasks are offloaded to edge servers by mobile apps in the MEC envi­
ronment. These are vulnerable to external security threats (e.g., snooping 
and alteration). In order to address this problem, a security and cost-aware 
computation offloading (SCACO) strategy is proposed for mobile users in 
a MEC environment, with the aim of reducing total costs while meeting 
risk likelihood constraints. The costs could be the mobile device’s energy 
consumption, processing delay, and task loss probability. The computation 
offloading problem is first formulated as a Markov decision mechanism 
(MDP). The optimal offloading policy15 for the proposed problem is then 
extracted using the common deep reinforcement learning approach, deep 
Q-network (DQN). 
EdgeSec,29 an Edge layer security service to improve the security of 
IoT systems EdgeSec is made up of seven major components that work 
together to address unique security issues in IoT systems in a systematic 
manner. 
The FogLearn7 framework was used to assist and thus improve the 
cloud computing framework’s capabilities. The data are processed by 
the Fog layer in FogLearn, and after processing, the data can be sent to 
the cloud layer for long-term storage and analysis. As a result, this archi­
tecture gives end-users more power for improved efficiency without 
adding computational overhead at the cloud layer. When the computa­
tional overhead at the cloud layer is very high and geospatial data sizes 
are growing, the built architecture has an advantage. As a result, the 
fog layer boosts overall performance by lowering latency and increasing 
throughput. When the data are processed locally, this system brought a 
privacy advantage. 
A critical problem impeding the growth of FMEC is how to effectively 
manage many dynamically varying security resources while meeting the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
102 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
needs of mobile users. To address this problem, we wanted to implement a 
method for selecting an acceptable security service in FMEC based on the 
needs of mobile users. The problem of choosing the right security service 
with hesitant fuzzy data is a multi-criteria decision-making problem. The 
authors presented25 a soft hesitant fuzzy rough collection (SHFRS) to 
solve multi-criteria decision-making problems in this paper. By fusing the 
hesitant fuzzy rough set theory with the hesitant fuzzy soft set, SHFRS is 
implemented as a groundbreaking extension of the hesitant fuzzy rough 
set theory. 
Real-time video processing is a crucial component that enables a 
variety of applications that would otherwise be impossible to implement 
due to scalability issues. When analyzing real-time information, predic­
tive models, specifically neural networks (NNs), are often used to reduce 
processing time. Using NNs, on the other hand, is computationally costly. 
By delegating parts of the job to edge nodes, edge computing aims to build 
systems that alleviate the pressure on the cloud. In order to reduce latency, 
such systems prioritize processing as much as possible on the edge node 
before delegating the load to the cloud. Furthermore, processing informa­
tion at the edge improves data privacy and protection. This paper utilizes13 
the edge nodes even more by allowing them to collaborate as a para-cloud, 
reducing reliance on the primary computing cloud. 
High transmission rate and large data volume are two characteristics 
of visual sensors. Face recognition sensors are commonly used in defense, 
healthcare, and other fields. This paper proposes a hybrid of edge-based AI 
and cloud computing for applications such as face recognition and protec­
tion that necessitate a large number of visual sensors, as well as image 
processing and analysis. 
5.8 CONCLUSION 
Edge computing environment provides lot of facilities for IoT devices. 
But due to the heterogeneous nature of its positioning varieties of 
threats are prevalent. Many researchers have dealt with the security 
issues and soft computing/AI has provided the solutions as per the 
discussion in this chapter. It is expected that lot many types of new IoT 
devices are yet to come which may come up with the more different 
types of threats. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
103 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
KEYWORDS 
• 
soft computing 
• 
artifcial intelligence 
• 
edge computing 
• 
fog computing 
• 
IoT 
• 
cloud computing 
REFERENCES 
1. Abebe, A.; Chilamkurti, N. Deep Learning: The Frontier for Distributed Attack 
Detection in Fog-to-Things Computing. IEEE Commun. Mag.  2018, 56 (2), 169–75. 
DOI: 10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700332. 
2. Dedy, A.; Suryanto, Y.; Ramli, K. In On Developing Information Security Management 
System (ISMS) Framework for ISO 27001-Based Data Center; 2018 International 
Workshop on Big Data and Information Security (IWBIS), 2018; pp 149–57. DOI: 
10.1109/IWBIS.2018.8471700. 
3. Alramadhan, M.; Sha, K. In An Overview of Access Control Mechanisms for Internet 
of Things, 2017 26th International Conference on Computer Communication and 
Networks (ICCCN), 2017; pp 1–6. DOI: 10.1109/ICCCN.2017.8038503. 
4. Ayodele, T. O. Types of Machine Learning Algorithms, In New Advances in Machine 
Learning; IntechOpen, 2010. DOI: 10.5772/9385. 
5. Bagaa, M.; Taleb, T.; Bernabe, J. B.; Skarmeta, A. A  Machine Learning Security 
Framework for Iot Systems. IEEE Access  2020, 8, 114066–114077. DOI: 10.1109/ 
ACCESS.2020.2996214. 
6. Bansal, S.; Kumar, D. IoT Ecosystem: A Survey on Devices, Gateways, Operating 
Systems, Middleware and Communication. Int. J. Wirel. Inf. Netw. 2020, 27 (3), 
340–364. DOI: 10.1007/s10776-020-00483-7. 
7. Rabindra, B. K.; Priyadarshini, R.; Dubey, H.; Kumar, V.; Mankodiya, K. FogLearn: 
Leveraging Fog-Based Machine Learning for Smart System Big Data Analytics. 
Int. J. Fog Comput. (IJFC)  1 (1). IGI Global, 2018; pp 15–34. DOI: 10.4018/ 
IJFC.2018010102. 
8. Botta, A.; de Donato, W.; Persico, V.; Pescapé, A. In On the Integration of Cloud 
Computing and Internet of Things. 2014 International Conference on Future Internet 
of Things and Cloud, 2014; pp 23–30. DOI: 10.1109/FiCloud.2014.14. 
9. Cao, K.; Liu, Y.; Meng, G.; Sun, Q. An Overview on Edge Computing Research. 
IEEE Access  2020, 8, 85714–85728. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2991734. 
10. Caprolu, M.; Di Pietro, R.; Lombardi, F.; Raponi, S. Edge Computing Perspectives: 
Architectures, Technologies, and Open Security Issues. In 2019 IEEE International 

 
104 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Conference on Edge Computing (EDGE), 2019; pp 116–123. DOI: 10.1109/ 
EDGE.2019.00035. 
11. Wesley, D. “Microsoft Edge Identity Support and Configuration, 2021. https://docs. 
microsoft.com/en-us/deployedge/microsoft-edge-security-identity (accessed May 
17, 2021) 
12. Ying, G.; Liu, Y.; Jin, Y.; Chen, J.; Wu, H. A  Novel Semi-Supervised Learning 
Approach for Network Intrusion Detection on Cloud-Based Robotic System. IEEE 
Access  2018, 6, 50927–50938. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2018.2868171. 
13. Gazzaz, S.; Nawab, F. In SoCC ’19, Collaborative Edge-Cloud and Edge-Edge Video 
Analytics, Proceedings of the ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing; Association for 
Computing Machinery: New York, NY, USA, 2019. DOI: 10.1145/3357223.3366024. 
14. Ting, H.; Ciftcioglu, E. N.; Wang, S.; Chan, K. S. Location Privacy in Mobile Edge 
Clouds: A Chaf
 
f-Based Approach. IEEE J. Select. Areas Commun.  2017, 35 (11), 
2625–2636. DOI: 10.1109/JSAC.2017.2760179. 
15. Huang, B.; Li, Y.; Li, Z.; Pan, L.; Wang, S.; Xu, Y.; Hu, H. Security and Cost-
Aware Computation Offloading via Deep Reinforcement Learning in Mobile 
Edge Computing. Wirel. Commun. Mobile Comput. 2019, 2019, e3816237. DOI: 
10.1155/2019/3816237. 
16. Ibrahim, D. An Overview of Soft Computing. Procedia Comput. Sci. 12th International 
Conference on Application of Fuzzy Systems and Soft Computing, ICAFS 2016, Aug 
29–30, 2016; Vienna, Austria, 2016, 102, 34–38. DOI: 10.1016/j.procs.2016.09.366. 
17. Khan, I.; Belqasmi, F.; Glitho, R.; Crespi, N.; Morrow, M.; Polakos, P. Wireless 
Sensor Network Virtualization: A  Survey. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor.  2016, 18 (1), 
553–576. DOI: 10.1109/COMST.2015.2412971. 
18. Guanwen, L.; Zhou, H.; Feng, B.; Li, G.; Li, T.; Xu, Q.;  Quan, W. Fuzzy Theory 
Based Security Service Chaining for Sustainable Mobile-Edge Computing, Hindawi. 
Mobile Inf. Syst.  2017, 2017, e8098394. DOI: 10.1155/2017/8098394. 
19. Hui, L.; Jing, T. A  Lightweight Fine-Grained Searchable Encryption Scheme in 
Fog-Based Healthcare IoT Networks, Hindawi. Wirel. Commun. Mobile Comput. 
2019, 2019, e1019767. DOI: 10.1155/2019/1019767. 
20. Li, L.; Ota, K.;  Dong, M. DeepNFV: A  Lightweight Framework for Intelligent Edge 
Network Functions Virtualization. IEEE Netw.  2019, 33 (1), 136–41. DOI: 10.1109/ 
MNET.2018.1700394. 
21. Lima, M. V. M.; Ricardo, M. F. L.; Fernando, A. A. L. In A Multi-Perspective 
Methodology for Evaluating the Security Maturity of Data Centers, 2017 IEEE 
International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC), 2017; pp 1196– 
1201. DOI: 10.1109/SMC.2017.8122775. 
22. Stephen, M. In Machine Learning: An Algorithmic  Perspective, 2nd Ed.; Chapman 
and Hall/CRC: Boca Raton, 2014. 
23. Merenda, M.; Porcaro, C.; Iero, D. Edge Machine Learning for AI-Enabled IoT  
Devices: A Review
 
. Sensors  2020, 20 (9). DOI: 10.3390/s20092533. 
24. Patel, M.; Sabella, D.; Sprecher, N.; Young, V. Mobile Edge Computing A  Key 
Technology towards 5G; ETSI White Paper No. 11. In 16. ETSI White Paper, 11, 
First 
Ed.; 
2015. 
https://www.etsi.org/images/files/etsiwhitepapers/etsi_wp11_ 
mec_a_key_technology_towards_5g.pdf. 

 
105 
Cloud and Edge Computing Security Using Artifcial Intelligence 
25. Rathore, S.; Sharma, P. K.; Sangaiah, A. K.; Park, J. J. A  Hesitant Fuzzy Based 
Security Approach for Fog and Mobile-Edge Computing. IEEE Access 2018, 6, 
688–701. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2017.2774837. 
26. Ray, P. P. A Survey of IoT Cloud Platforms. Future Comput. Inform. J. 2016, 1 (1), 
35–46. DOI: 10.1016/j.fcij.2017.02.001. 
27. Rudas, I. J. Hybrid Systems. In Encyclopedia of Information Systems; Bidgoli, H.; 
Elsevier: New York, 2003; pp 563–70. DOI: 10.1016/B0-12-227240-4/00088-5. 
28.  Sethi, P.; Sarangi, S. R. Internet of Things: Architectures, Protocols, and Applications. 
J. Electr. Comput. Eng. 2017, 2017, e9324035. DOI: 10.1155/2017/9324035. 
29. Sha, K.; Errabelly, R.; Wei, W.; Yang, T. A.; Wang, Z. In EdgeSec: Design of an 
Edge Layer Security Service to Enhance IoT Security, 2017 IEEE 1st International 
Conference on Fog and Edge Computing (ICFEC), 2017; pp 81–88. DOI: 10.1109/ 
ICFEC.2017.7. 
30. Subashini, S.; Kavitha, V. “A  Survey on Security Issues in Service Delivery Models 
of Cloud Computing. J. Netw. Comput. Appl.  2011, 34 (1), 1–11. DOI: 10.1016/j. 
jnca.2010.07.006. 
31. Subramanian, E. K.; Tamilselvan, L. A Focus on Future Cloud: Machine Learning-
Based Cloud Security. Serv. Oriented Comput. Appl. 2019, 13 (3), 237–249. DOI: 
10.1007/s11761-019-00270-0. 
32. Sultana, T.; Khan, A. W. IoT-Guard: Event-Driven Fog-Based Video Surveillance 
System for Real-Time Security Management. IEEE Access 2019, 7, 134881–134894. 
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2941978. 
33. Tanwar, S.; Bhatia, Q.; Patel, P.; Kumari, A.; Singh, P. K.; Hong, W. C. Machine 
Learning Adoption in Blockchain-Based Smart Applications: The Challenges, and a 
Way Forward. IEEE Access  2020, 8, 474–488. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2961372. 
34. Tecuci, G. Artificial Intelligence. WIREs Comput. Stat. 2012, 4 (2), 168–180. DOI: 
10.1002/wics.200. 
35. Vuong, T. P.; Loukas, G.; Gan, D.; Bezemskij, A. In Decision Tree-Based Detection 
of Denial of Service and Command Injection Attacks on Robotic Vehicles, 2015 IEEE 
International Workshop on Information Forensics and Security (WIFS), 2015; pp 
1–6. DOI: 10.1109/WIFS.2015.7368559. 
36. Steven, W. R.; Hammoudeh, M. Artificial Intelligence Agents as Mediators of 
Trustless Security Systems and Distributed Computing Applications; Computer 
Communications and Networks. In Guide to Vulnerability Analysis for Computer 
Networks and Systems: An Artificial Intelligence Approach; Parkinson, S.; Crampton, 
A.; Hill, R., Springer International Publishing: Cham, 2018; pp 131–55. DOI: 
10.1007/978-3-319-92624-7_6. 
37. Yang, W.; Wang, S.; Hu, J.; Zheng, G.; Yang, J.; Valli, C. Securing Deep Learning 
Based Edge Finger Vein Biometrics With Binary Decision Diagram. IEEE Trans. Ind. 
Inform.  2019, 15 (7), 4244–4253. DOI: 10.1109/TII.2019.2900665. 
38. Zhang, P.; Liu, J. K.; Yu, F. R.; Sookhak, M.; Au, M. H.; Luo, X. A  Survey on Access 
Control in Fog Computing. IEEE Commun. Mag.  2018, 56 (2), 144–149. DOI: 
10.1109/MCOM.2018.1700333. 
39. Zhao, X. P.; Jiang, R. Distributed Machine Learning Oriented Data Integrity 
Verification Scheme in Cloud Computing Environment. IEEE Access 2020, 8, 
26372–26384. DOI: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2971519. 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
CHAPTER 6 
SECURITY IN IOT USING ARTIFICIAL 
INTELLIGENCE 
SANCHARI SAHA 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
CMR Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 
ABSTRACT 
In various scenarios, data are referred to as the “oil of the twenty-first 
century,” and the Internet-of-Things (IoT) as one of the most popular tech­
nologies. IoT is a sparse network in which sensors extract useful infor­
mation from their surroundings and transmit it via the Internet. This IoT 
generation is vastly influencing our lives. Prior to the IoT, the majority of 
security threats were caused by information leakage or service disruption, 
however, with increased reliance on the IoT, security threats  are directly 
mapped to our day-to-day lives and can easily affect even our physical 
security. 
IoT is a brilliant technology for combating the COVID-19 pandemic 
and has the potential to meet significant challenges during a lockdown. 
This technology can detect real-time data as well as other pertinent infor­
mation about COVID patients. However, the main concern in deploying the 
IoT in this current pandemic situation is data security and privacy, which is 
a matter of life and death from the perspective of patients’ health. 
As user privacy is of high importance in most IoT applications, a mech­
anism is required to support multi-platform security for different device 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
108 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
interactions in IoT applications to prevent personal data from flowing to 
an unintended destination. 
Artificial intelligence has paved the way for addressing various secu­
rity issues that are present in IoT applications. In this chapter, readers will 
be able to visualize the role of artificial intelligence in correctly analyzing 
and preventing harmful attacks with greater efficiency. 
6.1 INTRODUCTION 
Internet-of-Things (IoT) has emerged as a cutting-edge technology and 
with its numerous applications it has gained popularity in both research 
and business domains. IoT can be thought of as a collection of various 
devices that require a cloud environment for data processing and transfer. 
Artificial intelligence (AI) is very much important in analyzing the stored 
data and providing reliable decisions in a short span of time. The assem­
bled IoT devices communicate with one another via unique identifiers and 
share data via the Internet or cloud infrastructure.1 Presently, the age where 
we are living, usage of AI and machine learning (ML) is critical in order 
to analyze cloud data quickly and accurately. Despite the fact that AI is 
playing a significant role in improving cyber security, cloud vulnerability, 
and IoT-based communications continue to pose a threat. Along with cloud 
and IoT security issues, attackers employ security threats related to AI 
also, which remains a threat to the cyberspace world. Furthermore, the 
vast majority of wireless IoT devices connected to public networks are 
vulnerable to ongoing cyber threats. 
IoT communicates data in conjunction with big data and AI.2 As per 
the article,3 around 13 new devices are getting connected to the Internet 
every second, and the number of devices connected globally is expected 
to increase to more than 2 billion by 2025, nearly tripling from 2011. The 
greater the number of IoT devices, the greater the need for network security 
and cloud-based bigdata protection. Although the development and benefit 
of implementing an IoT network provide a high return on investment, one 
of the key security issues is the ongoing cyber threat to the security of IoT 
devices and cloud network infrastructure. 
When considering the IoT as a collection of interconnected devices that 
provide intuitive Internet-based services such as data privacy and protec­
tion from various cyber-attacks during transportation, ensuring the highest 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
109 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
level of security is critical. AI or machine learning can be used to imple­
ment supervised practice, unused practice, and reinforcement practice to 
meet this requirement. The use of AI creates a better secure environment in 
the cloud setup and ensures the possibility of realizing the future of the IoT. 
The entity-based architecture of IoT is split into three layers, namely 
the terminal perception layer, network transport layer, and application 
service layer as shown in Figure 6.1.2 Terminal layer is responsible for 
data absorption of IoT, whereas the network transport layer is responsible 
to send information from the terminal to the application layer to perform 
communication and connection-oriented functions. The application layer 
on the other hand processes data from the network transport layer and 
merges with different industries to support various IoT applications.2 
FIGURE 6.1 Entity-based architecture of IoT. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [2] 
6.2 IOT SERVICES AND APPLICATION SCENARIOS 
The primary goal of IoT is to create a global network of various types of 
devices that can be connected to the Internet for information exchange. 
Interconnected devices can transfer data and perform various functions 
without the need for human intervention when using IoT technology. 
The IoT can be used in a variety of applications by installing sensors in 
home appliances, medical equipment, and transportation, for example. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
110 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
The sensor layer, network layer, and application layer comprise the IoT 
structure.4 
Each of these layers serves a specific purpose. The sensor layer is in 
charge of sensing the environment and receiving data via wireless tech­
nology, radio-frequency identification, or sensor technology. All these 
technologies form the foundation of the IoT. The network layer is in 
charge of transferring data from the sensor layer to the application layer. 
In addition, the cloud framework is an important component of this layer 
for analyzing large amounts of data. The application layer is located at 
the top of the IoT architecture and provides specific services to customers 
based on processed and analyzed data. The IoT architecture can under­
stand customer needs through these three layers and provide services that 
meet those needs while improving quality. 
The following section describes specific IoT services and application 
scenarios: 
(1) Remote Monitoring: 
The remote monitoring feature enables users of IoT infrastructure to 
remotely control devices connected to the Internet as well as monitor the 
surrounding environment, making life easier. The health status of chil­
dren and the elderly can be collected at any time, and parents can monitor 
the condition of their infants from anywhere using home-based sensors. 
Furthermore, real-time baby videos can be captured and distributed to 
users over time. Customers can easily track the status of their ordered 
goods or other logistics. Consumers can learn about the quality of items 
purchased online, as well as their status and current location, at any time. 
(2) Home Automation: 
Home automation2 has been around for a long time, so it is not a surprising 
application concept for us. But what deserves our attention is that smart 
home appliances have become more versatile, intelligent, and capable of 
providing better service to users. When we enter our room from outside, the 
air conditioner automatically turns on and adjusts the temperature. There 
are numerous other home service products available that make human life 
more comfortable. Sweeping robots are another IoT-based home appli­
ance that can turn on and off lights automatically without intervention. As 
a result, smart homes are a direct example of IoT services that aim to make 
human life easier and more comfortable. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
111 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
(3) Prediction of Natural Disaster: 
The IoT can help in predicting natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, 
tsunamis, and droughts.2 External sensors are used to collect data from the 
environment, process it, and reveal important information about potential 
natural disasters. This saves time in relocating people from disaster-prone 
areas while also minimizing damage to homes and other belongings as 
much as possible. The IoT has served as a solid infrastructure, propelling 
a revolution in many traditional offline industries. Even though the IoT is 
still in its early stages, it has gained popularity in a variety of application 
areas because it has positively impacted every aspect of humanity. Figure 
6.2 highlights the usefulness of IoT in various domains. 
FIGURE 6.2 Usefulness of IoT in various domains.2 
6.3 ASPECTS OF IOT IN COVID-19 
The novel coronavirus epidemic that erupted in Wuhan, China in December 
2019 has affected the entire world. The disease has been dubbed the Corona 
Virus Disease 2019 and has been named the world’s most dangerous virus 
affecting human health. Currently, the global number of COVID-19 cases 
has surpassed 5,000,000, with approximately 350,000 people reported 

 
 
 
 
 
112 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
dead worldwide. This figure is rapidly increasing by an hour. Health 
workers and medical researchers have discovered a new method to control 
the COVID-19 infection in this emergency medical situation. Continuous 
monitoring of this viral infection is critical for isolating infected patients 
and preventing relapse. In this situation, research fields like AI, ML, and the 
IoT are churning out technologies that can be used to address the increas­
ingly important medical issues associated with COVID-19. Figure 6.3 is 
highlighting remote monitoring of patients using IoT. 
The IoT has evolved into one of the most important technologies of 
the twenty-first century. In the modern era, we can connect cars, home 
appliances, health monitoring systems, and home security systems to the 
Internet with the help of IoT. Smart devices for exchanging data over the 
Internet are part of the IoT.1 It transforms traditional goods into smart 
goods. 
FIGURE 6.3 Remote monitoring of patients using IoT. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [29] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
113 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
The goal of the IoT is to bring everything under the umbrella of this 
world’s interconnected structure, allowing humans to not only control the 
devices around them, but also provide real-time updates on their states. IoT 
devices primarily perceive their surroundings and transmit data captured 
by them via the Internet without the need for human intervention. The IoT 
has emerged as an important part of human life, with a growing number of 
devices linked via IoT.3 
The IoT has been developed as a promising technology that will play 
an important role in a variety of fields including healthcare, home automa­
tion, industrial automation, autonomous vehicles, smart grids, and so on. 
It ensures the best use of resources with low costs and modest negotia­
tions in a seamless manner. As COVID-19 spreads around the world, it 
is critical to understand and clarify the role of the IoT in this pandemic. 
COVID-19 positive cases had surpassed 9 million by August 2020, with 
a 4.7% mortality rate.4 Medical researchers are experimenting with and 
researching different solutions to help protect against COVID-19.5 
The IoT is a collection of various components designed to serve multiple 
countries and combat the negative effects of COVID-19. With its scalable 
network, the IoT is capable of handling large amounts of data collected 
from sensor devices used by many applications to combat COVID-19. 
Furthermore, the IoT network’s dependability reduces the time duration 
in delivering emergency information, which can aid in providing on-time 
response during this global pandemic. Because of the spread of this corona-
virus, there has never been a greater need for the IoT. 
The IoT has been developed as the most useful technology that can 
change our lives due to its powerful integration with seamless connec­
tion and other associated technologies. IoT applications in combating this 
global epidemic are widespread in many areas, and they play an important 
role in lowering the risk of coronavirus outbreaks.11 The potential applica­
tions of IoT technologies that could be useful and necessary in combating 
COVID-19 are: 
• Smart education 
• Smart grid & AMI 
• Block chain-based IoT 
• AI-based accurate forecasting 
• IoT enabled ambulances 
• Automation 
• Wearable devices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
114 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
• Robot 
• Mobile app 
• Drone 
• Smart gadgets 
• IoT-based telemart 
• Digital telehealth 
6.4 SECURITY CHALLENGE OF IOT 
Access control, device identification management, and data encryption 
are some of the approaches used in the IoT security procedure to reduce 
vulnerability. The IoT technology has grown in value over time, but while 
ensuring overall data perfection, the complexity of communication, iden­
tification, and product perception has increased. The increase in data size 
has an immediate impact on data and network vulnerabilities.5 
The security of communication in an interconnected network and the 
connection of IoT devices pose a significant threat. The main concern 
with IoT devices in terms of data security is that most are incapable of 
dealing with cyber-attacks and privacy-related threats. As a result, it may 
endanger the entire IoT network. According to security experts, most IoT 
devices have inadequate security measures, making them an easy target for 
the attackers. In conclusion, ensuring security for large amounts of data, 
speed, diversity, and IoT infrastructure is a difficult task.4 
The device identifier is a unique code that adds another layer of secu­
rity. The identification codes for specific devices function similar to our 
mobile phone’s IMEI number, but this does not apply to all connected 
objects in the IoT network. As a result, the current identification standard 
is applicable to all devices in the system. 
When the exact physical location of the device is known, geographic 
location is another important factor that provides proper security. Although 
we can obtain such information from smart TVs or mobile phones, this is 
not true for all network-connected devices. 
Access to other vulnerable devices also provides cybercriminals with 
easy access to other connected systems in the network. For example, a 
typical agreement with “Baby Monitor,” which is linked to the IoT 
network, provides cybercriminals with easy access to other connected 
devices such as cars, homes, smart TVs, and many more. As a result, imple­
menting the IoT as a safety device is a difficult task. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
115 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
6.5 IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES OF IOT IN COVID-19 
SCENARIO 
Implementing IoT in the COVID-19 scenario imposes a number of chal­
lenges, which are highlighted below: 
6.5.1 SCALABILITY 
IoT devices are becoming increasingly popular as digital technology 
advances. The reason for this expansion is that IoT devices are not limited 
to a single App but are spread across multiple Apps that are popular today. 
According to a recent survey, the demand for smart home equipment will 
skyrocket between 2018 and 2022. 
The major challenge in implementing IoT to combat the global 
pandemic of COVID-19 is scalability. Internet-of-Health-Technology 
(IoHT) alone necessitates a large number of devices in order to correctly 
interpret patients’ vital signals and transmit them to the Internet cloud. 
Currently, there are approximately 4.1 million active COVID cases 
worldwide. Each IoT instrument is made up of multiple sensors, making 
implementation of the IoT a difficult task. As infrastructure grows, a massive 
amount of data flows through these tiny IoT sensor nodes, increasing 
energy consumption. 
6.5.2 BANDWIDTH LIMITATION 
As the number of IoT devices are growing, the demand for bandwidth to 
send data from sensor nodes to the cloud also increasing. Presently, the 
majority of IoT devices make use of licensed spectrum provided  by various 
mobile operators. However, along with this increasing number of devices, 
the demand for bandwidth, resulting data delivery delays and incorrect 
data transmission also are increasing. 
When the number of devices in a fixed IoT infrastructure grows, Wi-Fi 
usage in the coverage area becomes unreliable. At present, most of the IoT 
devices utilize the 3G/4G/LTE networks in performing their functionalities. 
The 3G/LTE/4G spectrum would soon be insufficient for a significant 
number of IoT users. During the COVID-19 pandemic, timely data transfer 

 
 
 
 
 
 
116 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
to entities connected to IoT devices was critical. Human lives might be lost 
as a result of errors or data delays. Latency and low data rates can be over­
come if the bandwidth is sufficient. 
6.5.3 PRIVACY AND SECURITY 
Because of the scalability and power limitations of the IoT devices, 
traditional cryptographic approaches are not feasible solutions to enforce 
protection. To ensure data protection, user privacy, and reliable authen­
tication, security solutions must be energy efficient, and algorithms that 
securely identify IoT networks must have minimal computational issues.15 
Therefore, lightweight protection algorithms must be developed in order 
to enforce security in IoT. The security requirements of IoT-enabled 
networks have increased as a result of the spread of coronavirus. 
Following are the major concerns related to security while imple­
menting IoT in COVID-19 scenario: 
• The data sent from the sensors implanted on the COVID-19 patent’s 
body must be correct. 
• The data must reach to its intended location. 
• There should be no duplication of data. 
• Data stored in the memory of an IoT  computer should not be acces-
sible to the unauthenticated users. 
• IoT  devices with low computing capabilities should be considered 
for security. 
• The requisite security algorithms must be accurate and maintain 
user confidentiality in addition to being lightweight.9 
6.5.4 STRENGTH, DEFICIENCY, OPPORTUNITY, AND THREAT 
ANALYSIS 
Table 6.1 shows IoT strength, deficiency, opportunity, and threat analysis 
review. Internal considerations are restricted to companies or researchers 
who choose to incorporate IoT in every area.  Internal variables can shift 
over time. External factors such as opportunities and risks are dependent 
on the market and cannot be adjusted.16 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
117 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
TABLE 6.1 Strength, Deficiency, Opportunity, and Threat Analysis. 
Internal Factors 
Strength 
Deficiency 
Accuracy of data 
High processing servers are required 
On time treatment 
Scalability of IoT device 
Timely diagnosis 
Huge data centers & data aggregation 
Information of safety measure 
Security & privacy preservations 
High demand of IoT based systems 
High bandwidth requirement 
Accurate forecasting 
Limited spectral resources 
External Factors 
Opportunity 
Threat 
Creation of awareness about the requirement 
Compatibility of devices 
of IoT 
Creation of jobs 
Use of unlicensed bands 
Software defined radios 
Cooperative Communication 
Towards mm wave communication for higher 
bandwidths 
Consistency of the data in IoT plays a positive role for implementa­
tion in COVID-19’ scenario. Sensors collect data from the atmosphere 
in real-time and send it to the cloud. It enables patients to receive prompt 
care potentially saving many lives. If anyone has COVID-19 symptoms 
and wants to see a doctor, the IoT can benefit by providing a telehealth 
network where medical advice can be obtained without having to go to a 
hospital or clinic. This applies to prompt COVID-19 diagnosis. IoT aids 
in the dissemination of information and security measures thereby helping 
prevention of the coronavirus. 
There is a high demand for IoT-based systems due to the role of IoT in 
addressing the ongoing global coronavirus epidemic. Using AI in conjunc­
tion with  IoT would enable researchers to better assess the need to combat 
COVID-19 in the future. 
When IoT needs to be used to combat the virus, errors and bugs must 
be taken into account. Because of the large number of IoT devices and the 
scalability criteria, data processing units must have sufficient processing 
power. The data center should be large enough to store all of the patient 
records and documents. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
118 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
The entire IoT network should be extremely stable, with security algo­
rithms that are as simple as possible. Since most of the devices transmit 
data to the cloud on a regular basis, high bandwidth requirements are 
unavoidable. Mechanisms must be developed to make efficient use of 
limited spectrum. 
It is not difficult to raise awareness about the use of IoT applica­
tions in eradication of coronavirus, particularly with the advancement of 
digital technology and the widespread use of smart phones. Furthermore, 
IoT assists the industry in creating jobs in local markets and effectively 
contributes to the growth of every country’s economy. 
6.6 SOLUTION TO FIGHT AGAINST COVID-19 
Problems in implementing scalable IoT network in COVID-19 context are 
controversial, but there are solutions for these challenges in the literature 
that can assist in the effective operation of IoT networks. 
Because of their scalability, most IoT devices are compact and easy to 
use. Steps must be taken to ensure that data are accessible at the destination 
in a secure and efficient manner. Since IoT nodes are mostly not physically 
secured, data protection serves as the backbone in operating IoT networks. 
If proper authentication protocols are not used, data can be easily dupli­
cated. Primitive basic  attack recognition, channel state masking, intrusion 
detection, localization, and data verification are all included in protection. 
A single data change will result in major issues. 
During COVID-19’s global epidemic, errors in a patient’s medical 
health reports and the smart grid power produced by IoT devices sent 
to physicians can cause major problems. Traditional cryptographic 
approaches are not feasible solutions due to the power limitations of IoT 
devices. End-to-end content safety, user authentication, and customer trust 
in the IoT environment are all dependent on energy-efficient encryption 
that uses less memory and has a lower computational complexity. 
Easy encryption methods are at the heart of lightweight security algo­
rithms. Various metrics, such as arrival time, step-by-step details, and 
received signal strength indicators, can be used to build lightweight security 
algorithms for IoT. The contact of IoT devices gave rise to linked finger­
prints. These linked fingerprints are encoded with a symmetric key and 
sent to a server, where Pearson correlation coefficient is computed using 
the linked fingerprint of the linked IoT system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
119 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
The Pearson correlation coefficient is a straightforward method for 
detecting negativity in IoT network.9 Table 6.2 summarizes some of the 
most significant lightweight security algorithms in the literature.18–21 
TABLE 6.2 Existing Security Algorithms for IoT. 
Security Requirements 
Gope et al. 
Dong et al. 
Ali et al. 
Kamal et al. 
[18] 
[19] 
[20] 
[21] 
MITM 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES 
YES 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
NO 
YES 
NO 
NO 
YES 
YES 
6.7 ENCRYPTION METHODS IN PRACTICE 
6.7.1 ANONYMIZATION PROCESS 
Anonymous technology is used to mask the identities of participants in a 
group of people by eliminating explicit attributes such as usernames and 
ID numbers. The most important data we need during transmission are 
not wasted because of the lost information that is linked to the user’s 
specific identity. Several privacy-oriented models such as K-anonymous, 
L-variant,22 and T-proximity23 models are used in various scenarios. Taxo­
nomic identifiers, semi-identifier attribute sets, and responsive proper­
ties are the three types of participant characteristics in the K- anonymous 
model. 
The explicit identifiers are extracted from the data before it is posted, 
and the data in the quasi-identifier attribute set are normalized to ensure 
that at least k records have a single partial-identifier. In the k- anonymous 
strategy, by linking or comparing data to other context data or looking at 
unique features contained in the published data, attackers can re-identify 
victims.24 In order to defend against this flaw, some researchers suggested 
I-variation and t-proximal models based on the k-anonymity technique. 
The diversity of sensitive features in each semi-identifier class should 
not be less than the I-variation value, lowering the likelihood of sensitive 

 
 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
120 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
features and their owners getting matched. In each equivalent class to the 
T-Closeness module, the distance between the distribution of sensitive 
properties and the normal distribution of sensitive properties should not 
exceed the upper limit T. 
6.7.2 CRYPTOGRAPHIC TECHNIQUE 
Until uploading data to a cloud server, cryptographic methods can encrypt 
the data. Cryptographic approaches necessitate a large computational over­
head (millions of times that of multiplier projection) as well as effective 
and efficient key management.17 
When it comes to generating important pairs based on certain math­
ematical problems, homomorphic encryption (HE) technology is more 
secure. Computers are the most difficult to crack. Generally, the public 
key and the private key build the key pair. Third parties are given access 
to the public key and certain process actions. The third party can conduct 
all operations on the encrypted data and return the result, which  is only 
represented by the private key. Hence, all information in the process is 
kept private. The Rivest–Shamir–Adleman (RSA) and Elliptic Curve 
Cryptography (ECC) algorithms are two common homomorphic encryp­
tion algorithms. 
6.7.3 INTERRUPTION OF DATA 
Example methods for global module training that obscure data models are, 
pair side disturbances and qualitative disturbances. Differential privacy 
(DP), which is used to gather information without disclosing a particular 
entry, is often linked to additive disruption. The adversary cannot differen­
tiate between the outputs of the neighboring dataset due to DP’s mech­
anism that protects the neighboring dataset’s various records. Certain 
mechanisms, such as Laplacian, Exponential, and Intermediate mecha­
nisms, are used by DP to add noise to data. 
The Laplacian mechanism identifies DP protection by applying random 
noise to the exact query product using the Laplacian distribution. Unlike the 
Laplacian process, the Exponential scheme chooses the best product for 
each question based on the likelihood. Random coefficient is a type of 
data manipulation technique that is used to manipulate data qualitatively. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
121 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
The random projection scheme tries to construct a new data representation 
by using random measurements to minimize the count of measurements. In 
general, data opacity is used in data mining to protect the privacy of users 
when collecting high-quality data. 
6.8 USE OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN IOT 
As security threats in the modern environment continue to evolve, it is 
critical to incorporate AI into security strategy of design and maintenance. 
Because of the sophistication of modern cyber threats including scarcity of 
cyber security expertise, network security teams rely on machine learning 
and other AI-based technologies to track, defend, and mitigate advanced 
attacks.25 
While businesses use AI to improve their security, cybercriminals use 
active software creation, automation, and ML to exploit network vulner­
abilities, detect, and exploit AI.26 
Cybercriminals now have the opportunity and ability to conduct rapid 
and complex attacks that enable malicious devices to penetrate corporate 
networks due to the number and diversity of IoT devices that infiltrate 
network infrastructure. The risks of today’s digital transformation efforts 
are exacerbated by AI’s potential attack capability. 
As a result, AI will soon have a way to successfully defend or threaten 
IoT, potentially putting cybersecurity experts and cybercriminals in an 
arms race. 
IT teams must consider recent developments in cyber strategy that will 
lead to an AI-based threat landscape in the coming years in order to defend 
digital changes and maintain a strict security posture. They must also know 
AI capabilities to allow inside their security stock in order to maintain a 
consistent security posture as and when their network develops and expands. 
6.8.1 CHANGED AI-DRIVEN COERCION LANDSCAPE 
Cybercriminals have also started to use automated and scripted methods 
to improve the pace and sophistication of their attacks. Because of these 
advanced capabilities, the increase in revenue from quarter 1 to quarter 2, 
2018 was 240%. Cybercriminals are setting the groundwork for AI to auto­
matically map networks, evaluate threats, choose attack vectors, deploy 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
122 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
them and also carrying out tests in order to create personalized and auto­
mated attacks. 
Cybercriminals are going through their own digital revolution and as 
a result, are still using manual threat detection and active development to 
speed up malware development and defeat advanced security solutions. 
The final adoption of AI will fasten this process even further. 
Because of the rapid advancement of cyber malware and exploitative 
developers, the raising question is when the business will be targeted. 
Unfortunately, many businesses continue to rely on the Legacy Point 
Product Solutions, which on average have more than 30 separate items in 
their networks to effectively recognize and react to today’s sophisticated 
attack strategies. Simply put, as cybersecurity skills deteriorate, manual 
threat detection, and reliance on security tactics as well as today’s cyber­
criminals’ advanced capabilities, cannot be reconciled. 
6.9 ANALYZING FEASIBILITY OF ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN 
MAKING IOT MORE SECURE 
According to the overview of the various security issues faced by IoT 
infrastructure, it is found that most of the security issues of IoT share same 
features that make security in IoT more complicated and create unique 
criteria for security protection in other areas.2 
In the usual IoT sense, data delivery is relatively stable. So, detecting 
suspicious activity and data outliers becomes a significant IoT security 
requirement.2 In general, IoT systems can only perform basic tasks like data 
collection and transmission due to a lack of resources. 
A large number of common devices operate in a continuous business 
mode and distribute collected data in a reasonably consistent manner. Static 
modes are common in network traffic on user IoT devices. Static signals 
are sent by these devices to a small number of endpoints, allowing for 
more robust, and organized network operations. Whereas denial of service 
(DoS)/distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack on the other hand, 
produce slightly diverse network traffic compared to IoT devices. As a 
result, real-time data tracking and classification, as well as time recording, 
and prior warning of suspicious commercial data sources are successful 
security measures against a variety of security threats. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
123 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
There is a lack of prior expertise due to the unpredictability and diver­
sity of attack modes and it meets the need for the security model’s rhythm 
and generalization capacity. 
Personal privacy had previously placed information security in jeop­
ardy. With the growth of the IoT industry, attack scenarios for the IoT are 
changing as well. There are countless attacks on hardware and software 
bugs, communication interfaces, and cloud services. Defenders, on the 
other hand, have no previous knowledge of new attack methods and are 
unable to respond quickly. 
Only after they have suffered a loss will comprehend the attack, and 
thereby significantly increasing the users’ security risk. Without prior 
experience, the security model must be able to sustain impact in a number 
of unknown situations that necessitate high security, generalization, and 
data control. 
The security approach of low-power equipment and microsystems 
terminals limits the ability to automate security. Complex security proce­
dures are not feasible because large IoT system integration necessitates 
optimized power and low-cost solutions. 
As a result, new IoT security practices have a hard time keeping up 
with older security techniques. Many of them lack the capacity to regen­
erate and grow on their own, which can be resolved by “active immunity” 
or “auto-immunity.” These methods depend on humans to maintain and 
upgrade databases, identify new attack modes, and intercept rules in the 
absence of initiative. The majority of manual participation lags behind in 
terms of security and is unable to learn the security plan in a timely manner. 
The question of how to build automated protection mechanisms with 
“active immunity” has become a pressing issue in IoT security. IoT secu­
rity plans will efficiently handle vast amounts of data and can be imple­
mented on a large-scale and on robust basis. 
IoT is a multi-layer framework that protects overall security concerns 
while also making data more dynamic and large-scale. It runs on termi­
nals, networks, and service platforms. The unity and credibility of IoT 
have created an immediate need for security solutions that can process 
vast amount of data, as well as the need to assure that solutions may 
be applied fairly on large scale basis, and that they can be successful 
and developed in complex situations according to new situations, at any 
moment. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
124 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
6.10 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE BASED SECURITY TOOL 
The massive existence of IoT devices has given the computing world a 
new dimension and design transition. The number of connected devices at 
each home is increasing at alarming rate, necessitating more secure cyber­
space infrastructure to mitigate the risk of leisure data, data in use, and data 
in motion as the most basic security requirements. Furthermore, IoT data 
collection, communication routes, and the cloud network on which data 
storage and analysis takes place, all follow stringent security criteria. 
The implementation of various AI frameworks offers more complex 
and functional interiors due to the existence of its highly flexible cyber­
physical structure and the interconnected devices whose data movements 
and analysis take place through very complex large area networks. It 
combines the features of Intrusion Detection System (IDS) and Intrusion 
Prevention System (IPS). Many businesses have implemented AI as key 
part of their security intelligence system, with the aim of ensuring that 
their infrastructure has a stable cyber defense posture to minimize risk. 
Due to a lack of conventional security technologies that are heavily 
focused on rules, AI has emerged as a key component in maintaining 
cyber security. In the continuing barrage of cyber threats, AI is currently 
supporting agencies for massive security control assistance. Although AI 
is not bulletproof, its implementation is becoming the default standard 
as part of cyber defense strategy and is providing excellent support on 
a much higher level. All IoT data storage and computing exist in cloud 
environments, and cloud protection is another important factor. Although 
AI is not bulletproof, its application is becoming the default standard as 
part of cyber defense strategy and is providing excellent support on a much 
higher level. 
The key benefits of AI/ML delivery include, but are not limited to real-
time monitoring of existing vulnerabilities, big IoT data analytics, cyber­
attack detection, and content delivery threat alerts.27 
WhileAI/MLadvancements promise to be a big boon to robotics science 
and cybercity, they also havethe opposite effect, allowing hackers to fully 
develop AI/ML solutions for cyber purposes.28 They are working 24/7 a 
week to develop and distribute more advanced AI/ML solutions that will 
use new attack vectors and promote similar attacks. 
In addition, hackers are using AI/MI to test and improve their own 
malware, as well as merge and dilute their opponent’s infrastructure with 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
125 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
other AI/ML solutions.25 With an increased count of AI/ML testing, the 
negative impact also gets increased. Other drawbacks of AI include its 
high cost, realism range, inability to represent human beings, unemploy­
ment, the need for human feedback to develop, and the effectiveness of 
its response to various cyber-attacks. The accuracy and availability of its 
training dataset, which comes from a variety of sources, determines its 
effectiveness. 
Since it lacks ingenuity, expertise, and development, it needs precise 
datasets to learn from the necessary level. Because of malicious internal 
or external threats, technology is becoming more widely used; training 
data can be accurately exploited to build algorithms with disastrous conse­
quences and harmful flaws. Several studies9,10 have suggested various 
solutions for detecting and preventing malware, including non-ML solu­
tions, in the field of IoT security. 
As a result, a hybrid taxonomy and DDoS attack protector for SDN-
based cloud environments using the history-based IP filtering (eHIPF) 
scheme are developed. In conclusion, this study focuses on  non-ML-based 
solutions, and research in this area appears to be successful in evaluating 
DDoS detection and prevention in SDO environments. The approach 
presented here  addresses IoT security issues to deal with the cyber threat 
that is best solved in the cloud computing setting. 
The training procedure is determined by the raw binary stream char­
acteristics of the models.27 Experiments have shown that the proposed 
approach is 75% efficient. However, there is still further work to be done 
in order to find their solution so that their research into evaluating their 
skill is limited to the problem. 
According to the authors of stream-based malware recognition using 
sensory neural network research,13 automatic malware detection using auto­
mated neural networks (CNN), and other ML algorithms may be useful.28 
They used CNN, multi-layer perceptron (MLP), support vector machine 
(SVM), and random forest (RF) for classification, with an accuracy of 85% 
for all groups in their research using CNN and RF, demonstrating accuracy 
and recall. We may deduce from this that more methodology is needed to 
obtain a more accurate result. We may discover from the related articles 
that the malware detection machine on the host side uses non-algorithms 
with a maximum accuracy of 85%. 
The study examines the role of AI and ML in combating emerging cyber 
threats (including malware) in cloud computing environments, especially 

 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
126 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
in the context of IoT security. It uses the various solution approaches to 
fight and reduce IoT cyber threats on host- based and network-level cloud 
computing environments. 
6.11 INSIGHTS OF AI-BASED SECURITY SOLUTION 
A computerized device or its configuration does not provide security 
by itself.14 Protection still extends to computer technology,15 as cyber­
criminals and hackers continue to develop new methods and techniques 
to discover vulnerabilities throughout our networks. To provide defense 
against these threats, a more complex and sensitive framework is needed. 
These solutions, according to security experts, should provide AI and ML 
with impenetrable security policies as they collect and analyze data from 
previous attacks and provide solutions based on that data.25 These devices 
continuously monitor the network and look for past and potential attacks. 
As a result, AI/ML solutions don’t wait for an attack to happen; instead, 
they work to anticipate attacks based on the past and provide solutions 
to combat the threat. While hackers invent new technologies every day, 
no attack is completely unique; rather, a slightly modified version of old 
methods is used. Most of the security solutions with IoT devices are based 
on the fact that our AI/ML solutions are equipped with attack history and 
prototypes and can easily identify future attack wall defenses. 
FIGURE 6.4 Data classification architecture. 
Furthermore, since AI and ML operate without human interference, 
there is no need for physical resources to track the network 24/7 days 
a week. Hiring a large number of cyber security experts saves businesses 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
127 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
a lot of money. When there is a large database to deal with, ML becomes 
very much involved.26 The study uses an obligatory dataset to execute user 
data, complete the log file for network level recognition of the host base and 
network data in order to put the algorithm into operation. Figure 6.4 shows 
the data classification architecture. Although the number of security warn­
ings and alerts can be overwhelming for humans, sophisticated security 
systems applications that use AI/ML can help. 
It would be almost impossible for security teams in large cloud data 
centers to maintain security without the assistance of these sophisticated 
security systems. By developing predictive analytics to avoid future 
research, this study addresses security concerns on cloud network 
infrastructure. 
IoT security is a crucial part of implementing reactive and preventa­
tive security policies that apply control to physical networks and soft­
ware layers. To help distinguish or classify attacks, the following structure 
employs extensive practice. 
System authentication, intrusion detection, DoS/DDoS attack detec­
tion and malware detection are all taxonomy tasks.2 AI solutions must 
be able to correctly distinguish approved and unauthorized devices for 
system authentication; solutions must also be able to categorize common 
and unusual network behaviors for intrusion detection; and so on.27,28 The 
current solutions for these issues are reviewed and summarized the flow of 
most of them in the process depicted in the Figure 6.5. 
FIGURE 6.5 AI solution steps for IoT security. 
Source: Adapted from Ref. [2] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
128 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
(1) Data acquisition 
Machine Learning solutions typically require datasets from specific envi­
ronments.2 To evaluate training datasets, you must select the appropriate 
data collection setting for various issues. To account for user variations, 
the dataset for system authentication should include information on device 
configuration, user behavior, and operating habits. 
(2) Exploration and pre-processing of data 
The effectiveness of an approach is directly related to the consistency 
of the training data.2 The data for the IoT come from a variety of sensors 
in various locations. The initial data collection, on the other hand, had a 
number of flaws, including a skewed data distribution and missing data. 
(3) Model selection and data Conversion 
Many ML models are used to secure IoT, but each model has its own 
scenario, so the best model should be chosen based on the model’s features 
and issues. The size of the dataset and the data’s pre-search performance 
are primary factors in model selection.2 For example, if the dataset contains 
more complex models and training must be completed quickly, a light­
weight algorithm such as naive Bayes can produce the expected results.2 
Data collected in real-world applications differ from the input 
data needed by the model, and it must be adjusted to suit the model’s 
requirements. 
Audio data obtained by voice sensors, cannot be directly entered 
into the RNN model, so data sharing is needed.2 Extraction of the mail-
frequency spectral coefficient (MFCC) from the original audio data is one 
of the conversion methods. 
(4) Training and testing 
After completing the data pre-processing and model selection, we 
must now input the data for training. 2 We may track the loss function 
values or result curves throughout the training phase to determine the 
model’s training pattern, and then change the learning rate accordingly 
to ensure that the model’s effect is moderately optimized. After receiving 
the training model, the generalization capability of the training model 
is tested using a reference dataset obtained from the real world. The 
parameters must be rearranged if the training models are underfitting or 
overfitting . 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
129 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
(5) Model evaluation and deployment 
We may use some impact measures to compare various samples after 
training when choosing the final design for actual deployment and 
implementation. 
6.12 FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTION 
AI and ML have a major impact on the growth of cyberspace. Similarly, 
IoT computers, smart houses, smart cars, and other innovations increase our 
everyday quality of life. An advanced protection approach isn’t complete 
unless it includes AI and ML components. AI and ML solutions mainly 
help distinguish correlations between previous attacks and provide instant 
warning when another of the same pattern is detected. The best thing about 
AI and ML is that it can continuously understand user’s behavior, evolving 
habits, and various manipulations. 
According to one of the research recommendations agreed by security 
experts, standardized available datasets make it easier for ML-based solu­
tions to interpret and analyze data. ML-based systems can be very useful 
in combating cyber threats once the dataset is specified and standardized. 
It can be recommended to use an unsupervised solution or drawing a 
fine line between the controlled ones based on the features derived from 
data collection and based on the study solution. AI and ML systems will 
function without human involvement or making limited human interven­
tion producing more balanced and efficient systems. 
Although the scope of the research is limited to host-based and 
network-level cloud computing environments, IoT is a hybrid paradigm 
for combating and mitigating cyber threats, and a variety of algorithms can 
be employed to achieve this. 
6.13 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
We live in a time when AI and ML are integral parts of some of the most 
innovative security solutions. AI and ML play a significant role in not 
only enhancing conventional cyber security, but also in improving our 
everyday quality of life through IoT devices such as smart homes, smart 
cars, and other connected devices. AI and ML systems will function 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
130 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
without human involvement, making limited human intervention systems 
more balanced and efficient. One of the most basic recommendations 
made by security professionals is to standardize the available datasets 
in order to facilitate data-based solutions and allow data to be quickly 
understood and analyzed. Once the dataset has been defined and stan­
dardized, ML-based systems can be extremely useful in combating all 
types of cyber threats. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 
With a profound sense of gratitude and respect, I am thankful to Dr. Dinesh 
K Anvekar, professor, Dept. of ECE, RNS Institute of Technology, Benga­
luru for his contribution of time in reviewing the content and sharing valu­
able comments & suggestions that has helped me to widen my knowledge 
in writing this book chapter. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
IoT 
• 
security 
• 
artifcial intelligence 
• 
COVID-19 
• 
challenges 
• 
privacy 
REFERENCES 
1. Girma, A. Analysis of Security Vulnerability and Analytics of IoT  (IOT) Platform. 
Inf. Technol. New Generat.  2018, 738, 101–104. 
2. Wu, H.; Han, H.; Wang, X.; Sun, S. Research on Artificial Intelligence Enhancing 
Internet of Things Security: A Survey. IEEE Access 2020. 
3. Patel, M. McKinsey & Company, Jan 13, 2020 [Online]. https://www.mckinsey. 
com/industries/semiconductors/ourinsights/ whats-new-with-the-internet-of- things 
(accessed Apr 20, 2020). 
4. Growth Enabler IoT, Market Pulse Report, IoT  (IoT), April 2017 [Online]. https:// 
growthenabler.com/flipbook/pdf/IOT%20Report.pdf. 

 
131 
Security in IoT Using Artifcial Intelligence 
5. Yadav, E. P.; Mittal, E. A.; Yadav, H. IoT: In Challenges and Issues in Indian 
Perspective, 2018 3rd International Conference on IoT: Smart Innovation and Usages 
(IoT-SIU); Bhimtal, India, 2018. 
6. Williamson, J. Dummies, 2020 [Online]. https://www.dummies.com/careers/find-a- 
job/the-4-vs-ofbig- data/ (accessed Apr 26, 2020). 
7. Efstathopoulos, P. 2019, July 29, 2019 [Online]. https://www.nortonlifelock.com/ 
blogs/rese arch-group/cloudsecurity- overwhelming-ai-and-machine-learning-can-
help (accessed April 26, 2020). 
8. Dataflair Team, Sept 15, 2018 [Online]. https://data-flair.training/blogs/how-iot-
works/ (accessed Apr 20, 2020). 
9. Yadav, E. P.; Mittal, E. A.; Yadav, D. H.  In IoT: Challenges and Issues in Indian 
Perspective, 3rd International Conference on IoT: Smart Innovation and Usages (IoT-
SIU); Bhimtal, India, 2018. 
10. Wu, L.; Ping, R.; Ke, L.; Hai-Xin, D. In Behavior-Based Malware Analysis and 
Detection, 2011 First International Workshop on Complexity and Data Mining, 2011. 
11. Saeed, N.; Bader, A.; l-Naffouri, T. Y.; Alouini, Md. S. When Wireless Communication 
Faces Covid-19: Combating the Pandemic and Saving the Economy. arXiv preprint 
arXiv:2005.06637, 2020. 
12. Anderson, H. S.; Kharkar, A.; Filar, B. Evading Machine Learning Malware 
Detection. Int. J. Appl. Eng. Res.  2017. 
13. Yeo, M.; Koo, Y.; Yoon, Y.; Hwang, T.; Ryu, J.; Song, J. In Flow-Based Malware 
Detection Using Convolutional Neural Network, 2018 International Conference on 
Information Networking (ICOIN); Chiang Mai, 2018. 
14. Chung, B.; Kim, J.; Jeon, Y. In On-demand Security Configuration for IoT Devices, 
2016 International Conference on Information and Communication Technology 
Convergence (ICTC); IEEE, 2016. 
15. Cano, J. J. ISACA J. Sept 01, 2016 [Online]. https://www.isaca.org/resources/isaca-
journal/issues/2016/volume-5/cyberattacksthe-instability-of-security-and-control-
knowledge (accessed Apr 04, 2020). 
16. Berry, T. How to do a Swot Analysis for Better Strategic Planning [Online]. https:// 
articles.bplans.com/ how-to-perform-swot-analysis/. 
17. Ghanchi, J. March 19, 2019 [Online]. https://thenewstack.io/the-possibilities-of-
ai-and- machine-learning-for-cybersecurity/ (accessed Mar 30, 2020). 
18. Gope, P.; Sikdar, B. Lightweight and Privacy-Preserving Two-Factor Authentication 
Scheme for Iot Devices. IEEE IoT J. 2019, 6 (1), 580–589. 
19. Dong, Z. C.; Espejo, R.; Wan, Y.; Zhuang, W. Detecting and Locating Man- in-the-
Middle Attacks in Fixed Wireless Networks. J. Comput. Inf. Technol.  2015, 23 (4), 
283–293. 
20. Ali, S. T.; Sivaraman, V.; Ostry, D.; Tsudik, G.; Jha, S. Securing First-Hop data 
Provenance for Bodyworn Devices using Wireless Link Fingerprints. IEEE Trans. 
Inf. Forensics Secur.  2014, 9 (12), 2193–2204. 
21. Kamal, M.; et al. Light-Weight Security and Data Provenance for Multi-hop IoT. 
IEEE Access 2018, 6, 34439–34448. 
22. Zhou, B.; Pei, J. e k-anonymity and l-diversity Approaches for Privacy Preservation 
In Social Networks Against Neighborhood Attacks. Knowl. Inf. Syst.  2011,  (1), 
47–77. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
132 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
23. Li, N.; Li, T.; Venkatasubramanian, S. In t-closeness: Privacy Be-yond k-anonymity 
and l-diversity, Proceedings of the 12 Security and Communication Networks IEEE 
23rd International Conference on Data Engineering; IEEE, Istanbul, Turkey, April 
2007; pp 106–115. 
24. Sweeney, L.  k-anonymity: A Model for Protecting Privacy. Int. J. Uncertain. 
Fuzziness Knowledge Based Syst. 2002, 10 (5), 557–570. 
25. Mishra, S.; Sagban, R.; Yakoob, A.; Gandhi, N. Swarm Intelligence in Anomaly 
Detection Systems: An Overview. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2021, 43 (2), 109–118. 
26. Gaurav, D.; Tiwari, S. M.; Goyal, A.; Gandhi, N.; Abraham, A. Machine Intelligence-
Based Algorithms for Spam Filtering on Document Labeling. Soft Comput. 2020, 24 
(13), 9625–9638. 
27. Dwivedi, R.; Dey, S.; Chakraborty, C.; Tiwari, S. Grape Disease Detection Network 
based on Multi-task Learning and Attention Features. IEEE Sens. J. 2021. 
28. Gaurav, D.; Shandilya, S.; Tiwari, S.; Goyal, A. In A Machine Learning Method for 
Recognizing Invasive Content in Memes, Iberoamerican Knowledge Graphs and 
Semantic Web Conference; Springer: Cham, Nov 2020; pp 195–213. 
29. Kamal, Mohsin, Abdulah Aljohani, and Eisa Alanazi. “IoT meets COVID-19: status, 
challenges, and opportunities.” arXiv preprint arXiv:2007.12268 (2020). 

The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 7 
CYBER SECURITY FOR INTELLIGENT 
SYSTEMS 
ABINAYA INBAMANI,1 N. DIVYA,1 R. R. RUBIA GANDHI,1   
M. KARTHIK,1 and M. SIVARAM KUMAR2 
1Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, 
Tamil Nadu, India 
2Karpagam Academy of Higher Education, Coimbatore,  
Tamil Nadu, India 
ABSTRACT 
The utilization of the Internet of things (IoT) has expanded dramatically, 
with online protection concerns expanded alongside it. On the bleeding 
edge of online protection is artificial intelligence (AI), which is utilized 
for the improvement of intricate calculations to ensure organizations and 
frameworks, including IoT frameworks. Notwithstanding, digital aggres­
sors have figured out how to take advantage of AI and have even started 
to utilize antagonistic AI to complete network safety assaults. This audit 
chapter aggregates data from a few other overviews and exploration 
papers in regards to IoT, AI, and assaults with what is more, against AI and 
investigates the connection between these three subjects with the motiva­
tion behind extensively introducing and summing up significant writing 
in these fields. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
134 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
7.1 INTRODUCTION 
Internet of Things (IoT) was conceived1 in 2008, its development has been 
blasting, and presently, IoT is a section of day-to-day existence and has 
a spot in many homes and organizations. IoT is difficult to define as it 
has been advancing and evolving since its origination; however, it very 
well may be best perceived as an organization of advanced and simple 
machines and processing gadgets furnished with novel identifiers (UIDs) 
that can trade information without human mediation.2 A human interfacing 
with a focal center point gadget or application, frequently a portable appli­
cation, that then, at that point goes on to send information and directions to 
one or numerous periphery IoT gadgets.3 The periphery gadgets can finish 
capacities whenever required and send information back to the center point 
gadget or application, which the human would then be able to see. The 
IoT idea has given the world a more elevated level of openness, upright­
ness, accessibility, adaptability, confidentiality, and interoperability as far 
as gadget availability.4 Nonetheless, IoTs are helpless against cyber attacks 
because of a mix of their different assault surfaces and their originality 
and in this manner, the absence of safety normalizations and prerequi­
sites.5 There is an enormous assortment of cyber attacks that aggressors 
can use against IoTs, contingent upon what part of the framework they are 
focusing on and what they desire to acquire from the assault. All things 
considered, there is an enormous volume of investigation into network 
safety encompassing IoT. This incorporates artificial intelligence (AI) 
ways to deal with shielding IoT frameworks from assailants, ordinarily in 
the wording of distinguishing strange conduct that might demonstrate an 
assault is happening.6 Nonetheless, on account of IoT, digital aggressors 
continuously have the advantage as they just need to find one weakness 
while network safety specialists should secure various targets. This has 
prompted expanded utilization of AI by digital aggressors too, to impede 
the muddled calculations that distinguish odd action and pass by unseen.7 
AI has gotten a lot of consideration with the development of IoT advance­
ments. With this development, AI innovations, for example, choice trees, 
straight relapse, AI, support vector machines, also, neural organizations, 
have been utilized in IoT network safety applications to be ready to distin­
guish dangers and possible assaults. Researchers in Ref. 8 give a complete 
audit of the security hazards identified with IoT applications and poten­
tial balances just as analyze IoT advancements as far as uprightness, 

 
 
135 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
obscurity, confidentiality, protection, access control, confirmation, 
approval, strength, and self-association. The creators propose profound 
learning models utilizing CICIDS2017 datasets for DDoS assault recog­
nition for online protection in IoT (Internet of things), which give high 
precision, that is, 97.16%.9 In Ref. [10], the creators assess the artificial 
neural networks (ANN) in a door gadget to be ready to recognize inconsis­
tencies in the information sent from the edge gadgets. The outcomes show 
that the proposed approach can work on the security of IoT frameworks. 
The creators in Ref. [11] propose an AI-based control approach for loca­
tion and assessment just as a pay of digital assaults in modern IoT frame­
works. In Ref. [12], the creators give a vigorous unavoidable discovery 
to IoT environments, furthermore, foster an assortment of ill-disposed 
assaults and guard components against them just as they approve their 
methodology. In Ref. [13], the creators investigate the new advancement 
of AI decision-making in digital actual frameworks and find that such 
development is basically independent because of the expanding incorpo­
ration of IoT gadgets in digital actual frameworks, and the worth of AI 
dynamic because of its speed and efficiency in dealing with huge heaps of 
information is logical going to make this advancement inescapable. The 
creators of Ref. [14] examine new ways to deal with hazard investigation 
utilizing AI and AI, especially in IoT networks present in industry settings. 
At long last, Ref. [15] talks about techniques for catching and surveying 
network protection dangers to IoT gadgets to normalize such practices so 
that danger in IoT frameworks might be all the more efficiently identified 
and ensured against. This survey paper covers an assortment of points in 
regards to network protection, the Internet of things (IoT), AI (computer 
based intelligence), and how they all identify with one another in three 
overview style segments and gives a complete audit of cyber attacks 
against IoT gadgets just as it also suggests AI-based strategies for securing 
against these assaults. The extreme objective of this paper is to make an 
asset for other people who are exploring these pervasive points by intro­
ducing synopses making associations. 
7.2 METHODS OF ATTACKS IN IOT DEVICES 
When the devices are connected to internet, it is prone to lot of cyber 
attacks. The attacks can be either in the hardware or the software or the 

 
 
136 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
interface. Identification of the surface is important before rectifying it. 
Figure 7.1 shows the basic level of interfacing the wireless sensor node 
with the web interface. The data collection and transmission layer, gateway, 
database, and web interface along with the monitoring and visualization 
center should be protected from cyber attacks. The wireless sensor nodes 
are called motes in which the inbuilt sensors of the motes transmit the 
information to the database through the processor and the gateway. The 
gateway has a remote monitoring station for visualization and monitoring 
of the data. 
FIGURE 7.1 Basic wireless sensor network integration with internet of things. 

 
 
 
137 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
Figure 7.2 shows the IoT devices connected to the cloud data server via 
network gateway. The user can visualize the data using a cloud data server. 
FIGURE 7.2 Process of communication. 
Physical attacks are the lowest type category attacks. The hardware 
of the device is attacked. Outage attacks are the best example. The entire 
functionality of the network is affected by injecting false codes, injecting 
virus or malware into the device with the help of USB. Signal jammers are 
also considered as one of the best examples of physical attacks. 
FIGURE 7.3 Types of attacks. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
138 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
The signals blocked will lead to misinterpretation of results leading 
to false signal injection. MITM is another famous method of attack in 
networks. The Man in the Middle Attack acts like a proxy and changes the 
information between sender and receiver. MITM attacks take place amidst 
the client and the server. The IoT devices send sensitive information to the 
server and the MITM attacks tend to change the threshold values leading 
to mis-happenings. Hence, utmost care needs to be taken when IoT is 
incorporated in the HealthCare applications as they are very sensitive to 
the threshold values. The absence of standardization of protocols is the 
major drawbacks of IoT leading to vulnerability of attacks. There are two 
main types of MITM attacks as shown in Figure 7.4. 
FIGURE 7.4 Types of attacks. 
When IoT devices are connected with each other via Bluetooth, MITM 
attack is leveraged. As Bluetooth is immense for huge power consumption, 
BLE is used in IoT devices as it is cheaper and cost-efficient. AES-CCM 
encryption is used to avoid MTIM attacks. BLE uses three-way pairing 
methodology. The process of the three-way pairing is shown in Figure 7.5. 
FIGURE 7.5 Three way pairing process. 

 
 
 
 
 
139 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
Fault Data injection is a type of MTIM attack in which IoT-sensored 
value is changed and prone to suspicion leading to faulty data. 
7.3 AI FOR CYBER SECURITY 
AI tries to mimic and build the human expertise. AI has various possi­
bilities to provide solutions for cyber security. AI systems are trained to 
define the threats to identify the defects and to safeguard the information 
or data. AI systems are tuned perfectly by experts to protect the system 
from threats. AI-based security systems were developed for cyber security 
alerts. 
7.3.1 MACHINE LEARNING 
Machine learning is a subset of AI. ML uses learning methodologies to 
classify a system. The important learning methods involved in ML are the 
supervised method of learning and the unsupervised method of learning. 
Supervised learning is like learning with the help of an expert. A system is 
trained with all possible inputs and conditions to attain the target output. It 
uses labeled data or information. Supervised learning methodology again 
categorizes into two cases like classification and regression. Classification 
categorizes the input data according to the labeled information. Regres­
sion produces a real-time continuous value and acts on conditions. The 
types of machine learning models are shown in Figure 7.6. 
FIGURE 7.6 Classical machine learning methods. 

 
 
 
140 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
The unsupervised learning method trains the system to describe the 
information from unlabeled data or information. It will gather all possible 
combinations of information in a set depending on the inferences made. 
Unsupervised learning methodology again categorizes into two cases 
such as clustering and association. Clustering methodology groups data 
depending on the information provided. An association method builds 
rules based on the connections between the inputs. ML employs various 
algorithms for real-world applications. Among these algorithms, most 
famous one is Naïve Bayes (NB), used for the classification of data based 
on the Bayesian theorem to supervise all the anonymous activities for 
cyber attack. NB falls under supervision learning algorithm.16 Using NB, 
a system is trained for producing its classes to analyze the cyber attacks 
and related activities. ML has a variety of algorithms in its pack such as 
K-Nearest neighbors (KNNs), decision tress, support vector machine 
(SVM), and so on. 
7.3.1.1 K-NEAREST NEIGHBORS (KNNS) 
K-NN falls under supervision learning algorithm and is implemented 
for both classification and regression-type problems. K-NN identifies 
the optimal dataset for the search space. It classifies the correct dataset 
depending on the optimal data points and trains the system for a require­
ment. For K-NN implementation, a training and testing data set is iden­
tified. The optimal data point is chosen as K which can be an integer. 
K point is also referred to as the nearest point for global identification. 
To find the distance between the other data points, Euclidean distance 
calculation method can be employed. All the data points are grouped in an 
array manner. The nearest points are considered as optimal values and the 
process takes over. K-NN method is very useful to detect yber threats and 
identify the colonial process. It uses Gaussian distribution method to find 
the minimum distance between the threats and defects and employs the 
system to identify the anonymous effects. The experts are down narrowing 
this method for cyber security-related problems classification is shown in 
Figure 7.7. 

 
 
 
141 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
FIGURE 7.7 KNN classification. 
7.3.1.2 DECISION TREES 
Decision tree (DT) is one of the most powerful methods for classification 
and identification process. A DT is structured like a tree and its branches, 
each node denotes specific attributes. It is divided into branches (subsets) 
that act as rules. DT uses the iteration method to optimize the analysis. 
It categorizes the event like cyber threat can be categorized as an attack 
or normal threat. DT trains the system to perform this type of categori­
zation.17 In cyber security, DT is employed to predict the event. If any 
anonymous threat is received, the system should identify from the traffic 
calls whether the received information is categorized under an attack or 
a normal event. DT uses the data splitting analogy as it falls under the 
category. All the threats fall under this tree structure and an algorithm is 
employed for prediction. DT also employs the learning rule technique, 
which falls under the classification quality, that is, it describes the class 
of a predicted system. Both methods are employed to predict the cyber 
threats depending on the anomaly. DT analysis has the potential to support 
intrusion detection with many challenges in defending the network. The 
DT has the capability to assist in the analysis of defect information. The 
implementation process is shown in Figure 7.8 

 
 
 
 
142 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 7.8 Decision tree implementation process. 
7.3.1.3 SUPPORT VECTOR MACHINES (SVM) 
Support vector machine (SVM) employs the supervised learning method 
for classification problems into pairs. This algorithm is well-suited for text 
classification tasks, where one usually has contact with a set of values of a 
maximum of several thousand labeled data samples. The main view of the 
SVM methodology is to determine an optimal space N (number of points) 
that single-pointedly finds out the data points. SVM, as already mentioned 
employs the supervised machine learning technique which finds applica­
tions in cyber security in order to determine the threats from training and 
testing data set of information. 
7.3.2 ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
An artificial neural network (ANN) is an optimal methodology to exhibit 
the human brain inference system. ANN trains the set of inputs with 
weights and reaches the target output after employing the activation func­
tion. The process is repeated till the test value reaches the target value. 
For this training, various learning rules are employed and continued with 
weight and bias updation. After calculating the net function, an activating 
function is employed to determine the target value. The massive advantage 
of ANNs is that they will adapt their mathematical model as new info is 

 
 
 
143 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
bestowed to them. Whereas alternative mathematical models might become 
out-of-date as recent methods of traffic and attacks spread. This conjointly 
means that ANNs are very effective in training the system to determine the 
cyber threats and to predict malfunctions. Today, the employment of AI in 
determining cyber defects is an emerging trend now. However, firms with 
giant networks will enjoy these results, particularly if they are considering 
or are already implementing IoT devices within their network. AI cyber 
security also will be helpful in large systems that we tend to encounter in 
an exceedingly sensible city, and AI can give in no time response times, 
that is very important for systems corresponding to traffic management or 
smart home. In addition, several AI cyber security measures sight or stop 
in-progress attacks instead of forestalling them in the initial place, which 
suggests that alternative preventive security measures should also exist. 
7.4 ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE IN IOT 
AI has taken a key role to be combined with the areas of IoT applications 
in the past 3 years. Most of the startups and other companies that work 
in the IoT domain are planning to combine AI with their area. Most of 
the IoT vendors now offer an AI-integrated system with the IoT software 
platform. This integration has climbed with many opportunities for the 
people working in the data analytics domain. The data monitoring was 
done using the IoT platform in the majority of the real-time data acquisi­
tion systems. Those data sets can be efficiently interlinked using the AI 
techniques such as machine learning, deep learning. 
Machine learning is one of the AI technologies which inhibits the deci­
sion-making scenario by training the data model. Like ANN, the input 
and output can be prescribed, and using the input layer, hidden layer, and 
output layer, one can adapt the tuning technique, whereas in machine 
learning, there are several types of learning as per data prediction type. 
The Internet of things with AI is blooming fast in comparison with the 
block chain, edge computing, and other technology. The reason behind 
this is that IoT is an augmented one and can be enhanced easily using 
machine learning. This is the one which effectively increases the demand 
in the business market for AI-based integration techniques in the IoT envi­
ronment. This makes the success story of AI seem to be an integral part of 
IoT-based digital ecosystems. The IoT-enabled AI is shown in Figure 7.9. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
144 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 7.9 Drivers for AI growth. 
Combining IoT with rapidly fast developing technologies like AI 
makes the system smarter that will enhance the intelligence which will 
help in taking decisions without any human intervention. The outcome 
of this combinatory approach is to accelerate the innovation for boosting 
the productivity in the organizations. A survey conducted by Bank of 
America predicted that the growth of the AI market is quickly adhering to 
the productivity increase of 30%. Simultaneously reducing the manpower 
labor costs between 18% and 30%. Using the Internet of things in Cyber 
security had exponential growth by implementing the complex algorithms 
for better protection in the network systems. When discussing about Cyber 
security with AI and IoT, it paves a wider way to the cyber attackers. It is 
indeed to balance both the side of cyber security growth in AI and reduce 
the cyber-attacking poles. Considering the attacks, not all the AI-based 
security systems are prone to attacks like intrusion detection, but some of 
the benefitted AI systems have been tuned against to their self-operation 
itself. These cases need to be considered for the betterment. 
7.4.1 DETECTING VULNERABILITY 
To detect the vulnerability in  any of the system, machine learning is a 
good choice for intelligently detecting vulnerabilities which need to be 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
145 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
covered. Some people are attacking the vulnerability location and trying 
to exploit the main system which is running in the backend. Each time, 
chasing the race with the attacker by manual detection takes more time. 
This can be reduced by making the automatic detection of capabilities 
for each day of operation. For each day, the vulnerability count must be 
minimized which is focusing for a zero-day vulnerability.18 The main 
factor for choosing AI for vulnerability detection is the fast fixing of the 
trap holes. The same job can be also done by the Development team, but 
the challenge is they used detecting technologies to find each day with 
each vulnerability; meanwhile, the attacker will use the AI detection and 
proceed further. Technology for Discovering Vulnerability in Web Inter­
face is shown in Figure 7.10. 
FIGURE 7.10 Technology for discovering vulnerability in web interface. 
7.4.2 VULNERABILITY FUZZING TECHNOLOGY 
In the area of Cyber security, fuzzing is meant to be an automatic process 
of discovering hackable bugs in a program by randomly feeding them 
with automated permutated data, such as comma, separators, braces, 
etc., creating a stress on the main program to unwantedly create leaks 
or crashes over the application until it reveals its one of the vulner­
abilities. This is a very old technique but for hackers to seek and exploit 
the vulnerability by bombarding a scratch data into the front end and 
to result in the issue in the case of zero-day strategy. One has used 
the fuzzing into the data world to spin up the collaborative work to be 
spoiled, despite the firewall or password setting, that person can crash 
the application very soon. In a view, it is not the main goal of fuzzing 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
146 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
to crash the program but rather to hijack the program. By putting a bus 
of data into the program to see what sort of errors they have made on 
the application. 
7.4.3 VULNERABILITY USING SYMBOLIC EXECUTION 
This technique is more like the fuzzing technique. The main difference 
by looking into the fuzzing method is that symbolic execution by using 
input variables as symbols instead of using a value in searching for vulner­
abilities. This technique is categorized into online and offline symbolic 
execution. The offline method uses only one path for the exploration of 
path prediction by creating input variables with new values. It is meant to 
access that one path; it needs to be executed from the starting point. This 
process is a time-consuming one since it is creating a large amount of 
overhead for each time of execution. If considered with online symbolic 
execution, the states are duplicated and create path predicates at each 
branch which is not creating much overhead. But the disadvantage with 
this is it occupies more memory space needed to store more information 
and simultaneously, it processes all the states which it is generating occu­
pying a substantial supply utilization. 
7.4.4 DIFFERENT TYPES OF INPUT ATTACKS 
The person when attacking the inputs of an intelligent system which 
causes the system to be crashed or malfunctioning is said to be an input 
attack. There are n number of attacking methods that can be categorized 
into different types depending upon the strategy they used for hacking.19 
Like an automated transport system which includes UAV, an automated 
self-driving car can be hacked by automatically including the physical 
stop symbol to create a mess in the driving system intelligence. In 
consideration with these types of input attacks, need not compromise the 
security system by changing the complexity of the algorithm or adopting 
different algorithms. But the set of inputs which is malfunctioned for the 
output needs to be altered. Input attack categorization is shown in Figure 
7.11. 

 
 
 
147 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
FIGURE 7.11 Input attacks categorization. 
Most of the input attacks are like hidden vision from the human eye. 
Inserting some small image or symbol in the front end also misleads the 
intelligence by incorporating the algorithm which has been used. Looking 
into the differentiation of input attacks, it can be classified as perceivable 
and format type. All these perceivable attacks are visible to the human 
eye.20 Some hidden agenda will be lying behind the applications which 
is an example narrated before like a self-driving car stopped suddenly by 
inserting a physical stop image into the automated data execution. And 
noise inclusion in the data comes under the data adding in the system are 
peculiar types of attacks that might not be noticed by the intelligence. 
Different forms of input attacks are shown in Figure 7.12. 
FIGURE 7.12 Different forms of input attacks. 

 
 
 
 
148 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
All the physical attacks can be termed as digital or in the physical form 
change else the combination. Most of the attacks take place in 3D printed 
objects by blending the pattern and modifying the structure. Some of the 
digital inputs attacked are video recordings, audio recordings, image files, 
and video files. In AI-related applications, the format attacks occur in 
image detection for the prediction-related application. Some of the images 
are altered which causes malfunctioning in the prediction. In other types 
like traffic light pattern detection there is maximum possibility of format 
attacks. 
7.4.5 POISONING OF DATA 
The training dataset seems to be the most important part of  the AI System. 
This is also attacked by hackers using different types of poisoning models 
like dataset poisoning, algorithm poisoning, and model poisoning. Data 
poisoning types are shown in Figure 7.13. 
FIGURE 7.13 Data poisoning types. 
Data set poisoning occurs in the all the datasets like image files which 
are used for training and testing purposes. Example: classifying red light as 
green light, classifying apple image as tomato image, etc., the percentage 
level of data set poisoning in the malfunctioning is almost 50%. Algo­
rithm poisoning happens in the type of algorithm adopted for detection in 

 
 
 
 
 
 
149 
Cyber Security for Intelligent Systems 
AI systems. Example: federated learning in the G board of Google. The 
effect of algorithm poisoning is harmful so needs to address soon. Model 
poisoning can be sorted out by revamping the inputs, data sets. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
artifcial intelligence 
• 
internet of things (IoT) 
• 
cyber security 
• 
network 
• 
online 
REFERENCES 
1. Evans, D. The Internet of Things: How the Next Evolution of the Internet is Changing 
Everything. Cisco Internet Business Solutions Group: Cisco, 2011. 
2. Rouse, M. What is IoT (Internet of Things) and How Does it Work? IoT  Agenda, 
TechTarget [Online]. http://www.inter netof thing sagen da.techt arget .com/ defin 
ition /Inter net-of-Thing s-IoT (accessed Feb 11, 2020). 
3. Linthicum, D. App Nirvana: When the Internet of Things Meets the API Economy 
[Online]. https://techb eacon .com/app-dev-testi ng/app-nirva na-wheninter net-thing 
s-meets -api-econo my (accessed Nov 15, 2019). 
4. Lu, Y.; Xu, L. D. Internet of Things (IoT) Cybersecurity Research: A Review of 
Current Research Topics. IEEE Int. Things J.  2019, 6 (2), 2103–2115. 
5. Vorakulpipat, C.; Rattanalerdnusorn, E.; Thaenkaew, P.; Hai, H. D. In Recent 
Challenges, Trends, and Concerns Related to IoT Security: An Evolutionary study, 
2018 20th International Conference on Advanced Communication  Technology 
(ICACT); Chuncheon-si Gangwon-do, Korea (South), 2018; pp 405–410. 
6. Lakhani A. The Role of Artificial Intelligence in IoT and OT Security [Online]. https 
://www.csoon line.com/artic le/33178 36/the-role-of-artificial -intel ligence-in-iot-
and-ot-secur ity.html (accessed Feb 11, 2020). 
7. Pendse A. Transforming Cybersecurity with AI and ML: View [Online]. https :// 
ciso.econo micti mes.india times .com/news/trans formi ng-cyber secur itywith-ai-
and-ml/67899 197 (accessed Feb 12, 2020). 
8. Meneghello, F.; Calore, M.; Zucchetto, D.; Polese, M.; Zanella, A. IoT: Internet of 
Threats? A  Survey of Practical Security Vulnerabilities in Real IoT  Devices. IEEE 
Int. Things J. 2019, 6 (5), 8182–8201. 

 
150 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
9. Roopak, M.; Yun, T. G.; Chambers, J. In Models Deep Learning, for Cyber Security 
in IoT Networks, IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and 
Conference (CCWC), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 2019; vol 2019, pp 0452–0457. 
10. Cañedo, J.; Skjellum, A. In Using Machine Learning to Secure IoT Systems, 2016 
14th Annual Conference on Privacy, Security and Trust (PST); Auckland, 2016; pp 
219–222. https ://doi.org/10.1109/PST.2016.79069 30. 
11. Farivar, F.; Haghighi, M. S.; Jolfaei, A.; Alazab, M. Artificial Intelligence for 
Detection, Estimation, and Compensation of Malicious Attacks in Nonlinear Cyber-
physical Systems and Industrial IoT. IEEE Trans. Ind. Inf.  2020, 16 (4), 2716–2725. 
https ://doi.org/10.1109/TII.2019.29564 74. 
12. Mishra, S.; Sagban, R.; Yakoob, A.; Gandhi, N. Swarm Intelligence in Anomaly 
Detection Systems: An Overview. Int. J. Comput. Appl.  2021, 43 (2), 109–118. 
13. Raoof, S. S.; Jabbar, M. A.; Tiwari, S. 1 Foundations of Deep Learning and Its 
Applications to Health Informatics. Deep Learning in Biomedical and Health 
Informatics: Current Applications and Possibilities, 2021. 
14.  Gaurav, D.; Rodriguez, F. O.; Tiwari, S.; Jabbar, M. A. Review of Machine Learning 
Approach for Drug Development Process. In Deep Learning in Biomedical and 
Health Informatics; CRC Press, 2021; pp 53–77. 
15. Pandey, S. R.; Hicks, D.; Goyal, A.; Gaurav, D.; Tiwari, S. M. Mobile Notification 
System for Blood Pressure and Heartbeat Anomaly Detection.  J. Web Eng.  2020, 19 
(5-6), 747–773. 
16. Roopak, M.; Yun, T. G.; Chambers, J. In Models Deep Learning, for Cyber Security 
in IoT Networks, IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop and 
Conference (CCWC), 2019. 
17. Kuzlu, M.; Fair, C.; Guler, O. Role of Artificial Intelligence in the Internet of Things 
(IoT) Cybersecurity.  Discover Int. Things  2021, 1 (1), 1–14. 
18. Jurn, J.; Kim, T.; Kim, H. An Automated Vulnerability Detection and Remediation 
Method for Software Security. Sustainability  2018, 10, 1652. https://doi.org/10.3390/ 
su100 51652 
19. Comiter, M. Attacking Artificial Intelligence. Belfer Center for Science and 
International Affairs, Belfer Center  for Science and International Affairs [Online]. 
http://www.belfe rcent er.org/sites /defau lt/files /2019-08/Attac kingA  I/Attac kingA  
I.pdf (accessed Aug 25, 2019). 

 
PART III 
Applications of Cybersecurity Techniques for 
Web Applications 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 8 
ANALYSIS OF ADVANCE MANUAL 
DETECTION AND ROBUST 
PREVENTION OF CROSS-SITE 
SCRIPTING IN WEB-BASED SERVICES 
SMIT SAWANT,1 GAURAV CHOUDHARY,2   
SHISHIR KUMAR SHANDILYA,1 LOKESH GIRIPUNJE,1 and 
VIKAS SIHAG3 
1School of Computer Science and Engineering (SCSE),  
VIT Bhopal University, Bhopal, Madhya Pradesh, India 
2Department of Applied Mathematics and Computer Science, 
Technical University of Denmark (DTU), Denmark 
3Department of Cyber Security, Sardar Patel University of Police, 
Jodhpur, Rajasthan, India 
ABSTRACT 
With the increase in internet users, the number of intruders and attackers is 
also increasing; this leads to security issues associated with web applica­
tions. These web applications are prone to many vulnerabilities due to a 
lack of secure coding practices by web developers, which in turn risks the 
privacy and confidential data of end-users using such web applications. 
Cross-site scripting (XSS) vulnerabilities are one of the most common 
bugs that affect most modern web applications. The nature of cross-site 

 
 
 
154 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
scripting has been always evolving and its risk impact on web applications 
varies from medium severity to critical severity. The traditional defense 
mechanism could not cope with various bypass techniques to trigger 
XSS even if there is some kind of protection mechanism to prevent it, 
for reference the Cuneiform-alphabet based XSS payload bypasses Cloud-
flare firewall protection mechanism against cross-site scripting attacks. 
In this chapter, We have analyzed the major concerns for defense mecha­
nisms against cross-site scripting attacks and came up with some robust 
security solutions which can be integrated with the traditional cross-site 
scripting defense methodologies to prevent all kinds of cross-site scripting 
attacks. For finding cross-site scripting bugs, manual detection techniques 
are robust as it locates vulnerabilities in the website’s dark corners while 
automatic vulnerability scanners have high false-positive and false-nega­
tive rates. The overall security of any web application can be enhanced 
with proposed non-responsive or non-dynamic search boxes which are 
implemented to prevent cross-site scripting attacks. The combined use of 
website security plugins with firewalls increases the robustness of web 
applications. Technique to discover Reflected cross-site scripting (XSS) 
attacks in URL paths and use of xsshunter, an online platform to find blind 
cross-site scripting attacks also boosts web applications against all types 
of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. 
8.1 INTRODUCTION 
Cross-site scripting is a weakness in web applications that can be exploited 
by a threat actor to gain access to login sessions, open redirects, and so 
on. Cross-site scripting flaws have been around since a long time, when 
the World Wide Web was just getting started (Web).1 The bubble days 
of old browsers like Netscape, Yahoo, and the obnoxious blink tag were 
a time when e-commerce started to take off. Website developers do not 
pay attention to the security aspect totally before deploying their websites 
and servers in public. If these websites are penetrated, lots of confidential 
data can be put in danger. According to the research study, almost 40% 
of all cyber attacks were performed by exploiting the cross-site scripting 
vulnerabilities. Here is the statistical data of Open Web Application Secu­
rity Project (OWASP) Top 10 security vulnerabilities for the year 2017 as 
shown in Figure 8.1.3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
155 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
As we can see in the above prescribed figure that in the year 2017 
the percentage of cross-site scripting attacks were about 77% which is 
really a very big number in terms of cyber attacks. The frequency of 
cross-site scripting attacks has subsequently increased in large numbers 
over these years and the risk impact these vulnerabilities can cause 
is very high. Moreover, the testing for detecting cross-site scripting 
vulnerabilities is still done in the classical orthodox way, thus many 
vulnerable sections get overlooked during such penetration testing. 
Most website moderators rely on old-school defense mechanisms like 
imposing Content Security Policy (CSP) header, blacklisting approach, 
escaping characters, encoding techniques, etc., but these defense 
solutions are not a standalone or robust technique to prevent cross-
site scripting (XSS) attacks. Therefore, the website developers need 
to adapt according to the changing variations of cross-site scripting 
attacks and devise a robust solution in order to prevent these attacks. 
FIGURE 8.1 
OWASP top 10 vulnerabilities.3 
Source: Reprinted with permission from Ref. [3] 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
156 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
8.2 PROBLEM STATEMENT AND OUR CONTRIBUTION 
This various cross-site scripting vulnerabilities is so common nowa­
days that almost 60% bug reports are of cross-site scripting (XSS) on 
various bug bounty platforms, such as Hacker one, Bugcrowd, Open bug 
bounty, moreover, the payouts range is also very high as its severity 
ranges from medium to critical. The main fault is that developers do 
not practice secure coding methodology. There are various existing 
works about the detection of Reflected XSS and Stored XSS such 
as static detection t e c h n i q u e , server-side detection t e c h n i q u e s . 
Moreover, there are various client-side and server-side defense mecha­
nisms like nonespaces using randomization, protecting cookies using 
cryptography, etc., but there are not many solutions on how to prevent 
DOM XSS and Blind XSS. Moreover, there are various automated 
mechanisms for detecting cross-site scripting vulnerabilities but we 
cannot completely rely on them because of high percentage of false-
positives. This paper aims to devise a defense mechanism for all types 
of cross-site scripting attacks. It also provides the manual detection 
methodology for detecting cross-site scripting areas in various dark 
areas in modern web applications. It also discussed the technique to 
find and report blind cross-site scripting vulnerabilities. 
8.3 RELATED WORK 
Wassermann et al.19 suggest an approach to detect vulnerabilities 
of cross-site scripting (XSS) because of weak input validation. The 
proposed algorithm checks untrusted scrips using HTML documents. 
Layout engines behavior is the base for evaluating errors caused by 
weak input validation for web applications. 
John et al.7 discussed about various prevention mechanisms for XSS 
like using efficient coding practices to sanitize and validate improper 
data input which provides robust way to eliminate data vulnerabilities. 
There are several ways by which input sanitization could be handled. 
The most common methods include replacement and elimination tech­
niques for the search of blacklisted characters. Escaping HTML: All 
the user input must be HTML escaped. A number of scripting languages, 
such as jsp, asp, and php support this feature by providing well-defined 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
157 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
functions. The approach suggested by Endler and David4 enables a 
developer to access “edit” page before “action” page by creating a unique 
signature based on CGI Script. This mechanism helps in avoiding 
XSS attacks. Shar et al.16 suggested a mechanism to escape untrusted 
reference data in HTML document by OWASP’s rules. 
Johns et al.8 studied that the similarity matrix generated using 
incoming information and outgoing JavaScript can easily detect 
reflected XSS only for script code. Gupta et al.6 propose a combined 
mechanism of browser-embedded script along with IDS which detects 
malicious JavaScript. The architecture suggested by Gundy et al.18 
defeats XSS attacks in both stored as well as reflected scenarios by 
returning untrusted user input to the victim. 
In Mohammadi et al.12 cookie misuse is prevented by triple DES 
encryption of cookie date.  Kour et al. [11] discuss about server-side 
technique which generated hash code for cookie name attributes, and 
by sending this value to the browser it reduces XSS attacks. 
Gupta et al.6 mentioned about the pros and cons of server-side and 
client-side approach to avoid XSS attacks. Client-side approaches 
cause poor surfing experience while server-side approaches increase 
system overhead. 
8.4 CROSS-SITE SCRIPTING (XSS) 
Cross-site scripting (XSS) is one of the most popular web application 
vulnerabilities that allows an attacker to inject malicious client code and 
alter the interactions that users have with web applications. This vulner­
ability can be abused by threat actors to hijack user’s login sessions by 
accessing HTTP cookies, deface websites, bypassing cross-site request 
forgery, open redirects, etc. Cross-site scripting vulnerability has been on 
the list of Open Web Application Security Project (OWASP)’ top 10 web 
application security risks for decades. The severity of cross-site scripting 
vulnerability is from medium to critical depending on the logical function­
ality of web applications. 
Cross-site scripting can be majorly categorized into three types – 
reflected, stored, and DOM. There is another type – blind xss which has 
gained popularity these days. Moreover, the severity of blind xss ranges 
from high to critical. 

 
158 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
1. Reflected XSS: It occurs when a web application receives data 
in an HTTP request and includes it in an untrusted manner in its 
immediate response. The most basic entry point for this form is 
search boxes on websites, where the user’s feedback is mirrored in 
the website’s response. 
2. Stored XSS: Persistent cross-site scripting is another name for it. 
It happens when a web application accepts user-supplied data in an 
HTTP  request and includes it in an insecure manner in the subse-
quent response (i.e., it is essentially stored on the server-side). 
Malicious code inserted in blog comment sections is a simple 
example. 
3. DOM XSS: It occurs when client-side code explicitly modifies 
DOM content or when client-side browser JavaScript processes 
data in an unsafe manner and then directly writes back to DOM 
content. 
4. Blind XSS: This type is caused due to the same reasons just like 
the other three types but the triggering action differs from the rest 
of the types. It is coined as blind because the malicious script gets 
saved on the web server but gets executed in another part of an 
application or completely in the other application outside of the 
current domain. The entry points for this type are contact and 
feedback pages. 
There are various pre-existing defense methodologies for preventing 
cross-site scripting attacks. These defense mechanisms can be client-
side protection or server-side protection mechanism. Some of these 
defense solutions are the following: 
1. Blacklisting approach: In this technique, the malicious words are 
listed which need to be blocked in order to prevent XSS attacks. 
This technique is not feasible because the threat attacker can easily 
bypass this defense mechanism. Example: Let us say suppose the 
developer has a blacklisted script word, then the attacker can try 
various combinations like ScripT or SCript or simply encode it to 
base64, that is, c2NyaXB0 in order to bypass the blacklist. 
2. White-listing approach: This approach is opposite to the black-
listing approach. In this approach,the benign characters are only 
allowed as input from the user thus eliminating the risk of XSS 
attacks. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
159 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
3. Encoding harmful characters: In this approach, harmful XSS 
characters like: ’, (, ), >, <, =, etc., are encoded to Unicode UTF-8 
characters or any other encoding in order to safely parse by the 
server and thus eliminating the risk of cross-site scripting attacks. 
4.
 Filtering non-benign characters: This technique is more 
efficient, as it directly eliminates the malicious characters from 
the attacker’s input. Example: If the attacker’s malicious input 
contains something like this ¡script¿, this approach will filter out 
the angular brackets and thus only the simple word script is passed 
to the server. 
FIGURE 8.2 
A generalized demonstration of XSS attack. 
8.5 PROPOSED SOLUTION 
This dissertation aims to provide techniques for the manual detec­
tion of cross-site scripting attacks in modern web applications. It also 
proposes robust prevention solutions for mitigating the risks associ­
ated with different cross-site scripting attacks. The defense mechanism 
collaborates with the old prevention techniques as well as the newly 
proposed techniques which will overall help in securing the modern web 
application. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
160 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
8.5.1 METHODOLOGIES 
Manual cross-site scripting detection techniques are more preferred by 
bug hunters due to high false-positive and false-negative rates of auto­
mated vulnerability scanners. There are various tools like dalfox1 which 
scans for cross-site scripting vulnerabilities. This tool tests different 
XSS payloads on the parameters of various URLs. Though the false-
positive rate of this tool is negligible, it still misses various sections for 
testing XSS in web applications just like XSS getting triggered on the 
reflected URL path section. 
In this section, we will take a look at manual detection of reflected XSS 
in the URL path, which is overlooked by all the vulnerability scanners as it 
can only be detected manually. Let us consider a hypothetical website say: 
https://redacted.com.Now let’s add something malicious like: 
(1) https://redacted.com/”\¿ or (2) https://redacted.com/(A(”’)) 
It is important to note here that we added malicious input as a 
path to URL, not to any parameter. Once it gets executed, it digs up the 
source code and will find whether the malicious input ”\¿ or (A(”’)) is 
getting reflected in it or not. If the input gets reflected as href parameter 
reference then there might be a possibility of reflected XSS, so now let 
us add some event handlers in order to trigger XSS. So let us change 
the URL as https://redacted.com/(A(“onerror=’alert(1)’)) 
where onerror=’alert(1)’ is the event handler; if the web applica­
tion filters out some of the input, we can change the event handler 
accordingly like if the alert(1) gets filtered out or the web applica­
tion firewall blocks the query, then we can try alert ‘1’, it will trigger 
reflected XSS on web application. 
Blind cross-site scripting cannot be detected by automatic scan­
ners. It requires manual inspection as well as automatic platform like 
xsshunter2 to generate the report of triggered blind XSS. Most of the 
contact and feedback pages are vulnerable to blind XSS attacks. Let 
us see the practical demonstration of detecting blind XSS on a contact 
page. The xsshunter platform provides different XSS payloads according 
to different scenarios. Once we decide on the payload to be used for a 
particular contact form, just fill in all the fields with the payload and 
submit the form. If the payload gets triggered on the admin or moder­
ator side, the xsshunter platform will notify you directly through email 

 
 
 
 
 
 
161 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
and generate a blind XSS report for the corresponding. The automatic 
vulnerability scanners are not able to detect such sections where there 
is a possibility of blind XSS. 
FIGURE 8.3 
Blind XSS triggered. 
FIGURE 8.4 
xsshunter report. 
FIGURE 8.5 
xsshunter report. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
162 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
8.5.2 IMPLEMENTATION 
Once we are familiar with the different methodologies for detecting 
cross-site scripting attacks, then comes the most vital part which is the 
prevention or remediation of such attacks. Exploiting vulnerabilities 
is not a big deal, but implementing solutions for preventing such 
attacks is like “ Drastic times call for drastic measures.” There­
fore, the blue team is more crucial to any organization than the red 
team. In this section, we will mention some robust solutions that can 
be implemented in order to protect modern web applications from 
cross-site scripting attacks. 
These days almost every single website has a search box imple­
mented, those search boxes can be of any type like some direct queries 
from the database, or it can be from G oogle search, or just a normal 
search box feature provided by content management system (CMS). 
We all notice that whenever we search any content through these 
search boxes it will provide us with something similar to a Search 
result for “XYZ” or No results found for “ XYZ,” the response 
of most of these search boxes will be identical to these. The main focus 
over here is the word “ XYZ” which is a user-supplied input that gets 
reflected on the website, if the website is secure then even if malicious 
javascript user input is supplied through search box, it will not trigger 
the reflected XSS. These prevention mechanisms consist of techniques 
such as escaping harmful characters, sanitizing user inputs, etc., 
which we have seen in the background section. We devised a search 
box which is non-dynamic or non-responsive in nature to prevent 
particularly reflected cross-site scripting attacks. Let us suppose we 
are searching for a particular word let us say “ HELP” through our 
newly devised non-responsive search box. The non-responsive search 
box will search the word “HELP” through the whole website as well 
as a database. If the word does not exist, it will not show any response 
by reloading the website stating No result found for HELP, so we 
can infer through this that the user input will not get reflected on the 
website due to the non-responsive nature of the search box. As we can 
see in the image below when we searched the word “ HELP” in the 
non-responsive search box it did not show any drop-down menu as the 
word is not present on the website nor in the database, also it neither 
reloaded the website to indicate that the word is not present, that is, 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
163 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
the user input did not get reflected on the website, thus preventing the 
possibility of reflected cross-site scripting. 
FIGURE 8.6 
Non-responsive search box. 
Modern WordPress websites are powered with a WordPress security 
plugin named Wordpfence which includes an inbuilt firewall along with 
a malware scanner and a vulnerability scanner. So when threat actors 
provide malicious javascript code in input field to trigger cross-site 
scripting attacks, Wordfence automatically blocks the request and bans 
the corresponding IP from which the request was sent to the server. 
Similar kind of defense mechanism can be implemented for modern 
web applications, there are various web application firewalls, such as 
Cloudflare, A kamai, which when organized with a proper rule set for 
server traffic filtering as well as blocking malicious user requests which 
helps in preventing cross-site scripting attacks. 
FIGURE 8.7 
WAF blocking malicious XSS request. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
164 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
8.6 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The manual detection techniques discussed above will help the red team 
of any organization to analyze various vulnerable areas which are prone 
to cross-site scripting attacks but goes undetected through automatic 
vulnerability scanners and accordingly convey to the website devel­
oper for secure coding practice. The xsshunter platform serves as a 
great utility for detecting critical blind cross-site scripting vulnerabilities 
which are not known to website developers as well as website admin or 
moderator. The non-responsive or non-dynamic search box is the vital 
concept that various website developers can adopt in order to prevent 
reflected cross-site scripting attacks. The overall performance metrics 
associated with this robust solution can be accurately calculated when 
this type of search box gets implemented in the real-time scenario. 
It is crucial that the implementation of such search box should be 
backed up with the traditional defense mechanism to protect cross-site 
scripting attacks, as there might be a scenario where the threat actor 
can search a word which is present in the website or in the database, 
then the search query will be successful for the request, but after getting 
the result, the threat actor can change the benign script to a malicious 
script to trigger reflected cross-site scripting attack. The website secu­
rity plugin like Wordfence should be inbuilt into the website to prevent 
malicious actors to exploit XSS vulnerabilities by directly blocking 
them, thus securing the web application. Though Wordfence plugin is 
developed for WordPress websites, alternate solutions of web appli­
cation firewalls, such as Cloudflare, Akamai, FortiWeb will efficiently 
protect the modern web application just like Wordfence plugin. 
The proposed system model can be implemented in different infor­
mation technology sectors, such as financial, banking, insurance, health 
sectors where it is crucial to protect sensitive and confidential infor­
mation, such as Personally Identifiable Information (PII), Protected 
Health Information (PHI), company data, login credentials, and lot 
more. This proposed system model will help in solving most of the 
existing problems in traditional defense mechanism for preventing 
various cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. The implementation idea of 
non-responsive or non-dynamic search box concept was an unique way 
to tackle the problem of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. We have 
also emphasized on the importance of manual detection techniques for 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
165 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
finding cross-site scripting vulnerabilities in modern web applications, 
so as to be more secure and not fall into the mirage of false-positives 
and false-negatives generated by automatic vulnerability scanners. We 
also discussed a methodology for finding reflected cross-site scripting 
vulnerabilities in URL path. The online xsshunter platform will help 
the web application penetration testers and bug hunters discover rare 
blind cross-site scripting vulnerabilities in a more efficient and simpler 
manner. We have also put forth the significance a n d the benefits of 
implementing security plugins like Wordfence in modern web appli­
cations. The web application firewalls, such as Cloudflare, Akamai, 
FortiWeb, can prove a great alternative to these security plugins but 
the defense solution will be more robust if they both function mutually. 
As it is rightly said that no organization is 100% secure due to t h e 
constant evolving nature of cyber attacks, there is always a scope for 
improvement for every cyber solution for preventing various cross-
site scripting attacks. All these added measures will help improving the 
conventional methodologies by a significant percentage. 
8.7 CONCLUSION 
The cross- s i t e  scripting is the major issue in t h e security of web 
applications. It is necessary to build cyber defense solutions that can 
prevent cross-site scripting attacks and mitigate the risks associated 
with them. The crucial challenge was to integrate the new proposed 
defense solutions with the existing traditional defense mechanisms to 
work mutually in defending cross-site scripting attacks. Moreover, 
developers do not focus on secure coding practices thus exposing a 
bunch of vulnerabilities in modern web applications to the threat 
actors. The reason behind the poor efficiency of these defense solutions 
is that they are not updated according to the new and evolving nature 
of cross-site scripting attacks and their different payloads. The threat 
actors always discover new techniques to bypass these defense mecha­
nisms and exploit the cross-site scripting vulnerabilities. In this work, 
the proposed work overcomes the drawbacks of the existing defense 
mechanisms for preventing cross-site scripting attacks. 
The research paper discussed how manual detection techniques can 
be useful in finding cross-site scripting vulnerabilities in various dark 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
166 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
areas of modern web applications where the automatic vulnerability 
scanner cannot even think of such sections. The technique to discover 
reflected cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks in URL paths and the online 
platform xsshunter is used to find blind cross-site scripting attacks in 
web applications. The new ideology of non-responsive or non-dynamic 
search boxes is implemented in order to prevent cross-site scripting 
attacks. These search boxes are not a standalone solution for t h e 
prevention of cross-site scripting attacks, as it needs to be backed 
up with the existing traditional defense mechanisms too. The paper 
also stressed the importance of incorporating website security plugins 
like Wordfence in modern web applications, as well as the usability of 
website security plugins like Wordfence for modern WordPress websites. 
Though web application firewalls, such as Cloudflare, A kamai, and 
FortiWeb are great alternatives to the website security plugin, but 
if these both mechanisms are implemented in modern websites it will 
boost the overall security of the web applications and thus will robustly 
defend all kinds of cross-site scripting (XSS) attacks. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
cross-site scripting (XSS) 
• 
manual detection 
• 
website 
• 
vulnerabilities 
• 
security 
• 
defense mechanisms 
REFERENCES 
1. Automatic Cross Site Vulnerability Scanner [Online]. https://github.com/hahwul/ 
dalfox. 
2. Automatic Platform to Generate Reports for Triggered Blind xss [Online]. https:// 
xsshunter.com/. 
3. Owasp Top 10 Vulnerabilities for the Year 2017 [Online]. https://www.ptsecurity. 
com/ww-en/analytics/web-application- vulnerabilities-statistics-2019/. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
167 
Analysis of Advance Manual Detection and Robust Prevention 
4. Endler, D. The Evolution of Cross Site Scripting Attacks, Technical Report, Technical 
Report, iDEFENSE Labs, 2002. 
5. Gupta, S.; Gupta, B. B. Cross-site Scripting (xss) Attacks and Defense Mechanisms: 
Classification and State-of-the-art. Int. J. Syst. Assur. Eng. Manag. 2017, 8 (1), 
512–530. 
6. Gupta, S.; Sharma, L. Exploitation of Cross-Site Scripting (xss) Vulnerability on Real 
World Web Applications and its Defense. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2012, 60 (14), 28–33. 
7. Mohd Umar, J.; Shah, J. L.; Ahmad, G. I. Web Abuse using Cross site Scripting (xss) 
Attacks. 
8. Johns, M.; Engelmann, B.; Posegga, J. In Xssds: Server-side Detection of Cross-
Site Scripting Attacks, 2008 Annual Computer Security Applications Conference 
(ACSAC); IEEE, 2008, pp 335–344. 
9. Kieyzun, A.; Guo, P. J.; Jayaraman, K.; Ernst, M. D. In Automatic Creation of sql 
Injection and Cross-site Scripting Attacks, 2009 IEEE 31st International Conference 
on Software Engineering; IEEE, 2009; pp 199–209. 
10. Kirda, E.; Jovanovic, N.; Kruegel, C.; Vigna, G. Client-Side Cross-site Scripting 
Protection. Comput. Secur. 2009, 28 (7), 592– 604. 
11. Kour, H.; Sen Sharma, L. Tracing Out Cross Site Scripting Vulner- Abilities in 
Modern Scripts. Int.J. Adv. Netw. Appl. 2016, 7 (5), 2862. 
12. Mohammadi, S.; Koohbor, F. Protecting Cookies Against Cross-site Scripting 
Attacks using Cryptography. In World Scientific and Engineering Academy and 
Society (WSEAS), 2010. 
13. Nadji, Y.; Saxena, P.;Song, D. In Document Structure In- tegrity: A Robust Basis for 
Cross-site Scripting Defense, NDSS; 2009, vol. 20. 
14. Rodr´ıguez, G. E.; Torres, J. G.; Flores, P.; Benavides, D. E. Cross-Site Scripting 
(xss) Attacks and Mitigation: A Survey. Comput. Netw. 2020, 166, 106960. 
15. Shar, L. K.; Tan, H. B. K.  Defending Against Cross-site Scripting Attacks. Computer 
2011, 45 (3), 55–62. 
16. Shar, L. K.; Tan, H. B. K. Automated Removal of Cross Site Scripting Vulnerabilities 
in Web Applications. Inf. Softw. Technolo. 2012, 54 (5), 467–478. 
17. Louw, M. T.; Venkatakrishnan, V. N. In Blueprint: Robust Prevention of Cross-site 
Scripting Attacks for Existing Browsers, 2009 30th IEEE Symposium on Security and 
Privacy; IEEE, 2009; pp 331–346. 
18. Gundy, M. V.; Chen, H. Noncespaces: Using Randomization to Defeat Cross-site 
Scripting Attacks. Comput. Secur.  2012, 31 (4), 612–628. 
19. Wassermann, G.; Su, Z. In Static Detection of Cross-Site Script- ing Vulnerabilities, 
2008 ACM/IEEE 30th International Conference on Software Engineering; IEEE, 
2008; pp 171–180. 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 9 
SOFT COMPUTING TECHNIQUES 
FOR CYBER-PHYSICAL SYSTEMS 
R.R. RUBIA GANDHI,1 ABINAYA INBAMANI,1 N. DIVYA,1   
M. KARTHIK,1 and E. RAMYA2 
1Sri Ramakrishna Engineering College, Coimbatore, Tamil Nadu, 
India 
2Bannari Amman Institute of Technology, Sathyamangalam, India 
ABSTRACT 
Cyber Physical Systems (CPS) are essential for paving a bridge between 
the physical objects and the computation elements. The CPS is prone to 
vulnerabilities and hence its dependability should be overawed by proper 
modeling of the elements and network. This book chapter gives an indica­
tion on the various computing techniques pertaining to CPS. The various 
spheres including the application domains in smart grids, industrial auto­
mation, and intelligent transportation system are discussed. The attri­
butes of the dependability factors are briefed to enhance the security. Soft 
computing methods are preferred as they are good in solving nonlinear 
problems and use approximation techniques for self-evolving and 
improvements. This book chapter describes the soft computing taxonomy 
with special inclusion to Fuzzy Logic, Artificial Neural Network, and 
Genetic Algorithm. The various integration technologies with regards to 
Cyber Physical systems are also described. 

 
 
 
 
 
170 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
9.1 INTRODUCTION 
The combination of hardware and software for a specific application 
is called embedded systems. The embedded system can work either 
as a standalone or can be connected to the internet. As the application 
increases, the number of controllers and microprocessors associated with 
it also increases. When the embedded systems remain connected to the 
internet, the processor’s intensity has been considered. So, for seamless 
transmission of data from one place to another, the layers of internet have 
to be considered. These layers will help in establishing the connectivity 
between various mediums and various operating systems. The security of 
the data has to be considered when the transmission is done to the end user. 
The deploy ability, operation, device management, and device discovery 
are the important factors under consideration. The seamless transfer of 
information along with the security leads to Cyber Physical Systems 
(CPS). The cost of processors has declined and the computation speed and 
its pertaining memory have improved. This leads to a lot of structured, 
unstructured, and semistructured data. Proper security of the data will in 
turn help in efficient communication. The initial inventions of wireless 
sensor networks have led to inventions of higher end communicators like 
IoT, M2M, V2V, and machine learning techniques. The architecture of the 
wireless sensor network is shown in Figure 9.1. The important components 
of WSN are the sensor network, analog circuit, microcontroller, battery, 
and radio. The sink node, sensor node, cluster node, and routing node are 
the important nodes in the wireless sensor network domain. 
The data from the wireless sensor node is communicated to the concen­
trator device via ISA, WHART and communicated to the end user with the 
help of the internet using TCP/IP or Modbus. Security plays a major role 
during this conversion. In the Gateway solution modbus can be used to 
connect the concentrator device to the end user. In the TCP/IP solution, the 
modbus and TCP/IP are used between the concentrator device and the user 
as shown in Figures 9.2, 9.3, and 9.4. The concentrator devices are given 
a unique address and data are processed. 
The hybrid-based topology solutions have concentrator devices 
connected to the internet. There is no aggregator point in hybrid solution. 
The access point solution helps in aggregating the data and proceeding to 
the end user. The various topology solutions are shown in Figures 9.5 and 
9.6. As the advancement of wireless sensor networks proceeds to the next 

 
 
 
 
171 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
level of embedded systems, the security feature also poses a major role. 
The physical systems when pertained to the internet have to be identified 
using IP addresses and secured by using Layer security protocols. 
FIGURE 9.1 Components in wireless sensor nodes. 
FIGURE 9.2 Front end solution. 
FIGURE 9.3 Gateway solution. 

 
 
 
 
172 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 9.4 TCP/IP solution. 
FIGURE 9.5 Hybrid solution. 
FIGURE 9.6 Access point solution. 
CPS has found applications in many fields as shown in Figure 9.7. When 
physical systems are viewed remotely, the applications are numerous. The 
smart grids help in efficient management of power. CPS finds applications 
in autonomous vehicles, healthcare systems, avoidance of traffic conges­
tion, reduction of greenhouse gas emissions, etc. 

 
 
 
 
173 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
FIGURE 9.7 Applications of CPS. 
CPS, when subjected to emergency or unavoidable circumstances, 
should have the ability to react to it. Dependability and reliability should 
be given importance and CPS must be robust and stable. Soft computing 
techniques help in making the CPS stable. 
FIGURE 9.8 Features of soft computing techniques in CPSs. 
Soft computing techniques can be used for modeling along with its opti­
mization. Accuracy is mandatory in hard computing, whereas robustness 

 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
174 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
is priority in soft computing. As soft computing can deal with imprecise 
data, it can provide approximations in answers. This chapter briefs about 
the application domains, soft computing for dependable CPS. 
9.2 CLAIM AREAS AND FIDELITY IN CPS 
CPS combines computation and networking with physical processes. 
Networked Control Systems (NCS), Distributed Control Systems (DCS), 
Sensor Actuator Networks (SAN), and Wireless Industrial Sensor Networks 
(WISN) are all terms that have been used to describe them.2 A CPS can be 
modeled as a distributed control system that is temporally integrated. CPS 
enables the integration of several technologies with applications across a 
variety of engineering fields. 
9.2.1 CLAIM AREAS OF CPS 
CPS has applications in practically every aspect of up-to-date natural life. 
CPS applications incorporate transportation frameworks, helped medical 
services, fluid organizations, independent vehicles, keen lattices for utility 
organizations, and communication, to give some examples. CPS makes an 
environment in these applications where distinctive implanted frameworks 
can work together to accomplish a shared objective. CPS is progressively 
helpless against digital assaults, digital actual assaults, and disappointment 
circumstances in these spaces because of its interconnection. To empha­
size the importance of a dependable and resilient architecture, we will 
go over several common CPS use cases and different disruptive circum­
stances in these systems. 
1. Electrical Power-based Smart Grid 
The power grid is a complex and geologically scattered organization of 
substances that create, manage, and use power. A CPS is a framework that 
joins power age, huge scope dissemination, and robotized power control 
at the customer level. Through fine-grained control of the whole frame­
work, these savvy networks empower higher adaptation to noncritical 
failure, security, and monetary advantages. Savvy networks can direct 
constant circulated detecting, estimation, and investigation of electrical 
force creation and dispersion.3 These advancements have the advantage 

 
 
  
 
175 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
of bringing down power interferences and ozone-depleting substance 
discharges. Notwithstanding these benefits, brilliant matrices are helpless 
against digital and digital actual attacks, which can bring about founda­
tional harm and a blackout on a worldwide scale. A deliberate cyber-attack 
on grid operators caused a major outage in Ukraine in December 2015. 
Around 225,000 people were left without power as a result of this. Smart 
grid, businesses, and system dependability are both impacted by such 
assaults. As a result, systems that protect both individual system compo­
nents and the entire CPS are required. 
2. Water Networks 
Water networks are fundamental public plans that straightforwardly 
influence the norm of living. Water networks are very mind boggling, 
containing an assortment of detecting gadgets, and their intricacy is cease­
lessly extending to fulfill the rising requests of enormous urban areas and 
organizations. Water frameworks are amazingly delicate to a wide scope 
of dangers. Any digital or digital actual attack can possibly have genuine 
wellbeing and monetary outcomes. For instance, in 2000, a disappointed 
worker in Mariachi Shire, Australia, directed a progression of attacks on 
the SCADA framework working the sewage treatment office, bringing 
about the spillage of 800,000 liters of crude sewage into public and neigh­
borhoods, exacting critical harm. These examples highlight the need of 
having a safe and trustworthy infrastructure in place to conduct CPS 
activities. 
3. Industrial Automation 
Through a heterogeneous organization engineering of sensors, actuators, 
and PCs, CPS might empower complete authority over complicated and 
monstrous mechanical offices.4 Fusing CPS into the mechanical chain 
will bring about extraordinary incomes for business and customer adapt­
ability.28 The fourth modern upset is being proclaimed as the conversion of 
industry mechanization, PCs, and constant systems administration. From 
the store network through assembling, stock administration, stockpiling, 
and exchanging, this can further develop the entire creation cycle. The 
German government launched the “industry 4.0” project to bridge the gap 
between seemingly unrelated parts of the supply and manufacturing chain. 
The development of standards and protocols for communication across 
the frequently disparate parts of the industrial process is underway. Intel­
ligent solutions in industrial automation will allow the sector to be more 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
176 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
responsive to consumer needs. These CPS in industrial automation, on 
the other hand, are quite susceptible. As a component of a more exten­
sive digital assault in 2013, unfamiliar programmers broke into the control 
arrangement of a dam in Rye Brook, New York. In 2014, another cyber 
assault took place in a German steel mill, resulting in massive physical 
damage. Using spear phishing email, the adversary obtained access to the 
plant network, causing many components and crucial processes to fail. 
Intelligent cars and intelligent infrastructure are being integrated into 
transportation networks. 
4. Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) 
Setting mindful vehicular CPS with cloud help will further develop 
driver, traveler, and passerby accommodation and security.5 Such 
devices will help to alleviate traffic and parking issues in cities. Vehicles 
may travel together in fleets in a controlled transportation system, and 
the road infrastructure can be exploited to its full potential. In the event 
of a crisis, smart transportation will aid in the evacuation of urban resi­
dents. While the framework and vehicles required for really keen trans­
portation frameworks are as yet in their beginning phases, the flight area 
is extensively further developed as far as innovation and organization 
of correspondence. A disappointment in ITS can have an assortment of 
natural results, just as time waste and public instability. Such failures can 
be caused by a variety of security vulnerabilities either by the system 
designers or by specific ITS components. Ghena et al. of late analyzed 
the retreat component of a certifiable ITS in Michigan to discover a few 
security issues. They had the option to distinguish three critical defects in 
the framework. These incorporated an absence of encryption, an absence 
of secure validation, and programming weaknesses. The creators took 
advantage of these blemishes to dispatch an assault on the framework, 
exhibiting to specialists how a foe might hold onto control of traffic 
foundation and use it to acquire an out-of-line advantage by lessening 
wellbeing and causing disturbance. 
5. Healthcare 
CPS have drawn in a ton of consideration as of late due to their possible 
uses in medical services. 
Wellbeing observing gear like sensors, actuators, and cameras can be 
joined with digital parts and knowledge in such frameworks. Several CPS 
designs have recently been developed to improve healthcare facilities.34 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
177 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
The WSN-cloud framework is used to showcase a CPS-based secured 
architecture for healthcare applications. Similarly, Ref. [6] proposes 
health-CPS model based on a mix of cloud and big data analytics. CPS-
based healthcare systems will be able to deliver universal healthcare 
thanks to developments in IT and AI. As a medical care supplier, CPS 
gives wellbeing administrations dependent on the wellbeing records 
or accounts of patients to upgrade therapy and patient consideration.7 
Criminals and cyber dangers have access to personal information stored 
in healthcare systems. An overall payoff product attack that designated 
medical care establishments in the United Kingdom, Ukraine, Spain, 
France, and clinics in the United States is an illustration of such an 
assault.8 
9.2.2 DEPENDABILITY IN CPS 
The entirety of the above models features the need of making CPS activi­
ties heartier and more reliable. Since the applications and administrations 
presented by a CPS should be guaranteed and dependable in an assortment 
of conditions (i.e., neighborhood just as worldwide), in this segment, we 
initially investigate the idea of steadfastness in a more extensive viewpoint 
prior to zeroing in on it explicitly with regards to CPS. Trustworthiness is 
a framework quality that incorporates attributes like dependability, acces­
sibility, survivability, wellbeing, viability, and security. It basically takes 
key standards from an assortment of innovations and joins them into a 
solitary expression. Constancy is characterized by the International Stan­
dards Organization (ISO) as the total word used to portray accessibility 
execution and it is influencing factors: unwavering quality, execution, 
viability execution, and upkeep support execution. Constancy is character­
ized by the International Electro specialized Commission (IEC) as a level 
of accessibility. Dependability in registering is an attribute of a processing 
framework that permits the client to believe the assistance it gives. As 
indicated by the unmistakable specialists nearby, one more definition for 
constancy is the ability to keep away from administration disappointments 
that are more incessant and serious than is mediocre. Contingent upon 
the circumstance, the expression trustworthiness has fluctuated implica­
tions. Figure 9.3 portrays the free characteristics of trustworthiness, which 
include: 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
178 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
• Availability: the ability to provide accurate service; 
• Reliability: the capacity to provide proper service on a consistent 
basis; 
• Security: no catastrophic effects on the user(s) or the surroundings; 
• Integrity: lack of inappropriate system state changes; 
• Confidentiality: absence of unauthorized exposure of information 
• Reliability: the ability to be repaired and modified. 
In the absolute sense, these characteristics are difficult to define. Treats 
are unavoidable in actual systems since they are never completely avail­
able, dependable, or safe. In the CPS worldview, we by and large inspect 
two kinds of dangers: arbitrary issues and disappointments, and vital 
dangers, which are attacks by a foe fully intent on disturbing CPS cycles to 
the greatest degree conceivable. The formation of a reliable PC framework 
requires the combination of various strategies and approaches equipped 
for risk avoidance, danger resilience, danger expulsion, and danger antici­
pating. The possibility of constancy should be explored as far as dangers to 
it just as approaches to accomplish it. To be reliable, a framework should 
have the option to help the accompanying: 
• Danger avoidance: how to keep dangers from happening or being 
presented; 
• Threat resistance: how to offer suitable support despite dangers; 
• Threat expulsion: how to decrease the number or seriousness of 
dangers; 
• Threat determining: how to conjecture the current number, future 
rate, and logical outcomes of dangers. 
General-reason figuring is much less surprising and reliable than hard­
ware, therefore embedded frameworks should be more reliable as a result of 
CPS. CPS should be solid and unsurprising to be utilized in significant 
applications like medical care, airport regulation, and auto wellbeing other 
variables, like security, should likewise be thought of. The advanced CPS 
faces vulnerability from both the actual world and digital parts of the frame­
work because of the expanding level of incorporation of new data advances. 
These blemishes in the CPS can open the framework to an assortment of 
dangers and perils from assailants, bringing about huge damage. As a result, 
while developing a dependable and resilient CPS, both digital and actual 
vulnerability should be considered. CPS vigor alludes to its ability to with­
stand and be ensured against a known scope of obscure aggravations and 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
179 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
boundaries, though its security alludes to its capacity to withstand and be 
shielded from startling and pernicious events. The CPS is meant to be secure 
and resilient; thus, these two qualities are pre-event. Despite numerous 
attempts, creating robust and secure systems is highly expensive, and 
complete security and robustness is difficult to accomplish. Therefore, 
survey the framework flexibility (post-occasion), which is the framework 
capacity to recuperate following the event of problematic occasions. When 
it comes to the reliability of computing or communication systems, the idea 
of security comes in useful. Confidentiality, integrity, and availability have 
all been defined as components of security. Another notion that has expanded 
significance in the perspective of safety is confidentiality (confidence that 
information will not be shared without authorization). In terms of the main 
qualities of dependability, Figure 9.3 illustrates the link between steadiness 
and safety. The creation of a robust CPS necessitates a thorough knowledge 
of the effects of cyber assaults. This necessitates a review of CPS cyber 
infrastructure reliability as well as its capacity to withstand outages. CPS are 
complex systems with many operational loops operating at various time and 
spatial scales The dependability of a system component can be used to eval­
uate its overall reliability. The disappointment likelihood of a framework 
without excess is higher than the disappointment likelihood of any of its 
parts. The qualities of a CPS are determined by component attributes as well 
as the system architecture. Traditional approaches for systems reliability 
analysis are typically used in CPS reliability and dependability studies, and 
are some of the contributions to CPS reliability analysis. Far-reaching 
concentrate on the trustworthiness of CPS is as yet needed to conjecture 
their dependability and foster methodologies to further develop it. We may 
use reliability analysis to find issues in telecommunication networks and to 
calculate the specific redundancy requirements of a network in the design 
phase, reliability modeling comes before analysis. Later in the plan cycle, 
when more explicit execution subtleties are known, unwavering quality 
examination is played out. The development of a model to conjecture the 
trustworthiness or weakness of a framework dependent on existing informa­
tion is known as dependability displaying. We can produce trustworthiness 
measures for a framework utilizing dependability demonstrating. It could be 
finished utilizing state-based stochastic models like Markov Chains (MC) 
and Stochastic Petri Nets (SPN) or combinatorial models like Reliability 
Block Diagram (RBD) and Fault Tree (FT). Combinatorial models give 
closed-form equations and allow for the description of system dependability 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
180 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
in terms of component reliability. They cannot, nonetheless, portray disap­
pointment conditions and asset limitations, which are vital for keeping up 
with arrangements and characterizing copy measures. Complex repetitive 
cycles might be addressed utilizing state-based demonstrating, which 
predicts unwavering quality systematically. They are also useful for fore­
casting maintenance policies. The potential of a state-space explosion, on 
the other hand, must be addressed. They cannot, nonetheless, portray disap­
pointment conditions and asset limitations, which are essential for keeping 
up with strategies and characterizing copy measures Complex excess cycles 
might be addressed utilizing state-based displaying, which predicts depend­
ability logically. They use a probabilistic approach to model component 
interactions. Petri Nets (PNs) and SPNs are a sort of BN that might be 
utilized to all the more viably address the dynamic (transient and circum­
stances and logical results) conduct of organization parts. They are particu­
larly appropriate for recreating state changes and information stream in 
confounded frameworks. They support both mathematical and stochastic 
recreation. A dependability block chart, otherwise called a Dependence 
Diagram (DD), is a successive and equal plan of squares that portray the 
probability of disappointment of a framework as far as part unwavering 
quality (blocks). Just in case there is no less than one series way of working 
squares over the range of the outline will a framework be addressed by a 
RBD work. RBDs are intended for frameworks that cannot be fixed and 
where the request for disappointments is insignificant. The consistent 
connection between part or sub-framework disappointments is imagined 
utilizing FT outlines. In FTA, an essential occasion is the top occasion in a 
shortcoming tree that mirrors a framework occasion of interest that is 
connected to part disappointments through legitimate entryways. Individual 
part disappointments lead to the breakdown of a whole framework, as 
uncovered by FTs and RBDs. Basic parts can be related to the assistance of 
FTs RBDs and FTs are combinatorial methods because they let us visualize 
how a number of events might lead to another one happening. At the point 
when the arrangement of disappointment matters or when fixes are plau­
sible, Markov Chain based displaying is fitting. In both the early and late 
phases of the plan interaction, FTs and RBDs are utilized to show reliability 
and foresee accessibility. In subsequent design phases, models based on 
Markov chains are commonly employed to assess or compare different 
design options. Traditional analytical methods or simulation tools can be 
used to examine models created using these or comparable methodologies. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
181 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
Formal techniques are increasingly being recognized as a helpful tool for 
building and validating models. Analytical models rely on the complicated 
system abstraction, simplification, and unrealistic assumptions. This makes 
them prone to errors, especially in big, complicated systems. In comparison 
to standard analytic and simulation approaches, formal methods offer a 
more rigorous manner of analysis. The scope of this article does not include 
network reliability evaluation, analysis, or modeling. The reader will 
discover detailed research on reliability analysis. Boolean logic, analytical 
models, determinism, and crisp categorization are all used in these tradi­
tional reasoning and modeling approaches. In the world of modeling, the 
system (or CPS) is intended to have all of the necessary knowledge to solve 
a certain issue. Significant data is much of the time available in the real 
world as tentatively acquired past information and framework conduct 
dependent on verifiable information yield information. Various arrange­
ments might exist inside a wide scale arrangement space that can accom­
modate our test by and large. Delicate processing advances are an assortment 
of versatile PC apparatuses that can adapt to vague information and look for 
approximations. In digital physical and other complex frameworks, an 
assortment of delicate processing approaches might be utilized to build 
framework reliability or model trustworthiness. CPS, dissimilar to sensor 
organizations, direct proactive tasks characterized by conveyed control 
circles that get basic criticism from the climate. Moreover, CPS has a wide 
scope of hub tallies and correspondence abilities. A cross breed framework 
rises out of this environment of confounded shrewd frameworks, which 
utilizes fluffy sets, neural organizations, and developmental calculation in 
different stages or cycles. 
9.3 SOFT COMPUTING METHODS FOR CYBER PHYSICAL 
SYSTEMS 
Soft computing methodology is an assortment of computation techniques 
that incorporate Evolutionary Computation (EC), Artificial Neural Networks 
(ANN), and Fuzzy Logic (FL) as important individuals.9 The logical order 
of soft computing methodology is shown in Figure 9.9. The computational 
methods are essential and helpful for the perceptive systems.10 Advanced 
methodologies like Machine Learning (ML), Probabilistic Reasoning (PR), 
Chaos Theory, Bayesian Networks (BNs), Rough sets (RS), and Nature 
inspired algorithms were categorized as the same sets.11 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
182 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
These soft computing techniques are getting used to additionally 
foster the consistency points as relentless quality of convoluted structures. 
They have in like manner been utilized in exhibiting the steadfast nature 
of confounded structures and computer networks. They are essential in 
events when it is rigid to secure a logical model to gauge system reliability. 
Soft computing methods often act as an additional system for recreation 
models.12 They are likewise helpful in tackling complex advancement 
issues, especially when data are ambiguous or deficient. 
CPS is a system which incorporates the communication, computation, 
and controlling of data service. Cyber physical systems can provide an 
active control and data service made on the depth incorporation of informa­
tion, dispersed computation of those data, and dynamic detecting network 
from the real-world data. The main advantage of the CPS is that it enables 
people to get the network access wherever the user wants. CPS integrates 
several technologies to enhance the accessibility. Some are listed below 
in the figure. By seeing to it, it can be delivered that compared to sensor 
networks, IoT, and other networks, CPS is a complex interconnected system 
to access.20 The complexity can be reduced by reducing the layers in the 
architecture by which the performance of the network can be efficiently 
improved. QoS needs to be guaranteed in CPS from end-to-end transmis­
sion. QoS of routing is the part where the soft computing can be applied and 
tested here. Majority of the discussion focus on the research work carried 
out using the ant colony optimization (ACO) and genetic algorithm (GA). 
FIGURE 9.9 Soft computing taxonomy. 

 
 
 
 
 
183 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
FIGURE 9.10 Integrating technologies in CPS. 
9.3.1 FUZZY LOGIC (FL) 
Fuzzy set speculation has stood combined to relentless quality model by 
changing the standard doubts near the determination of a section, that is, 
twofold state (0 or 1) and probability existence of the constancy.13 Fuzzy 
Logic system (FL) was intended to deal with fuzziness utilizing approxi­
mate reasoning. It is represented as a kind of believing with the human 
method for persuasion by means of linguistic variables and characteris­
tics.11 A system having a fuzzy set can have a level of enrolment for that 
precise set. Fuzzy arising maps promise to yield using fuzzy logic. This 
positioning would have the option to be used to derive models. 
Fuzzy logic steps into fuzzification, rule estimation, collection of rules, 
and defuzzification.14 Fuzzy induction is somewhat easy to execute and 
discovers broad use in contemporary control framework applications. FL 
is used to examine the fundamental consistency, safety, fault discovery, 
security, safety, and risk planning.15 FL has usually been intensive on the 
analysis of component reliability where the fuzzy set theory is used to 
enhance global reliability. Roy et al. have stated the reliability optimiza­
tion for serial and nonlinear systems with (opposing) consistency and cost 
goals, using the fuzzy method of multiple goal optimization methods with 
fuzzy constraints.16 

 
 
 
 
 
184 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Traditional dependability modeling methods are supported information 
of performance of the system. Typically, it is not likely to get such long-
run knowledge truthfully. Traditional dependability behavior likewise 
includes human judgement. Fuzzy probabilities or conceivable outcomes 
give an adaptable and effective method for displaying such frameworks.17 
Fuzzy logic and plausibility hypotheses are an option in contrast to proba­
bilistic demonstration. Likelihood is the level of probability accepted from 
the recurrence of an event or an occasion. The chance is the level of achiev­
ability or simplicity of accomplishment. Fuzzy logic has been utilized to 
demonstrate the unwavering quality of programming frameworks. 
Mahapatra et al. introduced a fuzzy-based method for tracking down 
the ideal framework unwavering quality of complicated frameworks, 
compelled by a framework cost.16 Their framework utilizes Intuitionistic 
Fuzzy Set which is a speculation of fuzzy model hypothesis intended 
to manage the dubiousness and fuzziness of information. Uncertainties 
have been utilized to demonstrate human dynamic.18 Mahapatra et al.16 
compromise some accuracy in dependability streamlining for framework 
effectiveness. They have utilized fuzzy set hypotheses to deal with loose 
information and multi-target programming utilizing Fuzzy Nonlinear 
Programming (FNLP) with fuzzy boundaries. Pandey et al.19 introduced 
a fuzzy-based derivation model to foresee programming issues. Their 
framework needs programming dependability measurements and a 
system dependent on engineer’s capacity development alongside expert’s 
viewpoints. 
Fuzzy Logic is a strong and somewhat less complex delicate regis­
tering method for order. In many occurrences, assurance of fuzzy partici­
pation capacities needed in fuzzy inference systems is made by different 
procedures. Huang et al.20 have utilized genetic algorithm to appraise limit 
upsides of the fuzzy participation capacities, and neural network to gauge 
fuzzy boundaries for the Bayesian model for dependability investigation. 
They have utilized fuzzy math with PNs to display dependability with the 
advantage of expanded adaptability and necessity of a more modest infor­
mational index of earlier unwavering quality. Tyagi et al.21 have deter­
mined the dependability of part-based programming frameworks utilizing 
a versatile neuro-fuzzy surmising framework ANFIS. Fuzzy Logic is like­
wise utilized related to or to help different strategies for unwavering quality 
demonstrating improvement or streamlining. Investigation into the use of 
fuzzy logic in reliable design has focused primarily on the framework 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
185 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
dependability analysis. There are a couple of situations where Fuzzy has 
been utilized for worldwide advancement of unwavering quality.13 
9.3.2 ARTIFICIAL NEURAL NETWORKS 
In view of their organic partners, Artificial Neural Networks (ANN) are 
hugely equal circulated frameworks for handling data. ANNs can gain 
from models. They update past gauges considering recently accessible 
proof.22 ANNs are organized units that work in correspondence to play 
out a worldwide assignment. These units will train and test the system 
boundaries in light of a developing environment.11 ANNs are utilized in 
the examination and enhancement of unwavering quality. They are used 
for boundary assessment for different calculations. The training and 
expectation capacity make them an imperative apparatus in vigorous way 
and unwavering quality improvement of CP system. Altiparmk et al. have 
utilized neural networks to demonstrate the dependability of system.23 
Bhowmik et al.24 utilized neural networks related to Discrete Wavelet 
Change to foresee and order transmission line shortcomings. Srivare et al.25 
have demonstrated the gain from existing classifications and anticipate 
network dependability in an all-terminal organization using ANN. Mora 
et al.26 discussed the use of neuro fuzzy classifiers. Caiet al.27 studied the 
adequacy of neural network system for taking care of dynamic program­
ming dependability information. 
ANNs have been utilized in mix with improvement procedures like 
GA to appraise beginning qualities for enhancement.28 Linda et al.29 
utilized the directed ANN-based IDS system for power converter appli­
cations. They use Levenberg-Marquardt (LM) calculation and back 
propagation of error to prepare their structure. Lee et al.30 proposed a 
combination of methods with FL rationale regulator for system deploy­
ment. The learning ability of neural structure makes them especially 
appropriate for IDS. Moya et al.31 have utilized Self Organizing Maps 
(SOM) for working on the security of sensor information in supervisory 
frameworks. Kange et al.32 utilized Deep Learning structure for inter­
ruption discovery to work on the security in vehicular networks. Their 
strategy utilizes high-dimensional CAN bundle information to prepare 
their profound conviction network which can separate assaulted parcels 
from ordinary ones dependent on their insights. 

 
 
 
 
186 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
9.3.3 EVOLUTIONARY COMPUTATION AND META 
HEURISTICS 
CPS with Genetic Algorithm 
All the random search algorithms can be switched into the evolutionary 
computation techniques. This technique was projected by John Holland., 
Professor in Michigan University. Based on the genetic evolution given 
by Mendel and Darwin’s Biological evolution theory, GA simulates the 
bio-genetic and optimistic roles to sort out the solution for heavy popula­
tion.34 The main aim of using this approach is to give an optimal solu­
tion to a problem using systematic random search. Under evolutionary 
computation, Genetic algorithms and other types are meant to be special 
cases. Genetic algorithm is used to stimulate the natural biological genetic 
behaviors which are necessary for the system enhancing performance. 
FIGURE 9.11 Optimization flow in GA. 
GA is a physical optimization type which uses the optimization process 
flow of selection, crossover, and mutation. In comparison with the other 
EC methods, GA has many possible advantages in the subsequent charac­
teristics. It will not fall into the local optimal solution. Foremost point to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
187 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
focus the GA is giving global optimal solutions that can be obtained even 
if the fitness function is not a continuous one, abnormal, and associated 
with noise. The next important feature is inherent parallelism, since it is 
best suited for parallel processing systems in a very large scale. Then it 
is very flexible to blend with other algorithms to create a new technique 
which can be used for better random search performance. The main advan­
tages for the optimization of GA are listed here. GA is a very simple, fast, 
and fault-tolerant algorithm which can be easily adapted for various struc­
tured objects.34 
The GA method does not look for direct variable search, rather it indi­
rectly depends on the variable array of data where those are encoded. 
Because of the feature, GA can be easily adopted for various structured 
objects like array, matrix, string, and trees. 
The GA method not only searches for a single point, but always tries 
to do a parallel search for several points in the big population. This paral­
lelism reflects in two ways; as previously mentioned, it is suited for a very 
parallelism concept in a large-scale sector. It does the search in a wide 
population space. It looks for several search areas in the solution place 
and simultaneously exchanges the data or information carried among each 
involved in the optimization flow. 
GA is known for its use of possibility of transferring set of rules 
for finding out the optimum path in whole population space included.36 
This means that it will search the optimal path among all the individuals 
involved in the population space, not like the other algorithms which are 
used to find the path from one of its neighbors. By this characteristic, the 
chance of falling into local optima can be avoided for sure in GA. Global 
searching is the biggest challenge with applications like big data analytics, 
cyber physical systems. 
GA has good fault-tolerant capability. In this process, the initial 
operation of the searching, the population considered for initial opera­
tion carries the information or data. This information is not a proper 
one, that is, irrelevant data deviating from the optimal solution. This 
can be made as proper information required for optimal solution by 
using the process of selection, mutation, and crossover. GA has the 
capability to filter out easily from the vast population solution space 
using the inherent parallel mechanism. GA conducts random mutation 
and crossover.33 

 
 
 
 
188 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 9.12 Random performance operation in GA. 
According to the above figure, GA randomly does any of the above-
mentioned one process to have a clear path to reach the global optimal 
solution. These are the important characteristics to choose the Genetic 
Algorithm for the Cyber physical systems. 
9.3.4 ANT COLONY OPTIMIZATION ALGORITHM 
Behavior of real ant colonies in nature: In 1990, Dorigo, an Italian 
researcher, proposed this algorithm. This algorithm mimics the directing 
performance of life ants. Based on the information exchange and coopera­
tion among the ant colonies, this algorithm finds for the ideal solution. 
ACO is known for its dynamic combinatory optimization problem. 
This is powerful for distributed computing and searching for better solu­
tions. This ACO algorithm can be easily combined with other algorithms 
and possess good strength in robustness. It has the higher order of flex­
ibility and robustness in a changing environment. It is very flexible enough 
to be adopted for routing-based problems. From that, it can be taken for 
the side of network routing problem which is the need for usage in QoS 
of CPS. The lacuna in this algorithm is delay in searching, lack of initial 
information, and possibility for stagnation in the move.33 
As per ACO, each ant involved in the path search dynamically needs 
to be updated with the Routing Table Item based on the experience and 
performance of the work given to it. All the ants are united together based 
on their usual information carried with their smell and hormone secretion 
called pheromone. If an ant passing path is blocked for a time along, then 
the path consists of less information element and the respective list item is 

 
 
 
189 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
less enhanced.37 If any of the paths an ant passes are smooth and provided 
with more pheromone secretion, then the respective item listed in that path 
is more enhanced. In this way, the pheromone enhances the routing of 
the path, but it is time dependent. When surrounding ants stop using this 
secretion path after a while, it can be inferred that the information was 
delayed and couldn't be saved for much longer. Because of this move of 
finding out another new optimal path, even if one path is blocked, it can 
be adopted for balancing the network load and utilizing such a network for 
exchanging processes. 
In comparison with GA, ACO can also be used as a parallel mecha­
nism. It is a distributive computing method which combines the greedy 
search algorithm and positive feedback mechanism. It is also a powerful 
tool for searching optimal solutions. It is known to be parallel computing 
based on the feature of giving optimal solutions. 
This can be implemented in the problem by following the steps listed 
here. 
• Ants—acting as small agents. 
• The movement of ant—select the next item for the continuous path 
movement 
• Pheromone—∆ƮKi, j 
• Memory—MK or TabuK 
• Another move—use possibility to move ant 
9.3.4.1 PROBLEM DESCRIPTION IN CPS 
In CPS, there may be presence of several network nodes either wired 
or wireless sensors or mobile sensors. These are correspondent to the n 
number of ants in the whole colony included. The system nodes are needed 
to exchange the data carried to the information center, which can take as 
food equivalent in the place of information. During the system operation, 
there might be delay in the network, or any congestion may occur; this 
needs to be eliminated by the usage of the algorithm. 
For analyzing the routing issues, the network can be explained in the 
form of undirected weigh graph W (n, l) where n is number of nodes, l is 
the set of bidirectional connection links. The aim of the QoS is to design 
a multicast tree to solve the routing problems. The factors like delay 
constraint, bandwidth constraint, Delay jitter constraint, packet loss rate 
constraint, and cost constraint need to be focused for multicast tree. 

 
 
 
 
 
190 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
9.3.4.2 RULE FOR GA AND ACO 
TABLE 9.1 Rules for GA and ACO. 
S. No 
Rules for genetic algorithm 
Rules of ant colony 
optimization 
1. 
Genetic Coding—encode the physical nodes 
The calculation of transition 
probability—each ant needs 
to select the node from i to j 
2. 
Fitness function—include delay constraint, 
Initial setting of the 
bandwidth constraint, delay jitter constraint, 
pheromone—set the initial 
packet loss rate constraint, and cost constraint 
value of pheromone like Ʈs = 
Ʈ + Ʈ 
C 
G 
3. 
The generating of the population—use rand 
Updating model of 
function to generate the random number of 
pheromone—local optimal 
individuals 
and global optimal path is 
combined 
As is discussed above, for a CPS heterogeneous network, QoS multicast 
routing issue is considered and by using GA, ACO the following improve­
ments can be obtained. GA implies good searching and gives a global 
optimal path. Using ACO, positive feedback mechanism and parallelism 
can be obtained. One more advantage by combining GA and ACO, GAAC 
is a new algorithm which enhances the multicast routing issue very well.36 
Sample simulation results for the review have been mentioned below, to 
have a choice of choosing GAAC algorithm for Multicast routing issue in 
Cyber Physical Systems. 
FIGURE 9.13 Simulation figures for GA, ACO, GAAC for node-to-node delay time and 
node to node to delivery ratio. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
191 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
Comparing the node-to-node pause time of GA, ACO, and GAAC, 
GAAC has very short node pause time which will decrease the transmit­
ting delay in exchanging the node information. Comparing the packet 
delivery ratio of GA, ACO, and GAAC, GAAC is higher. From the above 
discussion, it is giving a clear picture that usage of CPS along with the 
soft computing techniques like GAAC (Genetic Ant Colony algorithm) 
the delay time, cost constraint in the routing networks can be minimized 
and efficiently improved with faster transmission of information within 
the information center. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
cyber physical systems 
• 
application domains 
• 
ANN 
• 
fuzzy logic 
• 
soft computing 
• 
genetic algorithm 
REFERENCES 
1. Abinaya, I.; Manivannan, D. Remote Monitoring Using Wireless Sensor Node with 
IoT. Res. J. Pharm. Biol. Chem. Sci. 2015, 6 (3), 1480–1484. 
2. Mitchell, R.; Chen, R. Effect of Intrusion Detection and Response of Reliability of 
Cyber Physical Systems. IEEE Trans. Reliab. 2013, 62 (1), 199–210. 
3. Baheti, R.; Gill, H. Cyber-Physical Systems. The Impact of Control Technology, 
2011; vol. 12, pp. 161–166. 
4. Wang, Y.; Vuran, M. C.; Goddard, S. Cyber-Physical Systems in Industrial Process 
Control. ACM Sigbed Rev. 2008, 5 (1), 12. 
5. Wan, J.; Zhang, D.; Zhao, S.; Yang, L.; Lloret, J. Context-Aware Vehicular Xyber-
Physical Systems with Cloud Support: Architecture, Challenges, and Solutions. IEEE 
Commun. Mag. 2014, 52 (8), 106–113. 
6. Zhang, Y.; Qiu, M.; Tsai, C. W.; Hassan, M. M.; Alamri, A. Health- cps: Healthcare 
Cyber-Physical System Assisted by Cloud and Big Data. IEEE Syst. J. 2015. 
7. Latif, S.; Qadir, J.; Farooq, S.; Imran, M. A. How 5g Wireless (and Concomitant 
Technologies) will Revolutionize Healthcare? Future Int. 2017, 9. 
8. Glaser, U.S. Hospitals have been Hit by the Global Ransomware Attack [Online]. 
https://goo.gl/n4uEk5 (accessed Dec 12, 2017). 

 
192 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
9. Divya. N.; Nirmalkumar. A.; A Survey on Tuning of PID Controller for Industrial 
Process Usingsoft Computing Techniques. Int. J. Pure Appl. Math.  2018, 11 (118), 
663–667. 
10. Zadeh, L. A. Soft Computing and Fuzzy Logic. IEEE Software 1994, 11 (6), 48–56. 
11. Chaturvedi, D. K. In Soft Computing: Techniques and its Applications in Electrical 
Engineering; Springer, 2008; 103, p 11. 
12. Ebrahimipour, V.; Asadzadeh,  S.; Azadeh, A. An Emotional Learning-based Fuzzy 
Inference System for Improvement of System Reliability Evaluation in Redundancy 
Allocation Problem. Int. J. Adv. Manuf. Technol.  2013, 1–16. 
13. Ravi, V.; Reddy, P.; Zimmermann, H. J. Fuzzy Global Optimization  of Complex 
System Reliability. IEEE Trans. Fuzzy Syst. 2000, 8 (3), 241–248. 
14. Negnevitsky, M. In Artificial Intelligence: A Guide to Intelligent Systems; Pearson 
Education, 2005. 
15. Cai, K. Y. System Failure Engineering and Fuzzy Methodology an Introductory 
Overview. Fuzzy Sets Syst.  1996, 83 (2), 113–133. 
16. Mahapatra, G.; Roy, T. Reliability Optimisation of Complex System using 
Intuitionistic Fuzzy Optimisation Technique. Int. J. Ind. Syst. Eng. 2014, 16 (3), 
279–295. 
17. Onisawa, T. An Application of Fuzzy Concepts to Modelling of Reliability Analysis.  
Fuzzy Sets Syst. 1990, 37 (3), 267–286. 
18. Atanassov, K. T. Intuitionistic Fuzzy Sets. Fuzzy Sets Syst. 1986, 20 (1), 87–96. 
19. Pandey, A. K.; Goyal, N. A Fuzzy Model for Early Software Fault Prediction using 
Process Maturity and Software Metrics. Int. J. Electron. Eng.  2009, 1 (2), 239–245. 
20. Huang, H. Z.; Zuo, M. J.; Sun, Z. Q. Bayesian Reliability Analysis for Fuzzy Lifetime 
Data. Fuzzy Sets Syst. 2006, 157 (12), 1674–1686. 
21. Tyagi, K.; Sharma, A. An Adaptive Neuro Fuzzy Model for Estimating the Reliability 
of Component-Based Software Systems. Appl. Comput. Inform. 2014, 10 (1), 38–51. 
22. Bonissone, P. P. Soft Computing: The Convergence of Emerging Reasoning 
Technologies. Soft Comput. 1997, 1 (1), 6–18. 
23. Altiparmak, F.; Dengiz, B.; Smith, A. E. A General Neural Network Model for 
Estimating Telecommunications Network Reliability. IEEE Trans. Reliab.  2009, 58 
(1), 2–9. 
24. Bhowmik, P.; Purkait, P.; Bhattacharya, K. A Novel Wavelet Transform Aided Neural 
Network Based Transmission Line Fault Analysis Method. Int. J. Electr. Power 
Energy Syst. 2009, 31 (5), 213–219. 
25. Srivaree-ratana, C.; Konak,  A.; Smith, A. E. Estimation of all Terminal Network 
Reliability using an Artificial Neural Network. Comput. Operat. Res.  2002, 29 (7), 
849–868. 
26. Mora, J.; Carrillo, G.; Perez, L. In Fault Location in Power Distribution Systems 
using ANFIS Nets and Current Patterns, Transmission & Distribution Conference 
and Exposition: Latin America, 2006; IEEE/PES; IEEE, 2006, pp. 1--6. 
27. Cai, K. Y.; Cai, L.; Wang, W. D.; Yu, Z. Y.; Zhang, D. On the Neural Network 
Approach in Software Reliability Modeling. J. Syst. Software 2001, 58 (1), 47–62. 
28. Gao, W.; Morris, T.; Reaves, B.; Richey, D. In On Scada Control System Command 
and Response Injection and Intrusion Detection; eCrime Researchers Summit 
(eCrime), 2010; IEEE, 2010, pp 1–9. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
193 
Soft Computing Techniques for Cyber-Physical Systems 
29. Linda, O.; Vollmer, T.; Manic, M. In Neural Network-Based Intrusion Detection 
System for Critical Infrastructures, 
International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks, 2009; IEEE, 2009, pp 1827–1834. 
30. ChangYoon, L.; Tsujimura, Y. Reliability Optimization Design using Hybrid nn-ga 
with Fuzzy Logic Controller. IEICE Trans. Fundam. Electron. Commun. Comput. 
Sci. 2002, 85 (2), 432–446. 
31. Moya, J. M.; Araujo, A.; Bankovi´c, Z.; De Goyeneche, J. M.; Vallejo, J. C.; Malagón, 
P.; Villanueva, D.; Fraga, D.; Romero, E.; Blesa, J. Improving Security for Scada 
Sensor Networks with Reputation Systems and Self-organizing Maps. Sensors 2009, 
9 (11), 9380–9397. 
32. Kang, M. J.; Kang, J. W. Intrusion Detection System using Deep Neural Network for 
in-Vehicle Network Security. PloS One 2016, 11 (6). 
33. Gandhi, R. R.; Kathirvel, C. In A Comparative Study of Different Soft Computing 
Techniques for Hybrid Renewable Energy Systems, 2021 5th International Conference 
on Trends in Electronics and Informatics (ICOEI); IEEE, June 2021; pp 1667–1677. 
34. Wang, Z.; Jin, Y.; Yang, S.; Han, J.; Lu, J. An Improved Genetic Algorithm for 
Safety and Availability Checking in Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Access 2021, 9, 
56869–56880. 
35. Atif, M.; Latif, S.; Ahmad, R.; Kiani, A. K.; Qadir, J.; Baig, A.; ... ; Abbas, W. Soft 
Computing Techniques for Dependable Cyber-Physical Systems. IEEE Access 2019, 
7, 72030–72049. 
36. Gao, Z.; Ren, J.; Wang, C.; Huang, K.; Wang, H.; Liu, Y. A Genetic Ant Colony 
Algorithm for Routing in CPS Heterogeneous Network. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 
Technol. 2013, 48 (4), 288–296. 
37. Mishra, S.; Sagban, R.; Yakoob, A.; Gandhi, N. Swarm Intelligence in Anomaly 
Detection Systems: An Overview. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2021, 43 (2), 109–118. 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 10 
CYBER SECURITY USING MACHINE 
LEARNING APPROACHES:  
A SYSTEMATIC REVIEW 
MOHAN KUMAR K N1 and PAVAN KUMAR E2 
1Department of Computer Science and Engineering, 
Saividya Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, Karnataka, India 
2Department of ECE, Saividya Institute of Technology, Bengaluru, 
Karnataka, India 
ABSTRACT
 Machine learning in cyber security has recently made headlines. With 
the widespread increase of population, the need for reliable mechanism to 
prevent cyberattacks has increased in manifold. In the recent days, there is 
an increase in cyber security problems in majority of the enterprises across 
the globe. The reason for cyberattacks problems is not specific but it has 
become so uncertain. If we take a sample from the population, it should 
not be a surprise to see a enterprise suffered from cyberattacks irrespec­
tive of the technology adopted; for example Ransomware, Spyware, and 
Trojans are commonly found. So, this situation poses a serious challenge 
for researchers to find the root cause. It is difficult to accurately predict 
the future cyberattacks based on the current status because the scenario 
might not be the same for all the enterprises. Providing an affordable, high 
quality Cyber security service has become a big challenge. In this sense, 
cyberattack avoidance has been studied for decades, which is an area with 

 
 
196 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
a steady stream of new work and improvement over time. This article 
is based on a systematic investigation that aims to bring together prior 
research on cyberattack prediction and categorization, highlight signifi­
cant changes in patterns, and propose research direction for future work. 
10.1 INTRODUCTION 
Preventive care of cyberattack is a concept, in any sort of intelligence, 
technology or an application of intelligence, that is, cyberattack data from 
different sources and using predictive human behavior for dispensing 
information that improves the ability of detecting cyberattacks. Cyberat­
tack is said to be the biggest threat that majority of enterprises face. In 
the view of researcher’s perspective cyberattacks can be defined as any 
attempt to gain unauthorized personal computer, computing platform, or 
compute cluster with the intent to cause harm. Cyberattacks are designed 
to disable, disrupt, destroy, or seize control of computers, and also corrupt, 
block, wipe, edit, or acquire stored data on them. Cyber security can be 
disrupted by different attacks from time to time. The functioning of the 
compute node in the network would become abnormal for various reasons 
such as financial gain, disruption and revenge, and cyber warfare. Cyber­
attacks may also set off due to effects of long-term usage of the same 
technology and one attack may lead many other similar attacks if not taken 
care of.1 
Bad actors use cyberattacks to generate chaos, uncertainty, discontent, 
frustration, or mistrust. They could be acting in this way as a kind of retali­
ation for actions taken against them. They could be seeking to embar­
rass the targeted entities or ruin the organizations’ reputations. Attacks on 
government agencies are common, but they can also target financial as 
well as non-enterprises. Nation-state attackers are behind several of these 
cyberattacks. Others, known as malevolent hackers, may launch similar 
assaults in the protest of the recognized entity; the most well-known of 
these organizations is completely undetectable, a secretive, decentralized 
group of international dissidents.2 
A cyberattack is an abnormal situation that affects the normal func­
tioning of the system. Cyberattack is learnt by their indications, which 
may be caused by dysfunction. Cyberattack can affect enterprise applica­
tions not only physically, but also emotionally, as contracting and living 
with a cyberattack can alter the perspective of the system. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
197 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
Every year, cybercrime rises dramatically as attackers become more 
efficient and sophisticated.3 
Cyberattacks can occur for a variety of reasons and in a variety of 
formats. Cybercriminals will look to exploit vulnerabilities in an organiza­
tion’s security policies, methods, or technology, according to a common 
thread. Although an attacker can access an IT system in a variety of 
methods, the majority of cyberattacks use the same techniques. Among 
the most popular types of cyberattacks are listed following. 
Malware is a type of computer software that can be used to do a variety 
of damaging tasks. 
Certain malware strains are intended to capture everlasting network 
access, whereas others are developed to spy on the user in order to acquire 
identities or other important information, and still others are just meant to 
disrupt the user’s life. 
Whenever an offender tries to fool an unwary target into giving user­
names and passwords, credit card details, proprietary information, and so 
on, this is known as phishing. Phishing attacks usually take the form of an 
email appearing to be from a respectable source, such as your bank, the 
IRS, or perhaps another trustworthy origin. A man-in-the-middle (MITM) 
attack occurs when an intruder captures communication between the 
different parties with the intent of spying on the victims, stealing personal 
details or credentials, or altering the dialogue in a certain manner. 
An attacker uses a DDoS (Distributed Denial of Service) assault to 
overwhelm a target computer with traffic in the aim of disturbing, if not 
entirely closing it down. Unlike traditional denial-of-service assaults, 
which are detectable and respondable for most contemporary firewalls, a 
DDoS attack can leverage several sources of traffic to overload the target. 
Structural Query Language (SQL) injection is a specific type of attack 
that exclusively affects SQL databases. SQL queries are used to search 
data in SQL databases, and they are usually executed using an HTML 
form on a website. The attacker may be able to utilize the HTML form to 
perform queries that generate, read, edit, or delete information from the 
database if the database privileges are not set up correctly. 
A zero-day attack happens when hackers discover weaknesses in 
popular software programs and systems and then target organizations that 
use them to exploit the weakness before a fix is issued. 
DNS tunneling is a sophisticated attack method that allows hackers to 
keep access to a target for an extended period of time. Because many firms 

 
 
 
 
 
198 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
fail to monitor DNS traffic for malicious activity, attackers can insert or 
“tunnel” malware inside DNS inquiries (DNS requests sent from the client 
to the server). The virus is used to create an unbreakable communication 
channel that is undetected by most firewalls. 
Business Email Compromise (BEC): In a BEC attack, the hacker 
targets specific people, usually workers with bank transaction authoriza­
tion, and convinces them to transfer the funds to an account owned by the 
hacker. 
Hackers gain entry to a user’s computer or mobile device and use that 
to mine cryptocurrency such as Bitcoin, which is known as crypto jacking. 
While less well-known than other attack avenues, crypto jacking should 
not be neglected. 
When an unwary victim visits a website that then infects their computer 
with malware; this is known as a “drive-by-download” attack. It is possible 
that the website in question is one that the attacker has direct control over 
or one that has been compromised. 
Cross-site scripting attacks, like SQL injections, impact other users 
who visit the site rather than stealing data from the database. A simple 
example would be the comments section of a website. 
A password attack, as you might have guessed, is a type of cyberattack 
in which an attacker tries to guess, or “crack,” a user’s password. There 
are many different methods for breaking a user’s password, and a descrip­
tion of all of them is much beyond the scope of this paper. Eavesdropping, 
also known as “snooping” or “sniffing,” occurs when an attacker looks 
for unsecured network connections to intercept and access data being sent 
across the network. For this reason, employees must use a VPN when 
accessing the company network from an insecure public Wi-Fi hotspot. 
Artificial Intelligence (AI) being used to launch sophisticated cyberat­
tacks is a terrifying prospect, given that we have no idea what these attacks 
will be capable of. The most well-known AI-powered attack to date used 
AI-powered botnets to mount a huge DDoS attack using slave PCs. 
IoT devices are now less secure than most modern operating systems, 
and hackers are ready to exploit these holes. Because the internet of things, 
like artificial intelligence, is still a novel concept, we do not know what 
strategies cybercriminals would use to exploit IoT devices or for what 
goals. 
Efforts are needed to build sustainable preventive care of cyberattacks 
to target the challenges created by the growing prevalence of enterprise 

 
 
 
199 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
application, with strategies directed to primary, secondary, and tertiary 
levels of intervention. Decision-makers need information about the type of 
cyberattack problems, how to address these challenges and how effective 
these measures have been. Enterprise applications need access to informa­
tion about their cyberattack to help themselves.4–10 
The advancements in Machine Learning (ML) have been remarkable; 
the information provided is better than the existing techniques. Machine 
Learning enables increased cyberattack analytics, which is important if 
technology is to improve preventive care in the future. Machine learning 
models use massive amounts of computational power to establish a set 
of rules that a human brain would be impossible of processing. The more 
data given into a machine learning algorithm, the more complicated the 
rules become, and the more accurate the cyberattack prediction becomes. 
We need to identify specific use cases where machine learning capabilities 
can assist us in preventing cyberattacks. 
Hence, there is a need to analyze and design an efficient system which 
can classify attacks. A systematic approach is required to derive knowl­
edge out of cyberattack records which can help to prevent future attacks. 
Exploration of the existing techniques would give better visibility into 
the context discussed. IEEE Xplore, Science Direct, SpringerLink, ACM 
Digital Library, Wiley Online Library, and Google Scholar were utilized 
to gather information for the reviews. 
The structure of the chapter is as follows: Cyberattack prediction tech­
niques are described in Section 2. Datasets which are used in this domain 
are discussed in Section 3. Features used for cyberattack prediction are 
introduced in Section 4. Feature selection techniques are illustrated in 
Section 5. Model performance measures which are frequently used in this 
domain are explored in Section 6. Future works and conclusion remarks 
are explained in Sections 7 and 8, respectively. 
10.2 CYBERATTACK PREDICTION TECHNIQUES 
The techniques used in cyberattack prediction till now can be catego­
rized into parametric and nonparametric. The parametric techniques are 
Logistic Regression, Linear Discriminant Analysis; they have proved 
better performance and accuracy in forecasts. Figure 10.1 clearly consoli­
dated from certain causes to find out the procedures that are majorly used. 

 
 
200 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Logistical regression techniques for cyber-security prediction dominated, 
with 27.5%, this is because of the nature of health data.6–10 
FIGURE 10.1 Prediction techniques. 
The nonparametric approaches could deal with the nonlinearity in 
cyberattack data. When the database is nonlinear, methods like neural 
networks (NN) and clustering have shown greater prediction accuracy, 
indicating a better representation of real-world data. Figure 10.1 depicts 
the number of studies conducted on various forecasting approaches. The 
second most popular technique (25%) is the Support Vector Machine, 
which is also the most popular among nonparametric methods. Other 
NN techniques, such as fuzzy neural networks and neural networks, have 
produced positive outcomes. At 22.5%, Decision Tree approaches are also 
popular. Nonparametric models are computationally expensive and cannot 
be used for real-time prediction without extensive optimization. This is 
simply one of the reasons to combine statistical and machine learning 
techniques, that is, combine the capabilities of nonparametric methods 
to efficiently model nonlinear data. By combining the advantages of 
many models or by integrated forecasting, which combines the expected 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
201 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
values of distinct models, ensemble prediction machine learning models 
have shown to improve prediction accuracy. In cyberattack prediction, 
ensemble/combined/hybrid forecasts are often used. The various tech­
niques are employed in different contexts and their employment is listed 
in Figure 10.1; however given that deep learning and big data are newer 
breakthroughs, it is somewhat encouraging that the latest technology is 
now being used in cyberattack prediction.10–30 
10.3 DATA SETS USED FOR CYBERATTACK PREDICTION 
Many of the studies have been conducted on standard database. Other 
major source of data is KDD-99 which is extensively used (30%); the 
authors have gathered this data from different sources. Studies are also 
conducted on synthetic Record to an extent of 10%, 22% of CICIDS 2017 
dataset is used to classify different cyberattacks. To achieve optimiza­
tion studies have been conducted on mentioned data sets as well as on 
other data sets such as crawled data, six gill data, binomial classification 
data set, social analysis data, and other log data. It is evident from the 
studies that certain data set has been used to study the specific attacks. 
Interesting part is that KDD-99 data is used for the prediction and classi­
fication of cyberattacks. Figure 10.2 depicts the count of different data set 
usage in cyberattack prediction.5 
TextGAN, FM-GAN, MidiNet, Age-cGAN, CVAE-GAN, SenseGen, 
WGAN, ACGAN, Pedestian synthesis GAN, HP-GAN, VAE-GAN, 
WaveGAN, DermGAN, CT-GAN, X2CT-GAN, and D-NET are some 
synthetic data generation AI algorithms.31 
FIGURE 10.2 Plot of data sets used for cyberattack prediction. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
202 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
10.4 FEATURES USED FOR CYBERATTACK PREDICTION 
From Table 10.1, it is clear that professional crimes, corporate rivalry, and 
action origin are the most used feature in cyberattack prediction (10–38%); 
these features are commonly associated features along with other features. 
Professional crimes, corporate rivalry provides a description of the attack 
state at different phases. From this study it is deciding factor in attack 
prediction. To achieve precision, features such as action flood,23 timeli­
ness,30 and autonomous23 are also studied (2–10%). Interestingly some 
of the studies have proved that features such as availability status19 help 
in attack prediction. The latest trend is that timeliness15,24 described in 
data has been used for prediction analysis. The other commonly studied 
features that are used in process of attack prediction and prevention are 
autonomous.22 Some studies have used non-traditional methods, such 
as HTTP locale information.21 
TABLE 10.1 Comparison of the Percentage of Studies on Cyberattack Prediction Based 
on Features. 
Sl. No. 
Features 
Percentage of usage 
1 
Professional crimes 
38 
2 
Corporate rivalry 
20 
4 
Action origin-remote (single source) 
10 
8 
Availability 
10 
5 
Action origin-remote (multiple source) 
8 
6 
Action-flood (single source) 
5 
7 
Action-flood (multiple source) 
4 
9 
Timeliness 
3 
3 
Autonomous 
2 
10.5 FEATURE SELECTION TECHNIQUES 
The techniques that have been used for feature selection have been detailed 
based on context of the data and requirement of the applications. The 
linear kernel is used to discover the maximum-margin hyper-plan from 
the Context properties dataset for training the SVM classifier to find the 
maximum-margin hyper-plan.13 Construction of several sparse matrices 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
203 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
from a temporal aggregate of claims data and the matrices thus created 
can be viewed as a document-term matrix which can be used for training 
machine learning models.14 The commonly used feature selection tech­
niques are Re-sampling and Attribute Selection Techniques on manually 
collected data.24 Directly from the data set, rule learners extract rules that 
explain a pattern or correlations between input features and output class 
labels.30 AI-based models are used to develop term document matrix for 
diagnosis data.24 Lastly some statistically significant predictor factors are 
used commonly for feature extraction.30 
10.6 MEASURES OF PERFORMANCE EVALUATION 
The most often utilized performance measurements are root mean square 
error (RMSE) and mean absolute percentage error (MAPE).24,25 RMSE 
with cost (RMSEC) and RMSE variants such as Normalized RMSE 
(NRMSE) and RMSE with cost (RMSEC) were also employed. Mean 
Absolute Relative Error (MARE),17 Equal Coefficient (EC), R square, 
Mean Square Error (MSE), Mean Relative Error (MRE), Accuracy,29,30 and 
Variance Absolute Percentage Error (VAPE) are used in substantial quanti­
ties, but not nearly as much as the ones described above. Precision, recall, 
F1, False Positive rate, sensitivity24,25,29,30 and all these are the performance 
measures that are unique to the field of cyberattack forecasting. Because 
all of the performance indicators add up to a considerable portion of the 
total, it is difficult to compare approaches between different works. 
10.7 AI-POWERED TOOLS 
DeepHack, DeepLocker, GyoiThon, EagleEye, Malware-GAN, uriDeep, 
Deep Exploit, and DeepGenerator are few popular AI-powered tools for 
offensive cyber operations which are mainly used for the data analysis.31 
10.8 FUTURE WORKS 
Researchers are working effectively in this domain. It is very much essen­
tial to understand the future scopes in the prediction of cyberattack such 
as: 

 
 
204 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
• More studies are essential to find effective predictive models which 
produce positive outcomes. Several researches have contrasted 
Artificial Neural Networks to various machine learning approaches. 
As a result, more studies compare and monitor the effectiveness of 
Artificial Neural Network approaches with other state-of-the-art 
approaches that are needed. 13,20,26. 
• A  regular study is necessary to understand sophisticated defense 
systems using machine learning systems to protect from adversarial 
attacks. 
•  The existing models consider small set of records and features. 
They do not consider the overall history of attacks with respect to 
hierarchy of attacks.17 
•  Present models do not predict multiple attack correlation and their 
hierarchy of occurrences.24 
•  Researchers of this domain need to adopt big data technology to 
study cyberattack records of large size.30 
• It is very much essential to investigate Dark Web sources like IRC 
chat rooms, online market places, etc. 
• The goal of classification approaches is to discriminate between 
accurate and erroneous data, not to extract correct data. As a result, 
it is an important thing in the future to bring attention to which 
datasets should be included in inaccurate data. 
• Understand the gap between the amount of research done in this 
field and the amount of specific procedure of suggested technique. 
• Unsupervised deep leaning technique with k-means clustering can 
be used for better results. 
10.9 CONCLUSION 
A complete assessment of the existing studies on cyberattack prediction 
for preventive treatment of attacks is examined in this article, with the 
goal of recording and aggregating the findings. The requirements for a 
systematic study were first determined. The research needs were stated 
in such a way that inferences from our findings could be made. There are 
several prediction and classification strategies for cyberattack prediction 
that have been identified. We searched the internet for relevant research 
on the topic, extracted important data, and published a summary of our 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
205 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
findings to give an overview of the field, as well as to make one up to date 
on the demands for cyberattack forecasting and to propose recommenda­
tions for future work. The information derived from this research will aid 
our future efforts to establish a cyberattack prevention strategy. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
cyber security 
• 
cyberattacks 
• 
prediction 
• 
classifcation 
• 
metrics 
• 
machine learning 
REFERENCES 
1. Handa, A.; Sharma, A.; Shukla, S. Machine Learning in Cybersecurity: A Review. 
Wiley Interdiscip. Rev. Data Min. Knowl. Discov. 2019, 9, e1306. 10.1002/widm.1306. 
2. Deliu, I.; Leichter, C.; Franke, K. In Collecting Cyber Threat Intelligence from 
Hacker Forums via a Two-Stage, Hybrid Process using Support Vector Machines 
and Latent Dirichlet Allocation, In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Big Data 
(Big Data), 2018; pp 5008–5013. 
3. Roopak, M.; Yun Tian, G.; Chambers, J. In Deep Learning Models for Cyber Security 
in IoT Networks, 2019 IEEE 9th Annual Computing and Communication Workshop 
and Conference (CCWC), 2019; pp 0452–0457. 
4. Abdullah, M. S.; Zainal, A.; Maarof, M. A.; NizamKassim, M. In Cyber-Attack 
Features for Detecting Cyber Threat Incidents from Online News, 2018 Cyber 
Resilience Conference (CRC), 2018; pp 1–4. 
5. Sathya, K.; Premalatha, J.; Suwathika, S. In Reinforcing Cyber World Security with 
Deep Learning Approaches, 2020 International Conference on Communication and 
Signal Processing (ICCSP), 2020; pp 0766–0769. 
6. Azwar, H.; Murtaz, M.; Siddique, M.; Rehman, S. In Intrusion Detection in Secure 
Network for Cybersecurity Systems using Machine Learning and Data Mining, 
2018 IEEE 5th International Conference on Engineering Technologies and Applied 
Sciences (ICETAS), 2018; pp 1–9. 
7. Kadoguchi, M.; Hayashi, S.; Hashimoto, M.; Otsuka, A. In Exploring the Dark 
Web for Cyber Threat Intelligence using Machine Leaning, 2019 IEEE International 
Conference on Intelligence and Security Informatics (ISI), 2019; pp 200–202. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
206 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
8. Ibrahim, G.; et al. Cybersecurity and Cyber Forensics: Machine Learning Approach. 
Mach. Learn. Res. 2020, 5 (4), 46–50. 
9. D'hooge, L.; et al. In In-depth comparative evaluation of supervised machine learning 
approaches for detection of cybersecurity threats, 4th International Conference on 
Internet of Things, Big Data and Security (IoTBDS), 2019. 
10. Sebastian, A.; Baier, Harald. In A Plea for Utilising Synthetic Data when Performing 
Machine Learning Based Cyber-security Experiments, Proceedings of the 2014 
Workshop on Artificial Intelligent and Security Workshop, 2014. 
11. Md Zahangir, A.; Taha, T. M. In Network Intrusion Detection for Cyber Security 
using Unsupervised Deep Learning Approaches, 2017 IEEE National Aerospace and 
Electronics Conference (NAECON); IEEE, 2017. 
12. Giovanni, A.; et al. In On the Effectiveness of Machine and Deep Learning for Cyber 
Security, 2018 10th International Conference on Cyber Conflict (CyCon); IEEE, 
2018. 
13. Aslan; Çağrı, B.; Sağlam, R. B.; Li, S. In Automatic Detection of Cyber Security 
Related Accounts on Online Social Networks: Twitter as an Example, Proceedings of 
the 9th International Conference on Social Media and Society, 2018. 
14. Boddy, A.; et al. In A Study into Data Analysis and Visualisation to Increase the 
Cyber-resilience of Healthcare Infrastructures, Proceedings of the 1st International 
Conference on Internet of Things and Machine Learning, 2017. 
15. Buczak, A. L.; Guven, E. In A Survey of Data Mining and Machine Learning Methods 
for Cyber Security Intrusion Detection, IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, 
2016; vol 18 (2), 1153–1176. 
16. Das, R.; Morris, T. H. In Machine Learning and Cyber Security, 2017 International 
Conference on Computer, Electrical & Communication Engineering (ICCECE); 
IEEE, 2017. 
17. Shilp, D.; Kumar, Y. In Study of Machine and Deep Learning Classifications in 
Cyber Physical System, 2020 Third International Conference on Smart Systems and 
Inventive Technology (ICSSIT); IEEE, 2020. 
18. Kamran, S.; et al. Performance Comparison and Current Challenges of using Machine 
Learning Techniques in Cybersecurity. Energies 2020, 13 (10), 2509. 
19. Farooq, H. M.; Otaibi, N. M. In Optimal Machine Learning Algorithms for Cyber 
Threat Detection, 2018 UKSim-AMSS 20th International Conference on Computer 
Modelling and Simulation (UKSim); IEEE, 2018. 
20. Feng, C.; Wu, S.; Liu, N. In A User-Centric Machine Learning Framework for Cyber 
Security Operations Center, 2017 IEEE International Conference on Intelligence and 
Security Informatics (ISI); IEEE, 2017. 
21. Teixeira, M. A.; et al. SCADA System Testbed for Cybersecurity Research using 
Machine Learning Approach. Future Int. 2018, 10 (8), 76. 
22. Torres, J. M.; Comesaña, C. I.; Garcia-Nieto, P. J. Machine Learning Techniques 
Applied to Cybersecurity. Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern. 2019, 10 (10), 2823–2836. 
23. Sarker, I. H.; et al. Cybersecurity Data Science: An Overview from Machine Learning 
Perspective. J. Big Data 2020, 7 (1), 1–29. 
24. Sayan, C. M. In An Intelligent Security Assistant for Cyber Security Operations, 
2017 IEEE 2nd International Workshops on Foundations and Applications of Self* 
Systems (FAS* W); IEEE, 2017. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
207 
Cyber Security Using Machine Learning Approaches 
25. Fraley, J. B.; Cannady, J. In The Promise of Machine Learning in Cybersecurity, 
SoutheastCon 2017; IEEE, 2017. 
26. Shalev, N.; Partush, N. In Binary Similarity Detection using Machine Learning, 
Proceedings of the 13th Workshop on Programming Languages and Analysis for 
Security, 2018. 
27. Sopan, A.; et al. In Building a Machine Learning Model for the SOC, by the Input 
from the SOC, and Analyzing it for the SOC; 2018 IEEE Symposium on Visualization 
for Cyber Security (VizSec); IEEE, 2018. 
28. Yang, X.; et al. Machine Learning and Deep Learning Methods for Cybersecurity. 
IEEE Access 2018, 6, 35365–35381. 
29. Yavanoglu, O.; Aydos, M. In A Review on Cyber Security Datasets for Machine 
Learning Algorithms, 2017 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data); 
IEEE, 2017. 
30. Zheng, H.; et al. In Learning and Applying Ontology for Machine Learning in Cyber 
Attack Detection, 2018 17th IEEE International Conference on Trust, Security and 
Privacy in Computing and Communications/12th IEEE International Conference on 
Big Data Science and Engineering (TrustCom/BigDataSE); IEEE, 2018. 
31. Yamin, M. M.; Ullah, M.; Ullah, H.; Katt, B. Weaponized AI for Cyber Attacks. J. 
Inform. Secur.  Appl. 2021, 57, 102722. 


PART IV 
Cybersecurity for Cyber-Physical Systems 


The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 11 
EFFICIENT VEHICLE-TRACKING 
SYSTEM IN DENSE TRAFFIC TO 
ENHANCE SECURITY 
BHARATHI S.,1  AMISHA R. NAIK,1 and PIYUSH KUMAR PAREEK2 
1Department of MCA, Dr Ambedkar Institute of Technology, 
Bengaluru, India 
2Department of CSE, Nitte Meenakshi Institute of Technology, 
Bengaluru, India 
ABSTRACT 
It is very difficult to identify the vehicle number plate by a surveillance 
camera when the vehicles are in dense traffic. Because of fast moving 
of vehicles the image captured by the camera is not visible properly. To 
reduce this blur Wiener and OCR technique are used. The proposed system 
gives the robust method for deblurring the blurred number plate images. 
The objective of the proposed system is that the latent image captured 
lowers the stress for human eyes in identifying the faded number plate. 
It is very much required to identify vehicles during accidents or rule-
violating vehicles. Because of fast-moving vehicles or during dense traffic 
snaps taken by a surveillance camera at coverage time are blur. This gives 
the distorted, unnoticeable, and worsening of photos leading to loss of 
information, image evidence. In such a situation the proposed algorithm 
deblurs the image to get useful information from the photos taken for the 
identification of vehicle’s number plate. MATLAB is used to develop the 

 
 
 
 
212 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
framework and the output of the work is verified using real-time data. This 
kind of technique is extensively applied in heavy traffic and high-speed 
vehicle-moving zones like tolling, no parking zones, etc. The primary 
objective of this algorithm is designed to improve security system. 
11.1 INTRODUCTION 
There are various frameworks that are available for automatic number 
plate recognition in traffic area. This system depends on various proce­
dures for detecting number plate during fast moving of vehicles, uneven 
erratic number plate, dialect of vehicle number, and variation in lighting 
circumstances will help to estimate the quality of image. The number 
plate detection is required to identify the overspeeding vehicle or vehicle 
violating the traffic rules or during severe accidents. In many situations, 
the identification of a fast-moving vehicle is detected by using surveillance 
cameras frequently because of fast-moving vehicles, which is distorted by 
human eyes. The images captured are blur. There is an extreme loss of 
edge in low determination. 
Due to the fast movement, the number plate image is blurry; nonethe­
less, the hidden portion is clearly visible thanks to a very often straight 
uniform convolution and parametrically exhibited length and edge. 
Image restoration is a process of set of operations used to achieve deaf­
ening an input image to evaluate a noise free and clear image. Clamor 
encountered in photos are generally salt and pepper noise, Gaussian noise, 
miss focused photo taken by camera etc. The noises and blur in the image 
occur due to long time exposure to light which obscures the image. This 
is the result of comparative movement among camera objects. Automatic 
number plate recognition framework abnormally detects the vehicle 
proprietor. It is very useful in detecting problematic vehicles during road 
accidents or identifying the vehicles which are violating rules, because of 
the high-speed vehicles, image is blurred due to long exposure time taken 
by the surveillance camera. 
The output is unidentifiable, unnoticeable and debilitation of image 
gives loss of data. In such circumstances it is better to use image deblurring 
to get the clue from the image to record car’s number plate. The deblur­
ring of such obscured images is done by blind restoration and non-blind 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
213 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
restoration. In non-blur restoration the kernel information is well known 
and in blind image restoration the kernel information is unknown. 
The obscured image is mathematically shown as B(a,b) = (K*I)(a,b) + 
G(a,b) (11.1) 
where B represents the blurred image, I is the sharp image, and K is 
the blur kernel; G is the additive noise (frequently considered as white 
Gaussian sound) and * represents convolution operator. In blind restora­
tion, kernel K and sharp image I are unidentified. 
The blind image restoration problem can be divided into different 
ways: Uniform BID and nonuniform BID. Nonuniform image restora­
tion is achieved by interchanging the systems which causes the obscu­
rity of image, i.e., first finding the PSF so performing deconvolution 
whereas in uniform BID finding PSF and image restoration both are done 
simultaneously. 
11.2 METHODOLOGY 
The following steps are required to get the required information 
1. Acquiring the vehicle image 
2. Number plate detection through preprocessing 
3. Segmentation of characters 
4. Recognition of characters 
5. Converting image to text 
This framework is implemented and simulated using Matlab R2014a. 
The LPR technique is used for image acquisition. In this phase the 
images are acquired by a purchase system. In this proposed frame, the 
input image is recorded by a high-resolution camera. The input image size 
is 1200 × 1600 pixels. 
The objective of this proposed system is to enrich the clarity in the 
image data and to reduce distortions of the image or enrich the image 
features which is important for future processing. The image preprocessing 
techniques are used to keep size of the neighborhood pixel that is used for 
the further calculation of the recent pixel illuminations that are as follows, 
• transformations of brightness of the pixel 
• geometric transformations 
• preprocessing techniques use neighborhood of the processed pixel 

 
 
 
 
 
 
214 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
• image restoration requires the information about the complete 
image 
11.2.1 CHARACTER SEGMENTATION 
Number Plate Segmentation is nothing but character isolation recognizing 
the region of interest and trying to split it into individual characters. In this 
work segmentation is carried out through OCR. 
11.2.2 CHARACTER RECOGNITION 
The mechanisms that allow humans to identify the objects are still under 
development. The basic principles which are already known by scientists 
are integrity, purposefulness, and flexibility. The OCR develops the, 
enabling it to replicate acknowledgments that are typical or human-
like.  Optical character recognition provides computer vision functions 
used in an application to perform OCR. OCR is that technique through 
which the machine vision software reads text and/or characters in the 
image. 
FIGURE 11.1 Methodology. 

 
 
 
 
 
215 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
The process of detecting the characters in the image is commonly 
known as character segmentation. Before training the characters, the 
OCR technique gives the standards that segment the characters. Once the 
segmentation of the characters is over, it stores the knowledge that allows 
OCR to acknowledge the similar information in other images. The OCR 
technique is trained by giving the value for segmented characters, gener­
ating a singular representation of every segmented character. 
11.3 RELATED WORK 
The importance of image restoration is explained. It is the group of oper­
ations that act on the noisy image to measure the clarity of the image. 
Noises identified in the image captured are usually salt-and-pepper noise, 
Gaussian noise, miss focused image captured by camera etc. The image 
is obscured because of the continuous exposure time. This is the result of 
relative motion between camera, objects, and scene.1 Number plate recog­
nition helps in identifying the owner of the vehicle. This is very much 
useful in recognizing vehicles which are problematic during road acci­
dents or any vehicle violating traffic rules. The image captured during 
fast-moving vehicle becomes blur. The output image will be undetectable, 
unrecognizable, and deterioration of image which in turn causes the loss of 
information. During such situation image deblurring is the best solution to 
get back the information from the captured image to identify the vehicle’s 
number plate. 
Unique registered number plate may be one of indications to iden­
tify fast-moving vehicles or hit-and-run case vehicles.2 The fast-moving 
vehicle’s image captured by surveillance camera is usually blur because 
of fast movement, which is not even recognizable by human eyes. The 
images are low intensity and agonies, loss of edge evidence. This requires 
sightless deblurring techniques. The uniform convolution is required to 
analyze the blur kernel and modeled parametrically using length and 
angles. Sparse representation is used to identify blur kernel. During trans­
mission process, image is agonized by several factors, which ends up in 
some differences with the initial image. The image pre-processing is very 
important to remove the unwanted information from the captured image 
and also to improve the image quality by improving the boundary effect 
and increasing the brightness boundary.3 After removing noisy part, the 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
216 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
image of vehicle’s number plate becomes a clear image. Micro-position 
and height point detection method is used to indulge the position of the 
kernel. The angle of the kernel is defined by the coefficient of sparse 
representation of the enhanced image. In the Fourier domain, the kernel’s 
motion's dimension is assessed using random variation. 
The methods for deblurring the image are tested blind imaged blurring 
algorithms shown in this work. This paper is concluded with identifying 
the trouble maker vehicle by deblurring the obscured image based on the 
unique ID of the vehicle.4 
The number plate recognition system will be used for maintaining secu­
rity issues in parking areas, to control the vehicles in the border trying to 
cross the unauthorized areas and for identifying the stolen vehicles.5 These 
applications will be used in intelligent system to identify the vehicles by 
using automatic number plate detection in a real-time scenario. 
11.4 PROBLEM DEFINITION 
Number plate detection is a very significant issue. It is very difficult to 
identify the owner who is violating the traffic rules. It is required to iden­
tify the number plate from the fast-moving vehicle or vehicle in the dense 
traffic. Automatic Number plate Recognition (ANPR) framework is the 
better solution for this problem. 
The main aim of the proposed system is to decrease crime encountered 
by vehicles, reduce theft in the shops, decrease the damages, to reinforce 
the accuracy of the system. 
11.4.1 ALGORITHM 
TABLE 11.1 Algorithm for Deblurring the Number Plate. 
#Image acquisition(blurred image) 
[fnpn]=uigetfile('*.jpg;','Select image to be blurred'); 
I = imcrop(imread([pnfn])); 
I=im2double(I); 
imshow(I); 
#Preprocessing the blurred image 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
217 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
PPB = fspecial('motion', 50,45); 
Blurred_img = imfilter(I, PSF, 'conv', 'circular'); 
figure, imshow(blurred) 
imwrite(blurred,strcat('blurre',fn)); 
figure(5),subplot(1,3,1), 
imshow(imagen); 
if size(imagen,3)==3 
imagen=rgb2gray(imagen); 
figure(5),subplot(1,3,2),imshow(imagen),title('Gray Scale Image') 
end 
threshold_img = graythresh(imagen1); 
imagen1 =~im2bw(imagen,threshold); 
figure(5),subplot(1,3,3),imshow(imagen),title('Black and White 
image')
 imagen = bwareaopen(imagen,30); 
#Convert image to text 
oc=ocr(imgn); 
oc.Text; 
#Deblurred image 
axes(handles.axes3) 
imshow(im2bw(cp,0.8)),title('PreProcessed Image') 
bw=im2bw(cp); 
st=strel('rectangle',[3 3]); 
bwe=imerode(bw,st); 
tx=ocr(bwe); 
np=tx.Text; 
ocr_crp(cp) 
11.5 RESULT AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The proposed work involves the following phases: 
• Extraction of the region of interest of number plate 
• Segmentation of numbers and recognition of numbers 
To extract the numbers from the number plate edge detection technique 
and vertical projection techniques are used. For identifying the numbers 
diminishing vertical and horizontal estimation, filtering techniques are 

 
 
 
 
 
 
218 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
mainly used. Chain code concept is used to recognize the character with 
different parameters. The performance of the algorithm is tested with real-
time images. 
11.5.1 DEBLURRING THE NUMBER PLATE OF MOVING 
VEHICLES 
There are different possible problems in deblurring the image. These 
include: 
1. Image resolution is very poor because the number plate is captured 
from very far distance or the vehicle is moving very fast, or a low-
quality camera is used. 
2. Due to poor lighting and low contrast, overexposure, reflection, or 
shadows. 
3. A number on the plate is obscuring due to dirty on the plate. 
This proposed framework is developed using MATLAB Software. 
The proposed framework includes the following steps: Image Acquisi­
tion techniques to acquire the picture by a procurement method. In this 
proposed work, a high-resolution camera is utilized to capture the input 
image. The captured image considered is 1200 × 1600 pixels. Number 
Plate Segmentation is mainly used for character isolation which extracts 
the region of interest and segments the image into individual characters. 
Number Plate Recognition framework acknowledges the isolated charac­
ters. After segmenting the number plate, this method extracts individual 
characters from the image. Optical Character Recognition technique is 
used for the recognition of characters from the blurred image. 
The initial step is to take out the number plate from the captured image. 
This is very important to increase the accuracy significantly. The region of 
interest is extracted using different techniques which include masking of 
district of number plate with high probability. 
11.5.2 DESIGN AND IMPLEMENTATION 
Image restoration is done by applying different filters to enhance the noisy 
and degraded images. The output may not be accurate and varies depending 
on the limitations of filters. The main objective of the restoration is to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
219 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
remove the degradation which is occurred during image acquisition. Image 
degradation contains noises which are nothing but errors in pixel values 
or image is blurred due the camera motion or disturbances during image 
acquisition. The image restoration technique enhances the image clarity. 
11.5.3 EDGE DETECTION METHODS 
Edge detection is very important for object detection in image analysis. 
Computer vision algorithms are used to implement edge detection. During 
edge detection process different kinds of breaches occurred in the gray 
image are nothing but lines, edges, and points line. It is difficult to iden­
tify spatial masks with these discontinuities. Edge detection is one of the 
techniques for detecting important discontinuities in intensity level. The 
changes in the intensity value of the image are called edges. Edges are 
generated on the borderline of the two areas. The shape of an object is 
extracted from the edges of a picture. Edge-identifying techniques are 
nothing but changes in the original images into boundary images which 
results in the changes of gray level in the image. The sting identification 
treats the changes in the gray value of the image and identifies the physical 
and geometrical properties of objects. 
11.5.4 CHARACTERISTICS OF WIENER FILTERS ARE AS 
FOLLOWS 
Wiener filter is used in this proposed work to eliminate the noise in the 
image. This is a statistical method. 
1. Hypothesis: Signal and sound are motionless linear stochastic 
progressions with spectral features or known autocorrelation and 
cross-correlation 
2. Requirement: The filter must be physically realizable/causal 
(requirements are frequently dropped, leading to a non-causal 
solution). 
3. Performance criterion: Minimum mean-square error (MMSE). 
Wiener filtering technique is based on the deconvolution techniques. 
When the image quality is degraded by additive noise and blurring, this 
technique gives the Minimum Square Error. This filtering technique 

 
 
 
 
220 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
requires signal and noise processes as second-order stationary for calcula­
tion. This technique works on the principle of frequency domain. When 
frequencies have a poor signal-to-noise ratio, this technique tries to atten­
uate the effect of deconvoluted noise. This technique considers the images 
and noise as random process. 
The technique identifies the noise as random processes, and therefore the 
purpose is to look out an estimate f̂ of the clear image f such that the mean 
square fault among them is reduced and error measure is specified by 
e2 ={(f−f’)2} 
where E{.} is the arithmetic mean of the argument. The minimum of the 
error function is given within the frequency domain, by the expression 
F^(u,v) = [1H(u,v) |H(u,v)|2|H(u,v)|2 + Sn(u,v)Sf(u,v)⁄]G(u,v) 
where 
H(u, v) = degradation function 
H*(u,v) = complex conjugate of H(u, v) 
(u,v)|2 = H*(u,v) H(u, v) 
(u,v) = power spectrum of the noise 
(u,v) = power spectrum of the under graded image. 
If the noise (u,)/(u,v) is zero then the noise power spectrum vanishes 
and therefore this method decreases to the inverse filter. If the noise (u,)/ 
(u,v) is large, this filter becomes 0, in order that frequency is ignored. The 
most advantage is that it takes short computational time to get solution. 
The main advantage of wiener filter is that it regulates the output error. 
Sometimes, the resulting outputs are too blurred and spatially invariant. 
The LPR image acquisition technique is used for acquiring images. 
A high-resolution camera is used to acquire the input image 1200 × 1600 
pixels, input images are accumulated. 
Image representation is a combination of segmented raw pixels. This 
phase has the methods to show the region supported boundary or group of 
pixels forming the region. This phase is a kind of classification. 
11.5.5 NUMBER PLATE SEGMENTATION 
Image segmentation is a very important phase in number plate recogni­
tion. The digital images are partitioning into number of regions or group 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
221 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
of pixels. The result of image segmentation is contours extracted from 
number plate image. The image segmentation is done based on similar 
characters like color, intensity, and texture. 
The different image segmentation approaches are, 
• Identifying the boundaries between groups which support disconti-
nuities in intensity levels, 
• The distribution of pixel properties by using thresholds, like inten-
sity values. 
• Directly identifying the region of interest. 
Image segmentation depends on the quality of the image. In region-
based segmentation techniques, the image is divided into subregions based 
on the equivalent gray level. Regions are formed based on the common 
patterns in the intensity values during clustering process. 
The easiest segmentation technique is threshold technique. In this 
technique regions are formed based on the range values. Thresholding is 
the technique of transforming the input image into a binary image. This 
technique identifies the regions even if there are any immediate changes 
in the intensity value. This system is called Edge or Boundary-based tech­
niques; this is one of the most important and fundamental methods in 
image analysis. 
There are techniques used to locate the discontinuities in gray images. 
The most important approach in edge detection is to identify consequen­
tial discontinuities in the gray image. Image segmentation is mainly used to 
perceive discontinuities in the border. Number plate segmentation is nothing 
but character segregation, which gets the region of interest and tries to sepa­
rate each letter. Image segmentation is done through the OCR. Number Plate 
Extraction may be an important step in the proposed framework, giving the 
optimized result of the algorithm remarkably. This step takes out the region 
of interest; that is number plate from the image is captured. 
11.5.5.1 NUMBER PLATE RECOGNITION 
The LPR technique is applied to acknowledge the separation of characters. 
After segmenting the extracted numbers into separate character images, 
the individual characters in an image are recognized. In this proposed 
work optical character recognition is used for character identification. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
222 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
11.5.5.2 APPLICATIONS 
• To identify vehicle which is very fast over longer distances. 
• While crossing the border. 
• In petrol stations when a driver goes away without paying for the 
fuel. 
• System for managing the traffic. 
• Traveler’s behavior analysis for transport planning purposes. 
• To identify guest vehicles in visitor management systems 
• Auxiliary police use to identify the vehicle which violets the traffic 
rules. 
• Enforcing give way laws for emergency vehicles. 
11.5.6 RESULT AND PERFORMANCE ANALYSIS 
The input image contains several noises. Noises are removed using tech­
niques such as Weiner filter and OCR to obtain the deblurred image. The 
output image is in the human readable form. Steps involved in getting the 
deblurred output image from the blurred input image are as follows: 
Step 1: GUI is created which contains the operating buttons within it. 
FIGURE 11.2 
Creation of GUI. 

 
 
 
223 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
Step 2: Image is taken on the user interface and the characters are read 
FIGURE 11.3 Reading characters. 
Step 3: After reading the image on user interface each character is 
segmented 
FIGURE 11.4 Character segmentation. 

 
 
 
224 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Step 4: In the extraction step each individual character is obtained 
and displayed on the screen 
FIGURE 11.5 Output of deblurred image. 
FIGURE 11.6 (Continued) 

 
 
 
225 
Effcient Vehicle-Tracking System in Dense Traffc 
FIGURE 11.6 Output of deblurred image. 
11.6 CONCLUSION 
Vehicles in the traffic are identified by capturing the vehicle number 
plate and getting evidence from the vehicle number plate information. 
The circumstances become complicated when there are a large number 
of vehicles being identified in various places. In this proposed work, a 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
226 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
parameter evaluation technique is used for recognizing for number plate 
from high-speed vehicles in exceptional uncertainties; the denoise image 
will be reduced to a parameter estimation issue. The proposed system tried 
to deblur the license plate image with a parametric technique. The proof 
gets lost due to blurring of the image which is restored by using Wiener 
filter and OCR techniques. This framework is able to restore the obscured 
number plate image into a legible form. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
vehicle tracking 
• 
security 
• 
surveillance 
• 
character recognition 
• 
machine learning 
REFERENCES 
1. Namrata S., Bolaj; Padalkar, G. R. International Journal of Engineering Science 
and Research Technology. A Survey on License Plate Deblurring of Fast Moving 
Vehicles. Electronics and Telecommunication, Cummins College of Engineering for 
Women, Pune, India. 
2. Rishwana Yasmin, M.; Sudharsana Devi, K.; Sushmitha Sen, R.; Victoria Dejjee 
Singh, D.; Sahu, R. K. Deblurring Process for Number Plate Images Using Kernel 
Estimation. J. Electron. Commun. Eng. 15–19 
3. Lu, Q.; Zhou, W.; Fang, L.; Li, H. Robust Blur Kernel Estimation for Licence Plate 
Image from Fast Moving Vehicles. IEEE. Trans. Image Process. 2016, 25 (5), 
2311–2323. 
4. Abinaya, G.; Banumati, R.; Seshasri, V. In Rectify the Blurred Licence Plate Image 
from Fast Moving Vehicles using Morphological Process. 2017 IEEE International 
Conference on Electrical, Instrumentation and Communication Engineering 
(ICEICE), Karur, India, 2017, pp. 1–6 
5. Chittode, J. S.; Kate, R. Number Plate Recognition Using Segmentation, Int. J. Eng. 
Res. Tech. 2013, 1. 
6. Chunyu, C.; Fucheg, W.; Baozhi, C.; Chen, Z. In Application of Image Processing to 
the Vehicle Number Plate Recognition, International Conference on Computer Science 
and Electronics Engineering, Published by Allantis Press, 2013, pp. 2867–2869. 
7. Gupta, P.; Purohit, G. N.; Rathore, M. Number Plate Extraction Using Template 
Matching. Int. J. Comput. Appl. 2014, 88 (3). 

The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
CHAPTER 12 
OPTIMIZED ANALYSIS OF NETWORK 
FORENSIC ATTACKS USING AN 
ENHANCED GROWING NEURAL GAS 
(GNG) CLUSTERING TECHNIQUE 
A. DHANU SASWANTH,1 V. KAVITHA,2   
B. SUNDARAVADIVAZHAGAN,3 and R. KARTHIKEYAN4 
1Department of Computer Science with Cognitive Systems  
Sri Ramakrishna College of Arts and Science Coimbatore, India 
2PG & Research Department of Computer Applications,  
Hindusthan College of Arts and Science, Coimbatore, India 
3Faculty of IT, Department of Information Technology,  
University of Technology Applied Science-AI Mussanah, Oman 
4Vardhaman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
ABSTRACT 
With the enlightenment of the most modern technology intrusion in the 
domain of cybercrimes as well as networking are escalating at a gradual 
speed. It leads to boosting the online attacks and crimes in which malicious 
packets are being sent to further hosts. The concept of Network Traffic 
Analysis comes under one of the cyber forensics of Network Forensics that 
handle with recording, capturing, monitoring, and analyzing of network 
traffic. Network forensics is an extension integrated with the design of 

 
 
 
 
228 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
network which classically highlights detection as well as avoidance of 
society attacks. It will assist the firms to scrutinize the external commu­
nity. The techniques of Network Forensic can also be utilized to stay away 
from future attacks. Contemporary techniques of network forensic deal 
with numerous disputes that must be determined to progress the forensic 
methodologies. A number of key disputes contain elevated storage speed, 
data integrity, necessity of plentiful storage space, information privacy, 
location of information extraction, and access to IP address. Generally, the 
tools and technologies of network forensic could not be enhanced without 
addressing the obstacles of the forensic network. 
Foremost challenges in network forensics are the ever-growing volume 
of data that needs to be investigated. This problem has become even more 
prominent with the emergence of big data and calls for a rethink on the 
way network forensics investigations have been handled over the earlier 
period. The machine learning techniques of Growing Neural Gas (GNG) 
clustering technique have been accepted according to the objective data­
sets and achievement techniques while achieving forensic investigations. 
Adding convenience to the network's infrastructure and gathering proof 
from the intruder using network forensic techniques will help businesses 
better convey knowledge about network attacks and enable them to inves­
tigate both internal and external sources of network security attacks. 
12.1 INTRODUCTION 
Few years past, most of the crimes had proof that related to the real world. 
At the present time, the evidence of digital has become of dominant impor­
tance. Consequently, forensic sciences expanded their scope to embrace 
digital evidence. A most important challenge in this field is surviving with 
gigantic amounts of information during examinations now that the inclina­
tion is that the whole thing has become digital procedure. Cyber Forensics 
is comparatively novel as a discipline of scientific and handles with the 
acquirement, verification, and investigation of digital evidence.18 One of 
the prevalent challenges in this field has thus far been real data sources 
that are obtainable for experimentation. 
Cyber forensics is also referred as digital forensics. “Digital foren­
sics” is the progression of occupying systematic principles along with 
the procedures to evaluate automatically stored statistics and establish 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
229 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
the succession of proceedings which led to a specific occurrence.19 
Through the current digital era, it is very significant for investigators to 
become conscious of the current enlargements in this energetic domain 
and recognize scope for the expectations. The ancient decade has eyewit­
ness important scientific improvements to assist during digital explora­
tion. A lot of tactics, tools, as well as techniques have established their 
way into the domain considered on the standards of forensic. “Digital 
forensics” has also proved numerous unique approaches that have been 
included and discovered to attain and investigate digital witness as of 
miscellaneous sources.20 
Computer forensics is the domain of examination as well as inves­
tigation procedures to assemble and conserve substantiation from a 
meticulous estimating mechanism in a direction that is appropriate for 
arrangement in a court of rule. The objective of “Computer forensics” 
is to achieve a planned exploration and sustain a predictable series of 
witness to discover accurately what occurred on an estimating machine 
and who was dependable for it. The expression of “Digital foren­
sics” as well as “Cyber forensics” is frequently utilized as meanings for 
“Computer forensics.”21 
“Digital forensics” imitate among the gathering of statistics in a 
direction that preserves its truthfulness. Researchers then scrutinize the 
facts or scheme to establish if it was transformed, how it was altered 
and who prepared the modifications. The purpose of “Computer foren­
sics” is not continuously attached to an offense. The forensic procedure 
is furthermore performed as element of information recovery proce­
dures to collect facts from a damaged server, abortive force, redesigned 
“operating system (OS)” or further position like a scheme has unpredict­
ably blocked processing.22 
Depending on universal along with illegal justice scheme, “Cyber 
forensics” assist makes sure the truthfulness of digital witness offered in 
civil cases. Digital witness and the forensic process used to gather, safe­
guard, and analyze it have become more crucial in resolving errors and 
other legal challenges, much like computers and other information gath­
ering devices are used more frequently in every aspect of life. Digital 
witness is not now helpful in resolving digital-world crimes, similar to 
information theft, network breaches, as well as illegal online communica­
tions. It is also utilized to explain real-case offense like “burglary, assault, 
hit-and-run accidents as well as murder.” 

 
 
 
   
230 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 12.1 Conventional computer forensics process. 
The conventional “cyber forensics” process is articulated in the proce­
dures of Acquisition, Authentication, as well as analysis as shown in 
Figure 12.1. Through this traditional procedure of a computer hard device 
drive is linked to a hardware blocker along with cloned in order to create 
a bit stream valid duplicate of the hard driver. Further a hash worth value 
is determined for the disk as well as the copy of forensic and also the 
hash worth values are evaluated. If the hash worth values match, then the 
structure is estimated with its genuine and is acknowledged because it has 
sustained its reliability. Subsequent of this procedure the investigation of 
the media originates to locate digital witness relatable to the case at hand. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
231 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
The word “Cyber” termed as “Cybernetics” which denotes the science 
of perceptive, the control and association of machines as well as animals. 
Presently, cyberspace is the expression that is almost entirely utilized to 
portray information security substances. For the reason that, it is very tough 
to visualize how digital signals roaming across a wire can symbolize an 
attack to visualize the digital occurrence as a substantial one, cyber threats 
are a great challenge. Cyberattacks can arise due to crash of military equip­
ment, electrical collapses, and breaches of national security secrets. Cyber 
security threats occur in three expansive categories of purpose.19 Cyber 
threats are never static, it is always dynamic. A cyber security threat is 
a cruel and purposeful attack by a human being or association to 
achieve illegal right of entry to another human being or else concern’s 
network to damage, suspend, or steal Information Technology assets, 
academic property, computer networks, or any other type of insightful 
statistics. 
12.1.1 VARIETIES OF “CYBER SECURITY THREATS” 
At the same time as the classifications of “Cyber Threats” persist to culti­
vate, there are few of the major frequent as well as widespread cyber 
threats that present business scenario requires to identify.16 Some of the 
cyberattacks are as follows: 
 “Malware” 
“Malware attacks” are the very frequent and universal kind of cyberattack, 
which is referred as “malicious software, together with spyware, ransom-
ware and viruses along with worms,” which acquires established into the 
scheme when the user connects a hazardous connect or mail. Formerly 
within the system, malware can block rights to dangerous modules of the 
network, smash up the scheme, and assemble private statistics, surrounded 
by others. 
 “Phishing” 
Cyber criminals send nasty emails that seem to come from genuine along 
with justifiable properties. The consumer is then scammed into connecting 
the cruel connection in the electronic mail, leading to malware mechanism 
or discovery of susceptible data such as credit card particulars information 
along with login identification. 

 
 
232 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
 “Spear Phishing” 
“Spear phishing” is a further complicated structure of a phishing attack 
in which cyber criminals’ intention is simply privileged consumers like 
system administrators as well as “C-suite” executives. 
 “Man in the Middle Attack” 
“Man in the Middle (MitM) attack” happens when cyber illegal’s posi­
tion themselves among multiple gathering communications. Formerly, 
the attackers understand the statement, they might strain an appropriate 
susceptible information along with revisit unusual reply to the clients. 
 “Denial of Service Attack” 
“Denial of Service attacks” aspires to flooding procedures, networks, or 
servers with enormous congestion, in that way creating the system not 
capable to accomplish lawful demands. Attacks can furthermore employ 
numerous damaged mechanisms to initiate an attack on the objective 
structure. This is recognized as a “Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS) 
attack.” 
FIGURE 12.2 Types of cyber security threats. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
233 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
 “SQL Injection” 
The “Structured Query Language (SQL) injection attack” happens as soon 
as cyber criminals challenge to access the database through uploading 
the kind of hateful scripts of SQL. Formerly prosperous, the malevolent 
performer can modify, outlook, or remove information stored in the SQL 
database table. 
 “Zero-day Exploit” 
The “Zero-day Exploit attack” happens while either “software vulner­
ability” or ‘‘hardware vulnerability” is proclaimed, and furthermore the 
cyber criminals develop the helplessness before a bit or explanation is 
enhanced. 
 “Advanced Persistent Threats (APT)” 
The “Advanced Persistent Threat” ensues while a hateful performer 
expands unconstitutional access to a scheme or network and remains 
unobserved for an unlimited schedule. 
 “Ransomware” 
“Ransomware” is one of the kinds of malware attack in which the 
aggressor encrypts or locks the attacker’s information as well as pressures 
to distribute or block access to statistics except a ransom is remunerated. 
 “DNS Attack” 
The “DNS attack” is another kind of cyberattack in which cyber crimi­
nals develop susceptibilities in the “Domain Name system (DNS).” The 
attackers influence the DNS vulnerabilities to deflect site guests to spiteful 
page like “DNS Hijacking” in addition to exhilarating statistics from 
compromised procedures. 
12.1.1.1 NETWORK FORENSICS 
With 3800 testimony data breaches in the year 2019 where 89% of them 
were the attackers from outside concerns should be raised on developing 
computes to keep away from cyberattacks and loss of meaningful infor­
mation. Setting up a firm’s network security procedure is not as straight­
forward as establishing an antivirus resolution in the individual computer; 
there is more to it than that. 

 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
234 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Network forensics is a scientific technique that centers on the detec­
tion and retrieval of data surrounding a cybercrime within a networked 
atmosphere. General forensic activities comprise the capture, recording, 
and analysis of occurrences that happened on a network in order to ascer­
tain the basis of cyberattacks. “Network forensics” is the progression of 
observing packs as well as analyzing network traffic movement for inter­
ruption or malware detection. It absorbs categorizing an issue, collecting 
and investigating data, deciding on the finest troubleshooting reply, and 
developing it. 
“Network forensics or tools of network forensics” are classically 
utilized into multiple schemes to achieve information gathering and inves­
tigation: The “catch it as you can” scheme, anywhere all the information 
passing through the network is gathered and observed, and the “stop, look, 
and listen” scheme, where all information container is observed and simply 
the apprehensive information is detained and evaluated further.17 While 
efficient, the primary scheme employs a considerable size of storage; 
the secondary scheme, on the other hand, does not need as great storage 
space, but it needs a quicker along with further authoritative processor. 
Most of the disputes embrace elevated storage speed, the necessity of 
sufficient storage gap, data reliability, data confidentiality, access to IP 
address, and position of information extraction. The features regarding 
these confronts are afforded with probable explanations to these disputes. 
12.1.1.2 GROWING NEURAL GAS CLUSTERING TECHNIQUE 
The “Growing Neural Gas” approach involves changing the amount of 
neurons at a specific location, which is not an unchallengeable input limi­
tation but is changed during the struggle. The correlations among neurons 
are also not everlasting.2 As a result of the competition, a set of distinct 
neural networks covering a specific portion of the input data could be 
created. 
Growing Neural Gas is a simple technique that, like other competing 
models, allows for topology learning and representation. It is thus a type 
of topology-representing network, capable of approximating something as 
complicated as the topology of a human face while drastically lowering 
information and creating something relatively recognizable to a human 
observer. For example, the animation to the left shows how complicated 
something as intricate as the human face can be. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
235 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
The “Growing neural gas (GNG)” is the approach of “unsupervised 
topology learning” that copies an information space using interrelated 
units that are located in the majority densely occupied locations. It 
produces a graph that may be shown on a 2D plane and reveals cluster 
prototypes in datasets. When qualified on high-dimensional information, 
however, GNG frequently produces densely connected graphs, resulting 
in excessively congested 2D illustrations that might fail to reveal rele­
vant outlines. Furthermore, its chronological learning limits its ability 
to execute quicker on local datasets and, more crucially, to train on 
dispersed datasets using the computational capabilities of the infrastruc­
tures in which they reside.7 
Data sets are becoming increasingly large and complicated. Clus­
tering is utilized to expose formations as well as to discover “natural” 
clustering in multivariate information, and is regarded the most significant 
unsupervised learning task. In data mining applications, data clustering 
methods are commonly employed. The goal is to sort N unlabeled items 
into groups based on their commonalities in a P-dimensional space. Tradi­
tional methods such as k-means, on the other hand, enforce a formation 
happening the information rather than discovering it. The primary scheme 
is to arrange prototypes into clusters with members that are meaningfully 
comparable. 
The Growing Neural Gas algorithm forms network topology exclu­
sive of being constrained by k Dimensional structures by using the GCS 
growth process linked with Competitive Hebbian Learning (CHL). The 
neighborhood relationship between neurons is generated by connecting 
them, which happens among the first as well as second winning neurons in 
every cycle. Novel neurons are established in the appropriate order, each 
with the gathered error index, in the hopes of reducing errors in subse­
quent iterations.5 This GNG guidance dynamics generates a structure in 
the production space that can be thought of as a chart, including neurons 
acting as vertices. CHL creates associations between surrounding units, 
which serve as the graph’s edges. If the information dimension exceeds 
three, a dimensionality reduction procedure is required. 
The “Self-Organizing Map” is a renowned unsupervised neural 
learning technique (SOM). It has shown to be an effective tool for visual­
izing high-dimensional data. While neurons aim to estimate the density 
of incoming information, it conducts a nonlinear projection from high-
dimensional information onto a usual (typically) 2D grid. The goal is to 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
236 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
create model vectors that can symbolize the input information set while 
achieving a permanent planning from the input space to a lattice at the 
same time. 
SOM neural networks have been constructed in a variety of ways. In 
many circumstances, the structure is defined a priori; therefore, approaches 
should either employ a fixed amount of collections or attempt to determine 
with the help of “posteriori algorithms.” The authors present information 
clustering algorithm based on “Growing Neural Gas” that is both efficient 
and effective (GNG). The parallel implementation of GNG resolves the 
computational difficulty. To efficiently train such a “Neural network using 
a High Performance Computing (HPC)” cluster using MPI, some tech­
nical issues must be handled. The paper also considers the usual serial 
approach to GNG training. The parallel version of GNG is benchmarked 
using the serial learning GNG technique. 
The diagram “Neural Gas Production Competitive Hebbian Learning” 
generates and updates a Parallel Approach in real time. New neurons 
are automatically added based on the pre-set circumstances, and asso­
ciations among neurons are matter to the constraints of time and can 
be erased. GNG can be utilized for vector quantization, biologically 
influenced image compression, and disease detection by locating code-
vectors in clusters. 
Algorithm for “Growing Neural Gas” Clustering algorithm 
STEP 1: Establish the network process with two neurons using weight 
vectors. 
STEP 2: Opt the arbitrary unutilized input data vector. 
STEP 3: Achieve the one learning iteration. 
STEP 4: Minimize the error value for all neurons 
STEP 5: Redo  step 2 until the entire input data vectors are planned to use. 
STEP 6: Iterate until a few boundary conditions like greatest number of 
iterations are discovered. 
12.2 RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 
The “UNSW-NB 15 dataset’s raw network packets” can be created 
using the IXIA Perfect Storm program in “UNSW Canberra’s Cyber 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
237 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
Range Lab” to create a hybrid of real recent regular tricks and synthetic 
modern attack behavior. 100 GB of raw traffic was arrested utilizing 
the tcpdump program (e.g., Pcap files). “Fuzzers, Analysis, Backdoors, 
DoS, Exploits, Generic, Reconnaissance, Shellcode, and Worms” are 
surrounded by the 9 categories of attacks in this dataset. To construct 
a total of 49 characteristics along with the class label, the Argus and 
Bro-IDS tools are utilized, and 12 methods are built. The network 
forensic dataset includes information like Duration, Prototype, State, 
SBytes, Rate, and Sttl. For the GNG clustering implementation, ten 
datasets are explored. 
The network forensic dataset has the following details such as Duration, 
Prototype, State, SBytes, Rate along with Sttl. Ten datasets are considered 
for GNG clustering implementation. 
TABLE 12.1 Data Set Details of Network Forensics. 
Duration 
Prototype 
State 
SBytes 
Rate 
Sttl 
0.000011 
udp 
INT 
496 
90,909 
254 
0.000008 
udp 
INT 
1762 
125,000 
254 
0.000005 
udp 
INT 
1068 
200,000 
254 
0.000006 
udp 
INT 
900 
166,667 
254 
0.00001 
udp 
INT 
2126 
100,000 
254 
0.000003 
udp 
INT 
784 
333,333 
254 
0.000006 
udp 
INT 
1960 
166,667 
254 
0.000028 
udp 
INT 
1384 
35,714 
254 
0 
Arp 
INT 
46 
0 
0 
Table 12.1 explains the details of the data entity like duration of the 
attack, prototype of the attack, from which state the attack has been made, 
Sbyte of the attack, rate of the attack along with sttl values. 
The above-mentioned figures are explained about the grouping results 
with the assistance of Growing Neural Gas clustering technique along 
with the attributes such as Sttl, Prototype, duration, and State. 

 
 
 
238 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 12.3 Cluster the data using the attribute sttl. 
FIGURE 12.4 Cluster the data using the attribute prototype. 

 
 
 
239 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
FIGURE 12.5 Cluster the data using the attribute duration. 
FIGURE 12.6 Cluster the data using the attribute state. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
240 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
12.3 CONCLUSION 
Cyber security is a concern for every human being, corporations, and 
governments these days. Keeping information secure in a humanity where 
the whole thing is on the internet, from adorable kitten videos and vaca­
tion journals to credit card details, is one of the major concerns of cyber 
security. Ransomware, phishing attacks, virus attacks, and other types of 
threats are all possible. With 2,299,682 instances, India is rated 11th in 
the world in terms of local cyberattacks. It results in an upsurge in online 
attacks and criminal behavior as infected packets are sent to more hosts. 
Network traffic analysis is a cyber forensics discipline that handles with 
the recording, monitoring, and analyzing of network traffic. 
“Network forensics” is a network design expansion that traditionally 
focuses on the identification and avoidance of community attacks. It will aid 
businesses in scrutinizing the outside world. The network forensic technique 
can potentially be used to prevent future assaults. The modern network 
forensic technique has numerous challenges that may be insurmountable in 
generating forensic procedures. High storage speed, data integrity, the need 
for a large amount of storage space, data privacy, the location of data extrac­
tion, and access to IP addresses are only a few of the major challenges. 
The constant increase in the amount of data that has to be reviewed is 
a major difficulty in network forensics. With the advent of big data, this 
barrier is expected to become even more apparent, necessitating a reorga­
nization of the way network forensics investigations have been conducted 
in the past. While pursuing forensic exploration, one of the key clustering 
strategies of (GNG) Growing Neural Gas has been accepted according 
to the target datasets and accomplishment approaches. Finally, after 
employing the proposed technique, network communication data is better 
connected without the use of networking assaults, allowing businesses to 
study the internal and external sources of network security attacks. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
network forensics 
• 
authentication 
• 
cybernetics 
• 
growing neural gas clustering 

 
241 
Optimized Analysis of Network Forensic 
REFERENCES 
1. Jose Alfredo, F.; Ricardo, C.; Oliceira, S. In Cluster Analysis using Growing Neural 
Gas and Graph Partioning, IEEE 2007 International Joint Conference on Neural 
Networks, 10.1109/IJCNN.2007.4371447 (accessed Oct, 2007). 
2. Šimon, M.; Huraj, L.; Pospíchal, J. Neural Gas Clustering Adapted for Given Size of 
Clusters doi.org/10.1155/2016/9324793 (accessed Nov, 2016.) 
3.  Rizzo, R.; Urso, A. In Identifying Clusters Using Growing Neural Gas: First Results. 
Springer International Conference on Artificial Neural Networks ICANN 2009: 
Artificial Neural Networks – ICANN 2009; pp 536–545 
4. Canales, F.; Chacon, M. In Modification of the Growing Neural Gas Algorithm for 
Cluster Analysis. Springer Iberoamerican Congress on Pattern Recognition CIARP  
2007: Progress in Pattern Recognition, Image Analysis and Applications, pp 684–693 
5. Ultsch. Self-Organizing Neural Networks for Visualization and Classification. In 
Information and Classification, Opitz, O., et al., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, 1993; pp 
301–306. 
6. Doherty, K. A. J.; Adams, R. G.; Davey, N. Hierarchical Growing Neural Gas. 
In Adaptive and Natural Computing Algorithms; Ribeiro, B., Albrecht, R. F., 
Dobnikar, A., Pearson, D. W., Steele, N. C. Eds.; Springer: Vienna. https://doi. 
org/10.1007/3-211-27389-1_34. 
7. Vesanto, J.; Alhoniemi, E. Clustering of the Self-Organizing Map. IEEE Trans. on 
Neural Networks, 2000, 11 (3), 586–602. 
8. Silva, M. A. S.; Monteiro, A. M. V.; Medeiros, J. S. In Semi-Automatic Geospatial 
Data Clustering by Self-Organizing Maps. Proc. of the Brazilian Symposium on 
Neural Networks. Sao Luiz, MA, October, 2004. 
9. Fritzke, B. Growing Cell Structures – A Self-organizing Network for Unsupervised 
and Supervised Learning. Neural. Netw.  1994, 7 (9), 1441–1460. 
10. Meghanathan, N.; Allam, S. R.; Moore, L. A. Tools and Techniques for Network 
Forensics. Int. J. Netw. Secur. App.  2009, 1 (1). 
11. Kessler, G. In Online Education in Computer and Digital Forensics, Proceedings of 
the 40th Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences, 2007. 
12. Sisaat, K.; Miyamoto, D. In Source Address Validation Support for Network 
Forensics. Proceedings of the 1st Joint Workshop on Information Security, Sep 2006. 
13. Mitropoulos, S.; Pastos, D.; Douligers, C. In Network Forensics: Towards a 
Classification of Traceback Mechanisms. Proceedings of the Workshop on Security 
and Privacy for Emerging Areas in Communication Networks, September 2005, pp 
9–16. 
14. Ansari, S.; Rajeev, S.; Chandrasekhar, H. Packet Sniffing: A Brief Introduction. IEEE 
Potentials  Dec 2002/Jan 2003, 21 (5), 17–19. 
15. Kavitha, V.; Hemashree, P.; Dilip, H.; Elakkiyarasi, K. Clustering Process with Time 
Series Data Stream. Smart Innov. Syst. Tech.  2020, 159, 335–343. 
16.  Data for Cybersecurity Research: Process and “Whish List”. http://www.gtisc.gatech. 
edu/files_nsf10/data-wishlist.pdf (accessed July 15, 2013). 
17. Mahmood, T.; Afzal, U. In Security Analytics: Big Data Analytics for Cyber 
Security: A Review of Trends, Techniques and Tools, Proceedings of the 2nd National 

 
242 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
Conference on Information Assurance, Rawalpindi, Pakistan: IEEE, 2013, pp 
129–134. doi:10.1109/NCIA.2013.6725337 
18. Alvaro, A. C.; Pratyusa, K. M.; Sreeranga, P. R. Big Data Analytics for Security. 
IEEE Security and Privacy  2013, 11 (6), 74–76. doi:10.1109/MSP.2013.138 
19. Berman, J. J. Principles of Big Data: Preparing, Sharing, and Analyzing Complex 
Information. San Francisco, CA: Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc, 2013. 
20. Sharif, A.; Cooney, S.; Gong, S.; Vitek, D. In Current Security Threats and Prevention 
Measures Relating to Cloud Services, Hadoop Concurrent Processing, and Big 
Data. 2015 IEEE International Conference on Big Data (Big Data), IEEE, 2015, pp 
1865–1870. 
21. Rawat, D.; Ghafoor, K. Z. Smart Cities Cyber Security and Privacy. Elsevier, 
December 2018. 
22. Constantine, C. Big Data: An Information Security Context. Netw. Secur. 2014, 2014 
(1), 18–19. doi:10.1016/S1353-4858(14)70010-8 

The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity.  
M. A. Jabbar, Sanju Tiwari, Subhendu Kumar Pani, & Stephen Huang (Eds.) 
© 2024 Apple Academic Press, Inc. Co-published with CRC Press (Taylor & Francis)
 
CHAPTER 13 
SECURITY IN IOT: SYSTEMATIC 
REVIEW 
K. TEJASVI, RUQQAIYA BEGUM, and M. A. JABBAR 
Vardhman College of Engineering, Hyderabad, India 
ABSTRACT 
IoT platforms have grown into a worldwide powerhouse over the past ten 
years that dominates boosting human existence with its uncontrolled smart 
services throughout every aspect of our daily lives. The ease of acces­
sibility and the rapidly growing need for smart devices and networks are 
causing IoT to face more security challenges than ever before. By using 
already-existing security measures, IoT may be safeguarded. The explo­
sions in technology as well as the different attack patterns and their severity 
make traditional methods less effective. Therefore, the next-generation 
IoT system needs a robust, constantly improved, and current security 
system. A considerable technical advancement in machine learning (ML) 
has created a number of new research opportunities for tackling existing 
and upcoming IoT challenges. To do this, ML is being utilized as a strong 
tool to spot assaults and strange behaviors in networks and smart devices. 
The architecture of IoT is explored in this book chapter after a thorough 
literature ML methods research that emphasizes the need of IoT security 
in light of a variety of possible attacks and potential IoT security solutions 
based on ML. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
244 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
13.1 INTRODUCTION 
An interconnected network of distributed embedded systems called the 
Internet of Things (IoT) uses wired or wireless communication methods 
to exchange information.1 It may alternatively be described as a network 
of physical objects or objects with network connectivity, software, elec­
tronics (such as sensor devices), and limited processing, storage, and 
communication capabilities that enable them to acquire, sporadically 
process, and communicate data. In the Internet of Things (IoT), the term 
“things ” refers to everyday objects like smart bulbs, smart adapters, smart 
meters, smart ovens, AC, IP cameras, and more sophisticated technology 
like radio frequency identification (RFID) devices, heartbeat detectors, 
accelerometers, sensors in parking IoT, and various other sensors in cars, 
etc. The Internet of Things (IoT) provides a wide range of services and 
applications, including those for military, household appliances, critical 
infrastructure, agricultural, and personal health care.3 
IoT services are available in many different industries, such as manu­
facturing, energy, retail, transportation, and building management. The 
enormous size of IoT networks creates new difficulties with managing 
devices, handling vast volumes of data, storing it, communicating it, 
computing it, and protecting privacy. Research on these multiple IoT char­
acteristics, including as architecture, connectivity, protocols, applications, 
security, and privacy, has been considerable.1-4 The assurance of security 
and privacy as well as customer satisfaction, however, is the foundation 
of the monetization of IoT technology.1,4 Because IoT relies on supporting 
technologies like software-defined networking (SDN), cloud computing 
(CC), and fog computing, the danger landscape for attackers is expanded.3 
IoT devices generate a lot of data; thus, traditional techniques for 
gathering, preserving, and interpreting this data may not be effective at 
this extent. The sheer amount of data can also be utilized to analyze, fore­
cast, and detect patterns and behaviors. The diversity of data generated 
by IoT also creates a new application for already-used data processing 
methods. As a result, new systems are needed to take use of the value 
of data provided by the IoT. Machine learning (ML) is employed in this 
context and is thought to be one of the finest computational paradigms 
for providing integrated cognition in IoT devices.2 Robots and intelligent 
machines can benefit from machine learning to help them extrapolate 
knowledge from data provided by other machines or people. The ability 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
245 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
of a smart device to automate or modify a condition or behavior based on 
information is a crucial component of an IoT solution. For classification, 
validation, and cluster analysis tasks, machine learning methods have 
been applied. Computer vision, fraud protection, informatics, malware 
scanning, authentication, and voice recognition are just a few of the uses 
for machine learning (ML). ML may also be used with IoT to provide 
smart services. However, the study’s main focus is on the application 
of machine learning to provide security and privacy services for IoT 
networks. 
13.2 ARCHITECTURE OF IOT 
13.2.1 IOT LAYERS 
The Internet of Things architecture, which act as a bridge for numerous 
hardware applications, is being created to link and extend IoT services 
to every doorstep. In order to transmit and receive various information/ 
data, the Internet of Things architecture uses a variety of communication 
protocols, such as RFID, Wi-Fi, Bluetooth broad and broadband wave­
length, IEEE 802.15.4, LPWAN, and ZigBee. To better service their most 
important clients, big high-tech corporations also have their own IoT 
platforms, such as Microsoft Azure, Amazon AWS IoT, Samsung Artik 
Cloud, Google Cloud, and others.1 The three tiers that make up the basic 
IoT architecture are the network layer, perception/physical layer, and web/ 
application layer. 
13.2.1.1 APPLICATION LAYER 
In IoT systems, the third tier is the application layer, which provides 
services to users via mobile and web-based apps. IoT serves a range of 
objectives in today’s technologically evolved society based on recent 
developments and applications for smart things. The Internet of Things 
system and its numerous services have enabled advancements in the 
smartness of living spaces, transportation, medicine, education, farming, 
industry, and other sectors.2,4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
246 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
13.2.1.2 NETWORK LAYER 
The network layer is very important in Internet of Things (IoT) systems 
because it connects devices with smart services utilizing a variety of 
connection protocols.2 Local clouds and servers store and process data at 
the network layer, which serves as a bridge between the network and the 
next levels.1 Another essential element of the network layer is big data, 
which has caught the attention of today’s rapidly expanding economic 
sector. IoT systems transmit, analyze, and store a substantial volume 
of information/data produced by tangible objects at the physical layer. 
Machine learning (ML) and deep learning (DL) are frequently used to 
assess information/data that has been saved and generate useful appli­
cations for smart devices since information/data is necessary for smart 
services at the network layer.2 
13.2.1.3 PERCEPTION LAYER 
The perception layer, the first layer of the Internet of Things (IoT) archi­
tecture, is composed of the physical (PHY) and media access control 
(MAC) layers. The PHY layer focuses on the hardware, such as sensors 
and devices, that employs several communication protocols, including 
Zigbee, RFID, and Bluetooth.1-5 The MAC layer creates a connection 
between networks and physical devices so they can operate together 
successfully. MAC may connect to network layers using a variety of 
protocols, including cellular networks. The vast majority of IoT devices 
are plug-and-play, which generates a lot of huge data.1-5 
13.3 PROTOCOLS IN IOT 
Standards and protocols of IoT are split into two categories. 
13.3.1 PROTOCOLS FOR IOT NETWORKS 
Devices are connected through the internet using IoT network protocols. 
These are the communication protocols that are most often used on the 
Internet. End-to-end data transfer inside the confines of the network is 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
247 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
made possible by IoT network protocols. Many IoT network protocols are 
listed below: 
13.3.1.1 HTTP (HYPERTEXT TRANSFER PROTOCOL) 
A network protocol for the Internet of Things, such as Hyper Text 
Transfer Protocol, is the perfect example. It is the foundation of web-
based data transfer. When a lot of data has to be released, it is the most 
popular protocol for Internet of Things devices. On the other hand, the 
HTTP protocol is not employed because of its high cost, limited energy 
efficiency, short battery life, and other limitations. Two examples of 
HTTP protocol application cases are 3D printing and additive manu­
facturing. It allows computers to connect to a network of 3D printers, 
allowing for the printing of three-dimensional objects and the processing 
of prototypes. 
13.3.1.2 LONG-RANGE WIDE AREA NETWORK 
Long-range, low-power protocol can detect signals despite background 
noise. Using either private or public networks, battery-powered gadgets 
may connect to the Internet via the wireless technology known as 
LoRaWan. A LoRa gateway may be connected to street lighting using this 
protocol. The gateway then establishes a connection with a cloud applica­
tion that automates light bulb intensity adjustments based on surrounding 
lights, reducing power use during the day. 
13.3.1.3 BLUETOOTH 
Among short-range communication technologies, Bluetooth is one of the 
most used. This IoT protocol is widely used for wireless data transmis­
sion. Short-range, low-cost wireless communication between electronic 
devices is perfect for this secure communication protocol. Bluetooth is 
mostly used in mobile devices like smartphones, smart watches, and other 
gadgets where little amounts of data may be transmitted without using up 
a lot of power or memory. Of all the IoT device connectivity methods, 
Bluetooth is the easiest to use. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
248 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
13.3.1.4 ZIGBEE 
Communication between intelligent things is made possible through the 
Internet of Things (IoT) standard ZigBee. It frequently appears in home 
automation systems. Electric meters and street lights in urban areas both 
employ the low-power ZigBee communication technology. Additionally, 
it is used in security and smart home systems. 
13.3.2 DATA PROTOCOLS FOR IOT 
IoT data protocols are used to link moderately sized IoT devices. With the 
use of these protocols, users may communicate with their devices without 
a network connection. Wired or mobile networks are used to link IoT data 
protocol connections. The following are a few examples of IoT data protocol: 
13.3.2.1 MESSAGE QUEUE TELEMETRY TRANSPORT (MQTT) 
MQTT is a well-liked protocol for IoT devices since it collects data from 
various electrical devices and allows virtual network monitoring. This 
TCP-based publish protocol enables event-driven message exchange 
across wireless networks. Most low-cost devices with limited memory and 
power consumption use MQTT. Among these are text-based apps, smart 
watches, vehicle sensors, and smoke alarms. 
13.3.2.2 CONSTRAINED APPLICATION PROTOCOL (COAP) 
A restricted access internet utility protocol is called CoAP. The server may 
respond to the client’s request using HTTP utilizing this protocol, and the 
client can submit requests to the server. UDP (User Datagram Protocol) is 
used to implement it quickly and efficiently. The protocol sends a request 
to the endpoints of the application and then waits for a response from the 
application’s resources and services. 
13.3.2.3 ADVANCED MESSAGE QUEUING PROTOCOL (AMQP) 
In the context of message-oriented middleware, filtering and processing 
are accomplished via a software layer protocol known as AMQP. It 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
249 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
provides the safe and efficient transfer of data between connected devices 
and the cloud and is used to set up dependable point-to-point connections. 
Binding, Exchange, and Message Queue are the three elements of AMQP. 
The three components work in concert to enable secure communication, 
transmission, and storage. Additionally, it helps to create the connection 
between two messages. The majority of banking uses the AMQP protocol. 
The protocol monitors each message a server sends until it is properly 
delivered to the target purposes or locations. 
13.3.2.4 MACHINE-TO-MACHINE (M2M) COMMUNICATION 
PROTOCOL 
It is an open industry standard for managing remote applications for IoT. 
It provides a platform for two devices to interact and exchange data. With 
the help of this protocol, systems may more easily keep an eye on them­
selves and change to accommodate new conditions. The identification 
of autonomous vehicles, vending and ATM machines, smart homes, and 
M2M communication protocols are all employed. 
13.3.2.5 EXTENSIBLE MESSAGING AND PRESENCE PROTOCOL 
(XMPP) 
To send and receive messages instantly, XMPP uses a push mechanism. 
Modifications are simple to implement and XMPP is adaptable. XMPP 
uses open XML to provide the servers’ or devices’ availability status while 
sending or receiving messages in addition to instant chat platforms like 
Google Talk and WhatsApp. Additionally, XMPP is used by VoIP, gaming, 
and online news services (VoIP). 
13.4 ATTACKS OF IOT 
A series of assaults on the IoT system in recent years have made manufac­
turers and users more careful while designing and deploying IoT devices. 
We will discuss several attack types, their outcomes, and attack surfaces 
in the IoT in this section. 

 
 
 
 
250 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 13.1 Various types of IoT attacks. 
13.4.1 TYPES OF ATTACKS 
The most frequent IoT hazards are physical and cyber assaults, including 
active and passive cyber-attacks. Various types of attacks are shown in 
Figure 13.1. Cyber-attacks involve breaking into a wireless network’s 
computer system and changing user data. On the other hand, physical 
assaults are those that actually damage IoT hardware. In this instance, a 
network is not necessary for the attackers to attack the system. Because 
of this, physical IoT devices including cameras, smartphones, routers, 
sensors, and other devices are vulnerable to these attacks where the 
attackers disturb the service.1,2 The next subsections mostly discuss the 
various cyber-attack types and their severity in relation to IoT security. 
13.4.1.1 ACTIVE ATTACKS 
When a hacker gains access to the network and the data it holds with the 
goal of modifying the system's configuration and interfering with certain 
processes, that is the definition of an active attack. IoT device security may 
be compromised in a number of ways during active assaults, including 
intervention, modification, and interruption. Figure 13.11 demonstrates 
current attacks, such as man-in-the-middle, denial-of-service, spoofing, 
Sybil attack, selective forwarding, jamming, hole attack, data manipu­
lation, and malicious inputs, among others. Active assaults, including 

 
 
 
251 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
denial-of-service, man-in-the-middle, spoofing, jamming, selective 
forwarding, malicious inputs, and data tampering, etc., are outlined in 
Table 13.1 and shown in Figure 13.1.1 
(i) Denial of Service Attacks 
The primary reason for DoS attacks is that they repeatedly make dupli­
cate requests, which stops a system from performing its responsibilities. 
As a result, it is challenging for the user to make an educated decision 
since they are unable to connect with the IoT device. Additionally, DoS 
attacks continuously run IoT devices, potentially reducing battery life. 
A distributed denial of service (DDoS) assault takes place when many 
attackers use different IP addresses that cause a large number of requests, 
keeping the server busy. Because of this, it might be difficult to distinguish 
between legitimate traffic and attack traffic.1 In recent years, severe DDoS 
assaults that have destroyed thousands of devices have been brought on by 
a special IoT botnet virus known as Mirai.1,2 
(ii) Sybil and Spoofing Attacks 
Sybil attacks and spoofing mainly focus on users’ identities to gain unau­
thorized access to the Internet of Things system. IoT devices are particu­
larly vulnerable, particularly to spoofing attacks, since the TCP/IP suite 
lacks a trustworthy security protocol. These two attacks also sparked 
more harmful attacks including denial-of-service and man-in-the-middle 
attacks.1 
(iii) Jamming Attacks 
By transmitting unwanted signals to IoT devices, jamming attacks inter­
fere with current wireless network connectivity and pose problems for 
users by maintaining a constant level of network activity.10 By consuming 
more energy, bandwidth, memory, and other resources, this attack also 
impairs the performance of IoT devices. 
(iv) Man-in-the-Middle Attacks 
By using guise of a communication network component, man-in-the­
middle attackers assert to be directly linked to another user device. As a 
result, it may easily stop communications by changing genuine data with 
fictional and misleading information.4 

 
 
 
 
 
 
252 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
(v) Attacks in Selective Forwarding 
In order to create a network hole, the selective forwarding attack functions 
as a node in the communication system by enabling some data packets to 
be discarded during transmission. It is challenging to recognize and avoid 
attacks of this nature. 
(vi) Attacks in Malicious Input 
Malicious input attacks are malware software assaults like rootkits, and 
trojans that waste energy, worms, viruses, adware, cause financial loss, and 
degrade the operation of wireless networks in Internet of Things devices.1,2 
(vii) Data Tampering 
The act of intentionally altering a user’s data by an attacker in an effort to 
violate that user’s privacy by engaging in unwanted activities is known as 
data tampering. Data manipulation attacks are particularly vulnerable to 
IoT devices that store private user information, such as location, fitness, 
and payment information for smart equipment.1 
13.4.1.2 PASSIVE ATTACKS 
Passive attacks attempt to collect user information without the individu­
al’s consent or agreement, and then use that information to decode their 
private data.1 Eavesdropping and traffic analysis are two methods for 
passively attacking an IoT network. The IoT device of the user is used by 
eavesdroppers as a sensor to gather and utilize their location and personal 
information.1,2 
13.5 INTRUSION DETECTION IN IOT 
Due to their diverse nature, considerably bigger typical behavior, and 
increased vulnerabilities brought on by the exponential proliferation of 
IoT devices, conventional intrusion detection systems (IDS) are worthless 
in the IoT environment.4 As a result, traditional security software cannot be 
installed in IoT systems due to a lack of computing and storage capacity. 
Reference2 claims that safeguarding these devices will need a paradigm 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
253 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
shift. Approaches based on signatures and those based on anomalies are 
the two main intrusion detection techniques used to discover attacks in 
IoT systems.1,2 It is occasionally done to combine them to form a hybrid 
detection system, albeit it is difficult to do.2 As opposed to anomaly-
based systems, which analyze traffic patterns to spot attacks, signature-
based solutions categorize traffic as benign or malicious using recognized 
threats.2 
On existing and well-known assaults, signature-based solutions 
perform admirably. One of the drawbacks of the signature-based strategy 
is the time it takes to keep the signature database up to date. As the data­
base size increases, it becomes computationally expensive to compare 
input with it. Due to its reliance on previously known attack signatures, 
this method cannot detect zero-day or undiscovered assaults.6 When an 
irregular traffic pattern is identified, an anomaly-based detection tech­
nique is utilized because it looks at regular traffic patterns and either 
raises an alarm or restricts traffic. The ability of anomaly-based systems 
to detect zero-day and unidentified assaults is one of its benefits, but 
they may also generate a large number of false positives.5 One of the 
main reasons why researchers are concentrating on anomaly-based IDS 
is their superior ability to identify widespread, zero-day, and unidentified 
attacks. 
13.6 IOT MACHINE LEARNING METHODS 
The use of machine learning (ML) as a method of artificial intelligence 
enables machines to learn by experience rather than via explicit program­
ming.32 ML can function in dynamic networks and does not require 
complex mathematical computations or human interaction. Machine 
learning techniques have made substantial advancements in IoT security 
during the past several years.8 Therefore, machine learning approaches 
could be used to quickly identify various IoT assaults by monitoring 
device activity. Relevant solutions may also be provided for IoT devices 
with limited resources by using a variety of ML techniques. To detect 
clever attacks in IoT devices and develop a robust defense strategy, ML 
approaches including supervised techniques, unsupervised techniques, 
and reinforcement learning may be applied. 

 
 
 
 
 
254 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
13.6.1 ML TECHNIQUES 
To identify clever attacks on IoT devices and create a powerful security 
strategy, ML approaches such as supervised techniques, unsupervised 
techniques, and reinforcement learning may be employed. Figure 13.4 
illustrates several machine learning methods for IoT system security. 
13.6.1.1 SUPERVISED LEARNING 
Supervised learning, which employs a training data set and learning algo­
rithm to classify the output in line with the input, is the most popular 
kind of machine learning. Both classification and regression learning are 
supervised learning techniques. Classification Learning: A supervised 
machine learning technique called classification learning produces catego­
ries or fixed discrete values. Examples of several categorization learning 
strategies, including the Bayesian Theorem, Machine, Association Rule, 
K-Nearest Neighbor, Support Vector, and Random Forest, will be provided 
in the subsequent subsections. 
FIGURE 13.2 SVM learning. 

 
 
 
 
255 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
(i) Support Vector Machine (SVM) 
To analyze data from regression and classification investigations, the SVM 
technique is employed. A hyperplane, which SVM constructs between two 
classes, The hyperplane’s objective is to maximize distance between each 
class while minimizing error and maximizing margin (Fig. 13.2).27–30 After 
analysis, if the hyperplane is shown to be nonlinear, SVM employs kernel 
function to make it linear by introducing new features. In SVM, using the 
optimum kernel function can occasionally be challenging. SVM is useful 
for IoT security applications such smart grid attacks,32 intrusion detec­
tion,8,20 malware detection,31 etc. owing to its high accuracy level. 
(ii) The Bayesian Theorem 
The base of the Bayesian theorem is known as the Bayesian probability, 
which is often referred to as the possibility of statistics theorem for 
learning distribution. By applying Bayesian probability and the provided 
data, this kind of supervised learning technique generates new outcomes. 
Nave Bayes is the name of this individual. Because it uses prior theory and 
Bayesian probability to predict expected events, NB has become popular 
as a learning algorithm. This is one of the issues that the Internet of Things 
can effectively resolve. At the network layer, NB is frequently utilized 
in IoT for anomaly and intrusion detection.39,40 Some advantages of NB 
include its simplicity of usage, ability to apply to multi-stage calcification, 
and need for less categorization details. Because NB depends on charac­
teristics, how those features interact with one another, and previous infor­
mation, reliable findings might not be possible.37 
(iii) K-Nearest Neighbor (KNN) 
Euclidian distance is frequently used by KNN, a statistically nonpara­
metric supervised learning algorithm.14 The Euclidian distance in KNN is 
used to compute the average value of a node’s k closest neighbors when 
it is unknown.9 For instance, the average value of the closest neighbor 
may be used to forecast the loss of a node. Even if this number is incor­
rect, it still helps locate the possible missing node. The KNN method is 
uncomplicated, reasonably priced, and easy to use.12,13 On the other hand, 
locating the missing nodes demands precision that is hard to get and takes 
a lot of time. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
256 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
(iv) Random Forest (RF) 
A variety of Decision Trees (DTs) are used in RF, a revolutionary machine 
learning technique, to build an algorithm that produces a reliable and 
powerful predictive model for outcomes. These several trees are created 
at random, trained for a particular job, and utilized as the model’s final 
conclusion. Although RF uses DTs, the learning process is different 
since RF considers the average of the output and needs fewer inputs.14,15 
In network surface attacks, RF is frequently used to identify illegal IoT 
devices,18 detect anomalies,17 and detect DDoD attacks.16 Previous research 
demonstrates that RF provides superior outcome in the identification of 
DDoS attacks using ANN, KNN, and SVM.16 Although RF cannot be used 
in real-time applications, more training data sets are needed to create DT’s 
that can recognize unforeseen undesirable intrusions. 
(v) Association Rule (AR) 
The AR approach, which is used to identify the unknown variable based on 
how they are connected to one another in a given data set, is another sort 
of supervised machine learning methodology.19 To discover the intrusion 
in the network, fuzzy AR was utilized, which was a successful use of the 
AR approach for intrusion detection.40 Despite being equally clear-cut and 
easy to use, due to its high temporal complexity and reliance on concepts 
that would not produce a precise result for a massive and complex model, 
augmented reality (AR) is not commonly employed in the Internet of 
Things (IoT).11 
Regression Learning: Corresponding to the input variables, regres­
sion learning produces either a real number or a continuous value as the 
output. In the next subsections, many RLs are given, including Ensemble 
Learning, Neural Network, and Decision Tree. 
(i) Decision Tree (DT) 
The branches and leaves of a tree are analogous to the DT technique of 
natural supervised learning. Various branches act as edges and leaves as 
nodes in DT. The offered samples are sorted using DTs according to the 
featured values. Classification and regression are the two primary subcat­
egories of DT in ML.12 DT is superior to other ML techniques in that it can 
handle huge data samples, is transparent, and is easy to apply.13,14 Contrarily, 
this method has some drawbacks including the need for a considerable 

 
 
 
 
257 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
amount of storage space because of its substantial structure for the data. 
If more than one DT is used to solve the issue, the learning procedure 
becomes more complicated.13,14 In applications for security like intrusion 
detection, DTs and DDoS are frequently employed as classifiers.17,25 
(ii) Neural Network (NN) 
The neuron-using structure of the human brain served as the basis for the 
development of the NN method. ML methods that can handle difficult 
complex situations are frequently employed in NN.18,19 Hierarchical and 
connected networks are the two primary network types used in NN tech­
niques. As shown in Figure 13.3, these two network types are based on 
the input, hidden, and output layers of the neuron, which have distinct 
functional levels. The IoT system performs better because NN tech­
niques reduce network response times. Because of their computational 
complexity, NN are difficult to deploy in a distributed IoT system. 
FIGURE 13.3 Neural network. 
(iii) Ensemble Learning (EL) 
In Machine Learning, a learning algorithm called EL employs a range 
of classification strategies to enhance its performance and generate an 
acceptable outcome view (Figure 13.4). To deliver a reliable outcome, EL 
frequently combines homogeneous or heterogeneous multi-classifier. EL 
is well suited to address the majority of issues because it makes use of 
many learning techniques. In contrast to other single-classifier methods, 
EL has a high temporal complexity. El is frequently utilized for intrusion, 
malware, and anomaly detection.20–22 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
258 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
FIGURE 13.4 Ensemble learning. 
13.6.1.2 UNSUPERVISED LEARNING 
Unsupervised learning occurs when the input variables are not given any 
output information. While the algorithm searches for patterns in this data 
set, the majority of the data are unlabeled. On the basis of that, it divides 
them into various groupings. Infinite Gaussian mixture models and contin­
uous correlation analysis have both been used in a number of unsupervised 
learning techniques to secure IoT devices (IGMM).23,24 The next section 
will go through many types of unsupervised learning, such as the Principal 
Component Analysis and K-means clustering methods (PCA). 
(i) Principal Component Analysis (PCA) 
To divide a huge data collection into smaller ones while retaining the same 
amount of data as the larger set, the feature reduction approach known as 
PCA is applied. PCA thereby lessens the complexity of a system. A feature 
to detect real-time intrusions into an IoT system may be selected using this 
technique.25 A robust security protocol can be created by combining PCA 
with a few other ML techniques. A model presented by Ref. [26] creates 
an effective system using PCA and classifier techniques like KNN and 
SoftMax regression. 
(ii) K-mean Clustering 
Using an unsupervised learning approach, the given data samples are 
divided into smaller groups and then classified as a cluster. This well-
known method makes use of clustering strategies. You may use this tech­
nique by adhering to a few simple rules: (1) The given data set is initially 
divided into a number of clusters, with the primary goal being to determine 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
259 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
the k-centroid for each cluster. (2) Once all nodes have been reached, 
choose a node from each cluster and link it to the nearest centroid again. 
Afterward, a fresh computation is performed using the average value of 
each node from each cluster; and (3) the algorithm repeats its previous 
steps until they coincide with the K-mean value.27–29 In order to find 
suitable housing, smart cities can benefit greatly from K-mean learning 
approaches. Because of their simplicity, K-mean algorithms are excellent 
for IoT systems that do not require tagged data. But the performance of 
this unsupervised learning system is poorer than supervised learning. The 
detection of Sybil attacks and anomaly identification are two common 
applications of the K-mean clustering technique.30,32–34 
13.6.1.3 REINFORCEMENT LEARNING (RL) 
By taking actions to optimize the total feedback, through interactions with 
its surroundings, a computer using RL can learn much like a person.35,36 
Depending on the results of the assigned task, the feedback might be a 
reward. In reinforcement learning, there are no predetermined behaviors 
for each particular task; instead, the computer uses methods of iterations. 
Iterations help the agent choose the optimum strategy to maximize reward 
while learning from experience. Reinforcement learning is used by many 
IoT devices (such as sensors, electric windows, and air conditioners) to 
adapt to their surroundings. In order to detect different IoT assaults and 
offer the devices with appropriate security protocols, RL approaches have 
been applied for IoT device security. While Dyna-Q has been employed for 
malware detection and authentication, Q-learning has been used for authen­
tication, jamming attacks, and harmful inputs.36–38,40 Additionally, DQN and 
PDS, respectively, can offer security against jammer assaults and malware 
detection.39 IoT Security Using Machine Learning is shown in Table 13.1. 
TABLE 13.1 Applications of Machine Learning in Security. 
ML method 
Application/Attack detection 
Ref. 
NN 
IoT Security 
[6] 
DoS 
[7] 
Intrusion Detection 
[8, 9] 
IoT Privacy 
[10] 
Mobile Networks Security 
[11] 

 
ML method 
Application/Attack detection 
Ref. 
KNN 
Intrusion Detection 
[12, 13] 
 Anomaly, Impersonation Attacks, False Data 
[92, 15] 
Injection Attacks, Detection of Intrusion 
An IoT element's authentication 
[16] 
SVM 
Intrusion Detection 
[9, 16–21] 
Mobile Networks Security 
[11] 
Authentication, False Data Injection Attacks, 
[22–24, 92] 
Data Tampering, and Abnormal Behavior 
DT 
Unusual Traffic Sources and Intrusion 
[25] 
Detection 
Intrusion Detection 
[26] 
EL 
Authentication, False Data Injection Attacks, 
[22–24, 92] 
Detection of Intrusion and Malware, and Data 
Tampering 
K-means 
Private Data Anonymization in an IoT System [23] 
and Data Tampering, Abnormal Behavior, 
Sybil Detection in Industrial WSNs 
Intrusion Detection 
[27] 
Network attack detection 
[28] 
NB 
Intrusion Detection 
[26, 29] 
Anomaly Detection 
[30] 
IoT Security 
[31] 
Traffic Engineering 
[32] 
RF 
Intrusion Detection 
[13, 21, 33] 
Unauthorized IoT Devices, Anomalies and 
[34] 
DDoS 
PCA 
Intrusion Detection, Real-Time Detection 
[35] 
System 
RL 
DoS 
[37] 
Spoofing 
[36] 
Eavesdropping 
[38] 
Jamming 
[39] 
Malware Detection 
[40] 
AR 
Intrusion Detection 
[41] 
 
260 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
TABLE 13.1 (Continued) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
261 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
13.7 CONCLUSION 
Due to the enormous data generated by IoT devices attacks on IoT are also 
expanding. Traditional methods to safeguard this data are not efficient. 
Machine learning methods are widely used to secure IoT devices from 
various attacks. This chapter explores various machine learning methods 
to provide security and privacy services for IoT. In this chapter, protocols 
in IoT are discussed. Various types of security attacks like active attacks 
and passive attacks were explained. This survey explores various machine 
learning methods used in order to safeguard IoT devices. This chapter 
will help researchers, security practitioners, and network administrators to 
effectively implement machine learning methods in security. 
KEYWORDS 
• 
attack surfaces 
• 
challenges 
• 
architecture 
• 
internet of things 
• 
machine learning 
• 
IoT threats 
• 
security solution 
REFERENCES 
1. Tahsien, S. M.; Karimipour, H.; Spachos, P. Machine Learning Based Solutions for 
Security of Internet of Things (IoT): A Survey. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2020, 161, 
102630. 
2. Ahmad, R.; Alsmadi, I. Machine Learning Approaches to IoT Security: A Systematic 
Literature Review. Int. Things 2021, 14, 100365. 
3. Canedo, J.; Skjellum, A. Using Machine Learning to Secure IoT Systems, https://doi. 
org/10.1109/PST.2016.7906930, 16824896. 
4. Hussain, F.; Hussain, R.; Hassan, S. A.; Hossain, E. Machine Learning in IoT 
Security: Current Solutions and Future Challenges, IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor 2020, 
22, Third Quarter. 

 
262 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
5. Anthi, E.; Williams, L.; Słowińska, M.; Theodorakopoulos, G.; Burnap, P. A  
Supervised Intrusion Detection System for Smart Home IoT Devices, IEEE Int. 
Things J.  2019, 6 (5), 9042–9053. doi:https://doi.org/10.1109/JIOT.2019.2926365. 
6. Altaf, A.; Abbas, H.; Iqbal, F.; Derhab, A. Trust Models of Internet of Smart Things: 
A Survey, Open Issues, and Future Directions. J. Netw. Comput. Appl. 2019, 137, 
93111. 
7. Kulkarni R. V.; Venayagamoorthy, G. K. In Neural Network Based Secure Media 
Access Control Protocol for Wireless Sensor Networks, Proceedings of the 
International Joint Conference Neural Networks, Atlanta, GA, 2009, pp 3437–3444. 
8. Buczak A. L.; Guven, E. A Survey of Data Mining and Machine Learning Methods 
for Cyber Security Intrusion Detection. IEEE Commun. Surv. Tutor  2015, 18 (2), 
1153–1176. 
9. Sedjelmaci, H.; Senouci, S. M.; Al-Bahri, M. In A Lightweight Anomaly Detection 
Technique for Low-resource IoT Devices: A Game-theoretic Methodology, IEEE 
International Conference on Communications (ICC). 2016, pp 1–6. 
10. Jeong, H. J.; Lee, H. J.; Moon, S. M. In Work-in-progress: Cloud based Machine 
Learning for IoT  Devices with Better Privacy, 2017 International Conference on 
Embedded Software (EMSOFT), Seoul, 2017, pp 1–2. 
11. Do, V. T.; Engelstad, P.; Feng, B.; Do, T. V. Strengthening Mobile Network Security 
Using Machine Learning, In Mobile Web and Intelligent Information Systems; Younas, 
M., Awan, I., Kryvinska, N., Strauss, C., Thanh, D. V., Eds.; Springer International 
Publishing, Cham, 2016, pp 173–183. 
12. Branch, J. W.; Giannella, C.; Szymanski, B.; Wolff, R.; Kargupta, H. In-network 
Outlier Detection in Wireless Sensor Networks. Knowl. Inform. Syst.  2013, 34 (1), 
23–54. 
13. Narudin, F. A.; Feizollah, A.; Anuar, N. B.; Gani, A. Evaluation of Machine Learning 
Classifiers for Mobile Malware Detection. Soft. Comput. 2016, 20 (1), 343–357. 
14.  Chen, F.; Deng, P.; Wan, J.; Zhang, D.; Vasilakos, A.; Rong, X. Data Mining for the 
Internet of Things: Literature Review and Challenges. Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw.  
2015, 11, 431047. 
15. Aminanto, M. E.; Kim, K. In Improving Detection of WiFi Impersonation by Fully 
Unsupervised Deep Learning. Information Security Applications: 18th International 
Workshop, WISA 2017, 2017. 
16. Baldini, G.; Giuliani, R.; Steri, G.; Neisse, R. In Physical Layer Authentication of 
Internet of Things Wireless Devices through Permutation and Dispersion Entropy, 
2017 Global Internet of Things Summit (GIoTS), Geneva, 2017, pp 1–6. 
17. Bamakan, S. M. H.; Wang, H.; Yingjie, T.; Shi, Y. An Effective Intrusion Detection 
Framework Based on MCLP/SVM Optimized by Time-varying Chaos Particle 
Swarm Optimization. Neurocomputing  2016, 199, 90–102. 
18. Kabir, E.; Hu, J.; Wang, H.; Zhuo, G. A  Novel Statistical Technique for Intrusion 
Detection Systems. Future Gener. Comput. Syst.  2018, 79, 303–318. 
19. Wang, H.; Gu, J.; Wang, S. An Effective Intrusion Detection Framework Based on 
SVM with Feature Augmentation. Knowl. Based Syst.  2017, 130–139. 
20. Zissis, D. In Intelligent Security on the Edge of the Cloud. International Conference 
on Engineering, Technology and Innovation, IEEE, Funchal, 2017, pp 1066–1070. 

 
263 
Security in IoT: Systematic Review 
21. Zarpel£o, B. B.; Miani, R. S.; Kawakani, C. T.; de Alvarenga, S. C. A Survey of 
Intrusion Detection in Internet of Things. J. Net. Com. App.  2017, 84, 2537. 
22. Shi, C.; Liu, J.; Liu, H.; Chen, Y. In Smart User Authentication through Actuation 
of Daily Activities Leveraging WiFi enabled IoT. Proceedings of the 18th ACM 
International Symposium on Mobile Ad Hoc Networking and Computing, ACM, 
2017, p. 5. 
23. Lee, S.-Y.; Wi, S.-r.; Seo, E.; Jung, J.-K.; Chung, T.-M. In ProFiOt: Abnormal 
Behavior Profiling (ABP) of IoT Devices Based on a Machine Learning Approach. 
Telecommunication Networks and Applications Conference (ITNAC), 2017 27th 
International, IEEE, 2017, pp 1–6. 
24. Nobakht, M.; Sivaraman, V.; Boreli, R. In A Host-based Intrusion Detection and 
Mitigation Framework for Smart Home IoT Using OpenFlow. 2016 11th International 
Conference on Availability, Reliability and Security (ARES), IEEE, 2016, pp 
147–156. 
25. Goeschel, K. In Reducing False Positives in Intrusion Detection Systems Using 
Data-mining Techniques Utilizing Support Vector Machines, Decision Trees, and 
Naive Bayes for Off-line Analysis. SoutheastCon, 2016, IEEE, 2016, pp 1–6. 
26. Stroeh, K.; Mauro Madeira, E. R.; Goldenstein, S. K. An Approach to the Correlation 
of Security Events Based on Machine Learning Techniques. J. Int. Serv. Appl. 2013, 
4 (1), 7. 
27. Rathore, H.; Jha, S. In Bio-inspired Machine Learning Based Wireless Sensor Network 
Security. 2013 World Congress on Nature and Biologically Inspired Computing. 
IEEE, Fargo, ND, 2013, 140–146. 
28. IoT  Analytics. Why the Internet of Things is Called Internet of Things: Definition, 
History, Disambiguation. https://iot-analytics.com/internet-of-things-defnition/ 
29. Usama, M.; Qadir, J.; Raza, A.; Arif, H.; Yau, K. A.; Elkhatib, Y.; Hussain, A.; 
Al-Fuqaha, A. I. Unsupervised Machine Learning for Networking: Techniques, 
Applications and Research Challenges. CoRR 2017, arXiv:1709.06599. 
30. Mehmood, T.; Rais, H. B. M. In Machine Learning Algorithms in Context of Intrusion 
Detection. 3rd International Conference on Computer and Information Sciences 
(ICCOINS), IEEE, 2016. https://doi.org/10.1109/iccoins.2016.7783243. 
31. Jincy, V. J.; Sundararajan, S. Classification Mechanism for IoT  Devices Toward 
Creating a Security Framework. In Intelligent Distributed Computing; Buyya, R., 
Thampi, S. M. Eds., Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2015, pp 265–277. 
32. Hogan, M.; Esposito, F. In: Stochastic Delay Forecasts for Edge Traffic Engineering 
via Bayesian Networks. IEEE International Symposium on Network Computing and 
Applications. IEEE, Cambridge, MA, 2017, pp 1–4. 
33. Farnaaz, N.; Jabbar, M. A. Random Forest Modeling for Network Intrusion Detection 
System. Procedia Comput. Sci.  2016, 89 (Supplement C), 213–217. 
34. Miettinen, M.; Marchal, S.; Hafeez, I.; Asokan, N.; Sadeghi, A.-R.; Tarkoma, S. 
In IoT Sentinel: Automated Device Type Identification for Security Enforcement in 
IoT. 2017 IEEE 37th International Conference on Distributed Computing Systems 
(ICDCS), IEEE, 2017, pp. 2177–2184. 
35. Deng, L.; Li, D.; Yao, X.; Cox, D.; Wang, H. Mobile Network Intrusion Detection 
for IoT System Based on Transfer Learning Algorithm. Cluster Comp. 2018, 1–16. 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
264 
The Fusion of Artificial Intelligence and Soft Computing Techniques for Cybersecurity 
36. Xiao, L.; Li, Y.; Han, G.; Liu, G.; Zhuang, W. PHY-layer Spoofing Detection with 
Reinforcement Learning in Wireless Networks, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol. 2016, 65 
(12), 10037–10047. 
37. Li, Y.; Quevedo, D. E.; Dey, S.; Shi, L. SINR-based DoS Attack on Remote State 
Estimation: A Game-theoretic Approach, IEEE Trans. Contr. Net. Syst. 2016, 4 (3), 
632–642. 
38. Xiao, L.; Xie, C.; Chen, T.; Dai, H. A Mobile Offloading Game Against Smart 
Attacks. IEEE Access 2016, 4, 2281–2291. 
39. Han, G.; Xiao, L.; Poor, H. V. In Two-dimensional Anti-jamming Communication 
Based on Deep Reinforcement Learning. Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Acoustics Speech and 
Signal Processing, New Orleans, LA, March 2017, pp 2087–2091. 
40. Xiao, L.; Li, Y.; Huang, X.; Du, X. J. Cloud-based Malware Detection Game for 
Mobile Devices with Offloading. IEEE Trans. Mobile Comput. 2017, 16 (10), 
2742–2750. 
41. Tajbakhsh, A.; Rahmati, M.; Mirzaei. A. Intrusion Detection Using Fuzzy Association 
Rules. Appl. Soft. Comp. 2009, 9 (2), 462–469. 

INDEX 
A 
Advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 248–249 
Advanced persistent threats (APT), 233 
AES-CCM encryption, 138 
Ant colony optimization (ACO), 182 
problem description, 189 
rule for, 190–191 
Artificial intelligence (AI), 19 
advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 82 
applications 
binary decision diagram (BDD), 99 
binary decision diagram multi­
layer extreme learning machine 
(BDD-ML-ELM), 99 
cyber-physical device, 99 
deep Q-network (DQN), 101 
DeepNFV, 98 
discrete logarithm problem (DLP), 100 
distributed machine learning (DML), 
100 
edge/fog computing environment, 94 
EdgeSec, 101 
FogLearn framework, 101 
implementation of security, 95–96 
intrusion detection systems (IDSs), 97 
Markov decision mechanism (MDP), 
101 
ML algorithms, 97 
network function virtualization 
(NFV), 98 
network intrusion detection system 
(NIDS), 96 
provable data possession (PDP), 100 
real-time video processing, 102 
security and cost-aware computation 
offloading (SCACO) strategy, 101 
soft hesitant fuzzy rough collection 
(SHFRS), 102 
software defined networking (SDN), 
100 
stochastic gradient descent (SGD) 
method, 98 
support vector machine (SVM), 100 
aspects of 
COVID-19 spreads, 113–114 
method to control, 112 
remote monitoring, 112 
smart devices, 112 
cloud and edge computing security 
context-aware applications, 81 
deep learning (DL) techniques, 81 
denial of service (DOS) attack, 81 
fog computing, 80 
soft computing approaches, 81 
constrained application protocol 
(CoAP), 82 
cyber security 
artificial neural network (ANN), 
142–143 
decision tree (DT), 141–142 
K-nearest neighbors (KNNS), 141 
machine learning (ML), 139 
Naïve Bayes (NB), 140 
support vector machine (SVM), 142 
data distribution service (DDS), 82 
edge computing, 84 
cloudlets, 85 
core concept of, 85 
edge devices, 85 
European Telecommunications 
Standards Institute (ETSI), 85, 86 
resource management levels, 86 
security in, 86–91 
entity-based architecture, 109 
extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 82 
integration of, 84 
internet of things (IoT), 108 

 
266 
Index 
cyber security, 144 
dataset poisoning, 148–149 
detect vulnerability, 144–145 
fuzzing technique, 146 
input attacks, 146–148 
machine learning (ML), 143 
vulnerability fuzzing technology, 
145–146 
machine learning (ML) 
techniques, 92–94 
message queue telemetry transport 
protocol (MQTT), 82 
operating systems, 83 
services and application scenarios, 109 
home automation, 110 
natural disaster, 111 
remote monitoring, 110 
sensor layer, 110 
soft computing, 91–92 
terminal layer, 109 
use 
coercion landscape, 121–122 
cybercriminals, 121 
Artificial neural network (ANN), 135, 
142–143 
Association rule (AR), 256 
B 
Bandwidth limitation, 115–116 
Bayesian networks (BNs), 181 
Behavioral analytics, 19 
Binary decision diagram (BDD), 99 
Binary decision diagram multi­
layer extreme learning machine 
(BDD-ML-ELM), 99 
Blockchain cybersecurity, 19–20 
Business email compromise (BEC), 198 
C 
Cloud computing 
advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 82 
constrained application protocol 
(CoAP), 82 
data distribution service (DDS), 82 
extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 82 
integration of, 84 
message queue telemetry transport 
protocol (MQTT), 82 
operating systems, 83 
Competitive Hebbian Learning (CHL), 235 
Constrained application protocol (CoAP), 
82, 248 
Content security policy (CSP), 155 
Cross-site scripting (XSS) 
contribution, 156 
discussions, 164–165 
DOM XSS, 158 
encoding harmful characters, 159 
filtering non-benign, 159 
open web application security project 
(OWASP), 154 
personally identifiable information (PII), 
164 
problem statement, 156 
proposed solution, 159 
implementation, 162–163 
methodologies, 160–161 
protected health information (PHI), 164 
reflected, 158 
related work, 156–157 
results, 164–165 
stored, 158 
in Web based service, 153, 157–159 
blacklisting approach, 158 
blind, 158 
content security policy (CSP), 155 
white-listing, 158 
Cyber physical systems (CPS), 169 
Cybersecurity 
consequences for 
direct and indirect, 17–18 
literature survey, 5–8 
machine learning (ML), 195, 199 
AI-powered tools, 203 
artificial intelligence (AI), 198 
business email compromise (BEC), 198 
comparison, 202 
cyber attack prediction techniques, 
199–201 
data sets, 201 
DDoS (distributed denial of service), 
197 

 
Index 
267 
future works, 203–204 
selection techniques, 202–203 
used, 202 
man-in-the-middle (MITM), 197 
mean absolute percentage error 
(MAPE), 203 
mean absolute relative error (MARE), 203 
mitigation and prevention 
antivirus protection, 21 
awareness, 21 
backups, 22 
Enable MFA (Multifactor 
authentication), 21 
hospital systems, 22 
network segmentation, 22 
phishing awareness, 21 
physical security, 22 
risk management, 22 
tools and technology, 22 
virtual private network (VPN), 21 
weak spots, 21 
neural networks (NN), 200 
NIST cybersecurity (CSF), framework, 
4, 5 
performance evaluation 
measures of, 203 
role 
business organizations in, 14–16 
cyberattacks, 8–13 
government and media outlets, 16–17 
healthcare cybersecurity, 13–14 
root mean square error (RMSE), 203 
structural query language (SQL), 197 
surges 
cyber risk, 31–32 
global information security, 29–30 
human error, 28–29 
issues in, 35–36 
monetary value, 31–32 
psychological effects in, 35 
spear phishing attacks, 30–31 
types, 36 
weapon for, 33–34 
technologies used 
artificial intelligence (AI), 19 
behavioral analytics, 19 
blockchain cybersecurity, 19–20 
edge computing, 18–19 
embedded hardware, 20 
machine learning (ML), 19 
virtual dispersive networking (VDN), 
20 
zero trust model, 20 
variance absolute percentage error 
(VAPE), 203 
WFH (Work-From-Home), 4 
D 
Data distribution service (DDS), 82 
Data protocols, 248 
advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 248–249 
constrained application protocol 
(COAP), 248 
extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 249 
machine-to-machine (M2M) 
communication, 249 
message queue telemetry transport 
(MQTT), 248 
Decision tree (DT), 141–142 
Deep learning (DL) 
techniques, 81 
Deep Q-network (DQN), 101 
DeepNFV, 98 
Denial of service (DOS) 
attack, 81 
Dependence diagram (DD), 180 
Discrete logarithm problem (DLP), 100 
Distributed control systems (DCS), 174 
Distributed denial of service (DDoS), 232 
Distributed machine learning (DML), 100 
Domain name system (DNS), 233 
E 
Efficient vehicle-tracking system, 211 
design, 218–219 
edge detection methods, 219 
implementation, 218–219 
methodology, 213–214 
character segmentation, 214 
recognition, 214–215 
minimum mean-square error (MMSE), 219 

 
268 
Index 
number plate 
applications, 222 
deblurring, moving vehicles, 218 
LPR technique, 221 
segmentation, 220–221 
performance analysis, 222–225 
problem definition, 216 
algorithm, 216–217 
related work, 215–216 
result, 222–225 
Wiener filters 
characteristics, 219–220 
Enable MFA (Multifactor authentication), 21 
Encryption methods 
anonymization process, 119–120 
cryptographic technique, 120 
interruption of data, 120–121 
Ensemble learning (EL), 257 
European Telecommunications Standards 
Institute (ETSI), 85, 86 
Evolutionary computation (EC), 181 
Extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 82, 249 
F 
Fault Data injection, 139 
Fault tree (FT), 179 
Fuzzy logic (FL), 181 
Fuzzy nonlinear programming (FNLP), 184 
G 
GAAC (genetic ant colony algorithm), 191 
Genetic algorithm (GA), 182, 186–188 
Growing neural gas (GNG) 
network forensic attacks, 227, 228 
advanced persistent threats (APT), 233 
clustering technique, 234–236 
Competitive Hebbian Learning 
(CHL), 235 
data set details, 239 
denial of service, 232 
discussions, 236–239 
distributed denial of service (DDoS), 
232 
domain name system (DNS), 233 
high performance computing (HPC), 
236 
malware, 231 
man in the middle attack, 232 
network forensics, 233–234 
operating system (OS), 229 
phishing, 231 
ransomware, 233 
spear phishing, 231 
structured query language (SQL), 233 
varieties of cyber security threats, 
231–233 
zero-day exploit, 233 
H 
High performance computing (HPC), 236 
HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol), 247 
I 
Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), 59 
Intelligent systems 
AES-CCM encryption, 138 
cloud data server, 137 
cyber security for 
artificial neural networks (ANN), 135 
internet of things (IoT), 134 
Fault Data injection, 139 
HealthCare applications, 138 
man in the middle (MITM) 
attack, 138 
methods of attacks in, 135 
motes, 136 
physical attacks, 137 
signal jammers, 137 
three way pairing process, 138 
Intelligent transportation systems (ITS), 176 
International electro specialized 
commission (IEC), 177 
International standards organization (ISO), 
177 
Internet of things (IOT), 108, 134 
analysing feasibility, 122–123 
artificial intelligence, use 
coercion landscape, 121–122 
cybercriminals, 121 

 
Index 
269 
challenges 
solutions, 118–119 
cloud computing 
advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 82 
constrained application protocol 
(CoAP), 82 
data distribution service (DDS), 82 
extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 82 
integration of, 84 
message queue telemetry transport 
protocol (MQTT), 82 
operating systems, 83 
cyber security, 144 
dataset poisoning, 148–149 
detect vulnerability, 144–145 
encryption methods 
anonymization process, 119–120 
cryptographic technique, 120 
interruption of data, 120–121 
fuzzing technique, 146 
implementation challenges 
bandwidth limitation, 115–116 
deficiency, 116–118 
opportunity, 116–118 
privacy and security, 116 
scalability, 115 
strength, 116–118 
and threat analysis, 116–118 
input attacks, 146–148 
machine learning (ML), 143 
in security 
applications, 40–41 
client protection, 49 
impact in COVID-19, 43–45 
implementation, challenges, 46–48 
versatility to assaults, 49 
wireless sensor and actuator networks 
(WSAN), 46 
security challenge 
communication, 114 
device identifier, 114 
security solution, 126 
data acquisition, 128 
exploration and pre-processing, 128 
model evaluation and deployment, 129 
model selection and data conversion, 
128 
training and testing, 128 
security system 
cutting edge of, 50–51 
security tool, 124–126 
threat analysis 
directing assault, 49 
forswearing, 49–50 
vulnerability fuzzing technology, 145–146 
Intrusion detection systems (IDSs), 97 
K 
K-nearest neighbors (KNNS), 141, 255 
L 
Levenberg-Marquardt (LM), 185 
Long-range wide area network, 247 
M 
Machine learning (ML), 139, 143, 181, 
195, 199, 243 
artificial intelligence (AI), 198 
powered tools, 203 
business email compromise (BEC), 198 
comparison, 202 
cyberattack prediction techniques, 
199–201 
data sets, 201 
DDoS (distributed denial of service), 
197 
future works, 203–204 
reinforcement learning (RL), 259–260 
selection techniques, 202–203 
supervised learning, 254–258 
techniques, 92–94 
unsupervised learning, 258–259 
used, 202 
Machine-to-machine (M2M) 
communication, 249 
Man-in-the-middle (MITM), 197 
Markov chains (MC), 179 
Markov decision mechanism (MDP), 101 
Mean absolute percentage error (MAPE), 
future research direction, 129 
203 

 
270 
Index 
Mean absolute relative error (MARE), 203 
Media access control (MAC), 246 
Message queue telemetry transport 
protocol (MQTT), 82,248 
Minimum mean-square error (MMSE), 219 
Mobile App development 
developers, 58 
findings and analysis 
age, 63–65 
Chi-Square tests, 62 
educational qualification, 67–68 
gender, 62–63 
income, 68–70 
marital status, 70–71 
occupation, 65–67 
symmetric measures, 63 
objective, 61 
research methodology 
motivating variables, 61 
review of literature 
cases, 60 
Information and Communication 
Technologies (ICT), 59 
scholars and researchers, 60 
studies act, 60–61 
usage behavior, 59 
N 
Naïve Bayes (NB), 140 
Network forensic attacks, 227 
advanced persistent threats (APT), 233 
clustering technique, 234–236 
Competitive Hebbian Learning (CHL), 
235 
data set details, 239 
denial of service, 232 
discussions, 236–239 
distributed denial of service (DDoS), 232 
domain name system (DNS), 233 
high performance computing (HPC), 236 
malware, 231 
man in the middle attack, 232 
operating system (OS), 229 
phishing, 231 
ransomware, 233 
spear phishing, 231 
structured query language (SQL), 233 
injection, 233 
varieties of cyber security threats, 
231–233 
zero-day exploit, 233 
Network function virtualization (NFV), 98 
Network intrusion detection system 
(NIDS), 96 
Networked control systems (NCS), 174 
Neural networks (NN), 200, 257 
Number plate 
applications, 222 
deblurring, moving vehicles, 218 
LPR technique, 221 
segmentation, 220–221 
O 
Open web application security project 
(OWASP), 154 
P 
Personally identifiable information (PII), 
164 
Petri nets (PNs), 180 
Principal component analysis (PCA), 258 
Probabilistic reasoning (PR), 181 
Protected health information (PHI), 164 
Provable data possession (PDP), 100 
R 
Radio frequency identification (RFID), 
244 
Random forest (RF), 256 
Regression learning, 256 
decision tree (DT), 256–257 
ensemble learning (EL), 257 
neural network (NN), 257 
Reinforcement learning (RL), 259–260 
Reliability block diagram (RBD), 179 
Root mean square error (RMSE), 203 
Rough sets (RS), 181 
S 
Security and cost-aware computation 
offloading (SCACO) strategy, 101 

 
Index 
271 
Security challenge 
communication, 114 
device identifier, 114 
Security in IOT, 243 
active 
data tampering, 252 
denial of service attacks, 251 
jamming, 251 
malicious input, 252 
man-in-the-middle, 251 
selective forwarding, 252 
spoofing, 251 
sybil, 251 
applications, 259–260 
attacks, 249–250 
types, 250 
cloud computing (CC), 244 
data protocols, 248 
advanced message queuing protocol 
(AMQP), 248–249 
constrained application protocol 
(COAP), 248 
extensible messaging and presence 
protocol (XMPP), 249 
machine-to-machine (M2M) 
communication, 249 
message queue telemetry transport 
(MQTT), 248 
distributed denial of service (DDoS), 
251 
internet of things (IoT), 244 
intrusion detection systems (IDS), 
252–253 
K-mean clustering, 258–259 
layers, 245 
application, 245 
network, 246 
perception, 246 
machine learning (ML), 243 
reinforcement learning (RL), 259–260 
supervised learning, 254–258 
unsupervised learning, 258–259 
media access control (MAC), 246 
methods, 253 
ML techniques, 254 
principal component analysis (PCA), 
258 
protocols, 246–247 
Bluetooth, 247 
HTTP (hypertext transfer protocol), 
247 
long-range wide area network, 247 
ZigBee, 248 
radio frequency identification (RFID), 
244 
regression learning, 256 
decision tree (DT), 256–257 
ensemble learning (EL), 257 
neural network (NN), 257 
software-defined networking (SDN), 244 
supervised learning 
association rule (AR), 256 
Bayesian theorem, 255 
k-nearest neighbor (KNN), 255 
random forest (RF), 256 
support vector machine (SVM), 255 
types 
active, 250–251 
passive, 252 
UDP (user datagram protocol), 248 
Security solution, 126 
data acquisition, 128 
exploration and pre-processing, 128 
future research direction, 129 
model evaluation and deployment, 129 
model selection and data conversion, 
128 
training and testing, 128 
Security system 
cutting edge of, 50–51 
Security tool, 124–126 
Self organizing maps (SOM), 185 
Sensor actuator networks (SAN), 174 
Soft computing techniques, 169 
ant colony optimization (ACO), 182 
problem description, 189 
rule for, 190–191 
artificial neural networks (ANN), 181, 185 
Bayesian networks (BNs), 181 
claim areas, 174 
cyber physical systems (CPS), 169 
dependence diagram (DD), 180 
distributed control systems (DCS), 174 
electrical power-based smart grid, 174–175 

 
272 
Index 
evolutionary computation (EC), 181 
fault tree (FT), 179 
Fidelity, 174 
dependability, 177–181 
Fuzzy logic (FL), 181 
Fuzzy nonlinear programming (FNLP), 
184 
GAAC (genetic ant colony algorithm), 
191 
genetic algorithm (GA), 182, 186–188 
healthcare, 176–177 
industrial automation, 175–176 
intelligent transportation systems (ITS), 
176 
international electro specialized 
commission (IEC), 177 
international standards organization 
(ISO), 177 
Levenberg-Marquardt (LM), 185 
machine learning (ML), 181 
Markov chains (MC), 179 
methods, 181–183 
ant colony optimization algorithm, 
188–189 
artificial neural networks, 185 
Fuzzy logic (FL), 183–185 
networked control systems (NCS), 174 
petri nets (PNs), 180 
probabilistic reasoning (PR), 181 
reliability block diagram (RBD), 179 
rough sets (RS), 181 
rules, 190 
self organizing maps (SOM), 185 
sensor actuator networks (SAN), 174 
stochastic petri nets (SPN), 179 
water networks, 175 
wireless industrial sensor networks 
(WISN), 174 
Soft hesitant fuzzy rough collection 
(SHFRS), 102 
Software defined networking (SDN), 100, 
244 
Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) method, 
Stochastic petri nets (SPN), 179 
Structured query language (SQL), 197, 233 
injection, 233 
Supervised learning 
association rule (AR), 256 
Bayesian theorem, 255 
k-nearest neighbor (KNN), 255 
random forest (RF), 256 
support vector machine (SVM), 255 
Support vector machine (SVM), 100, 142, 
255 
Surges 
cyber risk, 31–32 
global information security, 29–30 
human error, 28–29 
issues in, 35–36 
monetary value, 31–32 
psychological effects in, 35 
spear phishing attacks, 30–31 
types, 36 
weapon for, 33–34 
T 
Threat analysis, 116–118 
directing assault, 49 
forswearing, 49–50 
U 
UDP (user datagram protocol), 248 
V 
Variance absolute percentage error 
(VAPE), 203 
Vehicle-tracking system, 211 
design, 218–219 
edge detection methods, 219 
implementation, 218–219 
methodology, 213–214 
character segmentation, 214 
recognition, 214–215 
minimum mean-square error (MMSE), 
219 
number plate 
applications, 222 
deblurring, moving vehicles, 218 
LPR technique, 221 
segmentation, 220–221 
performance analysis, 222–225 
problem definition, 216 
algorithm, 216–217 
98 

 
Index 
273 
related work, 215–216 
result, 222–225 
Wiener filters 
characteristics, 219–220 
Versatility to assaults, 49 
Virtual dispersive networking (VDN), 20 
Virtual private network (VPN), 21 
W 
Web based service, 153, 157–159 
blacklisting approach, 158 
blind, 158 
content security policy (CSP), 155 
WFH (Work-From-Home), 4 
Wiener filters 
characteristics, 219–220 
Wireless industrial sensor networks 
(WISN), 174 
Wireless sensor and actuator networks 
(WSAN), 46 
Work-From-Home (WFH), 28 
Z 
Zero trust model, 20 
Zero-day exploit, 233 
ZigBee, 248 

