JAMES P. BLAYLOCK
 
Paper Dragons
 
 
Here’s one of the strangest and most  strangely  beautiful
stories  you  are  ever  likely  to  read:  as  evocative,
melancholy,  and mys-terious  as a paper  dragon  soaring
against the darkening sky of evening. . .
 
James  P.  Blaylock  was  born  in  Long  Beach,
California, and now lives  in Orange,  California.  He made
his  first  sale  to  the  now-defunct  semiprozine  Unearth,
and  subsequently  became  one  of  the  most  popular,
literate,  and  wildly  eclectic  fantasists  of  the  1980s  and
1990s.  “Paper  Dragons”  won  him  a  World  Fantasy
Award  in  1986.  His  critically  acclaimed  novels—often  a
quirky
 blend
 of
 different
 genres
 (SF,
 fantasy,
nineteenth-century  mainstream  novels,  horror,  romance,
ghost  stories,  mystery,  adven-ture)  that  would  seem
doomed  to  clash,  but  which  in  Blaylock’s  whimsically
affectionate  hands  somehow  do  not—include  The  Last
Coin,  Land  of  Dreams,  The  Digging  Leviathan,
Homunculus,  Lord  Kelvin’s  Machine,  The  Elfin  Ship,
The  Disappearing  Dwarf,  The  Magic  Spectacles,  The
Stone Giant, and The Paper Grail. His most recent book
is the novel All the Bells on Earth.
 
* * * *
 
Strange things are said to have happened in this world—some are said to
be happening still—but half of them, if I’m any judge, are lies. There’s no
way to tell sometimes. The sky above the north coast has been flat gray for
weeks—clouds thick overhead like carded wool not fifty feet above the
ground, impaled on the treetops, on redwoods and alders and hemlocks.
The air is heavy with mist that lies out over the harbor and the open ocean,
drifting across the tip of the pier and breakwater now and again, both of
them vanishing into the gray so that there’s not a nickel’s worth of difference
between the sky and the sea. And when the tide drops, and the reefs
running out toward the point appear through the fog, covered in the brown
bladders and rubber leaves of kelp, the pink lace of algae, and the slippery
sheets of sea lettuce and eel grass, it’s a simple thing to imagine the dark

bulk of the fish that lie in deep-water gardens and angle up toward the pale
green of shallows to feed at dawn.
 
There’s the possibility, of course, that winged things, their
counterparts if you will, inhabit dens in the clouds, that in the valleys and
caverns of the heavy, low skies live unguessed beasts. It occurs to me
sometimes that if without warning a man could draw back that veil of cloud
that obscures the heavens, snatch it back in an instant, he’d startle a world
of oddities aloft in the skies: balloon things with hovering little wings like the
fins of pufferfish, and spiny, leathery creatures, nothing but bones and teeth
and with beaks half again as long as their ribby bodies.
 
There have been nights when I was certain I heard them, when the
clouds hung in the treetops and foghorns moaned off the point and water
dripped from the needles of hemlocks beyond the window onto the tin roof
of Filby’s garage. There were muffled shrieks and the airy flapping of
distant wings. On one such night when I was out walking along the bluffs,
the clouds parted for an instant and a spray of stars like a reeling carnival
shone beyond, until, like a curtain slowly drawing shut, the clouds drifted up
against each other and parted no more. I’m certain I glimpsed
something—a shadow, the promise of a shadow—dimming the stars. It was
the next morning that the business with the crabs began.
 
I awoke, late in the day, to the sound of Filby hammering at something
in his garage—talons, I think it was, copper talons. Not that it makes much
difference. It woke me up. I don’t sleep until an hour or so before dawn.
There’s a certain bird, Lord knows what sort, that sings through the last hour
of the night and shuts right up when the sun rises. Don’t ask me why.
Anyway, there was Filby smashing away some time before noon. I opened
my left eye, and there atop the pillow was a blood-red hermit crab with eyes
on stalks, giving me a look as if he were proud of himself, wav-ing pincers
like that. I leaped up. There was another, creeping into my shoe, and two
more making away with my pocket watch, dragging it along on its fob toward
the bedroom door.
 
The window was open and the screen was torn. The beasts were
clambering up onto the woodpile and hoisting themselves in through the
open window to rummage through my personal effects while I slept. I
pitched them out, but that evening there were more—dozens of them, bent
beneath the weight of seashells, dragging toward the house with an eye to
my pock-et watch.
 
It was a migration. Once every hundred years, Dr. Jensen tells me,
every hermit crab in creation gets the wanderlust and hurries ashore.

Jensen camped on the beach in the cove to study the things. They were all
heading south like migratory birds. By the end of the week there was a
tiresome lot of them afoot—millions of them to hear Jensen carry on— but
they left my house alone. They dwindled as the next week wore out, and
seemed to be straggling in from deeper water and were bigger and bigger:
The size of a man’s fist at first, then of his head, and then a giant, vast as a
pig, chased Jensen into the lower branches of an oak. On Friday there
were only two crabs, both of them bigger than cars. Jensen went home
gibbering and drank himself into a stupor. He was there on Satur-day
though; you’ve got to give him credit for that. But nothing appeared. He
speculates that somewhere off the coast, in a deep-water chasm a
hun-dred fathoms below the last faded colors is a monumental beast, blind
and gnarled from spectacular pressures and wearing a seashell overcoat,
feeling his way toward shore.
 
At night sometimes I hear the random echoes of far-off clacking, just
the misty and muted suggestion of it, and I brace myself and stare into the
pages of an open book, firelight glinting off the cut crystal of my glass,
countless noises out in the foggy night among which is the occasional clack
clack clack of what might be Jensen’s impossible crab, creeping up to cast
a shadow in the front porch lamplight, to demand my pocket watch. It was
the night after the sighting of the pig-sized crabs that one got into Filby’s
garage—forced the door apparently—and made a hash out of his dragon. I
know what you’re thinking. I thought it was a lie too. But things have since
fallen out that make me suppose otherwise. He did, apparently, know
Augustus Silver. Filby was an acolyte; Silver was his master. But the dragon
business, they tell me, isn’t merely a matter of mechanics. It’s a matter of
perspective. That was Filby’s downfall.
 
There was a gypsy who came round in a cart last year. He couldn’t
speak, apparently. For a dollar he’d do the most amazing feats. He tore out
his tongue, when he first arrived, and tossed it onto the road. Then he
danced on it and shoved it back into his mouth, good as new. Then he
pulled out his entrails—yards and yards of them like sausage out of a
machine—then jammed them all back in and nipped shut the hole he’d torn
in his abdomen. It made half the town sick, mind you, but they paid to see it.
That’s pretty much how I’ve always felt about dragons. I don’t half believe in
them, but I’d give a bit to see one fly, even if it were no more than a clever
illusion.
 
But Filby’s dragon, the one he was keeping for Silver, was a ruin. The
crab—I suppose it was a crab—had shredded it, knocked the wadding out
of it. It reminded me of one of those stuffed alligators that turns up in
cu-riosity shops, all eaten to bits by bugs and looking sad and tired, with its

tail bent sidewise and a clump of cotton stuffing shoved through a tear in its
neck.
 
Filby was beside himself. It’s not good for a grown man to carry on
so. He picked up the shredded remnant of a dissected wing and flagellated
himself with it. He scourged himself, called himself names. I didn’t know
him well at the time, and so watched the whole weird scene from my kitchen
window: His garage door banging open and shut in the wind, Filby weeping
and howling, through the open door, storming back and forth, starting and
stopping theatrically, the door slamming shut and slicing off the whole
embarrassing business for thirty seconds or so and then sweeping open to
betray a wailing Filby scrabbling among the debris on the garage floor—the
remnants of what had once been a flesh-and-blood dragon, as it were, built
by the ubiquitous Augustus Silver years before. Of course I had no idea at
the time. Augustus Silver, after all. It almost justifies Filby’s carrying on.
And I’ve done a bit of carrying on myself since, although as I said, most of
what prompted the whole business has begun to seem suspiciously like
lies, and the whispers in the foggy night, the clacking and whirring and rush
of wings, has begun to sound like thinly disguised laughter, growing fainter
by the months and emanating from nowhere, from the clouds, from the wind
and fog. Even the occa-sional letters from Silver himself have become
suspect.
 
Filby is an eccentric. I could see that straightaway. How he finances
his endeavors is beyond me. Little odd jobs, I don’t doubt—repairs and
such. He has the hands of an archetypal mechanic: spatulate fingers, grime
under the nails, nicks and cuts and scrapes that he can’t identify. He has
only to touch a heap of parts, wave his hands over them, and the faint
rhythmic stirrings of order and pattern seem to shudder through the
cross-members of his workbench. And here an enormous crab had got-ten
in, and in a single night had clipped apart a masterpiece, a wonder, a thing
that couldn’t be tacked back together. Even Silver would have pitched it out.
The cat wouldn’t want it.
 
Filby was morose for days, but I knew he’d come out of it. He’d be
mooning around the house in a slump, poking at yesterday’s newspapers,
and a glint of light off a copper wire would catch his eye. The wire would
suggest something. That’s how it works. He not only has the irritating ability
to coexist with mechanical refuse; it speaks to him too, whispers
possibilities.
 
He’d be hammering away some morning soon—damn all
crabs—piec-ing together the ten thousand silver scales of a wing,
assembling the jew-eled bits of a faceted eye, peering through a glass at a

spray of fine wire spun into a braid that would run up along the spinal
column of a crea-ture which, when released some misty night, might
disappear within mo-ments into the clouds and be gone. Or so Filby
dreamed. And I’ll admit it: I had complete faith in him, in the dragon that he
dreamed of build-ing-
 
In the early spring, such as it is, some few weeks after the hermit crab
business, I was hoeing along out in the garden. Another frost was unlikely.
My tomatoes had been in for a week, and an enormous green worm with
spines had eaten the leaves off the plants. There was nothing left but
stems, and they were smeared up with a sort of slime. Once when I was a
child I was digging in the dirt a few days after a rain, and I unearthed a
finger-sized worm with the face of a human being. I buried it. But this
tomato worm had no such face. He was pleasant, in fact, with little piggy
eyes and a smashed-in sort of nose, as worm noses go. So I pitched him
over the fence into Filby’s yard. He’d climb back over—there was no
doubting it. But he’d creep back from anywhere, from the moon. And since
that was the case—if it was inevitable—then there seemed to be no reason
to put him too far out of his way, if you follow me. But the plants were a
wreck. I yanked them out by the roots and threw them into Filby’s yard too,
which is up in weeds anyway, but Filby himself had wandered up to the
fence like a grinning gargoyle, and the clump of a half-dozen gnawed vines
flew into his face like a squid. That’s not the sort of thing to bother Filby
though. He didn’t mind. He had a letter from Silver mailed a month before
from points south.
 
I was barely acquainted with the man’s reputation then. I’d heard of
him—who hasn’t? And I could barely remember seeing photographs of a
big, bearded man with wild hair and a look of passion in his eye, taken when
Silver was involved in the mechano-vivisectionist’s league in the days when
they first learned the truth about the mutability of matter. He and three
others at the university were responsible for the brief spate of unicorns,
some few of which are said to roam the hills hereabouts, inter-esting
mutants, certainly, but not the sort of wonder that would satisfy Augustus
Silver. He appeared in the photograph to be the sort who would leap
headlong into a cold pool at dawn and eat bulgur wheat and honey with a
spoon.
 
And here was Filby, ridding himself of the remains of ravaged tomato
plants, holding a letter in his hand, transported. A letter from the master!
He’d been years in the tropics and had seen a thing or two. In the hills of
the eastern jungles he’d sighted a dragon with what was quite apparently a
bamboo rib cage. It flew with the xylophone clacking of wind chimes, and
had the head of an enormous lizard, the pronged tail of a devilfish, and

clockwork wings built of silver and string and the skins of carp. It had given
him certain ideas. The best dragons, he was sure, would come from the
sea. He was setting sail for San Francisco. Things could be purchased in
Chinatown—certain “necessaries,” as he put it in his letter to Filby. There
was mention of perpetual motion, of the build-ing of an immortal creature
knitted together from parts of a dozen beasts. 
 
I was still waiting for the issuance of that last crab, and so was
Jensen. He wrote a monograph, a paper of grave scientific accuracy in
which he postulated the correlation between the dwindling number of the
creatures and the enormity of their size. He camped on the cliffs above the
sea with his son Bumby, squinting through the fog, his eye screwed to the
lens of a special telescope—one that saw things, as he put it, particularly
clearly— and waiting for the first quivering claw of the behemoth to thrust up
out of the gray swells, cascading water, draped with weeds, and the
bearded face of the crab to follow, drawn along south by a sort of migratory
mag-net toward heaven alone knows what. Either the crab passed away
down the coast hidden by mists, or Jensen was wrong—there hasn’t been
any last crab.
 
The letter from Augustus Silver gave Filby wings, as they say, and he
flew into the construction of his dragon, sending off a letter east in which he
enclosed forty dollars, his unpaid dues in the Dragon Society. The tomato
worm, itself a wingless dragon, crept back into the garden four days later
and had a go at a half-dozen fresh plants, nibbling lacy arabesques across
the leaves. Hinging it back into Filby’s yard would ac-complish nothing. It
was a worm of monumental determination. I put him into a jar—a big, gallon
pickle jar, empty of pickles, of course—and I screwed onto it a lid with
holes punched in. He lived happily in a little garden of leaves and dirt and
sticks and polished stones, nibbling on the occasional tomato leaf.
 
I spent more and more time with Filby, watching, in those days after
the arrival of the first letter, the mechanical bones and joints and organs of
the dragon drawing together. Unlike his mentor, Filby had almost no
knowledge of vivisection. He had an aversion to it, I believe, and as a
con-sequence his creations were almost wholly mechanical—and almost
wholly unlikely. But he had such an aura of certainty about him, such utter
and uncompromising conviction that even the most unlikely project seemed
inexplicably credible.
 
I remember one Saturday afternoon with particular clarity. The sun
had shone for the first time in weeks. Tire grass hadn’t been alive with slugs
and snails the previous night—a sign, I supposed, that the weather was
changing for the drier. But I was only half right. Saturday dawned clear. The

sky was invisibly blue, dotted with the dark specks of what might have been
sparrows or crows flying just above the treetops, or just as eas-ily
something else, something more vast—dragons, let’s say, or the pecu-liar
denizens of some very distant cloud world. Sunlight poured through the
diamond panes of my bedroom window, and I swear I could hear the
tomato plants and onions and snow peas in my garden unfurling, has-tening
skyward. But around noon great dark clouds roiled in over the Coast Range,
their shadows creeping across the meadows and redwoods, picket fences,
and chaparral. A spray of rain sailed on the freshening off-shore breeze,
and the sweet smell of ozone rose from the pavement of Filby’s driveway,
carrying on its first thin ghost an unidentifiable sort of promise and regret:
the promise of wonders pending, regret for the bits and pieces of lost time
that go trooping away like migratory hermit crabs, inexorably, irretrievably
into the mists.
 
So it was a Saturday afternoon of rainbows and umbrellas, and Filby,
still animate at the thought of Silver’s approach, showed me some of his
things. Filby’s house was a marvel, given over entirely to his collections.
Carven heads whittled of soapstone and ivory and ironwood populated the
rooms, the strange souvenirs of distant travel. Aquaria bubbled away, thick
with water plants and odd, mottled creatures: spotted eels and leaf fish,
gobies buried to their noses in sand, flatfish with both eyes on the same
side of their heads, and darting anableps that had the wonderful ca-pacity to
see above and below the surface of the water simultaneously and so, unlike
the mundane fish that swam beneath, were inclined toward phi-losophy. I
suggested as much to Filby, but I’m not certain he understood. Books and
pipes and curios filled a half-dozen cases, and star charts hung on the
walls. There were working drawings of some of Silver’s earliest
accomplishments, intricate swirling sketches covered over with what were
to me utterly meaningless calculations and commentary.
 
On Monday another letter arrived from Silver. He’d gone along east
on the promise of something very rare in the serpent line—an elephant
trunk snake, he said, the lungs of which ran the length of its body. But he
was coming to the west coast, that much was sure, to San Francisco. He’d
be here in a week, a month, he couldn’t be entirely sure. A message would
come. Who could say when? We agreed that I would drive the five hours
south on the coast road into the city to pick him up: I owned a car.
 
Filby was in a sweat to have his creature built before Silver’s arrival.
He wanted so badly to hear the master’s approval, to see in Silver’s eyes
the brief electricity of surprise and excitement. And I wouldn’t doubt for a
moment that there was an element of envy involved. Filby, after all, had
languished for years at the university in Silver’s shadow, and now he was on

the ragged edge of becoming a master himself.
 
So there in Filby’s garage, tilted against a wall of rough-cut fir studs
and redwood shiplap, the shoulders, neck, and right wing of the beast sat in
silent repose, its head a mass of faceted pastel crystals, piano wire, and
bone clutched in the soft rubber grip of a bench vise. It was on Friday, the
morning of the third letter, that Filby touched the bare ends of two
microscopically thin copper rods, and the eyes of the dragon rotated on
their axis, very slowly, blinking twice, surveying the cramped and dimly lit
garage with an ancient, knowing look before the rods parted and life
flickered out.
 
Filby was triumphant. He danced around the garage, shouting for joy,
cutting little capers. But my suggestion that we take the afternoon off,
per-haps drive up to Fort Bragg for lunch and a beer, was met with stolid
refusal. Silver, it seemed, was on the horizon. I was to leave in the
morn-ing. I might, quite conceivably, have to spend a few nights waiting.
One couldn’t press Augustus Silver, of course. Filby himself would work on
the dragon. It would be a night and day business, to be sure. I determined
to take the tomato worm along for company, as it were, but the beast had
dug himself into the dirt for a nap.
 
This business of my being an emissary of Filby struck me as dubious
when I awoke on Saturday morning. I was a neighbor who had been
en-snared in a web of peculiar enthusiasm. Here I was pulling on heavy
socks and stumbling around the kitchen, tendrils of fog creeping in over the
sill, the hemlocks ghostly beyond dripping panes, while Augustus Silver
tossed on the dark Pacific swell somewhere off the Golden Gate, his hold
full of dragon bones. What was I to say to him beyond, “Filby sent me.” Or
something more cryptic: “Greetings from Filby.” Perhaps in these cir-cles
one merely winked or made a sign or wore a peculiar sort of cap with a
foot-long visor and a pyramid-encased eye embroidered across the front. I
felt like a fool, but I had promised Filby. His garage was alight at dawn, and
I had been awakened once in the night by a shrill screech, cut off sharply
and followed by Filby’s cackling laughter and a short snatch of song.
 
I was to speak to an old Chinese named Wun Lo in a restaurant off
Washington. Filby referred to him as “the connection.” I was to introduce
myself as a friend of Captain Augustus Silver and wait for orders.
Or-ders—what in the devil sort of talk was that? In the dim glow of lamplight
the preceding midnight such secret talk seemed sensible, even
satisfactory; in the chilly dawn it was risible.
 
It was close to six hours into the city, winding along the tortuous road,

bits and pieces of it having fallen into the sea on the back of winter rains.
The fog rose out of rocky coves and clung to the hillsides, throwing a gray
veil over dew-fed wildflowers and shore grasses. Silver fencepickets
loomed out of the murk with here and there the skull of a cow or a goat
impaled atop, and then the quick passing of a half-score of mailboxes on
posts, rusted and canted over toward the cliffs along with twisted
cypresses that seemed on the verge of flinging themselves into the sea.
 
Now and again, without the least notice, the fog would disappear in a
twinkling, and a clear mile of highway would appear, weirdly sharp and
crystalline in contrast to its previous muted state. Or an avenue into the sky
would suddenly appear, the remote end of which was dipped in opalescent
blue and which seemed as distant and unattainable as the end of a rainbow.
Across one such avenue, springing into clarity for perhaps three seconds,
flapped the ungainly bulk of what might have been a great bird, laboring as
if against a stiff, tumultuous wind just above the low-lying fog. It might as
easily have been something else, much higher. A dragon? One of Silver’s
creations that nested in the dense emerald fog forests of the Coast
Range? It was impossible to tell, but it seemed, as I said, to be
struggling—perhaps it was old—and a bit of something, a frag-ment of a
wing, fell clear of it and spun dizzily into the sea. Maybe what fell was just a
stick being carried back to the nest of an ambitious heron. In an instant the
fog closed, or rather the car sped out of the momentary clearing, and any
opportunity to identify the beast, really to study it, was gone. For a moment I
considered turning around, going back, but it was doubtful that I’d find that
same bit of clarity, or that if I did, the creature would still be visible. So I
drove on, rounding bends between redwood-covered hills that might have
been clever paintings draped along the ghostly edge of Highway One, the
hooks that secured them hidden just out of view in the mists above. Then
almost without warning the damp asphalt issued out onto a broad highway
and shortly thereafter onto the humming expanse of the Golden Gate
Bridge.
 
Some few silent boats struggled against the tide below. Was one of
them the ship of Augustus Silver, slanting in toward the Embarcadero?
Proba-bly not. They were fishing boats from the look of them, full of shrimp
and squid and bug-eyed rock cod. I drove to the outskirts of Chinatown and
parked, leaving the car and plunging into the crowd that swarmed down
Grant and Jackson and into Portsmouth Square.
 
It was Chinese New Year. The streets were heavy with the smell of
almond cookies and fog, barbecued duck and gunpowder, garlic and
sea-weed. Rockets burst overhead in showers of barely visible sparks, and
one, teetering over onto the street as the fuse burned, sailed straightaway

up Washington, whirling and glowing and fizzing into the wall of a curio
shop, then dropping lifeless onto the sidewalk as if embarrassed at its own
antics. The smoke and pop of firecrackers, the milling throng, and the
nagging senselessness of my mission drove me along down Washington
until I stumbled into the smoky open door of a narrow, three-story
restau-rant. Sam Wo it was called.
 
An assortment of white-garmented chefs chopped away at
vegetables. Woks hissed. Preposterous bowls of white rice steamed on
the counter. A fish head the size of a melon blinked at me out of a pan. And
there, at a small table made of chromed steel and rubbed formica, sat my
contact. It had to be him. Filby had been wonderfully accurate in his
description. The man had a gray beard that wagged on the tabletop and a
suit of sim-ilar color that was several sizes too large, and he spooned up
clear broth in such a mechanical, purposeful manner that his eating was
almost cer-emonial. I approached him. There was nothing to do but brass it
out. “I’m a friend of Captain Silver,” I said, smiling and holding out a hand.
He bowed, touched my hand with one limp finger, and rose. I followed him
into the back of the restaurant.
 
It took only a scattering of moments for me to see quite clearly that
my trip had been entirely in vain. Who could say where Augustus Silver
was? Singapore? Ceylon? Bombay? He’d had certain herbs mailed east
just two days earlier. I was struck at once with the foolishness of my
po-sition. What in the world was I doing in San Francisco? I had the uneasy
feeling that the five chefs just outside the door were having a laugh at my
expense, and that old Wun Lo, gazing out toward the street, was about to
ask for money—a fiver, just until payday. I was a friend of Augustus Sil-ver,
wasn’t I?
 
My worries were temporarily arrested by an old photograph that hung
above a tile-faced hearth. It depicted a sort of weird shantytown
somewhere on the north coast. There was a thin fog, just enough to veil the
surrounding countryside, and the photograph had clearly been taken at
dusk, for the long, deep shadows thrown by strange hovels slanted away
landward into the trees. The tip of a lighthouse was just visible on the edge
of the dark Pacific, and a scattering of small boats lay at anchor be-neath. It
was puzzling, to be sure—doubly so, because the lighthouse, the spit of
land that swerved round toward it, the green bay amid cypress and
eucalyptus was, I was certain, Point Reyes. But the shanty town, I was
equally certain, didn’t exist, couldn’t exist.
 
The collection of hovels tumbled down to the edge of the bay, a long
row of them that descended the hillside like a strange gothic stairway, and

all of them, I swear it, were built in part of the ruins of dragons, of
enor-mous winged reptiles—tin and copper, leather and bone. Some were
stacked on end, tilted against each other like card houses. Some were
perched atop oil drums or upended wooden pallets. Here was nothing but a
broken wing throwing a sliver of shade; there was what appeared to be a
tolerably complete creature, lacking, I suppose, whatever essen-tial parts
had once served to animate it. And standing alongside a cook-ing pot with a
man who could quite possibly have been Wun Lo himself was Augustus
Silver.
 
His beard was immense—the beard of a hill wanderer, of a
prospector lately returned from years in unmapped goldfields, and mat
beard and broad-brimmed felt hat, his Oriental coat and the sharp glint of
arcane knowledge that shone from his eyes, the odd harpoon he held
loosely in his right hand, the breadth of his shoulders—all those bits and
pieces seemed almost to deify him, as if he were an incarnation of Neptune
just out of the bay, or a wandering Odin who had stopped to drink
flower-petal tea in a queer shantytown along the coast. The very look of him
abolished my indecision. I left Wun Lo nodding in a chair, apparently
hav-ing forgotten my presence.
 
Smoke hung in the air of the street. Thousands of sounds—a
cacoph-ony of voices, explosions, whirring pinwheels, Oriental
music—mingled into a strange sort of harmonious silence. Somewhere to
the northwest lay a village built of the skins of dragons. If nothing else—if I
discovered nothing of the arrival of Augustus Silver—I would at least have a
look at the shantytown in the photograph. I pushed through the crowd down
Washington, oblivious to the sparks and explosions. Then almost
magi-cally, like the Red Sea, the throng parted and a broad avenue of
asphalt opened before me. Along either side of the suddenly clear street
were grin-ning faces, frozen in anticipation. A vast cheering arose, a
shouting, a bang-ing on Chinese cymbals and tooting on reedy little horns.
Rounding the corner and rushing along with the maniacal speed of an
express train, ca-reered the leering head of a paper dragon, lolling back
and forth, a wild rainbow mane streaming behind it. The body of the thing
was half a block long, and seemed to be built of a thousand layers of the
thinnest sort of pastel-colored rice paper, sheets and sheets of it
threatening to fly loose and dissolve in the fog. A dozen people crouched
within, racing along the pavement, the whole lot of them yowling and
chanting as the crowd closed behind and in a wave pressed along east
toward Kearny, the tu-mult and color muting once again into silence.
 
The rest of the afternoon had an air of unreality to it, which, strangely,
deepened my faith in Augustus Silver and his creations, even though all

rational evidence seemed to point squarely in the opposite direction. I
drove north out of the city, cutting off at San Rafael toward the coast,
to-ward Point Reyes and Inverness, winding through the green hillsides as
the sun traveled down the afternoon sky toward the sea. It was shortly
before dark that I stopped for gasoline.
 
The swerve of shoreline before me was a close cousin of that in the
photograph, and the collected bungalows on the hillside could have been
the ghosts of the dragon shanties, if one squinted tightly enough to
con-fuse the image through a foliage of eyelashes. Perhaps I’ve gotten that
backward; I can’t at all say anymore which of the two worlds had sub-stance
and which was the phantom.
 
A bank of fog had drifted shoreward. But for that, perhaps I could
have made out the top of the lighthouse and completed the picture. As it
was I could see only the gray veil of mist wisping in on a faint onshore
breeze. At the gas station I inquired after a map. Surely, I thought,
somewhere close by, perhaps within eyesight if it weren’t for the fog, lay my
village. The attendant, a tobacco-chewing lump of engine oil and blue paper
tow-els, hadn’t heard of it—the dragon village, that is. He glanced sideways
at me. A map hung in the window. It cost nothing to look. So I wandered
into a steel and glass cubicle, cold with rust and sea air, and studied the
map. It told me little. It had been hung recently; the tape holding its cor-ners
hadn’t yellowed or begun to peel. Through an open doorway to my right was
the dim garage where a Chinese mechanic tinkered with the undercarriage
of a car on a hoist.
 
I turned to leave just as the hovering fog swallowed the sun, casting
the station into shadow. Over the dark Pacific swell the mists whirled in the
sea wind, a trailing wisp arching skyward in a rush, like surge-washed
tidepool grasses or the waving tail of an enormous misty dragon, and for a
scattering of seconds the last faint rays of the evening sun shone out of the
tattered fog, illuminating the old gas pumps, the interior of the weath-ered
office, the dark, tool-strewn garage.
 
The map in the window seemed to curl at the corners, the tape
sud-denly brown and dry. The white background tinted into shades of
antique ivory and pale ocher, and what had been creases in the paper
appeared, briefly, to be hitherto unseen roads winding out of the redwoods
toward the sea.
 
It was the strange combination, I’m sure, of the evening, the dying
sun, and the rising fog that for a moment made me unsure whether the
mechanic was crouched in his overalls beneath some vast and funny

auto-mobile spawned of the peculiar architecture of the early sixties, or
instead worked beneath the chrome and iron shell of a tilted dragon, frozen
in flight above the greasy concrete floor, and framed by tiers of heater
hoses and old dusty tires.
 
Then the sun was gone. Darkness fell within moments, and all was as
it had been. I drove slowly north through the village. There was, of course,
no shantytown built of castaway dragons. There were nothing but
warehouses and weedy vacant lots and the weathered concrete and tin of
an occasional industrial building. A tangle of small streets comprised of
odd, tumbledown shacks, some few of them on stilts as if awaiting a flood
of apocalyptic proportions. But the shacks were built of clapboard and
asphalt shingles—there wasn’t a hint of a dragon anywhere, not even the tip
of a rusted wing in the jimsonweed and mustard.
 
I determined not to spend the night in a motel, although I was
tempted to, on the off chance that the fog would dissipate and the watery
coastal moonbeams would wash the coastline clean of whatever it was—a
trick of sunlight or a trick of fog—that had confused me for an instant at the
gas station. But as I say, the day had, for the most part, been unprofitable,
and the thought of being twenty dollars out of pocket for a motel room was
intolerable.
 
It was late—almost midnight—when I arrived home, exhausted. My
tomato worm slept in his den. The light still burned in Filby’s garage, so I
wandered out and peeked through the door. Filby sat on a stool, his chin in
his hands, staring at the dismantled head of his beast. I suddenly re-gretted
having looked in; he’d demand news of Silver, and I’d have noth-ing to tell
him. The news—or rather the lack of news—seemed to drain the lees of
energy from him. He hadn’t slept in two days. Jensen had been round hours
earlier babbling about an amazingly high tide and of his sus-picion that the
last of the crabs might yet put in an appearance. Did Filby want to watch on
the beach that night? No, Filby didn’t. Filby wanted only to assemble his
dragon. But there was something not quite right—some wire or another that
had gotten crossed, or a gem that had been miscut—and the creature
wouldn’t respond. It was so much junk.
 
I commiserated with him. Lock the door against Jensen’s crab, I said,
and wait until dawn. It sounded overmuch like a platitude, but Filby, I think,
was ready to grasp at any reason, no matter how shallow, to leave off his
tinkering.
 
The two of us sat up until the sun rose, drifting in and out of maudlin
reminiscences and debating the merits of a stroll down to the bluffs to see

how Jensen was faring. The high tide, apparently, was accompanied by a
monumental surf, for in the spaces of meditative silence I could just hear
the rush and thunder of long breakers collapsing on the beach. It seemed
unlikely to me that there would be giant crabs afoot.
 
The days that followed saw no break in the weather. It continued
dripping and dismal. No new letters arrived from Augustus Silver. Filby’s
dragon seemed to be in a state of perpetual decline. The trouble that
plagued it receded deeper into it with the passing days, as if it were
mock-ing Filby, who groped along in its wake, clutching at it, certain in the
morning that he had the problem securely by the tail, morose that same
afternoon that it had once again slipped away. The creature was a per-fect
wonder of separated parts. I’d had no notion of its complexity. Hun-dreds of
those parts, by week’s end, were laid out neatly on the garage floor, one
after another in the order they’d been dismantled. Concentric circles of
them expanded like ripples on a pond, and by Tuesday of the following
week masses of them had been swept into coffee cans that sat here and
there on the bench and floor. Filby was declining, I could see that. That
week he spent less time in the garage than he had been spending there in
a single day during the previous weeks, and he slept instead long hours in
the afternoon.
 
I still held out hope for a letter from Silver. He was, after all, out there
somewhere. But I was plagued with the suspicion that such a letter might
easily contribute to certain of Filby’s illusions—or to my own—and so
pro-long what with each passing day promised to be the final deflation of
those same illusions. Better no hope, I thought, than impossible hope, than
ru-ined anticipation.
 
But late in the afternoon, when from my attic window I could see
Jensen picking his way along the bluffs, carrying with him a wood and brass
tele-scope, while the orange glow of a diffused sun radiated through the
thinned fog over the sea, I wondered where Silver was, what strange seas
he sailed, what rumored wonders were drawing him along jungle paths that
very evening.
 
One day he’d come, I was sure of it. There would be patchy fog
illuminated by ivory moonlight. The sound of Eastern music, of Chinese
ban-jos and copper gongs would echo over the darkness of the open
ocean. The fog would swirl and part, revealing a universe of stars and
planets and the aurora borealis dancing in transparent color like the thin
rain-bow light of paper lanterns hung in the windswept sky. Then the fog
would close, and out of the phantom mists, heaving on the groundswell, his
ship would sail into the mouth of the harbor, slowly, cutting the water like a

ghost, strange sea creatures visible in the phosphorescent wake, one by
one dropping away and returning to sea as if having accompanied the craft
across ten thousand miles of shrouded ocean. We’d drink a beer, the three
of us, in Filby’s garage. We’d summon Jensen from his vigil.
 
But as I say, no letter came, and all anticipation was so much air.
Filby’s beast was reduced to parts—a plate of broken meats, as it were.
The idea of it reminded me overmuch of the sad bony remains of a
Thanksgiving turkey. There was nothing to be done. Filby wouldn’t be
placated. But the fog, finally, had lifted. The black oak in the yard was
leafing out and the tomato plants were knee-high and luxuriant. My worm
was still asleep, but I had hopes that the spring weather would revive him. It
wasn’t, however, doing a thing for Filby. He stared long hours at the salad of
debris, and when in one ill-inspired moment I jokingly suggested he send to
Detroit for a carburetor, he cast me such a savage look that I slipped out
again and left him alone.
 
On Sunday afternoon a wind blew, slamming Filby’s garage door until
the noise grew tiresome. I peeked in, aghast. There was nothing in the
heaped bits of scrap that suggested a dragon, save one dismantled wing,
the silk and silver of which was covered with greasy handprints. Two cats
wandered out. I looked for some sign of Jensen’s crab, hoping, in fact, that
some such rational and concrete explanation could be summoned to
explain the ruin. But Filby, alas, had quite simply gone to bits along with his
dragon. He’d lost whatever strange inspiration it was that propelled him. His
creation lay scattered, not two pieces connected. Wires and fuses were
heaped amid unidentifiable crystals, and one twisted bit of elab-orate
machinery had quite clearly been danced upon and lay now cold and dead,
half hidden beneath the bench. Delicate thises and thats sat mired in a
puddle of oil that scummed half the floor.
 
Filby wandered out, adrift, his hair frazzled. He’d received a last letter.
There were hints in it of extensive travel, perhaps danger. Silver’s visit to
the west coast had been delayed again. Filby ran his hand backward
through his hair, oblivious to the harrowed result the action effected. He had
the look of a nineteenth-century Bedlam lunatic. He muttered some-thing
about having a sister in McKinleyville, and seemed almost illumi-nated when
he added, apropos of nothing, that in his sister’s town, deeper into the heart
of the north coast, stood the tallest totem pole in the world. Two days later
he was gone. I locked his garage door for him and made a vow to collect
his mail with an eye toward a telling, exotic postmark. But nothing so far has
appeared. I’ve gotten into the habit of spending the evening on the beach
with Jensen and his son Bumby, both of whom still hold out hope for the
issuance of the last crab. The spring sunsets are unimaginable. Bumby is

as fond of them as I am, and can see com-parable whorls of color and
pattern in the spiral curve of a seashell or in the peculiar green depths of a
tidepool.
 
In fact, when my tomato worm lurched up out of his burrow and
unfurled an enormous gauzy pair of mottled brown wings, I took him along
to the seaside so that Bumby could watch him set sail, as it were.
 
The afternoon was cloudless and the ocean sighed on the beach.
Perhaps the calm, insisted Jensen, would appeal to the crab. But Bumby by
then was indifferent to the fabled crab. He stared into the pickle jar at the
half-dozen circles of bright orange dotting the abdomen of the giant sphinx
moth that had once crept among my tomato plants in a clever dis-guise. It
was both wonderful and terrible, and held a weird fascination for Bumby,
who tapped at the jar, making up and discarding names.
 
When I unscrewed the lid, the moth fluttered skyward some few feet
and looped around in a crazy oval, Bumby charging along in its wake, then
racing away in pursuit as the monster hastened south. The picture of it is as
clear to me now as rainwater: Bumby running and jumping, kicking up
glinting sprays of sand, outlined against the sheer rise of mossy cliffs, and
the wonderful moth just out of reach overhead, luring Bumby along the
afternoon beach. At last it was impossible to say just what the diminishing
speck in the china-blue sky might be—a tiny winged creature silhouetted
briefly on the false horizon of our little cove, or some vast fly-ing reptile
swooping over the distant ocean where it fell away into the void, off the
edge of the flat earth.
 
* * * *

